The Effigies of B. KEACH


THE TRAVELS OF True Godliness. FROM The Beginning of the World to this present
Day, in an apt and pleasant ALLEGORY: SHOWING, What TRUE GODLINESS is; also the
Troubles, Oppositions, Reproaches, and Persecutions he has met with in every
Age.

Together with The Danger and sad declining State he is in at this present
Time, by Errors, Heresies, and Ungodliness, or open Profaneness.

The TENTH EDITION corrected, and with the Addition of one whole CHAPTER.

By Benjamin Keach, Author of a Book called War with the Devil, and Distress,
and The Travels of Ungodliness.

BOSTON: Printed by B. GREEN and Company, for D. GOOKIN over against the old
South Meeting House. 1745.

The EPISTLE to the READER.
IN this Tract is showed the many Snares and Temptations that attend both
Riches and Poverty, Youth and Old Age; together with the chief Reasons why most
People of all Ranks and Qualities, are such great Strangers and Enemies to True
Godliness; the Legalist and Formal Hypocrite may here see what Danger they are
in: Also you have an Account of the present Errors and Heresies of these
present Times; with a Detection of Baxterian and Antinomian Errors. Moreover,
True Godliness is described in his own primitive internal and external Beauty
and Glory, being vindicated from all those foul Calumnies and Reproaches cast
upon him in this and former Ages; with his sad Lamentation, in respect of the
prevailing Power of Vice, Ungodliness, Papistry, and other Enemies at home and
abroad; also the Usefulness of Consideration, and of the Creatures utmost
Improvement of the Means, in order to Union with CHRIST and True Conversion, is
clearly opened; together with the Cause and dismal Consequences of Apostasy.

If thou art a Believer, read with Delight, but if thou art an Enemy to True
Godliness, read and tremble; for the great Happiness of the one, and the
miserable Condition of the other, is laid open before your Eyes.

In this Treatise you may see the little Cause the Godly have to mourn in the
worst of Times, or the Ungodly to rejoice in the best Times, or in what Times
soever they live. I hope none will be offended because True Godliness is here
presented in an Allegory, since the holy Scriptures abound with them, and so
fully justify our Essay herein; but since it has been abroad for near twenty
Years, and has found such kind Acceptance amongst People of all Persuasions, I
need not say any thing farther as to that, yet know, the Times being quite
changed to what they were when first it was published; the Ninth Edition I have
corrected, and made great Additions unto it, so that it is much different from
the former Editions.

And as I have received an Account from many, what good GOD has done by it to
their Souls, by reading the former, so that if any receive Profit by this, I
shall rejoice; and to that End shall commit it and thee, to the Blessing of
JEHOVAH, in whom I still remain, through infinite Grace, to be thy Soul's Friend
and Servant,

Horsey-Down, Fair-street, May 21. 1730. B. Keach.

THE TRAVELS OF TRUE GODLINESS.
CHAP. I.
Showing what True Godliness is, as also his Pedigree, Original, and Antiquity.

TRUE GODLINESS being of late (as well as in former Days) become so great a
Stranger to most Men, and indeed known but by a very few in the World; I shall
in the first place before I treat of his Travels and of the Entertainment he
meets with where he comes, give you a description of him, and the rather
because many Persons I perce^ive, are subject to so great an Error, as to take
Morality for him; and others out of Ignorance, (to say no worse) rail, and
ignominiously call and abuse him by the Names of Singularity, Stubborness,
Pride, and Rebellion, as if he were not fit to live or have a being in the
World, he being rendered a make-bait, a seditious and common disturber of all
Kingdoms, Cities Towns, and Villages, wheresoever he comes and is entertained:
Yea, such a factious and quarrelsome companion, that he is indeed the only
cause and stirrer up of all those unhappy differences, divisions, troubles, and
miseries in the World. This being so, I conclude nothing is more necessary,
than to take off that ugly Mass or Vizard, which his implacable Enemies have
put upon him, and clear him of all those foul and unjust slanders, and cursed
reproaches of the Sons of Belial; that so he may appear in his original,
primitive and spotless innocence, that none may be afraid of him, or be
unwilling to entertain him, nor ashamed to own him, and make him their
Bosom-Companion.

Know ye therefore in the first place, Godliness described.
that Godliness consists in the true and right knowledge of divine truths, or
fundamental principles of the Gospel; which all Men ought to know and be
established in, that would be saved, Without controversy great is the mystery
of Godliness: God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of
angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up to
Glory. 1 Timothy 3.16. These great truths of the Christian Religion are called
GODLINESS; many Men conclude it is no matter what principles they hold and
cleave to, provided they do but live a sober and honest Life, doing to all Men
as they would be done into, supposing that the whole of Religion and Godliness
consists in these things; but alas they are greatly mistaken; Godliness is
another kind of thing than they imagine; it is impossible to receive or
entertain True Godliness, whilst we shut out of Doors the essentials of the
Christian Religion; and instead thereof embrace Superstition, Error, and
Heresy; there being damning Principles as well a damning Practices, 2 Pet. 1.2,
3.

Now should any demand further, to hear more particularly what those Principles
of divine Truths, or fundamentals of the Christian Faith be, which are the
essentials of True Godliness.

1. I Answer, That there is one eternal, infinite, most holy, most wise, just,
good and gracious GOD, or glorious Deity, subsisting in three distinct Persons,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and these are one, i. e. one in
Essence.

2. That this GOD, out of his great Love and Goodness, has bestowed upon, and
given to his People, one sure, certain and infallible Rule of Faith and
Practice, viz. The Holy Scriptures, by which they may know, not only, that
there is a GOD and Creator, but of the Manner of the Creation of the World, and
of all Things in Heaven and Earth, in Six Days: Together of his Design, End,
and Purpose, or Reason, or Cause whereof he made all Things; and also to show
them how Sin came into the World, and what Righteousness it is which GOD's holy
Nature requires, to their Justification or Discharge from the Guilt of all Sin,
etc. viz. By a Redeemer, his own Son, whom he sent into the World; and that
there is no other Rule or Way to know these things, so as for Men to be saved
but by Revelation, or the sacred Records of the holy Scriptures only.

And that the Mystery of Salvation lies above humane Reason, and cannot be
known by the Light-in all Men.

3. That our Redeemer the LORD JESUS CHRIST, who is substituted the Surety of
the new Covenant, and only Mediator betwixt GOD and Man, is truly GOD, of the
Essence of the Father, and ^^ly Man of the Substance of the blessed Virgin
Mary, consisting of these two Natures in one Person: And that Redemption, Peace
and Reconciliation is by this LORD JESUS CHRIST alone.

4. That Justification and Pardon of Sin is alone by that full Satisfaction the
LORD JESUS CHRIST made to GOD's Justice; and that his perfect Obedience (in
doing what the Law required, and in his Suffering what we for our Sins
deserved) is imputed as that complete Righteousness to all that believe in him;
which Righteousness is apprehended by Faith alone, through the holy Spirit, by
which a Sinner is first apprehended by Christ, before he can apprehend and
receive him.

5. That all Men must be Renewed, Regenerated, and Sanctified by the holy
Spirit, which are, or can be saved.

6. That there will be a Resurrection of the Bodies of all Men at the last Day,
both of the just and unjust.

7. That there will be an eternal Judgment, or that all shall be brought to the
Tribunal of JESUS CHRIST in the Great Day, and give an Account for all Things
done in the Body; and that there will be a future State of Glory and eternal
Happiness of all true Believers, and of eternal Torment and Misery of all
unbelievers, and ungodly Persons, who live and die in their Sins.

Now, I say, in the true Knowledge and Belief of these Principles (which
comprehend the Substance of all the Fundamentals of true Religion, or the
Christian Faith) does True Godliness consist, as to his essential Part.

So that whosoever have not received, and do not steadfastly believe his holy
Doctrine, they have not received (...)

Secondly, Godliness, as to his inward and more hidden Parts and Power, is a
holy Conformity to the sacred and divine Principles, which natural Men
understand not: True Godliness consists in the Light of supernatural Truths and
Life of Grace, God manifesting himself in the Light of those glorious
Principles, and working the Life of supernatural Grace in the Soul by the Holy
Ghost: It consists in the saving and experimental knowledge of God and Jesus
Christ, in having all the evil Qualities of the Soul removed, and heavenly
habits infused in their Room, or in a gracious Conformity, Disposition and
Affection of the Heart to God, cleaving to all Truths made known to us, finding
the powerful Influences of the Gospel and Spirit of Christ upon us, whereby our
Souls are brought into the Image and Likeness of his Death and Resurrection:
This is True Godliness, it is not a bare living up to the natural Principles of
Morality, nor a simple Knowledge of the Letter of the Word, or an historical,
notional, or dogmatical Knowledge of the sacred Gospel, and the Precepts
thereof, but in a faithful living up to the supernatural Principles of Grace,
and the Gospel, discharging our Duties with as much Readiness and Faithfulness
toward God, as toward Man, so that our Conscience may be kept void of Offense
toward both, Acts 24.16. It consists in forsaking of every Sin, and not only
to leave it, but to loath it as the greatest Evil, and to cleave to God in
Sincerity of Heart, valuing him above all who is the chiefest Good, and from a
Principle of divine Love, willingly subjecting to all his Laws and
Appointments. Godliness makes a Man say with the Psalmist. Psalm. 73.25. Whom
have I in Heaven but thee, etc. Non amat Christian, qui amat a^^^^ (...) as for
the Wages of Religion: Some there be, who serve God, that they may serve
themselves upon God; but a true Christian desires Grace, not only that God
would glorify him in Heaven, but that he may glorify God on Earth: He cries,
Lord, rather let me have a good Heart than a great Estate; though he loves many
Things besides God, yet he loves nothing above God. This Man fears Sin more
than Suffering, and therefore he will suffer rather than sin: He is like a
Palm Tree, he always flourishes best when he is pressed down most. This may
serve in the second Place, to discover what the inward Life and Power of True
Godliness is.

Thirdly, That you may have a complete and perfect Knowledge of him, it may not
be amiss if I describe, or give you the Character of his Form and external
Parts, together with the very Fashion he continually wears, or go^s in.

First, Then know ye, that the Form or external Parts of True Godliness are
very comely and beautiful, and no marvel it is so, seeing he was formed and
fashioned by the Wisdom of the only wise God our Savior; the Works of whose
Hands being all glorious; but this, viz. The Formation of Godliness being one
of the chiefest, highest, and most admirable Contrivances of his eternal
Wisdom, must of Necessity excel in Glory, sweet Odor and Amiableness; his Form
and external Beauty therefore is such, that he needs no humane Artifice to
paint or adorn him, o^ any ways to illustrate or set off his Be^^^y and sweet
Comeliness of his Countenance; for the (...) nothing des^^^^ve as to his
evangelical and ap^^^^ (...) he ^ame out of his great Creator's Han^^ (...) is
(...) and admirable Order placed, that to his Beauty there can be no Addition:
Every one therefore that goes about to take from, add to, or al^^ any Thing,
touching the Form of True Godliness, mars instead of making, and defiles
instead of beautifying; besides God has strictly forbid any Thing of this
Nature to be done, no Man is to set up his Post by the Lord' Post: Prove. 30.6.
Add thou not unto his Word, (...) he reprove thee, and thou be found a Liar,
viz. By fathering that upon God which is none o^ his; do not the Papists call
those superstitious and vain Ceremonies used in their Church by the Name of
God's Worship? And what is this less than the putting a Lie upon him; besides
it reflects upon the Wisdom of God to attempt to change or alter any thing of
the form of Godliness, as if he did not know best how, and in what Way, or
after what Manner he himself would be Worshipped. But must be beholding to Man
for his Help, Wisdom, and rare Contrivance, touching many Things that are by
the Papists called decent and necessary; also it does reflect upon the Care and
Faithfulness of God, insomuch, that he should not himself take Care to lay down
in his blessed Word many Things which are very necessary to be added to the
Form of Godliness, which Man's Care and Wisdom is fain to supply.

Therefore from hence all may perceive, that True Godliness never alters his
Physiognomy, nor changes his Countenance; he is the very same, and not altered
in the least from what he was in the primitive Times; nay, and there is indeed
nothing in the World he bates more than those Pompous Garbs, Superstitious
Vestments, and other Fooleries that are used in the Popish Church, as Go^^ings,
(...) do not take the counterfeit Form of Godliness for the true Form; for as
there is a counterfeit Godliness, so there is a counterfeit Form of Godliness,
which the counterfeit or false Godliness always wears: It is also needful to
note one Thing more, lest you are deceived, viz. you must be sure to receive
the Power of Godliness with his Form; for his Form without his inward Life and
Power, will do you no good; it is but as the Body without the Soul, or the Shell
without the Kernel, or the Cabinet without the Jewel; neither ought any to
slight his Form, for you may remember what the Apostle speaks of the form of
doctrine, and of the form of sound words; Romans 6.17. 2 Timothy 1.13. for as the
true Faith must be held fast so must the profession of it also; you may, it is
true, meet with a Shell without the Kernel, but it is rare to meet with a
Kernel without the Shell.

Having thus briefly given you the Description, The Pedigree of Godliness.
both of the inward and out side Power and Form of True Godliness; we shall
proceed to treat of his Pedigree, and show you whose Offspring he is, that
you, by his Name may easily read from whence he descends, and learn what a
noble Patronage he is of; he is indeed high Born, the great and glorious
Offspring of the Lord JEHOVAH, the almighty Prince of Heaven and Earth, the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the universal Monarch of the World, whose
Kingdom rules over all; and as this is his noble Extract and renowned Descent,
so likewise he is always in high Esteem and Favor with his glorious Prince,
for there is none no not one in Heaven or Earth, that he loves and takes more
delight in, than in True Godliness; nor is there any indeed more like him,
(...) and such a venerable Respect and gracious Esteem has he of him, that
those who love him, he loves; those who hate him, he hates; those who receive
him, he receives; and those who reject him, he rejects; where he comes to
dwell, there God, Christ, and the Holy Ghost dwell.

Godliness is of great Antiquity; nay according to the Description we gave you
of him: The Antiquity of Godliness.
In the first place we may well say he is without beginning of Days; for Truth
(for sometimes he bears that Name) dwelt in God from everlasting, though in
Time manifest or made known to Men, and that in diverse Ways and Manners,
according as God in Wisdom saw good. But if we speak of his Antiquity, in
respect of his dwelling here below, the first Man that knew him was ADAM, who
whilst he stood in the State of Innocence, enjoyed some part of his sweet
Company, but by the Malice of a great and potent Enemy he was abused, and his
Image so defaced and marred, that he forsook his Habitation, which was the ruin
and utter undoing of our first Parents and their whole Posterity, and had not
the Father of True Godliness, the King of Heaven and Earth, sound out, through
his infinite Wisdom, a Way to Recover Man from his lost Estate, Godliness had
made his abode no longer in this World; for by Means of Corruption of Nature,
there was begotten and brought forth a cursed Monster of ugly Shape, whose Name
was Vice, alias Lust, who found so much favor with Adam's Children, that
Godliness was utterly Discountenanced; and though he was the Offspring of
Heaven, (as you heard before) and the only Delight of JEHOVAH; (and unto Man
the greatest Friend and chiefest Benefactor in all the Wo^^, striving (...) his
former primitive Glory, and thereby at last make him eternally Happy in Heaven)
yet he was neglected and lamentably slighted, that there was but only one of
Adam's Offspring cared for him at that Time, and he too, for Entertaining of
him with that just and good Respect he deserved, was by his Brother, whose Name
was Cain, basely Murdered; so that Godliness by this, perceived very early what
kind of usage and Entertainment amongst the Children of Men he was like to meet
withal; and truly never was there any one so nobly descended, and of such an
excellent, peaceable, and sweet a Nature and Behavior, generally so dealt with
as Godliness has been from the beginning to this very Day, (except the Prince
of Godliness himself;) yet he found some friends after Abel was slain, who
entertained him kindly, and though they were Reproached, Hated, and Persecuted,
for showing Favor to him, yet they never lost any Thing by him, but
contrariwise were infinite Gainers, for he never came empty handed to any Man's
House, but always brought Plenty of good Things along with him, yea, such
Things, the Worth and Value whereof no Mortal is able to compute, (as I Will show
hereafter, God assisting;) nay, so great a friend he was to the next Man, which
I find eminently embraced him, that he saved him from the Grave, he sent him to
Heaven without calling at the Gate of Death; his Name, as I remember, was
Enoch, and it is not to be thought what sweet and heavenly Communion, true Joy
and Felicity this good Man had with Godliness, for the space of three hundred
Years, for so long they abode together on Earth, and now dwell together with
the Father of True Godliness, and his only begotten Son in Heaven. Some time
after this great Prince (for so they are all made who entertain True Godliness)
was (...) Monster and Offspring of Hell, (viz) Vice, finding such great Favor
with the Men of that Generation, they delighting in nothing more than in Sin
and Wickedness, hating God, and his true and lovely Offspring Godliness, it
provoked him to take Vengeance upon them, and utterly to destroy them from off
the Earth; and this was done by a fearful and amazing Flood of Water: Now, this
heavy Judgment was brought, I say, upon the Men of that Generation, for their
Slighting, Neglecting, and basely Contemning of Godliness, and sad it was, to
consider how generally Men were at that Time out of love with him, for there
was not one in ten thousand but hated him, and loved Vice and Ungodliness far
better than he; nay, to tell you plainly, there was but one Man in all the
World who was an eminent Lover of this noble and highborn Prince Godliness,
whose Name was Noah, though it is not to be doubted but his Wife and Sons,
especially two of them, were in some measure Favorites of him likewise: But
mark how at that Time it fared with this holy Man and his Family, who were
friends to Godliness, never a one of them were destroyed by that Flood; we may
well say, Godliness is profitable unto all Things, and blessed are all they who
love and kindly Entertain him; for had it not been for Godliness, Noah had
doubtless perished as well as others.

But to proceed in this brief History of the Antiquity of Godliness, it would
not be amiss if we speak a little of the next renowned Man after Noah, who
entertained him, and how he was blessed in so doing; his Name at first was
Abram, but afterward Abraham: This Man lived for some Time amongst a blind,
heathenish, and idolatrous People, and was ignorant of True Godliness; but when
he became acquainted with him, sew Men ever loved him Delight, (and so indeed
must every one that entertains him) and hereby he became great, and his Glory
and Renown was spread abroad; nay, he was by this Means so honored,, that he
was called the Friend of God, and the Father of all true Lovers of Godliness;
and besides the outward Blessings this faithful Man reaped, as the Fruit or
Donation of Godliness, (which were many, for he had much Cattle, Menservants,
Camels, and Asses, so that he became very great) and he was blessed also with
all spiritual Blessings, viz. He had sweet Fellowship and Communion with God,
abounding in Faith, Love, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; the Covenant of Grace was
also renewed to him, with a gracious Promise, That in his Seed all the Nations
of the Earth should be blessed; for he having received Godliness as his
choicest Companion and chiefest Delight, Godliness brought along with him the
Promises of this Life, and that which is a thousand Times better, viz. the Life
which is to come.

But now, near where this faithful Man dwelt, there was a City; nay, more than
one, whose Inhabitants were utter Enemies to Godliness, and Lovers of that ugly
and base-born Monster and Spawn of the Devil, Vice, abounding in all Manner of
horrible Wickedness, who for this very Reason were destroyed with their Cities,
by fire and Brimstone from Heaven; yet nevertheless, before they were consumed
(so great a Lover is Jehovah of Godliness) that he told Abraham, if there were
but Ten righteous Persons in that City, viz. such who had entertained
Godliness, and were true Lovers of him, he would spare the City for their
sakes; but it appeared that there was but one Man, especially who showed him
Countenance, and was in love with him. And yet, before the City was burned, the
Angels bid him haste and be gone, for Godliness was such a sure Defense to him
the A^^els could do nothing 'till he was gone forth: Sodom could not take fire
while righteous Lot was in it.

I might proceed further, and show you who they were that entertained Godliness
in the succeeding Ages, for the Space of more than two thousand Years, and what
great Blessings he brought unto them, and what they suffered for his sake; but
I can give but a brief Hint or two upon this Account; it is known to all what
Joseph suffered for him from his envious Brethren, and how Godliness advanced
him for his Integrity to him at last. Moreover, the Children of Israel, after
Joseph was dead, were, through that Love they bore to him, grievously oppressed
by the mighty King of Egypt, but it proved his own utter Ruin in the End.
David, for the Love he bare to him, was for many Years together greatly
persecuted, but afterward Godliness raised him to great Honor, and made him
very rich, and set a Crown upon his Head; all along I might show you in ancient
Days he was very much hated and persecuted; nay, and some of his true Friends
and Favorites, were for his sake, cast into a fiery Fumace, and another into a
Lion's Den, yet they never lost any thing by him, nor did they ever repent the
Entertainment they gave him. If we should come lower into the Times of the
Gospel, it is well known what Usage he met with in our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and his blessed Apostles; after wards also by the heathen Emperors, he
was most abominably hated and persecuted, and all those who entertained him,
were put to all Manner of cruel Deaths and Torments imaginable.

Lastly, We might also show what hard Usage he met with by Counterfeit
Godliness, I mean Papistry, for near twelve hundred Years, and how many of his
dear Children and Servants, have for the sake of him been burnt to Death and
otherwise tormented in most Nations of Europs; but let what has been said
suffice, touching the Antiquity, Gray Hairs, and Usage of True Godliness in
former Days.

CHAP. II.
Showing who the chief Enemies of Godliness are.

HAving given you a brief Account of the Pedigree, Original, and Antiquity of
True Godliness, wherein occasionally has been hinted some of those great
Abuses he met withal in ancient Times; I judge it may not be amiss (before I
come to treat of his Travels and Entertainments in these latter Days, and how
it fares with him in this present Juncture) to give a Description of some of
his chiefest Adversaries, to the End the true lovers of Godliness may be aware
of them, and those who have a Mind to be acquainted with him, and are hindered
from receiving him into their Houses, (i.e. their Hearts) may know the Cause
and Reason of it. Now,

1. One of the chiefest Enemies of this great Prince and Favorite of Heaven,
is the Devil, nor is there any one that hates him more. 2. Sin, alias Vice,
alias Lust. 3. The Flesh. 4. The World.
But because this general and common Description is not sufficient to discover
the great Danger Men and Women are in, by certain other secret and domestic
Enemies, Who the Enemies of Godliness are.
who are the cursed Emissaries and Servants of those grand Adversaries of True
Godliness, some of which many are ready to entertain as Friends, not suspecting
the fatal Danger they are in thereby; I shall, upon this, therefore give you an
Account of a few of them, and tell you their Names. The first I shall begin
with is Unbelief, a very dangerous Fellow. 2. Pride. 3. Vainglory. 4.
Formality. 5. Hypocrisy. 6. Oppression. 7. Heresy. 8. Superstition. 9.
Idolatry, alias Papistry. 10. Prosperity. 11. Persecution. 12. Ignorance. 13.
Blind-Zeal. 14. Vain-Hope. 15. Sloth, alias Idleness. 16. Covetousness 17. Old
Custom. 18. Evil-Example. 19. Self-Righteousness. 20. Presumption. 21. Despair.
22. Slavish-Fear. 23. A sensual. Pleasure. And 24. Apostasy.
With many other of like Quality, too tedious here to reckon up; but by
mentioning the Names of these, you may easily discern who and what the others
are, who, with their Attendants are all implacable Enemies to true Godliness,
and as much as lies in them, endeavor to hinder his being entertained
wheresoever he comes, as you will find in the ensuing History of his Travels.
Now the Reason why True Godliness has so many Enemies, I had thought to have
showed in this Place, but because I will not hinder you from the main Scope and
Design of this Treatise, I shall reserve them for a more convenient Place.

CHAP. III.
Showing how Godliness, having received a Commission to travel, and visit the
Children of Men, comes to a certain Town on the Confines of Babylon, where one
Riches dwelt, and of his usage and evil Treatment there.

THE great and mighty JEHOVAH, the God and Father of true Grace and Godliness,
out of his great Mercy and infinite Goodness to Mankind, graciously was pleased
to send them a Savior; yea, a great and mighty Savior, or one able to save to
the uttermost all that come to God by him, Heb. 7.25. And to the end, that they
might have the Knowledge of this blessed Savior, he has sent the Gospel
amongst them, but in his eternal Wisdom has so Decreed and Ordained it, that
no Man should have any saving Benefit by this glorious Savior, but he who does
Receive, Entertain, and kindly Embrace True Godliness whenever he is sent to
Visit them; and to the end therefore, that they might not miss of so great a
Blessing which Godliness brings along with him: I may safely adventure to say,
according to my present Method, and to pursue my Allegorical Discourse;
Godliness has received Commission from the King of Heaven and Earth to Travel,
to see who would Embrace and Entertain him. Moreover, it appears his Commission
was very large, he was not limited to the small confines of Jury, nor to Travel
only in the Land of Canaan, but to go into all the World, or to Travel into all
Nations, Countries and Kingdoms of the Earth, Matt. 28.19, 20. Mark 16.15. and
to Visit the Rich and poor, the Old and Young, as well the King on the Throne,
as the Beggar on the Dunghill; even all Bond and Free, Male and Female; nor was
he sent to Travel alone, but had a very rich and glorious Retinue always with
him; neither did he come to any Man's House empty handed, but brought along
with him most rich and glorious Presents of the choicest Things of Heaven, the
worth of which is infinite, or beyond Computation. But since I perceive he is
come to a certain Town, where one Riches dwells, and is now at his Door, let us
see what Entertainment he meets with at this Place.

Now Godliness knocked very hard and often before any within would give an
Answer, Godliness knocks at Riches door.
Riches being full of Business; for either he was telling of his Money, or
casting up his Accounts, to see what his Neighbors owed him, or else
consulting new Projects to increase his Store, for I perceive he is a Person
never satisfied; besides, the Times being very perilous, his Mind was filled
with perplexing and vexatious Thoughts, how to save and keep what he had
already gotten; so that he had no Leisure nor Time to listen to the continual
knocking of True Godliness at his Door, insomuch that Godliness was forced to
stay there a long Time, and that which grieved this highborn Prince most of
all, was this, (viz.) be perceived that no sooner than some other Guests came
to his Door, (who were Persons much inferior, as to Birth and Quality, to him,
and indeed not worthy of the least Regard, and not having Business of that
great Weight and Moment with him as Godliness had) yet he opened his Door
immediately to them; but before this renowned Hero and darling of Heaven could
get in, Riches had so many base and ill-bred servants in his house, that they
clapped too the Door, so that he could not get so much as one Foot in. Now, the
Guests he so readily opened the Door unto, were (as I take them) these
following, (viz.) The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life, John 2.16. These he took much delight in, and kept Company with
continually; sometimes they had him to the Tavern, sometimes to the Playhouse,
and sometimes to Recreate him at Bowls, Cards, and Dice, with diverse other
sensual Sports and Pleasures; but at last it so fell out, that he was taken
very sick, and Godliness still waiting at his Door, it happened at this Time
one was in his House, who forced him to listen to this earnest and continual
knocking, his Name was Mr. Fearful; he is one that Riches does not at all love;
but when Sickness comes, he is grievously troubled with him; and he made him at
this Season to cry out, Who is there? Who is at the Door?

Godli. I am here, and have a long Time waited at your Door.


Rich. What is your Name?


Godli. My name is True Godliness, one that you have little Reason to slight,
neglect and contemn as you have done; for there is none you stand in more need
of, nor can do you that good as I can, and will do you, if you please but to
open your Door, and let me in.


Rich. Sir, I am troubled I have not minded you all this while; for I have a
great Reverence and Respect for Godliness. God forbid I should keep you out any
longer.

Upon this the whole House was in an Uproar, for he had) as I told you before)
diverse loose, ill bread, or rather Hell-bred Servants, all bitter Enemies to
True Godliness, their Names were Presumption, Pride, Unbelief, Ignorance,
Malice, Vain-hope, Covetousness, etc. These, and several other base Companions
of like Quality, (whom he had brought up, and a long Time cherished in his
House) seemed mightily concerned, that the least heed or attention should be
given to True Godliness; they also enquired who was the Cause of it; at last
they understood it was Mr. Fearful, then they presently joined together to fall
upon Fearful, and turn him out of the House. Presumption struck the first blow,
and spoke also to this Purpose.


Presumpt. Are not you a base Fellow, thus to Disturb my Master, as to cause
him in the least to doubt of the Strength of his strong and impregnable
Fortification, Riches bags of gold and silver.
wherein he has placed his long Confidence, and not to force him to incline to
open unto True Godliness, who is our utter Enemy? Is he not an honest Man? What
can you Charge him with? What cause or ground is there for this Disturbance?
Has he not done much good in the Parish where he lives, and given many a piece
of Bread at his Door? I warrant you it will go well with him, Fearful, What do
you say?


Fearf. Truly Sir, I seeing him very Sick, thought he might die in his Sins.


Presumpt. Thou Fool, what and if he should, did not Jesus Christ die for
Sinners? God is merciful, and will forgive Men their Sins at any Time, even at
the very last Hour, if they do but call upon him. Besides, Fearful, are you mad
to give way, much more to force him to open to True Godliness; for if once he
is let into the House, you will be immediately turned out, and hardly, if ever,
have one Meals-Meat more, nor the least Countenance.


Fearf. Truly, Presumption, the Fault was not principally mine; I was partly
forced to do what I did.


Presumpt. Forced by whom? Who forced you?


Fearf. 'Twas the Steward of the House, who keeps the Records, or an Account of
all that is done, whose Name is Conscience; he finding much Guilt lying upon
him through his Cruelty, Hard-Heartedness and debauched Life, stirred me up to
do what I have done; nay, Conscience told him he had been such a vile and
graceless Wretch, that if he died, he would go immediately to Hell; therefore
you cannot blame me for disquieting of him.


Pride. Hearken to me a little: Is it not, my Masters, below such a brave and
heroic Spirit, that always attends Riches, to be troubled about Sin, or give
way to a bawling Conscience, and this ill bred Fellow Fearful, I hate the
Tho'ts of it; this is the Way to bring him to Reproach and Shame amongst his
Neighbors, and to make great Men to Laugh at him and Contemn him, who have
been his Companions. My great Prince Lucifer sent me into his Service, and I
will not betray my Trust, ever to give Way, that this unwelcome and hateful
Traveller, True Godliness should be let in, who would beguile my Prince of his
Right.


Unbeli. Alas, Sirs, there is no Danger, I agree with my Friend and dearest
Brother Presumption, that his Condition is good enough, let Conscience say what
he will, (for if there be a Hell, for I much question it) yet he will go,
should he die, I will assure you to Heaven.


Ignor. What a stir is here? If our Master was poor, and had not so many Bags
of Gold and Silver, there might be some ground for this base Fellow Fearful, to
disquiet him: I can give as good Counsel as any of you: Money answers all
Things, he may make Friends with she Mammon of unrighteousness; let him give a
little more than usual to the Poor, and that will merit God's Favor: Who would
not part with a little Money, to get peace of Conscience, and purchase a place
in Heaven: Charity is more than all your new Notions of Religion: Read 1 Cor.
13. Though I know but little, I am not such an Ignoramus as some think.


Vain-hope. I am of the Mind with my Brother Unbelief; and 'twas I, also you
know, who have kept up his Spirits all along, and did what I could to stop
Steward Conscience's Mouth from giving way to Mr. Fearful, to open the Door,
let him therefore but put his Trust in me, and I warrant you he will fear
nothing.


Presumpt. Come, cease this Noise, all is well enough yet, Godliness is not let
in, and our Master is much better than he was; and though Conscience incline to
embrace this our Enemy, yet you will find he will not be regarded e're a little
while: Pray let us all agree at present, to stir up Riches eldest Son, whose
Name is Honor, the Father's Darling, and the hopes of all the Family, to see
what he can do, in order to keep our Enemy Godliness out. Now, our Friend Pride
is the fittest to be employed in this Work, for he is much in Favor with our
Master's Eldest Son, and his own-Child too. After a short time thus it fell
out: Riches being recovered, he consulted with Worldly Honor, a great Enemy to
True Godliness, which was one Reason why the Father and true Image of Godliness
said a great while ago, How can ye believe, that receive honor one of another,
and seek not the honor that comes from God alone, John 5.44. Now, Pride,
Ambition and Honor, being all three the (...) Offspring of Riches, got so
much into his Ass^^^ion, that (...) ^^^liness was kept out, (making good that
Word, The wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after
God: God is not in all his thoughts) and Conscience being at this time almost
stifled, Fearful was forced to fly and hide himself in some hole, till another
Season: But Godliness remained at his Door for a long Time, even till he waxed
old, and Conscience having recovered a little Strength, (by reason of his going
now and then to hear a Sermon) stirred up Mr. Fearful again to open the Door,
and had almost prevailed, had not a cursed Servant of Riches, who, I take, was
his Purse-Keeper; be-stirr'd himself, whose Name was Coveteousness, an
implacable Enemy to True Godliness, who, when he perceived, Godliness was like
to meet with some seeming Entertainment, spoke to Riches after this sort.


Covet. Sir, will you be so foolish now in your old Age, as to open you Door to
this Stranger, and factious Person, Godliness? It will be to your great Loss
and Injury, if you do I will assure you: And besides, I who have been a true
Drudge to you all along, and by the Means of whom you have got most of your
Estate, shall at the very Instant you Receive him into your House, be turned
out; nay, and not only so, but also be brought under a severe Sentence, and be
condemned to Die for Idolatry, and then your Money will fly, for you will find
him a chargeable Gentleman, for he teaches a Doctrine that I am sure you hate,
and I cannot blame you, for it is very destructive to your Interest.


Riches. What Doctrine is that, prithee inform me, for I have a very good
Esteem for thee; and in Truth, for a long Time have been sensible of the
gainful Service thou haft done me; for when I kept my old Servant Prodigality
to be my Purse-Keeper, I could never Thrive; but since I met with thee, I have
increased my Substance exceedingly.


Covet. Why Sir, then I will tell you, he teaches Riches to sell all that he
has, and give it to the Poor, and to follow a new Master who had not one Foot
of Land in all the World, nor a House to dwell in; no, nor one Penny of Money
in his Pocket, whose Disciples were generally poor illiterate contemptible
People, etc. Sir, in a Word, ^f you open to this Godliness, you will be undone;
for though you are not put upon the selling all you have presently, yet you will
be forced by him to give to the poor Saints (as they call them) not a little,
but according to what your Estate and their Necessity is; nay, you will not
know when you have done, for he will find out for you every Day new Objects of
Charity; he will tell you there are so many poor Parish-Children to be put out,
and so much you must give with them, and so many aged Widows, who must be
relieved; and who should do it, he will say, but Riches; nay, it is a thousand
to one if he does not put you to build an Hospital for them: Besides, when you
have done this, he will not let you rest, but will tell you, whenever Christ
in his Members is Sick, you must Visit them; and when Hungry, Feed them; when
Naked, Cloth them; and when in Prison, you must Relieve them; take Notice that
he will send you to this Prison and that Prison, to see if Christ be not there,
I mean some of his poor Children who lie there for his sake; if there be any,
though they may not in all points of Religion agree with you, yet he will tell
you, you must not let them want whilst you have enough to supply their
Necessities, and if you do, he will tell you, go ye Cursed will be you Portion
at last. Besides all this, you do not think what a deal of Money he will tell
you is your Duty to give to Pastors and Ministers of the Gospel, who are his
great Instruments and Promoters in the World; nay, Sir, he positively Affirms,
you ought not only to give to them just so much as will supply their
Necessities, but that it is your Duty to give, and their right jure divino, to
have a plentiful Allowance, so that they may be freed from all the perplexing
Cares of this Life; and not only so, but also may put them into a Capacity to
provide for their Wives and Children, that they may not be exposed to Want and
Necessities after they themselves are Dead, and to have so much out of your
Estate, as to be able to give to others also, that so they may be Examples of
Charity, (and indeed I cannot deny but that the Scriptures do say they ought to
be Men given to Hospitality, Tit. 1.8.) and many of them are Poor, and
therefore how they should do this Godliness says it is impossible, unless they
are capacitated so to do by Riches. Moreover, I will tell you more, (now I am
about it) this Godliness is so unhappy, and in truth has always been, that he
has many great and potent Enemies, so that they who receive and entertain him
have been exposed to great Troubles and Persecutions in the World.


Riches. I must confess thou have said enough to make me for ever out of Love
with True Godliness, I cannot bear the Thoughts of Entertaining such a Guest as
this in my House, but what should I do with my bawling Steward Conscience, for
he ever now and then tells me I must give Way to him, and stirs up Mr. Fearful
my Lodger (one that I hate, but cannot be rid of, let me do what I can) to
terrify me with the Thoughts of Hell and Damnation; for without holiness (I
must confess I have read it) no man shall see the Lord; and it is said too,
Whoever will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.


Covet. Why, truly Sir, I see no Remedy, but you must resolve to stifle him;
for I perceive he is the chief Cause of all the Disturbance and Trouble that is
in your House, and not only so, but in part, of all the Confusions and
Divisions which are this Day in the World; but which way this shall be done, I
must refer you to that worthy Gentleman and understanding Servant of yours Dr.
Self-love; for in this Case I am not fit to give Counsel, being not brought up
in Learning; but he and Sir Worldly Wisdom being both able Divines, will be
sure to find out a ready Way to do it, so that you shall not be troubled with
him any more; and this I will assure you, if I can be any ways helpful to them
in the Business, I will be at your Command, so long as you please to entertain
me. Dr. Self-love and Sir Worldly Wisdom being at hand Riches called for them,
to whom he addressed himself after this Manner.


Rich. Gentlemen, you have both great Learning and Experience in the Laws, both
divine and humane; I pray be pleased to give me a little of your Counsel, my
Case is this: There is one who calls himself True Godliness at my Door, and
presses hard for Entertainment, but by means of a Description I have lately had
of his Manners and Attendance, I perceive it will be dangerous at this Time for
me to receive him, or show him the least kindness. But I have a troublesome
Steward in the House, whom I cannot be rid of, who here of late too much
adheres to him, and is ready too often to give way to open the Door, so that by
his means and one Mr. Fearful, a timorous Fellow, whom he stirs up, I have of
late had but very little quiet: Now, what will you Advise me to do in this sad
Condition.


Dr. Self-love. You must not give way to him, for I know him well enough, his
Name is Conscience. Sir, if you follow his Dictates, and embrace this
Godliness, you will be undone, and your Wife and Children soon will be brought
to a piece of Bread, notwithstanding your great Estate: But alas, he is grown
old, and is in his Dotage, and for want of good Eyesight errs exceedingly;
nay, is so erroneous, that you do well to advise with us; come, doubt not but
we shall inform him better. Sir, your great Fault has been this, (I perceive
it clearly) you have read too much of late, why should you concern your self
with the Bible? I think it had been well if it had never been translated into
our Mother Tongue, this has given him opportunity to disturb your Mind; come,
give over this in the first place: The cause you know, of a Distemper, must be
first removed, or no effectual Cure can be expected, it is enough for you to
mind your secular Affairs, things of Religion belong to religious Men; and when
Conscience for any Sin gripes you, divert your self amongst the brave Heroes
you used to keep Company with, get to the Tavern, or to some Playhouse; but be
sure at no Time you read any Book besides your Books of Accounts and Romances,
or such like: And for Religion, let me tell you, that natural Religion is
sufficient, and that what this Traveller says, is but mysterious Nonsense,
enough to make Men mad. I do not say you should not be Religious at all, no,
God forbid I should give you such Counsel; but there is no need to entertain
strict Godliness, because you may be saved without it, else, Lord, what will
become of the greatest part of the World! go to Church and hear Prayers, but
besure forbear to go to such Churches where any bawling Preacher endeavors to
reach your Conscience. Can any Man persuade me his Soul cannot be saved, unless
he sell all he has, and give it to the poor, and so become a Fool, that he may
be wise, who can believe that another's Righteousness can make me Righteous
before God.


Sir Worldly Wisdom. Mr. Riches, the Counsel which my Brother has given is
very good, besure you are never led by the dictates of your Steward Conscience,
to expose your self to any loss or reproach for Religion; you hear you may be,
nay, ought to be Religious; and what is Religion, but to live an honest and
sober Life, to fear God, honor the King, say our Prayers, and pay our Debts:
But I have just now though it of a way that will do, you having a great Estate,
pray get another Servant into your House, keep a Chaplain in your Family; this
done, you will find all will be well, and you will hear no more Complaints from
within or without, for you will be taken by all your Servants, and others too,
for a godly Man; neither believe nor regard what such Bablers say, who talk of
such Things that lie above all humane Reason, as Mr. Self-love noted; can three
be one, or one be three? Or a Woman bear a Son, that never knew a Man? Or can a
Man be that God that made the World? Or can his Righteousness be yours? No, no,
your own good deeds justify you; this Godliness is but foolishness, regard him
not.


Riches having thanked them for their good Counsel, with a great deal of Joy,
retires himself, being very well satisfied with the Advice Dr. Self-love and
Sir Worldly Wisdom had given him. And indeed, this is the misery of most Rich
Men (viz) if they lie under any Conviction of Sin, from that little light
Conscience has at any time got, then presently (being stirred up thereto by
Covetousness;) they consult with Flesh and Blood, and then Dr. Self-love and
Sir Worldly Wisdom are their great Counselors.

But to proceed, Riches got now a Chaplain, and instead of opening to True
Godliness, he opens to Counterfeit Godliness, which was occasioned through
Ignorance, and those other foolish Counselors he hearkened to. Now, this Man,
as it appears, proved a sad Fellow, for though he was a Scholar, being brought
up in some University, yet he never cared to read the Bible, but as some say,
would now and then curse it, love to read Romances and Song-Books. But poor
Conscience being stifled, in a little time he gave Content to the whole Family,
in that he could mumble over a few Prayers out of a Book: And that in the
second place, he could Bowl, drink Healths, be Drunk, and cry Damn him with any
of them; and there was indeed never a one in all the Family that hated True
Godliness more than he; for he made Songs of him, and Scoffed, Jeered and
Derided him, continually calling him a Mysterious and Nonsensical Fellow,
talking of Things against all human Reason, and above all belief, of three that
are but one; and he made himself and others Merry with his mean, low and
distressed Condition, and also stirred up all the Neighborhood, to find Fault
and Quarrel with all those who were Friends and true Lovers of him.

Godliness now perceived he was like to have but cool Entertainment at his
House, having waited at Riches Gate till his Patience was almost worn out,
began to think of a Removal, and to Travel to some other Place; but before he
took his final Farewell, he was resolved to speak his Mind freely to him,
thereby to leave him without any kind of Excuse whatsoever, and therefore
Addressed himself to him after this Manner, being at the Door ready to depart.


Godliness. Well, Riches, I see now very plainly, you did but flatter me when
you began to hearken to your poor Steward Conscience, in order to the letting
me into your House; for evident it is, you are grown far worse than before, and
have blinded his Eyes, by entertaining another, who calls himself by my Name
instead of me; but before I do depart, I will show you the great danger you are
in, and the Cause of it; the Truth is, you have got such a Crew of loose, base
and deceitful Servants, that they will utterly undo you, and bring upon you the
eternal Ruin of your poor Soul, which I designed by my coming to you, to save
and make happy for ever; for indeed (whether you believe it or no) there was
never any who entertained these graceless Villains and Enemies of God, but were
for ever ruined by them at last; nay, not only eternally hereafter in the World
to come, but many times externally here in this World; therefore I advise you
to do what you can to get rid of them, and I will help you to far better
Servants in their stead. For first of all, can you think it will be safe for
you to keep Presumption still in your House, since there is scarce a more
deceitful and bloody Wretch in the World? How many thousands of poor Souls has
he impudently destroyed, by causing them to presume on the Mercy of God, and
the death of Christ, and yet live in Sin, Pride, and Covetousness, and in a
vile Manner hating and contemning me, that is to say, True Godliness? Does not
God say, It is hard for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven, and yet
you are persuaded by him, to think it is an easy thing? And does not the
Scriptures say, Except your righteousness do exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of God? Mat.
5.20. And yet he tells you that by doing a few good Deeds, or by giving a
little of your great abundance to the Poor, your State is good enough; whereas
many of the Pharisees did as to acts of Charity, exceedingly out do you; nay,
does not St Paul say, though he gave all his goods to feed the poor, and his
body to be burned, yet without Charity, (that is to say, true love to
Godliness) he was nothing, 1 Cor. 13.3. and yet you, though you flight and
contemn God and Godliness, are taught to presume on God's Mercy, who has
notwithstanding positively said concerning you, and such as you are; He that
made them will not save them; and he that formed them, will show them no
favor, Isa. 27.11.

As touching what Self-love says, it is abominable; do you not find the Lord
Jesus saying, that unless a man deny himself he cannot be my disciple, Mat.
16.22. Now this Fellow is one of the rest there meant, even Self-love and
Self-righteousness, as well as Sinful-self and Natural self. Sir, you must get
rid of them all, or perish for ever.

Will you love your self more than Christ? Self-love must die, he is a Traitor
to the Lord of Life and Glory; and an utter Enemy to your own Soul; if you make
him your Counselor, you are an undone Man.

And then as to Worldly Wisdom, he is the Devil's Attorney General, that ever
gives Counsel to all that hearken to him against God and Christ, and all
revealed Religion; this is he that Satan has stirred up (since Liberty of
Conscience has been established, and Popery has been vanquished) to deceive
and ruin the Souls of Men; it is he that ridicules all supernatural discoveries
of God, or revealed Religion, and would indeed rob the whole Kingdom of the
Gospel of Christ, and so Paganize this Isle again. Does not Paul say, the world
by wisdom knew not God? He would have you believe nothing to be a Truth or
Principle of Religion that lies above your own humane Reason; and therefore he
says there is nothing mysterious in Christianity; by which he gives the
Scripture the Lie, that says without controversy great is the mystery of
Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.

He will not suffer such that hearken to him, to believe the Trinity of Persons
in the sacred Godhead, nor that Christ is the most high God, and yet very Man
in one Person, because it lies above Man's Wisdom, or human Understanding to
comprehend it; nor that sinners can be justified by an imputed Righteousness,
or by the active and passive obedience of Christ, though it is positively asserted
to be thus, by the Spirit of God in the Word.

This Worldly Wisdom and Sir Humane Reason taught the Greeks (in the Apostles
time) to contemn the preaching of Christ crucified, and Salvation by him, as a
foolish Notion, or idle Dream; and so they strive to persuade People to think
now, and so to trample the chief Principles of the Christian Faith under their
Feet.

Alas! it is evident, that there are many earthly Things, or Things in Nature,
which no Man can comprehend nor give Reason of; and is it any marvel then, that
the Mysteries of the Gospel, or the deep things of God, are above Man's humane
Reason to conceive of them, so as to comprehend them?

Yet know, though these Mysteries are above humane Reason, they are not against
Reason to believe them: Is it not reasonable that Men believe what the God of
Truth affirms, and the eternal Father, Son and Spirit bear Record unto? These
Wretches would not have you to sell all you have, and give it to the poor, yet
you know the Lord Jesus Christ gave that Counsel to a Rich Man; and if you do
not part with all in your Love and Affection, and actually when God calls for
it, you can be no true Christian, because you do not love God with all your
Heart, nor above your Gold and Silver, or earthly Riches.

Moreover, if you will not choose to become a fool in the Esteem of carnal Men,
you can never be truly wise; see 1 Cor. 3.18. If any man among you seems to
be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise: Let the wise
Men of Reason account you a fool, if you are spiritually wise, wise unto
Salvation, matter not how you are called and censured by such whom Satan has
blinded: Does not the Apostle say, that the world by wisdom knew not God.

And then, as touching your Servant Unbelief, he is such a bloody and devouring
Monster, that he has sent Millions to Hell, by hindering them from believing
what God has said in his Word, touching his Grace and Clemency to true
Believers, and his Wrath and Vengeance to the impenitent and unbelieving Soul;
he will not suffer you to Believe nor give Credit to that Word, If any man
loves the world, the love of the father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. Nor to that
Word, Except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God, John 3.3.
And he that believes not, shall be damned; Mark 16.16. And many like dreadful
Sentences, which he will not suffer you to regard, nor give the least credit
to; and thus he teaches you to make God a liar, for he has said, You shall
without true faith, be damned, and perish in your sins; but he says, ye shall
be saved though ye live in your sins.

As to what Ignorance says, that you may purchase or merit peace of conscience,
by giving more liberally to the poor, and that may also make you friends of the
mammon of unrighteousness; he makes you think that God and Jesus Christ will
that way become your friends, and save your Soul when you fail, or come to die.

Sir, if you give all your Goods to feed the Poor, or give all you have to them
(which you are far from doing) yet you would be miserable, nothing that you can
do can change your State or procure God's acceptance of your Person; no, you
must obtain union with Christ, or receive me, or perish in your Sins for ever.
If Money co^'d purchase Peace of Conscience, or giving Liberally to the Poor
merit Heaven, what Rich Man need to fear being damned? And then also it might
be very easy for a rich men to enter into the kingdom of heaven, which the Lord
Christ says is not an easy thing. Sir, while the World is in your Heart, in
your Love and Affection, the love of the father is not in you, though ye give
much to the Poor.

As the young Man, who was very Rich, wanted one Thing, so do you, that is,
true Faith, and an Interest in Christ: You must be born again, or you cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and that you can never be, until you receive
the holy Spirit, and let in True Godliness: Whosoever receives me, receives the
Spirit, and true and right Principles; such as these, that all your own
righteousness is as filthy rags; and that all Works before Grace are dead
Works, and profit Men nothing.

Moreover,

That Christ's Righteousness, exclusive of all inherent Righteousness, alone
justifies a believing Sinner, etc.

As concerning Pride, whom you entertain and hug in your Bosom as a sweet and
beloved Friend, he has been the ruin of many Souls likewise; nay, and not only
Men, but Angels also, for it is though it he was the principal one who wrought their
eternal Destruction, and from Heaven cast them down to Hell, and of Angels of
light made them Devils. But, Sir, pray remember that Word, Pride goes before
destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall. What became of the great King
of Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar, for entertaining this Fellow? Was it not Pride that
brought him down with a Vengeance, and turned him a Grazing, to eat Straw like
Oxen? Dan. 3.4. Moreover, what became of Herod the great, who was so fond of
this Companion? Did he not bring God's heavy Wrath upon him in such a dreadful
Manner, that a blessed Angel was sent to smite him with Death immediately, and
he was eaten of Worms? Acts 12.23. Have you not read, that the day comes which
shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be
stubble? Mal. 4.1. This haughty Villain, Pride, is one of those seven Things as
Solomon shows, which God hates, Prove. 6.16. If you will not Riches, be
persuaded from hence to ^uin him out of your House, even take what will follow.

Vain hope, I know is one that has kept up your Spirit, and spoke Peace to you
all along, but he is fifty so called, for he will leave you like a deceitful,
false-hearted and treacherous Friend, when you come to fall into Distress. You
hope to be saved, (and so did many thousands that are now in Hell) but alas!
what ground have you to build your Hope upon! The hypocrites hope shall perish,
whose hape shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be as a spiders web, Job
8.13, 14.

Ah, Sir, what will your Hope avail you, though you have gained the world when
God takes away your soul? Job 27.8.

And lastly, as touching your sweet darling Covetousness, he is made up with
Idolatry, and what can be more detestable to Jehovah? so long as you entertain
and love him, you adore an Idol; he is indeed the Ringleader to almost all
manner of Wickedness; nay, there is scarcely a viler and more abominable Wretch
breathing on God's Earth, therefore justly called, the root of all evil, 1 Timothy
6.10. He has taught many to play the Thief, others to commit Treason, and
others to Murder Innocents for their Inheritance; he is guilty of Bribery,
Usury, Extortion, and Oppression: It was he that made poor Achan lose his sweet
Life, he also contrived the death of Naboth and his Sons; and more than all, he
tempted Judas to sell, and basely betray my dear Lord and Master JESUS CHRIST,
for thirty pieces of Silver: Do not blame me therefore, if I bear so hard
against him: Moreover, I can scarcely ever get one Foot into any Rich Man's
House through his Means; it is he and his Companions who keep me out; he has
through his hard-heartedness, almost famished to Death all the Poor, both in
City and Country, and has also of late very near betrayed my whole Interest
that I have in the World, into the Enemies hands; he has also grievously
corrupted many who profess kindness to me, by incumbring their Minds so with
the Affairs of this Life, that they cannot find the Way to the Church; when
they should be hearing of God's Word, he forces them to abide in their Shops;
nor will he suffer many of them to take a little Time to Pray in their
Families, nor in their Closets: He has also exposed many of my poor Ministers
to many great Straits and Necessities, by which means their Heads have been so
filled with the Cares of this Life, that they have been cut of Capacity to
preach the Gospel as they ought to preach it, nor can they get such helps that
are necessary, and all along of him: Nay, he has almost undone every Nation,
Kingdom and commonwealth; first, by corrupting the Law, and subverting
Justice, causing Judges to judge for Reward, and Lawyers to plead more for Fees
than Equity. And then secondly, by spoiling Commerce, for he has Monopolized
Trades and Commodities so into his own hands, and inhanced the Prices of
Things, that many Men have been undone by him. I cannot Sir, reckon up all his
horrible Crimes, and is this him you so dearly love? and must I be slighted and
disregarded by you through the love you bear to him? Alas, he will bring your
Soul if you follow him, to Destruction. Pray what became of Achan who harbored
him (mentioned before) also what became of Ananias and Saphira, whom he forced
to tell a lie to the Holy Ghost? Acts. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Who was it that caused
the young Man in the Gospel, to fall short of Heaven, and to go away from Jesus
Christ very sorrowful, and Demas to turn Apostate, and to embrace this present
evil World? Was it not Coveteousness? Ah, Sir, take heed of this abominable
Miscreant, for though some wicked ones of the Earth may bless you, yet he causes
God to hate you. See what David says, The wicked boasts of his heart's
desire, and blesses the covetous, whom the Lord abhors, Psalm. 10.3.
Consider of these Things, and be persuaded to put away all these deceitful and
hell-bred Companions, which you have a long time nourished in your House, or it
will be worse with you I do assure you. O that you would now at last, before I
leave you, hearken to my Counsel, and receive me into your House, and renounce
that Monster you have lately embraced, who calls himself by my Name! What do
you say Riches?


Rich. Do you think I am such a Fool to give entertainment to you, and loose
all my great Honor and Credit amongst the brave Heroes of the Earth?


Godli. Why, Sir, is not that Honor that comes from God better than all the
vain Honor poor Mortals can give you? You have I am sure, a rare Example of
one to follow in this great Case: Remember Moses, and the renowned Galacius the
famous Marquis of Italy, he was not of your Mind. Some rich and noble Men have
for my Sake, denied themselves of all the glory of this World, and accounted
the Reproaches of Christ greater Riches than earthly Honors and Pleasures of
Sin, which are but for a Season.


Rich. If others were such Fools to disgrace and undo themselves, what is that
to me? I however, know what I have to do.


Godli. Sir, I perceive your Condition is miserable, for you seem to be
hardened, and whilst you had gracious Means afforded you, to bring you to
Repentance, you are grown worse and worse; however, let me tell you, if you die
before you have embraced and received me into your House, you will perish in
your Sins, and Hell will be your Portion forever; those who reject me reject
God and Jesus Christ also, and to tell you the Truth, all this Time that I have
been at your Door, the Lord Jesus has stood waiting at your Door with me
likewise.


Rich. Leave your canting, you are a bold and impudent piece; do you begin to
threaten me? am I not my own Master? would you lord it over me? I perceive what
you aim at, you would have me entertain you, that so your poor despised
Offspring, might have a good Fleece out of me: I could find in my Heart to be
revenged on you, and set all the Rabble of the Town upon you; Sirrah, I have
considered of the Business, and have had Advice what to do from two able
Counselors, Dr. Self-love and Sir Worldly Wisdom.


Godli. Sir, St. Paul did not take Advice of those two shallow, depraved,
degraded Counselors, i. e. He consulted not with flesh and blood.


Rich. Will you not leave your Prating? you will undo me, you are called
Godliness, but that is not your Name, you are, I understand, a factious Fellow,
and your Name is Stubbornness, alias Singularity, alias Sedition, one may know
what you are by the many Names you go by; know ye therefore, friend, that I
have received the True Godliness already, and him will I keep; he is indeed an
honorable Person, one who great Men love, and is in favor with the Princes of
the Earth! But as for you, I see no encouragement for any Body to Respect you;
for as most People in all Nations speak against you, and hate you, so you would
soon spoil all my Joys, and bring nothing but, Sorrow and Fear along with you,
should I entertain you; I must not so much as tell you a lie for my advantage,
but you would threaten me with Hell and Damnation, nor go to the Tavern, and by
chance be Drunk, and let now and then an Oath fly, but you would stir up my
Steward Conscience to fall upon me, and beat me unmercifully, (but I praise God
I am rid of him) nay and if I should not give to the Poor according to your
Humor, I should soon be censured and condemned by you as a wicked Person, yea,
and every sweet, pleasant and beloved Lust, which I value as my Life, you say,
must be mortified; no, my dearest darling must not be spared; I perceive what a
Fool you would make me, begone from my Door, or I will call one of my Servants,
who shall drive you out of the Town: his Name is Malice, alias Envy, before
whom you will not be able to stand; and upon that he struck at him with all his
might, which no sooner did his Chaplain Mr. Reader perceive, but he came to his
Assistance with cruel Rage, being stirred up by Envy, and fell upon Godliness
in a most base and cruel Manner, calling him all the vilest Names he could
devise, enough to make any ignorant and unthinking Man conclude True Holiness
was as hateful a Companion as any in the World, and before all things to be
eschewed and discountenanced: His Chaplain also would needs challenge to
dispute with him, and confute Godliness by Scripture, producing that text, Be
not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self overwise: why should thou
destroy thy self? Eccl. 7.16. He thought with this one Weapon to have knocked
True Godliness down, and have spoiled his Traveling for ever.


But he soon answered, and said, that no man could be truly righteous overmuch,
nor have too much of that pure wisdom that is from above; but that a Man might,
he told him, under pretense of Righteousness, do more than God required of him,
and so be righteous overmuch, (as the Papists and others are) and thereby
destroy himself, since Will Worship was of such an abominable Nature; and that
a Man might be also overwise in his own Conceit.

At this Answer the Dispute ended; and Riches perceiving his Chaplain was
worsted, envied True Godliness much more, and raised all the Rabble of the Town
upon him; amongst which were these following, (viz.) Pride, Ignorance, Wilful,
Hate-good, Toss-pot, Outsides, Riot, Wastful, Hard-heart, Belly-god,
Giddy-head, Pick-thank, Rob-saint, and more (...) such like rustical and
ill-bred Fellows; and moreover ^e swore, if he would not be gone, the sooner he
would ^end for the two Constables Oppression and Cr^^lty, to lay him fast
enough; at which poor Godliness was fain to get away, and hide himself, or else
for certain he had been knocked of the head, or basely put to Death; but he
being out of their reach, by the Providence of God, escaped without any hurt to
himself, but many of his poor Friends were sadly abused, who stood up to speak
on his Behalf, being reproached as the vilest of Men.

Godliness being thus forced to leave Riches's Door, Vice and Ungodliness took
the full Possession of his House, (i. e. his Heart) and Godliness went on his
way, wandering up and down to look for entertainment, with a sad heart, being
grieved to see how he had hitherto been slighted and traitorously abused,
notwithstanding his Birth, noble Descent, and Pedigree.

Does Godliness thus wander to and fro,
For want of Friends must he a begging go?
It Is not to seek Relief, as if that he
Himself was poor, and in Necessity;
But it is to make poor Mortals happy, who
By Sin are brought to Sorrow, Grief and Woe:
But Riches him rejects with hate and scorn,
Though by Christ sent, a Prince and Noble born,
Riches are good, when sanctified they are,
But otherwise a Curse, a Plague, a Snare;
Rich Men do much mistake, who only measure
True Happiness by having worldly Treasure.
An Angel has no Gold, nor Flocks, nor Land,
And yet is mighty, rich, his wealth does stand
In better things; although the just Man's Store
Is small, he has enough, a Rush for more;
God does himself, instead of Wealth impart
Unto that Child of his: O coveteous heart!
What would have more? Or can there be
Ought else, dear Soul, than what is possessed by thee?
Happy's the Poor, in whom the Lord does dwell;
The Rich by craving all, get naught but Hell.
Be not in love with Gold, a golden Purse
Without a Part in God, is but a curse.
Give me not Riches, Lord! nor make me poor,
Since Riches against thee does shut his Door.
CHAP. IV.
Showing how Godliness in his Travels came to a poor Cottage, where dwelt one
called Poverty, with whom he earnestly desired to make his Abode, and how he
was shamefully denied Entertainment there also.

GOdliness finding how basely he had been served by Riches, and that he could
not with all the strongest Arguments and Motives imaginable get any
entertainment with him, traveled farther; and as he wandered up and down in the
Wilderness of this World, at last he chanced to come to a small Village, at the
farthermost End of which (upon the Common) he espied a little Cottage, a poor
old ruinous Thing it was, the Windows being all broke, only they had crammed
into the Holes some old Rags, to keep out the Cold, and by the propping of it
up, it seemed as if it was ready to fall; but however, he remembering what his
blessed Lord and Master said, The Poor receive the Gospel; resolved to go
thither, and see whether he might not meet with Entertainment there; (for he is
no Respecter of Persons, he is as willing to be Guest to the Poor as to the
Rich, and to dwell with the Peasant as with the Prince; or to make his abode in
a Cottage as in a Palace:) And being come up to the Door, he understood the
poor Man's Name who dwelt there, was Poverty: Now Godliness knocked five or six
Times before he could have any Manner of Answer, for it seems he was asleep in
Bed with his Wife; but at last, being between sleeping and waking, he asked
(though very faintly) Who Is there? Who Is at the Door?

Godliness. I am here; pray arise and let me in.


Godliness. listened, but could not hear what Poverty said, by reason of the
noise within; for he having many Children, it happened that by this time they
were waked and fell into a fit of Crying; some wanted Victuals, and cried for
other Things, which he had not to give them; which made him one while to weep,
and another while to fret and storm at the poor Children; so that Godliness
could have no Answer till he knocked again, which he did, and that pretty hard.


Poverty. Who is at my Door?


Godli. A Friend; my Name is True Godliness.


Pov. Godliness! Pray what Business have you here?


Godli. I want a Lodging.


Pov. From whence came you, Sir, I doubt you have lost your Way; is this a
likely House to afford Entertainment to a Traveller?


Godli. I came last from a great Man's House not far off, whose Name is Riches.


Pov. Well, had he no Lodging for you, that you are come to me?


Godli. No, he has utterly refused to entertain me; and not only so, but has
basely abused me, calling me at his Pleasure, and also raised the rude Rabble
of the Town upon me.


Pov. He had some Reason for it, I warrant you; and truly I my self do not like
very well what you talk of, for he is a Man ready enough to open his Door to
any, who are worth entertaining; I mean profitable Guests: If you could get no
Lodging at his House, why do you think to meet with any here? Besides, though I
cannot deny but that I have heard of your Name, yet I know you not; and
moreover, I was forbid formerly to entertain one who goes by your Name, and it
may be you as far as I know; I know not what Times may come again: It Is, Sir, a
dangerous Thing to open one's Door to Strangers at any Time, but more
especially now, when there are so many cheats and Robbers abroad; Sir, though I
have not much to loose, yet my Life is as dear to me as any Man's; and should I
let you in, how you would deal with me, God knows; for I hear many thousands,
through your Means, have lost their lives and Estates.


Godli. I will, poor Soul, do thee no Wrong, but contrariwise; if you please to
open the Door, and kindly entertain me, you shall find me the best Friend that
ever you met with in all your life.


Pov. You speak well; but what is it you will do for me? Have you any Money to
give me to buy my Family a little good Victuals? (For we have had little else
besides Bread and Water a great while to live upon) and some better Clothes;
for my poor Children go almost naked.


Godli. I cannot at present assure thee of much earthly Fullness, or worldly
good Things; I do not use to proffer Men Money, or hire them to open their
Doors to me: No, I hate the thoughts of setting one Foot in such a Person's
House; if I am not freely and heartily received, I will not come in at all:
Friend, I do not trade in Gold and Silver; but this I will promise thee, if
thou will kindly let me in, whatsoever good thing the Lord sees thou do need,
thou shall, upon my honest Word, nay, and upon the Word of Christ himself, have
it; seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you, Mat. 6.33. You complain of want, come open to me; do
you not remember that Word, They that fear the Lord shall not want any good
thing, Psalm. 34.9. The Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will
he with old from them that walk uprighty, Psalm. 84.11. What do thou say,
Poverty?


Pov. I am in a very low Condition; what you mean I cannot tell, but this I
know, my Head and Heart is filled about other Things, alas, what can you think
to meet with, or expect from me? Do you not see what abundance of poor hungry
and ragged Boys and Girls I have? It Is enough for me to get Bread for them, I
must leave such Things which you talk of to my betters; I mean such who have
more time to mind them, and are better learned; God help me, I cannot tell what
to say to you.


Godli. Come, let me in; that is to say, become a true Convert, get a right
Faith, and lead a good and holy Life, and I shall teach thee to be more
diligent and industrious in thy Calling than thou have been, and not foolishly
and idly to waste so many Days Work in the Month: Thou will gain, thou will
find, every way by True Godliness.


Pov. Truly we poor Folks in the Country think it is Co^lliness eno' for us to
bear an honest Mind, and pay truly for what we have, and go to Church now and
then, to hear some good Prayers there, and say the Creed, the Ten Commandments
and the Lord's Prayer now and then at Home, when we come from Work, if we do
not chance to fall asleep first; for it has been so with me, God knows many a
time, the Lord help me; for if I though it it would be for my profit, I could find
my Heart to open to you.


Godli. Poverty, I will assure thee it will be infinitely for thy advantage;
have not read --


Pov. I cannot read, Sir.


Godli. But have you not heard then of that Word, Godliness is profitable unto
all things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come, 1 Timothy 4.8. And that Word, Godliness with contentment is great gain: And
now, because I see you are weak, I will tell you of some of those Blessings you
will gain, if you do receive me in Truth: First, I, wheresoever I come, bring
along with me Reconciliation with God, Pardon of Sin, Peace of Conscience, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost; nay, I raise Men to Honor too; I will make thee a Son
of God, and Heir of Heaven, and at last set a Crown of endless Glory upon thy
Head! What do thou say Poverty?


Pov. I had rather have some better Clothes, and store of good Provisions and a
better House to live in; these Things suit my present Necessity; but as
touching of those Things you talk of, I do not well understand what they are,
they may be but Fancies as far as I know: Besides, what Work will you set me
about? I cannot endure hard Labor.


Godli. But stay, Poverty, what kind of Fellows are those you have got in your
House?


Pov. What is that to you? Why do you not Answer my Question?


Godli. Why then I will tell you your Duty: You must believe in Christ, and
very fervently read the Holy Bible, and every Lord's Day with great reverence
and seriousness hear God's blessed Word, and Pray at least twice a Day; nay,
and I shall teach you to be more painful and laborious in your Trade and
worldly Business: But this I know cannot be done, unless you put away that Crew
of loose and naughty Fellows in your House.

Now Poverty had it seems, diverse base and lazy Companions, who were all grand
Enemies to True Godliness; also some of them it is said, were his own Children,
or natural Offspring; there Names were these, (viz) Unbelief, Ignorance, Sloth
alias Idleness, Wastful, Light fingers, Faint-heart, Carping cares and
Fear-man, together with some others: Now when he began to open to Godliness,
these hindered him.

First, Sloth and Idleness would not suffer him to rise out of his Bed of
Security to call upon God, nor take pains to pull up the Briars and Thorns that
grew in his Heart; by which Means his Field lay barren and untilled, nothing
growing therein, but what the Ground brought forth naturally: Nay these made
him of such a Sluggish Temper, and such a lover of Rest, that he complained
many times because he could not go without Motion: Nay, he was unwilling to be
at the Trouble of Feeding himself, and therefore would wish that Men might live
as Trees and Plants do: I remember a very wise Man told me, that he hides his
hand in his bosom, and it grieveth him to bring it again to his mouth, Prove.
26.15. by the means of these two lazy Fellows, Sloth and Idleness.

Ignorance told him he had received True Godliness already, and that he had
dwelt in his House ever since he was a Child, and that Baptism brought him in;
and that the chief Business which God required of him, was to get Bread and
Clothes for his Family.

Unbelief told him, that those Things which Godliness talked of, were mere
Fictions. But when he questioned the Truth of what Unbelief spoke upon this
account, then the Wretch told him, however they were Things far out of his
reach, neither could they (if it was possible to obtain them) answer his
present Necessities.

Light-fingers told him he had been for a great while his best Friend, and if
it had not been for him, he had been starved to Death long before now.

Distrustful sell into Discourse with his thieving Brother, and positively
said, if he turned Light-fingers out of his House (as he knew he must if
Godliness came in) he would certainly go a begging from Door to Door.

Wasteful told him, that True Godliness, if entertained, would not suffer him
to buy such good pieces of Beef, Mutton, etc. as he was used to do on trust,
unless he knew he was able to pay for 'em; and that he would not suffer him to
go any more to merry Meetings, and carouse it amongst good Fellows at the
Alehouse, nor recreate himself at Cards, Nine-Pins, and other Sports, for
Money on Holidays, and that he must be content with such mean Clothes and Fare
he had got, and never lose a Day's Work to gratify the Lusts of the Flesh; and
that also he must change his Company; which particularly was grievous to
Poverty to bear.

Carping-cares filled his Head so full of distracting Tho'ts, that he had not
time to think of God, Christ, nor his own Soul, from one Week's end to another;
but his great Study was either to think where to borrow Money, and so get more
in Debt, or else how to Pay what he owed, to get out of Debt, or what he should
do for Work, Trade being grown (by the badness of the Times) very dead; by this
Means he was filled with sad Tho'ts, not knowing how he should get more Bread,
when that he had was gone, and more Clothes, when them he had, would hang on no
longer; besides, it could not go out of his Mind, but that at one Time or other
he should be Arrested, and thrown into a Gaol, having many Times most fearfully
broke his Word.

Faint-heart and Fear-man presented to him the Danger he would be in upon many
considerations, if True Godliness were entertained:

For, first, they told him how contemptible Real-Godliness was grown at this
present Time, being of very little esteem amongst any degrees of Men in the
World, by reason of Vice, which was never more rampant; insomuch that True
Godliness was like to be driven out of the World, and forced to fly into some
hole or corner of the Earth, to hide himself. Mr. Riches, who is Lord of the
Manor, has beat him away from his Door, and hates him with a perfect hatred;
now, if you entertain him, he will soon hear of it, and so will become your
deadly Enemy, and pull down your Cottage, or warn you out, or be sure not to
let you have a Farthing of the Poors Money, nor never set you to Work any more;
and what will become then of thy poor Wife and Children? Nay, said they, we
will tell you more; do you not hear what cruel Edict the Prince of the ancient
Gauls Country has made against True Godliness? The French King.
And how many of the Protestant Churches he has pulled down, and utterly
demolished? And now he is persecuted almost every where: come say they, it is
that pleasant and lovely form of Counterfeit Godliness, that will in a little
Time be generally embraced and those who entertain True Godliness, Papistry.
must expect to be reproached and reviled, nay murdered. Besides, do you not
hear how many thousands in France, and in other places, who have for a long
Time entertained him, have turned him out of Doors? They are weary of him, or
afraid to own him: And is this a time for you to think of embracing him?
Poverty! (said they) pity your self, and have more Wit, you are poor enough
already, and this is the way to make you more miserable: If Riches will not
entertain him, who has many Advantages to help himself in distressed Times,
over what Poverty has, or can promise himself, there is no ground of
encouragement for you to open to him.

Upon this poor Poverty resolved not to let True Godliness have a Lodging in
his House, but rather, instead thereof, to put stronger Bolts and Bars on his
Doors. Godliness having waited all this while to hear what these cursed Enemies
of his would say, and perceiving they had now done, he broke Silence, and began
to speak after this Manner.


Godliness. Well Poverty, I expected but little less from you, when I perceived
you were resolved to hearken to those graceless Villains you lodge in your
Heart.
House: for they (I hear) would do their worst to keep me out; but I shall now
however, to undeceive you, answer them all.

First, As to those lazy Companions, Sloth and Idleness, who will not suffer
you to labor for the good, neither of Body or Soul, they have in part brought
you into this poor and miserable Condition you are in. Oh how many have they
bro't to beg their Bread from Door to Door! and stirred up others to Rob, and
commit horrible Murders, for to uphold them in their lazy and ungodly Lives; by
which Means they have brought, and daily do bring Numbers to the Gallows: But
the greatest Mischief they do is to the Souls of Men; for they have cast
thousands into such a deep Sleep, that they will never awake till they lift up
their Eyes in Hell; they will not suffer Men to Labor to find out their
Danger, till it is too late; and others, when they do perceive their woeful
Condition, are hindered by them from endeavoring timely to get out; they many
times cry Lord help us, and Lord have mercy upon us; but never strive to take
hold of the offers of his Grace and Mercy by cleaving to Christ, and leaving
their Wickedness. It Is the idle soul that suffers hunger, who shall beg at
harvest, and have nothing, though there is Bread enough and to spare for you in
God's House, yet they will not suffer you to seek out for it, but cause you to
cry, yet a little sleep, yet a little slumber, yet a little folding of the
hands to sleep, Prove. 24.33. O remember that Word, Take the slothful and
unprofitable Servant, and bind him Hand and Foot, and cast him into utter
Darkness, there shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth, Math. 25.30. And then,

Secondly, As to Light-Fingers, he is a Thief, and if you follow his Dictates
he will bring you to the Gibbet; besides, no Thief shall enter into the Kingdom
of God, 1 Cor. 6.10.

Thirdly, Wasteful his Brother, for all his Hussing is almost as bad as he;
'twas this vain Fellow that brought the poor Prodigal to eat Husks with the
Swine, Luke 15. It Is he not only causes you to foolishly spend your Money,
(when you have got a little) but also your precious Time, which should be
improved for the Good of your perishing Soul. Poverty, can it do you any Harm
to be taught to be a better Husband, and not to consume the little you
sometimes get, amongst riotous Company, which might be a great Comfort to your
poor Wife and Children? Also I will appeal to my neighbor Morality, whether
there is any Ground for you to refuse to entertain me, because I teach you to
be content with mean Things, hard Fare, and do put you upon hard Labor, and
not run in Debt, unless you knew how to pay it.

Ignorance is a Murderer, and has destroyed Millions of Souls, though there
was a time indeed when God seemed to wink at him, Acts 17.30. i. e. Did not
lay, (as it were) his Hands immediately upon him; but now he is left altogether
inexcusable, because God has afforded him a Sufficiency of Light, to bring you
to the true Knowledge of Salvation, the Necessity of Faith and True Godliness,
if you would escape the Damnation of Hell. Unbelief I found the other Day with
Riches, and indeed, I can come to no Door but I find him within; I gave a plain
Character of him then, to which I refer you, if you have a Mind to know what a
dangerous Person he is; but however, take one Word or two in answer to what he
says to you against me; he affirms that all my Promises are Fictions, being
unseen Things, that have no Reality in them, or Things that you can never
attain to, and if you could, yet they could not answer your present
Necessities. If you will give Credit to such a notorious Liar, Murderer and
Blasphemer, who in a sly and treacherous Manner seeks to stab you at the Heart,
who can help it? Are Christ's Promises of Grace and Peace here, and Glory
hereafter, because not seen with external Eyes, Fictions? He will tell you
also, ere long, if you will believe me, there is no God, nor Devil, Heaven nor
Hell, because not seen with visible Eyes; he may suggest the one to you as well
as the other. Come, Poverty, Thousands of my Children, by blessed Experience,
have found my Promises no Fictions nor idle Fancies, but Things full of
Reality, Marrow and Fatness: O taste and see, how good the Lord is! And why may
not you obtain these glorious good Things, (viz.) Union and Communion with God,
Pardon of Sin, Peace of Conscience, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, as well as
others? They were commonly given in the Time of the Gospel to the Poor: Come,
Poverty, these Things are thine, (as sure as God is in Heaven, if thou will but
let me in) poor Lazarus understood them, and experienced the Sweetness of them,
and shall to all Eternity. And then lastly, have you no need of these good
Things of mine, because they may not so directly answer your outward
Necessities? Are not the Necessities of your Soul more to be minded, than to
get Store of Meat, Drink, Clothes, Silver and Gold? What are all these Things
to the Love and Favor of God, an Interest in Christ, and to have a Right to
the Kingdom of Heaven? How soon, alas, may your Life be gone? And what Good
will those Things do you? Do you not see they perish in the using? And as you
are corruptible, so likewise they can never satisfy nor fill the Desires of
your Soul, nor do they suit the Necessities thereof. Consider, Can any of these
Things make thy Soul happy? Can Gold and Silver enrich it? Or the rarest
worldly Dainties feed it? Or Wine cheer it? No, Poverty, if thou had the
Things of the World in never so great Abundance, yet till thou let me in,
and make me thy chief Companion, thy Soul will be miserable. What is it to
have Plenty of all good Things, and no GOD, no Christ, no Pardon, no Peace, but
contrary-wise, the curse of God, horror of Conscience, and Hell at last? Thou will, Poverty, become more happy if thou do open the Door to me, and thou and
I dwell together, than the proudest and haughtiest Monarch in the World; thy
Comforts, inward Peace, and Joy will excel their's, and thy Riches be more
abundant in Quantity, besides the rare and excellent Quality of them; nay, and
thy Glory will be far more transcendant; and besides will abide with thee to
all Eternity.

As for Carping-care, he has almost broke thy Heart already; he will not let
thee Sleep in the Night; but by telling thee thy Wants and necessities, sadly
disturbs thy Mind, but never helps thee to a Farthing, and why should thou
hearken to him any longer, he is thy utter Enemy, as well as mine: Hear what
the Lord Christ says, Who by taking thought can add one cubit unto his
stature? Mat. 6.27.

He has even eaten up thy very Spirits, and weakened thy Body, marred thy
Senses, especially the Spiritual Senses of thy Soul, so that thou can not
think one serious Thought for him; nay, when Sloth and Idleness will let thee
go to hear God's Word, he follows thee thither too, and so confounds thy Mind
with wandering Tho'ts, that all thy Devotion is spoiled, and you can profit
nothing: Therefore I beseech you do what you can to thrust him out.

Distrust, That faithless Fellow, sets on this base Wretch Carping-care, to
perplex thy Mind, and this is not all, for he tells thee, if thou turnest
Light-fingers out of Doors, thou will certainly go a begging. Come Poverty,
they are a pack of cursed Villains, set on by their great Master Apolyon, to
bring thee to shame, as if there was no way to live, but by breaking of God's
Commandment, Thou shall not steal; and is he not a Wretch that shall call into
question the Care and Faithfulness of God, whose Promises are to feed and
cloth thee, and to supply all thy Necessities in the Way of thy Duty, so that
thou shall not want any good thing, Psalm. 34.9, 10.

And now in the last place, let me speak a few Words to those cowardly fellows,
Faint-heart, and Fear-man, Isa. 51.12. these are they that would have you fear
Man more than God; and yet I am ready to believe some of their Words take as
much place upon your Heart, as any thing you heard from the other.

But for what reason then, we will come now to consider.

First, They say I am grown here of late very contemptible, and am of very
little esteem amongst any degree of Men, Isa. 53.3. and that I shall e're long
be forced to fly into a Corner to hide my self, etc.

To this I answer, first, I never had much esteem amongst great Men; nay, in
every age of the World very few gave Credit to me, and now being come (almost
to the end of my Travels) in the last and worst Age, I could expect no other
usage than what I met withal. How should I have any to admire and fall in love
with me, when the Text positively says, All the world wanders after the beast,
Rev. 13.3. That is, they are in love with, and admire Counterfeit Godliness;
and the truth is, I marvel not at it, because all along the false Prophets were
more readily embraced than the true, and their Words generally believed. If
another comes in his own name, (says Jesus Christ) him you will receive, John
5.43. The Reason is easily discerned, because they sooth the People up in their
Sins, 1 Kings 22.22, 23. Alas don't you see how Counterfeit Godliness gives
Liberty to Men to please their brutish Lusts, teaching an easier way to Heaven,
than ever I did, or can, for I always taught, as at this Day, the Doctrine of
Self-denial, Mark 8.34. the necessity of Faith in Christ, Regeneration and
Mortification of Sin, etc. John 3.5.

Secondly, Whereas they say, I shall ere long be forced to fly into some
corner; but if it should chance so to come to pass, woe be to you, and all the
World besides, if True Godliness once finds no Place nor Countenance in any
Nation of the Earth, and indeed you had the more need, with all speed, receive
me into your House, least hereafter you find me not, and so perish in your
Sins, John 8.22.

Thirdly, What though Riches has rejected me, he never had much kindness for me,
but was generally my Enemy; and whereas they say, he will be displeased with
you, and warn you out of your House, if you entertain me; What then? Christ
will receive you into his House, and you were better have him to be your Friend
than any Potentate of the Earth: When my father and mother says David, forsake
me, the Lord will take me up, Psalm. 27.10. Have you not read of that poor Man
which the Pharisees excommunicated for cleaving to me, and how the Lord Jesus
graciously received him, John 9.35. Come, Poverty, do not fear the worst that
Men can do, God will help you, and he is above them all, do thou but kindly
embrace me, and I will keep thee from falling, nay thou shall find me a sure
Refuge and Defense to thee in the Day of Distress, Psalm. 9.9. What do thou
say, Poverty? Shall I come in? But notwithstanding all that Godliness could
say, Poverty, would not give way to him, but began to give him reviling Words,
saying, he was born a Gentleman, though he was fallen to Decay; and that he would
not suffer such Tumults at his Door; (for it seems, while Godliness was praying
and pressing for Entertainmen, one Persecution, the Offspring of Adam's eldest
Son Cain, Genesis 4.8. had raised abundance of lewd Fellows together, to drive
Godliness away from Poverty's Door:) So by the Opposition within Doors, and
without, Godliness found no Lodging there neither; yea, and escaped not without
many bitter Threatenings, Execrations, and Blasphemous Words. Now one Reason why
Riches and Poverty did not receive True Godliness was, because Consideration
dwelt with neither of them, who being a grave Counselor, would have given them
better Advice, than to deny Entertainment to so sweet a Friend. Godliness,
after this, began for to be at a stand which Way to Travel next; but hearing of
one Youth, who lived not far off, he resolved to see whether he might not get a
dwelling with him, because he was one that his Commission particularly directed
him to visit.

Sad is the State of woeful Man I see;
Riches slights Christ, and so does Poverty.
The Snares are great which Riches does attend.
And Poverty to Virtue proves no Friend;
But this poor Wretch I pity most, for why
He has no Portion here, yet does deny
To entertain True Godliness, that so
He might have Heaven above, though none below.
But by cursed Foes he is so perplexed, that he
Cannot find the Way to true Felicity.
Not many Rich, nor many very Poor,
Unto True Godliness open their Door;
But rather such, who in the Medium be,
Betwixt great Riches, and low Poverty;
This State, with Agur, Lord, I beg of thee.

CHAP. V.
Showing how True Godliness finding Riches and Poverty had rejected him, in his
Travels, came to a great City, where dwelt a brave young Gallant, with whom he
had a Mind to be acquainted, and to take up his Lodging; showing also how
basely he was dealt withal by him.

ONE might think, by this Time, 'twas in vain for True Godliness to travel any
farther, not being like to find Entertainment any where, since Riches and
Poverty both had refused to receive him; yet he was resolved to pursue his
Journey, not being without Hopes of finding his dear Friend at last called
Consideration, whom he sought for; and coming into a famous City where one
Youth dwelt, could not tell but he might meet with him at his House, calling to
Mind what Kindness young Joseph, Moses, Samuel, David, Obadiah, Josias, John
and Timothy of Old, and many others, had showed him, and therefore came boldly
to his Door, and desired Entertainment. Now, it appears, this Youngster was a
great Gallant, but though he had been brought up to Learning, and lived in a
Place where the Gospel was powerfully preached, yet he was very ignorant as
touching the best Things, though very complaisant. And after Godliness had in a
grave and sober Manner, desired a Lodging with him, and asked him what he was,
as also his Name, he spoke thus:

Godli. Sir, I am a Person of noble Descent, being nearly allied to a great and
mighty Prince, and my Name is True Godliness, being by him sent to travel
hither, to commend his sovereign Grace and Clemency unto the Inhabtiants of
this City; and I have also brought along with me, (as Tokens of his eternal
Favor and Good Will, to such who will receive me) very rich Presents, and I
shall bestow them on you, if you will be pleased to entertain me.


Youth. Your most humble Servant, I must confess I have read and heard much of
you, but why do you choose to take up your Lodging in my House, there being many
grave and ancient Gentlemen near? I know you not, but you seem to be one whose
Company would better suit Men of riper Years.


Godli. Sir, my Master gave me Orders to commend his princely Grace and Favor
unto you, (if your Name is Youth) besides, he has chosen your House for my
Lodging, above others; nay, and he has made more blessed Promises upon your
kind and loving Reception of me, than he has to any besides in the World. Have
you not read that Word, I love them that love me, and they that seek me early,
shall find me, Prove. 8.17. And that Word, Seek first the Kingdom of God, and
his Righteousness, and all other Things shall be added unto you, Matthew. 6.33.


Youth. As for those other Things, I need them not, I have enough of this World.


Godli. Ay, Sir, but you want my Master's Righteousness. Rev. 3.17, 18. and
also a Part in this Kingdom, and those art some of those glorious Commodities I
have to bestow upon you, if you will entertain me.


Youth. Ay, there it is, I perceive I must entertain you if I would have them;
but I tell you plainly, your Company does not suit with my Age, why should y^u
force your self upon me?


Godli. Why, would you have a Part in the Righteousness of Christ, and in his
Kingdom, and not receive True Godliness? No, Sir, that will never be, you must
believe in him, and be united to him, or you will have no Part in this Matter:
He that believes not, shall be damned, Mark 16.16.


Youth. Pray, Sir, do not trouble me, you are going to preach.


Godli. It Is sad you should think I trouble you, because I desire you to let me
have a Lodging with you.


Youth. Sir, you will spoil all my Pleasures and sensual Delights, if I
entertain you; I know your Manners well enough. You will cause me also to turn
out of my House my familiar Friends and Consorts that rejoice my Heart in these
youthful Days of mine. Now those he called his Friends, were these following,
viz. Pride, Wanton, Vainglory, Love-Lust, Ambition, The chief Vices that
attend Youth.
Gay-Cloaths, Toss-Pot, Gamester, Please-Friend, Time-server, Scornful,
Hate-Good, and Scoffer.


Godli. Young Man, believe me, those Pleasures and Delights which your Heart is
so much set upon, are brutish and very hateful to God, and do also abase your
noble Soul, which is of a sublime Extraction. Nay, furthermore hear what wise
Solomon says, Rejoice, O young man, in the days of thy youth, and walk in the
ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. May be you will say, O this
is brave! I, but after the Flash of Lightning, comes a Clap of Thunder, enough
to make you quake: But know, that for all these things God will bring thee into
Judgment. Your Sweet-meat Young Man, is like to have Sour Sauce; you will pay
dear at last for all your Sensual Pleasures and Vanities.


Youth. But for all your haste, wise Solomon made trial of all the Delights of
the Children of Men, before he condemned them, and so will I too, as far as I
can.


Godli. It Is true, Solomon did so; and does he not, by the sad experience he
had of them, tell you, All was vanity and vexation of spirit? Come, Sir, you
had better believe the Poison in the Cup is deadly, than to taste of it.


Youth. Sir, pray speak no more, I have not sowed all my wild Oats yet, let me
alone.


Godli. Wild Oats indeed! Come let me persuade you to sow no more of them, for
it is but sowing to the Flesh; and he that sows to the flesh, shall of the
flesh reap corruption, Gal. 6.8. You had better far sow to the Spirit. And now
I will tell you what a kind of Crop you will have at Harvest, by sowing that
cursed seed, which you call wild Oats, unless by Repentance you pluck them all
up again.


Youth. Why, Sir, what a Crop shall I reap?


Godli. You are like, in the first place, to reap here in this World, a Crop of
loathsome Diseases? for Drunkenness, Rioting, and Whoring does commonly produce
that Secondly. You will reap a Crop of Infamy and Reproach; for Sin is the
shame of any people or particular Soul, Prove. 14.34. and it will be much if you
reap not a Crop of Want and Beggary too in the end. Thirdly. You will reap a
Crop of horrible and unsupportable Guilt, Prove. 18.14. by which Means your
Conscience will torment and lash you after such a sort, that you will not be
able to endure it; you will reap also a Crop of all the fearful Plagues and
Curses that are in the Book of God, pronounced against wicked and ungodly
Sinners, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20, 21.

Sixthly and Lastly, At the great and terrible Day of Judgment, you will reap a
full Crop of God's eternal Wrath and Vengeance, a Crop of brinish though
fruitless Tears, Groans and endless Torments in Hell Fire, Mat. 25.41. Now, if
you like to gather in at Harvest such Crops as these, go on and sow your wild
Oats plentifully.


Youth. Sir, I intend to sow other seed hereafter; I desire only liberty for
the Flesh in these my youthful Days; if you should chance to call at my Door
when I am Old, I may then possibly see Cause to entertain you; nay, Sir, I do
promise you I will then open my Doors to you.


Godli. Alas, Sir, present promises to open hereafter to God and True
Godliness, seldom ever any ends in real Performance: He who promised to go and
work in his Master's Vineyard, went not, Mat. 21.30. Such who put me off with
Promises, to become Godly hereafter, it is evident design to be wicked for the
present; besides, do you know you shall live to be old? or if you should, that
God will send me then to knock at your Door? nay, and let me tell you, if I
should then visit you, I fear it will be to no purpose, because, Sir, you ripen
apace already in Wickedness, and Sin is of an hardening Nature, evil Habits are
not easily changed; the Blackamore may as soon change his skin, or the Leopard
his spots; as you may learn to do well, Jer. 13.23. and open to me when you
have been a long time accustomed to do Evil: Therefore open so me now.


Youth. Sir, you will raise my Spirits anon, if you leave not off your Canting
the sooner; you are a Gentleman, I am sure, few or none cares for. Have any of
the Rulers and Nobles of the Nations embraced you, I mean strict Godliness?
John 7.48. Why do not you see if they will entertain you?


Godli. (...), pray be not offended with me, I seek your Profit, I will do you
no wrong; you shall not lose any thing by me, if you will but let me have a
Lodging with you, though possibly you may lose something for my sake, but if you
do, I will repay you again an hundred sold in this World, Mat. 19.20. and in
the World to come you shall have Life everlasting. And what though not many
mighty, and not many nobles do love me, or will entertain me, 1 Cor. 1 26. It Is
not because I do not deserve esteem from them, but because they are incensed
against me by the Devil, and are so in love with Vice, my mortal Enemy. Sir, I
am abused, and rendered very odious by wicked Men, as if I were a factious,
restless and seditious Fellow, Acts 24.25. and this is one reason why I am so
slighted and contemned.


Youth. I, (and to speak the Truth) I cannot believe but you are the Cause of
all the present Discord, Animosities, and Confusions that are amongst us, for
since you came into this Country, what Disputes, Contentions and Distractions
have there been?


Godli. I and my Children ever, I most confess, were thus censured and falsely
accused, though never so stigmatized, as now of late, Isa. 8.18. Jerusalem of old
was called a rebellious and bad City, because I dwelt in it; and my Enemies
said of old Time, Sedition had been there, and that it was a great Enemy to
Kings and Governments, Ezra 4.12, 13. But it is no marvel I am thus abused,
considering my Lord and Master himself was loaded with like Calumnies, John
10.20. being accused with Sedition, and called an Enemy to Caesar likewise. But
let not this discourage you from receiving me into your House.


Youth. It will not be for my Honor, I shall be derided and scoffed at, should
I do it, therefore pray be gone from my Door.


Godli. What if you lose the Honor of this World, I will raise you to far
greater; For Honor and Riches are with Christ! yea, durable Riches and
Righteousness, Prove. 8.18. John. 12.26. They that receive me, and serve Christ,
God will honor.


Youth. Pray let me alone, 'till another time until I am a little older.


Godli. Sir, my Master commands you to remember him now in the Days of your
Youth, Eccle. 12.2. and to remember him, is to embrace me: And let me tell you,
to Reject me, is Rebellion against him, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, John 12.28.


Youth. I have other Business at present of greater concern than to attend on
such a Guest, take an Answer therefore and be gone.


Godli. Nay, do not mistake your self, for to receive me and to lead a godly
Life, is Business of the greatest concernment in the World: Were you not made
and sent hither on purpose, to serve and honor your Creator? and not to live
like a Bruit, to satisfy your Lust, and the Devil, as heretofore you have done,
Isa. 43.21. Acts 17.27.


Upon this the young Gallant was in a great Rage, and Swore, Damn him he would
be Revenged on him, and on all his Friends, and never endure True Godliness
more: Nay, and presently all his Companions and Attendants, who were in his
House, (mentioned before) stirred him up to fall upon Godliness immediately,
and force him away. Pride swelled like a Toad, Vainglory vaunted himself, and
both bid him disdain the very motion Godliness had made. Time-server and
Please-friends bid him do as other young Gallants did. Scornful looked with
Contempt upon True Godliness. Toss-pot had the young Man away to the Tavern;
and Gamester, after he came there, set him to play at Cards, Dice, etc.
Love-lust enticed him to a Whore-House. Scoffer and Scornful loll'd out their
Tongues at Godliness, jeering him shamefully: Nay, and not only so, but also
made base Songs of him, crying, Hey Boys, up go we! And Hate-good commanded
them all to fall upon him, and rid him out of the World; and had it not been
for fear of some Neighbors, (who though they were but moral People) he had
doubtless been utterly trod under their Feet.

O how perverse is Flesh and Blood in whom
All Vice abounds, and blossoms from the Womb:
What God commands, Youth is averse unto;
But what Hell bids, O that! it is that he will do.
The Rich, the Poor, with Youth I do espy,
Acting their parts in Life's short Tragedy:
But are they Men, or Beasts? see, view them well;
Souls they have, but what in them does dwell
You may perceive, if you do cast your Eyes,
On what they choose and love, and what despise.
CHAP. VI.
Showing how Godliness came to knock at the Door of one old Age; as also the
Cause and Reasons why he refused to entertain him.

GOdliness being rejected both by Riches, Poverty and Youth, resolved to see
whether he might not be entertained by a certain decriped and feeble Person,
called old Age, concluding within himself, that 'twas very probable his dear
Friend Consideration (whom he had a long time sought for) might lodge in his
House; for, said he, surely Wisdom, though he dwell not with Riches, Poverty, nor
Youth, yet doubtless he does with the aged, Job 32.7. and therefore made up
directly to his Door, where he knocked and called a considerable time, without
any Answer; but at last old Age enquired who was at his Door?

Old Age. Who are you?


Godli. Your real Friend, True Godliness, who would fain have a lodging with
you now at last.


Old Age. Godliness, I have heard, I think, of you, but I do not know you.
Besides, I am not able to rise up from my Chair, to let you in, I have such a
weak and crazy Carcass, and so full of Pain and Aches, that I have enough to do
to sustain my own Infirmities: Pray come another time, don't trouble me.


Godli. Alas, Father, you may not live another Day, Death may seize you before
Tomorrow Morning, Prove. 27.1. Why should you put me off? I was formerly at
your Door, when you was young, and then you told me you could not open to me,
because you had not sowed all your wild Oats, and you were too young, and I was
not a fit Companion for Youth. Moreover, you then said, when you were old you
would let me in; and will you put me off now too? pray rise and open to me.

But all the Ways and Means Godliness could use, signified nothing, he was
settled on his Lees, and had such abundance of Stubborn and Rebellious Servants
and Children, that they would not suffer him to show Godliness the least
Favor, Jer. 28.11. Zeph. 1.12. The Names of some of them were, besides,
Weary-Limb, Dim-Eyes, Peevish, Hard-Heart, Impenitency, Self-conceit, Enmity,
Unbelief, and Ignorance, with many more of the like sort; the first I named
were his own natural Offspring, and somewhat younger than the rest;
Hard-Heart, he had nourished and fed continually from his youth, for Godliness
found him at his House when he gave him a Visit in the prime of his Days. But
now he was grown a very shout, stubborn and obdurate piece; this Fellow made
old Age no^ to regard at all, nor fear the threats of God. And he was so void
of Pity, that he stirred old Age up to stifle poor Conscience, who kept his
Accounts, and at every turn to tread him under Foot, if he had at any time so
much light and power as to tell him of his Debts, viz. What abundance of
abominable Sins he had committed against God.

Godliness by this time perceived Old Age was so hardened in his Sins, and
trained up by Ignorance so long a time, that 'twas next to an Impossibility
ever to think the evil Habits he had got by being accustomed so long to those
Ways of Vice and Ungodliness, should ever be changed, considering he was become
so unteachable and self-conceived, was resolved to leave him, not thinking it
was worth his Time to wait longer at his Door* nor give any Reply to those
base-bred Children and Servants he kept in his House; for Peevish made him so
foppish, that th^re was no speaking to him; remembering that Word of (...)
Prophet, Can the Aethiopean change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots? Then may
you, who are accustomed to do E^^^ learn to do well, Jer. 13.23. Yet he could
not but take Pity on him, considering his Age, therefore gave him this
following general Reply, and departed.


Godli. Father Old Age, it grieves me to find you thus blind, and hardened in
your evil Ways; and the rather, because I see your Enemy Death also standing
with his Sword drawn here at your Door, ready to enter in, and Hell is at his
Heels. Alas, Death, who now shakes his Sword over your Head, will soon sheath
it into your Heart. What will you do, who contemn true Godliness through
Ignorance, when you come to stand before God in Judgment, there is but a little
airy breathings between you and eternal Burnings; it is better to have your Eyes
open on Earth to bewail your Sins, than to have your Eyes open in Hell, to
bewail your Suffering; though you will not let me in now, who would make you
happy, yet you will not be able ere long to keep Death out, who will make you
eternally Miserable, Psalm 89.84. It Is sad you will not see your danger, till
you cannot escape your danger. As I now stand at your Door, saying, open to me,
but am not let in; so you ere long will say, Lord, Lord, open to me, but you
shall be kept out, for none but those who receive me into their Hearts on
Earth, shall be received by Christ hereafter into Heaven. Those who contemn
Godliness here, shall be condemned for their Ungodliness hereafter. Your poor
deluded Soul, who thicks its State so good without Grace and Regeneration, will
find it bad ere long under Wrath and Condemnation; For except a Man be born
again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John. 3.3.

How sad's the Case of frail and mortal Man,
Whose Time is short, its length is but a Span!
In Youth he is Proud, Ambition then so reigns,
That he true Grace and Godliness disdains.
Virtue is then contemned, it is Vice which he
Does make his choice, but yet does hope to be
When Old Age comes, another Man, for know,
He would have Heaven, but not let the Earth go;
But when he is old, Sin in him's grown so strong,
He Is more averse to Grace than are the Young.
Take heed you do not upon Old Age depend,
Least he deals by you like a traitorous Friend.

CHAP. VII.
Showing how True Godliness, in his fresh and late Travels, came into a certain
Island, where he met with a great Number of cursed Enemies; showing the present
State of the Church among us, and abroad in Neighboring Nations the Year 1688.

TRUE Godliness having traveled up and down in the World for many Years, and
suffered diverse Hardships, and grand Affronts, at last came, by the gracious
Providence of God into a small Isle, neither did he travel alone, but like a
highborn Prince, (though in a state of exile for many Years past) he had some
Servants to attend and wait upon him, who loved him* and his great Masters as
their own Souls, and above their natural Lives: their Names were True-faith,
Heavenly new-man, Innocence, Humility, Sincerity, Temperance, Sobriety,
Faithful, New-obedience, Hope-well, True-love, Blessed-experience,
Excellent-knowledge, Christian-courage, Vehement-desire, Godly-zeal, etc. with
many more. Now, after he had been there, and was in great esteem and honor for
diverse years, yet about Forty Years ago, lo, on a sudden, a black Cloud came
over him, and a new War was raised upon him, and upon all his real Friends,
Servants and Favorites, which God permitted, to fulfill an ancient Prophecy,
for the Slaughter of the two Witnesses, Rev. 11. and so if possible, utterly
suppress, root out, and destroy true Godliness; and in order to the
accomplishing of this, there were let into the said Isle a multitude of
outlandish Men, called Babylonians, being Natives of a great City, called by
that Name; so that the said Island, by this means, was called Sodom and Egypt,
where also our Lord was spiritually Crucified.

Now these Enemies had diverse strange and ridiculous Orders of Men amongst
them, and all cruel Enemies to true Godliness, but one Order proved more
suitable and implacable than all the rest called (by some) Loyalties, being as
it is said, the spurious Off spring of one Ignatious Loyala, who where Men of
such base Spirits, that they were content to become mere Pimps and Panders to
the great Whore, endeavoring all Ways to allure Kings, Princes and mighty Men
to commit Fornication with her; and if they could not effect that, then they
persuade Subjects to cast off their Allegiance to their temporal Sovereigns,
and to own the usurped Power and Jurisdiction of their great Master the The
Pope.
King of Babylon.

Now, these Men remembering what a great Enemy true Godliness had been to them
in the same Isle former Times, and how he had forced them to pack up their
Trumpery and begone: Nay, and not only so, but also they found that he had got
a great Number of the Inhabitants of the said Isle to side with him, against
their beloved Mistress and great Goddess Diana, which they feared might stand
in the Way of her mounting the Saddle once again; they sought out many Ways to
root out and utterly destroy true Godliness, and this they did, by contriving
diverse Plots and sham Plots; the first was in the Year 1661, when they craftily
ensnaring a Company o^ poor miss-led Men, called Fifth Monarchy Men, who though it
in their own Time, and by their own Strength, by outward force, to have erected
true Godliness a most glorious visible Kingdom; and by this Means the common
Enemy took an Occasion to call all the Friends and Favorites of true
Godliness, Traitors, and utter Enemies to Kings and civil Magistracy, which he
and they ever abhorred: But upon this a great Persecution was raised and many
of the chiefest Friends to true Godliness were imprisoned, and some executed*
and diverse died in filthy Prisons; but after this they raised a worse
Persecution, and another after that, and at last they maliciously an^
traitorously resolved, by a Devilish Conspiracy to destroy true Godliness, and
all that favored him, and to set up false and counterfeit Godliness in his
stead; and indeed they so far proceeded, that the friends of true Godliness
viz. the two Witnesses of Jesus were brought under (...) civil Death, being
divested of all Power, Help, or Hope, and like dead Men were cast out by the
Walls, yet God defeated their Conspiracy so far as to discover the
Conspirators, or else doubtless true Godliness, and all his Favorites had
received the most fatal Blow as ever was known; but God would not have the dead
Bodies of his Witnesses to be put into Graves, yet diverse holy Persons were cut
off by their bloody and traitorous Hands in the West, and also in the chief
City of the Isle, but God foresaw their crafty Design, and turned their Wisdom
into Follishness, in that he made the Men of Names, Enemies to their
treacherous Prince, and them also, who labored to violate the Laws and
Constitution of the Isle.

But lo! upon this most joyful News arrived the Lion of the North, whom God
raised up with a mighty Spirit, and with like Success, to attempt the
Deliverance of the whole Isle, and true Godliness also; which tidings frighted
the Babylonians and their Princes also, that on a sudden they all fled; and by
this means (and by Virtue of a Law made in favor of true Godliness) the
Witnesses of Christ were set upon their Feet, and stood on firmer Ground than
perhaps they had done for a thousand Years before, which caused no small Joy to
all that feared God, and were lovers of true Godliness in the Land.

And now, one would think, the Sorrows, Troubles and Sufferings of true
Godliness were near ended, and joy filled the Hearts of all that loved him: But
alas, alas, it appeared otherwise, for this glorious Deliverance and Revolution
has not had those desired effects as might have been hoped, for although outward
Peace and Prosperity seemed to favor the Isle, and true Godliness also, yet
there were (and still continue) many Causes of great Sorrow and Grief to true
Godliness, and all godly Persons, so that at this very Time, behold and see
true Godliness has put on Mourning Garments, and is in a whithering and
declining Condition, and cries out, O it was better with me and my Children in
Times past when in Egypt, under Servitude and Bondage. The Causes of this
Lamentation you will have an account of by and by.

1. It arises from that gross ignorant Blindness and Superstition, that still
covers great Part of the Isle. 2. By reason of the substituting holy Writ to
serve a secular Design. 3. From the Consideration of the Prevalency of almost
all Manner of Heresies and detestable Errors. 4. Particularly by reason of that
great Corruption in, and about, one main Pillar that upholds True Godliness,
viz.
That of Justification, and Errors in this Sense has crept in amongst some,
who pretend great Love to him; but stay, did I call this a main Pillar of True
Godliness? I must say it is an essential Part of which he does consist; so that
this one, and some other Errors, seem to strike at the very Life and Being of
True Godliness; so that the free Grace of God, that first shone forth in the
Beginning of the Reformation, seems to be contemned, and a sad Cloud has
spread over this Isle; and Popery creeps in under a Disguise; the internal Acts
and inherent Righteousness of Man, ^s joined to or mixed with the perfect
Righteousness of Christ, to justify a Sinner before God; the Gospel and free
Promise is turned into a mere Law, and that we are no farther justified than we
are inherently sanctified. No, this is to stab True Godliness, as it were, at
the very Heart, or it is to cut off a Limb of him.

And as these lay him a Bleeding on the one Hand, so others expose him to
Reproach and Shame on the other Hand; some affirm, that the Persons of the
Elect were actually justified from Eternity, even before they did personally
exist, and as much beloved with a Love of Complacency, before they obtain a
vital Union with Christ, yea, whilst Swearers, Drunkards, Whoremongers,
Thieves, etc. as when they are renewed, regenerated and sanctified Persons; and
that the holy Spirit, that unites the Soul to Christ, makes only a real and not
a relative Change, so that Justification by Faith, is only declarative to a
Man's own Conscience.

Now it is evident, that this is directly contrary to True Godliness, and the
Rule thereof, i. e. the Word of God, that says, all Men fell in the first Adam,
by his Disobedience, and are all alike naturally under Sin, Death, Wrath, and
the Curse of the Law, or first Covenant, Romans 5.12. all being called Ungodly,
Sinners, Enemies, Servant of Sin, dead in Sin and Trespasses, Children of
Wrath, without God, Strangers from the Life of God, without Christ, under
Condemnation, the Wrath of God abiding on them (and on all them) that believe
not, John 3.36.

Can these Things be said of justified and pardoned Persons? And is not Christ
to be offered to Sinners, to ungodly Persons, to condemned Persons, as such?
Or, are justified and pardoned Men and Women without God, without Christ,
condemned or ungodly, and unbelieving Persons? And because the Elect were
representatively virtually justified in the actual Justification of Christ,
when he was raised from the dead, were they therefore then all personally and
really justified, even before they personally did exist? Such Notions as these
are raised and cried up, which cast Contempt upon True Godliness.

Others also deny the Deity of Christ, and his Satisfaction, seeking hereby
utterly to eclipse his Glory; and others deny his Humanity; some, who pretend
to love True Godliness, affirm he is not God of the Essence of his Father, nor
Man of the Substance of the blessed Virgin, being worse Heretics than the
Arians: Others affirm, that the true Christ is nothing else but that inward
Quality or Light that is in the Hearts of all Men; and these Heretics (as one
that is come off from them says) have deluded an hundred thousand Souls in this
Isle, who hardly hold one sound Principle of true Christianity.

5. Another Cause is from that great Decay of the Power of Religion, and
strange Witherings, and Want of Love to one another, amongst them that pretend
to be the chief Lovers of True Godliness; together with those sad Contentions,
Strife and Divisions that are among them; for instead of loving, they do even
seem to hate and reproach one another; and because they are not all of one
Judgment, in some lesser Points of Religion, they are strangely alienated from
each other, in their Love and Affections.

6. Lastly, The disorderly Walking of Church Members, as in not keeping their
Places in those respective Congregations to which they belong, is no small
Injury, Reproach and Scandal to True Godliness: Members act as if they were
under no Government, nor Covenant to God, one to another, and unto the Church,
and go astray from the Fold, by which they cast Contempt upon the Ministry
where they are Members, and seem to charge God with Cruelty to them, in
bringing them into a Church where they cannot Profit; whereas the Cause may lie
in themselves, and by Reason of an evil Itch they have upon them; and by this
Means God, no Lord's Day, has a complete Church Sacrifice or Oblation, but a
Part, or but a few Persons; and that which adds to his Reproach, is that
unaccountable Practice of one or two Congregations, in the great City, who
countenance Rents and Schism, and contemn the Authority of other Churches, by
an irregular Reception of their Members.

Now, from the Sense of these Things, True Godliness broke forth into this
bitter Lamentation here following.

Godliness's Lamentation.

HOW shall I express my Grief, or utter my Complaint? Oh, the Sorrow that
seizes on my Soul! I that am the noble Offspring of the universal Monarch, of
the whole World, the true Favorite of Heaven, the true Interest of all
Nations, Kingdoms and Commonwealths; a fit Companion for Princes, and all the
Noble ones of the Earth; the only Benefactor of all Mortals, that continually
seek the Good and eternal Felicity of their Souls, who strive to deliver them
from Wrath and Judgment, and to stop the destroying Angel from executing
Vengeance: Should this Day be thus slighted, villified, censured and
stigmatized, and have all Manner of cursed and detestable Evils and
Abominations laid to my Charge.

For,

First, I am charged with Heresy, an horrible Crime indeed, but it is no other
than I was of old Times accused with. But what is the Heresy? What my Doctrine
is, is showed in the first Chapter of this Book, to which I refer the Reader;
but I may say with St. Paul, after that Way which they call Heresy, so I teach
Men to worship the God of the Fathers, Acts 24.14. and not to believe any Thing
but what is written in the old and new Testaments.

Secondly, I am accused to be a common Disturber, a mere Make-bait, setting one
Man against another, the Father against the Son, and the Son against the
Father; the Mother-in-Law against the Daughter-in-Law, and the Daughter-in-Law
against the Mother-in-Law; dividing Cities, Towns and Villages, setting
Neighbor against Neighbor. O, how does this wound my Heart! Was ever any
dealt with as I am? Shall such Things as these be fathered upon me? I do this
Day protest and declare before God and all the World, I am abused and unjustly
charged; for I am for Peace, Unity and Concord, and always do teach it; I abhor
Strife and Contention, and every evil Work, and have endeavored to bring all
Men to live in Love one with another; but if it fall out at any Time where I am
received, that the Father is set against the Son, and the Son against the
Father, or one Neighbor against another, it is not I that am the Cause of it,
but that cursed Enemy Pride, Unbelief and Sensuality, that is in the Hearts of
the adverse Party, they having espoused the Interest of Apollyon, my grand
Enemy; but can it be supposed, that Virtue should wink at, or side with filthy
Vice; or True Godliness allow of and indulge Men in Ungodliness, or Truth join
or close in with Error? Alas! Should I do thus, I should lose my very Being,
and be no more what I am: For as it is impossible for Light to have Fellowship
with Darkness, or Christ to have Concord with Belial, so it is for me to allow
of, or bear with any of the evil Enormities of the Children of Men; therefore
let all the World bear me Witness this Day, that I clear my self of those soul
Crimes and Calumnies that I am charged with. And farther to vindicate my self,
I call in my old Friend St. James, pray hear what he has to say about the
horrible Charge brought against me. St. James, pray speak to this great Case,
from whence comes that Strife, Wars and Contention that is in the World? Am I
the Cause of it?

James. From whence come Wars and Fighting among Men? Come they not hence, even
of their Lusts, that war in their Members? Ye lust, and have not, ye kill, and
desire to have, and cannot obtain, etc. Jam. 4.1. If you have bitter Envyings
and Strife in your Hearts, glory not, lie not against the Truth; (mark that)
this Wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish, Jam.
3.14.15.

O blessed St. James, thou have cleared me, ford, True Godliness, am the Truth,
whosoever receives me, receives the Truth, the Doctrine of Truth, and the Truth
of Grace. But pray St James go on.

James. Where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work.
But the Wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy
to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without wrangling, and without
hypocrisy.

Godli. It is enough, I always teach Men and Women, who embrace me, to be holy,
peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy, to hate hypocrisy,
and all the deeds of the Flesh. Therefore take notice, if any, who are called
by my Name, or profess love to me, are unholy, quarrelsome, given to strife,
debate and contention, falling out with their Neighbors, making causeless
Disturbance in the Town, Place or House where they dwell, and Churches also, I
do this Day disown them; and indeed, it is they, who have in part exposed me to
Reproach and Contempt in these eveil Days.

I am accused also with Sedition and Faction, and for being the chief
Ringleader of Sects, etc. But I may well say, with my old friend St. Paul,
(who was accused by Tertullian in like sort) being called a pestilent fellow, a
mover of sedition, etc. Acts 24.5. I am clear from this evil Charge, neither
can they prove this Accusation against me, I have been traveling up and down
in most parts of the Earth, for almost Six thousand Years, and it is strange,
were I really guilty, that none should come forth and prove it against me.
Therefore know ye, that the Doctrine of true Godliness, the Offspring of
Jehovah, the darling of Heaven, do, and ever did teach upon this Account, is
this, viz. That Husbands ought to love their Wives, Wives to obey their
Husbands, Children to honor their Parents, and Parents to carry it wisely
toward their Children, and to bring them up in the fear and nurture of the
Lord. Servants to obey their Masters, and Masters to carry it well toward
their Servants; and Neighbors to live in love with one another. Church Members
to love one another as their own Souls, and obey their Rulers; and Subjects to
obey their Prince. Did I not ever teach this Doctrine, viz. That all men ought
to be subject to principalities, to obey magistrates, and to be ready to every
good work? Tit. 3.1. And if Christians, at any time, are, by their Superiors,
required to do such things that they conceive are contrary to the Word and Will
of God, then I bid them patiently to suffer, and not to resist, but to learn of
my blessed Master, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, and when he
suffered, he threatened not.

But these Things are not the whole Cause of my Lamentation, but there are many
other Reasons. For,

Alas, alas, what Ignorance, Blindness and Superstition is in the Land; the
Isle was once famous, and spewed out those nautious Abominations, which too
many have licked up again: Some say there is no great difference between the
Service of great Babylon, and that which is in this Isle; and that which
troubles me most, is this, it is called by my Name, as if it appertained to my
ancient Form, which is a great abuse of me.

2. What pestilent and poisonous Errors and Heresies are here, the great City
seems like a Pesthouse, where many have not only the Plague-sores upon them,
but also are full of the Tokens, sad presages of eternal Death and Wrath in
Hell.

How is the glory of my great Prince eclipsed, and the light of the Gospel
darkened? How is Light taken for Darkness, and Darkness for Light, Truth called
Error, and Error called Truth.

3. How does Ungodliness vaunt himself, and Profaneness ride Rampant? What
multitudes stand ready to receive my Enemy Ungodliness in all his travels,
wheresoever he comes? the mighty bow down unto him, and nobles kindly salute
him; both old and young, rich and poor adore and hug him in their Bosoms, and
make him their love and chiefest delight; no Laws of Nature, Nations, nor of
Grace, will or can deter them; nor the hopes of Heaven, nor fear of Hell,
whilst I am contemned, slighted, and trodden under their Feet.

4. And O! how are my friends and dearest favorites Oppressed and Persecuted
abroad? Alas, alas, how low is my Prince's Interest brought in France, in the
Valleys of Piedmont, in the Palatinate and Saxony, and almost thro'-out all
Nations of Europe? What dismal Sufferings do my Nations endure under the last
great Nimrod and bloody Pharaoh, and none say, deliver them! Nor can they see
an end of their Sorrows.

But in the midst of my Lamentation, the Thoughts of those glorious Promises of
God, concerning what he has said of me in the latter Days, do revive my Heart;
for though I have few to plead my Cause, or to clear my Innocence, and am like to
be run down by Apollyon and his spurious Offspring; Lust and Ungodliness, yet
I see my Day is a coming when sin shall be ashamed, and iniquity stop her
mouth, Psalm. 107.42. When the holy of the Lord shall be esteemed honorable, and
it shall be a Reproach to the Wicked. Though I am now slighted, I shall then be
prised; Jehovah will make my glory to shine forth in the midst of all Nations,
and my Children shall flourish in every Place; and in that Day none shall dare
to open their Mouths against me, nor shall I need to travel up and down for
entertainment. For the knowledge of the glory of the Lord shall cover the earth
as the waters do the sea. In that day there shall be upon the bells of the
horses, holiness unto the Lord; and the pots in the Lord's house shall be like
the bowls before the altar. Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and Judah shall be
holiness unto the Lord of hosts, and all they that sacrifice shall come and
take of them, and seethe therein; and in that day there shall be no more the
Canaanite in the house of the Lord of hosts, Zach. 14.20, 21. Nay, and this
also adds to my Joy in the midst of my Sorrow; this longed for Day is near, and
hastens greatly; it is but a little while, there will be an alteration in the
World, the Angel who enlightens the Earth with Glory, will suddenly cry,
Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, Rev. 18.2.

CHAP. VIII.
Showing how True Godliness after this, traveled toward the City of
Jerusalem, near to which was a small Village called Religion, in which dwelt
one Mr. Legalist, at whose Door he knocked; showing the cause also why he did
not entertain him.

GOdliness having hitherto happily escaped with his Life, though it it now full
time to leave those Parts, where he had traveled up and down a great while, and
suffered many hardships, (being generally basely slighted and contemned by all
wheresoever he came) and to travel into some other Country, amongst People, (if
he could find such) who were not so abominably Wicked; however, not such
visible and open Enemies to him, as others were: And he though it within himself,
it might be his best way to bend his course toward Jerusalem, for hitherto he
had wandered up and down in the confines of Assyria, Edwna, spiritual Sodom and
Egypt, but so it sell out, before he entered into Salem he perceived a Village
lying near the City, and the Name of that Town he understood was Religion, a
place much frequented by all true Sioners (for so the Inhabitants of the City
of Jerusalem are called.) Now he presently made up thither, and being informed,
that one Mr. Legalist lived at the Town's End, near Mount Sinai, he resolved to
give him a Visit, and immediately came to his Door, where with great
earnestness he knocked, and he being within, spoke to this purpose.

Legal. Who is at my Door?


Godli. Sir, a Stranger to you, though your very good Friend, and one who would
gladly have Lodging in your House.


Legal. What is your Name?


Godli. Sir, my Name is True Godliness.


Legal. I wonder much you should say you are a Stranger to me, whereas I have
been so long a time acquainted with you, and know you so well.


Godli. Sir, it is your great Mistake, for I am sure you know me not, nor were
you ever yet acquainted with me.


Legal. What, do I not know True Godliness? this is strange! do not you and I
converse together every Day.


Godli. Sir, I am not the Person you take me for, there is one or two more who
go sometimes by my Name, and it is very probable you may be acquainted with
them. Pray what are his Manners? What Doctrine I mean, does he teach you? For
by that I shall know who it is.


Legal. Why Sir, he teaches me to keep the Commandments of God, to lead a
righteous Life, to do unto all Men as I would they should do unto me.


Godli. O, Sir, that is my Friend and honest Neighbor Morality, one that I
love very well, and I am sure it is your great Ignorance to take him for me, he
will not say his Name is True Godliness; for though in some things we are a
little alike, I teaching the same Doctrine you mention, yet we differ
exceedingly in many things. First, We herein agree; he says, you must keep
God's Commands, I say so too. Secondly, He says you must be righteous, I say
the like. And Thirdly, That you must do unto all Men as you would they should
do to you; I say the very same, it being my Master's own Doctrine.


Legal. Why, wherein then, Sir, pray do you differ?


Godli. He teaches you to seek Justification by doing, but I only by believing:
He by keeping the Law, or by living a sober and honest Life, I by God's free
Grace, through the merits of Christ.


Legal. What is that, Friend, you say, are we not required to keep the Law of
God?


Godli. No, Sir, you ought to keep it as far as you are able, though not as it is
the Law of Works, but as it is the Law of Christ; but you must not look for
Righteousness and Justification by your keeping the Law in any Sense, (it was
on this very Block the Jews of old stumbled and were broken in pieces) because
you have sinned, and daily do break the Law; and the least transgression
thereof exposes you to the dreadful Wrath and Curse of God.


Legal. I know I cannot perfectly keep the Law, but I will do (by the Help of
God) what I can, and wherein I, through Weakness, do transgress the Law, God is
merciful, and I trust he will forgive me.


Godli. Forgive you! Why, he has said he will in no wise clear the Guilty;
moreover, What the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law, that all
Mouths may be stopped, and the whole World become Guilty before God, Romans 3.19.


Legal. What do you say? Will not God forgive me, who am a penitent Person? O
what a horrible Doctrine is this! I believe he will not forgive the Impenitent,
and they are such guilty Ones only that the Scripture speaks of.


Godli. Mistake not, Sir, all are Guilty, all have broke the Law or the
Covenant, all are under Sin and Wrath (...) it is not your Repentance will do;
God will not forgive any Man, let him be who he will, except he believes in
Jesus Christ, and takes hold of the Merits of his Blood; for as by the Deeds of
the Law no Flesh shall be justified; so God will not pardon your Sins,
notwithstanding your Repentance, as a simple Act of his Mercy, unless you fly
to him through Christ, who has satisfied his Justice; for what you say renders
Christ's glorious Undertakings void and unnecessary; and so does cast a great
Reflection upon the Wisdom of God, in sending his Son into the World.


Legal. How do you make that appear?


Godli. Do you not say, you will do what you can to keep the Law; and wherein
you transgress, God will, through his Mercy, forgive you? Now, if God does accept
of your Obedience in keeping the Law, and forgive all your Deviations, as a
simple Act of his Mercy, and that hereby you are justified and accepted by him,
why then did he send Jesus Christ into the World, to die the cursed Death of
the Cross? For if by this way Righteousness and Salvation is attainable, it is
evident Christ is dead in vain; for could not God have done all this, if Christ
had never come? Thou art a wretched Creature, therefore look to Christ, or thou
art undone.


Legal. Why do you tell me of Christ? Do you take me to be Sinner like other
Men? A great Legalist spoke thus not long since.
Am I as this Publican? I have all my Days lived a holy and blameless Life, and
therefore shall be justified.


Godli. I am ashamed of you; you have, it is evident, a light Esteem of Christ.


Legal. Nay, Sir, do not mistake me neither; I do not think my Righteousness
justifies me, any otherwise than through the Merits of Christ.


Godli. Sir, you err exceedingly; it is not your personal Righteousness, no, not
through Christ's Merits, that does justify, but the personal Righteousness of
Christ, received by Faith alone. Alas, now you discover indeed what a great
Stranger you are to me; you are one of those just Men, it seems, that never
went astray; or righteous Ones, that Christ came not to call. Alas, I always do
declare and testify, that all Men must perish without Faith in Christ. Does not
the Scripture positively say, He that believes not, shall be damned, Mark
16.16. He that has the Son, has Life; and he that has not the Son, shall not
see Life; but the Wrath of God abides upon him, John 3.36. Sir, There is no
other Name given under Heaven, whereby Men can be saved, Acts 4.12. Other
Foundation can no Man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 3.11.

Come, let me into your House, and I will expel these dark Clouds, and teach
you another Kind of Doctrine: I will help you to be holy, and not to depend
upon it; to be righteous, but not to trust to it; I will lead you to say, In
the Lord have I Righteousness; and that he is made of God Righteousness, etc. I
tell you plainly, I cannot speak Peace to you; but if I come into you, you must
turn out of your House those helpless and unprofitable Servants you have got.


Legal. What Servants would you have me turn out?


Godli. Why, you must turn Moses out. Do you no read, he was not to abide in
the House forever? Mr. Mischief and Good Opinion and Self-Righteousness you
must turn out. Nay, in a Word, you must also remove your Dwelling farther off
from Mount Sinai: For look about you, begone quickly, for I see dreadful
Flashes of Lightning, the Mountain seems to be all on Fire: And hark don't you
hear it Thunder, Legalist? God is angry with you, Sir, there is no seeing of
his Face, but through a Mediator.


Legal. What! must I turn holy Moses out of Doors?


Godli. Aye, Sir, that you must; don't you remember, that those who said they
were Moses's Disciples, cast out the poor blind Man that received my dear
Master? It Is not Moses nor Elias, but JESUS only, that must dwell with you:
Nay, and you must cast out Blind-Zeal, Ignorance and Legal-Heart too, for these
are dangerous Fellows; and in their Room I will place True-Zeal, Right-Faith,
Broken-Heart, and Good-Understanding. Nay, Sir, and let me tell you, if you do
not, and that quickly, expel these out of your Tabernacle, you will be undone,
and perish in your Sins; for notwithstanding your great Hopes of Heaven, they
will soon thrust you down into Hell; for Publicans and Harlots go into Heaven
before you.


Upon this he began to be very angry, and gave True Godliness hard Words,
calling him Libertine and Antinomian, one that True Godliness does as little
Love as he: Moreover, Mr. Legalist told him, that he was sure, that he whom he
had already received into his House was True Godliness; and, said he, you are
but an Impostor, and in a great Rage bid him be gone from his House.

Upon this, Godliness perceiving Mr. Legalist was so wedded to his own Opinion,
that there was no Hopes of getting Entertainment in his House, he left him, and
traveled a little farther into the Town; being told, one Mr. Baxterian lived
not far off, with several others, though it to be found Christians.

Sad Ease, most noble Prince! What Travel still
From Place to Place, and there is none that will
Thee yet embrace? What! not in such a Town?
Does Legalist thus basely tread thee down?
Nay, of all Men, I see there is Cause to fear
He never will, blessed Prince! to thee adhere:
What! slighted by Professor and Profane!
Where Is then the Man, who will thee entertain?
Some Men are blind, and therefore perish do:
And those who think they see, these perish too.
CHAP. IX.
Godliness no sooner saw Legalist leave him, but lo another Man, of a strange
Countenance, came up to him, and it appears he was a Baxterian.

GOdliness. What are you, Sir?


Baxterian. Why do you ask me such a Question? do not you know me, this is
strange, when indeed I and you have been so long acquainted!


Godli. It Is your mistake, Sir, I am sure you are a stranger to me; I will not,
nor cannot own you to be a Friend of mine.


Baxt. Why, not own me, who am the only Man for Godliness and Righteousness
perhaps of all you have ever met with in all your travels!


Godli. What Righteousness Sir, are you for?


Baxt. I am not for legal Righteousness, but for evangelical Righteousness.


Godli. What is that evangelical Righteousness you speak of?


Baxt. Faith and sincere Obedience to the Gospel, by which through Christ's
Merits, I expect to be justified, so far as I am enabled to walk up to the Rule
of the Promise. God having received a full Recompense by his Son's Obedience,
for the breach of the severe Law of perfect Obedience; he has removed that Law,
and our dear Savior has merrited a mild Law of Faith and sincere Obedience;
and now, if we obey this new Law, and sincerely serve the Lord, we shall be
justified in his sight, and eternally be saved.


Godli. I though it I was not mistaken in you, I conclude, that this is that you
call evangelical Gospel, or the only justifying Righteousness; which shows what
a dark Cloud you are in, and how erroneous you are, whilst you go about to
establish your own inherent Righteousness.


Baxt. It is the Righteousness of God, viz. That Righteousness he has chose,
and will accept of, instead of a perfect Righteousness to the Law of Works.


Godli. You err exceedingly, and are ignorant of the Righteousness of God, and
go about to establish your own Righteousness as the Jews did, Romans 10.3. It Is
Christ's Righteousness, or his perfect Obedience only, that justifies a
believing Sinner, exclusively of all his own inherent Rightousness, Romans 4.5,
6. Romans 3.27. And 1. It Is called the Righteousness of God, because Christ is
God. 2. As well as that Righteousness that answers the rectitude of God's holy
Nature and holy Law. And 3. Also because God only found it out and will accept
of no other Righteousness to justify a Sinner, but this only.



Baxt. I expect to be justified by the new Law of Grace, or Gospel
Righteousness; my hope and title to Heaven, is my Obedience to this mild Law,
which Christ has purchased, that is, his Merits, and my sincere Obedience, is
the matter of my Justification.


Godli. Your Gospel is none of the Gospel of Christ, nor can you be justified
by such a Righteousness; for if your Righteousness be mixed with the
Righteousness of Christ, it renders the very Righteousness of Christ imperfect,
and full of spots, as an old piece of Cloth put to a new glorious Garment marrs
all its Beauty. Sir, does not filth cleave to your best Duties of Obedience?
Besides, Works and Grace cannot mix together, Romans 11.6. It must be wholly of
Grace, or else wholly of Works.

Moreover, the Law of perfect Obedience, resulted from God's pure Nature, and
not only from his sovereign Will and Pleasure, and remains also the same for
ever; Christ has not removed it, though he has removed it as a Covenant of Works,
yet not as a Rule of Obedience. Friend, this Doctrine of yours is against my
very Being, and it has almost ruined me, putting me to shame and contempt: And,
Sir, know, if God's holy Nature is such, that he could accept of imperfect
Obedience, sincerely performed, why did he not give such a Law at first? and so
have saved the Life of his own Son whom he sent to satisfy for Man's
Disobedience to his holy Law, to show his Nature, i. e. that he is Just as well
as Gracious. Sinners are justified without Works done by them, or Righteousness
wrought in them.


Baxt. I approve not of you nor of your travels; does not St. James say, we are
justified by Works? See Mr. Clark of Wickham's late Book of Justification, Page
71. these are his Words
That Justification that Paul speaks of, and James speaks of, I affirm is one
and the same, and to be justified by Faith, according to St. Paul, and by
Works, according to St. James, is all one; for Justification by Works,
springing from Faith, is Justification by Faith.


Godli. Sir, the Popish Doctrine of Justification is as good as yours; Paul
speaks of the Justification of a Sinner at God's Bar, through or by Christ's
Righteousness; James speaks of the Declaration and Manifestation of the
Justification of a Man to his own Conscience, or Paul speaks of the
Justification of the Faith of that Person: and is this all one?

I will not, Friend, argue with you any longer, for you are one of the Persons
that cause great Sorrow and Lamentation to me; but lo I see another man here,
who also Smiles, I perceive while we talk together. Friend, why do you smile?
this is no Laughing Matter, I do not like your Countenance.


Antinomian. (for so he is called, it appears) Sir, I do not smile at you, I
greatly approve of what you speak, but I smile at the Ignorance of these
Baxterians, they are very erroneous about Justification, and darken the
Doctrine of Free Grace.


Godli. I am afraid you are not sound in this point no more than he; pray
Friend, what do you believe about Justification?


Antino. I believe all the Elect are personally and actually justified from
Eternity, and beloved by the Lord, with a love of complacency; before they
believe, even when Swearers, Drunkards, Whoremongers, etc. as they are, after
called and sanctified.


Godli. You certainly are a Person very corrupt in your Judgment, whose
Doctrine Jesus Christ loathes; besides you talk as if you understand not common
Sense; can any be actually and personally justified before they actually and
personally be or do exist? I grant, Friend, that all God's Elect decreetively
were justified from everlasting, that is, God did decree to declare and
pronounce all his Elect, when they came into the World, and were united to
Christ, just or justified Persons, acquitted, free, and ever discharged from
Sin and Condemnation.

2. Also they were all representatively justified, as considered in Christ from
Eternity, by him, who calls Things that are not, as if they were, but actually
and personally they could not be: Nay, Friend, Did not all the Elect fall under
Condemnation, and the Wrath of God, and Curse of the Law, in the first Adam,
and also personally and actually when they personally did exist.


Antino. Yes, I cannot deny that, yet the Elect were actually justified from
Eternity.


Godli. What, actually and personally justified, and yet actually and
personally condemned at one and the same time! this is strange! And now, that
Adam, for his first Sin, fell under Wrath and Condemnation, is evident; and he
being a public Person, all the Elect were bro't under the same Condemnation,
and that Sin is charged upon, and imputed to all Persons, as they come into the
World, and partake of his corrupt Nature, and are Children of Wrath as well as
all others, becoming so by their own actual Transgressions, and abide in that
State until they are transplanted out of that dead Root, and are implanted into
Jesus Christ, and partake of a virtual Union with him, John 3.18, 36.

Can Sin and Righteousness be imputed and charged upon a Person at the same
Time? Or are Unbelievers justified Persons? Though God justifies the Ungodly, yet
do they remain Ungodly when justified before God, who are now sanctified, though
they may in order of Nature, yet not in order of Time.


Antino. The Words in the old and new Testament, whereby Imputation is
signified, do both of them signify an Act of the Mind and Will an immanent Act.


Godli. Friend, it is true, sometimes when they are spoken as they relate to
Men, they so signify; but they are not so taken when attributed unto God, but
do always hold forth a transistent Act, and not an immanent Act as Genesis 15.6.
Genesis 38.15. Numb. 18.27. Psalm. 32.1. Psalm 106.31. Romans 4.6, 8. 2 Cor. 5.19. nor
can any Place be produced, relating to God, as his Act, where it is so taken;
for it will otherwise ascribe a fallible Judgment unto God, to say, that he
imputes not Sin to a justified Person; that is to say, he judges and
esteems them not to have sinned, for God's Judgment is according to Truth;
and therefore such as have sinned, he looks upon them as such as have sinned,
and he cannot esteem them such as never did sin, though if he will justify and
pardon them, and deal with them as with such as have not sinned; and in this
sense he imputes it not to them whom he justifies, and actually pardons; to
justify or acquit a Sinner, implies he was before guilty and condemned; and
that thus it was with all the Elect, before they were united to Christ. The
Word of God testifies, and so does the Holy Ghost, also by Convictions, when
he first works upon the Hearts and Consciences of Sinners; therefore your
Notion charges the Holy Ghost to be a liar.


Antino. That which does secure Men from Wrath, and whereby they are discharged
and acquitted from their Sins is Justification; and by this immanent act of God
all the Elect are discharged and acquitted from their Sins, and secure from
Wrath and Hell.


Godli. You do not argue well, I shall distinguish upon your first Proposition,
i. e. that which does secure presently, actually, fully, and formerly from
Wrath, without any other cause intervening, is Justification; but I deny that
Election does presently, (as an immanent Act in God) actually fully and
formerly discharge the Elect from Sin, Guilt and Wrath; no, it is but a purpose
in God so to do, were they not really guilty or charged from eternity, or did
not God as much decree to charge his Elect with Sin, as he decreed also in and
through Christ, to acquit, justify or pronounce them discharged and free from
Guilt, Sin and Wrath. Sir, the Elect are born in Sin, and Children of Wrath by
Nature, which they could not be, if their Persons were justified from eternity,
and so continue until Effectual Calling: Also was not the Death of Christ a
necessary cause intervening between this Degree and their Discharge, for which
they are discharged, and without which they could not so be? and does not the
Work of the Spirit, in uniting them to Christ, intervene also? You must
therefore distinguish betwixt God's Decree and the execution of them.

Election and the Death of Christ, it is true, secures them from the execution
of God's Wrath, but it did not secure them from falling under the Sentence of
his vindictive Wrath and Justice, and it is true, Sin shall not be imputed to
them, to their Damnation in Hell; Election secures them from that, therefore
when Paul says, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? Romans
8.34. he speaks of such of them that are in Christ, ver. 31. or are effectually
called, ver. 29, 30. namely Elect Believers; for you dare not deny but the Law
of God does lay heavy things to their Charge before, and what the Law of God
does, God himself does.


Antino. You darken the free Grace of God, and make Faith a cause of our
Justification, which I deny.


Godli. I will forbear to show the great Absurdities of your Notion; it is well
known what vile Effects it has had on some Persons of late.

Friend, I deny Faith to be any Cause or Condition of Justification to be
performed by the Creature, and such as do assert it is, I dislike, as much as I
dislike you.

Faith is the Instrument I do own, by which (when the Spirit is insufed into
the Soul) the Creature receives Christ and his Righteousness, yet the Spirit
(or rather Christ by the Spirit) I affirm does apprehend the Sinner, before the
Sinner can, by Faith apprehend Christ, though the Union is not mutual or
complete, until the Soul is reconciled to God, as well as God is reconciled
unto the Soul.

Friend, dare you say, that actual Justification of a Person is without Faith?
you may (should you so say) affirm Men have life in them, who never eat
Christ's Flesh, nor drink his Blood, which the Lord Christ says positively they
have not, nor can have. Friend, were the Israelites who were stung with fiery
Serpents, healed before they looked up to the Brazen Serpent, and were they to
look up unto it, only to know they were healed, for so your Notion teaches Men
to believe.

Moreover, Does not a vital Union with Christ make a relative Change, as well
as a real Change?

Or, Are the Elect no otherwise dead in Sin and Trespasses by Nature, and
Children of Wrath, but in their own Consciences? How then is it said, they were
so as others are, by Nature Children of Wrath? And must not Ministers preach
the Gospel to all, as undone, naked and miserable Sinners; and affirm they are
condemned, and the Wrath of God abides upon them, and on all that believe not
in Christ: Or, Sir, are justified Persons naked? or do you see your Error?


Antino. I tell you, I like you not, nor do I regard what you say; I am for
Free Grace, God sees no Sin, nor ever did in his Elect, nor need they mourn for
Sin, nor doubt, nay, though they are ungodly, their state is good, say what you
will.


Godli. You are such, who expose me and my Friends to Reproach, your Doctrine,
alas, tends to Looseness and Ungodliness. I also hear that your Preachers never
pray for Pardon of Sin, and also tolerate ignorant People to rend themselves
from the true Churches of Christ, and will hardly allow any to be true
Ministers but themselves.

Those of your Communion I see are just like the Church of Laodicea, i. e.
increased in goods and have need of nothing in their own sight, not poor in
Spirit; for it does not appear it is so, when your haughty Preachers are so
full, that they need not confess their Sins, nor ask Pardon of God? for it
seems some of them never do this.

What though Believers, as to vindictive Wrath and Justice, are pardoned for
ever, as to all Sins past, present and to come, must they not therefore beg
Forgiveness? may they not desire God to impute Christ's Righteosness to them,
because they believe God does do it? and may they not also pray that God would
pass by their common Infirmities, as a tender Father, and chasten them.

Moreover, Friend, is not that an evil Notion, that renders Sin in the Elect, a
small and trivial Thing in the Sight of God? Nay, that he sees no Sin in them,
nor does regard it at all; and this because he does not see it, as to let out
his vindictive Justice against them for it, or does not require satisfaction
for it at their Hands, he beholding them in the Righteousness of his Son.

But does it from hence follow he is not offended with them for their Sins, and
as a displeased and grieved Father, will not chastise them? Certainly your
Notion opens a Door to Looseness and Licentiousness, which is against my Nature
and very Being; Friend, I know, what your Evasions are; but I will leave you,
and at this time talk no more with you.


CHAP. X.
Showing how Godliness came to one Mr. Formalist's Door, who bid him very
welcome; but he suspecting his integrity, and that he harbored diverse grand
enemies of his, particularly one Hypocrisy, refused to go in: Also how
Hypocrisy came to be discovered; wherein you have his Character, or a clear and
compendious description of him; showing likewise how Mr. Formalist at last
refused to entertain True Godliness.

GOdliness being (as I told you) informed, that there was another great
professor living in this Village or Town of Religion, he thought it was
convenient for him to see whether he might not get a Lodging in his House,
because he was a Man whom all the Neighborhood said had a great love to true
Godliness; nay, many verily thought he had a long time taken up his Lodging
with him, and wondered when they heard him ask for his House, (for by that
means they perceived he was a stranger to him) but it was a considerable time
before he could find where he dwelt. For it appeared he was called by another
Name, viz. Devotion; but at last coming by one Man's Door, and by another, he
heard a Man at Prayer, and he spoke so loud that all who walked along the
Streets, with much ease might hear him; he then presently concluded, it was
very probable he might dwell there; and to his Door he came, and knocked as he
used to do, and was soon heard.

Formal. Who Is there?


Godli. My Name is True Godliness.


Formal. True Godliness, pray Sir, come in; there is none in all the World I
love more dearly; the best Room in all my House is at your Service; pray where
have you been and what News do you hear? are the Imperialists and Turks at
Peace, and all Things adjusted? how go Things in the World? how does it fare
with our poor Protestant Brethren in France? what News from Scotland? when will
the Times be better? Many such Questions he asked, and professed abundance of
Respect to true Godliness, and (as you heard,) bid him come in, but never went
about to open the Door. Godliness was grieved to find him so full of Words; but
more especially because he took up his Time, and trouble his Head so much to
enquire after News, nay, and that too, when he should open to true Godliness;
and just upon ending his Devotion, for it appears he had newly done Prayer; yet
nevertheless Godliness very coldly answered him to this purpose.


Godli. Sir, as to your first Question, I Answer, (being willing to inform you
where I have been) I have wandered about from Place to Place, to seek
entertainment, I mean a fit and convenient Lodging for a little Time, for it
will not be long ere I have done traveling; but I am fallen into such an evil
and perilous Time, and scarcely any Body will show me the favor as to take me
in, and make me welcome: Riches, Poverty, Youth and Old Age have all refused
me; and shut their Doors most basely upon me; and since I came into these
Parts, and particularly to your Town, where every one concluded, I should be
most kindly embraced, the very first Man I came to, has denied me
entertainment; nay and not only so but also called me at his Pleasure.


Formal. What Man's that, for God's Sake?


Godli. Friend, don't take God's Name in vain, I cannot bear it: But to answer
your Question, the Man is called Legalist.


Formal. O Sir, there is not a Man in all this Town more haughty, proud and
conceited than he; he concludes, I warrant you, that he has Godliness enough
already; he makes, in Truth, the whole of Religion to consist in Principles of
Morality: I have heard him say, that if a Man do lead or square his Life but as
near as he can, according unto the Law of the Ten Commandments, not being
guilty of gross Sins, nor wilfully breaks any Precept of the two Tables, he
shall be saved. Now he never considers all the while the Necessity of Faith and
Regeneration; and although he trusted thus to his own Righteousness, yet I could
pick many Holes in his Coat; for he is a very worldly, proud and passionate
Person; nay, and he himself confesses he is a Sinner, and yet would be
justified by the Law; whereas you know the least Sin, Lusts of the Heart, and
evil Thoughts, are a Breach of it, and the smallest Breach is Death and eternal
Wrath, without a Compensation made to offended Justice; and none was able to do
this but Jesus Christ, and none have the Blessing of his Undertaking, but such
only who do believe.


Godli. You seem to have a good Understanding, and can talk well, but how comes
it about you let me stand all this Time at your Door? Is this your Kindness to
me? What signifies your Knowledge and Parts, except you entertain True
Godliness?


Formal. I have opened (you may perceive) to you already, you are in my
Affections, and I will farther open to you; pray come in.


Godli. Nay, do not mistake your self, you have opened to me in one Respect,
but not in another; you seem to like my Form, but not my Power; my external
Rites, but not my internal Life. I am indeed received into your Head, but not
into your Heart; I may be, in your Judgment, worth embracing, but your Will
consents not to receive me; you like my Garb, but love not my Person; you are
(I know) a Professor of me, but not a Possessor of me: The Truth is, I suspect
you.


Formal. Suspect me, Sir! for what?


Godli. That you have one or two implacable Enemies of mine hid secretly in
your House.


Formal. Who I, Sir! God forbid I should hide any cursed Enemies of True
Godliness: Who are they? Pray tell me their Names.


Godli. Old Man, Carnal-Affections, and Hypocrisy.


Formal. As touching the Old Man, there is no Christian (you know) can be quite
rid of him; but God forbid I should show him any Countenance. And as to
Carnal-Affections, in this you do mistake, for my Affections are spiritual. But
why should you think I harbor Hypocrisy in my House? I will assure you, there
is none in all the World I hate more than that base Fellow, for (...) know God
abhors him; and shall I show Countenance to him? Lord, far be it from me?


Godli. Nay, Formalist, be not too confident, it is not your bare Denial of it
which is sufficient to acquit you o^ the Suspicion I have of you upon this
Account; but since you deny it, I will see if I cannot find him out, for you
have a certain Officer in your House, who I am sure can make a righteous
Decision, if he be not basely corrupted and blinded, by your pretending so much
Love and Zeal for seeming Holiness. I know he will not flatter any Man, but
speak according to his Light and Knowledge impartially at all Times. Sir, I
will appeal unto him.


Formal. What is his Name?


Godli. His Name is Conscience.

Upon this Conscience was called, and enquired of after this Manner.


Godli. Conscience, Conscience appealed to about Hypocrisy.
I do require you in the Fear of God, to answer me a Question or two concerning
your Master: Does he not secretly lodge and hide one in his House called
Hypocrisy? For I very much suspect him herein to be guilty: What do you say?


Consci. Sir, if you please to give me his Character, or give me some certain
Signs of his Behavior and Properties, whereby I may know him, I will
faithfully discover all that I understand as touching this Matter.


Godli. Conscience I thank you, you speak like an honest Man, and indeed I have
always found you impartial, according to your Light. I will then give you such
a Description of this subtle and deceitful Enemy of mine, that you cannot well
mistake; and this I shall do, by propounding a few Questions to you.

First, Sir, Was he ever thoroughly wounded in the Sense of Sin, as it is Sin,
being convinced of the ugly and abominable Nature thereof; there being nothing
in all the World more hateful to God than that, not only convinced of the Evil
which does attend it, or is the Fruit of it, but also of that cursed Evil there
is in it, it being utterly contrary to the holy and pure Nature of God, a
Breach of his Law, and that which has made a Breach between God and Man, and
basety defaced the Image of God if him, and is the absolute Cause of all that
abominable Enmity that is in his Heart against God and me his blessed
Offspring; and also makes Man in love with the Ways of the Devil, nay, to be
like the Devil, conformable to him, and to do his Will.

Secondly, Is there no one Sin that he secretly loves and lives in, (the evil
Habits never being broken?) Have you found him now and then telling a Lie for
his Advantage Sake, or in telling of Tales or Stories, adding to them, to
please the Company, or to excuse himself when accused of this or that, that so
he may gain Credit? Is he not sometimes overtaken by Drunkenness? Is he not
proud, minding more the Honor, Praise, and Applause of Men in what he does in
Religion, than the Praise of God? Is he not Covetous? Does he give according to
his Ability to the Poor? Does he not rob God to serve the World? I mean neglect
hearing of God's Word, and other indispensable Duties, for worldly Profit Sake,
and so prefer the World above the Word? Does he never in Trading offend you, in
speaking better of his Commodities than they deserve? Is not the World more in
his Love and Affections than God and Jesus Christ? Does he always give good and
just Weight and Measure, and not take unlawful Profit? Does he not make Gain of
Godliness, and use Religion as a Cloak, to cover his secret Sins; does he
concern himself for the Interest of the Gospel, and his open-heartedness show
upon that account he loves Christ above Son or Daughter? Is he resolved to part
with all rather than to sin against God and to offend his Conscience Does he
see more evil in the least Sin, than in the greates^ Sufferings?

Thirdly, Does he desire as much to have his Sins mortified as pardoned? To be
made holy here, as well as happy hereafter? is he as much in love with the Work
of holiness, as with the Wages of holiness? Does he love the Word of God
because of the purity of it? Is he willing to bear the Cross as well as wear
the Crown? To be with Christ in his Exaltations hereafter? To live to God on
Earth, as well as to live with God in Heaven?

Fourthly, Is he the same in private as in public? Does he not rest satisfied
upon the bare performance of Duty, not minding whether he has met with God or
not? Does he Pray in public, as if Men saw him, and in private, as knowing God
sees him? Does not his satisfaction more lie in his asking of God; than in his
receiving from God? Does he not seek more for suitable Words in Prayer, than
for a suitable Heart? Does he not study more for acute expressions to affect
the Hearts of others, than to meet with powerful Impressions upon his own? Does
he not lengthen his Prayers before others, and hurry them over in private? Does
he as much endeavor after what he needs from God, as that which he needs of
God?

Fifthly, Can he bear Reproofs kindly for his Faults, and take them patiently?
Nay, and esteem him his greatest Friend, who deals most cordially with him? Is
he ready to take shame to himself, and give glory to God? Can he be contented
in the Ways of God, though he meets with little sensible comfort from God, nor
outward respect from Saints.

Sixthly, Does he as much desire to have his Heart filled with Grace, as his
Head with Knowledge? Does he take as much care to make the Glory of God his end
in what he has, as the Command of God his ground in what he does?

Seventhly; Is he not more severe in pressing the lesser concerns of Religion,
than in urging the greater? Does he not require those Duties of others, which
he himself is loath to practice? Is he not more curious to know other Men's
Conditions than his own?

Eighthly, Has he received a whole Christ with a whole Heart? First, A whole
Christ comprehends all his Offices, and a whole Heart comprehends all his
Faculties? Has he received Christ, not only as a Priest, to die for him, but
also as a Prince, to rule over him? Does he obey all God's Precepts, as well as
believe all God's Promises? Secondly, As to his Faculties, his Understanding
may be somewhat enlightened, but his Affections may be Carnal, and his Will
oppose me, being averse to true Godliness? Is not his Heart divided? Come
Conscience, I do now command you, in the presence of the great and dreadful
GOD, who searches all Hearts, to make a righteous Decision; tell me plainly, is
my Enemy Hypocrisy here or no? By these brief Hints you may easily know him.


Conscience, Sir, I must confess Hypocrisy is here; now I have found him out;
nay, Sir, and he has hid him secretly in his House, ever since he came to live
in this Town Religion he is seemingly holy but really wicked? He loves the face
of Holiness, but is without the Grace of Holiness; his greatest Care has been
to Wash the outside of his Platter: If he can but keep his Name from being
reproached by Men, he cares not though his Heart be grievously defiled before
God. Should I tell you of all those Lusts which he harbors in his Heart, and
what Favor he shows to that old Man, (you mentioned before) I should quite
shame him; he is a Saint indeed abroad, but a Heathen (to say no worse) at
home, he Prays, Hears and Reads, but it is to keep up his Credit. Name and
Esteem amongst many Christian Men of this Town; for I have often found him very
weary of these Duties, God knows as well as I; nay, Sir, he would seldom Pray
at all, were it not to quiet me, for he does not love my Lashes; besides, he
performs them with a sad, cold, dead, carnal and lifeless Spirit; he is much
for the lesser Things of Religion, (as you minded) he keeps a mighty stir about
Mint, Anise and Cummin, but quite neglects the greater and more weighty Things;
nay, there is one thing more I will tell you, as he does not love strict
Godliness himself, so his Heart is ready to rise against all such, who outdo
him. Sir, he is a mere Dissembler, yet he would be though it as religious a Man as
any in Town: I find him also much abroad, finding of Faults of others, or
espying the Mote that is in his Brother's Eye, but never minds the Beam that is
in his own; nay, and he is ready to fall out with many good Christians, because
they will not follow him in Habit, Mode and Gesture, etc. In a Word, most of
all those black marks of this deceitful Villan Hypocrisy you hinted at, I find
in him.


Godli. Conscience, say no more, I see I was not mistaken; but now Formalist,
are not you a Wretch, to pretend kindness to me, and secretly thus to entertain
one of my worst Enemies? Sir, it is you who have brought so great a Reproach
upon this poor Town Religion, and on all its Inhabitants; nay, and it is through
your means I am so basely vilified and condemned by that blind fellow
Ignorance, for he is ready to conclude, that all my friends and true favorites
are such as your self, viz. mere loose and formal Hypocrites, besides, you are
like to be undone, and perish for ever, unless you do the sooner turn this vile
Enemy of mine out of Doors; for I expect no other but that you will in a little
time fall into Apostasy: But should you die first, yet assure your self you
will be damned; for Hell is indeed prepared for such as you are; you are, poor
creature! in the worst Condition of all Men: For the wicked hate you because
you pretend so much love to Religion and Godliness; God also, because you are
not real, but only pretend love to them, being not sincere and upright in your
Profession.


Formalist at this began to be very angry, being greatly offended at true
Godliness, for he could not endure to see his State ripped open, nor did he like
to hear of his present nor future Misery; being persuaded by Mr. Vain-hope.
Unbelief and Good-opinion, to think his Condition, but for this, might be safe
enough; however Vain-hope told him, though at present his State might be
doubtful, yet he should have many Days on Earth, and that he might Repent, and
set all Things right before he died; whose Word and Promise he adventured to
take; and so bid true Godliness adieu, and no Man's State in all his travels,
he did indeed more lament, and his Soul being almost overwhelmed with Sorrow,
he broke out to this purpose, and departed.

Passion overflows! why melt I thus with Grief,
For him, whose traitorous Heart denies Relief?
But what could I expect, false Wretch? from thee,
Who harbour'st in thy House Hypocrisy?
A feigned Friend's worse than an open Foe,
And unto me oft-times more wrong does do,
Of all, to whom I am by JESUS sent,
Over thee, O Formalist! I do lament:
I know there is Cause, were Things considered well,
Thou suffer'st here, and yet must go to Hell.
Hated of God and Man, what can be worse
Than the Wrath of Man, and great Jehovah's Curse
Farewell, poor Soul! is this thy Love to me?
Must I begone! Adieu, Adieu to thee.
CHAP. XI.
Showing how Godliness traveling farther into the Town, (called Religion) saw
abundance of People, who had been great Professors, getting away out of the
Town as fast as they could. Showing also what Discourse he had with one of
them; wherein the Nature and Danger of Apostasy is plainly opened.

GOdliness had no sooner left Formalist's Door, and gone a little further into
the Town Religion, but he espied a great Number of People hastening out as fast
as they could go; nay, he observed some of them ran, though others of them went
very softly: At first he wondered what the Matter was, because the Town was a
little before looked upon to be a very safe and honorable Place to dwell in,
as any in all the Country, and had as great and glorious Privileges belonging
to it; but upon Enquiry, he was told there was a Number of Lions, ravening
Wolves, and other evil Beasts, (who had for a long Time been shut up in their
Dens) a getting out, and they having a great while been kept without Prey, they
were afraid they should be torn in Pieces: But he observing which Way they
went, Babylon's Fall very nigh.
was the more amazed; for he perceived plainly they all steered their Course
directly toward the great City Babylon, which he saw likewise a falling and
was sure would suddenly in one Hour be utterly destroyed.

True Godliness at this seemed so mightily concerned, that he could not let
them all pass without speaking to them; and minding one of them to look like a
sober Man, though he hung down his Head as if he had been ashamed, resolved to
have a little Discourse with him, (whose Name it seems was Apostate) to whom he
spoke after this Manner.

Godli. Sir, What is the Matter you leave this Town, and haste away so fast?
When you first took up your Dwelling here, did you not intend to abide in it as
long as you lived?


Apos. Truly Sir, I did intend it; I had a great Love for the poor Town; but I
must remove out, and be gone now.


Godli. Why must you? Is there a Necessity laid upon you to quit this Place,
this honorable Town, Religion?


Apos. Sir, I shall be destroyed else, for the Walls of late are much gone to
Decay; I do not see that Safety to reside here as formerly: Besides they say
there is a great Number of Lions, romish Wolves, and other Beasts of Prey,
breaking out upon us; and I am afraid if I should escape with my Life, yet
having a few Sheep and Lambs, they will devour them: Truly, Sir, I do it to
save what I have, yet I wish very well to this Place.


Godli. It Is very like you speak the Truth in this; but Sir, Pray whither are
you going?


Apos. I am going toward the Confines of Babylon, that great City.


Godli. I am heartily sorry for you; let me persuade you to return back, and
rest in this Town; Sir, do not fear those Lions you speak of; for God has said
he will break the Teeth of the Lions, the old Lion, and the Lion's Whelps, Job
4.10. Psalm. 56.6. But what though they should destroy your Substance, is not your
Soul worth more than all the World? Mat. 16.26. Come, go back again with me,
and I will dwell with you, and be a sure Defense to you, so that you will not
be hurt, let Lions, Wolves, and Devils too, do what they can: My Name is True
Godliness. Sir, I have saved many thousands from Ruin, in as great Danger as
you can be in.


Apost. Sir, there will be no safe Living for me, I must quit the Place, the
Town is besieged.


Godli. What, though it is besieged, God is able to defend it, and will be a Wall
of Fire about it; but why, Sir, do you choose that great City you speak of for
your Habitation? I perceive you intend to go far enough.


Apost. Sir, don't mistake me, I do not intend to go so far, but to return
again when the Danger is over; at present I will go but a little Way out of
Town.


Godli. Sir, you show your self to be a naughty, a traitorous, and hypocritical
Person, will you leave this Town in its Distress? If the danger be great which
attends it, you had the more need to abide in it, to strengthen and encourage
the poor Inhabitants. Pray, Sir, do not show so base and cowardly a spirit:
What is this less, than to betray the Town to the Enemies? Is not the strength
of any Place the People? Besides, your flying mightily encourages the
Adversaries; for by this means they may think to frighten all out, and then
with much ease take the Town, and utterly destroy it: Also you weaken the
Hands, and sadly grieve the Hearts of all true Protestants, whose chief
Treasure lies in the Town, and cannot be removed out; and it being also their
spiritual Native Place, they resolve to abide in it to the last, let what will
come. You say you intend to return again when the Danger is over. What Dangers
you see above others, to move you to quit the Town, I know not; but let me tell
you, few who leave this Town, out of fear of human Loss or Danger, do Return
again.

You say you intend to go but a little Way; alas! you cannot tell where you
shall stop; when once you leave the true Religion, you desert God's gracious
Protection; you may not only cleave to Papistry, but Atheism, or any Thing:
Come go back, let me save you from a fall: Why will you leave that Religion you
have been so long established in?


Apost. Sir, I retain the same Principles that I formerly held, and my love is
the same to the Town as it was.


Godli. Poor Wretch, you own the Principles of the true Religion, and yet
cleave to Idolatry and Superstition. The three Worthies of old, by your
Example, might have retained Faith and right Principles in their Hearts, of the
true God, and yet have bowed down to the golden Image, and so needed not to
have exposed themselves to a hot fiery Furnace.

Nay, by this Doctrine, who needs suffer Persecution? Besides, it renders all
the Martyrs of old to be mere Fools and Madmen. What do you say? Will you
return? My Company, one would think, might allure you.


Apost. No, Sir, I have formerly had your Company, and I don't find you so
pleasant a Companion: Besides, the Town is sadly divided amongst themselves,
those who love you do not agree.


Godli. Nay, Sir, now you are out, for you and I never Dwelt together yet, for
had I ever took up my Dwelling with you, I would have kept you from this great
Fall: You will prove your self a mere Hypocrite, one that never loved God nor
the Town Religion in your Heart. Sir, Uprightness and Sincerity of Heart
preserve from Apostasy: And what though the Town is divided, it is my great
Grief to see it, but you had more need to abide in it, to do what you can to
persuade them to Love and Union, however to unite in Affection. Come humble
your self before God, for this great Sin, and let us dwell together, now, and
thou shall abide secure, notwithstanding the Division^ within, and Troubles
without, and have most sweet Pe^^^ and inward Joy: Yea, such as thou never
had in all (...) Life. What do thou say?


Apos. Sir, hold your Peace, and say no more, I am resolved to be gone.


Godli. Well, since I see I cannot persuade you to return, but that you are
resolved (...) leave true Religion, and not receive True Godliness, I ^ill tell
you what your present State is, and what your future Portion is like to be for
ever hereafter.


Apos. Sir, pray be silent, I do not love to hear it.


Godli. I do not Care whether you do or no, I will show it.

First, It appears (as I hinted before) that you were never truly converted,
being no Part of that good Ground Christ's speaks of, Mat. 13.

Secondly, You are (it appears) forsaken of God; he has left you, or else you
would never think of cleaving to Mystery Babylon.

Thirdly, Either God will let Conscience out against you to torment you, (as he
did upon Francis Spira) or else wholly give you up (as he did Israel of Old) to
your own Hearts Lusts, to walk in your own Counsel.

Fourthly, Your Sin tends toward the Sin against the Holy Ghost, that shall
never be forgiven, neither in this World, nor in that which is to come; for you
have been a Person (I hear) much enlightened, and now wilfully cast off God and
Religion; pray read these Scriptures, Heb. 6.4, 5. Heb. 10.27, 28.

Fifthly, Jesus Christ will be ashamed of you at the last Day, when he comes in
the Glory of the Father, with all his holy Angels, Mark 8.18.

Sixthly, Those who set their Hands to the Plough, and look back, (remember)
are not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 9.62. nor will God's Soul take
pleasure in them.

Seventhly, Without you return back, you are like to have the hottest place in
Hell, Rev. 14.10.

Eighthly, The Place you are going to, is like suddenly to be Destroyed. Do you
not read how, just at the Time when her Judgments come upon her, she says in
her Heart, I sit a Queen, and shall see no sorrow, nor no widowhood, nor loss
of children any more.

Ninthly, Remember the fearful End, and what dreadful Judgments, God has many
Times in diverse Ages, brought upon such false and traitorous Persons as you
are. Besides, who will trust you? For you that are false to your God, and to
your own Soul, will never be faithful to Men. Come, that very Way you think to
save all, you may loose all. Besides, Sir, let me tell you, light is sown for
the Righteous, (though it is a dark time now) and Joy for the upright in Heart.
Nay, and this precious Seed is sown (as I could show you) in this present
Dispensation; but I am in haste. What do you say to these things? Will you
Return?


Apost. I dare not Sir, at present.


Godli. Well then; I see you love the World above Christ. I have but little
more to say unto you; but Sir, what Man in his right Mind would, to prevent a
few Sparks, leap into the Fire, or to save that, lose his Head? Alas! whilst
you seek to save your Estate, you are like eternally to loose your poor Soul.


Apost. Well Sir, trouble not your self, I will talk no more with you; Farewell.


Godli. Adieu then, poor deceived Soul.

Away he went as fast as he could go, toward the great City Babylon.


Godliness having thus parted with him; at last he met a Man traveling into
the Town of Religion, being not very Rich, nor very Foor, but in a middle state
between both, and he looked as if he had a mind to take up his Dwelling in this
Place, for he inquired where he might have a convenient House? Godliness was
much pleased with this Person, because when others were hasting to leave the
Town, he was hasting into it; besides, he had a very serious Countenance.

Now, he had no sooner settled himself in a Habitation, but Godliness knocked
immediately at his Door, not doubting now but he should find his sweet Friend
Consideration; yet Godliness first bewailed the Apostate's Condition.

Farewell, Farewell, thou Monster of Mankind,
Look East and West, see, see if you can find
A Man who may with this sad Soul compare:
Will he Return? or if he does, is there
A ground to Hope Repentance he may meet,
Who treads the Truth, nay JESUS under Feet?
Can any Man on Earth ever come to be
A full complete and just Epitome
Of Sin and Wrath? O then, Sirs, this is he.
Who turns his back on CHRIST, to Babel flies,
He unto Falsehood cleaves, the Truth denies.
CHAP. XII.
Showing how Godliness coming to one Thoughtful's House, found there his Friend
Consideration, whom he had a long Time sought for; also the great Opposition
Consideration met withal.

GOdliness being not without Hopes of finding serious Consideration (for so
sometimes he is called) in or near this Place, chanced to knock (as you heard
before) at a Man's Door, who was newly come to dwell in the Town Religion. Now,
this Person formerly (as it appears): had been a very great Enemy to true
Godliness, having lived a grievous loose and profuse Life, and like the poor
Prodigal, wasted all his chiefest Substance. Godliness had not long knocked and
called at his Door before he listened to him, and spoke within himself to this
purpose. Who is this that is come to my Door? sure, said he, this is a Voice
different from any I ever heard in my Life; and he does not knock also as
others use to do: At last he cried out, who is there? ho is it that is at my
Door? your Name Sir?

Godli. Soul, Christ is at thy Door, and I his noble and renowned Offspring,
True Godliness. Do thou remember that Word, Behold I stand at the Door, and
knock, Rev. 3.20. Sir, now I will ask you the like Question, pray what is your
Name? I hope I am come to the right Door.

He told him his Name might very well be called loose and ungodly Prodigal; for
(said he) I have hitherto lived a very wicked Life: But some call me of late
Thoughtful, because I am (blessed be God) newly come to my self, by thinking
upon my latter End, and the Evil of my former Ways.

Godli. But why do thou choose to take up thy Dwelling in this Village now,
when so many are going out?

Thoughtful. Sir, it is because I hear it is the best Town in all the Country to
secure a Man from Danger in evil Times, provided I can but get a Place in one
of its strong Holds in the Heart of the Town: For I hear there is no safe
dwelling at the Town's End, no, nor any where in the Suburbs.

Besides, I was told lately, that Babylon, where I have dwelt 'till of late,
will suddenly be destroyed: I do it indeed to save my own Soul; I am, Sir,
desirous to find out (if it may be) where true Peace, Happiness, and eternal
Felicity is to be had; For I see they are not to be found in those Paths in
which I formerly walked; I mean in the Ways of Riches, Honor, and the
Pleasures of this World.

Godli. I commend thee, honest Thoughtful; thou have done wisely, and like a
considerate Man; prithee let me come in and dwell with thee, and thou will find
this poor Town the most safe and most secure Place in these dangerous Times, in
all the World. Sir, I have wandered about a long Time, traveling from Place to
Place, to seek for one whom I bear much Good Will to, but hitherto I have not
found him; his Name is Consideration; and many Things more he said, to make him
in Love with True Godliness.

Upon this, Consideration, who it seems was within, whispers Thoughtful in his
Ear, and said, This is he that can alone make thee happy, if he be readily,
sincerely, and heartily embraced and entertained. Is it not good for thee to
muse upon the Worth and excellent Nature of thy Soul? Thou art made a Man, and
therefore for a nobler and higher End and Employment (sure) than eating and
drinking, sleeping and playing, and wholly to mind thy Trade and secular
Affairs, and to enjoy sensual Pleasures, (a Happiness which Beasts arrive to as
well as thee) for this glorious Soul which lies in thy Bosom, is capable of
knowing God, and of enjoying Union and Communion with him for ever; so that all
those who suffer the Honors, Profits, and Pleasures of the World, to take up
and engross their Hearts, go astray, and err from the great End of their
Creation. Alas, there is nothing that can fill the Desires of thy Soul, or be
its Summum Bonum, but God himself: Thou have hitherto suffered thy Affections
and Desires to run after whatsoever thou could think might yield thee true
Felicity; but it is evident there is nothing thou can find here below, that
can satisfy thy thirsty and ever craving Soul.

First, Riches which sometimes thy Heart has been so much set upon, cannot be
thy Summum Bonum, or chief Happiness; for they are uncertain, fleeting and
variable Things; and let a Man have never so much of them, yet he is still
craving and desiring more, so that it is as Solomon says, He that desires
Silver, shall not be satisfied with Silver. Secondly, Honors are of like
Nature; and besides their Vanity, they depend on the Minds, Wills, and Humors
of Men, who are changeable and unconstant. Thirdly, Pleasures and
Voluptuousness, they are common (as I told thee) with Beasts as well as Men,
and also have* annexed their Sting and Discontention when they are past.
Besides all this, Consideration, to induce him to open to true Godliness, bid
him ask his Soul, in what State it now was; What it was a doing; And whither it
was a going.

First. He endeavored to show him, that his Soul was in the Gall of
Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity, being under the Law and Curse of God,
both in Respect of original and actual Sin; he having not closed with Christ,
nor received True Godliness. Secondly, Then as to what he was a doing, he bid
him see if he did not neglect that one Thing needful. Have you, said
Consideration, made Religion your chief Business, since you came to live in
this Place? Have you not rather spent too much of your Time about Notions and
airy Speculations? Thirdly, Whither are you a going? said he: Are you fit
(being well prepared) to die? Are you going the Way to Heaven? Sure that cannot
be, unless you receive True Godliness: For I have heard that it consists in a
right Faith, as well as a holy Life. Oh what Cost, Labor, Pains, Means,
Motives, and Arguments, has God used to make Men sensible of the everlasting
Interest of their Souls, and to engage them to a serious Preparation for
another World.
And this serious Preparation must necessarily be a thoro' Work of
Regeneration, Faith and spotless Conversation; for the Nature of the Means
(says he) must ever be suitable and agreeable to the nature of the end. And
Heaven being a holy place, nothing but perfect Holiness reigning there, so it
will be impossible to enter into it hereafter, without a considerable Progress
was made in Holiness here; and that it was not to be though it a Man could reach to
the highest step of a Ladder without ascending the lowermost first. Who (said
he) ever hoped for a Crop of Corn without Sowing any? or expected to Reap Wheat
and sowed nothing but Tares?

He laid also before him the Nature and Holiness of God, his infinite Hatred of
Sin, and great Severity against all unbelieving and impenitent Souls, together
with the perfect Knowledge he had of the Hearts, Thoughts and Ways of the
Children of Men; likewise his dreadful Judgments, Commands, Threats, and
precious Promises.

He brought to his Mind also the Evil of Sin, showing him what an abominable
Thing it was for Man to seek to please, obey, and do the Will of the Devil, and
offend, disobey, and cross the Will of God. Nay, and he began to speak of the
Excellency of True Godliness also, and what he should gain by embracing him,
and letting Christ and the Spirit of Christ, Christ and the Grace of Christ,
Christ and True Godliness reign in his Heart. Nay he had so much to say, that
had he not been opposed and basely obstructed (with some other Help) Thoughtful
had presently opened the Door to True Godliness: But, alas, on a sudden there
was great Disturbance in the House, and poor Consideration went to the Walls,
and was almost utterly expelled his Tabernacle.

Now the Enemies he met with were these; Difficulty, Sloth, Deficiency,
Security, Danger, Worldly-Cares and Carnal Company: The chiefest Enemies to
Consideration.
These and many other Enemies appeared to obstruct and hinder Consideration
about this important Business of opening to True Godliness.

First, Difficulty spoke after this Manner: Sir, Do not trouble your self to
find out these great Mysteries of Religion and Godliness, for it is a Work too
hard and difficult for you to understand, there is nothing in the World more
abstruse and mysterious; therefore to muse upon them, would be lost Labor.

Sloth told him, it was laborious and toilsome Work, and it would be great
Wearisomness to him, if the Difficulty did not make it impossible.

Deficiency said, he was a Man of a weak Understanding, and those Things were
Matters for the Learned and most knowing Men of all to Study, nay, and that
many of them too, notwithstanding all their profound Learning, proficiency and
skill in the Tongues, could hardly attain to the right Knowledge of them.

Security endeavored to make it appear his Condition was very good and safe
now, and that he had Religion and Godliness enough, without troubling himself
farther, and that he exceeded in Holiness many Men that had lived long in the
Town. Moreover, he told him, that he had followed the Counsel of Consideration
too much already.

Danger too spoke several Things. 1. That to give place to him, would let in
his Enemy Melancholy, which might endanger his Life. Do not you see (says he)
how uncomfortable this Fellow Consideration has made many brave Men, causing
them, by thinking on their latter Ends, to hang down their Heads like a
Bull-rush, fold their Arms and spend their Days in Tears and Weeping; hearken
not to him, for he will certainly infuse sad Thoughts into your Mind, and give
you nothing but Gall and Vinegar to Drink. 2. He said moreover, Consideration
had made many Men go besides themselves; and if he did adhere to him, about
this Affair, he would be distracted. 3. He infinuated also, that if he did
seriously muse upon this Matter, or give Place to Consideration, so that
Godliness came to be let in, he would be undone, and utterly ruined, the Times
are such.

Worldly-Cares proved as great an Enemy to Consideration as any of them, for he
could not seriously muse, nor think upon Eternity, or the present Condition his
poor Soul was in; he was so hurried in his Mind about the Affairs of this Life:
Nay, no sooner at any Season that he set himself to ruminate or ponder them in
his Mind, but worldly Cares would expel and drive such Thoughts away.

Old Companions and carnal Company did greatly abuse Consideration, by
endeavoring to make him out of Love with a virtuous Life: These labored to
fawn him into Misery, and to tickle him into an Eternity of Torment; they
turned Religion and Godliness into a Jest, and made the Precepts of the Gospel
Matter for Railery, and told him, that those Men that seemed most serious, were
the most seditious, and that their Profession savoured of nothing but of Pride,
Singularity and Hypocrisy.

Now, after they had spoke their Pleasure, and almost silenced, nay, quite
routed poor Consideration: His Mind was filled and hurried about many Things;
which Godliness, though not yet let in, overheard, and presently took them all
up, and answered them one by one.

And first he spoke to this Purpose: Honest Thoughtful, I would not have thee
to be discouraged by these ill-bred Fellows thou have within, to slight poor
Consideration, for he is thy very good Friend, and as able a Counselor as most
in this Town: Moreover, very great Inconveniences also have always followed
those who have unadvisedly gone about to slight and contemn him: Nay, I must
tell thee most of all those great Miseries and heavy Judgments that have
befallen Nations, Cities, Towns, Churches, and particular Souls, has been
occasioned through their great Neglect to hearken to Consideration. This was
the Cause of Israel's Ruin of old; God, by his merciful Providence, sent to
them by his Prophets to advertise and warn them of their perilous State and
Condition, by Reason of their Sins, and not only told them of their imminent
Danger thereby, but also revealed the true Causes thereof, and how they might
easily provide Remedies for the Prevention of it; but they refused to lay it to
Heart, or give Way to Consideration about it, which made Jehovah to bewail
their future Misery after this Manner; O that they were wise, that they
understood this, that they would consider their latter End! Deuteronomy. 32.29. Among
many other Causes of their dismal Calamities, none^^ more general or oftener
alleged than the lack of Consideration, and it is through this means, as by a
common Snare, and Deceit of the Adversary, most Men fall into Sin, and rej^^t
me, and are holden also perpetually in Satan's Bonds, to their Destruction and
Perdition. Men go on in their abominable Lusts, Pride, Oppression, excess of
Riots, Drunkenness, and all manner of Debauchery, without considering what the
end of these Things will be: Woe unto them (says the Lord) that rise up early
in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, and continue until night,
till wine inflame them, and the harp and viol, the tabret and pipe, and wine
are in their feasts, but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider
the opperation of his hands, Isa. 5.21. Their cursed Lusts, and beastly
Sensuality brought them to neglect Consideration, and Inconsideration brought
them to the pit-side, or brink of Hell. Propterea captivus ductus est populus
meus quia non habuit scientiam, says God in the same Place, by the Prophet,
therefore, and for this Cause is my People led away Captive, etc. for they have
no Knowledge, no Understanding of the Time to come, no Consideration of their
Danger: He that will not lend an Ear to Consideration, renders himself little
better than a Brute: And what follows this Folly and Mad^^ss? therefore (says
the Holy Ghost) Hell has enlarged herself, and opened her mouth without
measure, and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that
rejoices shall descend into it, Isa. 5.13, 14. A brutish man knows not,
neither does a fool understand this, when the wicked spring as the grass, and
when all the workers of iniquity do flourish: It is that they should be
destroyed for ever, Psalm. 92.6, 7. The ox knows his owner, and the ass his
masters crib, but Israel does not know, my people does not consider, Isa. 1.3.

Negligence, carelessness, ignorance, and want of Consideration as it brought
Jerusalem down wonderfully, Lam. 1.9. so it has been the Bane and common
Perdition of unthinking and wretched Man from Time to Time, and will be yours,
if you hearken to these evil Enemies of your Soul, and suffer Consideration, to
be expelled your Tabernacle; why at this Day are there so many People, who
drink up Iniquity as the Fish drinks Waters? that commit all Manner of Sin, all
outrages, all injustice, all filthiness, treading down the poor, and contemning
(me) True Godliness, without remorse of Conscience, or dread of God's Wrath and
fearful Vengeance that does pursue them; but for the lack of Consideration of
that which is likely to be their Reward and Punishment for all their abominable
doings in the end? Thus says the Lord, consider your ways; consider your
doing, Haggai 1. Consider this ye that forget God, least he tear you in pieces,
and there be none to deliver you, Psalm. 50. Aye, but they will not consider it,
nor lay it to Heart, they will not know in this their Day the Things that
belong to their Peace, but inconsiderately put the evil Day far away, and
harden their Hearts against God, provoking him to draw his Sword, and cause his
Hand to take hold of Judgment; for nothing doubtless can be more intolerable in
the presence of the Almighty, than this Iniquity, since he has published his
Law, declared his pleasure against Ungodliness, charging all to bear it in
their Minds, to ponder it in their Hearts, and study and meditate upon it, both
Day and Night, at Home and abroad, when they rise up, and when they lie down to
make it their cogitation and rumination continually, etc. And O that Men should
ever, notwithstanding all this, contemn it, and make it no part of their
Thoughts, but rather flee the Knowledge thereof. God makes his Complaint, and
denounces judgment, but no Man (as the Prophet Jeremiah shows) will enter
into Consideration, nor mind why the Land mourns: None cry out, What have I
done? All Men, alas! are upon their own Courses, and run on the same with as
great vehemence and fierce obstinacy, as a fierce armed Horse into the Battle,
when he hears the Trumpets sound.

Come Thoughtful, Consideration, if thou adhere to him, will help thee to learn
to know God and thy self, and to find out the miserable Condition thou and all
Men are in by Nature: He is the Key that opens the Door for me to enter the
innermost Room of thy Heart; though it is true he cannot open it without Help:
Nay, farthermore, he is a Looking-Glass, or rather the very Eye of thy Soul,
whereby thou may view thy self, and see what a Condition thy Soul is in;
hereby thou may espy thy Debts, thy Danger, thy Duties, thy Defects, thy
Safety, the Course thou do follow, the Company thou do keep; finally, the
Place and End whereunto thou drawest; nay, he will give thee a View of all
God's Proceedings, and Dealings with Men, ever since the Creation of the World,
the Reason why God sent his Son, his Gospel, his Spirit, his Servants, and
takes so much Pains to bring Men to Salvation. Nay, and thou also, by his Help,
may find that all the Means God uses to bring thee to a true Sight and Sense
of Sin and Wrath, and to recover thee out of thy fallen Estate, will prove vain
and ineffectual to thee; let therefore the Consideration of the Danger thou
may escape through hearkening to him, on the one Hand, and the great Advantage
thou may receive on the other, together with the absolute Necessity of
nourishing and cherishing of him, and standing up for him, if thou would be
happy, engage thee not to be discouraged to incline to him, nor regard what any
speak against him, for he will cause thee to hear glad Tidings; nay, and be in
Part an Instrument to let me in; which if thou do, I will bring thee
acquainted with God and Jesus Christ; nay, help thee to a Room in his Heart,
and lead thee into Union and Communion with him, and give thee much glorious
Light, yea, and help thee to Pardon of Sin, Peace of Conscience, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost, and make thee a Son of God, give thee a Place in the heavenly
Family, feed thee with the Bread of Life, cloth thee with glorious Robes,
which sparkle like Diamonds, yea, make thee rich in Faith, in Knowledge, in
Experience, truly rich, always rich, eternally rich; yea, and set a Crown of
Glory upon thy Head, make thee an Heir of Heaven and Earth; thy Renown also
hereby will be great, thou shall have Angels to guard thee, Christ to serve
thee, God to honor thee. O love him, who would lead thee into Christ's Bosom,
and cause thee to sit in heavenly Places, make thee to triumph with Seraphims,
and sit down with thy glorified Redeemer upon the Throne of God for evermore.
It is impossible such a Friend should fare better than my great Master, who had
no Place where to lay his Head. Alas! Men deal with me and my poor Friend
Consideration, as the Inhabitants of Sodam, did deal with the three heavenly
Messengers that entered into Lot's House, viz. Quarrel with us, abuse us, and
offer Violence to us, show their Spleen against us, who seek to preserve them
from being consumed, and who, whilst we are with them, stay the Hand of Heaven
from falling upon them, the Hand of the destroying Angel, that they perish not,
and endeavor to make them for ever happy, possessing all true Felicity, and
free them from all Misery. Does not every Man desire that which is good? Was
ever any Man in love with Torment? Is it not every one's Interest to study how
to prevent it? Why then sure Thoughtful, Consideration cannot but have thy
Affection, unless thou do contemn rivers of Pleasures, inconceivable Glory,
even the inexhaustible Riches of both Worlds, and chufest rather Anguish,
Death, Hell, The Difficulty of Consideration answered.
and sulphurious Smoke for thy Portion. And now to take off what Difficulty
says against Consideration, he basely insinuates, that to muse and ponder upon
the great Concerns of Godliness and another World, is a hard and difficult Work.

Whereas to undertake great and hazardous and dangerous Achievements for
worldly Advantages, this is notwithstanding presently undertook; Men do not
care how difficult the Work is, if it be but profitable; and shall this be a
Stumbling Block in the Way? What will not a Man call difficult, if he have no
Mind to it! How should some Houses be built, Bridges over great Rivers be made,
Fields be sowed, and dangerous Voyages to Sea be undertaken? Shall the
Carpenter say, O it is difficult! And the Husbandman say, O it is difficult! And
the Mariner say, O it is difficult! And so lay it all aside? Nay, is it not fad,
that bloody Papists, and other wicked Enemies of the Gospel, should not think
any Thing too hard and difficult to undertake, to suppress and destroy
Godliness, and yet many who profess a Love to me, do not care to encounter with
small Difficulties about Consideration, how to entertain and embrace me, though
it be their only Business and chief Interest in all the World.

Were a Man's House on fire over his Head, and he like to be burned, would he
not think of Ways to get out because it was a difficult Work to do?

It Is not because Considerations about Heaven and Happiness are so hard and
difficult, but because Men have no Will nor Love to these Things, other Things
are more in their Affections. Besides, the rarest Things are not obtained but
through great Difficulty. What Hazards do Men often run for Honor and worldly
Riches? Oh? what Projects and Contrivances do they find out? And will thou
disist this Work, because it is difficult?

Consideration (says one) that spotless Virgin, that joy of Angels, that envy
of Devils, that offspring of God, Dr. Horneck.
the ladder whereby Men climb to Heaven is though it hard, though nothing be more
easy, it is always to be had, its always in Season, always at Hand, always in
Call, no Burden in a Journey, no Load in a Voyage, Men may carry it with them
where ever they go, when they travel Abroad, when they stay at Home, when they
sit down, when they rise up, they need not go beyond Sea to fetch it, or
involve many Books, to be Masters of it, they need not Sail to the Antipodes to
compass it, or dig under Ground to find it? they need not ransack the Indies to
enrich themselves with it, they need not sell their Lands and Houses to
purchase it, nor run the hazard of Sword and Fire to secure it; they need not
clamber Mountains to possess it, nor wade through Rivers to inherit it.

Strange Stupidity! Men do not think it hard to carry Talents of Lead, or
Mountains of Sin on their Backs, and yet they think Consideration difficult,
who like a faithful Friend, would tell them how to be rid of that load that
will (except they get Faith in Christ, or receive true Godliness into their
Hearts) sink them down into the lowest Pit; they do not think it hard to dig
into Hell, yet they think Consideration hard, who would teach them a Way to
quench that Fire; they do not think it hard to be oppressed by a bloody
Usurper, and yet they think Consideration hard, which would help them to shake
him off. O Fools and slow of Heart! they that have Courage to meet an Army in
the Field, and have Confidence to laugh at the glittering Spear and Shield,
they that have Courage to Plow the Sea, to face the Mouth of a Cannon, to stand
a Volley of Shot, to fight Duels, to endure the noise of Guns, to hear the
clashing of Swords and Spears, and lie on the cold Ground many Nights together,
to have an Arm or Leg out off; have they Courage to do all this; and shall thou
think Consideration about these great Things too hard for thee; contemn the
Thoughts of being overcome by this deceitful and timorous Fellow Difficulty.

Secondly, As to what Deficiency says, that thou art a Man of a weak
Understanding: Alas! thou can perceive that Gold is better than Glass or
Rattles, and that Pearls are better than Pebble; thou art able to perceive thou
art Mortal and must Die, and do know when a Bone is broke, it is good to have
it set; and that Food is good to thee when thou art Hungry; and that it is good
to get Clothes on to hide thy Nakedness, and art not able to consider the need
there is for Food to feed thy Soul, and that it is good to get Grace, to enrich
thy Soul. Art able to find how grievous it is to be cast into a Furnace of Fire,
and can not think that it is worse to be cast into a Fire that cannot be
quenched; nay, and have not weak and simple ones in their own Eyes, and in the
Eyes of others too, attained to the skill of Consideration about their eternal
Estates? Nay, and have wonderfully outdone the Wise and Learned ones of the
World in it too? Knowledge is easy unto him that has understanding, Prove.
14.16. Wisdom gives subtilty to the simple, and young men knowledge and
discretion, Prove. 1.4. When wisdom enters into thine heart, and knowledge is
pleasant to thy feet; discretion shall preserve thee, and understanding shall
keep thee, Prove. 2.10, 11.

Thirdly, As for what Sloth says, thou have cause to abhor him, for he is a
beggarly Villain, and deserves to be drove not only out of thy House, but out
of the Town and World too, for he never did no Man the least good, cast him out
a Vagabon! How now, Thoughful, would thou not take pains: Remember, the
slothful Person shall beg in Harvest, and have nothing through his Means; and
Idleness his Brother: Thy House is ready to fall through, and thy Vineyard is
grown all over with Thorns and Nettles, and yet he would not have thee consider
thy Danger, till it is too late to escape it. Oh how many have lost their Souls
by this bloody Wretch! What good comes of Idleness? Besides, do not you see how
the Men of the World hate him? They will not hearken unto him, but will in
despite of him, consider of fit Ways and Means to get Bread to eat, and
Clothes to put on, nay, and seek out through great Industry, rare Projects to get
Store of Riches; and will thou be drawn away by him from thinking of the ready
Way to be rich, great and renowned for ever? It Is the diligent Hand that has
the Promise; thou must seek for Wisdom as for Silver, and search for her as for
hidden Treasure, Prove. 2.4. Nay, and do not think neither, I put too great a
Burden upon thee, for thou may perceive thou need not to take greater
Pains about this inestimable Jewel, than the Men of the World take to get the
perishing Things of this Life; nay, if Men did bestow half the Labor about the
Good of their Souls, as they bestow about getting the World, and providing for
their Bodies, what happy Creatures might they be?

Fourthly, As touching what that timorous faint-hearted Fellow, Danger, laid
before thee, in respect of letting in Melancholy, this is a mere Deceit; for
there is a vast Difference between serious Consideration and destructive
Melancholy: A Man is not therefore sad, because he will not swear, rant,
whore, and be drunk. Consideration will let thee see, that those Men, who are
taken so much with vain Sports and Merriment, have the least Cause to rejoice
of any Men in the World.

Jollities are, as one observes, much like Attila's Nuptials, whose Wedding Day
proved his Funeral. Who would hazard an Eternity of Joy for a Moments Time of
vain and empty Pleasures? None can rejoice so heartily as he that has God for
his Portion, and has his Name written in Heaven.

Consideration will let thee see, that whatsoever vain Men may say, prate and
boast of, touching Joy and Pleasures, yet there is no Delight and Felicity like
that which is found in the Ways of true Virtue; that Godliness is the best
Security, and that the Joy of the whole Earth is Mount Sion; that in this
Garden are the sweetest Roses, the most oderiferous Flowers, the most fragrant
Plants, Roses which have no Prickles underneath, (nor like carnal Delights)
whose Flowers fade and wither away; nor like the frothy Mirth, which the
Laughter of Fools affords.

Consideration would let thee see, that those serious Persons, who look
dejected and melancholy to a carnal Eye, have Joy within, which no Stranger
intermeddles with; and as little as they make of Cheerfulness, yet they carry
in their Breast that which can make their Life a perpetual Jubilee.

2. They are Fools that account the Life of a Christian Madness, and his inward
Peace an airy F^ction; none is such a Frantic as he who cherishes a Serpent in
his Bosom, that will certainly sting him to death, who never sows, yet thinks
to reap a good Crop at Harvest; that may have glorious Robes to cloth him, and
yet value his own nasty Rags above them, or else chooses to go naked; who hates,
and seeks to destroy his best Friends, for the sake of whom he is not
destroyed; who thinks to go to Heaven, and yet walks the direct way to Hell.
Can there be greater Madness than to prefer a Stone before Bread, or feed upon
Husks with the Swine, when there is all good Things to be had, if they would
but seek out for them? Can there be greater Madness than to value a base Lust
above God, Christ, and eternal Glory?

3. Whereas Danger tells thee (to obstruct Consideration from opening to thee)
of the Evil of the Times, and that if I am let in, thou will be undone; know
then, if I am kept out, there is no Way to escape, but ruined thou will be? No
Danger like Soul-Danger? he can never be undone that has God for his Portion,
and Heaven for his Inheritance; lose thy Soul, and what haft thou more; and
unless thou consider the sooner, and open to me, thou can not save it, for
without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord.

Fifthly, Worldly-Cares, I know, hinders my dear Friend Consideration as much
as any Thing, he would persuade thee thou have no Time to think on God, nor
Godliness, having a Trade to follow, a Family to provide for, etc. But shall
those Things hinder thee from thinking of any thing else? Is there not one
Thing more needful, viz. to make much, or seriously think on me, and of the
Concerns of thy Soul, when thou art at work about thy secular Affairs, when
thou go out, and when thou come in, when thou lie down, and when
tho^risest up; thy Heart may be with God, when thy Hand is otherwise employed:
True, if the World is got into thy Heart, there can be but little Room for
Consideration or True Godliness; a continual Hurry of Business puts out the Eye
whereby it should reflect upon it self: But shall the Earth keep out Heaven,
and the Prince of Darkness shut out the Prince of Light, and Briars and Thorns
choke the good Seed? Shall worldly Cares and Business be thy chiefest Guests,
whom thou biddest welcome, and shall Christ stand at thy Door as a neglected
Stranger? Shall Thought be cherished about getting the World, and serious
Consideration be crushed, who would put thee in the Way how to get Heaven? But
remember this, he that has no Time to open to Christ here, Christ will find no
Time to open to him hereafter. Can the World help thee to Peace and Pardon on a
Deathbed, or Riches deliver thee in the Day of Wrath.

Sixthly, As to what thy old Companions lay before thee to render me odious, if
thou mind or regard then, adieu for ever: They that hate Seriousness
themselves, must needs dislike it in others: These are the Devil's Agents, whom
he sends abroad into the World to deflower Virtue, these are his Factors, by
whom he draws Men into eternal Chains of Darkness; these strive to put me (True
Godliness) into a Wolf's Skin, that they may set all the Dogs in the Town upon
me. This Age has bred more Monsters of Wickedness than many Ages before it.
Shun keeping Company with these Scoffers and Contemners of true Godliness, for
the Lord's sake. As thou art come into the Town of Religion, so let the truly
Religious be thy Companions, who will, instead of hindering, help serious
Consideration. What Ground is there to think a Man will mind the true Interest
of his Soul, that keeps Company with Persons who make a Sport and May Game of
serious Consideration? He that would keep his Garden and precious Flowers
securely, must be sure, whatever he does, to keep out the Hogs: What is he that
keeps Company with Sinners, but a Companion of Sinners? And Society in Sin
strangely takes off the Mind from the Heinousness of it: Also Men may judge of
a Person by the Company he keeps; as is a Man's Company, such is the Man; and
as is his Company here, such it is like to be hereafter. O how do Sinners
harden one another in the Ways of Wickedness! They think there is some Comfort
in having Associates in Misery. They dare to sin more freely (as Dr. Horneck
observes) when they are in Company, being afraid their single Valor will never
be able to duel God's Wrath: They hope God will not damn a Multitude of his
Creatures together; as if the Number of Sinners could move the Almighty into
Compassion; and if they perish, they think, nay, sometimes speak it, they shall
fare as well as their Neighbors; it is a hard Thing indeed, Thoughtful, to be
serious in such a lascivious Age as this is; a wicked Man, as he poisons the
Air in which he breaths, so he pollutes the Age in which he lives; it is bad
lodging in that House where God himself refuses to dwell; with the Froward thou will soon learn Frowardness: Who can touch Pitch and not be defiled? But it is
better to be contemned for Virtue by Men on Earth, than to be condemned for
Vice by the God of Heaven?

What say thou now, Thoughtful? Shall Consideration prevail with thee to
open the Door to me? He stood and paused a while, and had a great Mind to
embrace him: Conscience being quite brought over to join in with him,
Consideration overcomes all his enemies
and now Consideration was hugged by Thoughtful with great Joy, and all those
other Enemies seemed quite vanquished; but lo on a sudd^n new Enemies rose up
in his House, and made strong Opposition, and strove to keep Godliness out,
though Consideration was kindly embraced; for he, like David, thought on his
Ways, and begun to turn his Feet to keep God's Testimonies, Psalm. 119.59. and
with the Prodigal, being come to himself, resolved to go home to his Father's
House.

CHAP. XIII.
Showing how poor Thoughful, though he had embraced Consideration, and was
resolved to receive Godliness into his House, was hindered by one Old Man,
Wilfull-Will, Carnal-Affections, and Apollyon: Also showing how he met with his
good Friend Labourious, who did what he could to help him, but had not
prevailed, had it not been for another, who came in to his Assistance.

THoughtful having with much joy and gladness embraced Consideration, and most
bravely overcome the snares and impediments those Adversaries (we mentioned
before) laid in his Way, was now resolved to receive true Godliness, and
speedily close with Jesus Christ^ but lo on a sudden other Enemies (that seemed
to lie still in his House before) rose up, and made strong Opposition against
his entertaining this new Guest: But as he met with fresh Opposition from other
Enemies, whose Names were Old Man, Carnal-affections and Wilful-will, and
stirred up by the envious and black Prince Apollyon, and other Powers of
Darkness, so he had by the means of Consideration and the light of God's Word,
some new Friends, to help and assist him; there Names were Conscience, informed
Judgment, alias, enlightened Understanding. Now, Apollyon being in great fear,
that Thoughtful, by the help of Consideration, Conscience, and enlightened
Understanding, would embrace 01 true Godliness, rose up in great fury, and
spoke to the rest of the infernal Crew to this purpose.

Most mighty Powers who once from Heaven fell,
To raise this Throne and Monarchy in Hell,
Bestir your selves with speed, or all is gone,
For Thoughtful has almost the Battle won;
It Is hateful in my sight to think that we
Should by this thinking Thoughtful worsted be.
Or that true Godliness, that cursed Foe of ours,
Prevail against all Hell's infernal powers?
I swear in spite of Heaven it shall not be.
And presently he rose from off his Seat,
Ready to burst with Rage and Malice great,
And cast a terrible look on Thoughtful, who
Stood musing still, but knew not what to do:
At this, another Fiend stepped in and said,
Let never a Devil of us be afraid;
Lo, don't you see the unwary Wretch does try,
Open to your Arms in great security?
What though some Ground is lost, we'll seek about
To find some Way to keep this Traveller out;
We in the House have a strong Party yet,
Who in our Bands keep his unwary Feet;
But sad it is the Wretch such light should see,
As to perceive his woeful Misery.
We must bestir us, and give new Directions,
And by all means keep fast his Soul's Affections.
Affliction still by Old Man is directed,
And Wilful-will to us is well affected,
Let us pursue our present enterprise
With all the Power and Craft we can devise.
This Consideration has the mischief done,
Whom I do wish a Plague to light upon.
Apollyon and all the Powers of Hell, having thus combined together, to find
out new Ways to prevent Thoughtful from receiving true Godliness, endeavored
to stir up Old Man, and his cursed darling Carnal-affections, to do what they
could to place his Mind and Thoughts upon the perishing Things of this Life:
Which being done, this put poor Thoughtful into a stand; one while he was
resolved to open the Door, but then on a sudden his Heart was captivated with
the Pleasures and Delights of this Life, which came to pass by reason his
Affections were not yet thoroughly changed, nor the evil qualities of his Soul
removed; for Old Man had grievously corrupted all the Powers and Faculties
thereof, which Godliness (who with patience waiting still at his Door)
perceiving, asked him, what the matter was he did not let him come in?

Thoughtful answered, he was hindered by a base Fellow that he had got in his
House.

Upon this, Godliness and he fell into a serious Discourse again.

Godli. Who is it, Thoughtful, that obstructs my being received?


Thought. His name is Old Man;


Godli. He is, indeed I know, my grand Enemy, and has been near this six
thousand Years, (for so old this Villain is;) and there is not one in all the
World that has done me more wrong, to tell thee plainly, than he and his cursed
Daughter, Carnal-affections.


Thought. Aye, Sir, but I find also one Wilful will is utterly against your
coming in; Lord, what will become of me, I know you are a Person worthy
entertainment; and O, who am I, that you should come to be Guest to such a vile
and unworthy Wretch.


Godli. Nay, Thoughtful, I do not stand alone, but here are others waiting at
thy Door to come in with me also, who are Persons of no mean Quality.


Thought. Others, pray who are they?


Godli. Why here is my Father the eternal Jehovah, with Jesus Christ, the
prince of the kings of the earth, and the holy spirit, Rev. 3.30.


Thought. Lord, what shall I do? O infinite and admirable Grace and
Condescension! God and Christ, and the Holy Ghost at my Door, and I not let
them in! O this is an amazing Consideration?


Godli. Nay, Thoughtful, it is so, and more I must tell thee, they have been
waiting here a long Time, ever since I came first to knock at thy Door, and I
told thee so too, but I perceive thy Memory proves false to thee; likewise, he
is doubtless misled by that base Old Man; but if thou do not open to me the
sooner, they will leave thee, for they never come into any Man's House, who
keep their Doors shut against true Godliness. Why do not knock the Old Man
down, and lay him bleeding, it is not enough to cry, What, Lord, shall I do, but
thou must shake off that lazy Fellow, Sloth, and like a brave and courageous
Soul, acquit thy self.


Thought. Alas what can I do? This Old Man is too strong for me, and
Wilful-will is a very stubborn Fellow too, I am no match for them.


Godli. Why I will tell thee, there is one in thy House that will help thee, if
thou hearken to him.


Thought. What is his name, Sir?


Godli. His name is Conscience.


Thought. Sir, I know him very well, he has, since his Eyes were opened, been a
very good Friend to me. But for a great while he lay in my House as one dead,
and I found his Eyes almost quite put out by that cursed Old Man; but all that
he can do, is not sufficient without farther help.


Godli. Thou say right, thank enlightened Understanding for that!
Consideration, by bringing thee to read and hear God's holy Word, opened his
Eyes also, but is there never another Friend of mine in thy House, who can lend
thee a little Assistance in this Time of need?


Thought. Alas, Sir, who have I else that can do any Thing for me, for my House
is full of cursed Adversaries; never was a Cage fuller of unclean and hateful
Birds, than my House, I mean my Heart, which is full of base and filthy Enemies
to true Godliness.


Godli. Thou say right, I believe thee, poor Thoughtful; but prithee see if
thou can not find a Friend that I dearly love, and have a long Time sought
for.


Thought. Pray Sir, who is that? Tell me his Name.


Godli. His Name is Endeavor, alias Labourious; you cannot imagine Thoughtful
what great Things he has done: Oh, I love him dearly, he helped Noah to build
the Ark, and Jacob to get the Blessing, and to wrestle with the Angel, and to
prevail too; and Solomon to build the Temple. Consideration, it is true, caused
David to think on his Ways, but it was Endeavor that turned his Foot to keep
God's Statutes: Consideration also brought the poor Prodigal to his right Mind,
but it was my Friend Endeavor that sent him home to his Father's House; 'twas
be that made him find his Feet, (after the Spirit of God had bro't him to
himself) nay I could tell thee, I have taught him to get many a Blessing by
Prayer. Prithee, who was it that got the three Loaves in the Gospel? Was it not
this importunate Labourious? Was it not he likewise that made the poor Widow to
prevail with the unjust Judge to avenge her of her Adversary? Nay, in a Word,
the Promise of God is made to him, If you follow on to know the Lord, then you
shall know him. It Is this diligent, painful Person that makes Men (with God's
Blessing) rich, I mean spiritually rich: And this I must tell thee too, he can
do nothing of himself; do not think that he can open the Door; no, no, it must
be the Spirit of God that does that; I do not say, Thoughtful, that he is able
to do it, but the Promise of better Assistance is made to this my dear Friend
sweet Endeavor: Have you never read in Aesop's Fables, of a Man that was
fallen into a Ditch, and lying there almost drowned, he called to Jupiter to
help him out, but Jupiter answered, Endeavor to get out, and Jupiter will help
thee: Though this is but a Fable, yet the Moral is very applicable. Now what do
thou say, Thoughtful, can thou find thy good Friend Endeavor?


Thought. Truly Sir, now I think of it, I hope I have; but he has been here
but a little Time; I have found him, and God knows he has been too much
neglected by me, for I did not strive to enter in at the strait Gate 'till now.
But pray, wherein will he be so useful to me, what are his Properties?


Godli. Why he commonly stirs up Men to do what they can to open the Door to
me, he is a great Enemy to Sloth and Idleness, he makes them to rise betimes in
the Morning to call upon God, and to read God's Word, and pry into it very
diligently, and he will cause thee to incline thine Ear to what Conscience
says, and make thee tremble at his Reproofs and Accusations, when you sin
against God, if you will but take his Counsel: He will also cause thee to go to
hear Sermons, and not to sleep when you come there, nor neglect, nor slight
Convictions, nor be careless and remiss in any Duty, and will help thee to
labor after Faith, and not to rest upon any Thing short of Christ.


Thought. O Sir, this is the Friend I want, and blessed be God I have found
him, I am resolved to make use of his Help and Assistance continually. Now
Old Man look to your self, Laborious I hope, will do your Business, and I shall
quickly prevail, and open the Door to true Godliness.

Upon this he became very diligent in attending upon all the Means of Grace.
Moreover, by the Help of Endeavor, he cut off some one or two of the Members
of Old Man, that cursed Body of Sin, and prayed Morning and Evening, eschewing
all open Profaneness and scandalous Sins, and would not speak at Random with
his Tongue, nor neglect to hear one good Sermon if possible he could get an
Opportunity, and became mighty just in all his Dealings and Commerce with Men.
But soon upon this, Apollyon, by the Treachery of Old Man, raised up another
Enemy, which had almost insensibly undone him; his Name was Self-Righteousness,
a very great Enemy to true Godliness, which Godliness soon perceived; and
called upon him to open the Door, for it appeared he had not received him yet.


Godli. Thoughtful, what is the Cause of this great Neglect? What shall I not
yet be received? O what a long Time have I stood at your Door? What is the
Matter now?


Thought. Truly Sir, I concluded now the Door had been open, by the Help of my
good Friend Labourious, for I have done what he required of me.


Godli. No no, Thoughtful, I am still kept out, wilful Will and old Man have
beguiled you, and have let in another dangerous Enemy, whose Name is
Self-righteousness; this was he that quite undid poor Legalist, and will ruin
you too, if you take not heed: I would not have you to slight Endeavor, but
not to make an Idol of Endeavor. If you be found in your own Righteousness,
you will be lost by your own Unrighteousness. Duties can never have too much of
your Diligence, nor too little of your Dependence; it is not the salt Seas of
thy own Tears, but the red Sea of Christ's Blood must wash away thy Sins. You
owe the Life of your Soul to the Death of your Savior.

If you have no better Righteousness than what is of your own providing, you
will meet with no higher Happiness than what is of your own deserving; you must
take up Duties in Point of Performance, but lay them all down again in Point of
Dependence. There is as much Cause to fear you now as ever there was before;
what will you do?


Thought. Lord help me, what shall I do indeed? O how are many deceived, who
think it is an easy Thing to be saved? Sure I shall never obtain to a State of
Grace and true Conversion.

Upon this a melancholy and very dangerous Fellow (called Despond) fell upon
him, and almost knocked him down; nay, I perceived he broke some of his Bones,
wounding him so grievously, that he was left bleeding in such a Manner, that he
concluded there was no Hope of Life. Indeed he was wonderfully overwhelmed with
Trouble, and that which grieved him most of all, was, to think, that all this
Time, not only True Godliness, but CHRIST himself also waited at his Door.
Godliness perceiving what a sad Condition he was in, spoke to him afrer this
Manner.


Godli. Poor Thoughtful, do not give Way to Apollyon, that cursed Prince of
Darkness, for it is he who has stirred up that cruel Enemy Despond to take away
thy Life; that bloody Villain has sent many thousand Souls to Hell. Come,
though thy own Righteousness is worth nothing, but like filthy Rags, yet
Christ's Righteousness is sufficient to cover thee, and his Blood to heal all
thy Wounds. Your great Business is to believe, viz. Wholly to get out of your
self, and rely upon Christ's blessed Merits; and know assuredly, that that very
Moment you cast your self, by a lively Act of Faith upon Jesus Christ, I shall
come into your House.

O know poor Thoughtful, that Christ's Righteousness has more worth in it to
save you, and raise you up to Heaven, than your own unrighteousness has weight
to cast you down to Hell. You say you are a great, a black, and bloody Sinner,
but you can be but a Sinner; and Christ died for Sinners; and never any threw
themselves by an Act of true Faith upon him, but were saved by him; alas, he
died for the chiefest of Sinners; and do you not hear him say, Come unto me,
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest, Mat. 11.28.
Sir, He that believes not, make God a Liar, for he has said in his Son, There
is Life and Salvation for you, and all that come to God by him.

Thoughtful, O that I could believe! My Sins! My Sins!

No sooner had Godliness showed him what it was to open the Door, and laid
before him the Necessity of Union with Christ, and of Faith in him, but
Apollyon, with the Old Man, and other cursed Enemies, began to cause dreadful
Combustions in his House; for nothing does the Devil fear more than true Faith;
and Thoughtful found it very hard to believe, Wilful-Will being such a
stubborn, crooked and perverse Fellow; also Apollyon tried his Skill many other
Ways to undo him, so that he was hard beset; but when Apollyon saw none of
those Ways were like to do, he laid before him the outward Danger he would be
in, if true Godliness was embraced; he told him, he was like to suffer great
Persecution, it being the Portion of all who entertain true Godliness, insomuch
that his very Life might be in Danger; but Godliness comforted him sweetly,
with many precious Promises, telling him also he had such a glorious Retinue to
attend him, which he would bring into his House with him, that he need not fear
any Difficulty, provided that he would but let him in; but he seeing he was not
able to open the Door, his Enemies being too strong for him, notwithstanding
his own Strength, to his Joy he told him, there was one Friend of his, whom, if
he could prevail with to come to his Assistance, he would soon make the Way
clear, and open the Door. Who is that, said Thoughtful? Godliness then
discovered immediately the Excellency of his Person, and the Nature of his
Operation, by which he soon understood it was the Holy Ghost; upon this he was
not a little glad, but presently cried out as one whose Life is in Danger, to
God to send the Holy Spirit to assist him, O Lord, the Spirit, the Holy Spirit,
now Lord! Thus he cried, and presently there was strange Strugglings indeed,
(the Holy Spirit working upon all the Faculties of his Soul) yea, such a
Conflict that he never met with in all his Life; Judgment in the Combat behaved
himself bravely; Consideration was not wanting; Conscience laid on home Blows,
being backed with Endeavor, alias Labourious: In the Beginning of the Battle,
the Holy Spirit came in, and with him Faith, and other of Godliness's
Attendants, and the Door flew open, and Old Man immediately went to the Wall,
crying out for Quarter, pleading his great Age, but had no Mercy showed him.
Wilful Will strait-way subjected himself (that Scripture being made good, My
People shall be willing in the Day of my Power) and became Thoughtful's very
good Servants. Carnal-Affections changed their Mind, and were made heavenly;
and so they abode, to his great Joy, until his dying Day.

True Godliness being now entered into his House, with his Attendants,
Thoughtful was not a little comforted. Now Godliness's Retinue, who came in
with him, were these following, (some of which you had an Account of before)
viz. Heavenly-new-Man, True-Love, Innocence, Humility, Sobriety, Sincerity,
Temperance, Self-clearing, Faithful, Excellent-Knowledge, Blessed-Experience,
Godly-Zeal, Filial-Fear, Precious-Promises, Holy-Revenge, Vehement-Desires,
Constant-Supplication, Spiritual-Indignation, Christian-Courage,
Sincere-Aims-and-Ends, Careful, Patience, Hospitality, Stability, Charity,
Liberality, Chastity, Purity, Holy-Sympathy, Wake-Man, Watch-Well, Peaceable,
Harmless, Gentleness, Brotherly-Kindness and Love-All; besides several others
of like Quality; and by reason these, as I formerly told you, were all great
Nobles, or Persons highly descended, being the Offspring of Heaven, they had I
perceived also a most glorious Attendance to accompany them; and to the End you
may know what a happy Man poor Thoughtful is now become, and with him every
true Christian, I shall let you know who they were.

The first I saw was the Father of True Godliness, for he always dwells where
he dwells, and abides with this his glorious and heavenly Attendance.

Secondly, The Lord Jesus Christ, which brought that Word to my Remembrance, If
any Man loves me, he will keep my Words, and my Father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and make our Abode with him, John 14.23. Also the other
Words, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me, Rev. 3.20.

Thirdly, The Holy Spirit, for he also is said to dwell in us; and besides
these, there was,

Fourthly, Union.

Fifthly, Reconciliation.

Sixthly, Justification.

Seventhly, Acceptance.

Eighthly, Communion with the Father and Son.

Ninthly, Adoption.

Tenthly, Pardon of Sin.

Eleventhly, The Image of God.

Twelfthly, Peace of Conscience.

Thirteenthly, And Joy in the Holy Ghost.

Fourteenthly, Free Access to the Throne of Grace.

Fifteenthly, A Place in the heavenly Family.

Sixteenthly, Fellowship with Saints.

Seventeenthly, The Earnest and Sealing of the Spirit.

Eighteenthly, Increase of Grace.

Nineteenthly, The Attendance of an innumerable Company of Angels.

Twentiethly, Divine Protection, or sure Refuge in God.

One-and twentiethly, A full Assurance of Heaven; but it was a great while
before they could see him, he lay hid, it appears, though he came in with the
rest. And

Lastly, Final Perseverance.

But lo, I looked, and behold a good Way off, I espied another glorious Train
followed, in the midst of which I plainly discerned, amongst others (whose
Glory was so great, I could not behold them) these following, viz. Immortality,
Incorruption, Perfection, Glorious Victory, Heavenly-Triumph, the
Beatifick-Vision, Rivers of Pleasure, the Tree of Life, the King in his Beauty,
a white Throne, Mansions of Glory, the Holy City New-Jerusalem, the Streets
whereof were paved with pure Gold; a Crown of Righteousness, which so glister'd
that it dazzled mine Eyes in such a Sort, that I could not look downwards like
some Men ever since: Moreover, I saw Millions of Millions of glorified Saints,
coming amongst the holy Cherubim and Seraphim, and all the Host of Heaven, with
Palms and Harps in their Hands, singing Alleluia, to God and the Lamb; they
made such Melody, that it was enough to ravish one's Soul, and leave no Heart
nor Spirit in us to the empty Things of this World.


Now the two first glorious Companies, who attend true Godliness here, these
entered in with him immediately; and the other Glories Thoughtful was sure of
possessing after a few Days; so that he was wonderfully fortified against all
domestic Commotions, or foreign approaching Dangers whatsoever; for he could
not but expect new Troubles would be raised against him, both from within and
without: And so indeed it suddenly came to pass; for Apollyon, the cursed
Prince of Darkness, first raised up all his scattered Forces, which still
remained within, who lurked in Holes and secure Corners of his House; for
particularly Old Man, though he was dangerously wounded, his Head broke, and he
laid bleeding, yet it appears he was not quite dead, yet was committed close
Prisoner, under the Charge of one of Godliness's Servants, called Holy Revenge;
and though he had a strict Command to kill him, yet he saw he could not presently
do it; by which Means it fell out, that in a little Time he seemed to revive
again; and poor Thoughtful thereby was continually plagued with indwelling Sin
to his dying Day, which was a great Grief to him, and a Hindrance also to True
Godliness at all Times; and the worst of all was, that Inward Corruption, alias
Old Man, alias Body of Sin, getting too great Power by the Treachery of Mrs.
Heart, and Apollyon the Prince of Darkness; they laying before him the manifold
Evils and Remisness in holy Duties, persuaded him, that he harbored in his
House an Enemy to True Godliness, called Hypocrisy, and that he was like, upon
that Account, to lose all his Hopes here, and that Happiness which Godliness
assured him of hereafter; and had not Sincerity came in with Godliness, he had
been utterly undone; but, as God would have it, Self-clearing, by the Help of
poor Conscience, made it appear to him, that Hypocrisy was not hid in his
House, nor in the least countenanced by him; for, First, They made it out he
had a general Hatred of all Iniquity, and did not allow of, nor connive at any
Sin whatsoever, by the Aid of spiritual Indignation: And Secondly, That there
was no one Duty which he was convinced of, but he readily subjected to it by
the Help of New-Obedience. Thirdly, That he was mighty careful of, and had
always (by the Help of christian Watch-well) kept a strict Eye over Mrs. Heart,
whom he most of all mistrusted, and had a great Jealousy of. Fourthly, That he
rested not upon the external Performance of any Duty, but did what he did to
the Praise and Glory of God, by the Help of True-Love. Fifthly, That he was the
same continually in Private which he was in Public, by the Assistance of
Filial-Fear. Sixthly, And that also he gave according to his Ability at all
Times to the Support of Christ's Ministers, and to relieve the Necessities of
the poor Saints; the one by the Aid of New-Obedience, Bounty, Liberality, and
Godly-Zeal, and the other by the Help of christian Charity. Seventhly, That he
did nothing to be seen of Men, or for Vain-Glory's sake, by the Directions of
holy Ends and Aims, and by the Power of heavenly New-Man. Eighthly, And that he
was always constant in his Love to, and Esteem of true Godliness, being as much
for the Work of Godliness, as for the Wages, by the Assistance of Faithful.
Ninthly, That he did not inordinately love, nor set his Affections upon the
Things of this Life, by the Help of Temperance and Sobriety. Tenthly, That he
labored to live a spotless Life, being taught so to do by sweet Purity and
harmless Innocence. Eleventhly, That he bore up bravely in the Profession of
the Gospel, not being ashamed nor afraid to own Jesus Christ before Men, by the
Means of Stability and christian Courage. Twelfthly, And that he did not faint
under Afflictions and Trials, by the Help of blessed Experience, Patience, and
precious Promises. Thirteenthly, That he was not corrupt in Principle, nor led
into Error, by the Means of excellent Knowledge.


Now Conscience and Self-clearing having thus freed Thoughtful from the false
Charge about harboring Hypocrisy, he came to perceive what excellent Advantage
he had, and should receive by Godliness's noble and heavenly Retinue; and
hereupon he fell so in love with them, that he never would go any where, nor do
any Work without their Company, which Apollyon perceiving, knowing it was in
vain to assault him any more that Way, but being filled with hellish Rage and
Malice against him, he raised up mighty Forces and Powers upon him, from
without; for, first he stirred up abundance of base Fellows of the worser Sort,
to abuse him, amongst which were these following: Hate-good, Time-server,
Pride, Toss-pot, Outside, Riot, Ignorance, Belly-god, Hard-heart, Scoffer,
Please-all, Love-Lust, Make-strife, Giddy-head, Pick-thank, Robsaint,
Temporizer, Idolator, Opposer, Avarice, Shameless, Rash, High-minded, Lofty,
Sear'd-Conscience, and many more of the same Sort, like Bees, compassed him
about, mis-calling and abusing him in a cruel and unmerciful Manner; which made
him wonder what the Cause should be, but at last he perceived the Ground and
Reason of it was, only because he had received true Godliness.

Remembering that Word of Jesus Christ, Marvel not if the World hates you. And
that Word, They shall say all Manner of Evil against you falsely for my Name's
sake: With the Saying of the Apostle, And all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus shall suffer Persecution. At this he was somewhat troubled and cast down
in his Spirits, seeing nothing could be expected but that these Fellows would
plague him, if not utterly undo him, as touching the Things of this World; and
though by the Help he had by Godliness's Retinue, he was supported and
established in the Ways of Grace and true Holiness, yet he was somewhat
disquieted in his Mind; which Godliness soon perceiving, began to consider what
the Cause of it should be; but he quickly found out the Reason of it; for upon
Enquiry, he understood amongst all the good Company Thoughtful had got in his
House, yet there was one (whom Godliness dearly loved, and Thoughtful could not
be without) whose Name, it sees was Christian Contentment, and also it appeared
that this noble and highborn Hero Content, had been a long Time wandering about
in the Wilderness of this World, to seek a fit Companion to co-habit or dwell
with, but could not find one.

CHAP. XIV.
Showing how Thoughtful, meeting with his dear Friend Contentment, finding now
nothing wanting in order to the making his Life sweet and comfortable here, and
eternally happy hereafter, fell a singing Hallelujahs, Hymns of Praise and
Thanksgiving, to God and the Lamb.

THoughtful Christian, (for so now we must call him,) notwithstanding all the
high and unutterable Blessings, Riches and Honor he had arrived at, by his
late embracing True Godliness, remained very sad and melancholy, being
attended with many desponding Cogitations, by perceiving not only the great
Distresses and Troubles which his Wife and Children were like to meet with in
this World, but also what sad, unsettled, and unhappy Days he was fallen into,
and of the abounding Evils and horrible Blasphemies which star'd him in the
Face wherever he came; together with the low and deplorable Condition the
Church of Christ and true Religion was in, in this dismal Hour; which Godliness
perceiving, told him of one Contentment, whom he saw he had not yet found; and
that if he could but obtain that Favor, to persuade him to dwell with him, his
Mind would remain sweetly settled and composed, and that he would enjoy all the
Calmness and Serenity of Soul imaginable, being delivered from all anxious
Thoughts, about the present and suture Events of Things, and undergo all
Crosses and harshest Accidents with Equanimity and Acquiescence of Spirit,
wholly submitting unto, and being fully satisfied with the divine Disposal.
Now, this glorious, noble and renowned Prince Contentment had been, it seems,
traveling from Place to Place, like a poor Pilgrim, as True Godliness had
done, seeking a fit resting Place, but could find none; for he had been to
visit Riches, but no Dwelling there; and Poverty also, but found no Lodging
there; with Youth he could find no abode; and Old Age was a Stranger to him;
Pleasure could give him no Entertainment; Honors were forced to say, I know
thee not; he was not lodged in the Prince's Palace, nor in the Peasant's
Cottage; the unmarried sought him, but could not find him; and the married
wished for him, but there was no abiding for him there neither; for none of all
these States and simple Conditions of Men could yield perfect Peace, Content
and Sincerity of Mind; but Thoughtful hearing Godliness speaking of him, that
he was used to dwell with him, or where he took up his Lodging, sent presently
his old Friend Consideration to seek out for him, and by the Providence of God,
it was not long before he found him; yet for the Information of my thinking
Reader, I shall show thee a Way how Consideration, by the Assistance of Faith,
met with him, and brought him home to his dear Master Thoughtful Christian, and
made him his fixed Companion.

First, Consideration led him forth to ponder upon the divine Attributes,
Providence, and Promises of God; he caused him to consult infinite Power,
Wisdom, Omnisciency, Holiness, Mercy, Goodness, Truth, and Faithfulness, etc.
Secondly, He also stirred him up to seek for Contentment, by pondering upon his
present State and Condition. What (says he) has God done for thee? Thou wast
in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity, and God has brought thee out,
and yet not content! Thou wast a Child of Wrath, and now art a Child of God,
yet not content! Have thou God for thy God, Christ for thy Savior, the Holy
Spirit for thy Comforter, and yet not content! Nay, Does God, Christ, and the
Holy Spirit dwell with thee, and yet not content! Have thou received True
Godliness's glorious Retinue into thy House, to abide with thee, to enrich
thee, to strengthen thee, to comfort thee, and make thy Life sweet to thee, and
yet not content! Are thy Sins pardoned, thy Soul justified, have thou Union and
Communion with the Father and Son, and yet not content! Is thy Name writ in the
Book of Life? Shall thou dwell with God and Christ for ever? Is Heaven thy
Inheritance? Art thou an Heir of the Crown and Kingdom that fades not away,
and yet not content? Nay, let me tell thee, all these Things, and many more are
absolutely thine with contentment. Come art thou willing to possess them, to
make them thine own, and enjoy them for ever, yea or no? If thou would be
sure of them, then get contentment to dwell with thee? For Godliness with
contentment is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. It does not say Godliness without
contentment, but with contentment. It Is this glorious Prince it appears, who
puts thee into the present Possession of all true Happiness, and yet not
content. Thirdly, Ponder, says Consideration upon the excellency of
Contentment; for a Saint never looks like himself, acts like himself, acts like
a Person of such Rank and Quality, a Person who has received so many glorious
and excellent Graces and Privileges, but when in all Conditions he is
therewith content. Fourthly, Ponder, says Consideration, upon the Evils of
Discontent; Oh what Dishonor does it bring unto God! What Reproach to true
Godliness? And what great Wrong to thy own Soul? Fifthly, It Is below thy
Christian Relation, says Consideration, to be Discontent: It was the Speech of
Jonadab to Amon, Why art thou, being a King's Son, lean from Day to Day? But
that was (as one observes) for a wicked Cause? He saw his Spirit was troubled,
for otherwise he was fat enough. It Is below thy Relation to God, who is thy
Portion, thy Shield, thy Sanctuary, thy Father. David thought it no small
matter to be a Son-in-law to an earthly King: And art thou the King's Son of
Heaven and Earth, and yet not content? It Is below thy Relation to Jesus Christ:
What art thou the Spouse of Christ, a Member of Christ, the Brother and Friend
of Christ, an Heir with Christ, and yet not content? It Is below thy Relation to
the Holy Ghost, is he Comforter, Guide, Witness, Strength, and art not content!
It Is below thy Relation to holy Angels, who are thy Guard, thy Attendance, thy
Friends, thy Watchmen; have thou those Millions of glorious Spirits to minister
to thee, to fight for thee, keep thee in all thy Ways, and yet not content?
It Is below thy Relation to the Saints and heavenly Family: Art thou bro't home
to sit down with them, to partake of all the sacred Privileges of God's House
with them, and to have a share in all their Prayers, and yet not content? It Is
below the high and sovereign Dignity thou art raised to: Art thou born from
above, a Prince, a Favorite of Heaven, an Heir of both Worlds, and yet not
content? Sixthly, It Is below those Graces, divine Helps and Endowments thou
have received. Art thou in the Covenant of God? Has God tied and bound himself
by Promises and holy Oaths to help thee, uphold thee, and keep thee from
falling, and yet not content? Is thy eternal Estate secured, art thou made sure
of Heaven, and yet discontented?
Lastly, Consider all thy Afflictions, Troubles and Sorrows are nothing, in
Comparison of what other Saints have met with, nay, to those Jesus Christ met
with himself for thy sake, and art not thou content? Besides, are they not less
than thy Sins deserve? And yet not content? Nay, and all those hard Things thou
meetest with, God will cause to work for thy Good, and yet not content? All the
bitter Things thou art like to meet with, in this World, will be nothing but
Sweet hereafter, and yet not content? All thy Troubles will be soon gone, they
are but for a Moment; besides, they are intermixed with much Sweet, and yet not
content? Nay, and all thy Sorrows will be turned into Joy, and all Tears will
be wiped away from thine Eyes, and yet not content? No sooner had Consideration
l^id all these Things and many other of like Nature before him, but lo, to his
eternal Joy, Contentment came in, and was immediately gloriously welcomed by
Godliness's heavenly Retinue; yea, it cannot be imagined, what Rejoicing now
there was in poor Thoughtful's House; it would do one's Heart good to see how
the scattered Powers of the Enemy were forced to fly into Holes. Apollyon
himself was fain to pull in his Horns. Despond was vanished, cursed Disquiet
and Murmur could find no more Place in his House: O this to him was the Day of
Days.

Upon this, perceiving glorious Content with Triumph was entered into his House,
to dwell with the rest of True Godliness's heavenly Retinue, and that there was
nothing wanting to make his Life comfortable here, and happy hereafter, he fell
a singing of sweet Hymns of Praise and Thanksgiving to God.

A sweet HYMN of Praise.
I.
TRue Godliness is come to me.
And with him also lo I see,
His glorious Train, who will attend
My precious Soul unto the End.
No Day like this has ever been,
Content with Triumph's entered in.
II.
I love thee, and admire thee too,
What Work remains thou wilt help me do.
My chiefest Business it is done,
Possess the House which thou have won.
The Fruits of Conquest now begin,
Content with Triumph's entered in.
III.
What Is this! Indwelling Sin moves again.
don't boast, what can it be?
Rem^ins there still an Enemy?
Have I o^ercome all deadly Foes,
And shall this Old Man me oppose?
The Fruits of Conquest now begin,
Content with Triumph's entered in.
IV.
I shall, I Am sure, be rid of thee,
And then how happy shall I be?
When Godliness in me does reign,
Alone with his most glorious Train,
And not a Foe dares once appear,
O then what Triumph shall I hear.
V.
Can Man on Earth more happy be?
I Peace possess, I Glory see.
GOD and CHRIST with me do dwell,
I Am sure of Heaven, saved from Hell.
The Fruits of Conquest now begin,
Content with Triumph's entered in.

