A NARRATIVE Of the Captivity OF Nehemiah How, Who was taken by the Indians at
the Great-Meadow-Fort above Fort-Dummer, where he was an Inhabitant, October 11
th 1745. Giving an Account of what he met with in his traveling to Canada, and
while he was in Prison there. Together with an Account of Mr. How Is Death at
Canada.

Psalm. cxxxvii.1, 2, 3, 4. By the Rivers of Babylon, there we sat down -- We
hanged our Harps upon the Willows, in the midst thereof. For there they that
carried us away captive, required of us a Song; and they that wasted us,
required of us Mirth, saying, Sing us one of the Songs of Zion. How shall we
sing the Lord's Song in a strange Land.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold opposite to the Prison in Queen Street. 1748.

A Narrative etc.
AT the Great-Meadow-Fort fourteen Miles above Fort-Dummer, October 11th 1745,
where I was an Inhabitant, I went out from the Fort about 50 Rods to our Wood;
and when I had done, I walked toward the Fort, but in my Way heard the
crackling of Fences behind me, and turning about, saw 12 or 13 Indians, with
red painted Heads, running after me: On which I cried to God for Help, and ran,
and hollowed as I ran, to alarm the Fort; but by that I had ran ten Rods, the
Indians came up with me and took hold of me: At the same Time the Men at the
Fort shot at the Indians, and killed one on the Spot, wounded another, who died
fourteen Days after he got Home, and likewise shot a Bullet through the
Powder-Horn of one that had hold of me. They then led me into the Swamp and
pinioned me. I then committed my Case to God, and prayed, that since it was his
Will to deliver me into the Hands of these cruel Men, I might find Favor in
their Eyes: Which Request, God of his infinite Mercy was pleased to grant; for
they were generally kind to me while I was with 'em: Some of the Indians, at
that Time, took the Charge of me, others ran into the Field to kill Cattle.
They led me about half a Mile; where we staid in open Sight of the Fort, 'till
the Indians who were killing Cattle came to us laden with Beef: Then they went
a little further to a House, where they stayed to cut the Meat from the Bones,
and cut the Helve off my Ax, and stuck it into the Ground, pointing the Way we
went.

Then we traveled along by the River Side; and when we had got about three
Miles, I espied a Canoe coming down on the further Side the River, with David
Rugg and Robert Baker belonging to our Fort. I made as much Noise as I could,
by Hamming etc. that they might see us before the Indians saw them, and so get
ashore, and happily escape; but the Indians saw them, and shot across the
River twenty or thirty Guns at them, and killed the first mentioned Person, viz
David Rugg, but Robert Baker the other Person got ashore, and escaped. Then
some of the Indians swam over the River, and bro't the Canoe over the River,
scalp'd and stripped the dead Man, and then went about a Mile further, when we
came to another House, where we stopped; while there, we heard Men running by
the Bank of the River, whom I knew to be Jonathan Thayer, Samuel Nutting, and
my Son Caleb How: Five of the Indians ran to head them. My Heart ak'd for them,
and prayed to God to save them from the Hands of the Enemy. I suppose they hid
under the Bank of the River; for the Indians were gone some Time, but came back
without them, blessed be God.

We went about a Mile further, where we lodged that Night, and roasted the Meat
they had got. The next Day we traveled very slow, by Reason of the Indian who
was wounded, which was a great Favor to me. We lodged the second Night against
Number Four; the third Day we (...), traveled slowly, and stopped often to rest,
and to g^t along the (...) Man; we lodged that Night by the second (...) R^v^^
that runs into the great River against Numb. Four

The fourth Day Morning, the Indians held a Piece of Bark, and bid me wr^te my
Name and how many Days we had traveled; for, said they, May be English Men will
come here That w^^ a hand Day to me; for it was a w^^ Day, and we went over
prodigious Mountains, ^o that I became weak and faint; for I had not eaten the
value of one Meal from the Time I was taken, having nothing to eat but Beef
almost raw, without Bread or Salt. When I cam^ first to the ^oot of those
Hills, I though it it was impossible for me to ascend them, without immediate Help
from God; therefore my constant Recourse was to him for Strength, which he was
graciou^ly pleased to grant me: and for which I desire to Praise him. We got
that Day a little before Night to a place where they had a hunting House, a
Kettle, some Beer, Indian Corn, and Salt: They boiled a good Mess of it; I
drank of the Broth, eat of the Meat and Corn, and was wonderfully refreshed, so
that I felt like another Man.

The next Morning we got up early, and after we had eaten, my Master (...) to
^e. You m^t q^^k wa^^ to Day, or I will (...) you (...) I would go as fast as I
(...), a (...) ^ast^ (...)* At which, an old (...) who was the best friend!
^^d, took Care of me^ We traveled that Day (...) ^^^d, and eve^ ^^e^p^^ (...)
but it being (...) Day, I performed it with more Ease than before* yet I was
much tired before Night, but dare not complain.

The next Day the Indians gave me a Pair of their shoes, so that I traveled
with abundant more Ease than when I wore my own Shoes; though I eat but very
little, our Victuals being almost spent; when the Sun was about two Hours high,
the Indians scattered to hunt, and they soon killed a Fawn, and three small
Bears; so that we had again Meat enough, some of which we boiled, and eat
heartily of, by which I felt strong*

The next Day we traveled very hard, and performed it with Ease; insomuch that
one of the Indians told me, I was a very strong Man^ About three of the Clock
we came to the Lake, where they had five Canoes, and Pork, Indian Corn, and
Tobacco. We got into the Canoes, when the Indians stuck up a Pole about eight
Feet long with the Scalp of Davi^ Rugg on the Top of it, painted red, with the
Likeness of Eyes and Mouth on it: We sailed about ten Miles, and then went on
Shore; and after we had made a Fire, we boiled a good Supper, and ea^ heartily.

The next Day we set sail for Crown-Point, bu^ when we were within a Mile of
the Place, they went on Shore, where were eight or ten French and Indians, but
before I got on Shore two of them came running into the Water Knee deep, and
pulled me out of the Canoe; there they sang and danced round me, after which
one of them bid me set down, which I did* and then they pulled off my Shoes and
Buckles, and took them from me. Soon after we went along to Crown-Point, and
when we got there, the People both French and Indians were very thick by the
Waterside; two of the Indians took me out of the Canoe, and leading me, bid me
run, which we did; it was about twenty Rods from the Fort; the Fort is large,
built with Stone and Lime; they led me up to the third Loft, where was the
Captain's Chamber; a Chair was bro't that I might set by the Fire and warm me.
Soon after the Indians that I belonged to, and others that were there, came
into the Chamber, among whom was one I knew, named Pealtomy; he came and spoke
to me, and shook Hands with me; and I was glad to see him: He went out, but
soon returned and brought to me another Indian named Amrusus, Husband to Mrs.
Eunice Williams, Daughter of the late Rev. Mr Williams of Deerfield; he was
glad to see me, and I to see him. He asked me after his Wife's Relations, and
showed a great deal of Respect to me. A while after this, the Indians sat in a
Ring in the Chamber, and Pealtomy came to me, and told me, I must go sing and
dance before the Indians; I told him, I could not: He told me over some Indian
Words, and b^^ me sing them: I told him, I could not. With that the rest of the
Fort who could speak some English came to me, and bid me sing it in English,
which was, I don't know where I go; which I did, dancing round that R^ng three
Times; and then I sat down by the Fire: The Priest came to me, and gave me a
Dram of Rum; after that the Captain brought me Part of ^ Loaf of Bread and a
Plate of Butter, and asked me to eat, which I did heartily; for I had not eaten
any Bread from the Time I was taken till then. The French Priest and all the
Officers showed me a great deal of Respect: The Captain gave me a Pair of good
Buckskin Shoes, the Priest fixed them on my Feet; and we stayed there that
Night; where I slep^ with the Priest, Captain and Lieut: The Lieutenant'^ Name
was Ballock, he had been a Prisoner at Boston and had been at Northampton and
the Towns ther^ abouts. This Day, which was the Sabbath, I wa^ well treated by
the French Officers with Victuals an^ Drink: We tarried there 'till Noon, then
went o^ about a Mile, and put on Shore; where they stay'^ the rest of the Day,
and having Rum with them most of them were much Liquor'd. Pealtomy an^ his
Squaw, and another Indian Family went wit^ us, and by them I found out that Wm.
Phips killed a^ Indian, besides that we wounded before he was killed for an
Indian who was with us, asked me, if the^ was one killed near our Fort last
Summer? I tol^ him, I did not know: He said he had a Brother wen^ out then, and
had not seen him since, and that (...) had heard he was killed at our Fort, and
wanted t^ know if it was true: But I did not think it best ^^ tell him any such
Thing was suspected.

But the Indians now got into a Frolic and qua^rel'd about me; they made me
set in the Canoe by the Waterside: I was afraid they would hurt if n^ kill me:
They attempted to come to me, but the sober Indians hindered them that were in
Liquo^ Pealtomy seeing the Rou^ went to the Fort, and so^ after Lieut. Ballock,
with some Soldiers, came to u^ and when the Indians were ma^e^taly, they went
a^ way: We lodged there that Night, and the next Day was a stormy Day of Wind
Snow and R^^; so that we forced to ^a^ry there that Day and the next Night* in
th^^ (...) Ind^ans (...) fetching Rum from the (...) drunk Here I underwent
(...) so long in a Storm (...) They had a great (...) Scalp (...) had (...)
they lay down (...)

The next Morning (...) was (...) Day from the (...) of my ^eing taken* we
(...) the Night afte^ (...) there (...) stayed that Night, (...) went (...) and
(...) so the^ we^ ^^d V^ctua^s plenty (...) ^^pply of (...) us at the (...).

The next M^^^ing (...), we (...) Day (...) after ^ame to (...) A^ (...) was
Day (...) where (...) did the (...) I w^^ tak^ it (...) and fled ^o a (...) as
fast (...) I could run, ^he (...) at (...) As soon (...) I (...) Indians (...)
round (...) and (...) I did (...) them, in their Way, then they gave a Shout,
and left off. Two of them came to me, one of whom smote me on one Cheek,
to'ther on the other, which made the Blood run plentifully. Then they bid me
sing and dance again, which I did with them, and they with me, shouting as
before. Then two French Men took me under each Arm, and run so fast that the
Indians could not keep up with us to hurt me: We ran about 40 Rods to another
House; where a Chair was bro't for me to set down: The House was soon full of
French and Indians, and round the House they were looking in at the Windows. A
French Gentleman came to me, took me by the Hand, and led me into a small Room,
where none came in but such as he admitted: He gave me Victuals and Drink:
Several French Gentlemen and Indians came in, and were civil to me. The Indians
who came in, could speak English; they shook Hands with me, called me, Brother.
They told me they were all Soldiers, and were going to New England: They said,
they should go to my Town; which was a great Damp to my Spirit, 'till I heard
of their Return, where they had been, and what they had done A while after
this, the Indians whom I belonged to, came to me, and told me we must go; which
we did; and after going down the River about two Miles, we came to the thickest
of the Town, where was a large Fort built with Stone and Lime, and very large
and fine Houses in it; where was the General of the Army I sp^ke of before: He
asked me, what News from London and Boston; I told him such as I though it
convenient, and omitted the rest; and then went down to the Canoes, when some
of the Indians went and got a plenty of Bread and Beef, which they put into the
Canoes, and then we went into a French House, where we had a good Supper: There
came in several French Gentlemen to see me, who were civil to me; one of them
gave me a Crown Sterling. We lodged there 'till about two Hours before Day, when
we arose, and went down the River; I suppose we went a Hundred Miles that Day,
which bro't us into the great River called Quebec-River; we lodged that Night
in a French House, and were civilly treated.

The next Day we went down the River, and I was carried before the Governor
there, which was the Sabbath, and the 16th Day after my being taken. We stayed
there about three Hours, and were well treated by the French; and then the
Indians were ordered to carry me down t^ Quebeck; which was 90 Miles further:
We went down the River about three Miles that Night; then went ashore, and
lodged the remainder of the Night.

The next Morning we set off, and the second Day which was the 18th from the
Time I was taken, we arrived at Quebec. The Land is inhabited on both Sides the
River from the Lake to Quebec, which is at least two Hundred Miles, but
especially from Shamballe very thick, so that the Houses are within Sight of
one another all the Way.

But to return; after we arrived at Quebec, I was carried up into a large
Chamber which was full of Indians, who were civil to me: Many of the French
came in to see me, and were very kind to me: I stayed there about two Hours,
when a French Gentleman who could speak good English came in and told me, I
must go with him to the Governor; which I did; and after answering to a great
many Questions, and treated with as much Bread and Wine as I desired, I was
sent with an Officer to the Guard House, and led into a small Room, where was
an Englishman named William Stroud, a Kinsman of the Hon. Judge Lynde's in
New England: He belonged to South^Carolina, and had been at Quebec six Years,
whom the Governor kept confined for fear he should leave them and go to
New England, and discover their Strength: Mr. Stroud and I were kept in the
Guard-House one Week, with a Sufficiency of Food and Drink: The French
Gentlemen kept coming in to see me, and was very civilly treated by them: I had
the better Opportunity of discoursing with them as Mr. Stroud was a good
Interpreter.

After this we were sent to Prison, where I found one James Kinlade, who was
taken 14 Days before I was, at Sheepscot at the Eastward in New England: I was
much pleased with his Conversation, esteeming him a Man of true Piety: We were
kept in Prison eight Days, with Liberty to keep in the Room with the
Prison-keeper. We were daily visited by Gentlemen and Ladies, who showed us
great Kindness, in giving us Money and other Things, and a pleasant Behavior
toward us; blessed be God therefore, for I desire to ascribe all the Favors I
have been the Partaker of ever since my Captivity, to the abundant Grace and
Goodness of a bountiful God, as the first Cause.

After this, Mr. Kinlade and I were send to another Prison, where were 22
Seamen belonging to several Parts of our King's Dominions, three of them
Captains of Vessels, viz. James Southerland of Cape-Cod, William Chipman of
Marblehead, William Pote of Casco-Bay; this Prison was a large House built with
Stone and Lime two Feet thick, and about 120 Feet long. We had two large Stoves
in it, and Wood enough, so that we could keep our selves warm in the coldest
Weather. We had Provision sufficient, viz. two Pound of good Wheat Bread, one
Pound of Beef, and Peace answerable, to each Man ready dressed every Day.

When I had been there a few Days the Captives desired me to lead them in
carrying on Morning and Evening Devotion, which I was willing to do: We had a
Bible, a Psalm-Book, and some other good Books; our constant Practice was to
read a Chapter in the Bible, and sing Part of a Psalm, and to pray, Night and
Morning.

When I was at the first Prison I was stripped of all my old and lousey Clothes,
and had other Clothing given me from Head to Foot, and had many Kindnesses
shown me by those that lived thereabouts, more especially by one Mr. Corby and
his Wife, who gave me Money there, and brought me many good Things at the other
Prison. But here I was taken ill, as was also most of the other Prisoners, with
a Flux, which lasted near a Month, so that I was grown very weak, but after
that I was healthful, through divine Goodness, blessed be God for it: I was much
concerned for my Country, especially for the Place I was taken from, by Reason
that I met an Army going thither, a^ they told me: The 27th Day of November we
had News come to the Prison that they were come back to Shamballe, and had
taken upwards of a Hundred Captives, which increased my Concern, for I expected
our Fort, and others thereabouts, were destroyed* which put me upon earnest
Prayer to God, that he would give me Grace to submit to his Will; after which I
was easy in my Mind.

About a Fortnight after, a Dutchman was bro't to Prison, who was one of the
Captives the said Army had taken; he told me they had burnt Mr. Lydius's Fort,
and all the Houses at that new Township and had killed Capt. Schyler and five
or six more, and had brought 50 Whites and about 60 Negroes to Montreal: I was
sorry to hear of so much Mischie^ done, but rejoiced they had not been upon our
River and the Towns thereabouts; for which I gave Thanks to God for his great
Goodness in preserving them, and particularly my Family.

When Christmas came, the Governor sent us 24 Livres; the Lord-Intendant came
into the Prison and gave us 24 Livres more, which was about two Guineas: He
told us he hoped we should be sent Home in a little Time; he was a pleasant
Gentleman, and very kind to the Captives: Some time after Mr. Shearly a
Gentleman of Quality came to us, and gave to the three Sea Captains 24 Livres,
and to me twelve, and the next Day sent me a Bottle of Claret Wine. About ten
Days after he sent me twelve Livres more; it was in all eight Pounds old Tenor.

January 20th 1745, 6 Eighteen Captives were brought from Montreal to the
Prison at Quebec, which ^s ^80 Miles.

February 22. Seven Captives more who were taken at Albany were brought to the
Prison to us, viz. six Men and one old Woman 70 Years old, who had been so
infirm for seven Years past, she had not been able to walk the Streets, yet
performed this tedious Journey with Ease.

March 15. One of the Captives taken at Albany after 14 or 15 Days Sickness
died in the Hospital at Quebec, a Man of a sober pious Conversation, his Name
was Lawrence Plaffer, a German born.

May 3d 1746. Three Captives taken at Number Four, sixteen Miles above where I
was taken, viz. Capt. John Spafford, Isaac Parker, and Stephen Farnsworth, were
brought to Prison to us; who informed me my Family was well a few Days before
they were taken, which rejoiced me much. I was sorry for the Misfortune of
these my Friends, but was glad of their Company, and of their being well used
by those who took them: Let God have the Praise.

May 14. Two Captives were brought into Prison, viz Jacob Read and Edward
Clou^man, taken at a new Township called Gorham-Town near Casco-Bay. They
informed us that one Man, and four Children of one of them were killed, and his
Wife taken at the ^ame Time with them, and was in the Hands of Indians.

May 16 Two Lads, viz James and Samuel Anderson, Brothers, taken at Sheepscot
were bro't to Prison.

May 17. Samuel Burbank and David Woodwell, who were taken at New-Hopkington
near Rumford, were brought to Prison, and informed us, there were taken with
them two Sons of the said Burbank, and the Wife, two Sons and a Daughter of the
said Woodwell, whom they left in the Hands of the Indians.

May 24. Thomas Jones of Holliston, who was a Soldier at Contocook, was brought
to Prison, and told us, that one Elisha Cook, and a Negro belonging to the Rev
Mr. Stevens, were killed, when he was taken.

June 1. William Aikings taken at Pleasant Point near George's Fort was brought
also to Prison.

June 2. Mr. Shearly brought several Letters of Deacon Timothy Brown's of
Lower-Ashuelots, and Money, and delivered them to me; which made us think he
was killed or taken. A few Days after, Mr. Shearly told me he was taken: I was
glad to hear he was alive.

June 6. Timothy Cumings aged 60 was bro't to Prison, who informed us, he was
at Work with five other Men, about 40 Rods from the Block-House at George's,
when five Indians shot at them, but hurt none; the Men ran away and left him
and their Guns to the Indians; he told us that the Ensign was killed as he
stood on the Top of the Fort, and that the English killed five Indians at the
same Time.

June 13. Mr. Shearly bro't to the Captives some Letters which were sent from
Albany, and among them one from Lieut Governor Phipps of the
Massachusetts Bay, to the Governor of Canada, for the Exchange of Prisoners,
which gave us great Hopes of a speedy Release.

June 22. Eight Men were brought to Prison, among whom was Deacon Brown and
Robert Morse, who inform me there was six or eight Indians killed a little
before they were taken at Upper-Ashuelots, and that they learnt by the Indians
who took them, there were six more of the English killed at other Places near
Connecticut-River; and several more much wounded; these last, were supposed to
be the Wife and Children of the aforesaid Burbank and Woodwell.

July 5 We sent a Petition to the chief Governor that we might be exchanged;
and the 7th Mr. Shearly told us we should be exchanged for other Captives in a
little Time; which caused great Joy among us: The same Day at Night John Beman
of Northfield was bro't to Prison, who told us, that an Expedition against
Canada was on Foot, which much rejoiced us: He also told us of the three Fights
at Number Four, and who were killed and taken; and of Mischief done in several
other Places near Connecticut-River; and that my Brother Daniel How Is Son
Daniel was taken with him, and was in the Hands of Indians, who designed to
keep him.

July 20 John Jones a Seaman was brought into Prison, who told us he was going
from Cape-Breton to Newfoundland with one Englishman, and four Frenchmen who
had sworn Allegiance to King George, and in the Passage killed the other
Englishman, but carried him to the Bay of Arh, where there was an Army of
French and Indians, to whom they delivered him; and by them was sent to Quebec.

July 21. John Richards and a Boy of nine or ten Years old, who belonged to
Rochester in New Hampshire, were brought to Pris^n, and told us, there were
four Englishmen killed when they were taken.

August 15. Seven Captives, who with eight more taken at St. John's Island,
were bro't to Prison, and told us, that several were killed after Quarters were
given, among whom was James Owen late of Brookfield in New England.

August 16. Thomas Jones late of Sherburne in New England, after 7 or 8 Days
Sickness died: He gave good Satisfaction as to his future State.

August 25. We had at Canada a Squal of Snow.

September 12. Robert Downing who had been a Soldier at Cape-Breton, and was
taken at St. John's, and who was with the Indians two Months, and suffered
great Abuse from them, was brought to Prison.

September 15. Twenty-three of the Captives taken at Hoosuck-Fort were brought
to Prison, among whom was the Reverend Mr. John Norton: They inform us, that
after fighting 26 Hours with 800 French and Indians, they surrendered
themselves on Capitulation Prisoners of War: They also informed us, that Thomas
Nalton and Josiah Read were killed when they were taken. The Names of those now
brought, in Prisoners, are as follows, viz. The Rev. Mr. John Norton, John
Hawks, John Smeed, his Wife and six Children, John Perry and his Wife, Moses
Scot his Wife and two Children, Samuel Goodman, Jonathan Bridgman, Nathan Emes,
Joseph Scot, Amos Pratt, Benjamin Sinconds, Samuel Lovet, David Warren, and
Phineas Furbush: The two last of these inform me, that my Brother Daniel How Is
Son was taken from the Indians, and lives with a French Gentleman at Montreal
There were four Captives more taken at Albany the last Summer brought to Prison
the same Day.

September 26 Seventy-four Men and two Women taken at Sea were brought to
Prison.

October 1. Jacob Shepard of Westborough, taken at Hoosuck, was brought to
Prison.

October. 3. Jonath. Batherick was bro't to Prison.

October 5. Seventeen Men were brought to Prison, three of them taken with Mr.
Norton and others, viz. Nath. Hitchcock, John Aldrick, and Stephen Scot:
Richard Subes who was taken at New-Casco, says, one Man was killed at the same
Time: Also Pike Gooden taken at Saco, was bro't to Prison; he also says, he had
a Brother killed at the same Time.

October 12. 24 Seamen were bro't to Prison.

October 19. Six Seamen were brought to Prison.

October 20. Jacob Read died.

October 23. Edward Cloutman and Robert Dunbar broke Prison, and went for
New England.

October 27. A Man was brought to Prison, and says, the Indians took five more,
and brought ten Scalps to Montreal.

Nov. 1. John Read died.

Nov. 9. John Davis taken with Mr Norman died.

Nov. 17. Nathan Eames of Marlborough died.

Nov. 19. Mr. Adams taken at Sheepscot was bro't to Prison, and says that James
Anderson's Father was killed, and his Uncle taken at the same Time.

Nov. 20. Leonard Lydle and the Widow Sarah Briant, were married in Canada by
the Reverend Mr. Norton.

Nov. 22. The abovesaid Anderson's Uncle was brought to Prison.

Nov. 24. John Bradshaw, who had not been well for most of the Time he had been
a Prisoner died.

It is a very melancholy Time with us; there are now thirty sick, and Deaths
among us daily.

Nov 28 Jonathan Dunham died.

Nov 29. Capt Bailey of A^msbury died.

Dec 1. An Albany Man died.

Dec. 6 Pike Gooden died, and we have Reason to think he made a happy Change.

Dec. 7. A Girl of t^n Year's of Age died.

Dec. 11 Moses Scot's W^fe died.

Dec 15. One of Capt Roberson's Lieutenants died.

Dec 18 Daniel Woodwell's Wife died; she was esteemed a pious Woman, and we
believe made a happy Change.

Dec 23. John Perry's Wife died.

Dec 26 William Daily of New York died hopefully.

Jan. 3. 1746, 7. Jonathan Harthan died.

Jan 4. The Rev. Mr. Norton was so far recovered from Sickness, that he
preached two Discourses from Psalm. 60 11. Give us help from Trouble, for vain
is the help of Man.

Jan. 13. Twenty Captives were carried to another Prison, hoping thereby to
cleanse the other of the Infect^o^; the same N^ght one of them died, viz
Phineas Andrews of Cape-Ann.

Jan 15. Jacob Bailey Brother to Capt. Bailey aforesaid, died.

Jan. 17. Giat Braban Capt Chapman's Carpenter died.

Jan. 2^. Samuel Love^ Son of Major Lovet of M^^^on in New England died.

February 10 William G^^wafs died, as did also M^ S^ youngest Child

(...) Nephew Daniel How and six more were brought down from Montreal to
Quebec* viz. John Sunderland, John Smith, Richard Smith, William Scot, Philip
Scoffil, and Benjamin Tainter, Son to Lieut. Tainter of Westborough in New-
England.

Febr 23. Richard Bennet died.

Feb. 25 Michal Dugon died.

March 18. James Margra died.

March 22. Capt John Fort and Sam. Goodman died.

March 28 1747. The Wife of John Smeed, died, who left six Children, the
youngest of which was born the second Night after the Mother was taken.

April 7. Philip Scaffield died.

April 8 John San^ld died.

April 9. Capt James Jordan and one of his Men died.

April 12. Amos Pratt of Shrewsbury died.

April 14 Timothy Cummings died.

April 17. John Dil of H^ll in New England died.

April 18. Samuel Venhon of Plymouth died.

April 26. Capt. Jonathan Williamson was brought to Prison; he was taken at a
new Town on Sheepscot River.

April 26. Three Men were brought to Prison, who were taken at A^bany three
Weeks before, and tell us, that thirteen were killed, Capt Trent one of them,
they were all Soldiers for the Expedition to Canada.

April 27. Joseph Denox died.

April 28 Samuel Evans died. The same Night the Prison took Fire, and was
burnt, but the Things therein were mostly saved: We were kept that N^ght under
a Guard

May 7. Sarah Lydle whose Name was Briant when she was taken, and married while
a Captive, di^^*

May 13. Mr. Smeed's Son Daniel died.

May 14. Christian Fether died. The same Day died Mr. Hezekiah Huntington, a
hopeful Youth of a liberal Education, Son to Col. Huntington of Connecticut, in
New England

May 15 Joseph Gray died.

May 19 Samuel Burbanks died. At the same Time died two Children who were put
out to the French to Nurse

At this Time I received a Letter from Major Wil^ard, dated March 17. 1^17,
wherein he informs me, my Family was well; which was joyful News to me.

May 19. Abraham Fort died.

By another Hand.
MAY 25 1747. This Day died M^ Nehemiah How in the Hospital at Quebec in
Canada, in the 55th Year of his Age; who had been a Captive there one Year,
seven Months, and fifteen Days: He enjoyed his Health 'till about the middle of
this Month: He was a loving Husband, and a tender Father; greatly beloved by
his Brethren and Sisters, and indeed by every One who was acquainted with him:
Mr. How was a Person who had behaved himself as a Christian from his Youth. His
Death is a great Loss to his Friends; but I believe a Gain to himself; and that
he is gone from a Captivity of Sorrow on Earth, to join in Songs of everlasting
Joy among the Ransomed of the Lord in the heavenly Zion.

The Names of the Subscribers, with the Places of their Abode, to the foregoing
Narrative, with the Number of Books subscribed for.
Worcester.
THE Hon. John Chandler, Esquire Six Books. Major Daniel Howard, six Books. Mr
Thomas Wheeler, six Books. Mr. John Curtiss, six Books.
Concord,
The Hon. James Minot, Esquire six Books. Mr. Thomas Munrow, six Books. Mr. Henry
Flint, six Books.
Boston,
Mr. Jonas Leonard, six Books. Mr. John Burbeeen, six Books.
Rutland,
Capt. Joseph Stevens, six Books. Capt. Edward Rice, six Books. Mr. Moses
Leonard, six Books. Mr. Andrew Henry, six Books. Mr. Thomas Flint, six Books.
Mr. Nathan Stone, six Books. Mr. James Calv^ll, six Books. Mr. Joseph (...),
six Books. Mr. Aaron R^ss, six Books. Capt. John Hubbard, six Books. Mr. Edward
Savage, six Books. Mr. Eliphalet How, six Books. Mr. Jonas Stone, six Books.
Mr. Daniel Davis, three Books. Mr. Israel How, six Books. Mr. Benjamin Willar^,
six Books. Mr. Ske^t^n Felton, six Books. Deacon Eleazer Ball, six Books. Mr.
Moses How, seven Books.
Lancaster,
Samuel Willard, Esquire six Books. Mr. Joshua Hide, six Books.
Cambridge,
William Brattle, Esquire six Books. Edmund Goffe, Esquire six Books.
Stoughton, John Shepard, Esquire six Books. Shrewsbury, Mr. Daniel Willard, seven
Books. Hartford, Mr. Edward Codwell, Jun. six Books. Brimfield, Mr. Daniel
Burt, six Books. Sturbridge, Capt. Moses Marsey, six Books. Norton, Capt.
Jonathan Lawrence, seven Books. Sudbury,
Mr. Isaac Baldwin, six Books. Mr. David How, six Books. Mr. Ezekiel How, six
Books.
Brookfield,
Oliver Hayward, Esquire six Books. Mr. Ebenezer How, six Books. Mr. Abner Brown,
six Books.
Uxbridge, John Harwood, Esquire six Books. Upton, Mr. Jonathan Wood, six Books.
Woodstock, Mr. Joseph Chafe, Jun. six Books. Mendon, Mr. William Rawson, Jun.
six Books. Townshend, Mr. Timothy Heald, six Books. Leicester, Mr. Oliver Wit,
five Books. Marlboro', Mr. Ephraim Bridgham, six Books. Springfield,
Mr. Luke Stebbins, six Books. Mr. Nathaniel Ely, six Books.


