The Harmony OF THE DIVINE ATTRIBUTES Displayed; IN THE Redemption and
Salvation Of Sinners by JESUS CHRIST. Being a SERMON preached at Dunfermline on
the 2^th of September 1723, immediately after the celebration of the LORD'S
SUPPER.

By the Rev. Mr. Ralph Erskine.

BOSTON: N. E. Reprinted and Sold by S. Kneeland and T. Green in Queenstreet.
1748.

The Harmony of the divine Attributes etc.
PSALM LXXXV. 10. Mercy and Truth are met together: Righteousness and Peace
have kissed each other.


MY friends, at a solemn marriage-supper there is usually a friendly company
who meet together; and when, at such an occasion, all things are managed with
sobriety and decency, it is very joyful and pleasant to the parties concerned,
to see the members of the meeting, with mutual kindness to one another,
harmoniously gracing the solemnity: Even so at the marriage-supper of the lamb,
I mean, the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which we have been celebrating,
there is a joyful company, not of men and women, for that would make but a poor
earthly meeting; not yet of saints and angels, for that would make but at best
a mean creature-meeting; but it is a glorious delightful company of divine
attributes and perfections, in the sweetest concord meeting together, and
embracing one another. This wonderful conjunction of divine excellencies is the
friendly company that meets together, to put honor upon this nuptial
solemnity; and to see them thus harmoniously embracing one another in the
salvation of sinners, is the sweetest sight that the bride, the lamb's wife,
shall ever see at the marriage-supper, whether it be at the lower or upper
table. There is a great meeting in this house, but an infinitely greater in
this text; a meeting of divine excellencies, to grace the solemnity of the
marriage-supper of the lamb: Mercy and truth are met together, righteousness
and peace have kissed each other. When God made heaven and earth out of
nothing, he made them by a word, without any other ceremony; but, when he made
man, there was some particular solemnity, a grand council, as it were, of the
glorious Trinity called; Come, let us make man after our image. But now man
having unmade himself, if God has a mind for the praise of his own glorious
grace to make him up again, by a new creation in Christ Jesus, there must be a
more glorious solemnity yet; not only a council of the adorable Trinity, but a
grand meeting of all the attributes of God, to consult their own glory that was
marred, and reconcile their own interests, and seemingly contradictory claims:
For the sin of man had brought real confusion among all the creatures of God on
earth, yea, and seeming war among all the attributes of God in heaven,
concerning the execution of the sentence of the law upon mankind, the
transgressor thereof; some of these attributes, such as Mercy, saying, if the
sentence of death be executed upon them, how shall I be glorified? Others, such
as Truth, saying, if the sentence be not executed, how shall I be glorified? Is
it to be expected that such opposites can meet together? Or, if they meet, that
they will agree together cordially? Yea, though it be beyond the expectation of
men and angels, yet behold, it is here celebrated with a song? Mercy and truth
are met together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other.

This Psalm consists of a prayer of faith, and an answer of peace. 1st, The
Church's prayer, from the beginning to the 8th v. where they are praying for
the removal of many tokens of God's displeasure they were under,
notwithstanding their return out of the Babylonish captivity. 2 dly, The answer
of peace that is made to their prayer, from v. 8. and downward. We have here
the psalmist listening and waiting for the answer; I will hear what God the Lord
will speak; the answer itself in general is peace, He will speak peace to his
people, etc. If he give not outward peace, yet he will suggest inward peace,
speaking that to their hearts by his Spirit, which he had spoken to their ears
by his word. Whatever other sort of peace and prosperity they enjoyed, when at
length the children of the captivity, after a great deal of toil, had gained a
settlement in their own land, yet peace with God, and spiritual prosperity
under the Messiah's kingdom, was the great thing here promised, and prophesied
of; and that is a peace that lays the soul under the strongest obligation to
keep at a distance from all sin, which is the greatest folly, and to beware of
backsliding thereto. But let them not return again to folly: For true peace
with God brings in war with sin. But this is further explained in the main
leading part thereof, namely, salvation and glory, ver. 9. Surely his salvation
is near to them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our land. Now, whatever
other salvation be here imported, Christ is the great salvation intended. When
he is near in view, then the believer cries out, with old Simeon, Now mine eyes
have seen thy salvation: And, whatever other glory and honor be here imported
Christ is the chief glory here intended: When he goes away from a land, then
Ichabod, the glory is departed; but, where he abides, glory dwells: for he is
called, A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel.
But now, if we would know what sort of glory it is that appears when Christ is
revealed, why it is even the glorious harmony of all the divine attributes
illustriously shining in him, who is both our salvation and our glory; Mercy
and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed each other.
Now, though these words may be applied to the happy meeting of graces in men,
upon the revelation of Christ in the soul, which I may afterward observe in
the sequel, and in which sense some interpreters understand it* yet I take it
mainly to import the happy meeting of perfections in God to be glorified in the
sinner's salvation by Jesus Christ, which is a gloss that no interpreter I have
had occasion to consult does neglect or omit; and, if any of them should miss
it, I think they would miss the very groundwork and foundation of all other
happy meetings: Mercy and truth are met together, righteousness and peace have
kissed each other.

In the words you may observe, 1 st, The members of the meeting. 2 dly, the
manner of the meeting. 3 dly, the harmony of the meeting. 4 thly, The
strangeness of it.

Observe, I say, 1. The members of the meeting, mercy, truth, righteousness,
peace. I hope I need not caution some in this assembly that they beware of
imagining these various perfections of God, under the names of mercy, truth,
righteousness and peace, as if they were really distinct and different things
in God; or, as if they were really different parties, making a formal
consultation, in order, to their agreement; For God is one, and cannot be
divided; he is one infinite, eternal and unchangeable Being; there are not
distinct and different things in his nature and essence, however his
perfections be thus represented to our weak, finite capacities, which cannot
understand the perfections of God but in several parts, as it were. By mercy
then, here, we are to understand God himself, as he is a merciful and a
gracious God: By truth we are to understand the same God, as he is a true and
faithful God: By righteousness we may understand his justice, or God himself,
as he is a just and righteous God; and, by peace, the same God, as he is the
God of peace, and a God reconciling the world to himself. So that the whole
comes to this; it is the great and eternal God himself, consulting with
himself, in a manner becoming his infinite and adorable perfections, how to
glorify himself in all his glorious attributes in the way of saving sinners in
and by Jesus Christ.

2. The manner of the meeting. These excellencies and perfections of God meet
together, as it were, in pairs; mercy and truth, righteousness and peace, going
hand in hand into the council chamger, to concert the matters that concerned
their highest glory and honor.

3. The harmony of the meeting. Having met together, they kiss and embrace each
other. Mercy and peace, as it were, express their complacency in truth and
righteousness, and truth and righteousness express their complacency in mercy
and peace, and delight in one another's honor: For not one attribute of the
divine majesty can or will be glorified to the dishon^^ (...) or any other
attribute, but mutually embrace each other (...) the their everlasting arms,
for supporting the honor of each ^ther's excellency with complicated ineffable
endearment.

4. The strangeness and remarkableness of this meeting? For the agreement of
these parties met together is the more remarkable, in regard of their jarring
and opposite claims: For that mercy and peace shall meet together, and agree in
favor to save us, and that truth and righteousness should meet together, and
agree in justice to destroy us, were not so strange and remarkable. And, if
they had kept separate and remained so, man had been for ever separate from
God, and some darling attributes had never been glorified in man's salvation,
our sin and rebellion having in a manner set the attributes of God at such
variance, as nothing else than infinite wisdom could provide a sufficient
answer to all their contradictory claims and interests, which behoved to be
done ere the proposal concerning the salvation of any sinner could be gone
into. Why, says mercy, it is my interest that the sinner live and not perish,
that I may be magnified, since I have said, that I will have mercy on whom I
will have mercy. Well, but, says truth, it is my interest as a God of truth
that the sinner die, since I have said, that the soul that sins shall die.
Yea, and says righteousness, I must join with truth, and claim the sinner's
damnation for the advancement of my interest and honor; for I have said, and
will not gain say it, that I will by no means clear the guilty. O but, says
peace. I must join in with mercy, and claim the sinner's salvation, for
advancing my interest; for I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace to him
that is afar off, and to him that is near. So there appears to be a war in
heaven among these infinitely adorable attributes and perfections, while mercy
and peace are saying, we must have glory in showing undeserved pity on the
sinner, and yet truth and righteousness are saying, we must ^^ve glory in
executing the deserved vengeance. And now, men and angels! pray tell us, can
these antipodes meet ^^^^ther? Can these jarring-like attributes of the divine
majesty embrace each other in the salvation of the sinner, (...) as to get all
their demands answered, and their different interests advanced? What say you,
children of men, can you devise how these differences can be composed for your
own safety? No, no; human Wisdom says, It is not in me. What say ye, angels,
that excel in strength and wisdom? Can you contrive the reconciliation of these
irreconcilable demands? No, no; angelical wisdom says, It is not in me. Well,
since creature wisdom fails, may we address the infinite wisdom of the Deity,
and enquire at a higher hand? Behold, now we have taken upon us to speak unto
the Lord, who are but dust and ashes: What say thou, O infinitely wise
Jehovah? Can these opposite claims be reconciled, to the satisfaction of all
parties, and the salvation of the sinner? Yea, it is done, it is done in a
crucified Christ, whom we have been remembering at this solemnity; and therefore
we may sing this mavelous song upon an after review of it, saying, Glory,
glory, glory to God, that mercy and truth are met together, etc.

OBSERVATION. That in the salvation of sinners by Jesus Christ the glorious
attributes and perfections of God do harmaniously conspire and embrace one
another. Or thus, That in Christ crucified for the Redemption of sinners, all
the glorious attributes of the divine Majesty do harmoniously conspire, and
embrace one another.

When God is well pleased, no perfection of God is displeased; but God is well
pleased in Christ: And therefore every perfection of his nature is well
pleased, none of them displeased or dissatisfied, but all pleased and satisfied
to the full. See Hos. 2.19, 20. This is declared by an audible voice from
heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3.
last. And why? Even for the reason you have, Isa. 42.21. We see he has brought
in a righteousness answering the demands of all that stood in the way of our
salvation: Did divine truth and righteousness say, that the threatening of the
law must be executed, so sure as God is true, as well as its precept
obtemperated and obeyed? Well, can a righteousness, satisfying both these
demands, do the business? Yea, says justice itself, in concert with mercy, if
there be but one righteous man in the Sodom of this earth, that can satisfy my
broken and violated law, in its command of perfect obedience, and in its demand
of complete satisfaction; then I will spare all the elect world, for the sake
of that one righteous man, and, By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many. Well, says mercy, here is one whose name is wonderful, and whom
they call Immanuel, God-man, who has brought in an everlasting righteousness,
both active and passive, suiting the precept and penalty of the law: Why then,
might one attribute say to another, we are all pleased, and with one consent
let it be proclaimed on earth, that the Lord is well pleased for his
righteousness sake; for he has magnified the law, and made it honorable. And
now the great affair of man's salvation is so well concerted and contrived,
that God may have mercy upon them, and be at peace with poor sinners, without
any wrong to his truth and righteousness: The attributes of God have met and
agreed, and sealed their agreement with a kiss of infinite kindness, harmony
and satisfaction; Mercy and truth have met together, righteousness and peace
have kissed each other.

Now, that I may speak to this Purpose a little more fully, the method I
propose is, 1. To touch a little at this question, who are the members of this
meeting? Or, what are these attributes of God, which do thus harmoniously
conspire together, proposing their various claims? 2. I would enquire, when,
and where it is that they meet together, and embrace one another? 3. How, and
after what manner it is, that they meet together, and kiss one another? 4. Why,
or for what reason it is that they have met together thus harmoniously? 5. Make
some application.


First, I would speak a little of the members of this meeting, or the
attributes of God that thus harmoniously conspire together. We need not ask, at
whose instance this meeting is called? It is at the instant, and by the order
of JEHOVAH, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one God; his sovereign will and
pleasure resolving, in a manner like himself, to concert with himself. Neither
need we ask, what is the occasion of the meeting? Why, man had sinned, and all
mankind, by their sin, was involved under the curse of the law, and wrath of
God; and yet God had resolved and decreed, for the glory of his grace and
mercy, to save a world of sinners, elect according to the foreknowledge of God.
And while grace mercy and peace are upon this loving design of saving sinners,
it was fit that justice, truth and righteousness should be called into the same
council, to appear for their interest; since the proposal of such a salvation
of sinners seem to encroach upon their honor, which required the vengeance due
to be executed upon the sinner. Well, the meeting being called, these glorious
perfections, mercy, truth, righteousness and peace appear; mercy and peace full
of pity, truth and justice full of fury, which made a seeming controversy in
heaven. We may suppose Adam arraigned in the name of all mankind, and standing
as a trembling prisoner at the bar; yea, his very tongue chained up in silence,
by reason of sin and guilt, and he sentenced to eternal death, and ready to
have the sentence executed upon him and all his posterity. We may suppose,
next, the several members of the meeting opening the assembly, by putting in
their several claims; and we may observe them in the order of the text.

1. MERCY, being full of pity toward the miserable, comes walking along in the
cool of the evening, and meekly craving leave to speak, notwithstanding that
truth and justice be present at the meeting: It is true, says MERCY, That man
has sinned, and just that man shall die; but art not thou, O Lord, full of
pity and compassion, the Lord, the Lord God, pardoning iniquity transgression
and sin? What though man has sinned and is all over be smeared with mire and
blood? yet look upon him in love, and destroy not the work of thy own hand; he
was made a child after thy own image: Though now his garment be rent and all
bloody, yet see, is not this thy son's coat? JOSEPH is gone, and will thou lose
BENJAMIN also? Angels are gone, and shall men be lost also? Miriads of angels
are fallen, and that irrecoverably; and shall man peresh also? O spare him! is
he not a little one? and his soul shall live. I see, might MERCY say, that
TRUTH and RIGHTEOUSNESS or JUSTICE, which have the poor sinner in their chains,
are here present ready to speak in this assembly for their interest and honor
against the criminal: But let it be marked in the minutes of this court, that
MERCY craves to be magnified and must have honor at this meeting. Well, MERCY
having spoken her mind,

2. TRUTH comes in naked and open-mouthed, in favor of God's faithfulness, and
in opposition to man's perfidy and treachery, saying, I have heard what MERCY
craves in favor of this criminal; but, O thou faithful and true God, the word
is gone out of thy mouth, and there is no revoking of it; thou have said to
Adam, In the day thou eatest thou shall surely die; and now he has eaten, he
has sinned, and shall he not die? What, is there Yea and Nay with God, who
has faithfulness for the girdle of his loins? Must not God's word of
threatening take effect? Yea, heaven and earth shall pass away, but a jot of his
word shall not fall to the ground: And therefore, whatever be the demand of
MERCY, let it be marked in the records of this meeting, that TRUTH craves to be
magnified; and that it is honor be not infringed in the least, by any claim or
plea that MERCY had brought in. Well, TRUTH having spoken, gives way to her
sister justice; and thereupon,

3. RIGHTEOUSNESS or justice comes in, and impleads against the rebel sinner:
Righteousness, I say, bringing her scales in her hand, in which she had tried
him, and found him lighter than vanity itself: he is weighed in the balances,
and found wanting; yea, not only wanting and destitute of all that perfection
and obedience which the law required, but full of all that rebellion which the
law discharged, having sinned and come short of the glory of God; and so is
righteously subjected to the sanction of the law, and sentence of eternal
death: And therefore, says RIGHTEOUSNESS, O thou infinitely righteous and just
judge, MERCY can have no hearing in this court to the prejudice of thy honor
and glory, as a just and righteous God. As TRUTH has pronounced the sentence
of wrath and vengeance against sin; so, if thou be a just God, the infinite
vengeance due to such an infinite evil must be executed to the full. This
criminal is my prisoner, and loosed he shall not be, till I get full
satisfaction, and my sword be drunk with blood; for, vengeance is mine, and I
will repay it, says the Lord; and I will by no means clear the guilty: And
therefore let it be registered in this court, that RIGHTEOUSNESS craves to be
magnified, and JUSTICE to be glorified in a full satisfaction; and this is
claimed and demanded in the name of the righteous and just judge of the
universe; and shall not the judge of all the earth do right? Here is the
language of justice. What then? O! shall the demand of mercy be utterly run
down by these powerful opposing pleas of truth and righteousness? Is there no
friends in this court to take mercy's part? Yea, there is: Therefore,

4. PEACE immediately steps in with an olive branch in her hand saying, Fury is
not in me; and may I speak a word in behalf of forlorn mankind? may I offer a
meek answer to the claim of TRUTH and RIGHTEOUSNESS, which they have advanced
in opposition to the demand of MERCY? for a soft answer turns away wrath.
Well, PEACE being allowed a hearing, proposes a healing overture saying, O thou
God of peace, may not an atonement be made, a reconciliation thought of betwixt
thy Majesty and and thy creature? May not one befound out to stand in the gap,
and bear off this wrath, to become surety for the great debtor, to acquit and
liberate this poor miserable prisoner and criminal? May not one be found out
that will make up the breach, by vindicating the honor of TRUTH and satisfying
the demands of JUSTICE, and so making way for the claim of MERCY; and then all
differences may be peaceably composed, so as we may harmoniously agree and kiss
one another? O! may not then a peacemaker be found out, in whom we may find all
our demands satisfied at once, without prejudging one another; why, if such an
one can be found, surely his name shall be called wonderful, counselor, the
prince of peace. Well, the overture and proposal of peace being recorded amonst
the rest of the archives of the glorious court; and it being such a peaceable
overture, no members of the meeting could disprove it: But the great Question
then is, how it could be effectuate: For, if one man sin against another, a man
might determine; but, if a man sin against Jehovah, who shall entreat for him?
For when an infinite majesty is offended, who among finite creatures is able to
satisfy it, or, What can countervail the king's loss? Wherewith then shall he
come before the Lord, or bow himself before the most high God? Will thousands
of rams do it, or ten thousands rivers of oil, or the fruit of the body for the
sin of the soul? No, no; sacrifice and offering thou would not; for it is
impossible that the blood of bulls or of goats should take away sin; Heb. 10.5.
What then, will angels become surety for the sin of man? No, no; though they had
a will, they have not power, they have but oil enough in their vessels for
their own lamps. What then shall be done? Why, might Peace say, let us not
stand in a demur; we have infinite Wisdom here present with us at this meeting,
let us hear her judgment concerning this peaceable proposal, if it be possible
that such a person can be found in whom we may harmoniously center at last.
Then WISDOM sits down upon the privy council bench, and, being full of eyes,
does gravely determine this doubtful case with a happy issue: It is expedient,
says WISDOM, that one die for the people, that the whole nation of mankind
perish not; but he must be such a righteous one, that can justify many; yea, he
that will undertake this, must be finite, that he may die; and infinite, that
he may conquer death, and satisfy infinite justice: But lo, there is no such to
be found among all the creatures that ever God made, neither can such an one be
found, unless the Son of God himself, the second person of the glorious
Trinity, shall be pleased, by an unspeakable mystery, to become flesh, made of
a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that are under the Law, that they
may receive the adoption of sons, Gal. 4.4. That so, when he, that has no sin,
shall become sin for man; man who has no righteousness, may become the
righteousness of God through him, 2 Cor. 5. last: And thus MERCY may be
magnified, TRUTH justified, RIGHTEOUSNESS cleared, JUSTICE satisfied, PEACE
concluded, and all contented. WISDOM having determined how this proposal of
peace might be effectuate, all parties hearkened, as it were, with pleasure, and
willingly subscribed to the happy overture; and then heaven and earth conspired
together in solemn thanksgiving, saying, Glory to God in the highest, on earth
peace, and good will toward men. Thus the jarring attributes of God are now
reconciled; and behold, the members of the meeting, that seemed to be at the
greatest variance, are embracing one another in their Arms; Mercy and truth are
met together, etc.

The second thing was, when and where did these blessed parties meet together?
When we speak of a remarkable meeting, it is usual to enquire into the time and
place of the meeting. Now, the place where, and the time when, as to this
wonderful meeting, are two questions, which I put together; for they may both
be answered at once, because of their near relation.

1 st. Then, in general, the meeting place, or the place of meeting, is CHRIST;
and the time of the meeting was when Christ put himself in our room, or
substitute himself in the place of the sinner, to answer all the demands of all
the members of the meeting, who had any objection against our salvation, or any
thing to lay to our charge. Where then, and when did they meet together and
kiss each other? Why, it was even in Christ, when he took our law-room, to pay
our debt, and purchase our liberty in such a manner as mercy and peace might
have their interests advanced, without injury to truth and righteousness; that
mercy might have vent to the credit of truth, and peace might be proclaimed to
the honor of righteousness, and the sinner saved to the satisfaction of
justice. They meet together and embrace each other in him as the surety, the
surety of the better testament, Heb. 7.22. We were debtors to the mandatory and
minatory part of the law, arraigned at the instance of divine justice to pay
the debt; Christ substitutes himself in our room, and comes under the law to
pay the whole debt. It is true, the debt was personal, and justice had a demand
upon the person that sinned by virtue of the covenant of works; but that
covenant never excluded a surety, though it provided none. The law promised life,
upon our personal obedience; but, in case we fail, it revealed no surety to
make out an obedience in our room. There behoved indeed to be a secret reserve
in the covenant of works, whereby the perfect obedience of another was not
excluded: For, if the covenant of works had absolutely excluded a surety in our
room, then the covenant of grace had been excluded, and our salvation had been
impossible after our fall; but though the covenant of works did not exclude a
surety, yet that covenant did neither provide nor reveal a surety: This is done
in the covenant of grace, which is Christ as surety fulfilling for us the
covenant of works, in all the articles of it. Now, is truth and faithfulness at
any loss here? No, the truth of the promise and threatening both of the law of
works, is fulfilled. On the one hand, the promise of eternal life made to
perfect obedience; which, though we forfeited in our own person, yet we recover
in the person of Christ; the promise of life upon the ground and condition of
perfect obedience being fulfilled to us in him, who has yielded that perfect
obedience in our room: On the other hand, divine truth and faithfulness, in the
threatening of the law, which was death, is glorified, in that it is fulfilled
upon the surety; while we, who came under the sentence of death in the first
Adam, undergo that death in the second. Again, is righteousness and justice at
any loss by this surety in our room? No, no; whether we look upon it as
vindictive or retributive justice, vindictive justice is displayed in its
utmost severity upon Christ; Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and the man
that is my fellow: And so the sword is drunk in his blood to infinite
satisfaction. Retributive justice is gloriously displayed also, in the sinner's
being rewarded, justified, saved upon this ground. It is true, might JUSTICE
say, I could have demanded satisfaction upon the sinner himself in his own
person; but, as I can sustain no injury to my honor by such a surety as this,
whom they call EMMANUEL' God-man, so I find my honor and interest, instead of
being impaired, is advanced by this exchange of persons: For, though I should
damn the sinner to all eternity, I Will never get such full and complete
satisfaction upon any finite creature, as I will get by one stroke of my
avenging sword upon that person of infinite dignity; and so it pleased the Lord
to bruise him. Why then, they meet together and embrace one another in him, as
a surety; and, if truth and righteteousness be both pleased to the full, the
parties cannot but all agree and embrace each other. Again they meet together
and embrace one another in him, as a sacrifice a sacrifice and offering of a
sweet smelling favor unto God, Ephesians. 5.2. Why he offered up himself by the
eternal Spirit. O great! Even by his eternal Godhead; a valuable sacrifice
indeed! They meet together in him, as a propitiation, Romans 3.25. Whom God has
set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness, etc. Behold him righteous in showing mercy; here is the
atonement, the propitiation, that very word which the septuagint calls the
mercy-seat in the old testament; and it is the word that the poor publican made
use of, when he was seeking mercy, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. He
remembered this mercy-seat and propitiation. It is not simple mercy that he
sought, but mercy through a propitiation; he looked to the blood of atonement,
to the sacrificed lamb of God, saying, Give me mercy for this; by that solemn
propitiation be thou propitious to me. Here it is, that mercy and justice meet
together. They meet together in him, as a ransom, Job 33.24. Deliver his soul
from going down to the pit; I have found a ransom. In a word they have met
together, and kissed one another in a crucified Christ, whose death was the
payment of our debt, the punishment of our sin, the price of our redemption,
and a purchase of our life, liberty and eternal salvation. Here is the
meeting place then of these glorious perfections of God; here is the person in
whom they center, that they may be all glorified to the highest: Mercy, truth,
righteousness and peace, all are pleased. Mercy is gratified, and constitutes
him to be the mercy-seat; truth is satisfied, and centers in him as the way,
the truth and the life; righteousness is contented, and declares him to be the
Lord our righteousness; peace is pacified, and proclaims him to be the prince
of peace. Yea, not only are all the members of the meeting pleased and
satisfied for themselves, in the advancement of their own particular interest,
but they are infinitely well pleased in each other, and that the interests of
their seemingly opposite parties are advanced, as well as their own particular
claims: Mercy is pleased that truth has got all its demands, and truth is
pleased that mercy has got all her desire, and righteousness is pleased that
peace is proclaimed, and peace is pleased that righteousness is honored. Mercy
and peace rejoice that they are magnified to the infinite glory of truth and
righteousness, and truth and righteousness rejoice that they are glorified to
the infinite pleasure of mercy and peace: and hence they not only meet
together, but kiss one another. Here you see where they meet together: So much
for an answer thereto more generally.

2 dly, More particularly, as to the meeting-time, you may take these following
paticulars for the further clearing of it. Although this blessed meeting once
taking place is still continued, and cannot be said properly to adjourn from
time to time, and from place to place; for this assembly never dissolves: Yet,
in a suitableness to our weak capacity and finite understanding, which cannot
rightly conceive of a meeting that never had a time to meet, because they met
in eternity, and never shall have a time to part, because they meet to
eternity; we cannot conceive of it, I say, but by taking it, as it were, into
so many parts, or considering it in so many periods: And there are these eight
remarkable periods: wherein mercy and peace meet with truth and righteousness,
and kiss each other.

1. The first remarkable period is this, they meet together at the
council table of the covenant of redemption from all eternity, before ever the
foundation of the world was laid; and ere ever the morning-stars sang together,
mercy and truth met together, righteousness and peace kissed each other: For
the council of peace did then meet, Zech. 6.13. and all was concerted by
infinite wisdom, how mercy should be magnified, truth cleared, righteousness
vindicated, and peace concluded, and all in Christ, who according to the tenor
of that covenant (whereof the covenant of grace is but a transcript) was to
give his soul an offering for sin, and then was to set his seed, and the
pleasure of the Lord to prosper in his hand. Then it was that this pleasant
meeting in him was first constituted, as you may see, Prove. 8.30.31. He being
set up from everlasting; ere ever the earth was, God in all his glorious
perfections was delighted in him, and in him his delights were with the sons of
men. This was the grand meeting, at which the time and place of all the
subsequent meetings were concerted, and all the other particulars we are to
mention are but the result of this, and as it were emanations therefrom, for it
is a meeting that never dissolves, though in several periods it appears like a
new meeting unto us. Therefore,

2. Another remarkable period is their meeting together in the garden of Eden,
after man had made himself naked and obnoxious to the flaming sword of divine
justice. Mercy comes walking in the garden in the cool of the day, and the
guilty criminal being examined in open court, behold mercy and truth meet
together in the happy sentence that was pronounced, The seed of the woman shall
bruise the head of the serpent, Genesis 3.15. Behold righteousness and peace
kissing one another in the righteous vengeance that was to be executed upon the
devil and his works, in order to effectuate a happy peace betwixt God and man.
This meeting was gradually cleared up under the old testament, and in the legal
sacrifices, pointing out the great propitiatory sacrifice.

3. Another remarkable period is their meeting together at Bethlehem Ephratah,
upon Christ's Incarnation, Micah 5.2, 4, 5, etc.

4. Another remarkable period is their meeting together at the banks of Jordan,
when Christ was baptized, Mat. 3.13, 16, 17, etc.

5. Another remarkable period is their meeting together in the garden of
Gethsemane, when Christ, being in an agony, did sweat great drops of blood,
under the pressure of avenging justice; every drop of blood was an ocean of
mercy: And, while he was pressed in the wine press of God's wrath, mercy was
expressed. No mercy to Christ; for God spared not his own for, even when he
cried, mercy, mercy, God's mercy; saying, Father, if it be thy will remove this
cup from me. No, no, no mercy was shown to him, otherwise no mercy had been
shown to us: Justice must have its due from him, that mercy might have vent
toward us; and so here mercy and truth meet together.

6. Another remarkable period is their meeting on mount Calvary, where Christ
was crucified. It was upon the cross of Christ that mercy and truth meet
together, that righteousness and peace kissed each other; for there it was that
he paid all the elect's debt to the last farthing that truth and righteousness
could demand, until he cried with a loud voice, and said, It is finished.
Having done all that the law could injoin, he suffered all that the law could
threaten, so as it cannot crave a farthing more. It is finished; all that was
stipulated for with the Father in that federal transaction; all that was
promised in that eternal compact is finished; every article agreed to in the
counsel of peace was finished. The bargain that he had signed with his hand, he
now sealed with his blood; and in his appearance upon the cross, or in his
obedience to the death, did all the attributes of God meet, as in a center: And
on this account was mount Calvary more glorious than mount Sinai; for in mount
Sinai God appeared in his terrible majesty, making the mountain to tremble, and
the earth to shake; but here in mount Calvary he appeared, not only in his
terrible majesty, but in his tender mercy; in his terrible fury against sin,
and in his tender favor toward the sinner; and now, the controversy betwixt
justice and mercy seems at a crisis. Here was the critical juncture, wherein
their different demands behoved to be decided; and it was done with (...)
solemnity, as made the whole universe, as it were to tremble and quake: For
then did God shake, not the earth only, but also heaven; for, when Christ was
under the mighty load of this terrible wrath in the sinner's room, there was a
great earthquake, and the heavens grew black, the sun was eclipsed, and that at
a time contrary to the common rules of nature; which made a heathen
philosopher, at a distance, cry out, That either the frame of nature was on the
point of dissolution, or the God of nature was suffering: And indeed he was
suffering unto blood, and unto death. Behold the living and eternal God here,
in our nature, wounded to death and bleeding out his life, to be a sacrifice
for sin, that justice might be satisfied, and mercy might be magnified, and all
the attributes of God glorified to the highest. O wonder, that Golgotha, the
place of a scull, should be such a famous meeting place for the divine
perfections? It was a place of the greatest shame and ignominy; but in him who
endured the cross, and despised the shame, it was made a place of most
resplendent glory: For, in the cross of Christ, mercy and truth, righteousness
and peace met and embraced each other. God's attributes did harmoniously join
together, so as the one does not blacken, but illustrate the glory of the
other, while they shined gloriously in the face of Christ crucified, as a
beautiful and bright constellation; for he was set forth to be a propitiation,
to declare the righteousness and justice of God, together with his other
glorious names.

7. Another remarkable period is there meeting together at the bar of God's
great justice-court in heaven, within the vail, whither the forerunner has for
us entered, even Jesus, Heb. 6. last. When Christ was upon the cross, the vail
of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom, and a way was made
for entering into the holy of holies. And as the priests under the law were not
only to offer the sacrifice without the camp, but after that were to enter the
holiest of all, not without blood, but with the blood of the sacrifice, to
sprinkle the mercy seat, Lev. 16.14, 15. Even so Christ, having offered himself
a sacrifice, and suffered without the gate, Heb. 13.12. He is entered into the
holy place by his own Blood, Heb. 9.12. there to appear as our high priest, in
the power and virtue of his blood, to make a full atonement, and sprinkle the
mercy-seat. Hence believers are said to be come to Jesus the mediator of the
new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling. And where is this? Even in
heaven, as you see in the context, Heb. 12.23, 24. Now, in this work, Christ
carried the price of his blood into the very presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24.
and paid it down before him; and, in this act, justice has its satisfaction
brought home; and, by this act, mercy and justice actually are met: For hereby
Christ sprinkled the very mercy-seat with blood all over, both upon it, and
before it, as the forecited Lev. 16. represents: For the mercy-seat of old
stood so, that it could be seen but two ways, namely, upon it, and before it,
as a table next to the wall; and so this points out, that whatever way we look
to mercy by faith, we may see mercy and blood mixed, mercy and justice met
together, and all sorts of mercy conveyed through the blood of Christ,
top-mercies, and side-mercies, upper-mercies of a spiritual nature, and lower
mercies of a temporal nature; for the mercy-seat is sprinkled with the blood
upon it, and before it, and whatever way you look to it. The sacrifice was
finished on the cross, and all sacrifices finished therein; but the blood of
the sacrifice behoved also to be carried within the vail in order to the full
atonement, that what was written in blood upon the cross, might be sealed in
the presence of God at the heavenly bar: And we act not our faith far enough
for redemption, unless we follow Christ from the cross to the bar of God's
justice-court in heaven, to see all sealed and secured there within the vail,
where this blood is exposed, as it were, and pled at the bar; where mercy and
justice meet together, and embrace each other.

8. Another remarkable period is their meeting together at the bar of
conscience, God's lower court, on the day of actual reconciliation betwixt God
and the sinner: For then, the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit
did offer himself without spot to God, does purge the conscience, Heb. 9.14.
And the blood of sprinkling, wherewith the conscience is purged from dead works
to serve the living God, does put forth it is purgative power and virtue by a
certain internal speech; and what does it speak in the conscience? It speaks
better things than the blood of Abel; that speaks vengeance, but this speaks
mercy and peace, in conjunction with truth, righteousness and justice: For,
wherever justice satisfying blood cries for mercy and peace, there mercy and
truth, righteousness and peace meet, and embrace each other. This blood is the
cement whereby they are joined together. Before this blood be applied, the
conscience of the convinced sinner is all in a flame, like mount Sinai; thunder
and lightning, and smoke and darkness, and fear of hell and vengeance,
compassing the soul about, while it is arraigned at the instance of the fiery
law, to pay the double debt to the mandatory and minotary part of the law, that
is, perfect obedience upon the pain of eternal death and damnation. The sinner
finds himself lost and undone for ever by this law: But then, whenever the
blood of sprinkling comes in, and appears at the bar of conscience, it speaks
better things; it is a better speaker than the law: And what says it? Why, the
language of it is, By your leave, O law, you have nothing to crave; for Christ
the Son of God was arraigned at the instance of divine justice, to pay all this
debt, because he was this sinner's surety and substitute; and he actually paid
it, by obeying the command, and undergoing the penalty of the law: And for this
I produce the ancient records of God; In the volume of his book it is written
of Christ, that when sacrifice and offering would not, he said, Lo, I come, I
delight to do thy will; and that the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us
all; That he was made a curse for us; yea, that he was made sin for us, even he
who knew no sin, that we might become the righteousness of God in him: And
therefore, O law, though thou have truth and righteousness on thy side, yet truth
and righteousness have met with mercy and peace, and they have concerted
matters, and agreed harmoniously, and kissed one another, in token of their
full agreement in Christ; so that in Christ all charges are answered, and thus
in the believer's conscience parties meet together.

3. The third thing proposed was how, and after what manner is it that they
meet together, and kiss each other? We are to conceive of it after the manner
of God; for it is more than a meeting of saints, it is more than a meeting of
angels, it is a divine meeting of all the glorious attributes of God; And we
may observe these following qualities of it.

1. It is a wonderful and mysterious meeting, it is above our comprehension and
conception; O how wonderful a meeting is this! The very name of the person,
which is made the place of appointment, the meeting place, is called wonderful!
Isa. 9.6. Because the meeting is about us, his name is called Immanuel, God
with us. O how mysterious is this meeting, Great is the mystery of godliness,
God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. that is, all the attributes of God
meeting together, and harmoniously embracing one another in the eternal Son of
God, who has assumed our nature into his own personality; this is the most
wonderful mysterious meeting that ever was in heaven or earth.

2. It is a joyful meeting, they meet with infinite pleasure and satisfaction
in one another; Behold my servant, whom I uphold, mine elect, in whom my soul
delights, Isa. 42.1. As the perfections of God are glorified in Christ, so
they rejoice and are delighted in him: For Jehovah is well pleased for his
righteousness sake; and therefore the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his
hand, and he shall see the travail of his soul, and be satisfied. Surely, if
God has his pleasure, and Christ his satisfaction, no attribute of the divine
majesty, no member of the meeting is displeased or out of humor; no, no: This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. My justice is pleased, my mercy
is pleased, and all my other attributes are pleased. O it is an exceeding
pleasant and joyful meeting! May all that hear me be well pleased to see it; no
joyful meeting, but what has a respect to this.

3. It is a holy meeting. Some meetings among men, that are called joyful
meetings, yet are very unholy and sinful meetings; but here is an infinitely
holy meeting: Holiness to the Lord, is the motto of it. A meeting of holy
saints and holy angels is not such a holy meeting as this meeting of the holy
attributes of God, to advance the great design of infinite holiness. All the
holy meetings that ever were, or will be, are the result of this, and the
effect of some portion of holiness sent from it; for all holiness issues from
it. Here mercy and truth meet together in a holy manner, righteousness and
peace salute each other in a holy way, and greet one another with a holy kiss.

4. It is a happy meeting. All happiness and blessings flow from this meeting;
Christ the meeting place is the center of all spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1.3.
Many unhappy meetings have been in the world since sin entered into it, and
sinful unholy meetings are ever miserable and unhappy meetings; but this holy
meeting must be a happy meeting; and this holy kiss must be a happy kiss. If
mercy and truth had not met together, we had never met with God; if
righteousness and peace had never kissed each other, we had never got a kiss of
the fair face of the Son of God, nor ever been taken into the divine embraces.

5. It is a free meeting. Mercy and truth met together freely, without being
constrained; righteousness and peace kissed each other freely, without being
forced. No motive from without could ever take place to move God to call this
meeting from eternity; it was according to his own purpose and grace, which is
given us in Christ Jesus before the world began, 2 Timothy 1.9. Free sovereign
grace is the original of the meeting. It is also such a free assembly, where
every member might freely speak, and not one to interrupt another, as is usual
in meetings among men, where some cry one thing, and some another, in a
confused manner, like that assembly, Acts 19.32. where it is said, The assembly
was confused, and the greater part knew not wherefore they were met together;
and some cried one thing, and some another. No, this meeting is free, in
opposition both to all constraint and compulsion from without, and to all
confusion and commotion from within. Where sovereign free grace is the
master-convener, there can be no compulsion; and, where the God of order is the
great manager, there could be no confusion; and, where the God of peace was all
in all, there could be no dissension.

Therefore,

6. It is a harmonious meeting. Whatever different claims and pretensions the
members of the meeting seem to have, yet they harmoniously concur in advancing
one another's honor and glory; and hence, as they mutually met together, so
they affectionately embrace one another. There was no discord at this assembly,
no proper variance or striving for state, but gloriously conspiring with joint
hearts and hands to glorify each other in the salvation of a company of sinners
by Jesus Christ. The divine essence is undivided: And, as there are three that
bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit; and these three
are One; So the attributes of God, however manifold to our apprehension, yet
there is no division among them, they are all one, and their conspiring
together in Christ, for our redemption, is called the manifold wisdom of God.
The manifold perfections of God meet together in one, with one consent, and
with one heart. Behold mercy and justice in one another's arms; and so close in
the embracement, that they are just one. Though it is a fall meeting, and all
parties present, yet their is no war, no jar, no dissension, no division, but
all harmony and concord, and love and affection; it is the most peaceable
meeting that ever was. And yet,

7. It is a bloody meeting; and never was, and never will there be, such a
bloody meeting in heaven or earth. The mercy-seat must be sprinkled with blood;
mercy cannot be vented without blood, and truth cannot be cleared without
blood, righteousness cannot be vindicated without blood, and peace cannot be
purchased without blood; Without shedding of blood there is no remission, no
mercy to be vented, no peace to be proclaimed; Christ has made peace by the
blood of his cross, Col. 1.20. A bloody husband have thou been unto me, said
Zipporah; but, O how much more may Christ say, a bloody meeting has this been
unto me! Who is this that comes from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah?
Isa. 63.1. Why, what is the matter that his garment is dyed with blood? Why?
when mercy and truth met together, they pressed to be so near one another in
him, that they pressed the blood out of his veins; and so it was a bloody
meeting: And, when righteousness and peace kissed each other, it behoved to be
in Christ; and so the sword of justice behoved to pierce him through and through,
that so these sacred lips might meet and kiss each other in his heart; and so
it was a bloody kiss. They kissed each other with such good will, that Christ
was, as it were, bruised betwixt their lips, that the blood might cement and
glue them together. One would think, such a bloody kiss would be no pleasant
kiss; nay, but it pleased the Father to bruise him. They met together on a sea
of blood: Thus it was a bloody meeting. Again,

8. It is an efficacious meeting. Many meet and assemble together, and yet do
nothing for their meeting, it is to no effect; but here mercy and truth meet
together efficaciously, co-operatively: All is done at the meeting that God
proposed to be done, and all is done that concerns the glory of God and
salvation of men; their meeting together is their working together, and that to
perfection; For God the Lord is a rock, and his work is perfect. There meeting
together is their building together, Psalm. 89.2, 3. I have said, mercy shall be
built up for ever: Thy faithfulness shall thou establish in the very heavens.
There is mercy and truth both building, and the foundation of the building is
laid in Christ; I have made a covenant with my chosen, etc.

9. It is an unexpected meeting, it is beyond the expectation of men and
angels. If friends and intimates should meet, and salute one another, it would
not be surprising; but to see opposites, antipodes, and antagonists meet
together, and embrace each other, this were surprising and unexpected: So, to
see light and darkness, love and enmity, life and death meeting, how unexpected
were that? Thus it is here, mercy and truth, righteousness and peace, these
attributes of God, with respect to us, were opposites and antipodes. The
language of truth and righteousness is death and damnation to the sinner; the
language of mercy and peace is, life and salvation to the sinner: And, when a
sinner finds himself pursued to death at the instance of divine justice, and
the truth and veracity of a God engaged against him, according to the
threatening of the law; O how unexpected a rencounter is it, when he finds mercy
and peace meeting with justice and truth, and stopping the pursuit, according
to the promise of the gospel, to the credit of the opposite parties, saying,
Deliver his soul from going down to the pit; I have found a ransom, and so all
odds are made even, all opposites reconciled, to the infinite surprise, and
beyond the expectation of all created beings! No wonder then, upon this meeting
discovered, the poor souls cries, Is this the manner of men, O Lord? O, who is
like unto thee! Nay there is none like unto the God of Jesurun,, that rides on
the heaven for their help, and in his excellency on the skies.

10. It is an everlasting, indissolvable meeting. Other meetings will adjourn
their meetings from time to time and from place to place; yea, other meetings
must part; and, when they part, they may never meet again; and we that are here
met, must part, and never all meet again in time; even as some others that met
together with us the last year, are away to eternity. But O, this meeting
betwixt mercy and truth, righteousness and peace, is a meeting where there is
no parting; the meeting is from everlasting to everlasting: Their meeting
together, and kissing each other, is an eternal and unchangeable meeting, and
an eternal and unchangeable kiss; it is every way like God, without beginning,
without ending, and without succession. Whatever beginning, issue or increase
it has with respect to its manifestation to us, yet in itself it is still the
same in Christ Jesus, who is the same yesterday, today and for ever, Heb.
13.8. without any variableness or shadow of turning. The meeting never breaks
up, it is a continued meeting never to be dissolved, and there they kiss one
another to all eternity: for his mercy endures for ever, and his righteousness
to all generations; and because of truth, meekness and righteousness, in his
majesty he shall ride prosperously; and of the increase of his government and
peace there shall be no end. I have said, mercy shall be built up for ever; and
I have said, Truth shall be established in the heavens. Why, what is the
meaning of all these expressions? The language is as if one glorious attribute
of God should say to another, O the sin of man sets us all as it were at
variance* and the whole creation knows not how to reconcile God with himself,
if he shall save one sinner; but, behold, we having met together in Christ the
righteousness, the ransom, the atonement, the propitiation, having met
together, we shall never part again; having embraced one another in behalf of
these poor miserable sinners, our arms shall never separate, that are clasped
together. Mercy and truth have met together, saying, you and I shall never
part; righteousness and peace have kissed each other, saying, you and I shall
never sunder, nor suspend the embracement; neither death nor life, nor hell,
nor devils, nor sin itself, shall ever separate us. It is a bargain among us, a
divine match; they have met together by an everlasting covenant, sealed the
bargain with an everlasting kiss, and cast a knot in an everlasting
righteousness, which is the band of the union, even Christ; for the covenant
does stand fast with him, Psalm. 89.28. where you will also see how this
everlasting meeting is established in Christ, ver. 14. Justice and judgment are
the habitation of thy throne, or the establishment of thy throne, as it may be
rendered; And mercy and truth shall go before thy face. And ver. 21. With him
my hand shall be established, and my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with
him. And, ver. 28. My mercy will I keep for him for ever. Thus it is an
everlasting meeting.

The fourth thing proposed was, why or for what reasons they have met together,
and kissed each other? Why have the prefections of the glorious God conspired
so harmoniously, and met together in such a sweet solemnity? Surely such a
meeting as this must have noble designs in view; and I Will tell you these four
reasons of the meeting, or four things that were to be concerted at this great
assembly.

1. They met together, to concert measures for advancing the glory of God to
the highest. This parliament of heaven met together upon ways and means, for
bringing in the greatest revenue of praise and glory to the crown of heaven, to
Father, Son and holy Ghost, and all the glorious attributes of this great and
eternal God. These attributes conspired harmoniously to set forth and glorify
themselves most illustriously. They met together, and kissed one another, that
they migh glorify each other. The glory of God, was the first and last end of
the meeting: What is the chief end of man, but to glorify God, and enjoy him
for ever? And O, what is the chief end of God! It is even to glorify himself in
all his perfections, and to enjoy himself for ever. And, how does God glorify
himself most brightly? It is even in Christ the meeting place of these
perfections, with a view to our redemption, To the praise of the glory of his
grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. And how does
he enjoy himself most sweetly? It is even in Christ, Behold mine elect, in whom
my soul delights. I was daily his delight, says Christ, while my delight was
with the sons of men, Prove. 8.30. They met together to put a crown of glory and
honor upon each other. Adam's sin and rebellion, and your sin, my friends, and
my sin (O that God dishonouring, evil, sin!) which had pulled off that crown of
glory as it were, from the head of the great King eternal and immortal, and
cast it into the mire, and stained it with filth and dirt: But, behold, these
attributes of God meet together to take up the crown, to rub off the dust and
dung that sin had cast upon it, and to add some more sparkling jewels to it
than ever, and set it upon the head of their sovereign, to the highest praises
of his mercy, justice, truth, righteousness and grace, and love, and holiness,
and wisdom, and all his other excellencies; that men and angels might sing and
say, Glory to God in the highest, etc. that all the saints might sing a consort
in praise of the meeting betwixt mercy and truth, justice and peace, saying,
Psalm. 89.14. Justice and judgment of thy throne
Shall be the dwelling place:
Mercy accompanied with truth
Shall go before thy face.
And that every saint might sing the 57th Psalm 9th and 10th verses; I Will
praise thee among the people, LORD,
Among nations sing will I;
For great to heaven thy mercy is,
Thy truth does reach the Sky.
They met together, to put a crown of glory upon the head of Christ, Heb. 2.9.
in whom they met. This assembly did convene for the coronation of the son of
God: For, he having humbled himself, and become obedient unto death, even the
death of the cross, God has highly exalted him, and given him a name above
every name, Phil. 2.10. That at the name of JESUS, every knee shall bow, of
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and that
every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the
Father. Christ has glorified the Father, and therefore the Father glorified
him, Joh. 13.31, 32. And now is the son of man glorified, and God is glorified
in him. And, if God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself.
Him that honors me, I will honor, says God. And in whom does this take
place to perfection? It is in Christ: God is honored most highly by him; and
therefore he is honored most highly of God. Amen, so let it be, and so it
shall be. And therefore it is concerted in that meeting, that all the saints
shall glorify him; Hence that royal edict comes forth, He is thy Lord, worship
thou him, Psalm. 45.11. And so we find them doing, Rev. 5.9. Thou art worthy to
take the book, and open the seals; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to
God by thy blood. It is concerted in that meeting, that all the angels shall
glorify him: Hence that edict comes forth, Let all the angels of God worship
him, Heb. 1.6. And so we find them doing, Rev. 5.11, 12. I heard a voice of
many angels, and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and
thousands of thousands, saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the lamb that was
slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and
glory, and blessings. It is concerted in this meeting, that all the creatures
in heaven and earth, sea and land, shall glorify him; as we see v. 13. But lest
the sinful creatures upon earth, like you and me, should not glorify him, or
see his glory, it is concerted in that glorious meeting, that the Holy Ghost,
the eternal Spirit, one God equal in power and glory with the Father and the
Son, shall be sent down to the earth to glorify him, Joh. 16.14. He shall
glorify me; for he shall receive of mine, and show it unto you. O, has the
Spirit of God been showing any thing of Christ among you this day? Any thing of
his grace, fullness, righteousness, so as to glorify him, and make him glorious
above all things to you? Why then, we may reckon that you have found something
of the saving fruits of this glorious meeting; for the grand design of it was
to glorify God in Christ, by the spirit. They met to concert all things
relating to the glory of the Father, in the Son, by the Holy Ghost. They met to
consult their own glory in Christ, that mercy and truth might be glorified in
him.

2. They met together to concert their proper work, in carrying on this great
end, of the glory of God, and his perfections. They do not meet together to sit
idle, and do nothing; no, they meet together to concert each of them their
proper business: As Christ said to his friends, Wherefore was it that ye sought
me? Wist ye not that I must be about my father's business? So may I say here,
the attributes of God met together, that they might go about God's business.
What business? What work belongs to each of them severally? Why, mercy and
truth meet together, that they may be sent upon an ambassy together, Psalm.
57.3. God shall send forth his mercy and his truth; his mercy to give in the
promise of the gospel, and his truth to make out the same: Thus mercy and truth
meet together, that they may be sent forth upon some gracious expedition,
particularly both to be leaders and followers to the remnant, whom God
appointed unto life. On the one hand, to be leaders; hence the Psalmist cries,
Psalm. 43.3. O send forth thy light and thy truth; let them lead me, and bring
me to thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacle. Then will I go to the altar of God,
to God my exceeding joy. Behold the wonderful business of mercy and truth, and
the work they are sent out upon, even mercifully to lead blind souls to a God
in Christ. On the other hand, it is to be, not only leaders, but followers,
Psalm. 23.6. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life.
If the child of God, under any temptation, refuse to be led by mercy and truth,
and give up with them as his leaders, yet, for all that, he shall not hinder
them to be his followers: He may run out of God's way, but mercy will follow
and bring him back; and, when mercy follows, it is even in company with truth:
And O, what think you of this wonder! mercy and truth meet together, that they
might go forth together, like two pages, to follow you, believer, through all the
steps of your wilderness journey; goodness and mercy shall follow me all the
days of my life. Here is a piece of work, that mercy and truth have met
together for, even to be sent forth, as leaders and followers of poor elect
sinners, till they be out of all hazard, in Emmanuel's land where glory dwells:
See Psalm. 61.7. But then, as mercy and truth have met together, to pursue their
proper work; so righteousness and peace have kissed each other, for pursuing of
theirs. Well, say you, what is the work of righteousness and peace? You have a
word in the last verse of this Psalm where our text lies; righteousness shall
go before him, and set us in the way of his steps. Divine rightousness,
displaying itself in Christ Jesus the sun of righteousness, goes before him to
prepare his way, and to bring us to God, and to our duty. And to be sure,
whenever righteousness goes before, peace will follow after: for the fruit of
righteousness is peace, whether it be imputed or implanted. Here then the work
of righteousness and peace kissing each other, is to bring in these blessed
effects in their order: We consider them as divine perfections in the text:
And, in these effects, righteousness leads the van, and peace comes up with the
rear.

3. These attributes conspire harmoniously, they meet together, and kiss each
other, for this reason, that, by their meeting together, they may concert the
dissolving of some unhappy meetings. These opposite-like attributes of God meet
together, that some intimates may be separate, and sad and sinful agreements
may be broken up. Isai. 28 15. there is a sad meeting and agreement we read of;
We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement. Why? Is
not this the case of all men by nature? Yea; but, how is this sad and miserable
meeting dissolved? See v. 16. Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone,
a tried stone, a precious cornerstone, a sure foundation: Judgment also will I
lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet. Well, when judgment and
righteousness mercifully meet in Christ, the sure foundation, what will be the
effect? It follows, v. 17, 18. The hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies,
and your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell
shall not stand. Whatever sad aspect this scripture may have to the dispisers
of Christ, yet it has a merciful aspect to all the chosen of God, and all that
desire to cleave to the Lord Jesus; yea, there is here a foundation of faith
laid for all that here the joyful sound, that whatever sinful and miserable
meetings and agreements there are betwixt hell and them, betwixt death and
them, yet it cannot stand before this glorious meeting, which was designed to
break up and dissolve the opposite meetings that stand in a contrariety
thereto. There are many black unions which this blessed union does dissolve,
and there is no dissolving of them but by this blessed meeting. There is the
black union betwixt the sinner and the law, which is the foundation of the
black union betwixt the sinner and his sin; For, when the union betwixt him and
the law is dissolved, then the union betwixt him and his sin is dissolved;
according to Rom 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you; for ye are not
under the law, but under grace. Now, what is the covenant of grace? Why, mercy
and truth meeting together, righteousness and peace kissing each other in
Christ Jesus, is the substance, the marrow, the kernel of the covenant of
grace; and it is this blessed meeting that dissolves the union betwixt the
sinner and the law, and so betwixt the sinner and his sin. O view the glorious
design of this meeting! They met together, that you might be separated from
your sad associates. By nature you and the devil had met together, and you was
a slave to him; and it is the virtue of this meeting in Christ, that dissolves
that; the seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the serpent. The world and
you had met together, and you took pleasure in your wicked companions, or else
was wholly drowned in worldly affairs; O it is the faith of this meeting that
dissolves that! This is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith.
The curse of God and you had met together, and you lie under that curse, till,
in the faith of this meeting, you shall see, that Christ has become a curse
for us. This meeting is designed for the breaking up of all these, and the like
unhappy meetings. They met together in a glorious band, to loose all the knots
the devil had tied.

4. These glorious attributes of God do conspire harmoniously, they meet
together and kiss each other, that they might concert and carry on some happy
meetings, and make up some blessed matches. These opposite-like attributes
harmoniously meet, that opposites and irreconcilable things might meet
together harmoniously, and kiss each other, whether real or seeming opposites.

(1.) There are real opposites that meet together harmoniously, by virtue of
this glorious meeting; particularly these six,

1. These opposite-like attributes meet together harmoniously that opposite
natures might meet together, even that God and man might meet together, and
embrace each other. And there are these two meetings betwixt God and man, that
were concerted at this meeting: The one is the meeting betwixt God and man, in
the hypostatical union of the two natures of Christ, our Emmanuel God-man in
one person; this is the great mystery of goodliness, God manifested in the
flesh; and this is the foundation of all other saving and merciful meetings
betwixt God and man: The other is the meeting betwixt God and man, in the
spiritual union betwixt Christ and his members, in one mystical person, by the
bond of the spirit; For he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit; And this
union is the foundation of all spiritual communion with God. We were not only
at an infinite nature distance from God, as we are creatures; but at an
infinite moral distance from him, as we are criminals and sinners: But the
attributes of God met together and kissed each other in Christ, that God and
man might meet together in a close spiritual union, and kiss each other in a
sweet spiritual communion: Whatever spiritual communion you have with God,
believer, this day, it flows from this glorious meeting of the divine
attributes in Christ; and this union and communion is indeed a meeting of
opposite natures: God became man, and took on our nature, and he makes us
partakers of his nature, etc.

2. These opposite-like attributes met together, and kissed each other, that
opposite wills might meet and embrace each other. God's will and ours are
opposite; this is indeed a branch of the former, but our wills are the great
forts of corrupt nature, that stand out against God and his will: We are enmity
against God, and not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. Now, how
comes the will to be reconciled to God's will? It is only by Christ, in whom
the perfections of God meet together: Thy people shall be willing in the day of
thy power.

3. These opposite-like attributes met and kissed each other, that opposite
persons Jews and Gentiles, man and man, that were enemies and haters of one
another, might meet together; that Jews and Gentiles might meet together, and
men at variance with men might meet together: Hence it is said of him, in whom
the attributes of God do meet, He is our peace, Ephesians. 2.14. who has made both
one, and has broken down the middle wall of partition: Having abolished in his
flesh the enmity, etc. If any thing slay the enmity to God or man, this is it.

4. These opposite-like attributes of God meet and kiss each other, that
opposite climates might meet together; I mean, that heaven and earth might meet
together, the church militant and the church triumphant. Heaven and earth were
at variance by our sin; but now, in Christ, saints in heaven and saints on
earth meet together; Hence we are said to be come to the general assembly and
church of the first born that are written in heaven, to the spirits of just men
made perfect. All believers are said to be thus come to mount Zion, the
heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22. Yea, in Christ, angels in heaven, and men on
earth, do meet together: Hence also believers are said to be come to the
innumerable company of angels; and the angel of the Lord encamps about them,
etc. Yea, all things in heaven and earth do meet together, and kiss each other
in Christ, the meeting place, Col. 1.20. Having made peace by the blood of his
cross, by him to reconcile all things to himself, whether things in heaven, or
things in earth, Ephesians. 1.10. See how, upon the back of this meeting in the text,
heaven and earth are said to meet together in the following verse; Truth shall
spring out of the earth, and righteousness shall look down from heaven; which I
insist not upon here.

5. These opposite-like attributes of God meet and kiss each other, that
opposite covenants might meet and embrace each other, even the covenant of
works, and the covenant of grace, in Christ the meeting place of the divine
perfections* These two covenants do, as it were, join hands and agree. Did the
covenant of works command perfect obedience? and, being broken, did it demand
complete satisfaction? Behold, Christ's obedience to the death answers both;
God's covenant of grace, dispensed to us, is just Christ fulfilling for us the
covenant of works: And so in him they meet, and kiss each other; For he is the
end of the law for righteousness to every one that believes. Again,

6. These opposite-like attributes of God meet and kiss each other, that
opposite tho'ts might meet together, and embrace each other, even God's tho'ts
and our tho'ts. How opposite these are, you may see, Isa. 55.8, 9. For my
tho'ts are not your tho'ts, nor your ways my ways; for, as the heavens are
higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thot's than
your tho'ts. Some have presumptuous thot's while they look only to God's mercy,
and so they think certainly God will have mercy upon them, though yet they are
strangers to Christ; these are opposites to God's tho'ts, he has no tho'ts of
showing mercy that way. Others have despairing tho'ts, while they look merely
or mostly to God's justice, and so their though it is, O, will God have mercy on
such as I am; and, he cannot in justice save such a one as I! These tho'ts are
also opposite to God's tho'ts: My tho'ts are not your tho'ts. O then, how shall
these opposite tho'ts meet together? Why, let a man view the mercy and justice
of God met together, and harmoniously kissing each other in Christ, so as to
see God in Christ reconciling the world to himself. If your tho'ts be
spiritualized, to discern mercy venting itself through the sacrifice that
satisfies divine justice, then God's thoughts and your thoughts meet together,
and kiss each other. Thus the divine attributes meet together harmoniously,
that real opposites may meet together harmoniously: This glorious meeting lays
a foundation for these happy meetings.

(2.) There are seeming opposites, that meet together harmoniously, by virtue
of this glorious meeting; as,

1. These opposite-like perfections of God meet together, and kiss each other
harmoniously, that opposite-like providence might meet together and kiss each
other. There are frowning providence and smiling providence, crosses and
comforts in the believer's lot; here is a providence that favors the promise,
and there is a providence that seems to contradict the promise; here is an up,
and there is a down: Well, how shall these walk together? Why? They meet and
embrace each other in Christ, the meeting place; for all things work together
for good to them that love him, and are the called according to his purpose.
Hence we will find, not only light and darkness in the believer's lot, but
sometimes light and darkness meeting together, Zech. 14.7. There you read of a
day, that is neither day not night; yet a day known to the Lord neither clear
not dark, but at evening time it shall be light: There evening-darkness
ushering in the morning light. Hence they have occasion both to sing of mercy
and of judgment, because of their meeting together, and kissing each other, and
working together for good: Behold the cross and the crown meeting together.

2. These opposite-like perfections of God meet together, and kiss each other,
that opposite-like desires may meet, and embrace each other. While mercy
desire, our life, and justice seems to demand our death; these are reconciled
only in Christ, in whom mercy and truth, righteousness and peace meet and
embrace each other. But look to our own desire of God's glory, and our
salvation, men and angels could never have contrived how these two desires
could be reconciled, if mercy and truth had not met together, and kissed each
other; for the glory of God's truth and righteousness, in the threatening of his
law, seems to rest satisfied with nothing less than our destruction; and
therefore to desire God's glory, would (...) been to desire our own damnation;
and consequently, in desiring our own salvation, we may have desired God's
dishonor: But now this blessed contrivance of infinite wisdom lets us see how
these two are, not only reconciled, but made inseparable; Having set forth
Christ to be the propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness in the remission of sins.

3. These seemingly opposite attributes meet and kiss each other, that
seemingly opposite graces might meet and embrace each other; for example,
reverence and confidence. How shall fear and reverence meet together with faith
and confidence? Why, truth and righteousness are at the meeting, and therefore
fear and reverence becomes us; but mercy and peace are also on the bench,
therefore faith and holy confidence may boldly step in, We have boldness to
enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus.

4. These opposite-like attributes meet and embrace each other, that
opposite-like duties may meet together. Prayer and praise seem opposite duties
in some cases; prayer supposes our wants to be great, otherwise, why should we
pray? Praise supposes our enjoyments to be great, otherwise, why should we
praise? Well, truth and righteousness, these awful attributes, present at the
meeting, say, we have nothing in ourselves, therefore we ought to pray; but
mercy and peace say, we have all, we have enough in Christ, and therefore we
ought to Praise. Humiliation and gloriation seem opposite duties; but the
seemingly opposite attributes of God meeting together, bring also these duties
to meet and embrace each other. Is truth and righteousness in the company with
mercy and peace? Then humiliation is our duty; but is mercy and peace in
company with truth and righteousness? Then gloriation is our duty; let him that
glories, glory in the Lord.

5. These seemingly opposite attributes of God meet and embrace each other,
that seemingly opposite experiences may meet and embrace each other, and be
reconciled, though seemingly irreconcilable. There are sad experiences, and
(...) experiences: O here is the sad experience of a guilty conscience, a
powerful corruption, and a conquering temptation! Can ever that be reconciled
with the experience of holy peace, pardon and victory? Yea, here is a
foundation laid for the reconciliation of these opposites. If Justice and mercy
have met together, then a guilty conscience and a mercy-seat may meet together;
a prevalent corruption and pardoning purifying blood may meet together: as they
did in the Psalmist's case, Psalm. 65.3. Iniquities prevail against me: But as
for our transgressions, thou will purge them away. The sad experience of
fatherly anger, or of the feeling of divine wrath may meet with the sweet
experience of felt love and favor; for mercy and justice are met together,
Isa. 54.7, 8. The sad experience of perplexing thoughts may meet with the sweet
experience of spiritual consolation, and be swallowed up therein; since truth
and justice have met with mercy and peace: Hence it was that these two met
together in David, Psalm. 94.19. In the multitudes of my thoughts within me, thy
comforts delight my soul. O! Is such a sad experience consistent with an
interest in Christ? Why? Both terrible and amiable attributes of God meet
together in Christ, and therefore it is not strange that the sadest and
sweetest experiences meet together, so as not to be inconsistent with the state
of a believer that is in Christ. To see awful justice and lovely mercy meeting
together in a sweet smelling sacrifice, is a greater wonder, than to see your
sadest and sweetest experiences meeting in Christ, to make up a Hallelujah,
praise ye the Lord; and the former meeting in the reason of this.

6. These irreconcileable-like attributes of God meet and embrace each other,
that irreconcileable-like scriptures might meet together and embrace each
other. How shall Exodus ^^. He will by no means clear the guilty, or justify the
sinner, irreconciled with Romans 4.5. where he is said to justify the ungodly? O
how can these two opposites meet together? Why, mercy and truth have met
together in Christ, to make up a match betwixt them: A ransom is found, a
propitiation is set forth; why then, these opposite-like scriptures may meet
together, and kiss each other. He will by no means (...) the guilty, without a
ransom, a propitiation: Well, is the ransom found; and the propitiation set
forth? Then he will justify the ungodly on that ground; Deliver his soul from
going down to the pit, I have found a ransom. Now, he can justify the sinner,
and be just in so doing, while he draws him in to Christ by says, Romans 3.25,
26. Thus you see the reasons of the meeting. In a word, they meet together upon
a design to bring the greatest good our of the greatest evil, and the highest
glory out of the deepest misery, to the praise of all God's glorious
perfections.

The fifth thing proposed was the application in a few inferences. Is it so,
that, in the salvation of sinners by Jesus Christ, the glorious attributes and
perfections of God do thus harmoniously conspire and embrace each other? Then
hence we may see,

1. What a dreadful evil sin is, which sets all the attributes of God, as it
were, at odds, and puts all the world into confusion, and every thing out of
order; it sets heaven and earth and all things in them, at variance one against
another. To think light of sin, is to think light of this glorious meeting of
divine attributes, that met together to break this rebellion, and take order
with this horrid insurrection against heaven. O what a great matter is the
salvation of a sinner! Ere that can take place, this grand meeting must be
called; all the occured attributes of God must have an honorable reparation.
Justice must be satisfied, truth vindicated, righteousness cleared: And, in
order to all this, a surery must be provided, even a God in our nature; the
guilt must be imputed to him, and the iniquity of us all must be laid upon him;
and then a bloody tragedy must be acted upon his soul and body, till he sink to
death under the weight of infinite wrath. But,

2. Hence see what a wonderful person our Lord Jesus Christ is, in whom so many
wonders meet together. It is in him that mercy and truth, righteousness and
peace do meet together, and kiss each other. Here all the bright perfections of
the divine nature do gloriously conspire; here is the bright constellation of
all the divine attributes shining forth in him, and every star performs its
revolution in this orb. Behold in him the bright glory and excellency of God's
grace and love, a whole Trinity in concert, each person to perform his own
part, and each attribute its own work; and Christ the image of the invisible
God set forth to be a glorious theater, on which men and angels might see the
splendour of the transaction; He is the brightness of the Father's glory, and
the express image of his person. Here is the great mystery of godliness, God
manifested in the flesh, and all his attributes meeting together, and kissing
each other, in our Emmanuel, God-Man. There are two things meet in Christ,
which should make him wonderful to us: The one is, all our sins meet together
on him, that they may be condemned, according to (...) word, Isa. 53.6. The
Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all, or made them to meet on him:
The other is, all the attributes of God meet in him, that they may be
glorified: And indeed there is no saving or satisfying knowledge of any
property of God, but what is to be had in Christ. To see God to be a merciful,
just, true, righteous, good and holy God, is neither a saving, nor a satisfying
sight, unless we see these attributes meeting in Christ for our salvation; and
to see this, is to see the glory of God in (...) face of Christ. Here see the
glory of divine mercy! What is pardoning mercy? It is God's free gracious
acceptance of a sinner, upon satisfaction made to his justice, in the blood of
Jesus; Nor is any discovery of mercy, but as relating to the satisfaction of
justice, consistent with the glory of God; mercy cannot be seen savingly, but
as meeting with justice in Christ. Here also we see the glory of divine truth
in the exact accomplishment of all his threatenings and promises. That original
threatening and commination, whence all other threatenings flow, Genesis 2.17. 'In
the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die, backed with a curse, 'For
cursed is 'every one that continues not in all things, etc. is in him
accomplished fully, and the truth of God therein cleared to our salvation,
while he tasted death death for us, and was made a curse for us; so that, in
every threatening his truth is made glorious. And, as to the promises, they are
all Yea and Amen in Christ Jesus, to the glory of God by us. 2 Cor. 1.20. And
so of all the other attributes of God, they are made glorious and exalted in
Christ to our salvation. Hence when Christ desired his father to glorify his
name, John 12.28. to make his name, that is, his nature, and properties, and
perfections all glorious in the work of redemption, that he had in hand; he was
instantly answered from heaven, I have both glorified it and will glorify it
again; I will give my attributes their utmost glory in thee.

3. Hence see the difference betwixt the law and the gospel. One great
difference betwixt them lies in this, that, in the law, the sinner that has
violated the same, may see truth standing engaged against him, but no mercy in
company with truth; and righteousness in arms against him, but no peace in
company with righteousness. Justice without mercy, and war without peace, to
the sinner, is the motto of the law: For therein truth and righteousness meet
together, but mercy and peace are not at the meeting; and so the language of
the law, to you that are out of Christ, and under the law, is, no mercy, no
peace, but the wrath of God, the vengeance of God, the curse of God upon you,
and that so sure as God is a God of truth and righteousness: There is the law.
But in the gospel, mercy and peace come into the meeting, and make up a match
betwixt all the opposite-like parties, to the highest glory of God, and the
greatest happiness of the sinner; and they seal the match with a kiss of
infinite complacency, so that the sum of the gospel is this, mercy and truth
are met together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other.

4. Hence we may see what is the fountainhead and foundation of all true
communion and fellowship with God and man. This glorious meeting is the
foundation of all other happy meetings; fellowship with God, and an happy
meeting with him, is a stream that flows from this fountain. We could never
have met with God, or got a kindly kiss or embrace in the arms of his favor
and love, if this divine meeting and embracement had not made way for it.
Fellowship with man, or the communion of saints, is a rivulet that flows from
this spring. When saints meet together for prayer or praises, under the
influence of the spirit, and under a gale of heaven; when their hearts are
fired with love to God, and to one another in him; what is this? It is just a
live-coal cast in among them from the altar, Christ Jesus, where all the
attributes of God meet together, and kiss each other; and hence true fellowship
with God, and with the saints, are both declared to be in and through Christ
Jesus, 1 John 1.3. That which we have heard and seen, declare we unto you, that
ye may have fellowship with us: And truly our fellowship is with the Father,
and with his Son Christ. The harmony of the attributes of God in Christ, is the
fountain of all the harmony among the saints: The little harmony that takes
place among them in our day, and the rarity of holy fellowship meetings, flows
from the little faith of this heavenly divine meeting; for all the saints, that
are under the lively views thereof, cannot but desire to meet together and
embrace eaach other harmoniously, in the arms of mutual love.

5. Hence see the malignity of the sin of unbelief, the great employment
whereof is, to spoil the harmony of the divine perfections, and to do its
utmost to dissolve that glorious meeting, and separate what God has joined,
saying, in effect, they have not met together, nor kissed each other. This we
may discern in the unbelief, whether of secure or awakened sinners: See it in
the unbelief of the secure sinner, who sets truth and righteousness out of the
meeting, saying, God, is a merciful God, and I shall have peace, though I walk in
the immagination of my own heart, adding drunkenness to thirst: Thus they hope
in God's mercy, and speak peace to themselves, while they never view the truth
and righteousness of God, and how the credit thereof shall be saved, or the
honor thereof repaired* hence, as faith is said to set to the seal, that God
is true, or that he is a God of truth, so unbelief is said to make God a liar.
To fancy that God will have mercy on their souls, without regarding the truth
of his threatenings, is to make God a liar, and say, mercy and truth have not
met together; to think that God will be at peace with them, while his
righteousness and justice are not satisfied, is to make God a liar, and say,
righteousness and peace have not met together. Thus the unbelief of the secure
sinner puts truth and righteousness out of the meeting. Again, on the other
hand, the unbelief of the awakened sinner puts mercy and peace out of the
meeting, saying, O he is a God of truth, and how shall he have mercy on the
like of me? He is a God of awful justice and righteousness, and how will he be
at peace with me? What is the language of this, but that mercy and peace have
not met with truth and righteousness? Here is a making God a liar also, and
separating what God has in the gospel declared to be joined. Behold then the
malignity of unbelief; it breaks the glorious meeting, and will not let them
kiss one another. The presuming sinner will not let God have the glory of his
truth and righteousness, the despairing sinner will not let God have the glory
of his mercy and grace; both are in a concert with the devil to break the
harmony of the meeting. But O, may virtue come from that glorious meeting in
Christ, to the poor sinful meeting in this house, for dashing your unbelief to
pieces, that we may see mercy and truth meet together, righteousness and peace
kissing each other.

6. Hence see sure and noble ground for the boldness and confidence of faith in
Christ; In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of
him, Ephesians. 3.12. Here Is an answer to all the objections of unbelief and
diffidence, the chief whereof lies here; O, says unbelief, may I, sinful guilty
I, lay hold on the promise of mercy and peace in the gospel, when I see the
great ordnance of the divine threatening hard charged with the truth and
righteousness of God, and ready to be discharged against me with thunder and
lightning, saying, no mercy, no peace; He that made thee will not have mercy
upon thee; and there is no peace, says my God, to the wicked? Mercy and peace
in the promise then, says unbelief, cannot take place with respect to me; for
truth and righteousness in the threatening stand in the way, like a flaming
sword, to keep the way of the tree of life. Nay, but, says faith, here the
promise and the threatening have met together, and kissed each other in Christ;
mercy in the promise, and justice in the threatening, have met and agreed in
him, in whom all the promises are Yea and Amen, and in whom all the threatenings
are fully executed, by drawing out his heart-blood. Thus then, we have boldness
to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, Heb. 10.19. By a new and
living way, which he has consecrated for us through the vail of his flesh:
Therefore let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of says. O
what ground for the boldness and assured confidence of faith, with particular
application, notwithstanding the threatening! The threatening has nothing to say
to me, says faith, for Christ has spoken with it already, and spoken it out
of breath; he has left it speechless and breathless; not a breathing of wrath
in it toward me. The believer may have a million of doubts, while his unbelief
keeps the chair; but let gallant faith come in, and take the room, it will
dispel them all. Let once unbelief break the harmony of this meeting of divine
attributes in Christ, and then nothing but doubts of God's favor and mercy
must ensue; but let faith view the harmony, and see them meeting and kissing
each other, and then, according to the measure of faith, such will be the
measure of holy boldness, confidence and persuasion of the favor, mercy and
good will of God in Christ, with particular application to the person himself.
Take away unbelief from faith, and then not a single doubt will remain behind:
Unbelief creates all the doubts that are in the believer, his faith has no
part in them. The general doubtful faith of the Papists is not faith, but
unbelief; and therefore no wonder that our forefathers abjured it in our
national covenant. Behold the sure ground and firm bottom that faith stands
upon, even the mutual meeting and embracement among the divine perfections in
Christ. If you break and separate the meeting by unbelief, then your confidence
is broken, and your peace with God marred; but, if you keep them together in
your view by faith in Christ, then you have boldness confidence and affiance on
this ground: yea, then God in Christ and you meet together, and kiss each other.

7. Hence we see what is the best mark of a believer in Christ, for your trial
and examination: Try it just by this, What view have you got of this glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ, and of the attributes of God meeting and
embracing each other in him? Have you seen the glory, and felt the virtue of
this happy meeting?

1. Have you seen the glory of it? When once in a day you had seen the
attributes of God in arms against you, because of your sinful rebellion against
God, and when you had seen the truth of God pronouncing the sentence of the
law, and his righteousness and justice ready to inflict the sentence, and
execute the same with curses and vengeance, making you despair of mercy, and
give up with all hope and expectation of peace with God by the law of works;
have you thereupon got a view of the harmonious meeting of these attributes of
God, in Christ Jesus, as the surety, the sacrifice, the ransom, the
propitiation, in whom the truth and veracity of God is accomplished, and the
righteousness and justice of God satisfied? And so mercy and peace vented
gloriously, without detriment to any other excellency or perfection of God.
Has nothing satisfied your conscience, but the view of this meeting betwixt
mercy and justice, in the death of Christ, and kissing each other in his
mediation? Has God and you met together this way, and made your heart joyful
to kiss and embrace this wonderful device, as worthy of God, and suitable to
you? Have you seen his glory at this rate? Then, in God's name, I pronounce you
a believer in Christ; For God, who commanded light to shine out of darkness,
has shined into your heart, to give you the light of the knowledge of his
glory, in the face of Christ; and Christ and you met together, and kissed each
other! Whether it was in the day of first believing, when you fled to him for
refuge, or in the day of after-manifestation, when, upon the back of dismal
hiding on God's part, or grievous backsliding on yours, the Lord drew aside the
vail, and gave you a glance of his glory; whether it was by some word of grace,
sweetly and powerfully coming in, and opening your understanding, to see this
harmonious meeting, or by some sweet droppings of the blood of sprinkling upon
your conscience, by which blood the meeting is cemented together. Have you seen
this glory, whether in a secret corner, or public ordinance; whether at the
market-cross of the gospel, where this glorious meeting is proclaimed of at a
communion table, where it is sealed? It is all (...) was heaven begun.

2. Have you felt the virtue, as well as seen the glory of this harmonious
meeting of the divine attributes in Christ? 2 Cor. 3.18. Behold, as in a glass,
the glory of the Lord, we are changed into the same image, from glory to glory
as by the spirit of the Lord. Surely, if you have seen this glory, you have
felt something of this virtue, by changing you from glory to glory. It is true,
many that have got a discovery of this glory of the Lord, can never think that
they have felt the sanctifying virtue thereof, and this keeps them down in the
pit of discouragement; it is true, they that are not sanctified, and made holy,
they discover, that they never beheld this glory of the Lord: For this meeting
of attributes makes a meeting of graces in the person that sees it savingly.
But you must remember, that this virtue will never be perfectly felt, 'till
this glory be perfectly beheld in heaven, where we shall be like him, because
we shall see him as he is: And therefore, since you cannot judge and try
yourself by a perfect sanctification, try it by the beginnings of it; this
transforming virtue, this sanctifying virtue is present with you, though you
cannot discern it. But, that you may through grace discern something of it, let
me ask you, What makes you wrestle in secret sometimes against sin, if it be
not some sanctifying virtue? What makes the prevalency of sin to humble you to
the dust? What makes you lament your own unholiness and impurity? What makes
you long and groan for complete victory over, and freedom from, sin,? What
makes you glad of any victory over your corruption, when this glory shines?
What makes your heart to rise against sin? and, when sin prevails, what makes
you find yourselves uneasy, and continually out of your element, 'till the Lord
return, and until you get a new dip in the Jordan of the blood of the Lamb? You
have no mercy on your lusts, and are at no peace with them, but still crying
vengeance upon them! Why, it is just the sanctifying virtue that flows from
this view of the glory of God in Christ, in whom mercy and peace meet with
truth and righteousness. If you fall and stumble at any time, believer, is it
not like the stumbling of a horse, that makes you run the faster? So as you get
more good of one fall, than a natural man will get of a hundred duties, while
it makes you still the more humble and watchful, and circumspect and dependent.
Why, by all this, it appears (whatever be the defect of your sanctification)
that having beheld the glory of God, you are changed into the same image from
glory to glory; you have seen the glory, and felt the virtue of this harmonious
meeting of divine attributes in Christ. But then again,

8. Hence we may see ground of terror to all christless, unbelieving souls,
that never have seen the glory, nor felt the virtue of this harmonious meeting,
and live careless about either of these. What shall I say? If our Gospel be
hid, it is hid to them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. In whom the God of this
World has blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the
glorious gospel of Christ should shine into them. May be, you are presuming
upon the mercy of God, while yet your eyes are blinded, that you do not see the
truth of his threatenings standing against you: And therefore, O blasphemer, do
not think that he will be a God of mercy, and not a God of truth? Nay, his
mercy will never be vented, unless the glory of his truth be saved. May be you
are speaking peace to yourself, saying, I shall have peace; while yet your eyes
are blinded, that you do not see how God's being at peace with a sinner is
consistent with his righteousness in taking vengeance upon sin. O then,
blasphemer and presumer, do you think that God will be a God of peace, and not
a God of righteousness? know it then, in the Lord's name, O sinful unbelieving
wretch, that, as there is no mercy for you, to the discredit of God's truth; so
no peace, to the dishonor of his righteousness. You expect mercy and peace
separate from truth and righteousness; and therefore mercy and peace shall be
separate from you, and truth and righteousness will meet with you in fury, and
with a vengeance Your false hope of mercy and peace makes you merciful to your
lusts, and at peace with your ideas; but the truth and righteousness of God,
which you (...) from the meeting, will hide mercy and peace for ever (...) your
eyes. Justice instead of mercy, war instead of peace, will ensue; for truth and
righteousness will execute judgment upon you, for the abuse of mercy and peace.
While, through unbelief you do not see or approve their meeting, together and
kissing each other in Christ: While you are in this case, you cannot meet with
God; though, you may meet with his people at ordinances, or at a communion table,
yet God and you never met together: Nay, you have other company, the devil and
you meet together, and your lusts and you embrace each other; the world and you
meet together, and its vanities and you do kiss each other; the law and you
have met together, and its curse and you do embrace each other. But, because
you do not see the terrible curses and threatenings that you are under, remember
that, in a short while, death and you will meet together, and its cold arms and
you must embrace each other; and, if this gospel be hid to you, then, after
that, hell and you will meet together, and the flames of divine wrath and you
will embrace each other to eternity; and the motto written upon the door of
your hell will be, The vengeance of truth and righteousness, for the abuse of
mercy and peace. Let this word of terror sink into your conscience, O
graceless, christless, unbelieving soul, that never saw the glory, nor felt the
virtue of this blessed meeting, and, Galio-like, care for none of these things.
But on the other hand,

9. Hence, from this doctrine, see ground of comfort to all believers in
Christ, who have seen the glory, and felt the virtue of this harmonious meeting
of divine attributes in Christ. This doctrine is as comfortable to you, as it
is ^^rrible to others. Can you say before God, That these last two marks are
your experience? Then I can say, that all the comforts, that issue from that
glorious meeting in Christ, belong to you; and God allows you strong
consolation, who have fled for refuge to the hope set before you: For that city
of refuge, to which you have fled, is the cencre of the meeting, and the place
appointed, where they kiss one another harmoniously. Why, say you, What concern
have I in their meeting and embracing each other? O believer, they met together
for your sake, and kissed one another out of kindness to you: For there was no
real jarring among them, but all the apparent jarring was about you, and how
they should be glorified in your salvation; and when infinite wisdom found the
ransom and so the way how they should all be glorified in your eternal
happiness, then they hugged each other in their arms, as it were, in a rapture
of joy, for your sake. Prove. 8.31. His delights were with the sons of Men. It
was not one attribute only, that had its delight, satisfaction and glory, it is
delights in the plural number; for all the attributes of God had their
delights: And about what was it? Why the counsel of peace was concerning you;
for his delights were with the sons of men. And you having seen the glory of
this device, and felt something of the virtue thereof, God and you have met
together, and Christ and you have kissed each other; he has embraced you, and
you have embraced him; and that embracement is a pledge and earnest, that he
and you will meet together in heaven, and embrace each other to eternity. This
meeting and embracement is founded upon the harmonious meeting and embracement
of the divine attributes in Christ; and therefore it shall be sure, abiding and
everlasting; and all these attributes are engaged for your comfort and support,
and this glory of the Lord you shall for ever behold: For Christ, in whom all
these glorious perfections meet together, has prayed for it, John 17.24.
Father, I will, that these whom thou have given me, etc. Here then, believer,
is ground of comfort to you, in every case: comfort against desertion. Is it
long since Christ and you met together, and kissed each other? Behold, here is
the reason, why, he will never altogether leave you, nor forsake you; but still
meet with you now and then, when he sees it fit, and give you the other kiss of
his infinitely blessed lips, and embrace of his arms, till you come to the
intimate, immediate embracements of his love in glory; why, because mercy and
truth are met together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other. So sure
as mercy and truth are met together, as surely will the Lord meet with you.
Here is comfort against the law, when it comes in as a covenant upon your
conscience, saying, Pay what thou owe, or otherwise thou art cursed, and must
go to hell; and the law, speaking in the name of truth and righteousness, seems
terrible: But you may soon answer by faith, and say, O law, the demand is just
indeed, and agreeable to truth and righteousness; but you mistake the person:
For truth and righteousness have already met with mercy and peace, in the
person of Christ my husband, who endured all my hell, and became a curse for
me; and therefore I have no ground to fear the hell thou threatnest, nor the
curse thou denouncest, nor any liableness thereto. Here is comfort against
Satan and his temptations. For this blessed meeting in Christ did concert his
ruin, and the bruising of his head. Here is comfort against church-divisions
and commotions: When neither ministers nor private christians do meet together,
or embrace one another with love and amity; is this sad and afflicting to you?
Here is a meeting, that may give you comfort in that case: For no member of
that meeting will ever fall out among themselves, or fall out with you. Here is
comfort against your jarring with friends: What do I know but there is some
here that cannot get lived in peace with such a friend or relation, nor their
christian liberty enjoyed, because of their frowns? And may be they are as
aliens to you, not in speaking terms with you; you cannot meet together with
them cordially, nor embrace one another amicably: But let this be your comfort
in that case, mercy and truth are met together, righteousness and peace have
kissed each other; and you have got a kiss by the by, and that is better than
all the kindness of all the friends in the world. Here is comfort against
public calamities that seem to be approaching, or personal trials that may be
coming upon you. Here is a cordial, though affliction and you meet together;
though in a little time death and you meet together; yet this meeting of divine
attributes in Christ, your glorious head; speaks comfort and safety to you in
every case. Though you should die distracted, this meeting cannot be dissolved;
and you, having seen the glory, and felt the virtue thereof, shall be sure to
enjoy the benefit of it to eternity: Yea, surely goodness and mercy shall
follow you all the days of your life, and you shall dwell in the house of the
Lord for ever.

10. The last inference is, Hence see the duty of all that hear and know this
joyful sound. Never was there a sweeter sound in heaven, or in earth: And what
is the duty of all you that hear it? Surely, the news of such a glorious and
harmonious meeting of the divine perfections, about the salvation of sinners in
and by Christ Jesus, should be joyfully received. Here are the good tidings of
great joy to all people, Luke 2.10. When Elisabeth the mother of John, and Mary
the mother of Jesus our Lord, met together and saluted each other, the babe
leap in Elisabeth's womb for joy. Behold, here is yet a more wonderful meeting
and salutation among the jarring-like attributes and perfections of God; and
surely, if the babe of grace be in your womb, it will leap for joy, when you
perceive such a blessed meeting and salutation. O may it not bring our heart to
our mouth, and make it flutter within us, when we hear of such a salutation as
this, mercy and truth are met together! etc. And again, What is your duty,
believer, who not only hears, but knows this joyful sound? Your duty is, not
only to rejoice in this matchless harmonious conjunction of divine attributes
in Christ, but to exemplify the same, by an harmonious conjunction of graces
and holy virtues in you. Let mercy and truth meeting together, as divine
attributes, in Christ, be exemplified by mercy and truth meeting together, as
divine virtues in you: Let righteousness and peace kissing each other in him,
be exemplified by righteousness and peace kissing each other in you: Let the
meeting of mercy and truth engage you to be merciful and true; merciful,
because your heavenly Father is merciful; and true, because he desires truth in
the inward parts. Let the embraces of righteousness and peace engage you to be
righteous and peaceable, that is, to be students of purity and peace: For the
wisdom that is from above, is first pure, and then peaceable, Jam 3.17. It is
declared in the verse following our text, that it is the design of these
perfections of God, looking down harmoniously from heaven, to make suitable
graces spring up from the earth: Truth shall spring out of the earth, and
righteousness shall look down from heaven. When the Son of righteousness, in
whom all the excellencies of God do shine, looks down; then as the natural sun,
sheddings its influences, makes fruit to spring up from the earth; so the Sun
of righteousness looking down, and shedding abroad his influences, makes truth,
and all the rest of the fruits of the spirit, to spring out of the earth, out
of the heart, the soil where they are sown, in regeneration. O does mercy look
down from heaven to you, in friendship with truth; shall not this mercy make
you merciful to the bodies and souls of others, by doing them all the temporal
and spiritual good that you can? And shall God manifest his truth, in
conjunction with mercy toward you; and will you not be a friend to truth even
to all the precious truths of his gospel? Shall not truth, in opposition to
hypocrisy, be your study; and truth, in opposition to error, be your concern;
and this truth, in conjunction with mercy? For, when truth is in any Hazard,
should not mercy to your own soul, and the souls of others, make you zealous
for it? And mercy to your children and the generation that is to come after
you, on whom we show no mercy, (...) truth be not transmitted purely to them,
as it was by our forefathers to us, at the expense of their blood, however now
the waters of the sanctuary are troubled. Again, does righteousness and peace
look down from heaven, kindly embracing each other in your behalf, believer;
And shall not you be a student of righteousness, in opposition to all
unrighteous and unholy ways; and of peace, in opposition to contention and
discord? As much as possible, follow peace with all men and holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord. Does God glorify his righteousness toward
you; and will you study no righteousness in your conversation toward God and
man? Does God speak peace to you, and will you be at war with him, and love to
live in war with any of his? Shall that be the disposition of any, with whom
God is at peace? O tell it not in Gath; Surely there are none here, that have
tasted of this sweet peace of God, but they would desire to live at peace with
all men, and particularly all the saints. They would desire to see all the
honest ministers of Scotland meeting together more kindly than they do, and
embracing each other. Some indeed are at this time reproached as enemies to
peace in the church; but the matter is, peace must not be studied separately
from righteousness, not mercy separately from truth, but all as meeting and
embracing one another: For mercy and peace, without truth and righteousness, is
a cruel conspiracy against God and man. Now certain things have past concerning
the truths of God, and the righteousness of Christ, in our day, which some
think will stand infamous till doom's-day; and, this truth and righteousness
being the great ministerial trust, some chused rather to be reproached by the
world as enemies to peace, than be challenged by God and their own consciences
as betrayers of the trust. However, O believe, study you through grace to get a
match made up betwixt mercy and truth, righteousness and peace in you, seeing
there can be no merciful peace to the prejudice of righteous truth: And study
to get all these attributes of God exemplified in your heart and life, and the
seal and impress thereof upon your soul, you being united to Christ, in whom
all these glorious excellencies of God do meet together with harmonious
embracements. Out of Christ's fullness do you receive, and grace for grace. As
the child receives member for member from the father, and the paper letter for
letter from the press; so, beholding his glory, be you changed into the same
image, by receiving mercy for mercy, truth for truth, righteousness for
righteousness, and peace for peace: Out of his fullness do you receive grace for
grace, holiness for holiness, and an holy virtue suitable to every holy
perfection that is in him, and all these harmoniously meeting together and
kissing each other in you: Let no heavenly grace or holy duty be excluded out
of the meeting: Let says and repentance meet together, let love and new
obedience kiss each other; let knowledge and practice meet together, and prayer
and praises embrace each other. Yea, let opposite-like graces meet harmoniously
in you: Let humility and boldness meet together, let godly sorrow and holy joy
embrace each other. Here is the gospel-holiness we call you to, in a
suitableness to these harmonious attributes of God in Christ: If the world call
you Antinomians, known it is the will of God, that by well-doing you put to
silence the ignorance of follish men, 1 Pet. 2.15. Let the mouth that
reproaches the gospel be stopped by the power of it in your walk. The world will
surely reckon you the greatest stars, that give the greatest light: Therefore
let your light so shine before men, that others seeing your good works may
glorify God: even the works of mercy and truth righteousness and peace, hand in
hand together: And thus, for the sake of the glory of God, the honor of
Christ, and the credit of the gospel, let the world know, that you have seen
the glory, and felt the virtue of these perfections of God, harmoniously
meeting and embracing each other in Christ. Here is your duty and work,
believer, in the wilderness; and now in all your short-comings therein, still
look again to God's holy temple, to Christ the meeting place of these divine
perfections: This is the mercyseat, of which God says, Exodus 25.22. There will
I meet with thee, and commune with thee from between the Cherubims. And every
new meeting with God there, will bring in new strength for all your work and
warfare in time, till God and you meet together, and embrace one another in
glory through eternity?

And now, believer, I know you would desire that others should share of the
same happiness with you; and therefore pray that a short concluding word may be
blessed with power to thousands that hear me. O ye that are by standers and
hearers only, in what ever corner of this house round about me, whether you be
in my view or not, you are in God's view; and I have a word from him to you
all: And, as I have told you what a terrible thing is is to live and die in
unbelief with respect to this glorious device, so now I would tell you your
duty in this matter, and how you may share of the blessings and benefits, in
time and for ever, that flow from this glorious meeting and embracement; and it
is by kissing the Son of God, in whom all these attributes of God do kiss and
embrace each other, Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish
from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little: Blessed are all they that
trust in him. Blessed are all they that kiss and embrace him. Would you then
share of the grace and glory that issue from this wonderful meeting, and
ineffable embracement among the divine perfections, in Christ the Son of God? O
then, come and kiss the Son: O down, down with carnal tho'ts, carnal kissing,
carrousing, and cajolling; here, here is an object worthy of the most endeared
embraces of the immortal soul. O come, and kiss the Son, by believing in him,
and applying the benefits of this glorious transaction to yourself: And, be who
you will, if you kiss and embrace the Son, you shall find these glorious
attributes of God kissing and embracing you and hugging you in their arms, as a
darling of heaven, and a special favorite in the house of God. Are the
attributes of God embracing one another in Christ? O flee into their embraces,
by fleeing into Christ. Say not, Christ is in heaven, how shall I embrace him?
For the word is nigh thee, even in your mouth, and in your heart, Romans 10.8. q.
d. So near is he in this word, that you may kiss him with your mouth, as it
were, and embrace him in your heart; and to take in his word of grace, and
Christ in it, is to embrace him. What do you say against Christ? Are you afraid
that truth and righteousness conspire against you, and hinder mercy and peace
from ever meeting with you, and embracing you? O no, fear not; only believe,
that mercy and truth are met together, and that righteousness and peace have
kissed each other in Christ. Truth will not stand in the way of mercy; for they
have met together: Righteousness will not stand in the way of peace; for they
have kissed each other. He is indeed an infinitely just God, to take vengeance
upon sin; but justice will not hinder mercy from coming to you: Only believe
that justice and mercy are reconciled in Christ, so as mercy can vent itself
toward you, to the credit of justice. But O! may such a blackmouthed sinner as
I, as black as hell and the devil, expect a kiss of such an infinitely fair
Jesus? Is that to be expected, that such opposites should meet in one another's
arms? Ye, allow me, though a black sinner like yourself, to be the happy
messenger, to tell you in God's name, that be you as black as you will, such a
meeting and embracing betwixt Christ and you is more to be expected, than ever
men or angels could have expected that infinite justice and mercy should have
met together, and kissed each other in a God-man; and this unexpected meeting
is the very ground upon which your expectation of a meeting with, and
embracement of God in Christ, is to be founded: O then, come, and kiss the Son.
Why but I cannot, say you; I think I would fain do it; but I cannot get at him,
to kiss and embrace him. Indeed this kindness must begin on his side; and
therefore, O pray that he would come, and meet you with a kiss of infinite
love. Say with the church, Song 1.2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth: For his love is better then wine. If that be the language of your soul,
O I cannot embrace him; but my heart says, O let him come and embrace me, and
draw me out of the embracements of all my former lovers and lusts that I may
never kiss any idol in the world again, but may live and die in the arms and
embraces of the Son of God; is that the language of you soul before the living
GOD? why then the embracement betwixt Christ and you is begun, that shall never
have an end; for it is a pledge, that he and you shall meet together in heaven,
and embrace each other to eternity.

Now, though I hope that this glorious meeting of divine perfections in Christ
has put forth some vitrue to draw in some poor soul to the match; yet I fear
that the most part are yet but idle hearers and spectators, as if they were not
concerned: But O unconcerned soul, be who you will, O yet, will you come and
see this great sight! O come and see the greatest sight that ever was, or will
be, in heaven or earth, a bush burning and not consumed; all the burning and
shining attributes of God meeting together with infinite harmony in the bush of
our nature, and yet the bush able to bear the glory, Zech. 6.13. O come and
wonder! Here is the wonder of men and angels! For this is a wonderful meeting
to them: And the name of the meeting place is justly called, wonderful! O come
and partake; for the meeting is concerning your salvation in Christ: His
delights were with the sons of men. O come and sing to the praise and glory of
this wonderful harmonious embracement of divine perfections in Christ,
especially you that partake, so as to see the glory, and feel the virtue
thereof O will you sing with your hearts, and lips, and lives, saying. Glory to
God, that his attributes have meet together, and kissed each other, in Christ;
and that ever the like of me got a kiss by the by: Glory to God, that there is
no breaking off this ^^^^ting, nor parting of these embraces, by sin, Satan,
earth or hell; but that they meet and embrace each other to eternity. And though
you cannot remmember to sing all that has been said, yet I hope the weakest
memory may remember to sing the best note of all the sermon every day, saying,
Glory, glory, glory, to God, that mercy and truth are met together,
righteousness and peace have kissed each other.

FINIS.

