SEVERAL DISCOURSES UPON IMPORTANT SUBJECTS. WHEREIN I. THE Nature, Mode and
Seasons of FASTING, are particularly explained; its Necessity and Importance
represented, and OBJECTIONS answered. II. THE Nature and Properties of PRAYER
in general, and the Necessity of IMPORTUNITY in particular, opened and urged.
III. THE absolute CERTAINTY and great MOMENT, of the Doctrine of the
RESURRECTION proved, and illustrated; with a REPLY to the principal Objections
against it. IV. THE DISPLAYS of Divine JUSTICE, in the Propitiatory SACRIFICE
of CHRIST are represented, the Nature, Necessity and Sufficiency of his
SATISFACTION, the IMPUTATION of his RIGHTEOUSNESS, in Consequence of it,
together with an Answer to the most important Objections. V. THE GENERAL
JUDGMENT briefly represented.


By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by W. BRADFORD, at the Sign of the BIBLE in
Second-Street. MDCCXLIX.

TWO SERMONS Preached at BURLINGTON, in New Jersey, April 27th. 1749.

The Day appointed by His Excellency the GOVERNOR, and the Honorable the
COUNCIL, FOR A Provincial FAST, Before the GOVERNOR and others, upon Texts
Chosen by His Excellency.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M.

Joel. 1. Sanctify a Fast, call a solemn Assembly, gather the Elders and all
the Inhabitants of the Land into the House of the Lord your God, and cry unto
the Lord. The Corn is waste^^ the Land mourns, is not the Meat cut off from
before our Eyes?

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by W. BRADFORD, in Second Street.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY JONATHAN BELCHER, Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief
in and over His Majesty's Province of New Jersey, and Vice Admiral of the same.

AND TO THE HONORABLE THE COUNCIL Of said Province.

THE following SERMONS are humbly Dedicated,

By Your Affectionate Friend, and Humble Servant, G. TENNENT.

SERMON I.
MATTHEW vi. 16, 17, 18. Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the Hypocrites, of a
sad Countenance: For they disfigure their Faces, that they may appear unto Men
to fast. Verily I say unto you, they have their Reward. But thou when thou
fastest, anoint thine Head, and wash thy Face. That thou appear not unto Men to
fast, but unto thy Father which is in secret: And thy Father which sees in
secret shall reward thee openly.


OUR blessed Lord having in the former Chapter, armed his Disciples against the
corrupt Principles of the Scribes and Pharisees, especially in their Exposition
of the Law, which is elsewhere called their Leaven; proceeds in this to warn
them against their corrupt Practices; particularly their Hypocrisy and vain
Glory in giving Alms, in Prayer, and in Fasting: These, say the Arabians, are
the three great Christian Duties, the three Foundations of the Law, by them we
do Homage to GOD with our three principal Interests; by Prayer, with our Souls;
by Almsgiving, with our Estates; and by Fasting, with our Bodies: It is the
last of these that our Lord treats of, in the Words of our Text; which indeed,
when duly observed, is attended with the other two. The blessed JESUS offers
the same Caution to his Disciples, in the Celebration of every of them, e. g.
When thou do thine Alms, (says he, that is in secret) do not sound a
Trumpet before thee, avoid all Ostentation, let not thy Left Hand know, what
thy Right Hand does, that thy Alms may be in secret, and thy Father which
sees in secret will reward thee openly. Not that it is unlawful to dispense
Charity in the Sight of others, when thereto called by divine Providence: No!
But only for that End that we may be seen by them. The Thing forbidden under
these metaphorical Expressions, is Ostentation, and seeking our own Honor and
Applause; and the Thing commanded is Sincerity in regard of our End: Though the
Action of Charity be sometimes necessarily public, yet the End should be
always secret: Those that give their Alms for Ostentation-sake, have their
Reward; not the Reward that GOD promises to them that do Good: No! But the
Reward they promised themselves, and a poor Reward it is; they did it to be
seen of Men, and they are seen of Men, and applauded by them, and this is all
their Reward: They have it in present Possession, and nothing remaining in
reversion.

BUT those that are sincere and humble in Almsgiving, are not only graciously
accepted in this Life, but will be openly rewarded by GOD himself in the Life
to come; thy Father which sees in secret, he himself shall reward thee openly.

IN like Manner our Lord cautions his Disciples against the same Evils, namely,
Hypocrisy and Ostentation in secret Prayer; which were too frequent and
flagrant among the Pharisees.

WHEN thou prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites are, for they love to
pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the Corners of the Streets, that they
may be seen of Men, verily, I say unto you they have their Reward.

THE Pharisees affected the most conspicuous Posture, and most public Places
for their private Devotion, with Design to be commended for their Eminence in
Religion, and this was all the Benefit they obtained by it.

ALTHOUGH their stated Use of public Places for private Worship without
Necessity, was improper and unjustifiable; yet it was their evil Design herein
that our Lord principally reprehends.

BUT as to the Posture of standing in Prayer, it was certainly lawful, proper,
and usual in public Worship, ( Matt. xi. 25. Luke xviii 11.) When ye stand
praying, forgive, says our Lord, and therefore it was their ambitious corrupt
View herein, that our Savior opposes, and on the contrary, councils his
Disciples, to choose for their secret Devotion, some Place of Retirement and
Privacy, that being unobserved and undisturbed, it might be effectually
secured, both from Ostentation and Distraction; and be pleasing to that GOD who
principally requires the Heart, and penetrates its most concealed Designs, and
will in due Time graciously and honorably reward such as are sincere.

THE very same Language does our Lord use, the same Councils and Cautions does
he give, respecting the Duty of Fasting, in the Words of our Text; which have a
plain Reference to the aforesaid Instances of Almsgiving and Prayer; as
appears not only from the same Forms of Expression, the same order of Discourse
used therein, as well as the same Persons spoken of, and to; but likewise from
the introductive Particle or first Word of our Text, Moreover, which manifestly
shows its Relation to the preceding Instances; it is as if our Lord had said,
besides what I have spoken to you upon Almsgiving and Prayer, Take these
Directions which are of the same Kind, in Relation to the Duty of Fasting.
Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the Hypocrites are of a sad Countenance, etc.

NOW in the Words of our Text, three Things are observable, viz. the Duty of
Fasting recommended, the Manner of it prescribed, and the Reward inciting
hereto proposed, and promised. And

1. THE Duty of religious Fasting is recommended or enjoined upon proper
Occasions, i. e. when GOD by his Providence calls to it, or the Case of our own
Souls upon any Account requires it.

OUR Lords prescribing the Manner of observing it, necessarily supposes the
Reasonableness, Expediency, and Necessity of the Thing itself, yea, the
Prescription, or Injunction of that, to which the Mode relates; otherwise our
Lord must be supposed with seriousness to direct how his Disciples should do
nothing; which is absurd! Or that which is worse than nothing, namely, what is
sinful!

TO suppose that the Mode or accidents of Things, can subsist without the
Substance, is to run into the wild Delusion of the Papists about
Transubstantiation, which equally opposes the Principles of sober Reason, and
evidence of common Sense!

AND to suppose that our Lord would direct to the Manner of performing any
Thing that is Evil, is in other Words to say, that he approves of it; which is
as impious as the other is irrational!

BESIDES Fasting is recommended, in the same Manner as Almsgiving and Prayer,
and therefore he that opposes the former, may with equal reason oppose the
latter, and if so, Religion is stripped of its principal Parts, namely, Piety
toward GOD, and Charity toward Men, and consequently destroyed!

WHAT Piety toward GOD can a Man be reasonably supposed to have, who does not
pray to him? Will such fear him, love him, and depend upon him, who pay him no
Homage, return him no Thanks for Benefits received, nor own their Dependence on
his Providence? And can there be real Piety without these? No, surely!

AND have such Charity toward Men, who, when their Ability admits, and
Occasion requires, customarily refuse to dispense their Benificence to the
proper Objects of it? In a Word, by this Method Religion is made as opposite to
GOD, as unfriendly to Society!

2. THE Manner of Fasting is prescribed in our Text, and that both negatively,
and positively: And,

1. NEGATIVELY, Our Lord councils his Disciples, when they fast, not to be as
the Hypocrites, of a sad Countenance, for they disfigure their Faces, that they
may appear unto Men to fast. We are not to suppose, that our Lord here,
prohibits such a Garb and Gesture, as is suited to a Day of public Fasting;
for GOD himself sometimes commanded the Jews to put off their Ornaments: Nor
was any thing more common among Good Men, than to cloth themselves with
Sackcloth, and put Ashes on their Head, or spread them under them, upon such
solemn Occasions; but what CHRIST prohibits, is their affecting those Things
for selfish and sordid Purposes, while in the mean Time they wanted what was
signified by them.

AND their making no difference between a private and public Fast. As our Lord
had spoken before of private Almsgiving, and private Prayer, so he here speaks
(at least principally) of a private Fast, as appears from these Words, that ye
appear not unto Men to fast, but to your Father who sees in secret.

THIS is by no Means applicable to a public Fast, for then do Persons appear
to Men with whom they have social Worship to fast; the Design is known, the
Business is no secret: Yea, and as it is their Duty to be deeply affected on
such a solemn Occasion, so to appear in respect of Garb and Behavior suitable
to it! In private Fasts indeed the Case is otherwise, it is then no doubt
necessary to conceal from others observance, as much as we can, our private
Exercises, and Humiliations.

THE Pharisees, whom our LORD frequently calls Hypocrites, pretended Fasting
when they were destitute of Humiliation and Contrition, which are the Soul and
Kernel of that Duty. They affected to appear more Humbled than they really
were, and so mocked GOD, and deceived Men, by their feigned Pretenses: This the
Almighty justly resents in the Prophesy of Isaiah, is it such a Fast that I
have chosen, a Man to afflict his Soul, is it to bow down his Head as a
Bulrush, and to spread Sackcloth and Ashes under him, will thou call this a
Fast, an acceptable Day to the Lord? No! Bodily exercise, if that be all, will
profit little.

BESIDES the Pharisees proclaimed and blazed abroad their private Fasts; as
they did their private Charities, and private Prayers; and so managed the
Matter in respect of their appearance and gesture as to declare to every one
whom they met with, that it was a Day of Fasting with them; to this purpose
they appeared in the Streets, when they should have been in their private
Rooms, and were clad in a poor Habit, affected a Melancholy Aspect, and went a
slow Pace, on Purpose to attract the attention of others, and invite their
Applause, that they might pass for strict and mortified Men.

THE Pharisees received their Name from hence as Grotius observes, that they
were not contented to fulfill the Rites enjoined by the Law, but were
distinguished from others, by severer Institutions of their own invention: And
therefore they disfigured their Faces on Fast Days.

THE original Word (aphanizusi) signifies to obscure say Erasmus, Mont^nus,
Vatabulus, the Pag^ine, and Tigurine versions; because they darkened the Beauty
of their Aspect by some filthiness they put on their Faces.

HESCIUS, Phavorinus, and Hammond, translate the aforesaid Word cover, as was
the Custom of Mourning; Intimating that they covered their Faces.

THEY blackned and changed their Countenances, says the Arabic Version. They
mard them says the Syriak. They corrupted and disfigured them, say Tremelius,
P^scator, Burgensis; in a Word all the Versions center in this, that they
studiously changed and corrupted the Native color of their Faces, one way or
other; and it was with this Design, that they might appear to Men to Fast: i.
e. That they might get a Name among Men, verily I say unto you, says CHRIST,
they have their Reward. i. e. That Applause which they so much Covet, and that
is all. But,

2dly. Positively, CHRIST teaches us, how to Conduct a private Fast, But thou
when thou Fasteth anoint thy Head, and wash thy Face, that thou appear not to
Men to Fast, but to thy Father which is in secret. i. e. Lay aside all show and
appearance of Fasting, appear with thy ordinary Aspect and Dress, and whilst
thou abstainest from Bodily refreshments, Endeavor to carry so that it may not
be taken Notice of, conceal it as much as you can. rather show the appearance
of Gladness then of Grief.

IN the mean Time observe, that CHRIST does not direct to abate any Thing of
the reality of the Fast, not to take a little Meat, or a little Drink, or any
Bodily Refreshment whatsoever, No! But to lay aside the Show of it, and make
the inward Part of it our principal Care, namely to be Humble and Sincere
before GOD, in observing this Solemnity, and to endeavor to approve ourselves
to him To all such,

3dly. There is a reward proposed and promised, their Father that sees in
Secret will Reward them openly, i. e. The blessed GOD who is the Heavenly
Father of all true Christians, who beholds with delight their sincere, humbling
and mortifying Exercises in Secret, in their Days of Fasting, will reward them
graciously and honorably at the General Judgment: So that fasting has its
Reward, not considered separately, but as an Instance of our Obedience to a
divine Institution, and as it serves to promote the Power of real Godliness,
which has the Promise of this Life and that which is to come.

THE Consideration of G^d's favorable acceptance of our Fasts, should make us
dead to the Hopes of Men's applause, as well as to the Fears of their censures.
King David would not decline the Duty of fasting, though it was turned, by the
Enemies of Religion, to his Reproach.

IF it be objected, that seeing CHRIST speaks of a private Fast in our Text,
one of a public nature cannot be thereby proved.

I Answer, It is a Mistake, CHRIST approves of abstinence, which is the Genus
or Kind, that includes all the Species or different Sorts of it. Moreover, an
Argument from the greater, is conclusive and certain. Seeing CHRIST approves of
the Duty of fasting in private, when the Causes are lesser and private; he must
needs approve of public fasting when the Causes are greater and more
important, when it is observed humbly and sincerely, with a secret Intention;
or else be very unreasonable, in preferring a private Good to a public.

SEEING GOD has given us Bodies as well as Souls, is it but just and rational,
that he should be served by both, not only in private but in public?

IF it be said, that Reformation is sufficient without outward abstinence I
Answer, this will conclude as much against Almsgiving and Prayer: For, by a
parity of Reason, we may say, it is enough to pray in our Hearts, and thus all
vocal Prayer is destroyed; and likewise that it is enough to give Alms in our
Hearts, and thus all Charity is destroyed! In a Word, the aforesaid Objection
tends to overthrow, in its Consequences, all the outward Offices of Religion
and Friendship at a Stroke, and therefore cannot be true!

FROM the Words of our Text thus explained, I would observe the following
Proposition, viz. That Religious Fasting is a Duty of Divine Institution, and
great Advantage to Mankind, and therefore should be observed with Care and
Caution.

IN Discoursing upon this Proposition, I would according to the Order of our
Text.

I. Prove the Divine Institution of Religious Fasting.

II. Open the Mode of its Observance

III. Represent its Advantages and Importance; and then proceed to the
Improvement.

Here it should be previously observed that I made mention of Religious
Fasting, to distinguish it from Civil and Medicinal; the former of which is
prescribed by the Magistrate for a Civil Purpose, viz. The saving of Provision;
the latter is used for the preventing of Sickness* or recovery of Health.

BUT Religious Fasting is undertaken, on the Account of Religion; with design
to assist the performance of the Duties o^ it, and may be thus described, viz.
That it is an Instance of divine worship prescribed by God, to illustrate his
Glory, and promote the Good of Mankind. Or in other Words,

THAT it is a Solemn voluntary abstinence, from Food, Drink, and all the
Pleasures of Life, for a certain space of Time, which is set apart to be spent
in Prayer and Humiliation.

OR if the Constitution be so weak, as not to be able to endure a total
abstinence without prejudice to Health; yet they should abstain as far as is
consistent with it, which may be called a Fast; but it is a total abstinence
that properly Claims that Character.

NOW this Instance of Religious Worship, is prescribed by GOD otherwise it
woud'nt be the worship of GOD, but Will Worship and sinful Superstition; the
Duty in general is prescribed immediately in the Word of GOD, but the Time for
its Observation by the Mediation of Men; yet so nevertheless, that the
appointment of the Day for a Fast, does not depend upon the mere will of Men,
but upon the Judgments of God, and Circumstances of Men; by which the Almighty
calls to the Duty of fasting, and points to a suitable Season for the
Performance of it.

RELIGIOUS fasting, by Reason of the divine Judgments, that urge its
Observation, may said to be fourfold. viz either Personal, when the Judgments
of God affect a particular Person only, and call him to a secret Observation of
this Duty by himself alone.

OR Domestic, when extraordinary Calamities do affect and distress a
particular Family, who are ^ereby invited to observe a private Fast by
themselves, in a social Manner.

OR Ecclesiastical, when divine Judgments are inflicted, or threatened to be
inflicted, upon a certain particular Church or Society, and they are hereby
induced to observe religious abstinence.

OR Provincial and National; when abstinence is observed by the Generality of
their Inhabitants, in pursuance of the Order of those that preside over them,
because of the Judgments of God upon them

THIS Duty of religious fasting, under the Gospel Dispensation, seems to be
extraordinary and occasional only

NOW the Occasions hereof are these following, viz. extraordinary Sins
committed by ourselves or others. In the Time of Ezra and Nehemiah, there were
public fasts for the sinful Marriages of the People of Israel, with Infidel
and Idolatrous Nations.

FARTHER, another Occasion hereof, is either Judgments inflicted, or threatened
to be inflicted. When the Famine raged among the People of Israel, in the Time
of the Prophet Joel, God commanded them by him, to sanctify a fast, to call a
solemn Assembly, to gather the Elders and all the Inhabitants of the Land into
the House of the Lord their God, and to cry unto the Lord: The Priests, the
Ministers of the Lord, were on that Occasion to weep between the Porch and the
Altar, and say spare thy People O Lord, and give not thy Heritage to Reproach;
then, says the Prophet, will God be jealous for his Land, and pity his People.

AND when the pious Prince Jehosaphat, heard of the design of Ammon and Moab to
invade Judah, he feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a
Fast throughout all Judah; and Judah gathered themselves together to ask help
of the Lord.

MOREOVER it is proper to fast, either when we engage in any extraordinary and
important Undertaking, or want Victory over some perilous and violent
Temptation, that we may obtain Success in the former, and Deliverance from the
latter; thus when Queen Esther was to intercede before the Persian Monarch, for
her Nation, who were in the utmost Danger of utter ruin, as well as herself in
the Attempt to rescue them from it, she ordered the Jews in Shushan to fast,
which she and her Maidens likewise observed; and indeed before this Order, the
Hebrews in all the Provinces of Persia, and Media, who had heard of the King's
bloody Decree, mourned, and fasted, and wept of their own accord; and many lay
in Sackcloth and Ashes!

AND in regard of violent Temptations, methinks what our Lord says of bodily
Possession, that that Kind goes not out but by Fasting and Prayer, is easily
applicable to them.

THE Exercise of religious fasting, both private and public, is commended to
our Esteem and Observance, both in the Writings of the Old and New Testament.

WHEN Nehemiah heard, that the Remnant of the Captivity were in great
Affliction and Reproach; and that the Wall of Jerusalem was broken down, and
the G^^es burnt with Fire, he kept a private Fast, he mourned certain Days, and
fasted, and prayed before the God of Heaven, (Nehemiah i. 4.)

WHEN King David's Child was struck with Sickness, after the Prophet's
Threatenings, he fasted, lay all Night on the Earth, and besought God for the
Child, (2 Samuel xii.)

WHEN the Prophet Daniel understood from the Writings of Jeremiah, that the
Space of 70 Years would put a Period to the Desolations of Jerusalem, and that
the Time was drawing nigh, he set his Face to seek the Lord for that Mercy with
Prayer and Fasting, (Dan. iii.) and elsewhere we are informed, that Daniel was
mourning three full Weeks, and eat no pleasant Bread, neither came Flesh or
Wine into his Mouth, (Dan. x.)

IN the twelfth Chapter of the Prophesy of Zecharias, we have a Prediction of
the State of the Gospel Church, representing that then the Spirit should be
poured forth, and in Consequence thereof, that there should be not only a great
and general Mourning for Sin in public Assemblies, but likewise particular in
private Families; every Family mourning apart, and their Wives apart.

NOW forasmuch as our Lord represents religious Mourning, and Fasting as Terms
of the same import, ( Matt. ix. 15) the aforesaid Prophesy is therefore an
Argument of the divine Original, and constant Obligation of the Duty of
Fasting, both personal, domestic and public: Those therefore who profess
themselves Partakers of the promised Effusion of the Spirit of Grace and
Supplication; would do well to prove the reality of their Claim by a
conscientious Compliance therewith.

IN the Reign of Jehoiakim, King of Judah, a Day of public Fasting was
proclaimed by the Order of GOD, that they might present their Supplications
before the Lord, and every one return from his evil Way, and that in
Consequence hereof the Execution of divine Vengeance might be prevented, ( Jer.
xxxvi. 6, 7)

THE Prophet Zecharias makes mention of a public anniversary Fast of divine
Approbation, in the seventh Capter of his Book the 4th and 5th Verses, which
the Almighty complains they did not sincerely observe; when ye fasted and
mourned in the fifth and seventh Month, did ye at all fast unto me, even to me?
The Day of Atonement in the seventh Month, was by God's Appointment, to be
kept annually as a religious Fast; in that Day they were to afflict their
Souls, and do no Manner of Work yea, the Persons that did not observe this
Order, were to be put to Death. See Levite xxiii. 26 -- 32.


NEHEMIAH, the pious, zealous, and faithful GOVERNOR of the Jews, a Gentleman
of a brave and public Spirit, who had very much at Heart the Good of that
People, and was distressed for their Impiety! ordered a religious Fast, on
account of the prevailing Iniquity of the Times; and was the first that signed
and sealed the Covenant entered into upon that Occasion, to serve GOD, and
avoid profaning his Sabbath! (An Evil which lamentably prevails in this and the
neighboring Provinces, at present! See Neh. 9th, and 10th Chapters) He induced
others to so good a Work, by his own amiable Example!

WHEN David and his Army, heard the News of the Defeat of Israel by the Troops
of Amaleck, they rent their Garments, mourned, and wept, and fasted until the
Even, (2 Samuel i. 12.)

NOR is the New Testament without Instances of Fasting. The forerunner of
CHRIST, John the Baptist, was a Man of singular Abstinence, he came neither
eating Bread, nor drinking Wine, (Luke vii 33.) He was so abstemious, says
Basil, that his whole Life was but one continued Fast.

OUR Lord before he entered upon his public Ministry, prepared himself by
fasting, (Matt. iv.) and after his Entrance into it, sometimes omitted to eat
his Bread, and often continued long in lonely Retirement, which was doubtless
attended with Abstinence: And what he practiced himself he recommended to
others in the Words of our Text, which I have before considered

ANNA, the Prophetess, likewise served GOD with Fasting and Prayer, ( Luke ii.
37.) And the devout Cornelius observed the same Practice, ( Acts x. 30.)

THE Apostle Paul, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, 7 chap. and 5. ver.
signifies, that married Persons should at Times give themselves to Fasting and
Prayer, and elsewhere farther observes, that he had approved himself the
Minister of GOD in Labors, Watchings, and Fastings, (2 Cor. vi. 5.) By the
wholesome Discipline of religious fasting, he kept his Body under, and brought
it into Subjection to the Government of the Mind, as he himself elsewhere
informs us, (1 Cor. ix. 27)

THE Disciples of John fasted often, (Luke v. 33.) This probably intends their
Performance of the Duty in a united social Way, as an Assembly, seeing they
were wont to pray together at stated Times, and had Directions from their
Master to this Purpose, ( Luke xi. 1.) And afterward the Christian Churches,
often met for this End: Thus when Paul and Barnabas were ordained, and to be
sent to the Gentiles, the Church appointed a Fast, to obtain the divine
Presence and Blessing on this solemn Occasion, ( Acts xiii. 3.) So likewise
when they ordained Elders in every Church they prayed with fasting, ( Acts xiv.
23.)

THESE Elders, are elsewhere enjoined to feed the Flock of GOD, exercising the
Office of a Bishop over it, (1 Pet. v. 1.2) for so the original Word
Episcopuntes, should be translated: Hence you may see that in the Apostle's
Times, every little Flock as the original Word (Poimnion) signifies, had either
one or two Bishops to take the pastoral Care over it; in those primitive Times,
the Bishop's Diocese was but small, for no more but one Society or Flock, and
that generally a small one, fell to the Share of one or two of them. But to
proceed,

THESE Words of our Savior, ( Mark ii. 15.) then shall they fast in those
Days, are not only a Prediction of what his Disciples after his Departure from
them should do, but a Precept obliging them thereto.

MOREOVER an Injunction to fast, as well as to pray, is included in these Words
of CHRIST (Matt. xvii. 21.) This Kind goes not out but by Prayer and Fasting,
for this shows that in our Saviors Time, it was used with his Approbation upon
important Occasions.

IT is true we meet with no Example of national Fasts, in the New Testament;
nor can this be reasonably expected, because the Christian Religion was not
national in the apostolic Times.

CERTAINLY the Appointment of public Fasts at proper Seasons is rational, for
hereby it is made the joint Act of Churches, and States, and Humiliation under
the mighty Hand of GOD the better promoted.

THIS the ancient Churches were sensible of, and therefore appointed particular
Days of fasting on Occasion of public Calamities, such as Pestilence,
Persecution, War, etc. as Tertullian, Cyprian, Justin Martyr, and Augustine
assure us. Yea, many of the Gentiles were directed by the Light of Nature or
Reason only, to this Duty, witness the Ninevites, (Jona. iii.) the Athenians,
and Egyptians likewise, used some kind of Abstinence, from some sort of Food in
Honor of their Gods, as Plutarch and Herodotus informs us. Hierocles and
Purphery observe of the Pythagorean Philosophers, that they used Abstinence to
purge the Soul from the Disorders of Sensuality, and to advance internal
Goodness; to which valuable Purposes, by the mere unassisted Dint of human
Reason, they justly apprehended it had an excellent Tendency! In a Word, Caesar
testifies, that Abstinence from some Sort of Food generally prevailed in the
Pagan World.

IF it be objected, that Christ himself excuses his Disciple's Omission of the
Duty of Fasting:

I answer it is true, but in such a Manner, as shows his Approbation of the
Observance of it, in proper Seasons: This will appear by considering the Nature
of Christ's Apology, which is to the following Effect, viz. That these were
early Days with them, and that therefore fasting was not then so seasonable as
it would be afterward, nor were they so able to endure the Severity of it;
every Thing is beautiful in its Season, as Solomon truly observes, and indeed
then only!

THOSE that enter into the Marriage Relation, must expect both Care and Trouble
in the Flesh; yet during the Nuptial Solemnity, they are cheerful, and it is
but decent they should be so. Now Christ and his Disciples, were but newly
married, the Bridegroom was yet with them, and the Nuptials yet celebrating,
particularly Mathew's: But when the Bridegroom should be removed from them, to
a far Country, then our Lord signifies, that it would be a proper time for them
to sit as a Widow in solitude and fasting; and to this, that under the Jewish
Economy, Persons newly married were, for a time, to be freed from the fatigues
of War.

FARTHER, The Disciples being but beginners in Religion, and not yet accustomed
to the severer Exercises of it, as the Disciples of John were, who came neither
eating nor drinking, as their Master did. Now in such a Situation, to put them
frequently upon fasting might, perhaps, discourage them in Religion, or
prejudice them against it, and so drive them to Apostasy from the Profession of
it: It was like to be of as ill consequence as putting new Cloth upon an old
thin Garment, and new Wine into old Casks: But to lead them to those Severities
by Degrees, was the most rational and safe Method, (See Mark ii. from the 18 to
the 23 verse) The blessed Jesus consults the Frame and Strength of his
Followers, and Proportions their Difficulties thereto; he carries the Lambs in
his Arms, and leads those gently that are with Young; nor will he, who is Love
and Goodness itself, break the bruised r^ed, or quench the smoking Flax!

IT may be again objected, that the fasting recommended by Christ in our Text,
is only spiritual fasting from Sin.

I Answer, That such a Notion is contrary to the etymology of the original
Word, (nesteuete) which, as Pasor observes, is derived from ne, which in
compounds is negative or privative, and ethio to eat; so that to fast is not to
eat, or to be without meat.

IT is likewise contrary to the universal Acceptance of the Word fasting in
Scripture, as well as to its current meaning in other Writings; and the
received ideoms of Speech.

AND it is likewise attended with many absurdities, a few of which I shall
mention; viz.

IT is foreign to the Subject of CHRIST'S Discourse in our Text, which was the
Pharisees Fasting in a literal Sense. It supposes an analogy between Sin and
Bread, and consequently represents it as necessary in ordinary Cases; as good
in itself; as nourishing to the Soul as Bread is to the Body; and likewise that
it is only to be abstained from at some extraordinary Seasons; and that when we
do abstain from it, we should not appear to Men to do so; that is, in other
Words, we must carefully avoid confessing Christ before Men; whereas the
Redeemer in the mean Time assures us, that if we are ashamed of him and his
Words, he also will be ashamed of us, when he comes in the Glory of his Father
with the holy Angels.

AT this rate of allegorizing without necessity or president, and contrary to
the Context, the reality of the Creation of the World and of Mankind may be
denied, and on the contrary their eternity contended for, seeing Conversion is
called a Creation; and indeed the Case is so with the Bemists, they positively
deny the Creation.

AND the Resurrection of Christ's Body from the Dead, together with all his
miraculous Works, may be in like manner denied, for Conversion is called a
Resurrection in Scripture. Now upon these Facts the Credibility of the Gospel
hangs; but b^ allegorizing of them, their litteral certainty is destroyed;
Christ is made a Sinner, for none but such need Conversion; and his Gospel a
Cheat; being stripped of the Credentials which confirm its divine original.

AFTER the same Manner may also the Lord's Supper be spiritualized, and then it
will follow, that it is a damnable Sin to feed upon Christ by Faith, o^ believe
in him; for it is said, that he who eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
Damnation to himself. Now what is spiritual eating and drinking, but believing?
and yet the Scripture says, that he that believes shall be saved. In a Word,
the literal Certainty of Scripture Doctrines and Facts, will be rendered hereby
precarious, and so the whole Christian Revelation unhinged! But I proceed to the

II Proposed, Which was to speak of the Mode or Manner of (...). Here observe,
that the religious Worship of a Fast is performed partly by general Offices,
proper also at other Times (...) public Worship, and partly by Offices
peculiar to a fast.

THE general Offices are these, namely, hearing the Word of God, Prayers,
giving Thanks, and giving Alms, Nehe. ix. 4.5. And the seed of Israel read in
the Book of the Law one fourth Part of the Day, and another fourth part they
confessed and cried with a loud Voice unto the Lord their God; then the Levites
said, stand up and bless the Lord your God. Blessed b^ thy glorious Name which
is exalted above all Blessing and Praise.

CORNELIUS, who fasted and prayed likewise gave Alms, which come up as a
memorial before God, ( Acts x 30, 31.) When the impious Israelites murmured and
queried, wherefore have we fasted and thou see not? The Almighty answered,
that it was because they did not extend Mercy and Charity to the Poor, Is not
this the fast I have chosen to loose the Bands of Wickedness, and deal Bread to
the Hungry, (Isa. lviii) i. e. By the Figure Synecdoche, this is the Manner of
fasting that I approve of and accept; those who would ask Mercy from God, must
not forget to show it to Men.

THE peculiar Offices of a fast either respect Preparation for it, the
Celebration of it, or the Consequences that follow after it.

THE preparatory Offices, or Duties, are these two especially, viz.
Consideration and laying aside our worldly Business. We should seasonably and
solemnly consider the Nature and Qualities of the Occasions of the Fast, viz.
the Judgments of God, together with the number and heniousness of our Sins the
procuring Causes of them. These Things we should ponder upon and realize till
our Hearts are deeply affected with a fear of God, with sorrow for our Offenses
against him; with a desire after his favor, and a Resolution to seek and serve
him; and hence it is said of Jehosaphat, that he feared and set himself to seek
the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah, (2 Chronicles. xx. iii)

ANOTHER Preparative, is to lay aside timeously our worldly Business, and order
our temporal Concerns in such a Manner, that they may be no hindrance to us in
the Duties of the Fast. ( Levit. xxiii. 7, 8.) And no doubt these Preparatives
should be attended with devout Addresses to God for divine Influence, without
which nothing can be done to purpose in Religion,

BUT the peculiar Duties that respect the Celebration of the Fast, are either
Negative or Positive. The Negative are these, viz.

ABSTINENCE from all Food and Drink, as much as our Health can bear. ( Est. iv.
16)

ABSTINENCE from all bodily Recreations, (Joel ii. 16.) Let the Bridegroom go
forth of his Chamber, and the Bride out of her Closet. (Isa. lviii 3.) Behold
in the Day of your fast ye find Pleasure.

ABSTINENCE from all Ornaments of Dress, unsuitable to a Day of Humiliation.
(Isa. xxii. 12.) In that Day did the Lord call to weeping and mourning, to
baldness and girding with Sackcloth.

The Positive Duties are these, namely, Humiliation, Prayer, and renewing our
Covenant with God.

1. WE should humble ourselves before Jehovah, in a Confession of Sin, a
Condemnation of ourselves for Sin, a Purpose and Promise to forsake it, and
practice Virtue. And hence a Day of fasting is called by God himself, a Day for
a Man to afflict his Soul, (I^a. lviii. 5.)

2. Another positive Duty in the Time of the Fast, is calling upon God's Name.
Eza. viii. 21. Then proclaimed I a fast at the River Ahava, that we might
afflict ourselves before our God, to seek of him a right way for us.

3. RENEWING our Covenant with God, is also necessary, (2 Kings xxiii. 2, 3)
And the King stood by a Pillar and made a Covenant before the Lord, to walk
after the Lord and keep his Commandments, with all their Heart and all their
Soul. And all the People stood to the Covenant. It is necessary on a Day of
fasting, to renew our Consent to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, to renew
our Resolution to perform the Duties thereby required; and to renew our
reliance upon the Promises therein contained, for Guidance and Assistance to
perform the aforesaid Duties.

BUT to proceed, The principal Duty consequent upon fasting, is Reformation of
Life, which should be immediately begun in Church, State, Families, and
particular Persons. 2 Chronicles. vii. 14. If my People which are called by my Name
shall humble themselves and pray, and seek my Face, and turn from their wicked
ways, then will I hear from Heaven and will forgive their Sin and heal their
Land. The Fast that God has chosen, as was before observed, is to loose the
Bands of Wickedness, and undo the heavy burdens, to let the oppressed go free,
and deal our Bread to the Hungry, and to break every Yoke. When fasting is duly
observed, it will incline us, in our after life, to avoid all the Methods of
Injustice, Oppression, and Cruelty; and on the Contrary, to be merciful and
charitable in the Sentiments of our Minds, the Speeches of our Lips, and the
Actions of our Lives.

BUT more particularly in our Manner of fasting.

1. WE should beware of Hypocrisy, that we do not with the Pharisees in our
Text, put on a guise of extraordinary Devotion, merely out of Pride, to get a
Name among Men; or with Jesabel cover a covetous and cruel Intention therewith
Of the same stamp were those impious Jews, the Royal Prophet speaks of, who
fasted for strife and debate, to smite with the fist of Wickedness: They
oppressed the Poor by their Cruelties, ground their Faces, and laid
intolerable Yokes upon their Necks, notwithstanding of their pious Pretenses.

2. WE should beware of Superstition in our Fasts, by an over frequent Use of
them, especially of such as are of a public Nature. Fasting is an
extraordinary Duty, and therefore not to be practiced on ordinary Occasions;
otherwise it is apt to degenerate into Superstition; to make Religion
burdensome, and discourage the Weak.

IT is unreasonable in any to make the Yoke of Christ heavier than he has made
it. Our compassionate Lord, who is Wisdom and Love itself, did not think it
proper to impose upon his Disciples, either the Rigors of the legal
Ministration, or the Burdensome Traditions of the Pharisees, or even the
Austerity of John the Baptist; and hence it is said, that his Yoke is easy, and
his Burden light.

3. WE should beware of formality, in resting satisfied with the outward
Performance of the Duties of the Day, without an inward Sense of them, and
without a Reformation of Life, this formal Fasting is of no avail. Of such the
Almighty God complains by the Prophet, Zeca. vii, 5. did ye at all fast unto
me, i. e. ye did not regard my Honor as your principal Scope in fasting, nor
answer the End thereof, which is Amendment of Life.

4. WE should likewise beware of the Papal Notion of meriting by our fasting,
or of terminating the Worship in the Fast itself, which is only designed to
qualify us for divine Worship: Seeing we are both Creatures and Criminals, and
as such owe to God a Debt of perfect Duty and infinite Penalty, which we can
never pay, being both fini^e and imperfect, it is absurd to suppose, that we
can Merit any Thing at God's Hand, by any Instance of our obedience, No! When
we have done all we can, we are unprofitable Servants.

ON the contrary therefore, we should endeavor to perform the Duties of the
Day, with humility, sincerity, faith, contrition and Reverence; hereby
laboring to approve ourselves to him, who sees in secret, and will reward the
upright openly: Which brings me to the

III. HEAD of Discourse, which was to represent the Advantages and Importance
of the Duty of Fasting.

1. FASTING has a natural Tendency to curb our sensual Appetites, by
withdrawing the Fuel that inflames them As some Savage Beasts are ^am'd by
Hunger, so are those brought hereby under the control of Reason and Religion.
Abstinence was the first precept given to Man in Innocence, the Violation of
which, has been the Source of innumerable Evils and Calamities to the whole
human Race.

2. FASTING is of advantage to assist the Performance of all Religious Duties.
A few of which I shall mention, viz. Prayer, hearing the Word of God, Charity
and Repentance.

IT was from the Persuasion of fasting's being a help to prayer, that
Jehosaphat, Ezra, and Nehemia, anexed it thereto, in Junctures of great
Distress, when they wanted to exert the utmost vehemence and fervours! Reason
teaches us, that as fullness of Bread is apt to make us drowsy, so on the
Contrary, Abstinence tends to make us more lively in religious Exercises!

NOR has religious Abstinence less aptness to prepare the Mind to hear the
divine Word with Attention and Reverence. Jeremiah the Prophet, was aware of
this, and therefore ordered Baruch, the Son of Nereiah, to read the Roll of
threatenings in the Ears of all Judah, in the Day of public fasting; expecting
that at that Time it would make the deeper Impression on them, ( Jer. xxxvi.
6.) inasmuch as their Minds were freed from the fumes of the Body, and
separated from the Entertainments of Sense, they must of Consequence be more
serious and composed, and therefore better prepared to give due Attention to
the divine Oracles.

AND does not Abstinence likewise tend to promote our Charity, for being hereby
made sensible of want and hunger ourselves, we are by our own Experience
naturally led to compassionate those who are by necessity forced to graple with
such hardships, and of Consequence to relieve them. This not only Reason
Demonstrates, but evident Facts confirm, in the Case of Cornelius, who was as
famous for his liberality as his fasting and prayers, (Acts x.) His abstinence
stirred the Bowels of his Humanity to succor the Indigent.

FARTHER, my Brethren, abstinence promotes Humiliation and Contrition for Sin,
by making us taste the bitter Fruits of it; by denying ourselves of those
Supports and Comforts, we abase ourselves in signifying our unworthiness of
them, and Submission to God's Government over us; as well as execute some
reasonable revenge upon ourselves, for our Rebellion against his Authority, by
the abuse of his Creatures: Our feeling the painful Fruits that Sin has
produced among Mankind, must needs tend to excite equal Indignation against it,
and Sorrow for it, as well as a just Fear of the divine Judgments: Hence it is
that Times of fasting were Seasons of uncommon Sorrow in every Age of the
Church, as appears from the Instances before produced, to which, for the Sake
of Brevity, I must not add.

3. FASTING is not only an efficacious and profitable, but very necessary Mean,
to prevent the execution of extraordinary Judgments threatened; as evidently
appears from the memorable examples of the Fast of the Jews in the Time of
Queen ^sther, and of the Ninivites, who were both hereby delivered from a
National Destruction, and that very near at Hand.

4. RELIGIOUS Fasting is of equal advantage and efficacy to remove Judgments or
Calamites that are actually inflicted; of this I would mention the two
following Instances.

IN the civil Wars between the Benjamites and Israelites, the latter having
been very unsuccessful in their undertaking against the former, thereupon kept
a public and solemn Fast, which was crowned with Success and Victory! ( Judge.
xx)

WHILE Samuel was Judge in Israel, with design to testify their Repentance for
their Iniquities and promote Reformation from them, he ordered the People of
Israel to be conveen'd at Mispeh to a public Fast; which they kept with great
Affection, and soon saw the happy Fruits thereof, in a very surprising conquest
over their Philistine Enemies, who ignobly attacked them with hostile violence,
in the very time of their religious worship. (1 Samuel vii.)

5. FASTING observed with a proper frame of Mind, is conducive to obtain the
most important Benefits, temporal, spiritual, and eternal; that either
particular Persons or Societies need. An Instance of this we have in Ezra, who
proclaimed a fast in order to obtain the Guidance and Smiles of Heaven, in and
upon the difficult but important Enterprise of rebuilding Jerusalem, and hereby
obtained his generous and noble Design!

THIS View in fasting was not peculiar to the Old Testament, but is common to
both. In entering upon all Matters of great Difficulty and Moment, both CHRIST
and his Apostles fasted as was before observed. Our Lord's fasting in the
Wilderness, was preparatory to his engaging in the public Ministry, and his
Apostles followed his Example herein, by religious Abstinence, before they
undertook that sacred Work; and in all succeeding Ages, the Practice of the
Church has been agreeable to those noble Presidents, and in this Way they have
reaped valuable Advantages!

WHEN a Time of general Calamity and Desolation is sent, by a righteous GOD to
punish the Iniquities of a sinful People, then a Mark is set upon the Foreheads
of the Men, that sigh and cry for all the Abominations, which are done in the
Places where they have their respective Residence! ( Ezekiel. ix.) A Mark of
Distinction, of Honor, and Protection; such noble Souls as weep in secret for
the Dishonours done to GOD, by the aforesaid Evils, shall be confessed by him
another Day; yea, and comforted in this! Almighty GOD seals these his Servants,
and marks Zyons Mourners, he books their secret Sighs, and bottles up all their
Tears!

BUT the Benefits of fasting sincerly, and suitably performed, are not confined
to this State of Trial and Probation, but extend beyond the Grave. That
gracious GOD who beholds such with Complacence he^ will gloriously adorn them
hereafter, with a Crown of Blessedness that shall never fade away: He who sees
in secret has graciously promised to reward them openly, and will be as good as
his Word; he who is the Witness of their Sufferings and Labors, and Integrity
in both, mercifully accepts of, and is pleased with their secret Sorrows and
Groanings, and will finally admit them to a State of supreme Dignity, and
inexpressible Felicity, which shall know no Comparison, no Intermission, no
End! As Instances of passive Obedience, are more difficult than active, and
therefore more noble, (nam quo sublimiora eo dificiliora) so of Consequence
they will meet with a greater Recompense: Now among those, may be reckoned the
denying of Ourselves at Times, of the Comforts of Life for CHRIST'S Sake; all
such may therefore rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is their Reward in
Heaven: Such as suffer for CHRIST and the Gospel's sake, in any kind or degree
shall in this Life receive an Hundredfold, and in the World to come Life
everlasting: The Spirit of Glory and of GOD rests upon them in the Way, and
their Mansion of Bliss at the End of their religious Course, shall be of
distinguished Beauty and Luster, commensurate to their Sorrows, their
Sufferings, and their Labors here! What has been said, respecting the natural
Tendency, and Advantages of religious Fasting, as well as the Pagan's Discovery
hereof, by the mere Force of human Reason, plainly show that it is no arbitrary
and alterable Institution, but grounded upon the Nature and Reason of Things,
which being ever the same, it is therefore moral, and of perpetual Obligation.

To be freed from any Duty of this kind, by the Gospel, would make it an
unreasonable and disadvantageous Dispensation, inferior at least in that Point
to the Jewish Economy, to which it is frequently and justly preferred by the
inspired Apostle, and declared to be a reasonable Service; to be bereaved of a
valuable Advantage, is no Privilege, but a great Loss!

Moreover seeing it is in this Life only, that temporal Judgments can be
inflicted on a Society as such, and temporal Mercies vouchsafed according to
their general Behavior, agreeable to the Rules of God's moral Government; it
is therefore reasonable and necessary, that Societies as such should unite in
public and social Acts of Humiliation, to avert the one, and obtain the other.




THE Improvement of this Subject yet remains.

WHAT has been said, my Brethren and Fathers, serves to inform us how impious
and unreasonable it is in any, either to oppose or neglect, the seasonable
Observance of an Institution, so firmly bottomed on the highest Authority, and
so directly conducive to secure and advance our most important Interests!

IT is trifling to object, that fasting is observed by the Papists, and
therefore should be neglected.

I answer, must we disbelieve and neglect all that they believe and practice,
then we must deny the Being of a GOD, and that CHRIST is the promised Messiah,
because they believe both; and we must quit Prayer entirely, because they
observe it, in some Sort; the bare mentioning of which Absurdities sufficiently
exposes them!

THOUGH in the mean Time, it should be observed, that the Way they manage their
fasts, is a mere Farce! For while they pretend to fast by abstaining from Flesh
only, they sumptuously feast upon the fattest of Fish, the most delicious
Fruits, and the richest Wines! Yea, Cardon and Toletus, two eminent Men of the
Romish Communion, positively affirm, that though Persons feast even to gluttony,
they don't b^^^ their Fast. Quamvis aliquis multum excedat, non solvit
jejunium. Card, tolet, ^ustruct sacerd, L. 6.


NOR is it of greater Weig^^ to say, that fasting is abused by many that
observe it.

I answer, what if it is, so are eating and drinking, and must they be
therefore constantly laid aside? The Objector must hold this, if he would be
self-consistent, and thus, while he opposes fasting in extraordinary Cases, he
himself unawares virtually establishes a constant Fast; which is very severe!

IT is exceedingly to be lamented, my Brethren, That the Duty of religious
fasting, is so much neglected as it is, by many that profess Christianity; have
they forgot that Self-denial is one of the first Lessons of the Religion of
JESUS, and that we are enjoined by divine Authority, to crucify the Flesh with
its Affections and Lusts?

OUR growth in Goodness is undoubtedly much marred by the aforesaid Neglect.
The primitive Christians, who in general far excelled us in Zeal and
Heavenliness, did much abound in the Duty of religious Abstinence; yea, some of
them with a noble Intention, carried the Matter to the contrary Extreme; and
hence were termed by some haughty Infidels, sqalidi et trepidi, lean and
trembling!

AUGUSTINE asserts, That many of the Catholics (or orthodox Christian Church)
did not take any bodily Refreshment, so much as once in the Day toward Night,
which was the most usual Custom; but that for the Space of three whole Days or
more, they very frequently lived without Meat and Drink. Multos catholicorum
non quotidie semel sub noctem reficere corpus, quod ussi atissimum est, sed
continuum triduum, vel amplius, sepissime sine cibo ac potu ducere. Augustine de
moribus Ecles. Cathol. 23.


BUT the Medium, the middle Way in this, and all other Cases, is best to be
observed. These Words of our Lord mentioned by the Evangelist Luke, (vi. 21,
25.) deserve to be thought upon, Blessed are ye that hunger now; for ye shall
be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now; for ye shall laugh. But woe unto you
that are full; for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now; for you shall
mourn and weep!

SUFFER me therefore my Fathers and Brethren, to exhort you to observe the Duty
of Fasting this Day, in the Manner before represented.

THE Causes of religious Abstinence before expressed, namely, Judgments
threatened, and inflicted, together with the Mercies we have need to implore,
which are mentioned in the Proclamation, do sufficiently justify the
Appointment of this Solemnity at this Time, by His Excellency the GOVERNOR, and
the Honorable the COUNCIL of this Province; and consequently oblige to the
observance of it.

TO have Seasons set apart for Fasting and Prayer, exceedingly becomes the
Saints and People of GOD: Thus the Apostles Paul and Barnabas prayed with
fasting, (Acts xiv. 2, 3.) The original Word nesti^^n, is the same with that in
our text.


FASTING, Sirs, has been practiced by the Professors of revealed Religion, from
time immemorial.

FASTING has been observed by diverse Infidels of different Nations, by the
Direction of natural Reason only.

FASTING is entirely rational; for seeing God has made the Body, it is but
proper he should be served by it.

FASTING is a necessary Duty, both in respect of Command and Mean, appointed by
the highest Authority, as a Medium to obtain the most precious, valuable and
durable Benefits.

FASTING is an honorable Duty, in respect of its Author, Nature and Issue.

THE Author of it, is the blessed God, who is the Fountain of all Honor, which
merits that Character.

THE Nature of it contains an Instance of the Creatures Homage and Subjection
to the Sovereign Authority of its Creator and Lord, and that both in his
Precepts and Providence, which being agreeable to the Rules of Justice, and
Maxims of Reason, must needs be Honorable,

THE issue of it rightly observed, will be the open Approbation of the
infinitely wise God, and a State of perfect conformity to the unstained purity
of the divine Nature, and uninterrupted Communion in the divine Love, and the
ravishing Contemplation of the divine Excellency; all which imply the highest
Honors a God can give, and a created Nature receive: Essential and inflexible
Truth has told us, that those that Honor him, he will Honor. But to proceed,

FASTING is a pleasant Duty. I confess it is contrary to the vicious
Propensities of our degenerate Natures, which verge to Ease, to Indolence and
sensual Gratifications inordinately; and consequently make Men reluctant to
restraint, though never so necessary, reasonable, decent, and honorable; and this
doubtless is the secret source of the Strong Prejudices of many against the
Duty I have been discoursing upon.

IT is indeed extremely difficult for the Ministers of Christ to urge any Thing
successfully, that touches Men in so tender a Point; their Affections are apt
greatly to bias their Judgment, in favor of what they love, though never so
criminal; and even to that degree, that they will hardly give a fair hearing to
what is offered against it. But seeing the Nature of Things, my Brethren,
cannot be changed by your Fancies and Prejudices, and you must be judged at
last according to them, it is your wisest Course to be impartial; and therefore
we do in the Name of our Master, the KING of KINGS and LORD of LORDS, desire
and demand a fair hearing, and calm Consideration of what we say.

BUT notwithstanding the Duty of fasting be cross to our natural Inclinations,
as has been observed, yet it is agreeable to the Mind, inasmuch as it helps to
reduce it to its just Empire over the sensual Appetites, and free it from their
tyrannical Mutinies and Encroachments: And thus it tends to introduce a solemn
Calm into the Soul, and bring it near to the blessed God, the original Beauty
and supreme Good, the source of Sweetness, and center of Rest, whose loving
Kindness is better than life, and can only yield solid Satisfaction.

IN a Word, Sirs, this opens a Fountain of spiritual, sublime and superior
Sweets, which infinitely transcend all brutal Pleasures; as well as exactly
suit the spiritual and noble Nature, and realy equal the vast Desires, the
raised Hopes, and endless Duration of a human Soul! And may be reflected on
without uneasiness: Surely Wisdoms Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and all its
Paths are Peace. Again,

FASTING is a profitable Duty, as well as pleasant: It is profitable, my
Brethren, to human Society in general, by preventing and removing public
Calamities, and in obtaining public, precious and permanent Benefits.

IT is profitable to ourselves in particular, many Ways.

FASTING is profitable to our Bodies, in correcting their natural Disorders: By
it the crudeties occasioned through excesses, are gradually digested and removed,
and the Stomach, the Fountain of our nourishment, brought to its proper tone,
and fitted for its proper Functions.

FASTING is profitable to our Souls, in curing their moral Maladies and
Disorders: By it, our sordid, sensual, brutal Inclinations are weakened, through
the Substraction of their Incentives.

FASTING assists in all the religious Offices we owe to God and Man, as has
been already observed, and thus we are Assimilated to the Author of our
Existence, which is at once our highest Dignity and greatest Felicity.

FASTING, Sirs, is not only pofitable in Time, but its salutary Effects reach
to Eternity. Such as now observe it in due Manner, their Father who sees in
secret will reward them openly, his Promise is firmer than the Foundations of
the Earth, and cannot fail.

WHATEVER unjust Invectives may be cast upon them by Infidels and Epicures, who
make their Belly their God, and Glory in their shame, they will meet with
divine Approbation; that God who sees the Sincerity of their Intentions, will
finally vindicate their Conduct, and put Honor on their Persons, before the
vast Assembly of the Universe!

WHILE impenitent Sensualists and profane Scoffers, who walk after their own
Lusts, are covered with shame and Comtempt, and racked with the accutest
Anguish, the blessed Jesus will accost his People in this gracious Language,
Come ye blessed of my Father, and inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
Foundation of the World.

THE Lord Redeemer will give them a Reward of Mercy, more than proportioned to
their Self-denial, Diligence and Fidelity.

A REWARD which no human Understanding can grasp with its sublimest flights of
Thought and grandest Sentiments; or human Tongue express with all the Charms of
Diction, with all the figures, fires and force of Language!

A REWARD which the boldest and most striking Images in universal Nature are
not equal to, but faint before and sink in darkness and obscurity!

A REWARD, large as our Desires, and lasting as our Souls!

A REWARD of such immense weight and value, that all the light and momentary
Sufferings of this present Life, are not worthy to be once compared with it.

A REWARD that contains a perfect and perpetual freedom from every Evil, both
moral and penal; and the uninterrupted and eternal Possession of all Good!

SO that all manner of incentives conspire to incite us to celebrate this
Solemnity, viz. The divine Authority, Honor, Pleasure and Interest of every
Kind; the Principles of Reason and Gratitude; the Examples of others, and a
regard to the public Weal. May Almighty God therefore of his infinite
Goodness, enable us to perform the Duties of this Day, with such Humility,
Ardor and Integrity, that he who sees in secret may Reward us openly through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

SERMON II.
JONAH iii. 8. But let Man and Beast be covered with Sackcloth, and cry
mightily unto GOD: Yea, let them turn every Man from his evil Way, and from the
Violence that is in their Hands.


IN this Chapter we are informed, that the Prophet Jonah was commissioned by
the Almighty to go to the City of Nineveh, and threaten it with a sudden
Overthrow, in Case they did not repent and reform: Though the Threatening was
expressed absolutely, yet certainly a Condition was implied, and in this Sense
the Ninevites understood it, otherwise they would not have endeavored by the
Use of any Means to avert the impending Calamity.

THE Prophet, after the miraculous Cure of his criminal Reluctance, executed
his Commission with Zeal and Earnestness, When he entered the City a Day's
Journey, he cried and said, yet forty Days and Nineveh shall be overthrown: His
bold and faithful Delivery of his Message, was attended with happy Influence
and Success, both upon the Prince and People; for in Consequence hereof they
believed GOD, and proclaimed a fast, and put on Sackcloth from the greatest of
them even to the least. Though Jonah was a Stranger to them, yet his just
Description of their Sins, his authoritative Declaration of their Danger and
Doom, in Case they persisted in them; together with the Consideration of a
Possibility of Escape in the Use of proper Means, being attended with divine
Influence, induced them to believe the GOD of Israel, i. e. not only to give
Credit to the Threatening which Jonah denounced in his Name, but to believe him
to be the Supreme Lord of the Universe, whose Laws they had transgressed by
their Impieties, and to whose Justice they were of Consequence obnoxious; they
clearly saw their Desert of Punishment, and therefore dreaded the Menace, which
the Prophet published in the Name of his Master.

Now ^^^on as they believed GOD, a fast was immediately proclaimed by public
Authority, viz. by the Decree of the King and his Nobles, the King and Council
concurred herein unanimously, and enjoined the Observation of a fast by an
authoritative Act.

WHEN the Account of the Prophet's Errand to Nineveh, was brought to the King,
who is supposed to be not Sardanapalus, but P^ul Belochus, he immediately arose
from his Throne, as Eglon, King of Moab did, when Ehud signified that he had a
Message to him from GOD: The King of Nineveh rose up, doubtless to express his
Reverence to a Word from God; as well as his Fear of the ^ivine Displeasure,
demerited by his and his People's Sins; he likewise laid aside his Royal Robe,
the Badge of his supreme Dignity, and put on the rough, the humble Dress of a
Mourner, he co^^red himself with Sackcloth and sat in Ashes, to signify his
Humiliation for Sin, and Dread of the divine Vengeance on account thereof; a
heroic, a noble Example, well worthy of a Prince of the highest Order and
vastest Empire!

TO revere the Author of our Existence, and go before others in good Examples
tho of the humblest kind, at all Adventures, is not only a Proof of the
soberest Exercise of human Reason, but an Argument of a great and brave Mind!

THE greatest of Men are not so much an Ornament to Religion by their pious
Practice, as it is to them: In the mean Time, it is certainly an important
Benefit to any People, when such who are in high Places of civil Trust among
them, are Men fearing GOD and hating Covetuousness; for their Example is apt to
have great Influence on others in lower Life, as we see by the Ninevites, who
imitated the laudable Pattern of their Prince. It is a just and general Maxim,
that Example has more Efficacy than Precept, and that by the Example of Princes
in particular, their Subjects are formed. Precepta docent, exempla cogunt, ad
exemplum regis, totus, etc.


BUT on the contrary when Persons who are clothed with civil Authority, and
bear some figure in high Life, are not only destitute of Religion themselves,
but deride it in others with equal Vanity and Virulence, thereby industriously
laboring to subvert all the valuable Interests of Society (of which Religion
is the grand Support) which it is therefore the Duty of their Offices to
encourage. I say when they are neither willing to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven themselves, nor to suffer those that are entering to enter, it is no
wonder if the pious and prudent lament! Seeing their impious Conduct, is as a
troubled Fountain, and a corrupt Spring, of whose Waters the Inhabitants of a
City drink! When the Righteous, says Solomon, are in Authority, the People
rejoice! But when the Wicked bear Rule, the People mourn!

BUT to proceed. The King of Nineveh took particular Care, to have a fast
speedily appointed and notify'd to the People by those public Officers who
were wont to proclaim the Edicts of the King and Council. It is said that he
caused it to be proclaimed and published: This ingemination or redoubling of
the Words, not only confirms the Certainty of the Fact, but likewise signifies
the deep Sense which the King had, both of his own and his People's Sins,
Danger, and Duty in this Exigence: The Concurrence of the Legislature in the
Appointment of the fast, and of the Body of the People in the Celebration of
it, made it a national Act, and it was proper it should be so, seeing a
national Destruction was to be prevented by it.

NOW the Contents of the Proclamation of the King and Council of Niniveh, for a
public Fast, which are to be the Subject of our present Meditations, we have
in the Words of our Text, together with the preeceeding and following Verses.
These Contents show us what was required by the Proclamation, and to what
Design: They are indeed a valuable compend and summary of the principal Duties
to be performed on such Solemnities, in all succeeding Times. The Duties
mentioned are these four, viz. Abstinence, Humiliation or Mourning, Prayer and
Reformation. And

1. THE Proclamation required a total abstinence from Food and Drink, both by
Man and Beast; let neither Man or Beast taste any Thing, or drink Water. To
pretend to fast without abstaining from Food and Drink, and all the Comforts of
Life, as far as can consist with the safety of our Bodies, and their fitness
for religious Service, is mere mockery.

AND to add to the Solemnity of the Fast, at that extraordinary Juncture, the
Beasts were to be restrained from Food and Drink, that a view of their Miseries
might affect the People the more, and that the Cry of Man, seconded by the cry
of hungry Cattle, might enter the Ears of God, who preserves Man and Beast.

2. THE Proclamation required, that Man and Beast should be covered with
Sackcloth; The Men were to put on a coarse, a humble and uneasy Dress, to
signify the Humiliation of their Souls for Sin, and their Sorrow on the account
of it, as well as fear of the divine Vengeance impending over them.

AND even the Beasts must do Penance, as it were, as well as Man, because they
had been made subject to vanity as Instruments of his Sin; that either by their
complaints, or silent pining for want of Food, they might strike the Springs of
their Owners Sorrows!

AND those Beasts, particularly the Horses and Camels, on which they rode, and
were wont to cover with rich Trapings, must be stripped of those Ornaments and
clad in Sackcloth, agreeable to the ancient and modern Custom of covering
Horses with black Cloth, at the Funerals of Noblemen; that they might seem to
mourn on such Occasions, as Chrysostom observes. The Persians, in a Time of
mourning, were also accustomed to poll or clip their Horses, as Plutarch
informs us.

SO that to be covered with Sackcloth seems to be a proverbial Expression,
signifying deep Mourning and Grief. Thus the Heavens are said, by the Prophet
Isaiah, to be covered with Sackcloth: The chief Thing therefore here demanded
of the Ninivites, was that they would humble themselves before God, because of
their Offenses against him, and that they would with bitterness bewail them.

NO doubt at a Time of public fasting the Garb should be suited to the
Business of the Day; but that which is especially necessary, is a humble, a
mourning Mind; a sincere mourning from the Heart, an Evangelical mourning from
love to that God whom by Sin we have provoked: A mourning great in Degree,
somewhat proportioned to the Number and heniousness of our Sins: Thus Samuel
testifies of the People of Israel, that they gathered together in Mispeh, and
drew Water and pourd it out before the Lord, and fasted on that Day. These
Words are designed to represent in a figurative manner, the plentiful mourning
of the People of Israel; the Effusion of their Tears on that Occasion,
resembled the pouring forth of Waters: The Calde reads it, they poured out
their Hearts in Repentance before the Lord; they wept Rivers of Tears, and
sorrowed after a godly sort, as in the Presence of God, from regard to his
Majesty, and with an Eye to his Glory.

O HOW amiable was this Convention! O that our Heads were Waters and our Eyes a
Fountain of Tears, that we could with suitable Contrition this Day bewail our
own and others Trespasses!

WHEN the Disciples of John enquired of JESUS concerning fasting; in his Answer
he used the term of mourning in the room of it, to show, that the one cannot be
acceptably observed without the other; why, said they, do we and the Pharisees
fast often, but thy Disciples fast not; and Jesus said unto them, can the
Children of the Bride-chamber mourn, as long as the Bridegroom is with them;
but the Days will come, when the Bridegroom will be taken from them, and then
shall they fast. In like manner, by a metonimy of the adjunct, fasting is
called weeping, because the latter is a part of the former, Zec. vii. 3. should
I weep in the fifth month, separating myself, i. e. from labor, food and the
comforts of life? Thus it is said of Hanna, that she wept and did not eat, 1 Samuel i. 7,


3. ANOTHER Duty required by the Proclamation of the King and Nobles of
Nineveh, to be performed on the Day of public fasting, was to cry mightily
unto God: These terms do undoubtedly signify great Vehemence, fervor and
importunity in their Supplications for needed Mercy, and Deprecation of
threatened Judgment. An urgent necessity required their storming Heaven as it
were with their Tears, Sighs, and Groans, and their taking no denial of God!
Hence we are told that the fervent Prayer of the Righteous avail much; and that
Jacob wrestled with the Angel and prevailed, for he wept and made Supplications
unto him. The Incense, under the Jewish Economy, was put upon burning C^als,
to show the Necessity and Excellency of intense Devotion.

WITH Jacob, who as a Prince had Power with God and with Men, we should
determine not to let Jehovah go, unless he bless us.

THE relenting of the unjust Judge, stands upon sacred Record, as an
unanswerable Argument of the irristable force of persevering in Prayer; for if
he who neither feared Gnd nor regarded Man, who was lost to all Sense of
Religion and Humanity, was notwithstanding overcome, merely by the importunity
of a necessitous Supplicant, to grant her request. How much more will that God
who is Goodness and Benignity itself, grant Blessings to the Indigent, who pray
always and do not faint.

A CRYING Prayer pierces the Heavens. We read not a Word that Moses spoke, and
yet God was moved by his cry, which consisted in vehement Desires, and
inutterable Groanings; yet no doubt a Complication of sore Distresses may even
extort vocal Cries. I cried to the Lord with my Voice, says the Psalmist, and
he heard me out of his holy Hill.

IT is said of Hezekia, that the Lord heard his Prayer, for he had seen his
Tears.

WHEN Backsliding Ephraim began to bemoan himself, then were the Bowels of God
troubled for him; then did Jehovah declare, that he would surely have Mercy
upon him.

AS importunate Supplication is an excellent Mean to obtain the Mercies we
need, so it is an encouraging Token that they are near at Hand.

WHEN Elijah prayed seven Times successively for Rain, the watery Magazines
hastened from the Sea to refresh the parched Earth.

IT is amazing that importunate Devotion should as it were, conquer and
control Omnipotence! Ask of me Things to come, and concerning the Works of my
Hands Command ye me. O stupenduous Condescension! When we exert the utmost
Strength of our Souls in humble Devotions, and persist in our Pleadings for
needed Mercies, both of a public and private Nature, drawn from the Glory of
God's Name, the Perfections of his Nature, his Promises and Providence; these
Petitions are like the continual blowing of the Silver Trumpets over the
Sacrifices, for a memorial before the Lord; or like the Watchmen upon the Walls
of Jerusalem, who never hold their Peace Day nor Night, and are commanded not
to keep Silence, or give him Rest.

AN admirable Instance of this Kind, we have in the Woman of Canaan, who in the
midst of Discouragements from the Disciples of Christ, yea and from Christ
himself, nobly persisted! The Disciples wanted her dismissed, because she
troubled them by crying after them; and the blessed JESUS at first answered her
not a Word, and afterward spoke roughly to her, though with a Kind Intention,
but still she followed with increasing Importunity, argued the Mercy into her
Bosom, and obtained a high Encomium upon her Faith! Philosophei he gune, says
Chrysostom, the Woman Philosophizes, she disputed the Mercy from the Redeemers
Hand. May almighty God teach us all this blessed Philosophy for JESUS Sake.

IMPORTUNITY, my dear Brethren, does not consist in a Multitude of Words, When
ye pray, says our Lord, use not vain Repetitions, as the Heathen do; for they
think to be heard for their much speaking: but it consists in an earnestness of
Spirit, to be heard, in a prudent Choice of proper Arguments, and in a resolut
persisting in our Requests, till they be answered; Hear me speedily. O Lord, my
Spirit fails, says the Psalmist: I would order my Cause before him, and fill
my Mouth with Arguments, says Job.

WHEN the Multitude rebuked the blind Men, for crying after Jesus, instead of
being discouraged by such Opposition, they cried the more, saying, Have Mercy
on us O Lord, thou Son of David, but Jesus had Compassion on them, and touched
their Eyes, and they received Sight. O, the Depth, the breadth, the Height of
the Redeemer's Love!

THE poor Man that had a Palsy, who could not get near to Christ below,
because of the Crowd, did not give over his Attempt in discouragement, but
still persisted, and got some Friends to carry him to the Roof of the House,
and untile it, and let him down through the Roof, into the midst before Jesus; no
doubt some of the Rubbish fell down upon Christ's Head, or upon the Heads of
some of his Hearers, and interrupted him for a little Space in his Sermon; this
Behavior looked somewhat rude and unmannerly, yet the dear Jesus spoke not a
Word of Reproof upon this Occasion, but on the contrary, encouraged the poor
Man, and said, be of good Comfort, thy Sins are forgiven thee! O, the amazing
Kindness and Condescension of Christ! Well might it be said that our High
Priest is touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, may we not therefore
come with boldness to the Throne of GOD's Grace, that we may obtain Mercy and
find Grace to help in Time of need.

BUT why must we pray with such importunity? I answer, it is necessary, both on
Account of GOD and ourselves.

THE Honor of God's Majesty is wronged by Sin, and it is but reasonable that
this be felt and acknowledged before it be forgiven. Moreover it is a Disgrace
to God's Mercy, to be asked coldly* the Almighty enjoins us to be importunate
and urgent, that it may appear by our Groans how we esteem his Grace!

NOR is importunity less necessary in respect of ourselves, for without it we
know not how to value the Mercy of God aright, and when the Case is so, are we
likely to improve it? No! By no means! Those that have been once poor, are
careful of the Riches they have got by their Industry, while those that are
born to Wealth are often careless and profuse, and therefore the Almighty in
general, orders it so, that Men shall not obtain Mercy without Difficulty, they
must strive in an Agony to enter in at the strait Gate, and take the Kingdom of
Heaven by Violence; they come with Weeping and with Supplication will I lead
them says GOD by the Prophet Jeremy. This seems to allude to a Prince's
Meeting a Beggar on the Road, who asks an Alms of him, but he goes on his Way
as if he took no Notice, the Beggar perceiving this, follows him, and continues
his Importunity till he prevails, by crying, O, Sir! I am a poor necessitous
Creature, pray extend your Charity; or in other Words to this Purpose.

TWO things make Men importunate, namely a clear View of Danger great and near,
and the Influences of the blessed Spirit. When the Disciples saw that they were
like to be drowned, they soon cried out Master save us, we perish!

BUT to open the Duty of Prayer more distinctly, it may not be improper very
briefly to consider, the venerable Westminster-Assembly's Description of it,
which is this, that It is an offering up of our Desires to GOD; for Things
agreeable to his Will, in the Name of Christ, with Confession of our Sins, and
thankful Acknowledgement of his Mercies.

THIS Description contains the following Particulars, viz. the Object of
Prayer, the Essence, the Matter, the Manner, the Properties, the Parts of
Prayer: Each of these allow me to speak a few Words upon.

THE Object of Prayer or he to whom we should offer our Supplications is GOD
only, for Prayer is a Part of his natural Worship, and therefore it is his
peculiar Prerogative; Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve. It is God alone who knows all his People's Wants, who is present
with them in them all, and able to supply them; and hence the Ninevites were
justly enjoined in our Text, to cry mightily to God, and to none but him.

THE Essence or being of Prayer, consists in the offering up our Desires to
God. Whatever Desires we have after spiritual or temporal Benefits, yet unless
they be offered or presented to God, they cannot be called Prayers, for Prayer
is the Address of an indigent Supplicant to his Superior for some Benefit,
which necessarily includes a certain Homage in it.

THE Matter of Prayer, or Things prayed for, must be agreeable to God's
revealed Will of Precept or Promise. What the Almighty has commanded us to ask
or promised to confer, that and that only we should ask; and if we do
otherwise, we may expect a repulse; ye ask and receive not, because ye ask
amiss, says the Apostle James, that ye may consume it upon your Lusts.

THE Manner of Prayer in the general, is that it be offered in the Name of
Christ, if ye shall ask any Thing in my Name, says our Lord, I will do it. Now
this intends not only our mentioning ^^ in our Supplications, but our entire
reliance upon his Merit for the Acceptance of them. It is in him only who is
the Way, the Truth and the Life, that we have access to his Father. God is holy
and we are sinful, both in our Persons and Performances, and therefore need a
Mediator, to render them acceptable by the incense of his Merit.

THE Properties of Prayer are these.

IT must be Reverent, Behold I have taken upon me, who am but Dust and Ashes,
to speak to the Lord, O let not the Lord be angry, said Abraham. How dreadful
is this Place, this is no other then the House of God, and this is the Gate of
Heaven, said Jacob.

IT must be humble: To this purpose these Words of the Psalmist are remarkable,
Lord thou have heard the Desire of the Humble, thou will prepare their Heart,
thou will cause thine Ear to hear.

AGAIN, Prayer must be sincere, flowing from the Heart, and ye shall seek me
and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your Heart, says God by the
Prophet Jeremiah.

FARTHER, It must be believing; let him ask in Faith says the Apostle James.
But what is that? I Answer, It contains these Things, viz. our firm Persuasion,
that what we ask is agreeable to God's revealed Will, and that God is able and
willing to confer it; as likewise our entire Dependence upon his faithful Word
to this End.

THE Importunity that ought to be in Prayer, I have before discoursed upon.

AND undoubtedly as Prayer in general, so in particular. The Prayer spoken of
in our Text, includes these Parts, viz. not only Petition for the Mercies we
need, and the Deprecation of the Judgments we fear. But likewise a humble
Confession of our Sins, and an Affectionate Thanksgiving for Mercies received.

IN the public Fasts observed in the Time of Ezra, Nehemiah, and Daniel, there
was a particular Confession of Sin, accompanied with shame and grief.

WHEN Ezra heard of the Sin of Israel, after their return from Captivity, he
sat astonished until the Evening, and then rose up, rent his mantle, and spoke
to God in this Language, O my GOD I am ashamed and blush to lift up my Face to
thee my God! To the same Purpose speaks Daniel upon the like Occasion, to us,
says he, belongs confusion of Face! The unreasonableness and ingratitude
that are in Sin, cause shame. Confession of Sin is necessary in order to our
Humiliation for it, as well as Self-Condemnation and Justifying of God, whereby
he is glorified.

AND if no Sorrow for Sin attends our Confession of it, the Fast wants its
Beauty, and is like to fail of its Design. The Scriptures inform us, that a Day
of fasting is to afflict the Soul; and how can this be effected without Grief
and Sorrow? Hence the Prophet Daniel assures us, that in his private Fast, he
mourned three full Weeks; and the Almighty reproved the Jews, that in the Day
of their Fast they took Pleasure.

NOR should Thanksgiving for Mercies received be omitted: For the right
Consideration of Mercy, tends to aggravate Sin, and make our Confession of it,
and Grief for it, evangelical, the Goodness of God leads Men to Repentance: And
hence in the Fasts observed by Ezra and Nehemiah, thankful mention was made of
the divine Benefits. The

4. DUTY required by the Proclamation, is Reformation of Life, let them turn
every one from his Evil way, and from the violence that is in their Hands.
Corruption, Oppression and Fraud generally prevailed among them. Now every one
high and low, rich and poor, was enjoined to turn from his evil Way, i. e. the
Way he loved and was addicted to by Custom and Practice.

AND particularly from the Violence that was in their Hands, i. e. Let them
restore what they have unjustly taken, and make Reparation for the Wrongs they
have done, and let them not any more oppress those they have Power over, or
defraud those they deal with. Particular mention is made of Violence, or of
Injury and Rapine, as Vatabulus, Liveleius, Mercer, Piscator, A^i^s, Montanus
and Calvin interpret the Word; because those Evils were flagrant among the
Ninivites. That bloody City, as the Prophet Nahum speaks, was full of Lies and
Robery, the Prey departed not; and for this especially, God was displeased and
threatened their Destruction.

NOW Violence is said to be in their Hands, partly to signify that it was daily
committed by their Hands, which are the Instruments of Action; by the Hand Men
are wont to take Things by force, and offer Abuse and Injury to such as ressist
them: And partly to signify, that they kept in forcible Posession, what they
got by Injustice and Fraud, and would not restore it, without which Repentance
cannot be sincere; according to that just and ancient Proverb, (non remittitur
precatum, nisi restituatur ablatum) the Sin is not pardoned till the ill gotten
Goods be restored.

AS Justice both distributive and commutative, is not only amiable in itself,
but the grand Pillar of all social Comforts: So its contrary, is one of the
most malignant and distructive Evils; that tends not only to disparage human
Nature, but utterly to destroy civil Society, and turn the World into an
Acceldema, a field of Desolation and Blood!

IT should be farther considered, that unjust Persons are often disappointed of
their Design; for how artfully soever they may disguise their management, yet
some unforseen Accident often draws the Curtain, and brings to light the Evils
they practiced behind it: This discovery ruins their Reputation, and marrs
their future Success.

BUT supposing their Vilany be not detected by others, they cannot hide it from
themselves; their own conscious Reflections must needs occasion a^ tumult and
uneasiness in their guilty Minds, especially when they come within view of a
vast Eternity, and consider, that if they live and die with the Spoils of
Injustice about them, they hereby expose themselves to the Wrath of God, which
is revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness of Men, and resign their
deathless Souls, which all the Treasures of the Indies, or of the Universe,
cannot Balance, to the Pangs and Agonies of everlasting Death!

BUT besides the Duties enjoined by the Proclamation of the King and Council of
Niniveh, to be observed on the Solemnity of a religious Fast, which have been
discoursed upon; and do indeed contain the principal Offices necessary upon
such like Occasions, to render them ornamental to Religion and serviceable to
answer their Design; We have an Account in the verses following our Text, of
the Intention and Motive of the aforesaid Solemnity, and the Success of its
Celebration.

THE Design of appointing said Solemnity, was as the Proclamation expressess
it, to turn away God's fierce Anger, and prevent their perishing. They were
threatened with and in great Danger of Destruction; there was but a step between
them and ruin: It was therefore high Time to use proper Means to prevent it,
and these their Reason taught them, were Fasting, Mourning, Prayer, and
Reformation of Life.

The Motive that induced them hereto, was some Apprehension they had of the
divine Goodness, who can tell, say they, if God will turn and repent, and turn
away from his fierce Anger, that we perish not. They could not object against
the equity of God's Judgment, or pretend to appeal to a higher Tribunal, yet
they hoped in the divine Mercy, that while they were bewailing their Offenses,
while they were resolving and endeavoring to alter the Course of their evil
Conduct toward God and one another, and imploring divine Assistance herein,
that Jehovah would be pleased to alter the Course of his afflictive Providence
toward them, and forbear to execute the threatened Punishment. In some Places
of Scripture, God is said to repent, and elsewhere it is said, that he is not a
Man that he should repent: The true Meaning hereof is, that God cannot repent
properly as Men do, who then change their Mind, and are affected with Grief;
and no wonder seeing they are short sighted and imperfect Creatures: But these
Things are inconsistent with the infinite Wisdom of God, the Immutability,
Perfection and Felicity of his Nature. He is of one Mind and who can turn him;
he is far from the shadow of Change. And therefore the Almighty is only said
to repent, improperly and figuratively, in condescension to our weak way of
apprehending divine Things, through Ideas derived from outward Objects by the
Senses. The Almighty's altering the Course of his Providence toward us, (though
it is what he before designed) is called Repentance, because it resembles, to
appearance, the Practice of Men, who express their Repentance by changing their
course of Conduct.

The Almighty, as it were, lisps to us in our own broken Language, and clothes
divine Truths with earthly Similitudes, that we may the better understand them.
God's Repentance, says Theodoret, is the change of his providential
Dispensations (Penitentia Dei, est oiconomias mutatio) But those Things that
are spoken of God, agreeable to human Passions, ought to be understood so as to
accord with the Perfection of the divine Nature; as Athanasius justly observes,
(Ta^^ a anthropopathoos men legontai, theoprepoos de noountai.)




THEIR Hope indeed was mixed with Fear, yet it was such as prevailed with them
to use Means.

THOUGH Jonah had no Commission to promise them a Deliverance, yet it is probable
he acquainted them with the merciful and gracious Nature of GOD, of which he
himself had so enlarged a Discovery, that he wanted to decline the threatening
Embassy, least the Interposure of divine Goodness should prevent its Execution,
and of Consequence, apparently eclipse his prophetic Character.

NOR did the Issue of this religious Solemnity, fail of answering their
Expectation and Design, for GOD saw their Works, that they turned from their
evil Way, and repented of the Evil he had said he would do unto them!

JEHOVAH not only heard their good Words, by which they professed Repentance,
but saw their good Works, by which they brought forth Fruits meet for it;
without which their Profession and outward Appearances, would have been vain,
and to no Purpose in his Account.

HE saw a general Conviction of Sin, a real Resolution to forsake it, and
serious Endeavors to this Purpose; he saw and approved their Works, as
necessary in their Place, as good materially, and of good Tendency, and in
Consequence hereof, did not inflict the Judgment threatened: A blessed Issue
indeed, a happy Solemnity! Now having endeavored to explain the Text, I
proceed to the Improvement.

WAS the King and Nobles of Nineveh, to be commended for appointing this
extraordinary Duty of religious fasting, in a Time of public Danger and
Calamity, as well as for going before the People (especially the PRINCE) in the
Observation of it, and do not his Excellency the GOVERNOR, and the Honorable
the COUNCIL of this Province, deserve the like Commendation for consulting the
Honor of GOD, and the public Safety and Interest, in appointing the like
Solemnity to be observed this Day?

ALTHOUGH this Province, does not seem to be in the same Degree of iminent and
immediate Danger of utter-ruin, as the City of Nineveh; which was threatened to
be destroyed in forty Days, yet considering that the same Evils abound here, as
did among them, and that under greater Light and Advantages, than those poor
Pagans enjoyed! That GOD'S Justice is invariable, and that what was written
before Time, was written for our Learning, there is certainly Reason to fear,
more awful Strokes of divine Judgment than we have yet felt!

BUT to confirm and illustrate this laboring Point, I must beg leave to
mention, the Reasons assigned in the Proclamation, for the Order of this Day;
which I think are as just and conclusive, as they are well expressed! The Words
are these,

TAKING into Consideration the State of our Nation in general, and the
Circumstances of this Province in particular. -- The unhappy Divisions which
have so long subsisted among us -- The general Disorder and Confusion in which
at present the Province is involved, -- The abounding of Infidelity,
Profaneness and Immorality. -- The Frowns of divine Providence upon us in the
great Scarcity and excessive dearness of Bread, and the mortal Sickness that
has prevailed in many Parts of the Jerseys. -- That these are the bitter
Fruits of our manifold Sins and Transgressions, the procuring Cause of divine
Judgments. -- That it is the indispensable Duty of a professing People, to
acknowledge GOD in all their Ways. -- To own their Dependence upon him, and
humbly implore divine Mercy and Goodness, graciously to remove the Evils we
labor under, and to bestow on us the Favors we need, and to protect and
preserve us in the Possession of such as we yet enjoy.

AGAIN Sirs, is it a Duty to fast upon extraordinary Occasions, then such are
to be reproved, who in Place of fasting, required of them, give up themselves
to all Excess of Riot; instead of denying themselves for the Service of GOD,
they make their Belly their GOD.

WHEN the Almighty is visiting the World with his Judgments, they scorn to own
his Government, so far as to humble themselves under his Rebukes, and implore
his Mercy, No! With the impious Israelites, in a Time of general Calamity, they
sit down to eat and drink, and rise up to play!

INSTEAD of Mourning for the Afflictions of the Church and State, they take up
the Tymbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the Sound of the Organ, they send forth
their little Ones like a Flock, and their Children DANCE!

THEY speak in the sordid Language of the licentious Epicure, let us eat and
drink for tomorrow we die; and as the Prophet laments in the Day that GOD
calls to weeping, to mourning, to boldness, and to girding with Sackcloth;
behold Joy and Gladness, slaying of Oxen and killing Sheep, eating Flesh and
drinking Wine, -- Surely this Iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die
says the Lord of Hosts!

GLUTTONY, my Brethren, the Evil opposite to the Duty of this Day, contains in
it, Idolatry and Self-Murder, for hereby that Love, Care, Delight and Service,
which are due to GOD, are given to the B^lly, and so of Consequence it is made
the Glutton's GOD, whose End is destruction, says the Apostle, whose God is
their Belly, whose Glory is in their Shame, who mind earthly Things, being
Enemies to the Cross of CHRIST, i. e. to all ^ufferings for CHRIST, to all the
Self-denying Flesh mortifying Exercises of Religion.

GLUTTONY oppresses the Body with crude Humors, vitiates the Blood, destroys
Digestion, and hereby introduces almost all the Diseases which afflict, and at
last put a Period to human Life, which the Time would fail to enumerate, and
thus it may be justly called a slow Poison!

GLUTTONY is an Enemy to the Mind, it stupifies and unfits it, for all the
valuable Employments of Reason, both Civil and Religious; it is the fatal, the
formidable Source of the most sordid Sensuality, Nam fine cerere et baccho
friget venus: It pampers the Flesh, and makes it an easy Prey to every vagrant
Lust: It makes Man's Reason a Lacky to his Appetite, and thus degrades that
once noble Creature into the Order of Beasts, by inducing him to place his
supreme Happiness in the Pleasure of a Swine!

GLUTTONY consumes GOD'S Creatures in vain, and makes us unthankful for them;
it wastes our Time* and robs our Estates, and which is still worse, it offends
GOD, and ruins our Souls! It turns our Tables into a Trap to ensnare us, and
makes the Prosperity of Fools destroy us!

IF it be enquired, when we may be said to be in any Degree guilty of this
Evil, I answer when (the body being healthy) we do not leave off eating with an
Appetite, and much more if it makes us uneasy and oppressed!

NOR is inordinate Drinking less criminal and pernicious, who has Woe, says
Solomon, who has Sorrow, who has Contentions, who has Babbling, who has
Wounds without Cause, who has redness of Eyes, they that t^rry long at the
Wine?

NOW the aforesaid Evils are still rendered the more henious, when they are
committed under the Rebukes of Providence, for hereby men cast Contempt on GOD,
and walk contrary to him, who has declared that in that Case, he will walk
contrary unto them, and punish them seven times for their Iniquities*

Such impudent Transgressors, do as it were, ^^sh upon the ^osses of GOD's
Bucklers, even when he appears in a Robe of incensed Majesty, and is clad with
Zeal as a Cloak; as if these insolent but contemptible Animals, who are but of
Yesterday, and liable to be crushed by the Moth, could contend with
Omnipotence, and had an Arm like GOD! But let such know that with the Froward,
GOD will show himself froward, and wound the hairy Scalp of such, as still
persist in their Trespasses.

WOE be to them that are at Ease in Zyon, says GOD by the Prophet Amos, that
put far away the evil Day, and cause the Seat of Violence to come near, that
lie upon B^ds of Ivory, and stretch themseves upon their Couches, that eat the
Lambs out of the Flock, and the Calves out of the S^all, that chaunt to the
Sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves Instruments of Music like David,
that drink Wine in Bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief Ointments; but
are not grieved for the Afflictions of Joseph, therefore shall they go Captive,
with the first that go Captive.

AND now, my Fathers and Brethren, give ^^e leave to exhort you to comply with
the Design of this Day, in a serious Performance of the Duties recommended in
our Text. Let us humble ourselves before God, and cry mightily to him, let
every one turn from the Evil of his Ways, and from the Violence that is in
their Hand.

FOR are not Evils of the most enormous Kinds awfully flagrant, such as
Swearing, Whoredom, Drunkenness, Gluttony, Sabaoth-breaking, and Injustice and
Violence, in many of its hideous and awful Forms!

AND are there not diverse Fools, who make a Mock of Sin? Deride Religion with
profane Burlesque, and deny a Providence, and thus cast about Fire^^nds,
Arrows, and Death in sport! With Design to debauch Men's Principles and
Practice, and if they succeed in their malignant Attempts, do Glory in their
Shame, boast of their Conformity to the grand Enemy, in his pernicious
Projects! Should not such remember the coarse but just Compliment our Lord paid
to their Predecessors in Iniquity, You are of your Father the Devil, for his
Works ye will do, he was a Liar and a Murderer from the Beginning, and abode
not in the Truth!

NOW should not Rivers of Waters run down our Eyes, when we behold sincere
Religion treated with Contempt, the great GOD dishonored, and his equitable
Laws made void?

WHAT we cannot reform, let us lament, with the tenderest Passion, and cry to
GOD to rectify!

THE present Languors of Religion in general do invite our Sorrows! Alas, my
Brethren! Does not the Love of many wax cold? And are not the Things that
remain ready to die?

NOR should the awful Increase of the Power of France, escape our mournful
Notice!

AND the Frowns of angry Heaven provoked by our impieties, appearing in the
late mortal Maladies that have spread in this and the neighboring Provinces,
together with the extraordinary scarcity of the Staff of Life should alarm our
Fears, least we feel a heavier Weight of Woe through our Stupidity and
Impenitence!

SHALL a Lion roar and the Beasts of the Forest forget to tremble? Shall
Jehovah's Hand be lifted up, and we will not see? What meanest thou O Sleeper,
arise, call upon thy GOD, if so be that God will think upon us, that we perish
not!

HEAR ye the Rod, and who has appointed it. When Jehovah speaks the Pillars of
Heaven tremble, the Earth's Foundations shake, and the very Devils roar. The
Pagan Ninevites were deeply affected under the Frowns of GOD, and shall we be
unconcerned. What are we more stupid than the Earth we tread upon, yea, than
Pagans, than Beasts, than Devils; O unaccountable Infatuation!

IF we mourn over our Offenses, cry to GOD from our Hearts, and reform our
Lives, who can tell but he will turn away his Anger from us, that we perish
not! This was the fruit of the Ninevites fasting, and if we observe this
Solemnity with the like Earnestness, with equal Ardor, there is reason to hope
from the divine Goodness, that it will be crowned with the like Success!

THE Fasts of Queen Esther, Jehosaphat, Ezra and Daniel were all successful and
prevalent.

THOSE that now fast and Mourn in the Bridegrooms absence, shall Rejoice
eternally with him at his Return, then shall they Feast but fast no more; the
Days of their Mourning shall be ended. I will see you again said JESUS to his
Disciples and your Heart shall Rejoice, and your Joy no Man takes from you.

NOW to answer those great Ends, this extraordinary Duty of Fasting, should be
managed with extraordinary believing vehemence, and followed with a universal
Reformation of Life, with doing Justice, loving Mercy, and walking humbly with
God; without which the strictest Institutions are not acceptable to God, nor of
any avail: And hence the very Denomination of a Fast is ascribed thereto by the
Royal Prophet, because that is the Design of it, Is not this the Fast that I
have chosen, to loose the Bands of Wickenness, to deal thy Bread to the hungry,
to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every Yoke, and bring the Poor
that are cast out to thy House; when thou see the naked that thou cover him,
and that thou hide not thy self from thy own Flesh; then shall thy light break
forth as the Morning, and thine Health shall spring forth speedily, and thy
Righteousness shall go before thee, and the Glory of the Lord shall be thy
rere-ward.

LET us therefore, as the Proclamation directs, Earnestly implore the divine
Mercy and Favor to us a sinful and unworthy People, to remove the Judgments we
feel, and avert such as we have Reason to fear. And that God would grant us
such Mercies, both Spiritual and Temporal, as we need: Particularly that it
would please God to restore and establish Tranquillity, Peace and Harmony among
ourselves -- Revive declining a Religion -- Bring forward the Springing of the
Year, and grant us fruitful Seasons, and a plentiful Harvest. -- That it would
please God to bless the Person of our rightful and gracious Sovereign KING
GEORGE, the Prince and Princess of Wales, the Duke, the Issue of the Prince and
Princess of Wales, the Princesses, and all the Royal Family -- And that the
Kingdom of CHRIST may universally prevail in the World.

TO those suitable and necessary Petitions, mentioned in the Proclamation, give
me leave to add these following, viz. That the Almighty would be pleased to
vouchsafe all Covenant Mercies upon the GOVERNOR of this Province, his Lady and
Family; and likewise upon the COUNCIL and ASSEMBLY; and particularly, that
Jehovah would support his EXCELLENCY and Comfort him in the Wane of Life, under
the Infirmities of his aged Years, and the Burden of a Government; as also
crown with happy Success, his pious Desires, Projects and Attempts for the
lasting Benefit of this Colony, in Regard of both its religious and civil
Interests; and long preserve His valuable Life as a public Blessing thereto,
and late translate him, full of Days of Usefulness and Honors, to that Rest
that remains for the People of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen and Amen,

APPENDIX.
I WOULD have it observed, to the Honor of God, who has not said to the seed
of Jacob, that they should seek his Face in vain; and for the Encouragement of
such like Solemnities in Time coming; that Prayer was expressly and repeatedly
offered for Rain (by the GOVERNOR'S desire) in the Afternoon of the Day of
Fasting, it being a very dry Season; which Supplications were speedily answered
by seasonable and refreshing Showers. For this Instance of immerited and
condescending Mercy, in hearing the Cries of the Poor, may all Praises be
ascribed to a gracious God, by Men and Angels, for ever and ever.

FINIS.
The SUBSTANCE and SCOPE of both TESTAMENTS, OR The Distinguishing Glory of the
Gospel.

A SERMON ON The DISPLAYS of Divine JUSTICE, IN The Propitiatory SACRIFICE of
CHRIST: Representing the Nature, Necessity, and Sufficiency, of his
SATISFACTION, the IMPUTATION of his RIGHTEOUSNESS, in consequence of it,
together with an Answer to the most important Objections.

Preached at PHILADELPHIA, in April 1749.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M.

1. COR. iii. 11. For other Foundation can no Man lay, then that is laid, which
is Jesus Christ.

1. COR. i. 21.23.24. For after that, in the Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom
knew not God, it pleased God by the Foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe. We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling Block, and unto
the Greeks Foolishness; but unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks,
Christ the Power of God and the Wisdom of God.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold, by WILLIAM BRADFORD in Second-Street, 1749.

ROMANS, iii. 25, 26. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation, through
Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins that
are past, through the forbearance of God:

To declare, I say, at this Time his Righteousness: That he might be just and
the justifier of him which believes in Jesus.


THE unsearchable Wisdom and unparrallel'd Love of God, are not only
conspicuous in the Method of our Redemption by the Lord JESUS CHRIST, but the
Glory of His Justice and Righteousness is herein likewise very apparent, as the
Verses I have read inform us; in which we have these three Things, viz. Two
important Benefits mentioned, Propitiation for, and Remission (...) Sin 2. The
Causes hereof assigned both meritorious and instrumental, the Blood of Christ
and Faith. 3. The Design of God herein declared, viz. The manifestation of his
Justice and Righteousness,

THE first Benefit mentioned in our Text, is Propitiation or Atonement, whom
God has set forth to be a Propitiation. It is Christ that the Apostle here
Speaks of, as appears from the preceding Verse, him the Father has purposed
and engaged in his Councils and Covenant from Eternity to be a PROPITIATION,
and has actually exhibited him as such in Time, not only by the Shadows of the
Law and Prophesies of the Prophets, but also by the open preaching of the
Gospel after his Advent. To be a Propitiation, il^sterion, either from
ilascomai, to expiate in or show Mercy; or from i^^sco placo, to assuage,
quiet, pacify, atone, reconcile, There is in the Words a Metalipsis of the
Effect for the Efficient; Christ is called a Propitiation because he purchased
it, instead of propitiator, reconciler, pacifyer, etc. The Word il^sterion, is
the Title of the Mercy Seat; this is ascribed to Christ, because in many Things
he resembles it; it was indeed an eminent Type of him: The Mercy Seat covered
the Tables of the Law which were broke by us, to signify that by Christ pardon
is procured for us; by the sprinkling of the Blood of the Sacrifice upon it,
God was rendered propitious or favorable, and exhibited himself there upon a
Throne of Grace, so it is in Christ alone that God is reconciled to inners, and
through him we have access to the Father: He interposes between divine Justice
and our Guilt, and purchases the Kindness of God for us. God was peculiarly
present in a Cloud on the Mercy Seat, and gave gracious Answers thence to his
People from between the Cherubims, ( Levit. xvi. 2. Number. vii. 83) Thus it is
only in Christ that we can expect God's special Presence and a merciful Answer
to our Requests.

The 2d Benefi^ mentioned in our Text, which is indeed but a consequent of the
former, is the Remission of Sins, i. e. The cancelling of their Guilt, or our
Obligation through them to Punishment. Now this is obtained by the Propitiation
or Atonement of Christ. This Remission the Apostle observes, extends to Sins
that are past, i. e. Not only to ^ins committed after Christ's coming, but to
Sins committed before it, even from the Foundation of the World: He only
mentions the Sins that are past, because that seemed incredible tha^ the Effect
of Remission should exist before its Cause, and likewise that he might
represent the great Value and Efficacy of the Death and Satisfaction of Christ;
which not only extended forwards to the Time to come after it, which is easy to
conceive, but also to the Time past before it. It was a difficult and
momentuous Question, What became of the Fathers who dyed before Christ's
coming? Now the Apostle tells us, that they were forgiven, and God's
forbearance exercised toward them, the ^im^s of Ignorance God winked at. We
must consider the Death of Christ, not as a natural but a moral Cause; it is not
strictly or properly as a Medicine that heals, but as a Ransom that f^ee^ a
^aprive. Natural Causes operate nothing before their a^^ a Existence, but Moral
Causes do. Its sufficient that they shall be, and that the Person with whom
they are effectual, accept the Promise A ^aptive is released upon assurance
given that he will send his Ra^som, though it is not actually paid: Thus the
D^^th of Christ was available to purchase pardon for Believers before his
coming; for he interposed as their Surety, and God, to whom all Things are
present, knew and saw the accomplishment of it in the Time promised; and hence
he is called the Lamb slain from the Found^tion of the World, not only in
respect of God's Purpose concerning the certainty of his Death, but likewise in
regard o^ the Efficacy of it. The ^alvation we derive from him was ever in him.
It is true, under the Old Testament they had not so clear Knowledge of him, yet
notwithstanding they enjoyed the Benefit of his Sufferings: For the Medium by
which his Benefits are conveyed, is not an exact Knowledge of what he did and
suffered, but sincere Faith in the Promise of God. Now the divine Revela^io^
being the Rule and Measure of our Faith, such a Degree was sufficient to
Salvation, as answered the general Discovery of Grace: Believers then depended
upon God's Goodness to pardon them in a way honorable to his Justice: By their
Ceremonies and Sacrifices they were taught the reality and greatness of their
Disease and Danger, and the necessity and sufficiency of a Remedy without
themselves, even in the Mesiah: And from hence, together with the Prophesies of
the Prophets respecting him, they were induced to believe that he would
certainly come in due Time and bring Salvation with him: Thus Abraham rejoiced
to see Christ's Day, and Moses valued the Afflictions of Christ more than the
Treasures of Egypt. From what has been said it appears, that the Jewish and
Christian Church is one essentially; they differ but as the Morning and Evening
Star, which is the same, but is diversely called from its Appearance before the
Sun rising and after its setting. Our Faith respects a Savior that has already
come, theirs respect him as yet to come.

NOW the meritorious Cause of the Benefits of Propitiation and Remission, is
the Blood of Christ, i. e. by a Synedoche the whole Sacrifice of Christ, which
began in the obedience of his Humiliation, and was consumated in his Death

BUT the instrumental Cause of the Application of the aforesaid Benefits to us,
and our Investiture in them is Faith, such a cordial Complacence in, and entire
Dependence on the Method of Salvation by the Death of Christ, as habitually
attracts the Mind and Life, to the Love of Truth, and Practice of Good, both
moral and evangelical, whom GOD has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith
in his Blood; and indeed the Wisdom of the divine Constitution i^ ^^^rein
apparent, that an actual Interest in the Benefits of CHRIS^^S Death, is
communicated in a way entirely consistent with the Purity of GOD'S Nature and
Honor of his Government. Sinners must first humble themselves before GOD for
their Offenses, and accept the Mediator before they are forgiven. But the

3d. PARTICULAR in our Text, is the Design of GOD in our Redemption by JESUS
CHRIST, and that is the Manifestation of his Justice and Righteousness: Whom
God has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood to declare his
Righteousness. To declare I say at this Time his Righteousness, that he might
be just; and the Justifier of him that believes in JESUS. This Point is
repeated with earnestness by the Apostle, not only to signify its great
Importance, and inexpressible Moment, but likewise to make the deeper
Impression by it upon our Minds. The Justice of GOD is that Perfection of his
Nature, whereby he is inclined to render every one his Due: That attribute
whereby he is disposed to hate Sin, and punish Sinners according to their
Demerit; now of this the blessed GOD has given a glorious but awful
Demonstration, in the Sufferings of CHRIST'S by condemning and punishing Sin, in
the Person of his only begotten and dearly beloved Son; hereby the Almighty
shows before the whole World, the Inflexibleness and Severity of his Justice,
and that he will not suffer Sin to pass unpunished.

FROM the Words of our Text t^^ explained, I would observe the following
Proposition, viz. That the Justice of GOD is gloriously manifest, or declared
in the Redemption of Man, by the Death of JESUS CHRIST: Although GOD spared
guilty Man for the Honor of his Mercy, yet he spared not his own Son, when he
became the Sinner's Surety, for the Honor of his Justice.

IN speaking upon this Proposition I would,

I. OPEN the Nature of GOD's Justice. And,

II. SHOW how it is gloriously manifest in the Redemption of Man by the Death
of Jesus Christ, and then proceed to the Improvement.

NOW the Justice of GOD, is that eternal Rectitude of the divine Nature,
whereby he orders and disposes all Things, according to the Rules that his
infinite Wisdom has prescribed; and governs all Mankind with the utmost
Exactness and Impartiality in Relation to the Distribution of Rewards and
Punishments; to illustrate this we should observe, that there is an intrinsic
RECTITUDE and OBLIQUITY in Things, and that the Reasons and Relations of moral
Good and Evil, do not depend upon any uncertain and arbitrary Principle; but
are fixed and immutable, indispensable, and eternal; pursuant to this, that
Truth, Goodness, and Justice are essential and necessary Properties, in the
divine Nature; antecedent to any Consideration of the divine Will; and what he
can no more alter or unsettle, than he can deny himself or cease to be; that as
he is the Maker and Governor of the World, he has an undoubted Authority to
make Laws, and enforce them with proper Sanctious; that when Laws are thus
enacted, he setts Bounds in some Measure to his own Authority; for Justice
requires that he should not prescribe what is above Man's Strength, or if he
does, that he should give supernatural Power to obey it; that upon Obedience he
cannot without Prejudice to his Justice, deny the promised Reward, or, upon
Disobedience, finally forbear to inflict the threatened Punishment: And from
hence it follows, that GOD is necessarily obliged, both by his Nature and
Covenant, to act with the strictest Justice and Impartiality, in all his
Proceedings with Man: But I proceed to the

II. Proposed, Which was to show how divine Justice is gloriously manifest, in
the Redemption of Man, by the Death of Jesus Christ. Now the Particular in
which, or Manner how divine Justice is glorified by the Death of Christ, is the
Satisfaction that has been made thereto by it. In order to open this important
and FUNDAMENTAL POINT, of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION, and give it its just Weight,
let me endeavor to represent,

1. THE indispensable Necessity there was of a Satisfaction to Justice, in
order to our Redemption and Salvation. And,

2. EVINCE the Reality and Sufficiency of that which Christ has made thereto by
his Death.

NOW the Necessity of a Satisfaction to divine Justice in order to our
Redemption and Salvation, appears from the Consideration of the Nature of GOD,
and his Relation to intelligent Creatures

JUSTICE being a natural and necessary Perfection of the divine Nature, has
consequently an invariable Respect to the moral Qualities of intelligent
Beings, as divine Goodness in some Degree naturally and necessarily diffuses
itself upon Agents, perfectly pure and innocent, so likewise Justice terminates
upon the Guilty and Nocent by Punishments equal to their Crimes; except a
Satisfaction intervene. If it be impossible considering the Perfection of the
Diety that Holiness should be unrewarded, then surely it must be more
impossible that Sin should be unpunished; seeing the Exercise of Justice is
more necessary than that of Goodness; for the Rewards which Goodness dispenses
are pure Favor, inasmuch as the Creature has received it is Being, and all its
Benefits from GOD, all the Services it can perform, are due to him on account
hereof, and if so, by the Payment of a just Debt, they cannot merit fresh
Benefits; but the Punishments which Justice inflicts are due and demerited, for
violating the Rights of Heaven, and all the Obligations they are laid under to
GOD; seeing Justice in it is Nature is a Perfection, it must of Consequence be
in GOD, who is possessed of all kinds of Excellency, and that in the highest
Degree of Eminence, or infinitely, and if so it is inflexible and eternal.

SIN is directly contrary to the divine Purity, and therefore he must as
necessarily hate it, as he loves himself; this is evident from the Law of
Contraries, as well as from the Psalmist's Observation, The righteous Lord
loves Righteouness, but the Wicked his Soul hates. Now Punishment is but a
natural Effect, and proper Manifestation of this Hatred; and therefore it is
not an arbitrary Constituion; it is true, the Time and Manner of it is
Infliction is founded in divine Sovereignty, but the Matter or Substance of it
is bottomed on the essential Purity and Rectitude of the divine Nature to which
Sin is repugnant.

BUT if together with what has been offered, respecting the divine Nature; we
consider the Relation Jehovah bears to the moral World, it adds much Light and
Force to this Argument.

ALMIGHTY GOD in the Character of a Governor, is obliged to protect the Laws of
his Government from Reproach and Insult.

AS it was proper and necessary, that the reasonable Creature should have a Law
to direct it, in that Homage and Service, which it had a Capacity to perform to
its Creator and Sovereign.

SO it is highly reasonable that the aforesaid Law should be confirmed by such
important Sanctions, as were necessary to procure the Creature's Obedience.

SIN being the greatest moral Evil, because opposite to the greatest moral Good
the blessed GOD, it is but suitable that it should be punished with the
greatest penal Evil, viz. Death.

NOW the Law being broken, was it not just and necessary, that the Penalty
threatened should be inflicted, either upon the Transgressor himself, according
to the immediate Intent of the Law, or upon such a Surety in his room, as was
able to make Satisfaction equivalent to the Offense; that so the Majesty,
Purity, and Righteousness of GOD might be rendered conspicuous, as well as the
Value he puts upon Obedience to his Law.

IF the Penalty threatened be not inflicted, upon a proper Occasion, does it
not reflect either upon his WISDOM, as if he had not with good Reason concerted
the SANCTION, or upon his POWER, as if he was not able to inflict it, or upon
his PURITY, as though he connived with Transgressors; or upon his TRUTH, inasmuch
as his Word is not performed. And would not Sinners be hereby induced to
contemn the Law and the Lawgiver, and encouraged in their Impieties? All which
Considerations plainly prove the Necessity of Satisfaction for the Breach of
GOD'S Laws; without this, GOD'S Hatred against Sin would not be declared, nor
the Honor of his Laws preserved, nor a suitable Fear of offending him awaked,
every of which are necessary and excellent: It is true, temporal Magistrates
are sometimes obliged to dispense with the Law, and spare an Offender, either
through inabillity to punish him, or because his Life may be of more Service to
the State; and still there is a superior Tribunal, to which the Case either is,
or ought to be referred; but GOD'S Government is very different, no Criminal
can either escape his Notice, bias his Justice, or control his Power; here is
no Exigency of Government that requires Impunity, no superior Tribunal:
Moreover the Majesty of these Laws is more sacred than that of Civil States and
Kingdoms. But,

2. I am to evince the Reality and Sufficiency of that Satisfaction which
CHRIST paid to divine Justice by his Death. And to this End, it will be
necessary to consider the PREQUISITES in order to it; and the Account the
sacred Scriptures give of Christ's Death, together with the CONSEQUENTS thereof.

NOW in order to Satisfaction, these Things were previously necessary, viz. The
personal Holiness of the Mediator; his being possessed of the divine and human
Natures; his Appointment to undertake this Province, and his Consent thereto.

HE that satisfies for another's Sin must be without Sin himself, for guilty
Blood is impure and consequently stains by its Effusion rather than cleanses:
Now the Lord JESUS was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners, he
appeared to take away Sin and in him was no Sin: To prevent his Infection with
original Sin propogated by natural Generation, he was conceived in a miraculous
Manner, by the Power of the Holy Ghost according to the Angel's Declaration,
The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power of the highest shall
overshadow thee, therefore also that holy Thing that shall be born of thee
shall be called the Son of GOD. And as he was perfectly free from original, so
likewise from actual Sin; ^atan, when he came found nothing in him, to fasten
his Temptation upon; and therefore was baff^ed in all his Stratagems; though he
came in the likeness of sinful Flesh, yet he had no Sin: just as the bra^en
Serpent had the Figure, but not the Venom of the fiery Serpent: Our Lord
fulfilled all Righteousness, and ever did what pleased his Father.

NAY our Lord was not only free from Sin, but it was impossible that he should
be tainted with it, because of the intimate Union of his human Nature with the
divine; the divine Nature being Holiness itself, and Almighty Power, must needs
by its Presence and Union infallibly prevent Sin in the Redeemer.

BUT it was not only necessary that the MEDIATOR should be personally holy, in
order to make Satisfaction, but likewise possessed of the divine and human
Natures: He must assume the Nature of Man, that he might be allied to him, and
capable of suffering in his stead, for the Deity cannot suffer. Under the
Jewish Economy, the Right of Redemption belonged to him that was next in
Blood; hence our Lord took upon him the Seed of Abraham, that he might have a
Right of Propinquity or near Alliance as Man, to ^^deem us, and be capable to
make Satisfaction for us in the same Nature that sinned.

NOR was it less necessary that the MEDIATOR should be GOD, that so the human
Nature might be supported under its Sufferings, and they made of ^^finite
Value, and so equivalent to the demerit of Sin. JUSTICE ^equired an exact
Proportion between the Guilt of Sin, and the Satisfaction made for it, which
could not be, if the Mediator had not been GOD. The Guilt of Sin is doubtless
infinite, because committed against an infinite GOD, but the Sufferings of any
finite Nature can be but finite in Measure and Value; and there was an absolute
Necessity of a Union of the divine and human Natures, in the Person of the
Mediator, to communicate an infinite Dignity to his Sufferings: By Reason of
this Union there is a Communication of the special Properties of both Natures
to the Person of Christ, which being properly the Fountain of his Actions, must
needs communicate an infinite Merit and Dignity to them all, and hence it is
said, that the Lord of Glory was crucified; and that we are purchased by the
Blood of GOD, the human Nature being united to the divine, the Actions
proceeding from it, are not merely human, but raised above their natural Worth,
and therefore meritorious and infinitely excellent: One Hour of Christ's Life
glorified GOD, more than Millions of Ages spent in his Service by Men and
Angels, because this being done by Creatures, can be but finite and limited;
but the other being the Obedience of one who is GOD, is of infinite Excellency,
and worthy of GOD: He that comes from above, is above all; the same may said of
his Sufferings.

ANOTHER Pre-requisite to Satisfaction, is the Mediators Appointment to
undertake this Province; without this his Mediation would have been in vain,
being destitute of sufficient Authority. Now the Scriptures plainly and
positively declare our Lord's Appointment to the mediatorial Work, in these
Words for him has GOD the Father sealed, GOD anointed Jesus of Nazareth with
the Holy Ghost, and with Power, the Lord has sworn and will not repent, thou
art a Priest forever after the Order of Melchizedek. Therefore does my Father
love me, because I lay down my Life, this Commandment I have received of my
Father. These Scriptures and many others that might be mentioned, do
sufficiently show Christ's Authority and Commission to mediate.

GOD the Father in this Constitution, is to be considered as a Governor, who by
an Act of Supremacy and pure Jurisdiction, may dispense with the Execution of
the Law, upon such Considerations, as fully answer the Ends of Government.

THE Law is not executed according to the Letter of it, for that obliges the
Person that Sins to suffer, and if the Case were so no Flesh could be saved;
nor is it disannulled, for if so no Obligation to Duty or Penalty would remain,
but all Men are obliged to obey, and those who impenitently neglect it, are
under a Curse, it is therefore only relaxed in regard of its Penalty, by a
merciful Condescension of the Lawgiver.

IT is true the Moral Law cannot be relaxed, in respect of its Precept; for
that being a Copy of the divine Purity, the Almighty cannot deny himself by
contradicting it, or allowing what is intrinsically Evil; nor can it be relaxed
in Respect of the Substance and Weight of its Penalty in general, because of
the Justice and Truth of GOD engaged to issue the same.

YET that the Penalty may be relaxed, as to the Person of the Sinner, for wise
and just Reasons, is evident by considering, that it is not the Evil of the
Offender, that is primarily designed by it, But the Honor of the Lawgiver, and
the Preservation of public Order and Government; in case therefore those
valuable Ends can be attained, by substituting a Surety in the Place of the
Transgressor to suffer for him; the End of the Law is answered.

ALTHOUGH the Threatening declared the Demerit of Sin in the Transgressor, and the
Right of Punishing in the Creator and Sovereign, yet it cannot vacate GOD'S
Power to relax it upon just and wise Reasons; otherwise it would be absurd and
inconsistent with his Supremacy.

THE last Pre-requisite that I mentioned, was the REDEEMERS Consent to the
Fathers Appointment; this was necessary to make his Sufferings satisfactory;
for being GOD himself he could not be compelled by any superior Authority; its
true, after he had undertaken, he was then obliged to pay the Debt; but his
first Engagement was altogether free and of Choice.

AND seeing that the Virtue of his Sufferings does not arise merely from the
Dignity of his Person, but from his Substitution in our stead, this rendered
his Consent likewise necessary; his sufferings for others without his Consent,
if he could have been compelled thereto, would have been liable to the Charge
of Injustice; and therefore the Scriptures expressly declare his willingness to
undertake the Business of Mediation, Burnt-offering, and Sin-offering thou
did not require, then said I, lo I come, in the Volumn of the Book it is
written of me, I delight to do thy Will, O my God, yea, thy Law is within my
H^^^. And hence it is said, that he gave himself f^^ us; and that on this
Account, the Father loved him, because he laid down his Life; these Passages of
Scripture do sufficiently manifest Christ's free, and full Consent to the
Fathers Appointment, of his undertaking to be our Surety.

NOW having spoken of the Pre-requisites necessary in order to Satisfaction; it
is proper to discourse on the Account which the Scriptures give of the
Redeemer's Death, to the End we may know whether it was satisfactory or not,
and to show how divine Justice is therein glorified. Now the Scriptures
represent the Death of CHRIST under a threefold Character, viz. as a Punishment
inflicted for Sin, as a Price to redeem us from Ruin, and as a Sacrifice to
reconcile us to God. And

1. IT is represented as a Punishment for Sin, this will appear by considering.

THAT Man on account of his Transgression, was sentenced by the Law he broke to
Death; and being insolvent, the Lord Jesus Christ by his Father's Appointment
and his own Consent, engaged as a Surety to pay the Debt; and hence he is
called the Surety of a better Covenant, and he is said to be made under the
Law, that we might obtain the Adoption of Sons; he who was God over all blessed
forever, was in respect of his human Nature, and as Mediator, subject to its
Precepts, and liable to its Penalties, that by performing the one and
sustaining the other, he might redeem those that were under the Law.

THE Debt we owed was not pecuniary but penal, a Creditor may forgive the
former without Payment, because it is his Property, but the latter cannot be
forgiven without the Prince's Consent, who is Guardian of the Laws, because
public Justice is concerned in it.

JESUS CHRIST having assumed the Relation of a SURETY, became one with the
Debtor, in the Judgment of the Law; and so was liable to their Punishment
according to Justice.

AND this Punishment the Scriptures assure us, GOD as a supreme Judge
inflicted upon him; and hence he is said to be delivered up by the Determinate
Council of GOD, and that the Lord laid upon him the Iniquities of us all, that
is the Guilt of them, and Punishment due for them. It is farther said, that it
pleased the Lord to bruise him, and elsewhere that the Messiah was cut of but
not for himself, that he was wounded for our Transgressions, bruised for our
Iniquities, that the Chastisement of our Peace was laid upon him, and that by
his Stripes we are healed; that he himself bare our Sins on his own Body on the
Tree. Moreover the Sufferings CHRIST endured, were answerable to the Penalty
the Law denounced, in Substance, the Death threatened was both Temporal and
Spiritual, and thus our Lord, not only bore a Temporal Death, accompanied with
great Dishonor, and exquisite Anguish, but likewise with the Curse of GOD, and
he also bore the Wrath of Jehovah upon his Soul, and hence he is said to tread
the Wine Press of it alone: -- The FEAR and SORROW of CHRIST at the approach of
his Sufferings as well as his BLOODY SWEAT and Lamentation under them, showed
that he endured something more terrible then all outward Torments, for the
Martyrs have endured such with triumph, and surely our Redeemer co^d not have
less courage then they, who was the Source of the^r Fortitude; the Difference
then must be in the Nature of their Sufferings, GOD the Father dealt with him
as our SURETY, and not as his own SON; and therefore suspended a comfortable
Sense of his Love, and appeared as a severe inexorable Judge: Now from the
aforesaid Account of the Sufferings of CHRIST, it is evident they were PENAL;
seeing they were inflicted for Sin by the Supreme Judge, and were equivalent to
the Sentence of the Law, and we receive spiritual and special Benefits by them.

IN Christ's Sufferings we may observe the Matter and Form and Ends of
Punishment. The Matter of Punishment is something afflictive, either privative
in being deprived of some good, or positive in enduring something grievous,
both which Christ bore. The form of Punishment is when it is Inflicted for Sin,
and this distinguishes it from a Calamity. Now Christ suffered Death for Sin
not his own, and hence he is said to bear our Sins, to be delivered up to Death
for our Sins, yea, to be made Sin and a Curse for US. The End of Punishment is
the common good, partly in deterring Persons from violating the Laws, which is
the design of exemplary Punishment, and partly in maintaining the Honor and
Interest of those who have suffered by the Breach of the Laws, this is the
Design of Satisfactory Punishment, answerable to which in the Death of Christ,
the Severity there expressed is to deter from Sin, and maintain the Honor of
the great Lord of the Universe, by making compensation for the Injury done
against him by Sin.

2dly. THE DEATH of CHRIST is represented in Scripture as the PRICE of our
Redemption: Redemption in general is a delivering of one from a Calamity by a
Ransom, i. e. Some valuable Consideration, which is termed a Price; to
understand which let it be considered, that Man by Disobedience to GOD was
bro't into Misery, such Misery as the Scripture often expresses by Captivity,
which consists in a servile Subjection to Satan and Death, to which Man was as
it were committed for his Rebellion by the Supreme Judge and Governor; from
this Calamity Men could no otherwise be delivered then by Ransom, for by Order
of Divine Justice we were detained Prisoners, and till this was Satisfied, no
Discharge could be obtained; freedom from a Calamity without a Price is
Deliverance simply, but not properly Redemption: The Word Redemption to which
the Scriptures ascribe our escape (apolutrosis) signifies Deliverance by a
Ransom; and hence it is said, that CHRIST gave himself a Ransom for all,
(antilutron) This Word is exceeding Emphatical, and signifies a Ransom paid
instead of another. Anti denotes Substitution, when a Thing or Person is put in
the Place of another; many Instances might easily be given of this, so that the
Meaning of the aforesaid Words, he gave himself a Ranson for many, is this,
that he died in their stead, and by his Life as a Price obtained their
Redemption; which Truth the Apostle Paul elsewhere confirms, by saying that
Christ has Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us;
the Price upon Consideration of which we are Redeemed, is not corruptable
Things such as Silver and Gold, but the precious Blood of CHRIST as of a Lamb
without Blemish and without Spot, this Price was paid in our stead to GOD, for
it was for Sin against his Majesty, that we were cast into Misery, and by his
Righteous Order detained in it; and therefore to him the Price of our
acquitance must be paid; Satan is no more then an Instrument of his Justice: If
CHRIST had died only for the Confirmation of the Gospel, or to exhibit to us a
Pattern of Suffering, as the Socinians imagine, then what was there in his Death
more than in the Death of other Martyrs, and how can we be said to be redeemed
by it? Would it not be as ridiculous as blasphemous to say, that we are
redeemed by their Death? But

3. THE Death of Christ is represented in Scripture, as a Sacrifice to
reconcile us to God; him Jehovah has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith
in his Blood.

THAT the Death of Christ was a true and real Sacrifice appears not only from
the express Declaration of Scripture, but from all the Ingredients of a
Sacrifice being found in it, Christ our Passover, says the Apostle to the
Corinthians, is sacrificed for us; and in his Epistle to the Hebrews he informs
us, that Christ has appeared once in the End of the World to put away Sin by
the Sacrifice of himself.

ONE Ingredient of a real and proper Sacrifice, was that the Person offering
must be a Priest, every high Priest, says the Apostle, taken from among Men is
ordained for Men in Things pertaining to God, that he may offer both Gifts and
Sacrifices for Sins; and was not Christ constitued a Priest by Oath after the
Order of Melchizedeck.

AGAIN, The Things offered were to be of God's appointment, otherwise it was
but Will Worship, even in freewill Offerings, though the Time of Offering was not
fixed, yet the Things to be Offered were appointed; and thus was not what
CHRIST offered, appointed and prepared by God, a Body have thou prepared me,
says Christ; this Body was animated with a Soul, which being separated
therefrom in his Death, is said to be made an Offering for Sin, by the Royal
Prophet; and elsewhere he is said to offer himself, i. e. both his Soul and
Body, ( Heb. ix.)

FARTHER, that which was offered for a Sacrifice was to be destroyed; those
Things that had life were killed, and their Blood poured out, and the other
Parts besides the Blood were burnt, either wholly or in part: Thus our Lord was
slain and his Blood shed, and his Soul was exposed to his Fathers Wrath. And as
the Jewish Sacrifices were burnt without the Camp: Thus did not JESUS suffer
without the Gates of Jerusalem. Moreover, Sacrifices were offered to God only,
and hence the Author to the Hebrews terms t^^m Things pertaining to God: And
did not JESUS CHRIST, through the eternal Spirit, offer himself without Spot to
God, (Heb, ix. ^^.)

FROM the aforesaid Particulars it appears, that all the Ingredients or
Constituents, of a real Sacrifice are found in the Sacrifice of Christ.

HAVING already shown that CHRIST'S Death was a real Sacrifice, I would proceed
to assert and prove, that it was a Sacrifice of Propitiation or Atonement and
Reconciliation.

TO this End observe, that the Propitiatory Sacrifices under the Jewish
Economy, were figures and shadows of the Sacrifice o^ Christ. Now if the Types
and Shadows had any propitiatory Virtue in them, much more the Antitype, else
the Substance would not exceed the Shadow, which is absurd. That the Jewish
Sacrifices did prefigure the Death of Christ, the Apostle declares at large in
the ninth and tenth Chapters to the Hebrews, and in the second Chapter of his
Epistle to the Colosians, where he calls them Figures and Shadows of good
Things to come: but in the mean Time observes, that the Body is of Christ; as
if he should say, those Propitiatory Jewish Sacrifices had some resemblance of
this, as the shadow has of the Body, though obscure and imperfect; but the
Substance and Perfection of Atonement is in the Sacrifice of Christ.

BUT to make this very important Point more evident, let me endeavor to prove,
that all that was absolutely necessary to a Sacrifice of Propitiation under the
Jewish Economy, is to be found in the Sacrifice of Christ, e. g. The Sin of
the Offender was laid upon the Sacrifice, and likewise his Punishment was
inflicted upon it, the Sacrifice was substituted in his Room, apeased the
Almighty, and removed the Sinners guilt.

EACH of these Particulars deserves and requires our Attention. The Sin of the
Offender was laid upon the Sacrifice, or imputed to it and charged upon it, so
as to be made responsible and liable to suffer for it, as if it had contracted
the Guilt itself; even as a Surety is obliged to pay a Debt he never
contracted, yea as much as if he had: The Sacrifice was looked upon and treated
as a guilty Thing, though it had not fined itself; hence these Sacrifices were
called Sins, (Levit. xx. 17) which is translated Sin-Offering. Farther they are
said to bear the Iniquities of the People, ( Levit. xvi. 22.) and the Goat
shall bear upon him all their Iniquities. We are farther informed in the
aforesaid Chapter, that the People laid their Hands upon the Head of the
Sacrifice, confessed their Sins over him, and put their Sins upon him; and
Aaron shall lay both his Hands upon the Head of the live Goat, and confess over
him all the Iniquities of the Children of Israel. Putting them upon the Head of
the Goat, signified, say the Hebrew Masters, that the Guilt was transferred
from the People to the Sacrifice that was offered for them. And hence the Escape
Goat, and other Propitiatory Sacrifices, were looked upon as execrable and
poluted Things; and those that touched them were po^^ted. ( Levit. xxvi.) Now
as the Sin was charged upon and imputed to the legal Sacrifices, so our Sins
were charged upon and imputed to JESUS CHRIST, as the Apostle observes to the
Corinthians, he was made Sin for us who knew no Sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him. How could he be made Sin who knew none, any other
way than by Imputation? And how can his Righteousness, who is God, be made ours
by any other Method? Sin was imputed to Christ when it was charged upon him,
and he obliged to suffer for it in our stead; as a Debt may be said to be
imputed to a Surety when he takes it upon himself, and is thereby obliged to
pay it, though he never contracted it; and Christ's Righteousness is imputed to
us when it is accepted for us, and we as realy entitled to its Bene^^ as though
we had performed it. Moreover,

THE Penalty of the Offender was laid upon the Sacrifice offer^d for him; the
Sinner deserved temporal Death and Destruction, and the Sacrifice was slain or
destroyed. A Bullock which was a Sin-Offerring for the High Priest, and a Goat,
which was a Sin-Offering for the People, were ordered to be killed, and the
Sca^^ Goat was sent into the Wilderness to be destroyed one way or other. ( See
Levit. xvi) And in like manner the Sin Offerings for private Persons whether
Lambs, Kids, Turtle-Doves, or Young Pidegons, were to be slain, and the
Offering of Flour was to be partly consumed. ( Levit. v.)

THE Sacrifices, by having the Sins of the People said upon them, became liable
to the Penalty, and did actually under go it: Thus it was with Christ whom they
pointed to; he himself, says the Apostle Peter, bare our Sins in his own Body
on the Tree, by whose stripes we are healed; he was bruised for our Iniquities,
says the Prophet, wounded for our Transgressions, and poured out his Soul unto
Death. Farther,

THE Sacrifice suffered the aforesaid Penalties in the Offenders room and
place, and this indeed necessarily follows from the Particulars
beforementioned, for to suffer in one's stead is nothing else but to suffer for
another what he should have suffered, that he may escape; thus the Sacrifice
suffered Death for the Offender that he might not die, and therefore died in
his stead, its Life went for his Life, Levit. xvii. 11. For the Life of the
Flesh is in the Blood, and I have given it to you upon the Altar to make an
Atonement. The Blood being the Vehickle of Life, when it goes, the Life goes;
this therefore being offered to atone for them, or save their Lives, of
Consequence the Life of the Sacrifice went instead of the Life of the Offender.

AND if, as has been before proved, both the Sin and Punishment of the Offender
were laid upon the Sacrifice, it must needs suffer in his room and place; but
for farther Illustration of this important Point of the Substitution of the
Sacrifice in the Transgressors room, it may be observed, that no Sacrifices
were instituted for Capital Offenses, such as Murder, Idolatry, etc. because
the Sinner himself was to be cut off; but for other Sins which though they in
strictness according to that Dispensation, deserved Death, yet God was pleased
to relax the Penalty of the Law ^^ Respect of the Transgressor, and accept of
the Life of the Sacrifice for his Life: Agreeable hereto the guilty Person was
to offer a clean Beast of his own, to signify its Substitution in his stead,
for as Proprietor he had a Dominion over it to apply it to that Use.

WELL, if there was in the Sacrifices of Atonement a Substitution of the
Sacrifice in the Offender's room, and Christ was such a Sacrifice as has been
proved, then it necessarily follows that he died not only for our Good, but in
our room and place, seeing he is the Substance and Antitype to which those
Shadows pointed, and in whom they have their Accomplishment, and hence he is
said to die for the Ungodly, and to suffer the just for the unjust that he
might bring us to GOD, just as the innocent Sacrifice in the room of the guilty
Transgressor, not only the original Words in those Scriptures Huper and Anti,
but the Things spoken of manifestly declare a Substitution of Christ in the
Place of Sinners as a Sacrifice of Propitiation.

AGAIN, propitiatory Sacrifices were to appease God and turn away his Anger,
this is the Meaning of the Word Atonement, which was the Design of the
Sin Offerings, the Trespass-Offerings, and the Burnt-Offerings, Levit. vii. 7.
and i. 4. And he shall put his Hand upon the Head of the Burnt-Offering, and it
shall be accepted for him to make Atonement for him. And this was also the
Design of the Peace Offerings, and this End those Sacrifices attained, many
Examples of this Kind might be offered but I shall only, for brevity's sake,
mention one, 2 Samuel xxiv. ult. And David offered Burnt-Offerings and
Peace Offerings, so the Lord was entreated for the Land, and the Plague was
stayed from Israel. Because the Lord by those Sacrifices was rendered
propitious or well pleased, therefore they are frequently said to be of a sweet
savor to the Lord, Levit. i. Noah's Sacrifice is said to be a savor of Rest,
as it is in the Margin, Genesis viii. 21. on which Occasion God said he would not
curse the Ground any more for Man's sake. It is called a savor of Rest,
because when God i^ pacified, his Anger rests, Ezekiel. xvi. 42. Hence those
Sacrifices are called propitiatory. The Words Propitiation, Atonement,
Reconciliation, Pacifying, are synonimous Terms, and signify one and the same
Thing.

NOW the same Words and Effects are ascribed to the Sacrifice of Christ (or to
his Death and Blood which is the same) in our Text he is said to be a
Propitiatory through Faith in his Blood, by him, says the Apostle to the Romans,
we have received the Atonement, Romans xi. He is called our Peace, Ephesians. ii.
14. And the Chastisement of our Peace is said to be laid upon him, i. e.
Punishments necessary to procure our Peace, and by his Blood and Death we are
said to be justified and reconciled. Romans v. 9.10.

PREVIOUS to this Reconciliation, Satisfaction to Justice was necessary, which
implies not only the Suffering of a Calamity, but that in Substance, which the
Law threatened and the Sinner deserved. Justice that it may be satisfied
requires the Execution of the Law, and the Calamity aforesaid must be endured
by the Sinner, and in his stead by another, if one suffers upon his own
Account, that can be no Satisfaction for another, all these Particulars we have
already proved, are verified in the Jewish Sacrifices, and in the Substance
which they prefigured.

ONCE more I may observe, that the Jewish Sacrifices removed Guilt or
Obligation to Punishment, here observe, that Guilt may be said to be threefold,
viz. Civil, Ceremonial, and Moral. Civil Guilt consisted in a liableness to
temporal Death, for some violation of the civil or judicial Law, Deuteronomy. xxi. 9.

CEREMONIAL Guilt consisted in an Obligation to be debarred from the Privileges
of public Worship under the Jewish Economy for some Breach of the ceremonial
Law, for some legal Pollution, Levit. 5. But,

MORAL Guilt consists in an Obligation to endure eternal Death for
transgressing the moral Law, for by divine Constitution the Wages of every
moral Evil or Sin properly and intrinsically so called is Death; now the legal
Sacrifices could free from the two former Kinds of Guilt, but the Death of
Christ alone from the latter, Heb. ix. 13, 14. For if the Blood of Goats, and
Ashes of a Heiser sprinkling of the Unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of
the Flesh, i. e. promoted an external Sanctification or Expiation, as to the
Flesh, not as to the Soul and Conscience, How much more shall the Blood of
Christ purge your Consciences from dead Works.

THE legal Sacrifices could not make him that did the Service, perfect, as
pertaining to the Conscience, because they could not compensate the Injury Sin
had done to GOD, being finite, without which, Justice is engaged to punish the
Transgressor with eternal Death.

THESE Sacrifices could only remove a civil and ceremonial Guilt, or liableness
to outward Punishment enacted by those Laws, (in Instances not grounded upon
the Nature and Reason of Things, but merely upon divine Sovereignity;) and
shadow forth the Sacrifice of Christ, which being of infinite Value is
sufficient to satisfy divine Justice, remove the Guilt of moral Impurity, and
save the Soul: Under the Law we are told, that without the shedding of Blood
there was no remission of Sins, and the Blood is said to make Atonement,
Levit. xvii 11. the Reason is, because the Life was in the Blood, and therefore
when the Blood was offered to make Atonement for the Offender, the Life of the
Sacrifice was supposed to be given instead of his Life, and thus the Sentence
of the Law threatening Death was executed, and so Justice satisfied. For this
Reason the Blood of the Mediator is said to speak better Things than the Blood
of Abel, for that cried for Revenge, but this procures Remission to Believers;
and this doubtless is the Reason why so frequent mention is made of the blood
of Christ, in the New Testament, viz. to show that our dear Redeemer has
endured the Penalty of the Law, Death itself, and thereby satisfied Justice,
magnified the Law, and made it honorable.

BUT the Reality and Sufficiency of Christ's Satisfaction to Justice appears,
not only from what has been said upon the scriptural Representation of Christ's
Death as a Punishment inflicted for Sin, as a Price to redeem us from Ruin, and
a Sacrifice to reconcile us to GOD, but likewise from the Consideration of the
Quality of the Person suffering, the Degrees of his Sufferings, and the Effects
of them.

THE Quality of his Person derived an infinite Value upon his Sufferings. Our
Redeemer was the true and eternal GOD, coequal and coeternal with his Father,
the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, the Son of
GOD, not merely by Office, but by Nature, and therefore was able to make full
Satisfaction for our Sins. The Wisdom and Justice of all Nations agree that
Punishments receive their Estimate from the Quality of the Persons that suffer:
Though the Deity is impassible, yet it was a divine Person that suffered, and
hence his Blood is called the Blood of GOD, in Scripture, this made his
Sufferings of infinite Worth.

NOR was there any Defect in the Payment he made, we owed a Debt of Death to
the Law, and his Life was offered up as a Sacrifice; yea, he trod the
Wine Press of his Father's Anger, and his divine Nature communicated an
infinite Dignity to his Sufferings, so that they were in Kind, Degree, and
Value, suited to the Sentence of the violated Law, equal to the Demerit of Sin,
and consequently satisfactory to divine Justice, provoked by it.

BUT methink, the Consideration of the Consequents and Effects of Christ's
Death pours more Light upon this important Subject, and clearly proves the
sufficiency of his Satisfaction to Justice.

NOW there are these three Consequences of his Death that deserve our present
A^ention, viz. his Resurrection from the Grave, his Ascension into Heaven, and
Exaltation to the Father's Right Hand.

OUR Lord, in Quality of our Surety, was arrested by Justice, and detained as
Prisoner in the Grave, till he had by his Death satisfied the Law and paid our
Debt; upon which he received a Discharge in his Resurrection, and hence the
raising of Christ is ascribed to GOD as reconciled, Now the God of Peace, who
brought again from the Dead the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of
the everlasting Covenant; besides it is ascribed to his Blood because that was
the full Price of his and our Liberty. Justice incensed arrested and slew him,
but Justice satisfied gave him a Release and Acquittance, of which his
Resurrection is a clear Demonstration.

THE blessed Jesus having risen from the Dead, ascended into Heaven as our High
Priest, there to interceed for us: Now his Admission into Heaven, after he had
undertaken to be our Surety, is a full and certain Proof that he has faithfully
discharged that important Trust, this is doubtless the Meaning of these Words
of Christ, John xvi. 10. He shall convince the World of Righteousness, because
I go to my Father, i. e. the holy Spirit shall convince and persuade Sinners of
the Compleatness of my personal and mediatorial Righteousness, by the Argument
of my ascending to and being accepted of my Father, for without this he would
exclude me from his divine Presence.

AFTER the High Priest had offered Sacrifices without at the Altar, for the
Sins of the People, he opened the Vail and entered into the Holy of Holies, and
there offered sweet Incense and the Blood of Sacrifices to render GOD
propitious to them, ( Levit. xvi. 14, 15.) These Things were Figures of what
Christ was to perform, the Holy of Holies was a Type of the third Heaven, as
that had a double Vail which separated it from the inner Temple, and the
outward Court, so is the third Heaven separated from the Earth by the double
Vail of the starry Heavens and airy Regions, none that was impure might enter
into the Holy of Holies, and into Heaven, we are told that no unclean Thing can
enter; there was the Throne of GOD, for as the Psalmist observes, He dwells
between the Cherubims, there the Tables of the Law, the Emblems of divine
Wisdom and Purity, there the Cherubims the Figures of the blessed Angels, there
the High Priest entered with the Blood of the Sacrifice, carrying the Names of
the twelve Tribes upon his Breast Plate.

THUS our great High Priest, after having by the Sacrifice of himself without
the Gates of Jerusalem, a toned for the Sins of his People, entered into the
eternal Sanctuary with his own Blood, bearing on his Bosom the Names of all the
redeem^, and taking Possession of Heaven for them in their Names, and there
offering their Supplications to his Father, perfumed with the Incense of his
Merits. Of this there was a miraculous sign given at his Crucifixion, for in
the Moment he expired, the Vail of the Temple was rent from the Top to the
Bottom, to signify that the great High Priest had Authority to enter into
Heaven itself as our Surety, and that his Design herein was to appear in the
Presence of God for us as the Lamb slain, ( Heb. ix. 24.)

AS our LORD purchased Salvation for us, by the real Sacrifice of himself upon
the Earth, so he applies it to us by his Intercession in Heaven, which is a
Commemoration of that Sacrifice; and therefore he is said to appear before his
Father by Sacrifice. (Heb. ix.)

IF any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous. His Intercession is attended with Majesty and Efficacy: He does not
now supplicate with strong crying and tears, as in the Days of his Flesh, but
Wills Salvation to his People, Father I will that those thou have given me be
with me, that they may behold my Glory. Nor does his Suit ever fail of Success,
for it is just, he asks nothing but what he has bought by Blood. Moreover, he
is nearly related to the eternal Father, and has an inexpressible Interest in
his Affection; and hence we are told, that him the Father hears always.

FARTHER, the present Exaltation of our Redeemer to the highest Degree of
Dignity, Glory and Dominion, is a certain Argument of the sufficiency of his
Satisfaction to Justice by his obedient Sufferings, because it was promised to
and conferred upon him by his Father as a Reward the^

THAT he is now advanced to the highest Dignity and Dominion, is evident from
these Scriptures, (Ephesians. i.) When he raised him from the Dead, and set him at
his own right Hand in heavenly Places, far above all principality and Power,
and Might and Dominion; and every Name that is named, not only in this World
but also in that which is to come, and has put all Things under his Feet, and
gave him to be the Head over all Things to the Church.

THAT the Father promised to him, as Mediator, the aforesaid Dignities as a
Reward, and consequent of his Humiliation, is likewise evident from these
Places of Scripture, ( Luke xxiv. 26.) Ought not Christ to have suffered and to
enter into his Glory: This doubtless refers to the Covenant of Redemption
between the Father and the Son, before all Worlds, wherein the Son engaged to
suffer for Sinners, and the Father promised to reward him for it; for without
Reference had hereto, there was no Obligation either upon the Father or the Son
in these respects, See also Phil. ii. 8.9. He humbled himself and became
obedient unto Death; wherefore God has also highly exalted him, and given him
a Name which is above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every Knee should
bow. Heb. i. 3. When he had by himself purged our Sins, he sat down on the
right Hand of the Majesty on high.

NOW seeing the aforesaid Exaltation, of being Head of the Church, and Lord of
the Universe, was promised to the Mediator as a Reward and Consequent of his
Sufferings and Satisfaction; forasmuch as it is dispensed, it is a sufficient
Proof that the Condition is performed, on which the Promise was suspended, or
in other Word^, of the certainty and sufficiency of CHRIST'S Satisfaction to
Justice.

BUT the Effects of Christ's Death, are likewise Evidences of his Satisfaction
by it, and therefore give farther force to this Argument. The Law made nothing
Perfect, all it is Sacrifices and Ceremonies could not cancel the Guilt, or
cleanse the stain of moral Impurity, nor open Heaven for us, all which are
necessary to our Perfection. But CHRIST by one Offering has perfected forever
them that are sanctified; he has acquired for his People, acquitance from the
Guilt of Sin, deliverance from its Stain and Dominion, and a ^^al Admission
into the Imperial Paradise

The Death of JESUS has blotted out the Handwriting of Ordinances which was
contrary to us, and took it out of the Way, nailing it to his Cross i. e.
entirely cancelled the condemnatory Sentence of the Law as to Believers; for in
the aforesaid Terms there is a manifest allusion to the Defacing and
Destruction of obligatory Bonds. In the End of the World our great high Priest
appeared to put away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself; his Blood cleanses from
all Sin, and not only extends its Efficacy to all Time past, but will to all
Time coming; and hence he is said to be the same Yesterday today and forever,
able to save to the uttermost all that come to the Father by him.

NOR is the Death of CHRIST less efficacious in removing the Dominion and Stain
of Sin, for by it the sanctifying Influences of the Holy Spirit are procured,
whereby we are renewed after the Image of God, and made meet for Communion with
him; hence it was that Christ promised the Comforter as a consequent of his
Ascension. ( John xvi.) Hence we are said to be sanctified in Christ Jesus, and
to have our Robes made white in the Blood of the Lamb. (Rev. vii. 14.)

AND is it not through the Blood of CHRIST that we have boldness to enter into
the holiest? (Heb. x. 19) Which is a clear Evidence of the complete
Satisfaction made by it: For without this, Justice would never suffer the
Privilege of the Righteous to be confered on the guilty and depraved. To this
very Purpose the Apostle himself argues, (Heb. v. 9.) He learned Obedience by
the Things which he suffered, and being made Perfect, be became the Author of
eternal Salvation to all them that obey him. The meaning of which is, that
there was Obedience to the Fathers appointment in Christ's Sufferings, and that
after he had perfected the End designed by them, which was Satisfaction to
Justice, he became the Author of Happiness to all that are believingly subject
to his Government and Authority.

Having gone through the Heads of Discourse proposed; give me leave, because of
the inexpressible moment of this Subject, before I proceed to the Improvement,
to offer a brief Answer to the principal Objections that are made against the
Satisfaction of Christ.

1. The Socinians object, that it is a Violation of Justice to transfer the
Punishment of one to another.

I Answer, It is so in some Cases, but not in all, e. g. When the Person
punished has not Power to dispose of his Life, does not consent to the
Punishment, and no valuable End can be answered by it, then it is no doubt
unjust to transfer the Punishment upon him. But on the Contrary, when he has
Power to dispose of his Life, consents thereto, and a valuable End can be
answered thereby, it is not unjust.

NOW every of these Things are applicable to Christ. He had full Power to
dispose of his Life, and freely consented to his Death, ( John x. 18.) I lay
down my life, no Man takes it from me, I have Power to lay it down and Power
to take it again; nor was it possible he should be held under the Power of
Death, ( Act. ii. 24.) otherwise no doubt it would have been unreasonable for
such a one as he to endure it, for worthless rebels.

MOREOVER, an infinite Good results from his Death; God is hereby glorified,
and guilty Sinners saved, and the great Ends of Government answered.

JUSTICE is no disorderly Appetite, that aims principally at the Ruin of the
Guilty, and is dissatisfied without it. No, it preserves Right with pure
Affections, and is therefore content when the Injury is repaired, from
whomsoever Satisfaction comes.

THOUGH an Inocent Person cannot suffer as Inocent, without Injustice; yet he may
contract an Obligation which will expose him to deserved Sufferings. The Wisdom
and Justice of all Nations agree in punishing one for another Fault, where
there is previous Consent, as in the Case of Hostages; though it is essential to
punishment to be inflicted for Sin, yet not on the Person sinning, for in the
Judgment of the Law, the Sinner and Surety are one.

EXCHANGE in Criminal Cases it is true is not allowed, but that is not from a
Supposition of Injustice in its Nature, for then it would not be allowed in
civil; but for other Reasons, such as these, viz. Because Life is a Depositum
committed to us, to be preserved till God or the public Good calls for it;
besides the Public would suffer loss by the Destruction of one of its Members,
and perhaps the surviving nocent, or guilty Person, grow worse by impunity.

Moreover we should remember, that there is a difference between the same
Person, when abstractly considered, and by himself, and when sustaining the
Representation of others, since such a one's Inocence, though it renders him
incapable of suffering, strictly so called, in the former of these respects,
yet not in the latter, because the Law then no longer looks upon his private
but public Character; and consequently the Punishment of those he represents
devolves upon their Proxy. These Things duly considered, the aforesaid grand
and popular Objection vanishes into Smoke.

But it is again objected, that the Punishment which our SAVIOR, underwent,
was not the same which the Law threatened, and therefore is not Satisfactory; it
is but the Death of one, but a transient and temporal Death, whereas the
eternal Death of all was threatened.

I Answer, It is true there was a Difference in some Circumstances, but not in
Substance. Jesus Christ did endure a real temporal Death, and something
Equivalent to an eternal, in weight and value. He could not endure indeed the
reproaches of a sinful Mind, or the Anguish of Despair, because it is
impossible from the Nature of Things, that these Calamities could come upon an
inocent and divine Person, they being the result of personal Guilt and
Impotency to atone for it; but our Lord endured Agonies of another Kind, the
awful apprehensions of a painful ignominious Death, the Malice of Satan, and
the unrelenting Vengeance of Almighty God, which all united at once against
him; while in the mean Time the divine Nature, as it were, withdrew from his
relief. Whatever were the Ingredients of that bitter Cup which God that mixed
them, and he that drunk them, only knew, yet this we may say, that it could be
no ordinary penal pressure, which could overwhelm his Soul with such a deluge
of Grief, dissolve his Body into a sweat of Blood, and at last extort that
awful outcry, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me. This inexpressible
weight of Pain, which the dignity of his Person put an immense Value upon, made
his Sufferings equal to the Guilt of all he represented, and more than equal to
the sufferings of all Mankind; the eternal anguish of the whole human Race
could not have to much honored the Justice and Law of God, as the Sufferings
of God himself in our Nature, though but for a small space of Time

But to open and illustrate this Matter more fully, let it be considered, that
it was impossible for the Redeemer to pay the Debt of Penalty denounced by the
Law for Sin, in all the Circumstances of it: He did indeed endure a natural
Death strictly so called, but then it was but one in the Room of Millions, the
Defficiency of which was made up by the Dignity of his Person.

BUT as to spiritual Death, though he bore something like it, viz the withdrawing
for a Time a comfortable Sense of his Fathers love, and anguish of Spirit, in a
Degree that we cannot conceive or express; yet it was impossible that he should
endure it in all its Parts strictly and properly; for as spiritual Life
includes these two Things, viz, a Union to God by Faith and pious Habits, from
which all truly spiritual and acceptable Acts proceed, so by the Law of
Contraries, spiritual Death must needs include a real Separation from God, a
real removal or privation of pious Habits, for so long as one has them, however
clouded, weakened or out of Exercise, though he may be said to be in a spiritual
Sleep or Consumption, yet he is still alive.

NOW to suppose that the human Soul of Christ was separated from the divine
Nature, as it is without Foundation in Scripture, so it destroys the infinite
value of the Sacrifice of it to Justice, which depends upon that Union.

AND to suppose that the Soul of Christ was devoid of pious Principles or
Habits, is to make him a SINNER realy and inherently, and thus to disqualify
him entirely from being a Savior of others. The Reason is this, the moral Law
being spiritual, in Regard of its Author, Nature and Design, and Perfect also,
must needs require Purity in the Temper and Disposition of the Soul, which
cannot be without the aforesaid Habits: Now if CHRIST wanted these, he was
disconformed to the Law, and so a Sinner realy and inherently, for Sin is any
want of Conformity to, or Transgression of the Law. 1 John iii. 4. He amartia
estin, he anomia.


IF so, CHRIST would want another MEDIATOR to save him, and therefore he was
only made Sin by Imputation, being in the mean Time personally and inherently
holy, harmless and undefiled, and knowing no Sin.

WHAT was defective in the Sufferings of Christ's human Nature, in respect of
the Species or Circumstances of the Penalty threatened by the Law, was made up
by its Union with the divine, and so rendered an equivalent to the demerit of
Sin.

AND indeed in this Constitution, the Wisdom of God appears admirably; for on
the Supposition that Christ paid the Debt in Specie in all Circumstances which
the Law required, (were that possible) the Bond would be cancelled, and all
those Christ represented actually freed from the Curse, at least from the Time
of the Payment made by the Surety, which Notion is as dangerous as absurd.

BUT an EQUIVALENT puts it into the original Creditors Power whether he will
accept of it at all, and when, and how to communicate the Benefits thereof to
the Debtors.

AGREEABLE hereto the blessed God has, in unspeakable Wisdom and Goodness, so
formed the Plan of the new Covenant, that none shall have any actual Title to,
or Investiture in the Benefits of Christ's Purchase, until they be enabled to
repent and believe.

THIS, rightly understood, entirely oversets the dangerous and inconsistent
Doctrines of the Antinomians, preserves the Harmony of the Scriptures, and
makes the Doctrines of Grace and Duties of Religion entirely consistent.

ANOTHER Objection is this, How could God receive this Satisfaction, since he
himself was the Party that gave it? Or how could the Savior of Mankind,
supposing him to be God, make Satisfaction to himself? The Answer is,

THAT the infinite Goodness of God in giving a Redeemer, does not divest him of
the Office of supreme Judge, nor hinder him from receiving a Ransom to preserve
the Rights of Justice inviolable. To illustrate this Matter, we have an eminent
Instance, not unlike it, in the Case of Zaleucus, the Prince of the Locrians,
who passed a Law, that Adulterers should loose both their Eyes; and when his
Son was convicted of that Crime, the People, who respected him for his
excellent Qualities, came and interceeded for him, Zaleucus, in a conflict
between Zeal for Justice and Affection to his Son, took but one Eye from him,
and parted with one of his own to satisfy the Law, and in this Action both paid
and received the Punishment: He paid it as a Father, and received it as a
Conservator of public Justice. In like Manner when guilty Mankind could not
pay the Forfeiture of the Law, God, the Father of Mercies, was pleased to give
it from the Treasures of his Love, i. e. the Blood of his Son for our Ransom;
which he nevertheless as the Supreme Judge received from Christ upon the Cross,
and declared it to be an Offering of a sweet smelling Savor to him, or a
sufficient Satisfaction to his Justice.

NOR is it inconsistent with Reason, that the Son of God, clothed with our
Nature, should by Death make Satisfaction to the Deity, and therefore to
himself. In a Difference between two Parties, a Person that belongs to one of
them, may interpose for Reconciliation provided he divests his own Interest,
and leaves it with the Party from whom he comes. For Instance, when a Father
and Son, both possessed of Imperial Power, have been offended by rebellious
Subjects, it may not be improper for the Son to interpose as a Mediator, to
restore them to the favor of their Prince, and yet at the same Time he
reconciles them to himself, and procures them the Pardon of an Offense whereby
his own Majesty was violated. But the Time requires that I hasten to the
Improvement.

HAS Jesus Christ been slain as a Sacrifice of Propitiation for us? Then how
vain, how uncomfortable and perilous is the Opinion of those who deny the
Imputation of his Righteousness to Believers; for hereby they endeavor to sap
the Foundations of the Christian's Hope, and shut up the Springs of their Joy,
hereby they oppose the continued Series of Revelation both in the Old and
New Testament: To deny the Imputation of his Righteousness to Believers, is the
same Thing in effect, as to deny his being sacrificed for them, and equally
unreasonable, as has been before represented, and if CHRIST has not died our
Faith is vain, we are without Hope, Help, Comfort; but blessed be GOD, though the
Doctrine of CHRIST crucified be to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the
Greeks foolishness, yet to those that believe, it is the Wisdom of GOD, and the
Power of GOD.

HAS Christ been set forth as a Sacrifice of Propitiation, then we may hence
learn the Sinfulness of Sin and strictness of divine Justice in the Punishment
of it; its true, the Evil of Sin may be in some Measure discerned from its
malignant Nature, being an Enmity against the blessed GOD, a Contrariety to,
and dishonorable Reflection upon all his adorable Attributes, as well as a
rebellious Contempt of all the sacred and unalianable Rights of his Government
over the Natural and Moral World.

BUT the most affecting Demonstration of its Malignity appears in those
Punishments which are inflicted for it; the Torments of the Damned are, no
doubt, equal to the Demerit, and therefore expressive of the great Evil of it:
But they are too little thought upon and realiz'd by stupid, indolent
Transgressors, until it be too late to obtain a Deliverance; and temporal
Calamities cannot sufficiently represent the infinite Displeasure of GOD
against the obstinate and ungrateful Contempt of his Goodness and Government;
but in the Sacrifice and Sufferings of CHRIST it is expressed to the utmost in
the most strong and flaming Colors. Had divine Justice rent the Heavens and
appeared on this Theater, attended with the most terrible Images of Pomp and
Majesty, to punish the Affronts and Insults cast upon the Authority of GOD by
impenitent Transgressors, it could not make a deeper and more abiding
Impression upon our Minds, than the due Consideration of the Sufferings of our
Lord JESUS: The drowning of the Old World by an awful Inundation of Water, and
the dreadful Destruction of the Cities of the Plain by Showers of Fire, do not
set the Evil of Sin, and divine Severity in the Punishment of it in so strong
and striking a Light; if we consider not only the Depth of his Sufferings but
the Dignity of his Person, and near Relation to his eternal Father; he suffered
not only Torments from Men many Ways, but his Father's Wrath in a Degree equal
to the Desert of all the Sins of those he represented; and the Person who
endured these Things was the Son of GOD by Nature, and of coequal Glory and
Majesty with his eternal Father. O how inflexible is the Justice of GOD, that
would not spare even his own innocent and beloved Son, when he became Surety
for Transgressors.

AND how then shall those escape the angry Strokes of GOD'S ^on Rod, who
obstinately persist in Unbelief and Impenitence, when such a dearly purchased
Salvation is set before them, and they repeatedly and earnestly urged to accept
thereof? Can they fortify themselves against Almightiness, or encounter with
divine Vengeance, the Apprehensions of which made the Soul of Christ sorrowful,
and heavy, even unto Death? Can they bear with Patience forever, that
Indignation which extorted a bloody Shower from Christ's Body; and the most
affecting Lamentations from his Soul! Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani,
notwithstanding his personal Inocence and the Supports of his Godhead? O
Sinners! For GOD'S sake, realize these Things speedily, least ye feel the
Weight of God's Vengeance forever.

AGAIN, methinks what has been said in the doctrinal Part of this Discourse,
serves to remove the Reproach of CHRIST'S Cross; this was a Stone of Stumbling,
and a Rock of Offense to the Jews, they wanted a pompous Messiah to deliver
them from temporal Bondage, and judged it absurd to expect great Things or
(...) Blessedness from one under Circumstances of the deepest Abasement, and
many of the Gentiles are of the same Stamp, and take Occasion of Prejudice one
Way or other from Christ's Cross; but to such as believe it is exceeding
precious; for they clearly apprehend that CHRIST by his Death has satisfied
Justice, ^ade Atonement for Sin, and purchased spiritual and eternal Benefits:
The Doctrine of Christ's Sacrifice upon the Cross, is the very Foundation of
the Gospel, upon which its whole Fabric is firmly built; its the Center in
which the Lines of both Testaments meet and harmonize, the Soul that animates
the whole Frame, without which it is but a dead Carcass; this is the Source of
our Righteousness and Peace, our Comfort and Salvation: This opens a Door of
Hope to distressed Sinners, and a Fountain of Joy and Solace, to all the Saints
of GOD that will never, never run dry. For the Man Christ Jesus is to them a
hiding place from the Wind, a Covert from the Tempest, as Rivers of Waters in a
dry Place, and as the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land, sure Protection
from every Danger, sweet Refreshment in every Difficulty, and strong Support
under every Pressure; a (...) to every Wound, a Salvo to every Fear, yea, even
to that of divine Justice; for Justice being satisfied by the Blood of the
great Sacrifice, becomes our Friend, and instead of barring us out of the
celestial Paradise with its flaming Sword, safely conducts us thither, and
infallibly ascertains our Salvation; for JUSTICE in its Nature requires but a
single PAYMENT, which GOD the Father having received, in the obedient
Sufferings of his beloved Son; is JUST, even IN JUSTIFYING THOSE THAT BELIEVE
IN HIM.

O therefore let us come to CHRIST, and depend upon his BLOOD alone for
Justification and Salvation; for him has GOD set forth to be a Propitiation
through Faith in his Blood; it is in vain, my Brethren, to depend upon our Works,
for he is cursed that don't continue in all Things that are written in the Book
of the Law, to do them, and if we were perfect in our Obedience in Time coming,
this Payment which is due to the Law, cannot cancel the former Debt we are
under to Justice for past Offenses; it is in vain to come with Burnt-Offerings,
and Calves of a Year old, to offer thousands of Rams, and ten thousand Rivers
of Oil, or to offer our Firstborn for our Transgression, the Fruit of our Body
for the Sins of our Souls, it is Christ, and Christ alone, that can help and
save us: O then let us with the Apostle count all Things but Loss and Dung for
the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ our Lord, that we may be found in him,
not having our own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through
the Faith of Christ the Righteousness of GOD through Faith; let us beware of the
Ignorance of God's Righteousness, least we go about to establish our own, and
so rebelliously refuse to submit to the Righteousness of GOD, seeing that by
the Deeds of the Law no Flesh living can be justified, let us then inviolably
pursue the Apostle's Sentiments, Disposition, and Practice, maugre all
Opposition to the Contrary from Men and from Devils, namely, to desire to know
nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, to worship God in the Spirit, to
have no Confidence in the Flesh, and to rejoice in Christ Jesus, who by the
Sacrifice of himself has satisfied divine Justice for us, and is our all in
all, AMEN, AMEN, AMEN. May God himself say AMEN.

FINIS.
A SERMON Preached at PHILADELPHIA, July 20. 1748. ON A FUNERAL OCCASION,
Wherein the absolute CERTAINTY, and great MOMENT, of the Doctrine of the
RESURRECTION Are proved and illustrated; with a REPLY to the principal
OBJECTIONS against it.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M.

Ecles. vii. 2. It is better to go to the House of Mourning, then to go to the
House of Feasting: For that is the End of all Men, and the living will lay it
to Heart.

Dan. xii. 2. And many of them that Sleep in the Dust of the Earth shall awake,
some to everlasting Life, and some to shame and everlasting Contempt.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by W. BRADFORD, in Second Street, 1749.

1. THESSALONIANS, iv. 13.14. But I would not have you to be Ignorant Brethren,
concerning, them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which
have no hope.

For if we believe that Jesus died, and arose again, even so them also which
sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.


THE Apostle in these Verses, labors to assuage and moderate the Sorrows of
Christians, on Occasion of the Departure of their pious Friends, Acquaintances
and Relations, by observing to them, that their Death was but like a Sleep,
from which they should be in due Season awaked; and that to indulge an excess
of Grief on such Occasions, was but to imitate the unreasonable practice of the
Pagans, who had no Hope of the Resurrection of the Dead, and a blessed
Immortality ensuing upon it. This Resurrection the Apostle assures us, is a
necessary consequent of the Resurrection of CHRIST, for if we believe that
JESUS dyed and r^se again^ even so them also which sleep in JESUS, will God
bring with him, i. e. Those who die in a State of vital Union to CHRIST, he
will bring their Souls with him in Triumph to the Seat of Judgment, and unite
them to their Bodies raised from the Dead, that so they may enjoy consumate
Blessedness.

FROM the Words of our Text considered complexly, we may collect the following
Proposition, which I think contains their Substance and Scope, viz. That the
Consideration of the glorious Resurrection of such as sleep in JESUS, may
justly check immoderate Sorrow for their Departure from us.

IN Discoursing upon which, I would enquire, I. Who those are who may be said
to Sleep in JESUS. II. Represent the Properties of that Sorrow which is
immoderate on this Occasion. III. Offer some Thoughts upon the Resurrection of
the just, and show why the Consideration hereof, ought to give in allay to the
former Sorrow.
I return to the

I. Proposed, Which was to enquire, who those are that Sleep in JESUS. Previous
to which I would observe, that Death is here compared to a Sleep, because of
the Analogy between them, especially in the following Instances, namely.

WHEN we Sleep our Senses are bound up, so that we cannot behold what is done
about us. And thus when we die, our Eyes are shut, our Eye strings broken, so
that we cannot behold what is done under the Sun.

WHEN we sleep we are likewise unactive and cannot carry on the Business of
Life. And thus in the Grave whither we all hasten, there is no Work nor
Invention, and therefore we should Work while the Day lasts.

FARTHER, Sleep gives rest to the Body. And does not Death do so likewise? Job,
speaking of Death, says, I should have lien still and been quiet, I should
have slept, then had I been at rest. In the Grave is a Rest from labor and
travail, a Rest from trouble and oppression, there the Wicked cease from
Troubling, and the Weary are at Rest, a rest from Sorrow and Suffering, no
Sickness or Uneasiness shall afflict us there, and that which is indeed the
best of all, there is a rest from Sin and every Temptation to it!

AGAIN it may be observed, that Sleep is not perpetual, those that Sleep for a
while do awake at last. And thus those that sleep the sleep of Death, shall
awake and arise at the general Judgment. Hence the Grave is called a Bed, by
the Royal Prophet: Isaiah lvi. 2.
And hence the ancient Fathers of the three first Centuries after CHRIST,
called the burying Place a place of sleep. Is it not upon this Account, that
Solomon says, Proverbs xiv. 32.
that the righteous have Hope in their Death; there is Hope of their
Resurrection and happy State after Death, hope of seeing them at CHRIST'S
coming to judge the World.

WE go to Sleep without distressing dread, nay sometimes we earnestly desire
it. And may not pious Persons cheerfully resign themselves to the Empire of
Death, seeing the sting of it is taken away, viz, the guilt of Sin? And do not
some of them desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ which is far better?

NOW those that sleep in JESUS, are such who have received him by Faith, have
Communion in his Love, and conformity to his Law.

WHILE in a State of Nature we are separated from Christ, and must, in order to
our vital union to him by Faith, be convinced by the Word and Spirit of God, of
our guilty, dangerous and helpless Case, so as to be seriously affected with a
view of it, and constrained to fly to Christ as our only Remedy, and embrace
him as our Prophet, Priest and King without reserve: When this is Real and
Sincere, we are united to Jesus in a saving Way; and, as a natural consequent
of this Union, Communications of divine Light, Love and Life are vouchsafed
upon us, which transform us into the Image of God more and more in our inward
governing Dispositions; and incline us habitually to endeavor Conformity
thereto in Practice. Those that are in Christ are new Creatures, have
Fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, and walk even as he
walked.

HERE it may not be improper to offer some general Hints concerning Death,
which is doubtless a Dissolution of the Union between the ^oul and Body,
whereby though the Soul is not hindered in its activity, yet the Body is hereby
rendered a pale and inactive Carcass! If the Soul sometimes acts without the
Assistance of the Body, while it is in a State of Union with it, as
particularly in sleep; how much more may it act in a State of Separation from
it.

THE sacred Scriptures inform us, that Death came into the World by Sin, and is
the Wages of it, and to this Testimony right Reason accords, for why should a
Punishment be inflicted without respect had to a previous Fault?

THAT which gives Death a very solemn Sound, is that it not only concludes the
Projects, Labors, and Enjoyments of Life, but likewise brings the Seasons and
Means of Grace we enjoy to a final Period; we are then called to an account for
our Stewardship, for we may be no longer Stewards. When Men's Breath goes out,
in that very Day their Thoughts perish: All the Projects to secure a future
temporal Good, which perhaps too much occupy'd and perplexed their anxious
laboring Minds, are suddenly broken and crushed by the Foot of Death, and they
of Consequence disappointed of their fond Expectations!

AT Death our ^tate of Trial expires, and we immediately enter into an
unchangeable and eternal State of Rewards or Punishments; the Comfort or Misery
of which, the strongest Imagination cannot sufficiently paint, the largest
Understanding comprehend or the most eloquent Tongue express.

AND though the Time of our Death be known to and fixed by the Almighty, who has
appointed to Man, as a Hireling, his Days, and established his Bounds so that
he cannot pass, yet from us it is for wise Reasons kept secret, that we may be
thereby excited to continual Preparation, seeing we know not what a Day may
bring forth. I proceed to the

II. Proposed, Which was to represent the Properties of immoderate Sorrow for
the Death of others.

NO doubt we should have a tender Sense of the righteous Displeasure of GOD in
those afflictive bereavements! Humble ourselves under his mighty Hand, and call
upon him in the Day of our Trouble. The Religion of CHRIST being rational, does
not oblige us to be as Stocks or Stones, insensible under Afflictions, but on
the contrary forbids it, My Son despise not the Chastening of the Lord. I
afflicted them, says the Almighty by the Prophet, and they have not grieved,
yea, they r^fused to receive Correction. True Christianity does not destroy the
proper Use of the Passions, but only regulates their Objects and Exercise,
guides them into a proper Channel, and keeps them within the bounds of Reason
and Decency; for Excesses are as hurtful to us, as they are dishonorable to
Religion!

BUT when may Sorrows for the deceased, be said to be immoderate? I answer,
when they incline us to murmur against God's Providence, which is always wise,
righteous, and sovereign, the Wheels whereof are full of Eyes, Jehovah is a
Rock, his Ways are perfect, a God of Truth and without Iniquity, just and right
is he; there are many devises in Man's Heart, but the Council of the Lord that
shall stand, and he will do all his Pleasure.

MOREOVER Sorrow may be said to be immoderate, when we are hereby disposed to
distrust GOD'S Promises, which are faithful, and cannot, will not fail of a
seasonable Accomplishment, when through this Diffidence we are ready to faint by
the Way, and sink under the Weight of our Pressures, when we are thereby
rendered unable to perform the Duties required of us, and look upon the
remaining Consolations of GOD as small and inconsiderable!

NOW as immoderate Grief contains in it, great Ingratitude against GOD'S
Goodness, and Rebellion against his Authority, so it cannot remove our
Miseries, but only make us more unable to endure them.

III. Proposed, Comes next to be considered, which was to offer some Thoughts
upon the Resurrection of the Just, and show why the Consideration hereof should
give an allay to immoderate Sorrow for their Departure from us?

OUR Lord himself expressly asserts the Resurrection of the Dead in these
memorable Words, Marvel not at this; for the Hour is coming, in the which all
that are in the Graves shall hear his Voice, and shall come forth, they that
have done Good, unto the Resurrection of Life; and they that have done Evil,
unto the Resurrection of Damnation. John v. 28, 29.
It cannot be a spiritual Resurrection or Conversion that is here intended, for
then the Meaning would be that a Number shall be converted and born again in
order to be damned, which is both false and absurd, and contrary to what Christ
has elsewhere declared! And therefore it is the Resurrection of the Body that
our Savior asserts, for there are but these two Kinds of Resurrection, viz. of
the Mind and of the Body. And hence Christ promises to raise up his People at
the last Day, who did before experience a spiritual Resurrection or Conversion,
John vi. 44.
and we are farther informed that GOD will swallow up Death in Victory. Isa.
xxv. 8.
It is but reasonable and just, that those Bodies which have been the
Companions of the Soul in its Actions, should be therewith rewarded according
to them.

BUT the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead, is, methinks, an unanswerable
Argument of our Resurrection; if it be considered, that he arose as a public
Person, as the Head of his Church, and promised that their Bodies should be
made like to his glorious Body. The first Fruits are a sure Evidence of a
future Harvest, of the same kind therewith: But now is Christ risen from the
Dead, says the Apostle, and become the first Fruits of them that slept. 1 Cor.
xv. 20.
To imagine that this Resurrection of Christ was spiritual, (signifying his
Conversion) is ridiculous and blasphemous! For this would suppose that he was
before dead in Sins and Trespasses, and it is contrary to the Testimony of the
Apostles, who declare that they saw him, conversed, and eat with him after his
Resurrection; and saw him after some Time ascending to Heaven; to which the
Declaration of CHRIST himself accords, who when his Disciples were terrified at
his first Appearance to them, after his Resurrection, imagining that they had
seen a Spirit, addressed them in this Language, Behold my Hands and my Feet,
that it is I MY SELF, handle me and see me, for a Spirit has not Flesh and
Bones, as ye see me have. Luke xxiv,


THE Instance of THOMAS one would think is sufficient to convince even
Infidelity itself. When the other Disciples informed him, that they had seen
the Lord after his Resurrection; he replied, except I shall see in his Hands,
the Print of the Nails, and put my Fingers into the Print of the Nails, and
thrust my Hand into his Side, I will not believe. This peevish Infidelity
showed, that he had but little Knowledge of CHRIST'S Godhead, and had given
little heed to the Promise our Lord had made, of his rising again on the third
Day, after his Crucifixion.

TO convince this Man of his Infidelity, eight Days afterward, JESUS in the
Presence of the Disciples thus addressed him, Thomas reach hither thy Finger,
and behold my Hands, and reach hither thy Hand, and thrust it into my Side, and
be not faithless but believing. Me ginu apistos. Do not become an Unbeliever to
signify that the Denial of CHRIST'S Resurrection, especially under the
Advantage of the strongest Evidences in favor of it, is an awful Sign of the
total Want of true Faith, or real Goodness and Piety!

THOMAS having complied with his Lord's Injunction, 1 John i. 1. upon which
Scripture Tertullian observes, that the Apostle's hearing and seeing, and
handling of him, convinced them that the Body of Christ was no Phantasm, (epse
auditus, et visus, et ne phantasma crederetur, etiam contrectatus; Tertul.
adversus praxeam.) I say Thomas having complied with the aforesaid Injunction
was convinced of his perilous Mistake, and thereupon immediately acknowledged
Christ to be the Lord his GOD, saying my Lord, and my God.

UPON this Acknowlegement, Jesus observed as follows, Thomas, because thou have
seen me, thou have believed; blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have
believed; as if Christ had said, thou have been enduced by the Testimony of thy
Senses, to believe in the reality of my Resurrection, thou do well, in that
thou have seen me, have felt me, and so believed; but it is more noble to
believe in my Resurrection from the Dead, without any such sensible Evidence;
this, this, is the Way to true BLESSEDNESS! See John xx. Chap.

WHEN the Jews asked a Sign of our Lord's divine Mission and Authority, he
referred them to his Resurrection, destroy THE TEMPLE, and in three Days will I
raise it up: This he spoke of the Temple of his Body: When therefore he was
risen from the Dead, his Disciples remembered that he had said this unto them,
and they believed the Scripture, (John ii. 18 -- 22.). And hence we may learn,
that to deny the RESURRECTION of the SAME BODY of CHRIST, which was laid in the
SEPULCHER, is to DISBELIEVE the SCRIPTURE, to make CHRIST a FALSE PROPHET, to
overthrow the Sign or EVIDENCE of his divine MISSION, which he himself directed
them to, and consequently to ^AP the very FOUNDATIONS of CHRISTIANITY. Very
terrible, but unavoidable Consequences!

WELL then, seeing the same Body which was laid in the Sepulcher, with its
Flesh and Bones, was raised from the Dead, then either the same numerical
Bodies of his People, that sleep in the dust shall be raised (as to their
Substance) at the general Judgment, or his Promise of making them like his,
must entirely fail. Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the Dead, how
say some among you that there is no Resurrection of the Dead, but if there be
no Resurrection of the Dead, then is Christ not risen, and if Christ be not
risen, then is our preaching vain, and your Faith is also vain; yea we are
found (says the Apostle) false Witnesses of God, because we have testified of
God, that he raised up Christ, whom he raised not up, if so be that the Dead
rise not. 1 Cor. xv.


FROM what has been said, the great stress which the Apostle lays upon this
DOCTRINE of CHRISTIANITY easily appears: Agreeable to which is what he
elsewhere speaks of Hymeneous and Philetus, who, says he, concerning the Truth
have erred, saying, that the Resurrection is passed already, and overthrow the
Faith of some. 2 Timothy ii. 17, 18.
He likewise observes, that their Word eat as does a Canker; their Doctrine
spread like a Gangreen; they vainly imagined that there should be no
Resurrection of the Body in time coming; but that what was intended by the
Resurrection in Scripture, was already passed, either in the Resurrection of
Christ, or in the spiritual Change which is wrought in the Hearts of good Men
in this Life by the Holy Ghost. The Corruption and Danger of which flesh
pleasing Principle, the Apostle sets himself to oppose and represent.

NOR was this Notion peculiar to some erroneous and heretical Christians in the
Apostolic Times, No! It was the universal Opinion of the Saduces and Pagans,
that there will be no Resurrection of the Dead. The former denied it, and the
latter de^ided it. When the erroneous Saduces (Men of the same stamp with the
modern Deists) who say that there is no Resurrection, endeavored to nonplus
our LORD concerning it, by an impertinent query, he answered, Ye do err not
knowing the Scriptures, or the Power of God, for in the Resurrection they
neither marry nor are given in Marriage. Mat. xxii.
The proud Pagan Athenians, when they heard Paul preach of the Resurrection of
the Dead, they mocked him, Acts xvii. 32.
they looked upon the Opinion as absurd and ridiculous; and no wonder, for
(...) the Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom knew not God. The Doctrine of
Christ's Crucifixion and Resurrection, was to the Jews a stumbling block, and
to the Greeks foolishness, but to those that believe it is the Wisdom of God,
and the Power of God.

METHINKS the Evangelists Declaration, that at the Crucifixion ^^ CHRIST, the
Graves were opened, and many Bodies of Saints which slept arose, and came out
of their Graves after his Resurrection, and went into the holy City, and
appeared to many, Mat. xxvii. 52, 53.
is no inconsiderable Proof of the RESURRECTION of the DEAD, for hereby a plain
SPECIMEN is given of it.

I MIGHT add, that if the Body did not arise, the Soul wo^ld not be completely
happy, because of its desire of Union therewith.

THE Resurrection is properly the reviving or raising up a dead Body, and
re-uniting it to its own Soul, Thy dead Men, says the Prophet, shall live
together, with my dead Body shall they arise, awake and sing ye that dwell in
the Dust, for thy dew is as the dew of Herbs, and the Earth shall cast out her
Dead. Isaiah xxvi 19.


THE Cause of it, is the Almighty Power of God: And hence the Resurrection of
Christ is ascribed to the working of his mighty Power. Ephesians xix 20.
To the Exertion of which, the Sound of the last Trump, and Voice of the
Archangel, will be introductory Preludes, or Preparatory Signals!

The Subjects of the Resurrection, are all that ever lived, and have dyed, and
have not yet risen from the Dead, and all that shall exist to the End of Time,
those only excepted who shall be found alive at the coming of Christ to judge
the World, who shall not sleep the sleep of Death, but be changed in a Moment,
in the twinkling of an Eye, at the last Trump; for the Trumpet shall sound and
the Dead shall be raised incorruptible. 1 Cor. xv. 52, 53.
There shall be a Resurrection both of the Just and Unjust; the Dead, small and
great, shall stand before God; the Sea shall give up its dead, and Death and
Hell shall give up their Dead. Act xxiv. 1^. Rev. xx 12, 13.


THE Time of the Resurrection will be the End of the World. Just before the
general Judgment, then, says the Apostle, comes the End, when he shall have
delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, when he shall have put down
all Rule and all Authority and Power, -- The last Enemy shall be then
destroyed, which is Death. 1 Cor. xv 24, 26.


The End of the Resurrection, is undoubtedly the Glory of God's Power, Mercy
and Justice, which will be hereby rendered eminently conspicuous.

THE Differences of the Resurrection of the Just and Unjust, will be very
great; although both shall be raised by the same Power, and judged by the same
Judge, and made Immortal, yet there will be a vast difference in many respects,
particularly as to the Principle, End and Manner.

THE Principle of the one, will be God's Love and Promise, and the Merit of
Christ: Hence Christ is called the Resurrection, not only as he is the
efficient but meritorious Cause of it; in consequence of which, he promises to
raise up his at the last Day: But the Resurrection of the Wicked, flows from
God's Justice and threatening.

THE End will be also very different, which the Prophet emphatically
represents, and many that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall awake, some to
everlasting Life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. Dan. xii. 2.


THE Manner will be likewise different; for the Bodies of the Saints will be
spiritual, in respect of their Qualities: It is sown, says the Apostle, a
natural Body, it is raised a spiritual Body, 1 Cor. xv. 44.
and therefore they will be nimble in their Motions, and no Obstruction to the
Soul in its Operations: In the mean time, you may observe, that the Apostle
Points to the SAME IT, both as natural and spiritual, showing that it is the
very same numerical identical Body, as to substance, which was laid in the
Grave, and suffers such a Change in Quality or Disposition.

FARTHER the Bodies of those that Sleep in Jesus, will be Immortal in Duration;
for then mortality shall put on immortality, and corruption, incorruption. In
respect of Power, they will be Strong, it is sown in Weakness, it is raised in
Power; they shall no more labor under Weakness, or be exposed to weariness, to
sickness or Pain. The Inhabitant of the new Jerusalem, shall not say, I am
sick, the People that dwell therein shall be forgiven their Iniquities. Isa.
xxxiii. 24.
All Tears shall be wiped away from their Eyes, all Sorrow and Sighing shall
fly for ever from their Hearts: They shall not need Clothes or Food, being
spiritual; or Sleep or Marriage, being immortal; like the Angels of God in
Heaven, as our SAVIOR informs us, Mat, xxii. 30.
As to form, the Bodies of those that Sle^p in Jesus, will be beautiful and
glorious; it is sown in Dishonor, it is raised in Glory. It will be Perfect in
Parts, and adorned with the brightest Splendors; and so made like the glorious
Body of Christ, which at his Transfiguration shone as the Sun, while his
Raiment was white as the Light. Mat. xxviii. 3.


BUT the Bodies of the Wicked, shall be raised in Dishonor, and be an
abhorring to all Flesh. Isaiah lxvi. 4.


THAT the same Body, in Substance, will be raised from the Dead, appears
(besides what has been already offered upon this Head) from the express
Testimony of Jo^, who declared, that though Worms destroyed his Body, yet in his
Flesh he should see God Job. xix. 26.
And indeed if it were not so, but that another Body, different in Substance
from the former, should be formed in the End of Time and united to the Soul, it
would not be a Resurrection, but a new Creation: For the Resurrection is a
standing up again of the same Body that fell into the Dust of Death; and hence
it is compared to a Sleep, to signify that it is the same Body that dies, that
awakes at the Resurrection. Was it not the same Body of Christ that was
crucified, that arose from the Dead? If not what shall become of the
credibility of the Gospel, which (in a great Measure) hangs upon this Fact?

IS it not reasonable, that the same Body that sinned, should suffer, and not
another that has not been accessory thereto? And is it not equally reasonable,
that the Bodies of the Saints, which are Temples of the Holy Ghost, and Members
of Christ, and have contributed their Part in Acts of Devotion, Virtue and
Charity, should in consequence hereof be glorified together with the Soul, in
the Presence of God forever.

IF those that are alive at the coming of Christ to Judgment shall not die, but
be changed in a moment, as was before observed, then the same Body, in
Substance, that is now united to the Soul, is only altered or changed as to its
Qualities, and goes to Heaven: If it is not separated from the Soul, it goes
with it to Heaven; but it is not separated, says the Apostle (1 Cor. xv. 7.)
Behold I show you a Mystery, we shall not all Sleep, but we shall all be
changed in a Moment at the last Trump. Now without Death (which is frequently
termed Sleep in Scripture) there can be no Separation of the Soul from the
Body, for the Nature of Death consists therein: And if the present Body be not
separated, another newly created cannot be united to the Soul, unless it be
supposed to go to Heaven with two Bodies of different Kinds, which is as absurd
as it is unscriptural.

WELL if some have gone to Heaven with the same Body in Substance, as was
united to the Soul in this Life; witness Enoch, Elias, and our LORD JESUS; and
many shall do so at the last Judgment, as the Apostle assures us in the
Scripture before quoted: Then why not all that are pious? Is there any mention
in the inspired Writings, that some of the Saints, after the general Judgment,
shall have one sort of Body, and others another? No! But if there was, would it
not contradict that Promise, that our vile Bodies (without Exception) shall be
changed and fashioned like unto the glorious Body of CHRIST? (Phil. iii. 21,)

THE Grave which is a Prison to the impenitent Sinner, is a Bed of Rest to a
Saint of God, in which it sleeps s^ure till the general Resurrection. It is
still united to CHRIST notwithstanding of its Separation from the Soul, and is
kept by a wakeful Providence, that none of it be missing, and when the
appointed Time comes, it shall be brought with Honor and Triumph from its
dwelling in the Dust, and reunited to its ancient and intimate Companion^ that
both may mutually glorify and enjoy the blessed God, without Defect,
Interruption or End.

THESE Considerations, together with a view of the glorious State of perfect
and perpetual Freedom, from every Sin and from every Misery, and the
everlasting Possession of all Good, which those that sleep in JESUS pass into,
may reasonably moderate our Sorrows for their Departure from us; seeing that
they are unspeakably more happy, than while they sojourned with us in this vale
of Tears! They now behold, without a Glass, the adorable Perfections of the
divine Nature, the inimitable, the inexpressible Charms of the divine Word and
Works (of Creation, Redemption, and Providence,) which here they had but small
and transient, yet sweet and delightful Glimpses of; they now are perfectly
conformed to GOD in Holiness, and perfectly enjoy Jehovah's Love, without
Interruption, without a Period, or any Fears of it; this fills their Hearts
with Ravishment, this tunes their Tongues for unceasing Hosanna's, to GOD and
the LAMB that sits upon the Throne. There no Sin, no Sorrow, no Temptation,
shall have any Entrance! O blessed Place! Who would not desire to be dissolved,
and to be with JESUS? How then can we be excessively grieved for any that have
gone from this miserable World, this Place of Groaning and Weariness thither?
Seeing that our Loss is their Gain, and we shall see them again, when they
awake out of their Sleep in the Morning of the Resurrection, clothed with the
same Bodies as to Substance, but glorious in their Qualities, for them that
sleep in JESUS shall GOD bring with him.

BUT it is objected, that the Doctrine of the Resurrection opposes Reason. I
answer, No, it does not: For it is not impossible in the Nature of Things;
there is no Absurdity or Contradiction in it. Why may not that GOD who made all
Things out of Nothing, raise the Dead out of Something? And indeed the Almighty
Power of GOD, is the Principle which Christ himself resolves the Resurrection
into, as has been before observed.

NOR is it difficult for that God, to whose Eye all Nature is entirely and
eternally open, who sees were every Particle of his People's Dust is scattered,
and is infinite in Strength, to prevent by his all-governing Providence, the
Commixture of Bodies, so that every ^oul shall have its own Body, at the Advent
of Jesus to judge the Universe.

BUT does not the Scripture inform us, that the Saints shall be like the
Angels, even in regard of their Bodies? It is true, but that is not in regard
of the sameness of Nature, but only as to Similitude or resemblance of
Qualities; their Bodies will be like the Angels, incorruptible, immortal, but
not of the same Nature or Substance with them, pure Spirits; for that is not
asserted, and indeed to assert it, implies a Contradiction, for a Body and a
Spirit are of different Natures, so that both can not be the same; this our
Lord confirms by these Words before mentioned, a Spirit has not Flesh and
Bones, as ye see me have: Behold my Hands and Feet, that it is I myself handle
me and see.

NOW the Apostle John informs us, that he and the rest of the Apostles obeyed
this Precept, of their Master, that which was from the Beginning, (in respect
of his divine Nature) which we have heard, which we have seen with our Eyes,
which we have looked on, says he, and our Hands have handled of the Word of
Life, and bear witness that eternal Life was with the Father, and was
manifested unto us. (1. John i. 1, 2.) The Apostles handled or felt the Body of
Christ, both before his Death, and after his Resurrection. (See Matt. xiv. 31.
John xiii. 23. Luke xxiv. 39 -- 44. John xx. 27, 28, 29.)

TO the aforesaid Testimony, of the true and faithful Witness; right Reason
adds its suffrage, by informing us, that a Body is a material Substance, which
may be seen and felt, and has the Dimensions of length, breadth, height, and
depth.

BUT that a Spirit is an intelligent Being, without Matter, and consequently
without the Properties of it; a Being that can neither be seen or felt; a Being
that has no Color or Figure, no Breadth, Length, etc. He that contradicts
this, does not only contradict the Wisdom of the Father, but set himself in
Opposition to the first Principles of Science, as well as to Experience, and
Common Sense.

IT is true the Apostle says, that it is sown a natural Body, it is raised a
spiritual Body; yes, but still he calls it a Body, and points to the same Body
that was sown or put into the Grave; and therefore must intend Matter however
refind, or else he does not speak good Sense; but the latter is impious to
imagine, and therefore the former is true. If the Apostle had designed to
acquaint us, that a new Spirit or Soul, should be added at the general
Judgment, to the one we have already; he would have told us so, by assigning
to it, it is proper Name of Spirit, and not spiritual Body, or Body
spiritualized.

IN a Word, that spiritual Body, the Apostle speaks of, either has Matter, or
it has not. If it has not, then either a new Soul will be then created, and
added to this; and so every one will have two Souls, which is as ridiculous as
it is unscriptural! Or else the Substance of the present Body will be turned
into a pure Spirit, which is more absurd, if possible, than the former! Because
in this Case it not only follows, that every one will have two Souls, but that
in order to the Formation of one of them, the Substance of the present Body
must be reduced to nothing, for while it retains the Nature of a Body, it
cannot be a Spirit; and if it be reduced to Nothing, how can it be said to be
turned into a Spirit? Is it not as contrary to the divine Wisdom, to anhiliate
any Part of his Creation, as it is impossible for his Power, to produce what is
contradictory to Reason, and the Nature of Things? For that would imply
Weakness.

BUT if the aforesaid Body, has Matter, though never so much refined and
spiritualized in its Qualities, is not the Cause in Effect given up? And is it
not more agreeable to Scripture and Reason, to conclude, that that Matter will
be what was united to the Soul before, rather than Matter newly created, seeing
there is no mention (in Scripture) of such a new Creation of Bodies, or Matter
at the general Judgment, nor is it consistent with the divine Wisdom, to exert
Almighty Power, in creating new Matter without any Necessity: Not to say that
it is hard to reconcile the perpetual Punishment of Bodies newly created,
without any Fault contracted by them to the common Maxims of Justice and
Equity, which all Mankind do with one Voice acknowledge.

AND although sinful and corruptible Flesh and Blood cannot enter into the
Kingdom of GOD, yet sinless and incorruptible can; otherwise the Body of Christ
must be excluded from a Place there, which is shocking to imagine! The Apostle
in the latter Part of the Verse referred to, shows that he mea^ corruptible
Flesh and Blood, by saying neither does Corruption inherit Incorruption.

SURELY either some Charity should be extended to Jesus Christ, by those that
profess his Name, or else, in order to be self-consistent, they should lay
aside that Profession altogether, and openly renounce all Claim to him, or the
grand Peculiars of his Religion, and assume to themselves another Character;
for it is but fit and candid, that Names and Things should agree. If the very
Body of Christ (as to Substance) which was laid in the Sepulcher did not go to
Heaven, the APOSTLES are FALSE WITNESSES CHRIST himself is unworthy of our
CREDIT! and consequently his RELIGION OVERTHROWN!

IT is true the Apostle says, thou sowest not that Body that shall be, but
bare Grain it may chance of Wheat, or some other Grain, but God gives it a
Body as it pleases him, to every Seed its own Body. The true meaning of which
is no more, than that God gives to every Grain or Kind of Seed, such a Body as
is agreeable to his Will, and a different Body according to the Nature of the
Grain: Yet none can reasonably deny, but that it is the Seed sown which comes
up, though with a different Body in respect of some Qualities: When it is sown,
it is bare grain, but when it again rises, it is not bare Grain, without
either Stalk or Ear, which was the Body sown; yet every particular Grain has
its particular Body, and the same in Kind with itself, though different in
Qualities. The Apostle's design in these Similitudes, is partly to show the
Possibility of a Resurrection, by observing, that that which is sown is not
quickened except it die; and partly to show the Manner of it, in the different
Qualities and Condition of Bodies after the Resurrection, to what they are at
present; they are now mortal, but then they will be immortal, etc.

THE Improvement of this Subject remains.

SHALL the Bodies of those that Sleep in JESUS, be raised from the Dead and
glorified: Then, methinks, the Consideration hereof should constrain us to
preserve them in Sanctity and Honor, not making the Members of Christ the
Members of a Harlot, but glorifying God in our Bodies and Spirits which are
God's; we should keep our Eyes from unchaste Glances, our Tongues from Slander
and evil Speaking, and our Hands from B^^bes.

THE Doctrinal Proposition I have been discoursing upon, easily applies itself
to the present Occasion, forasmuch as there is Reason to hope, from the
deceased Youths soundness in Christian Principles, acquaintance with
experimental Religion, and blameless Conversation, that he slept in Jesus,
there is no Reason for his Relations indulging an excess of Grief, on Occasion
of his Departure from them to a better World. They should rather speak in the
Language of Eli and David, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.
The Lord has given, the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord.
In the mean Time they should be hereby excited to prepare for their own Change,
by the earnest Use of all appointed Means. When afflictive bereavements are
conscientiously improved, they become valuable Mercies. Hear ye the Rod, and
who has appointed it, and behold Jehovah's Name wrote upon it. Despise not the
chastning of the Lord, nor faint when ye are rebuked of him; for though no
chastning for the present seems joyous, but grievous, nevertheless it
yields the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness unto them that are exercised
thereby.

BUT to address the Audience more generally. Seeing that those who Sleep in
Jesus, are translated to such a blessed State, we should enquire, whether we
are in Christ? For surely none but such who are in him in Life, can reasonably
expect to Sleep in him at Death. Have we received Christ by Faith? Have we had
Communion in his Love? And are we conformed to his Law? Is Christ precious to
us? Do we live to his Glory and upon his Offices? Do we love his People, and
are we concerned for his Honor and Kingdom? Such as have experienced these
Things, need not be afraid of Death, for it will be but as a refreshing Sleep
to them, a blessed inlet to a glorious Eternity. But such as are destitute of
the aforesaid Characters, have great Reason to be afraid of Death, because of
the dreadful Consequences of it to Christless Souls. Is it not a dreadful Thing
to be forever separated from all the Sweets of Paradise, and to fall into the
Hands of the living God?

DOES Death put a final period to all our temporal Enjoyments? Then should we
not labor to be weaned from them, and set our Affections on the Things that
are above?

O BRETHREN! What Reason have such dying Worms as we, who must be so soon
reduced to Rotteness and Putrefaction, and who are liable to the stroke of
Death every Moment, to be humble, watchful, and diligent in seeking and serving
God?

THIS Instance of Mortality, calls aloud upon us all, to seek a vital Union to
Jesus Christ, speedily and vehemently, that so when God-Man sends his Messenger
for us, we may sweetly sleep in him, and be at last brought in triumph with him
to the general Judgment; To this End we should confess and bewail our
Offenses, turn from them, and embrace the Mediator.

But in particular, methinks, this Providence should alarm young People, to
remember their Creator in the Days of their Youth, while the evil Days are far
off, when they shall say they have no Pleasure in them.

O how amiable is Religion in Youth! It is like Blossoms in the Spring, surely
it is more likely that you shall find GOD in a way of Mercy in Youth, than
afterward, in case you seek him heartily; for your Hearts are now more tender
and receptive of good Impressions, and GOD generally strives more with such,
than others, I love them that love me, and those that seek me early shall find
me, says the Almighty: But if ye give a deaf Ear to GOD'S gracious Calls by
his Word and Providence, have ye not Reason to fear that his Spirit will cease
striving with you, and that your Hearts will be judicially hardened!

SURELY the earlier ye turn to God, ye will have the clearer Evidence of your
Sincerity, and the greater Opportunity of Serviceableness to Mankind in
general, and to your Relations in particular, upon whom the Example of your
early Religion may have a blessed Effect, which may GOD grant, for CHRIST'S
Sake. AMEN.

FINIS.
The TERRORS of the LORD.

A SERMON UPON THE GENERAL JUDGMENT, Preached at MAIDENHEAD, in New Jersey, May
the 17th 1749. BEFORE The SYNOD of YORK.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M.

ISAIAH 58.1. Cry aloud Spare not, lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, and show
my People their Transgression, and the House of Jacob their Sins.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold, by WILLIAM BRADFORD in Second-Street, 1749.

2 CORINTHIANS v. 11. Knowing therefore the Terror of the LORD we persuade Men.


MY Fathers and Brethren, the governing Passions of the human Soul, which are
indeed the great Sources of Action, are love and fear. Now the Religion of
JESUS contains Arguments nobly adapted to influence both, which is indeed its
peculiar Glory. Here are the most powerful attractives to allure our love and
strike our ingenuity that ever were presented to the human Mind. I mean
redeeming Love and Goodness, the astonishing condescension of God himself in
assuming our Nature, under the ruinous Circumstances consequent to our
Apostasy, and therein enduring voluntarily and patiently, in his Name, Body and
Soul, all that Contempt and Misery which our Sins demerited, in order to
reconcile us to GOD, and save us from Wrath and Ruin. O matchless Mercy! O
amazing Goodness! O the intolerable, incomprehensible and inxpressible Agonies
and Pains our dear dear, Lord endured! One would think that the mentioning of
this Love alone, was sufficient to constrain Mankind to follow the Redeemer's
Standard, and to dare to be Holy. But sad Experience proves the Contrary.
Degenerate Mankind, while under the Dominion of Sin, are almost wholly lost to
all sense of Ingenuity and Gratitude. Nothing truly Great and Noble has the
habitual ascendant in them. No! Immoderate Self-love is the secret Spring of
all their Motions, and therefore it is necessary to alarm those selfish Souls
out of their fatal Security and Indolence, by Arguments of Terror, that hereby
they may be brought to a sight and sense of their Danger, and consequently
constrained to the earnest Use of Means to obtain an escape.

THIS the primitive Ministers of CHRIST were well aware of, as the Text I have
chosen to discourse upon informs us. They having had the Experience of the
Terrors of God upon their own Minds, before their closure with JESUS, and
having known their Necessity, Influence and Use, did labor by the same
Arguments to persuade others to be Holy, Knowing the Terrors of the LORD we
persuade Men.

AND methinks among all the Arguments of Terror grasped in the sacred Volumn,
none is more affecting and awful than that of the General Judgment, and this is
what our Text refers to, and is therefore the Subject of our present
Meditations.

THE General Judgment, my Brethren, is one of the most grand and important
Events that comes within the Compass of human Knowledge; the Consideration
whereof should summons all our Powers to the most reverend and deep Attention.

THAT there is a JUDGMENT to come, appears from the natural Subordination of
Man to God, as a Creature to his Creator, a Subject to his Prince, and a
Servant to his Master.

FROM this Subordination, correspondent Obligations do result: for the Neglect
or Performance of which, it is but reasonable they should Account, and receive
Rewards accordingly, otherwise the aforesaid Relations and Obligations would be
vain and to no Purpose.

THERE are likewise natural Relations among Men, and Transactions which give
ground to several Duties of Justice and Humanity, by the neglect of which
others may suffer great Injury, of which they can sometimes get no redress. Is
i^ not then most just and reasonable that such Cases should be referred to the
common Patron of RIGHT, in order to be suitably rewarded? This was the
Apostle's Judgment in his Epistle to the Thessalonians, he assures us, that it
is a righteous Thing with God, to recompense Tribulation to those that trouble
his People, and to them who are troubled rest.

AND are there not many secret good and bad Dispositions, which are not nor
cannot be here awarded? Then is it not reasonable that there should be a Time
when both shall be disclosed and obtain an answerable recompense?

THERE have been, and no doubt are in the World, such Persons who commit great
Injuries, and yet no Justice can be got of them, either because of their
Policy, their Power, or Authority: Is it not necessary therefore that there
should be a supreme Tribunal, before which such grand, insolent and
ungovernable Criminals should be arraigned? Not to say that Conscience accuses
for the most secret Crimes, and presages a Judgment to come; yea the common
Sense of Mankind dictates the reasonableness of Punishment to the Guilty. Does
not every Person when he sees another guilty of gross Crimes, judge it unfit
that he should escape with Impunity? And will not the Mind be grated with
Indignation or Grief by beholding the Inocent and Beneficent Suffering?

I^ not a future Judgment, my Brethren, when eternal Rewards shall be
dispensed, needful to excite Men to Virtue and Goodness, and to restrain them
from Vice? Certainly Men are by Nature prone to a present sensible Good, which
the fears of a greater Evil, and the Hopes of a greater Good, are necessary to
turn them from.

FEAR and Hope are doubtless the main Springs which turn the Wheels of human
Action. Now this (...) scarcely afford Rewards which overpoi^e the Difficulties
that attend (...) and Virtue; neither can human Laws extend to all Actions, a^^
hence, as the Apostle observe, i^ in this Life only we have H^^ we are of all
Men the most miserable.

AGAIN, Human Society must disband without a Judgment to come: For how can that
subsist without Justice and Charity, and can these be expected without
Conscience, and can that do its Office without Fear and Hope, without a regard
to a future reckoning?

IF you enquire concerning the Judge, I answer, the absolute Power of judging,
inseparably belongs to God the Father, he being our Creator, to his Judgment we
stand obnoxious But the exercise of this judicial Authority, is, for wise
Purposes, committed to the Son.

IT is necessary that the Judge should be visible, in order to the clearer
Conviction and more ample Satisfaction of the Parties concerned.

MOREOVER, the Power of Judgment is a Branch of CHRIST'S Kingly Office, which
the Father conferred upon him as a Reward of his mediatorial abasure. Indeed it
is an Office of two great eminence to be conferred upon any other, to determine
the final States of intelligent Beings; the Lamb is only worthy to take the
Book of Judgment and open the Seals thereof, because he has redeemed us to God
by his Blood. It is he alone who has a Capacity for this Province, because of
his Omniscience, Wisdom and Goodness.

AND surely, Sirs, it is but right that the Lord Jesus Christ should be vested
with a Power to reward his Friends, and crush his inveterate Enemies that so
the apparent dishonours of his Cross may be forever rol'd away.

FARTHER, the Glories of God's Wisdom and Love, are displayed in appointing so
well qualified a Person, so meek, so loving, so merciful a Judge. Not to say,
that this appointment likewise serves to beget in us, a Reverence of Christ, an
Observance of his Laws, and an Imitation of his Example.

AS to the Manner of the judicial Process, the sacred Scriptures give us the
following account hereof, viz. That a Time is appointed for it, which is called
a Day.

THAT God has registered Men's Actions in the Book of his Omniscience in order
to it.

THAT for this End, a Resurrection of the Just and Unjust shall be effected by
Almighty Power.

THAT then all Persons raised, shall be presented before the Bar of God; I saw,
says the Apostle John, the Dead, small and great, stand before God,

THAT every Thought, Word and Action shall be examined, God will bring to light
the hidden Things of Darkness, and make manifest the Counsels of all Hearts.

THAT after this, a definitive Sentence shall pass agreeable to Men's Actions,
which shall be accordingly executed.

THAT all Things shall be transacted in a fair and regular Manner, to the
Conviction of all present.

NOW, my dear and reverend Brethren, methinks the Consideration of what has
been said, should excite us, who bear the Ministerial Character, unweariedly to
endeavor (pro viribus) to alarm and persuade a secure and obstinate World, by
the Terrors of the LORD, after the Apostolical President in our Text, whatever
Antinemians and Enthusiasts mutter to the Contrary, seeing that the whole need
no Physician, but the sick. Let us urge Sinners with the utmost Importunity and
most solemn Pathos, to repent and believe the Gospel; to fly from the Wrath to
come to the great Redeemer for Shelter and Salvation.

AND should not the Thoughts of the solemn judicial Scene before us, excite
all, both Ministers and People to watchfulness and sobriety, for we know not
when the Son of Man comes, at Midnight, Cock-crowing, or in the Morning.

NOR should we be thereby less induced to sincerity and candor in our whole
behavior, and to the serious steady Performance of the secret Duties of
Religion; which will be then openly and honorably mentioned, and graciously,
but plentifully, Rewarded. O, Sirs! let us endeavor to have the Testimony of
our Consciences in our favor, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the
World. O let us improve our Talents, for we are but Stewards, and must quickly
give Account of our Stewardship. My Reverend Brethren, in order to improve to
Purpose, the Talents which a gracious God has given us, is it not necessary to
keep to the Business of our proper Province, (Hoc age, en tutois ^sthi) and
should we not call to mind the notable Council of the famous German, who of a
Minister of Religion became a Minister of State, and for some Mismanagement
being condemned to die, generously left for our Instruction this ^istick, ^^ice
meo exemplo, mandato munere fungi.
Et fuge seu pestem ten polup^a^ mosunen.



LET us relieve Men's outward Wants as far as we have Ability and Opportunity:
This, above all other Instances of Goodness, is particularized in the
scriptural Description we have of the General Judgment, I was Hungry and ye fed
me, etc.

O! let us forgive Injuries, he shall have Judgment without Mercy, who has
showed no Mercy. If we forgive not Men their Trespasses neither will God
forgive ours.

O! let us beware of rash judging, why do thou judge thy Brother, or why do
thou set at naught thy Brother, for we shall all stand before the Judgment Seat
of Christ.

AND on the Contrary, dear Sirs, O let us labor to increase in that glorious
Grace of LOVE, which hopes all Things, suffers long, and is kind, and is not
easily provoked. And let the Thoughts of the last Judgment deter us from
Injustice, Covetousness and Lightness of Mind and Behavior. Let no Man go
beyond and defraud his Neighbor, for God is the avenger of all such. Seeing
then that all these Things shall come to pass, which the Scriptures speak of
the last Judgment, what manner of Persons ought we to be in all holy
Conversation and Godliness?

THE Consideration of the last Judgment may serve to keep us from Infidelity,
because of the Confusions and Injustice that are in the World, for this is but
a short Time of Trial; after the Conclusion of this Drama, all Things will be
put to Rights and appear in their proper Colors. What though we endure unjust
invectives for a Time, God will bring forth the Righteousness of his People as
the Light, and their Judgment as the noon Day; and hence the Apostle observes,
it was a small Thing to him, to be judged of Man's Judgment.

NOW, Sirs, we should be excited to examine our Sates, our Principles of
Action, our Speeches and Works, and see whether they will stand the trial of
the last Judgment.

METHINKS, dear Brethren, the Consideration of the last Judgment, may justly
strike Terror and Consternation into every Tribe of Impenitents; if it be
considered, that it shall be universal as to Persons and Things, as well as
impartial and irreversible. God will bring to Judgment every Work, with every
secret Thing; he will bring to light the hidden Things of Darkness, and make
manifest the Councils of the Heart, as I before observed.

THE most secret impious Thought must then be disclosed, and the most disguised
Contrivances brought to the open light of Day; and it is but reasonable it
should be so, seeing the moral Good and Evil of Actions much depend upon their
Intention. The Lord Jesus, who is a discerner of the Thoughts, and searcher of
the Heart, will, in the Day of his coming, examine and open the secret Springs
of the Actions of Men; and then likewise shall their Words be scanned and
judged; and this is but reasonable, seeing they are the most natural
Indications of the Temper and Disposition of the Mind, and often do much Injury
to the Names, Bodies and Estates of Men. Our Lord assures us, that Men must
give an Account of every idle Word in that Day, (Mat. xii. 36, 37.) and that by
our Words we shall be justified, and by our Words we shall be condemned. The
Apostle Jude informs us, that Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these
Things saying, that the LORD shall come with with ten Thousand of his Saints to
execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly of their
ungodly Deeds and hard Speeches. How shall the liar, the unjust Person, the
whoremonger, the slanderer and back-biter then appear?

AND every evil Action must then be stripped of all its present disguises, and
opened in its horid deformity; yea and the Evils we have induced others to
commit, we must then answer for. There a light shall be struck into all the
Works of Darkness, through all the pretexts of Subtilty, and every impenitent
Transgressor, with out Distinction, will be covered with Confusion, and exposed
to contempt and scorn!

The Alexanders and Nimrords of the Earth, and all the Sons of Violence, of
Blood and Rapine, that have sacrificed the Lives of Thousands to their Ambition
and Avarice, and made Nations tremble before them, must stand appal'd before
their Judge to receive their final Sentence: Then will they curse the madness
of their Arrogance, and cry to the Hills and Mountains to fall on them, and
hide them from the Face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath
of the Lamb. All the human Race must appear at the dreadful Summons. The
greatest Potentates, the depest Politicians, the bravest Heroes, as well as
every Person of the meanest order, to receive their Doom, their final Doom! At
that Tribunal there will be no difference or respect of Persons observed
between the greatest Prince and meanest Peasant. And that which makes the
General Judgment the more solemn and dreadful, is that there will be no Appeal
forever from the Sentence of the Judge.

WITH what awful Solemnity does the holy Scriptures represent the Scene of the
last Judgment, then, we are told, that there will be distress of Nations, with
perplexity, the Sea roaring and Men's Hearts failing them for fear, that then
the Sun shall be darkened and the Moon shall not give her Light, and all the
Powers of Heaven be shaken; that the Archangel's Trumpet shall sound to the
Extremities of the Earth, after which the Son of Man shall descend from the
visible Heavens in a Cloud, and appear in his own and in his Father's Glory.
Thousands of Angels shall minister to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
shall stand before him! The Son of GOD will come with Power and great Glory in
flaming Fire, to take Vengeance on those that know not GOD, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting
Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power.
Then the Sea shall give up her Dead, and Death and Hell shall deliver up their
Dead, and the whole Atmosphere be in one awful uniform Blaze! The Heavens shall
pass away with a great Noise and the Elements shall melt with fervent Heat, the
Earth also and all its Works shall be burnt up!

THEN the Almighty Judge shall be seated upon his Sapphire Throne from which the
Earth and Heavens shall flee away.

WHEN our blessed Savior came to suffer for the Sins of the World, he came in
the Form of a Servant, and veiled his Glory with a clayie Mantle; he stooped to
assume the Infirmities of Humanity in the most humble Circumstances, and was
exposed to Cruelty and Contempt: But when he comes as a Judge, he will assume
his proper Greatness, and appear with a Splendour suitable to the Dignity of his
Office, suitable to the Glory of his Character! All Nature shall tremble before
him, and the Foundations of the Hills shall shake because he is Wroth! The Sars
shall start from their Orbs, and the Canopy of the visible Heavens shall
shrivel up into a flaming scroll, and the whole Earth shall be a burning
trembling Globe of Fire. The great Redeemer will be clothed with Majesty
surpassing all Expression, the Hair of his Head will be white as Snow, his Eyes
as a flame of Fire, his Countenance as the Sun shining in his Strength, and his
Voice as the Sound of many Waters, and the Court that attends the descending
GOD, will be arrayed in all the Pomp of Heaven; in their magnificent ROBES of
State. When all these amazing Events are brought to pass, and that in a sudden
and tremenduous Manner, how shall the Wicked appear; when the Curtain between
both Worlds is drawn, and all the Inhabitants of Heaven, Earth, and Hell
present themselves to us at one View, how will it strike the impenitent with
Terror and Amazement, especially when the final Sentence shall be pronounced,
Go ye Cursed into everlasting Fire, pr^pared for the Devil and his Angels. How
dreadful will it be for all the Sons of Shame and Death, to behold universal
Nature dissolving in the most dreadful Agonies, and all the curious Works of
Art covered with Flame and Ruin! To hear the Heavens roaring with dreadful
Thunders, and the great Ocean bewailing the general Catastrophe, with the
loudest Murmurs! To see the visible Heavens covered with one sheet of Fire, and
sending down burning Showers upon the reeling Earth! The sulphurous Matter of
which will doubtless catch fire and burst its Bowels into burning Rivulets! How
dreadful will it be to feel the Earth totter like a Tennis Ball with
Earthquakes, and to hear the dreadful ^umblings thereby caused in its Bowels,
together with the hideous Screeches of damned Men and Women! The whole Earth
will be then like a burning Vesuvius or Aetna! Where will these poor Creatures
fly for shelter who have no Friend in Heaven, or on Earth to help them in their
Distress? What shame must cover their Faces? What Anguish rack their Hearts,
when their secret Impieties are disclosed, before that vast Assembly of the
Quick and Dead! How must a Sight of their Companions in Iniquity confound them
and increase their Woe and Horror? How shall ye be able to look the great Judge
in the Face, whose Laws ye have broken, and whose Salvation ye have slighted?

O secure Sinners, your Eyes and Ears shall see and hear these Things! O what a
scrole of Mourning and Lamentation and Woe shall then be opened before you? (
Rev. i. 7.) Behold he comes in the Clouds, and every Eye shall see him, and
those also that peirced him, and all the Kindreds of the Earth shall wail
because of him, O Sinners! Sinners! realize these awful Events by frequent and
believing Mediation, and make it the Business of Life to secure a Retreat from
the Tempests of divine Vengeance, under the Wing of IMANUEL, by bewailing your
Transgressions against him, and by believing in him; set your Faces toward
Zyon with a religious Resolution, enquire the Way thither with humble
Importunity, and weep as ye go! O let your Laughter be turned into Mourning,
and your Joy into Heaviness! Rent your Hearts and not your Garments, and turn
unto the Lord your God, for though he be just and righteous, jealous and
omnipotent, yet he is precious and merciful, slow (...) Anger, and of great
Kindness.

SIRS, the strongest Images we can form of the Majesty of GOD, and the terrible
Effects of his angry Resentment are infinitely too feeble and languid to give
an adequate Representation thereof. O therefore let us kiss the Son, least he
be angry and we perish from the Way, when his Wrath is kindled but a little,
blessed are all they that put their Trust in him. By this may we all be hid in
the great and terrible Day of GOD'S Anger, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD. AMEN.
AMEN,

FINIS.

