A few Words concerning that pious Youth, of worthy Memory, to wit, THOMAS
SCATTERGOOD, Jun. who departed this Life the 19th of First Month, 1731, in the
26th Year of his Age.
IT being my Lot to be pretty much with him in the Time of his Illness, which
he bore with Patience, to Admiration; his Distemper being a Stoppage in his
Stomach or Breath, he was sometimes almost strangled; yet, when he could speak,
his Words, though few, were savory: Many Times Praying to the Lord with a
composed Mind, when in great Extremity of Body. I have often thought it great
Encouragement for People to endeavor to dwell near the Lord, when we see how
he bears up such as sincerely trust in him: As we have Cause to believe this
Youth did. For he would call upon the Lord with a cheerful Countenance, and
with such Hope and Confidence, as if he no Ways questioned the Lord's Mercy to
him; and would often drop sweet Doctrine among such as came to see him, for
their Encouragement; often Praying to the Lord, not only for himself, but for
the Family, and his Friends and Neighbors. O the many sweet Prayers that I
have heard him put up unto the Lord, that he (...) pleased to give him (...)
near what his holy Mind and Will was to (...) upon ^im. Adding: O thou pure
Fountain! that never can be drawn dry, sweeten my Soul a little, and strengthen
my inward Man; with many more precious Sayings: Often saying; O Lord! raise up
many Thousands, from the East, from the West, from the North, and from the
South; that they may be faithful Ministers unto thee, that so thy Blessed Truth
may grow and prosper in the Earth. Thus was the Concern of this virtuous Young
Man, in the Time of his Illness, as it had been in his Health. He was a
diligent Frequenter of Friends Meetings, when well; and sometimes he had a
Concern upon him to bear a Public Testimony for the Truth; which I believe he
was faithful to, and retained his Integrity to the End. O that the Youth of our
Age would take him (and such as he was) for an Example. His Deportment suited
his Clothes, plain; and his Words were seasoned with Grace.

And he would often say: O that our young People would but give up their Days
to serve the Lord! How would he adorn them! Often directing them to that
Blessed Guide, meaning the Spirit of Truth. He himself was wonderfully adorned
with that inward Adorning of a meek and a quiet Spirit, which is with the Lord
of great Price.

I write these few Lines, chiefly to ease my own Mind concerning One for the
Loss of whom my Spirit mourns in secret: Having often been comforted with what
dropped from his Mouth; the Power which attended his Words being to my needy Soul
as the Oil of the good Samaritan to the wounded Man. But the Lord alone is able
to make up the Loss, and raise up many more faithful Ministers, as was the
fervent Prayer of this Young Man.

I never perceived that the Thoughts of Death were any Surprise to him: But
sometimes, when he thought he was near his End, he would be very earnest with
the Lord, that he would give him Patience to bear his Affliction of Body, that
he might not dishonor his Holy Name.

I do not remember that I ever heard him speak a murmuring Word, though his
Distemper was hard to bear for a long Time; only I have heard him say, O Lord!
What have I done? What have I done, that thou art pleased thus to try me?

I have admired to see the Goodness of the Lord to him, and how he fed his Soul
with Food convenient and suitable to the Day: For he would sing Praises to the
Lord, when he could hardly speak, his Pain of Body was so great: Which has
made my Soul to rejoice, although, at the same Time, my Heart has been pained
within me, to see the Affliction of his Body. But after a long Time, and many
Means used, he seemed somewhat to recover, which gave us great Hopes the Lord
would have spared him with us longer; he being a Pattern of Piety, Meekness,
and Plainness; and seemed as if he might have been of great Service among our
young People. But his Distemper seizing him sharply again, put a Period to his
natural Life in a little Time, and set his Soul at Liberty from the distressed
Body. And I am well satisfied the Lord has taken him to Himself, to live with
Him forever.

I was not with him in his last Moments: But a Person who was with him at that
Time signified to me: "That the Night before he departed, he was in a sweet
Frame of Spirit; and a few Minutes before he left the World, he was heard to
say, How glorious is thy powerful Presence, O Lord! And the last that he was
heard to speak, was, Into thy Hands, O Lord, do I commit my Soul!"

Having been much with him, and seeing his Zeal, Courage and Constancy, I could
do no less than make these Remarks thereof to his Memory. And conclude with
Desires that we who have enjoyed so many of the Lord's Mercies, may prize them
as we ought to do.

Blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord, from henceforth; yea, says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them,
Rev. iv.13.

Written by One who has been made a Sharer of the good Counsel which the Lord
enabled him to drop among his Relations and Friends, for their Edification and
Instruction; Part of which I took to myself, and treasured it up in my Mind.

Burlington County, in West-Jersey. ANN BUFFIN.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by James Chattin, next Door to the PIPE, in
Church-Alley. [Price 2d.] Where Printing Work is carefully done, in a new Type.


