AN ESSAY ON THE GOVERNMENT OF THE COLONIES.

Fitted to the Latitude Forty-one, but may, without sensible Error, serve all
the NORTHERN COLONIES. POOR RICHARD 's Title Page.

NEW YORK: PRINTED and SOLD by J. PARKER, at the New Printing-Office in
Beaver-Street, 1752.

AN ESSAY, etc.
A LATE elaborate Author tells us, The Design of Colonies is to trade on more
advantageous Conditions, than could otherwise be done with the neighboring
People, with whom all Advantages are reciprocal. It has been established, that
the State which has founded the Colonies, alone shall trade in the Colonies;
and that from very good Reasons; because the Design of the Settlement was the
Extension of Commerce, not the Foundation of a City, or a new Empire. Thus it
is still a fundamental Law of Europe, That all Commerce with a foreign Colony,
shall be regarded as a mere Monopoly, punishable by the Laws of the Country. It
is likewise acknowledged, that a Commerce established between the
Mother-Countries, does not include a Permission to trade in the Colonies; for
those always continue in a State of Prohibition.

The Disadvantage of a Colony that loses the Liberty of Commerce, is visibly
compensated by the Protection of the Mother Country, who defends it by her
Arms, or supports it by her Laws. From hence follows a third Law of Europe,
That when a foreign Commerce with a Colony is prohibited, it is not lawful to
(...) Seas; except in such Cases as are excepted by Treaty.

The great Distance of our Colonies, is not an Inconvenience that affects their
Safety; for if their Mother Country, on which they depend for their Defense, is
far distant, no less distant are those Nations, by whom they may be afraid of
being conquered. Besides, this Distance is the Cause, that those who are
established, cannot conform to the Manner of living, in a Climate so different
from their own; they are obliged, therefore, to draw from the Mother Country,
all the Conveniences of Life.

The Carthagenians, to render the Sardinians and Carsicans more dependent,
forbid their planting, sowing, or doing any Thing of the like Kind, under Pain
of Death. So far my Author.

We are told, this Continent was first discovered to the Europeans, by
Sebastian Cabot, a Genoese Adventurer, who lived at Bristol. In the Year 1497
he was sent by King HENRY the Seventh, to make Discoveries in the West Indies;
Columbus's Successes, five Years before, having set all the trading Nations in
the World, upon Expeditions into America, in Hopes of sharing the Treasure of
the new discovered World, with the Spaniards.

The 25th of March, 1584, Sir Walter Raleigh obtained Letters Patent from Queen
ELIZABETH, to possess, plant, and enjoy, for himself and such Persons as he
should nominate, themselves and Successors, all such Lands, Territories, etc.
as they should discover not in the Possession of any Christian Prince: And this
Company was the first of that Kind that was established in Europe.

A Settlement was carried on with much Zeal and Unanimity. The Form of
Government consisted of a Governor and twelve Counselors, incorporated by Name
of The Governor and Assistants of the City of Raleigh, in Virginia: But Sir
Walter, that great Projector and Furtherer of those Discoveries and
Settlements, being under Trouble and Disgrace at Court, after an infinite
Expense, besides the Hazard and Loss of many Lives, gave over all Thoughts of
prosecuting those Designs. And the King, in 1606, did incorporate two Companies
in one Patent, to make two separate Colonies; the first to Sir Thomas Gates,
etc. Adventurers of the City of London, with Liberty to begin their first
Plantation and Seat, at any Place upon the Coast of Virginia, between the
Degrees of 34 and 41; and for the second Colony, to Thomas Hanham, etc. of the
Town of Plymouth, with Liberty to begin their first Plantation or Seat, at any
Place upon the Coast of Virginia, between the Degrees of 38 and 45. But (as the
Author of The History of Virginia, by a Native of the Place, observes) they
were no sooner settled in all this Happiness and Security, but they fell into
Jarrs and Dissentions among themselves; which continuing, the Virginia
Adventurers, were under the Necessity of petitioning his Majesty for a new
Patent, with Leave to appoint a Governor. In Consequence of which, they
re-settled all their old Plantations that had been deserted; made Additions to
the Number of the Council; and called an Assembly of Burgesses from all Parts
of the Country, which were to be elected by the People, in their several
Plantations. These met the Governor and Council in May, 16^0, and sat in
Consultation in the same House with them: And this was the first General
Assembly that ever was held there. This, however, had but little Effect; for
the same Author tells us, That the fatal Consequences of the Company's
Mal-administration, cried so loud, that King CHARLES the First coming to the
Crown, had a tender Concern for the poor People that had been betrayed thither
and lost; upon which Consideration he dissolved the Company in 1626, reducing
the Country and Government unto his own immediate Direction, appointing the
Governor and Council himself, and ordering all Patents and Process to issue in
his own Name, reserving only to himself, an easy Quit-Rent of Two Shillings for
every Hundred Acres of Land: He likewise confirmed the former Methods and
Jurisdictions of the several Courts, as they had been appointed in the Year
1620; and was pleased to establish the Constitution to be by a Governor,
Council, and Assembly.

This, however, was the first regular Form instituted for the Government of the
Colonies, and has been the Plan for every other of his Majesty's Colonies.

His Majesty and his Ministers having the Prosperity of this Colony at Heart,
and with great Reason, considering the vast Addition it brought into the
Revenue; not less, it is computed, than Twenty Million, since its first
Settlement; all due Attention was given to the Legislature, and each kept
strictly within its own Sphere of Action: And Matters went smoothly on till the
Year 1676, when Bacon's Rebellion happened. Whoever has read the History of
those Transactions, will easily see how far the Assembly interested themselves
in that Affair, which cost the Crown and Colony upwards of L. 200,000, and
brought the Colony almost to an End. The Words of my Author are, The King, when
he was informed of this Rebellion, was so far from hearkening to the Pretenses
of Bacon's Assembly, that he ordered a Squadron of Men of War to be fitted out,
and a Regiment of Soldiers to embark on board it, for Virginia: But Bacon was
dead before Sir John Berry arrived with his Squadron; and his Followers
returned every one to their own Homes, with Fear and Trembling. The Governor
having made some false Steps in the Affair, as it is supposed, the Matter was
not so strictly enquired into.

Thus you have the Fate of this Colony; First, in the Dissolution of the
Company, for their Abuse of the Powers they were entrusted with; and next, by
being almost brought to Destruction, by the Countenance the Assembly gave
Bacon. As to their Conduct since, it shall be taken Notice of hereafter.

The Northern Colony, or Plymouth Adventurers, escaped a Dissolution, by their
Friends at Court, but were not less guilty of the Abuse of their Powers; as may
appear from the following Letter; upon which I shall make no further Comment,
than to request the serious Perusal of it, by those our pretended Patriots; --
let them consider in Time, what a perverse, continued, and obstinate
Disobedience to his Majesty's Instructions and Commands, may bring upon us. We
have, I doubt, but few Friends at Court, and fewer, I doubt, at the Board of
Trade: How, indeed, can we expect it, from our Behavior, after so many gentle
Admonitions from both? But to the Letter, which is in very few People's Hands.

A LETTER of THANKS from the Governor of New England, to Mr. Boil, for his
Services to that Colony.
HONORABLE SIR,
THE Occasion of our giving you this Trouble, is from the Confidence we have of
your Favor and Care of these his Majesty's Colonies in New England, manifested
by your continued Endeavors; as in promoting that good Work of the Natives
Conversion; so in taking Opportunity for ingratiating us with his Majesty, and
the Right Honorable the Lord Chancellor; as we understand by your Letter to
Mr. Winthrop; whereby you have given us that comfortable Information of his
Majesty's Grace toward us, in expressing himself in a very favorable Manner;
and that the Lord Chancellor did assure you, (with giving you Commission to
assure our Friends in the City) that the King intends not any Injury to our
Charter, or the Dissolution of our Civil Government, or the Infringement of our
Liberty of Conscience; and that the doing of these Things is not the Business
of the Commissioners: The Truth whereof we believe, (as we ought) having the
Word of so gracious a King. But alas! Sir, the Commission impowering those
Commissioners to hear and determine all Causes, whether military, civil, or
criminal; (what they have further by Instruction, at present, we know not)
should this take Place, what will become of our Civil Government? which has
been (under God) the Hedge to that Liberty for our Consciences, for which the
first Adventurers passed through, and bore up against all Difficulties that
encountered them, as in the Way to, so in the Continuance in, this Wilderness.

Sir, We return unto you our true and hearty Thanks for your former Favors;
and crave the Continuance thereof, as Opportunity shall offer; and the great
Mover of Hears, shall incline you in appearing our Friend still, that, if
possible, the Commissioners may be recalled; for which End we have made our
humble Supplication to his Majesty; in whose Eyes, if we find Favor, we and
our Posterity shall have Cause to bless the Lord: But if the Decree be passed,
so that it may not be recalled, we shall wait the Lord's Issue with us: And
whatever may be the Conjectures of any, rendering Alterations here advisable,
the Issue will speak them to b^ the Subversion of all which makes this Place,
or our Abode herein, desirable; or if any of those that desire a Dominion
(...) us, (not to serve his Majesty's Interest in advancing Plantation Work;
with the Countenance of Godliness; but to serve themselves by his Majesty's
Authority, and our Ruin) shall prevail, it will, to Posterity, be rendered a
Disservice to his Majesty's Honor, and such a Damage as the Procurers will not
be able to repair. We can sooner leave our Place and all our present outward
Enjoyments, than leave that which was the first Ground of our wandering from
our native Country; nor are we thereby made such Strangers thereunto, but that
we can rather choose to return, and take our Lot with our Brethren, than abide
here under the Deprivement of the Ends of our Travels.

Our Way is with the Lord. -- Craving your Honor's Pardon for this Boldness;
lifting up our best desires for you; we remain,

SIR, Your humble Servant. JO. ENDECOTT, GOVERNOR.
In the Name, and by Order of the General Court held at Boston, in New England,
October 19 th, 1^^4.

First, Their Loyalty was called in Question.

Secondly, They were said to be factious in the Principles of Religion.

Thirdly, It was said they were a divided People.

Fourthly, They were charged with carrying disrespectfully toward his
Majesty's Commissioners.

Fifthly, They were blamed for a great Omission touching baptizing Infants.

Sixthly, They were accused of Rigidness to such as differed from them in
Matters of Religion.

Seventhly, Of grasping after Dominion, more than belonged to them.

This appears from a Letter to the same Gentleman, dated May 1^th, 16^3.

How this Affair ended, I have not been able to learn from any Part of their
History. Most People, however, know what Amendments in their Constitution, from
Time to Time, have been made, and for what Reasons: The last was thought
severe; but the Alternate was given them, either to take it upon those
Conditions, or they were to have no Charter.

Numerous Instances of the Encroachments and Abuse of Power in our Colony
Assemblies might be given, which I shall wave; what the Event will be, is hard
to determine: The many Complaints, however, that have gone, and daily going
Home, upon this Su^^ect, have created Impressions with his Majesty, his
Ministers, and the Parliament, not at all in our Favor. Our Neighbor Colony
is, at present, in the Hands of the Potter; in what Shape they may turn off the
Wheel we shall soon know. My Intention in this, upon the Whole, is no more,
than to convince, if possible, our Assembly that they are in the Wrong, and do
make a bad Use of their Power; in which if they persevere, it will infallibly
bring our Constitution and Privileges into Danger. This, at least, is my Way of
thinking. As this is a Subject of no small Importance to me and mine, as well
as, I conceive, to us all, I hope a little Warmth (should it so happen) will be
pardoned.

Previous to this it may be necessary, as few of our Assembly-men have had the
Advantage of a Liberal Education, or the Opportunity of Books to inform
themselves of the Nature of Government ( especially that of our own,) to
present them with a short Sketch of it, which I accidentally met with; and is
as follows:

The Design of Civil Government is to secure the Persons and Properties, and
Peace of Mankind, from the Invasions and Injuries of their Neighbors: Whereas,
if there were no such Thing as Government amongst Men, the stronger would often
make Inroads upon the Peace and Possessions, the Liberties and the Lives of
those that were weaker; and universal Confusion and Disorder, Mischiefs and
Murders, and ten Thousand Miseries would overspread the Face of the Earth.

In order to this general Good, viz. the Preservation of the Persons of Men,
with their Peace and Possessions; Mankind have been led by the Principles of
Reason and Self-Preservation, to join themselves into distinct Civil Societies;
wherein, as by a Compact, expressed or implied, every single Person is
concerned in the Welfare and Safety of all the rest; and all engage their
Assistance to defend any of the Rest, when their Peace or Possessions are
invaded; so that by this Means, every single Member of the Society has the
Wisdom and Strength of the Whole engaged for his Security and Defense: To
attain this End most happily, different Societies have chosen different Forms
of Government, as they thought most conducive to obtain it.

The most regular Mixture seems to be that wherein the chosen Representatives
of the People have their distinct Share of Government. The Nobles, or great
Men, have their Share; and a single Person, or the King, has his Share in this
Authority; and all agreed upon by the whole Community. This is called a mixed
Monarchy; and herein these three Estates of the Kingdom, are supported by
mutual Assistance, and mutual Limitations; not only to secure the common Peace,
the Liberty of the Nation from Enemies, but to guard it also from any dangerous
Inroads that might be made upon it, by any of these three Powers themselves.

Such is the Happiness of Great Britain, under the King, Lords, and Commons.

Here let it be noted, That whosoever has the Power of making Laws, whether the
King, Nobles, or the People, or al these together; yet still the particular
Execution of these Laws, must be committed to many particular Magistrates or
Officers; and they are usually fixed in a Subordination to one another; each of
them fulfiling their several Posts, throughout the Nation, in order to secure
the general Peace.

In all Forms of Government there is, as before hinted, a Compact or Agreement
between the Governors and the Governed, expressed or implied, viz. that the
Governors shall make it their Care and Business to protect the People in their
Lives, Liberties and Properties, by restraining or punishing those who injure,
attack, or assault them; and that the Governed submit to be punished, if any of
them are found guilty of those Practices; and also that they oblige themselves
to pay such Homage, Honors and Taxes; and yield such Assistance to the
Governors, with their natural Powers, and their Money or Possessions, as may
best obtain the great Ends of Government, and the common Safety of the whole
Society.

For this Purpose, therefore, each Person, by his Compact, willingly abridges
himself of some Part of his original Liberty or Property, for the common
Service of the Society of which he is a Member: And he engages himself, with
his Powers and Capacity to defend and preserve the Peace, and Order and
Government of the Society, so long as he and his Fellow Subjects are protected
by it, in the Enjoyment of all their natural Rights and Liberties. The very
Reason of Man, and the Nature of Things, show us the Necessity of such
Agreements

From this View of Things it appears, that though no particular Form of
Government, besides the ancient Jewish, could claim divine Right, yet all
Government is from God, as he is the Author of Reason and Nature, and the God
of Order and Justice: And every particular Government which is agreed upon by
Men, so far as it retains the original Design of Government, and faithfully
preserves the Peace and Liberties of Mankind, ought to be submitted to, and
supported by the Authority of God, our Creator, who, by the Light of Reason,
has led Mankind into Civil Government, in order to their mutual Help and
Preservation, and Peace.

In this Sense it is, that the two great Apostle, Peter and Paul, vindicate
Civil Governors, and demand Subjection to them, from Christians. Romans xiii.1.
etc. Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers; for there is no Power but
of God. The Powers that be, are ordained of God: Whosoever, therefore,
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist,
shall receive to themselves Damnation, (i. e. are condemned;) for Rulers are
not a Terror to the good Works, but to the evil. 1 Pet. ii.13. Submit
yourselves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's Sake; whether it be to the
King, as supreme, or to Governors, as to them who are sent by him, for the
Punishment of evil Doers, and the Praise of them that do well. What St. Paul
says, is, ordained of God, i. e. in general; as Civil Government, or Civil
Powers. St. Peter calls it the Ordinance of Man, i. e. in particular; as to the
several Forms of this Government, which Men agree upon or appoint: And, indeed,
God has left to Men to agree upon and appoint the particular Forms: And so far
as any of them pursue and attain this End, they must be submitted to, and
supported as an Ordinance both of God and Man.

What Connection there is between this System, and the Constitution of
Great Britain, let those acquainted with it, judge: -- A Constitution envied
and admired by every State and Power on Earth; and which Nothing has been able
to injure, or ever will be able to injure, but those intestine Encroachments
and Divisions amongst themselves; and while the Balance of that Power, lodged
with the three Branches, is kept in a due Poise, will last as long as Time
lasts. Of this glorious System we are but a very faint Resemblance; if any at
all, it is the most disagreeable Part of it, that, viz. of encroaching upon the
two upper Branches of the Legislature; in this we have shown a good Deal of
Dexterity. But more of this hereafter.

We are no more than a little Corporation, in the same Manner as a Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council are empowered, by his Majesty's Letters Patent, to
form Rules and Orders for the Government of a City, in its several Wards and
Districts; even so; though in somewhat a higher Degree, and more extensive
Sphere; but all to the same Purpose is a Governor, Council and Assembly, to
govern a Colony, in its several Counties and Precincts, by the same Power:
Every Law or Rule made, that is not peculiarly adapted to their respective
Communities, has no Meaning; and every Law made, that in any Shape clashes or
interferes with the Laws of Great Britain, are, ipso Facto, void. By this I
understand, that the Liberties and Properties of British Subjects abroad,
established and cemented by the Treasure and Blood of our Ancestors, Time out
of Mind, is not left to the Caprice and Humor of a Colony Assembly. -- O
Fortunati! I would not, therefore, advise our worthy Assembly, or their
Leaders, to profane those sacred Terms, either to frighten or mislead the
Ignorant. Our Liberties and Properties are out of their Reach; they have
Nothing to do with them: Every Subject within the King's Dominions, the meanest
as well as the greatest, have a Right to the common Law of England, and the
Great Charter, established and confirmed, as Sir Edward Coke tells us, by two
and thirty Acts of Parliament, and is only declaratory of the fundamental
Grounds of the common Law, and no more than a Confirmation or Restitution of
the Privileges which were previously claimed and due thereby; and all this we
were entitled to, before Assemblies had a Being, and which our Posterity will
enjoy when they are no more. I would, therefore, advise those Gentlemen, for
the Future, to drop those parliamentary Airs and Style, about Liberty and
Property, and keep within their Sphere, and make the best Use they can of his
Majesty's Instructions and Commission, because it would be High Treason to sit
and act without it. This is our Charter; and we may, if we please, be extremely
happy in the Privileges we enjoy from it; that alone, of having it in our Power
to tax ourselves, is invaluable; of this, I doubt, we shall never be truly
sensible, till, by some Mis-conduct of our own, we come to lose it. If we
abuse, or make a wicked Use of his Majesty's Favors, we are, of them, but
Tenants at Will; we only hold them during Pleasure, and good Behavior. In most
Corporations, where there appears an Abuse of Power or Neglect of Duty, a Quo
Warranto is necessary to set Things to rights; in our Case it is not wanted,
though, (as that great Lawyer Lord Chief Justice Hale, has remarked, in Relation
to the Island Jersey) we are Parcel of the Dominions of the Crown of England;
we are no Part, nor ever were, of the Realm of England, but a Peculiar of the
Crown; and by a natural and necessary Consequence, exempted from parliamentary
Aids. Thus you see our Dependence and the Reason of it, is altogether upon his
Majesty's Grace and Favor. If we don't approve of our present System of
Government, let us pray for a better: In the mean Time, let us not
contemptuously treat those Favors the Crown has been pleased already to confer
upon us. That this is the Case, is but too obvious.

The Constitution, or Frame of Government the Crown has been pleased to favor
us with, is by a Governor and Council of his own Appointment; and to which, by
his Directions, are added the Representatives of the People; of which his
Majesty's Commission and Instructions are the Basis. This is an Emblem, or
faint Representation of the British Constitution; and will, with equal
Propriety, answer all the good Purposes intended, if we have but Sagacity
enough to make a proper Use of it. Here are three Branches in the Legislature,
whose Powers are sufficiently distinguished and pointed out to them; and while
the Balance is duly kept up, that is, while each of the Branches keep heartily
and strictly within its own Sphere of Action, without encroaching, infringing,
or maliciously endeavoring, for any particular Ends, to vilify or lessen the
Powers of any other of the Branches, we may conclude ourselves in a happy Way;
on the Contrary, if we see any one of the Branches, assuming to itself any Part
of that Power, originally lodged, and intended by his Majesty to be lodged with
the other Branches, and scrambling vehemently, out of all Measure and
Character, for more Power than ever was intended it, you may conclude, that
every Step taken for that Purpose, is a Nail in our Coffin, and tends to an
Alteration, if not a Dissolution of the Constitution. That each, in their
Turns, have attempted this, is beyond Dispute. Those Attempts from a Governor,
can only be by Fits and Starts, out of Pique or Prejudice to Particulars; they
cannot long subsist: He may be guilty of some few Acts of Oppression; but
considering he has not only the other two Branches of the Legislature to check
him, but even his own Commission and Instructions, nay, even the whole Body of
the Laws of England, and one particularly adapted to the Purpose, which makes
him accountable in Westminster Hall, for any Mis-conduct here. There Mr.
Lowther was called to an Account for Acts of Oppression, and was like to have
paid severely for it, had he not screened himself by the Act of Grace. He was
allowed, upon a regular Complaint, to come home to defend himself; at the
Conclusion thereof, he was committed by the Council Board, till he entered into
a Recognizance with Sureties (...) L 20,000; and was also ordered to be
prosecuted by the Attorney General. From hence I would infer, that no Governor,
from any Acts of his qua Governor, can endanger our Constitution. From a
Council we have not much to apprehend, even if they were to join any one of the
other Branches, provided the third keeps it is Ground. The Council are in the
Nature of Moderators between the Extremes, without whose Concurrence they have
no Power to act: Should they, however, neglect their Duty, or abuse the Powers
they are entrusted with, they are accountable to his Majesty, and a Suspension
soon puts an End to their Being.

From an Assembly, if we value our Constitution, we have every Thing to dread;
they have the (...) on their Side, which greatly preponderates in the Balance,
and will be doing (I wish I could say fairly) what every other monied Person
does; that is, turn it to their own particular Advantage; and in this Kind of
Traffic our Assemblies have, of late Years, shown great Dexterity, even so far
as greatly to lessen that Dignity and Power, so essential to Government, lodged
with their Superiors, the Governor, and Council; and to add to our Misfortune,
there is no Remedy, at present, in Being, to cure this Mischief, but either a
great Alteration, or a total Dissolution of the Constitution; dissolving an
Assembly is none, but the most effectual Method to continue the Mischief: This
we may learn, in some Measure, from an Advertisement of their own, or from some
of their Friends, of the 17th of February, in the Gazette, in these Words,
Notwithstanding the utmost Efforts of the Court Party had been exerted, yet our
two late Members carried the Elections by a very great Majority; and thus, I am
persuaded, it will be, should we have an Election every Month in the Year, for
we are determined not to be worried out; and we know our Interest too well, to
be deceived either by Paper of Parchment. I cannot conceive what this
Advertisement refers to, unless it be to the King's Commission, which, if I
mistake not, is on Parchment, as the Instructions are on Paper.

Thus it is evident, a Dissolution is no Cure for the Abuse of Power in an
Assembly: And this brings to my Mind an Observation of a noted Author, on this
Point, viz. That when the Balance of Power is duly fixed in a State, Nothing
is more dangerous or unwise, than to give Way to the first Steps of popular
Encroachments; which is usually done, either in Hopes of procuring Ease and
Quiet from some vexatious Clamor, or else made Merchandise, and merely bought
and sold. This is the breaking into a Constitution to serve a present
Expedient, or supply a present Exigency; the Remedy of an Empirick, to stifle
the present Pain, but with certain Prospect of sudden and terrible Returns.
When a Child grows easy and content by being humored; and when a Lover becomes
satisfied* by small Compliances, without further Pursuits; then expect to find
popular Assemblies content with small Concessions. If there could one single
Example be brought, from the whole Compass of History, of any one popular
Assembly, who, after beginning to contend for Power, ever sat down quietly with
a certain Share; or if one Instance could be produced, of a popular Assembly,
that ever knew, or proposed, or declared what Share of Power was their Due;
then might there be some Hopes, that it were a Matter to be adjusted by
Reasonings, by Conferences, or Debates: But since all this is manifestly
otherwise, I see no Course to be taken, in a settled State, but a steady,
constant Resolution, in those to whom the Rest of the Balance of Power is
entrusted, never to give Way so far, to popular Clamours, as to make the least
Breach in the Constitution, through which a Million of Abuses and
Encroachments, will certainly, in Time, force their Way.

Health, in the natural Body, consists in the just Proportion of those Salts,
Sulphurs, and other Principles which compose our Fluids: If any of them becomes
predominant, or too much weakened, Sickness ensues: And in order to restore an
equal Balance, we are frequently obliged to have Recourse to a Remedy, which,
to a Man in Health, would prove a slow Poison.

Most of the Revolutions of Government, in Greece and Rome, began from the
Abuse of Power in those selected for the Preservation of the People; which
generally ended in the Tyranny of a single Person. This shows the People are
their own Dupes.

The Romans chose Legislators to pick up the best Laws wherever they were to be
found, and to digest them into Order; and during the Exercise of their Office,
suspended the Consular Power: But they soon affected kingly State, destroyed
the Nobles, and oppressed the People.

The Ep^eri in Sparta usurped the absolute Authority, and were as cruel Tyrants
as any in their Ages.

The Athenians chose four Hundred Men for the Administration of Affairs, who
became a Body of Tyrants: They murdered, in cold Blood, great Numbers of the
best Men, without any Provocation, for the mere Lust of Cruelty.

In Carthage the Balance of Power got so far on the Side of the People, as to
bring their Government to a Dominatio Plebis; as was that of Rome, at last,
which ended in the Tyranny of the Caesar's. Thus it may appear, Tyranny is not
confined to Numbers.

Now, if I may be allowed to compare small Things with great* if it evidently
appears, that those great and free and independent States, lost their Liberties
from an over Balance of Power, usurped by their popular Assemblies; and if I
can show, that our little, diminutive, dependent States are following that
Example, as fast as ever they can; and that the same Causes eternally produce
the same Effects; I hope I shall be entitled to the Thanks of some of my
thoughtless, unwary Countrymen; and though it may not affect us in so fatal a
Manner, our Liberty being, (as before mentioned) otherwise secured; yet it must
infallibly endanger our Constitution: We are but yet, as it were, in the Hands
of the Potter; in a probationary State of Go^d-Behaviour; if we totter upon
three Legs, he can add or diminish, or turn us off in whatever Shape he
pleases; and who dare say, What do thou?

If any impartial Thinker, or indeed that can think at all, would give himself
the Trouble seriously to reflect, and compare our present Situation and
Constitution, with any other upon the Face of the Earth, I am confident he
would determine in our Favor. We have, from the Infancy of Times here, been
nursed up and indulged, at an infinite Expense to the Crown, and People of
England: Even at this Day, they are at the Expense of L. 10,000 Sterling,
yearly; and have been at no less, for any Thing I know, every Year ever since
we had a Being, for our Preservation. We are exempted from all parliamentary
Aids; we have never added any Thing to the Revenue of Great Britain, as some of
our Neighbor Colonies have done, of immense Sums: Our Plan of Government is
from that of Old-England; the most complete System known; to which, if any
Additions can possibly be made, we have it in our Power to make them: We have
it in our Power to tax ourselves, as Convenience suits; which bears no
Proportion to those Taxes paid by a like Number of our Fellow Subjects, in
Great Britain. Can mortal Men expect, then, to be happier? or any reasonable
Man or set of Men, wish for, or endeavor at a Change?

Let us now see what grateful Returns we have made, on our Parts, for those
Favors.

A general Retrospection into the Proceedings of our Assembly, is a Task I have
neither Inclination nor Leisure to undertake; and shall, therefore, leave it to
those who may hereafter have the Curiosity to collect the Debates of that
House, for the Benefit of the Community; and shall only content myself with
giving a short Specimen of their Conduct for -- Years past.

The Commission and Instructions directed to his Excellency the Governor, but
intended for the Good of the Whole; which, by the Bye, I cannot help thinking,
that if they were in every Body's Hands. as a Family-Piece or House Bible, and
not cooped up like the Sibylline Oracles, to which Recourse was only had upon
extraordinary Emergency, it might be of mighty Use; the People would become
acquainted and in Love with their Constitution! they would there see* through
the Whole, the benevolent Intentions of our most gracious Sovereign the King,
and our Mother Country: Whereas, at present, they are represented, by some of
our Dealers in Po^ticks, as big with that Monster, Prerogative, a Thing which
some of our weak Members are taught to dread as much as ever Children were that
of Raw-Head and Bloody-Bones.

Thus by wicked Instruments, for wicked Purposes, are weak Minds imposed upon;
for whose Sake I shall endeavor to explain the Word, which, I doubt, is but
ill understood, even by those the Perverters of it: If I am mistaken, I shall
readily stand corrected.

There is, in every Family, a Sort of Government without any fixed Rules; and
indeed it is impossible, even in a little Family, to form Rules for every
Circumstance; and therefore it is better conceived than expressed; but
perfectly understood by every Individual belonging to the Family. The Study of
the Father or Master, is for the Good of the Whole; all Appeals are to him; he
has a Power, from the Reason and Nature of Things, to check the Insolent, or
Indolent, and to encourage the Industrious: In short, the whole Affairs of the
Family are immediately under the Care or Direction of the Father or Master; and
this is a natural Prerogative, known and acknowledged by every Man living, who
has ever had a Family, or been any Ways concerned in a Family, in all Ages and
in all Places. His Majesty, as he is our political Father, his political
Prerogative, from the like Circumstances and Reasons, is equally necessary. And
this political Authority has been allowed the supreme Director, in all States,
in all Ages, and in all Places; and without it, there would be a Failure of
Justice.

In the Commission and Instructions, as I was observing, there are some Powers
in the Crown, which it cannot divest itself of, that, viz. of the Militia,
Guards, and Garrisons; and though his Majesty has given particular Directions for
the Regulation of the Militia here, (a Part so essential to every State and
Government) yet our late worthy Assembly thought fit to drop it altogether; for
which, as they have given us no Reasons, they must give us Leave to guess; and
I think there can be but two, that, viz. of lessening the Power of the Captain
General; or that the Road to those Commissions, is not generally through the
Assembly-House.

It is plain the Intention of the Crown, in our Constitution, was to bring it
up, as near as possible, to that of the original Plan. All Moneys raised by
Parliament, are issued by Warrant from the Lords of the Treasury. His Majesty
has been pleased to direct, that all Moneys raised in the Colonies, shall be
issued by Warrant under the Hand of the Governor in Council. What due Regard
has been paid to this Instruction, is notorious, and the Reason plain; because,
otherwise, the Assembly would, in a great Measure, lose those Applications for
Gratification of Services done, or pretended to be done, by their Friends and
Dependents; of which they take upon themselves to be the sole Judges, in
Derogation of the Power lodged with the other Branches of the Legislature, and
Violation of his Majesty's Commands.

This will appear in a clearer Light, from the Proceeding of our late Assembly,
and the Council's Address to his Excellency, upon that Point; to which I beg
Leave to refer. But, as I have met with an Address in the Proceedings of a
neighboring Colony, upon the same Subject, done with great Spirit and
Accuracy, I shall make no other Apology for inserting so much of it, as relates
to the Subject; and is as follows*

-- And now we are come to that Part of this Controversy, which we are no less
surprised than confounded should ever be made One, since, as the Gentlemen of
the Assembly are sensible, that what is objected to, under this Head, was
wholly new, and not to be met with in any former Excise Act; so they could not
be ignorant of his most sacred Majesty's Instruction in this Respect; his
Excellency having caused the same to be laid before them, previous to their
passing the Act; and consequently they might well believe, that no Member of
the Council could consent to the passing this Bill, with such Clauses in it,
without justly forfeiting, at the same Time, his Place at this Board.

The Words of the Bill are in the forty-third Clause; wherein, after some of
the Uses are mentioned, is the following Proviso, viz. Provided, That a
particular Account of all such Necessaries and Utensils, be first laid before
the Assembly, to be by them inspected, regulated and approved of: And they,
thereon, address the Governor and Commander in Chief of this Island, for the
Time being, and Council, for the Payment thereof: And the Treasurer for the
Time being, is strictly enjoined and required, not to pay, or allow of, any
Order or Orders that shall be granted, or obtained, for the Payment of such
Utensils or Necessaries, unless such Order or Orders, be obtained in Manner
aforesaid. And the Committee of public Accounts, for the Time being, is hereby
strictly repuired and enjoined, not to allow of any Order or Orders that (...)
be granted, or ^^tained, for the Payment of such Necessaries or (...), unless
the same be obtained (...) to the Credit of the Treasurer, (...) upon his
accounting with them; (...) Custom to the contrary (...). After this, another
Use is specified; (...) following Paragraph.

(...) or Sums of Money shall be (...) Persons whatsoever, by the Treasurer for
the Time being, on any Order or Orders that shall be hereafter passed; but such
only, as shall be addressed for by the General Assembly, and obtained in the
same Manner, as is herein before appointed in this Clause: Nor shall they, or
any of them, be allowed of by the Committee of public Accounts, for the Time
being, to the Credit of the Treasurer for the Time being, on his accounting
with them; any Law, Usage, or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

All which the Council would have left out of the Bill; and an unanswerable
Argument, why they must necessarily insist upon their being left out, the
Members of Council think proper to insert, immediately after those Words in the
Bill, the King's thirty-fourth Instruction to the Governor; by which they
apprehend it will, at first View, appear what a direct Opposition there is in
one to the other. The Instruction is as follows, viz.

You are not to suffer any public Money whatsoever, to be issued, or disposed
of, otherwise than by Warrant under your Hand* by and with Advice and Consent
of our said Council: But the Assembly may, nevertheless, be permitted, from
Time to Time, to view and examine the Accounts of Money, or Value of Money,
disposed of by Virtue of Laws made by them, (which you are to signify unto
them) as there shall be Occasion.

These Words in the Instructions, the Council think too plain and full to be
misunderstood; and that they are not capable of any other Meaning than that
genuine, in which they have been, and are taken by the Members of this Board;
who cannot, therefore, suffer themselves to be taught otherwise. Thus we find
the Royal Instructions say, No public Money whatsoever, shall be suffered to
be (...) of otherwise than by Warrant under the Governor's Hand, by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Council. But the General Assembly of his
Majesty's Island, on the contrary, say, That no Warrant or Order for (...),
shall be obtained, till the Accounts of the Persons seeking such Order, have
been first said before them, to be by them inspected, regulated, and approved
of: And if the Governor and Council should presume to issue any such Order, in
Pursuance of his Majesty's Instructions, the Gentlemen do strictly enjoin and
require the Treasurer not to pay or allow of any Order, to be granted or
obtained; nay, if the Treasurer should, by Inadvertency or otherwise, pay any
such Order, the Gentlemen of the Assembly have still another Remedy behind; and
do, therefore, strictly enjoin and require, the Committee of public Accounts,
not to allow the same to the Credit of the Treasurer.

The Royal Instructions make it necessary, for all those who are entitled to
any public Money, to apply for it to the Governor and Council; but the
Assembly of this Province will have it, that Application shall be first made to
them for it. The King's Instructions say, That the Governor and Council, and
they only, shall be Judges of what Warrants are proper to be issued for any of
the public Money: But diverse of his Majesty's Subjects, who are of the General
Assembly here, insist, that they will be the Judges; and that no Order for
public Money shall issue, till their Judgment has been obtained for it. The
Royal Instructions permit the Assembly only to view and examine the Accounts of
Money, after it has been disposed of; but these Gentlemen contend for a View,
Inspection, Regulation, and Approbation of them, before; and that too, with the
strongest Words of Defiance, -- any Law, Usage, or Custom to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

Such Contrarieties as these, betwixt the Royal Pleasure, signified in the
Instructions, and that of the General Assembly, may well be thought enough,
without any more, to determine the Opinion of this Board; and no better Reason,
certainly, can be expected from the Members of his Majesty's Council, for their
refusing their Assent to any Bill, than that the passing of it would be
contrary to the King's Instructions. But as the Members of the Council are
assured, that the Gentlemen of the Assembly are going upon a great and
dangerous Mistake; and that they are now aiming at what can have no other
Tendency (though we do not charge them with any such Intention) than to subvert
the Constitution of the Island, as settled by his Majesty's Commission and
Instructions, and to render the Council altogether unuseful in the Government;
they cannot pass over this Head without observing, that this Attempt of the
Assembly, is not only a bold Innovation here, but is also very contrary to the
Usage of Parliaments in England; where, though it is admitted, that bills of Aids
and Subsidies do generally begin with the Commons, and they usually lay the
Rates and Duties on Merchandise, yet they have Nothing to do with the
Application of the Money, as far as we may presume to judge by their Practice.
If they are afterward apprised of any Misapplications or Abuses, the Method
is, to address the King, (as the Assembly may do here) that the several
Officers concerned in the same, do lay the Accounts before the House, that they
may examine into them, and be therefore enabled to take suitable Measures for
bringing the Offenders to condign Punishment, or for preventing the like Abuses
for the Future; but that is all. And will the Assembly of this Island, assume
Powers not attempted, nor even claimed by a British House of Commons? For
Gentlemen to set up for Judges of what does not belong to them, and to assume
to themselves the Powers and Privileges of the Council Board, we cannot think
at all becoming; but, on the other Hand, are satisfied it must lead to
Confusion, and in the End, if a timely Stop be not put to it, produce the worst
of Consequences.

The Members of the Council would be glad to know what there is in the Nature
of those Accounts, that they may not be supposed capable of judging of them, as
well as the Assembly? or why this Board may not be presumed to have as tender a
Regard for the Interest of the Island, and to the due Disposition of its
public Money, as the Assembly? They think they may reasonably ask, how it
comes to pass, that the Gentlemen of the present Assembly should be deemed the
only Persons fit to be trusted with the public Affairs? or what Security the
Country will have, that the same would be safer in their Hands, than where the
King has been pleased to place them?

The Gentlemen go on to observe upon the Agent Bill.

The ninth Amendment is to the following Clause of the Bill, viz. For the
Payment of such Sum or Sums of Money, as from Time to Time, upon the Address of
the General Assembly of this Island, shall, by Order of the Governor, or
Commander in Chief for the Time being, by and with the Advice and Consent of
the Members of his Majesty's Council, be made payable to such Person or
Persons, as the present General Assembly of this Island, shall or may appoint
to be their Agent or Agents, to regulate the public Affairs of this Island, in
Great Britain. Which Clause discovering the same Spirit of Encroachment with
the last, the Council found it necessary to alter, and instead thereof, to
insert what follows, viz. For the Payment of the Salary of such Agent or Agents
of this Island, in Great Britain, as shall or may, at any Time hereafter, be
appointed, and given by any Law for that Purpose. And this, they apprehended,
would answer all the good Purposes of the other, without being liable to any of
the Objections. By these Words, if the Legislature, at any Time during the
Continuance of the Act, judge it proper to have Agents for the public Service,
here is sufficient Provision made to pay them out of the public Money: But the
Council could not, nor can on any Account, consent to the Clause, as it stands
in the Bill; First, Because the Money is not to be paid but upon the Address of
the Assembly: Secondly, For that the Words are too general and indefinite; for
the Payment of such Sum or Sums of Money, as shall, from Time to Time, etc.
whereby the Assembly might have it in their Power to give away immense Sums for
that Purpose, or under that Pretense: Thirdly, Because the Money is made
payable to such Person or Persons, as the present General Assembly shall or may
appoint to be their Agents. And here the Members of his Majesty's Council
cannot forbear expressing their Amazement, that the Gentlemen of the Assembly
should take upon themselves to appoint Agents of their own, as they call them,
when, at the same Time, they say, it is to negotiate, transact, and carry on
the public Affairs of this Island, in Great Britain* What! are all those
public Affairs to be carried on by their Agents, without any Concern of the
Governor and Council? Must these have no Hand at all in directing and
instructing such Agents, in what will be for the public Benefit; and the
Money, notwithstanding, even unlimited Sums, be implicitly paid, by their
Allowance? What is this but to assume, in Effect, an arbitrary and independent
Power, and so far to render the other Branches of the Legislature useless, and
of no Signification? -- etc.

The Event of this Affair was, that the Bill, or a Draught of the Bill, with
the Council's Reasons for their Amendments, were sent Home; and the Governor
soon received an Order, grounded on a Report of the Honorable the Committee of
his Majesty's Privy Council, for rejecting the Draught of the Bill, as contrary
to the constant Usage of that Island, and of all other his Majesty's Colonies,
and derogatory to the Royal Prerogative; which being expressly said to be
advised by their Lordships, with Intent to discourage Attempts of the like Kind
for the Future.

While these Matters were in Agitation at Barbados, the same Disputes were
carried on in New England, but, if possible, with still more Obstinacy, though
with somewhat more Color of Reason, because of their Charter, which they
pretended was infringed by the Instructions: They, therefore, were not
satisfied with the Royal Determination, but thought fit to apply to the
Parliament; as appears from the printed Votes of the British House of Commons.

Jovis 10, Die Maii, 1733.
A Memorial of the Council and Representatives of the Massachusets-Bay, was
presented to the House and read; laying before the House the Difficulties and
Distresses they labor under, from a Royal Instruction given to the present
Governor of the said Province, in Relation to the issuing and disposing of the
public Moneys of the said Province; and moving the House to allow their Agent
to be heard by Council upon this Affair: Representing also, the Difficulties
they are under, from a Royal Instruction given, as aforesaid, restraining the
Emission of Bills of Credit; and concluding with a Petition, That the House
will take their Case into Consideration, and become Intercessors for them with
his Majesty; that he would be graciously pleased to withdraw the said
Instructions, as contrary to their Charter; and tending, in their own Nature,
to distress, if not ruin them.

Resolved,

That the Complaint contained in this Memorial and Petition, is frivolous and
groundless; an high Insult upon his Majesty's Government; and tending to shake
off the Dependency of the said Colony upon this Kingdom, to which, by Law and
Right, they ought to be subject.

Ordered,

That the said Memorial and Petition be rejected.

To this I have only to add, by Way of Query; -- Should an Assembly, chose by
the People as Trustees and Guardians of their Constitution and Privileges,
after so clear a Declaration of his Majesty's Sentiments, continue to insult
his Majesty's Government, by contemptuously rejecting every Order and
Instruction that does not suit their Taste or Humor? And are they not
accountable to the People, for the Consequences of their Conduct? Surely no One
can think otherwise.

But I shall go on to show, in a few more Particulars, the Intention of the
Crown, in forming us upon the British Plan.

The Bill for the Payment of the Debts of the Government, has been sufficiently
animadverted upon, by the Address of the Council here, as well as what may be
collected from that other of Barbados. The Application Act, as it is called,
comes next to be considered: It is, indeed, an Original; and from the very Face
of it, appears to be calculated in direct Opposition to his Majesty's
Instructions, and the very Form and Nature of our Constitution: Every Officer
of the Government is there named by the Assembly, with his Allowance tacked to
the End of it; which being a Money Bill, is, with them, sacred and not to be
touched with profane Hands; and with this Proviso too, viz. That if any of them
die or are removed, so much of the aforesaid Allowances to be paid, as shall be
at that Time due; and no more. If an Officer, then, dies or is removed, the
Governor, it is true, may put another in his Place; but he can have no Salary
or Allowance, till the Assembly please; and that Allowance is just as they
please to like the Person. It is not a new Thing with some of our Assemblies,
to add or substract a Figure in the Salary of of the Officers, according to the
Nature of the Application; and even to drop an useful Office, upon Occasion, if
they disapprove of the Officer; witness the Weigh-Master General's Office.
This, I think, is an Encroachment with a Witness, as it creates a Dependence of
all the Officers of the Government, upon an Assembly; which, of Course, quite
inverts the very Order and Nature of Government.

In Great Britain, to defray the necessary Services of the Government,
Estimates are laid before the House of Commons, of which they, if they please,
may judge of the Necessity, as well as of the Quantum; the Funds, however, are
raised; but the Application is left to his Majesty. If there are any
Misapplications, it is with the Commons to enquire; and Nothing is more
dreaded, than a parliamentary Scrutiny.

The Disposition of Officers, is an inherent Right of the Crown; and is,
indeed, a Part of that Power lodged in that Branch of the Legislature, in order
to keep up the Balance; and without it, it would lose of its Weight. It is his
Majesty's Intentions, that we should follow the same Method; but, those
Intentions our Assemblies have treated according to their usual Complaisance.

The proper Appointments of the Civil List, for his Majesty's Support, is for
Life; which, from long Experience, is found most conducive to the Benefit of
the Community.

It is his Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure, that there be paid to his
Governor and Captain General, L. 1200 Sterling, yearly, out of his Revenue
arising in his said Province; and it is his express Will and Pleasure, that all
Laws made for the Supply and Support of Government, be indefinite, and without
Limitation, as to Point of Time: As the Commission is, the Meaning I think is
plain, that it should last, at least, as long as the Commission; and in this
Sense, most of those Colonies immediately under his Majesty's Direction, have
taken it; and accordingly, as I am informed, observe it, and enjoy Peace and
the Favor of the Crown, while New York and New Jersey are, at present, famous
all over his Majesty's Dominions, for worrying one another, and Contempt of
Royal Orders and Instructions: But instead of this, our Assembly tell him he
may take L. 1200, if he pleases, but it shall be at 40 per C. Discount; and
even that, but from Year to Year; it is this or Nothing; there is no Alternate.
This, however, is paying no great Compliment to his Majesty's express Royal
Will and Pleasure, and but poor Returns of Gratitude for Ten Thousand Pounds
Sterling, laid out upon us yearly, by his Majesty. That of a yearly Support is
but of a late Standing; it was not so from the Beginning. From this Period,
however, we may date the Commencement of all our Confusions. Five Years was the
common Method; and I believe I may challenge the most sanguine Party-Man, to
point out any dreadful Consequences that attended it. This, I say, was the
Method, this ought to be the Method, and this will be the Method, however
terrible, at present, it may appear; and if we do not follow it, it will be
done to our Hands; or we shall have no Peace in o^r Israel, and the King no
Government.

Can any Thing be more absurd, than to imagine a Governor, sent abroad to
govern a People, and to be supported according to the Dignity of his Office,
and under certain Restrictions and Instructions, essential to that Government;
but to obtain that Support, every Instruction must be given up, one after
another, or have no Support? which is just throwing the Governor into their
Hands: This has been the Practice for many Years, and his Majesty and his
Ministers know it too; what the Event will be, Time only can discover. Some
Remedy must be found, or the People will at last govern.

A Governor is no sooner appointed, than the first Question is, Into whose
Hands shall I throw myself? the Answer is ready, Into whose but such as can
best manage the Assembly. Hence Prime Ministers and Courtiers are established;
and, of Course, Anti-courtiers: Hence Parties are formed; and thus the Peace of
the Public is destroyed, honest Neighbors set together by the Ears, and all
Good-fellowship excluded the Society; Elections are carried on with great
Animosity, and at a vast Expense, as if our Alls were at Stake: And what is all
this for? Is the public Good really the Point in View? or is it to show how
dexterously the one Side can manage the Assembly for him, and the other against
him? Let us be told what mighty Advantage the Public has reaped from that
repeated Round of Squabbles we have been pestred with, with no other View than
to distress a worthy Gentleman.

Thus, I think, the Reasonableness, and even the Necessity of supporting a
Governor, according to his Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure, that is
independently of any Body but himself, is evident, as it will destroy all those
Sources of Contention.

In Virginia, the Two Shillings Sterling, upon every Hogshead of Tobacco
exported, makes the Support easy to the People, who are at this Time, and like
to continue in all Duty and Obedience. It is the same in the Leeward-Islands,
from the Four and an Half per C. and we hear of no Fraca's amongst them.

A gentle Tax upon Lands here, would answer all these Purposes, relieve the
Merchant, and encourage Trade, at this Time in a languishing Condition.

If a Man of Worth and Honor falls to our Share, (which indeed, as Matters
stand at present, we can hardly expect) he will, if supported according to his
Dignity, naturally incline to do us all the good Offices in his Power, if we
ourselves don't take Pains to prevent him; and he, the Council, and General
Assembly, will have that Time, hitherto spent in trifling Squabbles, to think
of securing us from abroad, and encouraging Trade and Industry at home.

The Manner of our supporting our Judges, is equally ridiculous and absurd. It
is agreed on all Hands, that those Offices ought to be held for Life,
independent both of Crown and People, and under no Bias; but our Assembly are
determined to keep them too, under their Thumbs; and tell them, we will allow
so much for this Year, but if you do not behave as we think you should do, we
will give you less next Year, and perhaps Nothing at all. This would have
little Weight with a Man of Fortune and Integrity, in that Office; but might
prove too powerful a Temptation to such as have Nothing else to depend upon. As
the Commissions, therefore, for good Reasons, are for Life; so ought, for the
same Reasons, the Salaries to be.

I have been informed, that in New England, there was a long Debate in the
House, whether the Governor's Salary should be paid at the Beginning or at the
End of the Year, that they might be the better able to judge of his
Good-Behaviour; and, if I am not mistaken, it was carried for the latter.

The Jersey Assembly, not many Months ago, waited upon the Governor with the
Revenue Bill, insisting, that the Council had Nothing to do with it; and had he
passed it in that Manner, can any Body doubt, but that their next Vote would
have been to exclude both Governor and Council. Those are great Strides in our
Assemblies toward --

But to go on with our Act.

Whoever will be at the Pains to compute the Amount of the Salaries, and
compare it with those Allowances made to Assemblies, and their immediate
Dependents, will readily see how far the one comes short of the other.

There are Twenty-seven Assembly-men, to whom the Law allows to some Ten, to
some Six, and to others, Four Shillings a Day; take the Medium at 7 s. and this
amounts to L. 9:9:0, every Day from their setting out, to their Return to their
Homes; and this is a Tax immediately out of the Farmers Pockets; all others are
upon the Merchant (a Point that may be discussed at another Time;) besides L.
300 to a Treasurer, yearly, though his Majesty has appointed one for that
Purpose, and L. 200, yearly, to an Agent of their own. The Incidents on both
Sides may be left out in the Computation. We shall be told, perhaps, that some
of these Gentlemen, don't take up their Allowance; but sure They will not openly
declare this, because, in my humble Opinion, it is downright Bribery, as I
cannot conceive the Difference between saying, I will give you seven Shillings
a Day, if you choose me; or, I will forgive you seven Shillings a Day, if you
choose me. -- So much for this extraordinary Act.

His Majesty, out of a tender Regard for the Preservation of the Lives and
Properties of his Subjects here, has given Directions, that proper Provision be
made for Indian Affairs; but our worthy Assembly, that their Conduct may appear
of a Piece, have made none; I shall not enquire into the Reasons; they ought,
indeed, to be very good Ones, to satisfy the People; because, in Case of a
Rupture with France, it must have very fatal Consequences; and it is not
impossible, (considering how indefatigable the French are in this Matter) but
that Fresh Water may become our Frontier: I can see Nothing to hinder them,
without our Indians, from driving the whole Country in before them. How far the
Authors of this Neglect may be answerable for those Consequences, at the great
Day of Accounts, I am not Casuist enough to determine; and shall, therefore,
leave it to their own Consciences.

I have but one Thing more to observe upon, in this Act, and that is, That
neither Governor nor Council can command one Shilling of the public Money, if
that Shilling would save the Province, while the Speaker has it in his Power,
by Order of the House, to dispose of it as he pleases, without being
accountable to any but themselves. -- See the last Clause but one, in the Act.
-- How consistent this is with the Nature of our Constitution, or, indeed, any
other Constitution, I shall leave to those more judicious to determine.

As I have but little Hopes of any Remedy for those Evils, on this Side of the
Atlantic, I would have it enacted, by a British Parliament, That whereas great
Irregularities and Confusions have arisen from the present Methods taken for
the Support of Government, and Officers of the Crown, etc.

I. Be it Enacted, That all Lands hitherto granted, or that shall be granted by
his Majesty, shall pay at the Rate of One Shilling for every Hundred Acres,
upon Oath, in Lieu of all other Rents or Reservations whatsoever; applicable
only toward the Support of Government and the Officers of the Crown; to be
issued by Warrant, according to Instructions.

As to what may be objected in Relation to the giving up the Quit-Rents; they
are but a Trifle to the Crown, and will ever be a Canker in the Estate of the
Subject. From 1664 to 1710, they are but of very little Importance. The
Counties of New York, West-Chester, Duchess, and Albany, that is, all the East
Side of Hudson's River, extending along the River about 170 Miles, does not, by
an accurate Calculation, pay above L. 90 Sterling, to be collected from several
Thousand Hands. The Rest of the Counties are much upon the same Footing; and I
may, I think, venture to affirm, that, had it not been for the vacating two
Grants; one, viz. to Mr. Evans, and the other to Dell^^^ and Bayard; the
Quit-Rents would not have defrayed the Expense of collecting them; nor would
the Province have been half so well settled.

Governors, during that Period, were under no Restrictions. Grants of Lands,
and Reservations, were in Proportion to the Gratifications to a Governor. The
greatest Part of the Grants, during that Time, are to pay such Quit-Rents, as
hereafter shall be established by the Laws of this Country; which is just
saying, you shall pay when you please. There are, however, some Pepper-Corns,
some Wampum, Stivers, and Beaver-Skins ascertained.

Since 1710, 2 s 6 is reserved upon every Hundred Acres; but as Grants are not
easily come at by a poor Man, the Rich have generally engrossed them, not with
a View of settling the Lands, but of parcelling of them out to the best
Bidders. Those Grants, and, of Course, the Reservations, by these Means became
so divided and subdivided, that at last, it will become impracticable, if not
impossible, either for the Officer to collect, or the Possessor to pay, though
never so willing, with any Certainty or Regularity. In many of the old Grants,
the Shares of the Possessors does not amount to the tenth Part of a Penny; and
they must go perhaps a great Way to pay that, or be prosecuted; or if any one
of them should even be obliged to pay the Whole, they have no Remedy against
those concerned. A poor Man in the Moba^ok's Country, possessed, perhaps, of
fifty Acres, must go upwards of two Hundred Miles every Year, to pay fifteen
Pence, or be prosecuted; the Event of which may be fatal to such a Person. This
will, in Time, create great Uncertainty and Confusion in that Collection. In
Lieu, therefore, of which, I humbly conceive, that One Shilling upon every
Hundred Acres, would relieve the Subjects, amply support Government, the
Officers of the Crown would become independent of Assemblies, Trade would be
relieved, and those extravagant landed Gentlemen, would be obliged to pay their
Proportion of that Expense.

From good Hands I understand, that a Person possessed of two Hundred Acres,
pays more to the Pubblick, than some of those possessed of their Hundred
Thousands.

In order to put our Indian Affairs upon a proper Footing, I would have all
Moneys, raised upon the Retailers of Liquors, (being a Sort of a voluntary Tax
through the whole Continent be made a perpetual and unalienable Fund for that
Purpose. If this Affair, of so much Importance to the British Interest, be left
much longer to the Caprice of Assemblies, we may easily guess what will be the
Consequence. And that all Duties upon Indian Goods cease, and the Trade left
open to all his Majesty's Subjects, except those that take the Road to Canada.

As I conceize, that Trade carried on between Albany and Canada, is attended
with very pernicious Consequences to the British Interest, I cannot help
thinking, with Submission, but that an effectual Stop might be put to it by the
following Method. By the 12th of Chapter II. no Alien, or Person not born within
the King's Allegiance, etc. shall exercise the Trade or Occupation of a
Merchant or Factor in any of his Majesty's Plantations, upon Forfeiture of all
his Goods, etc.

Let an Officer, therefore, be posted at Albany, who is to publish the above
Clause; giving Notice, that in three Months, all Goods, Wares, or Merchandise
exported or imported, from or to Albany, by the French or their Factors, the
Natives, not under his Majesty's Allegiance, will be seized; the Proof to be
put upon the Owner.

There are two Objections to this; First, If the French are not supplied from
us, they will fall upon other Means of supplying themselves, which will
prejudice the Consumption of the British Manufactures: But the Absurdity of
this Objection has already been sufficiently exposed, ( See the Papers relating
to an Act of the Assembly of the Province of New York, for Encouragement of the
Indian Trade, etc. and for prohibiting the selling of Indian Goods to the
French, viz. of Canada; and Mr. Colden 's History of the Five Nations) I shall
take no further Notice of it.

As to the second Objection, that this will be acting contrary to that Freedom
of Commerce with the Indians, mutually stipulated by the Articles of the Treaty
of Utrecht; to this I have only to say, that the French understand not that
Treaty in such Light; as appears by their discharging our Traders from trading,
upon any Pretense whatever, within their Territories, under severe Penalties;
witness the Treatment those three Philadelphia Traders met with lately, for
trading at Ohio, only pretended to be within their Territories; whereas neither
English nor Indians, admit it to be so; and the Ohio Indians will suffer all
the Extremities of War rather than admit it to be so.

By this Time, I presume, I am reckoned a mighty Governor's Man, (an invidious
Distinction) and no Friend to Assembly-men. As to the first, I own it, First,
Because I find the Laws are severe (where Laws govern) against such as
industriously endeavor to create Jealousies between the supreme Magistrate and
the People: Secondly, Because no Piques or Prejudices ought to eff^ce
Good-Manners, due to every Superior, especially a Supreme Magistrate: And
lastly, Because in the whole Course of my Observations, I never knew any one
Individual get any Thing by it, but a little Vanity and a great Deal of
Vexation.

As to Assembly-men, there are those whom I revere. One whose only Aim is at
the Honor, Safety, and Interest of his Country; and who on this Mark
constantly keeps his Eye fixed; who dreads not the Frowns of an enraged
Governor, or the horrid Clamours of a possessed Multitude; who smiles to see so
many (in all Appearance) honest and thinking Men, jog on like a Gang of
Pack-Horses; who truly enjoys all that Freedom in his Actions, which he thinks
his Duty to procure for, and defend his Countrymen in; One, in short, who is
directed, influenced, or biassed by none; and while he is in his Country's
Service, thinks the most glorious Epithets the World can fix upon him, are
those of a rigid, inflexible, ill-natured, honest Man. -- And such a one who
would not revere?

But, as a certain Gentleman observes: I think, says he, there is hardly to be
found through all Nature, a greater Difference between a representing Commoner
in the Function of his public Calling, and the same Person, when he acts in
the common Offices of Life; here he allows himself to be on a Level with the
Rest of Mortals; here he follows his own Reason and his own Way; in short, here
his Folly and his Wisdom, his Reason, and his Passions, are all of his own
Growth, not the Echo of other Men: But when he is got near the Walls of his
Assembly, he assumes and affects an entire Set of very different Airs; he
conceives himself a Being of a superior Nature to those without, and acting in
a Sphere where the vulgar Methods for the Conduct of Life, can be of no Use:
He Is listed in a Party where he neither knows the Temper nor Designs, nor
perhaps the Leader; but whose Opinions he follows and maintains with a Zeal and
Faith, as violent as a young Whitefieldian does those of a Methodist, whose
Sect he is taught to profess: He has neither Opinions, nor Thoughts, nor
Actions, nor Talk, that he can call his own; but all conveyed to him by his
Leader, as Wind is through an Organ: The Nourishment he receives, has not only
been chewed, but digested before it comes into his Mouth: Thus instructed, he
follows the Party, right or wrong, through all its Sentiments, and acquires a
Courage and Stiffness of Opinion, not at all congenial with him. Such a One, if
any such there be, I most heartily despise.

The Raging of the Sea and Madness of the People, are put together in
Holy-Writ; and the Wrath of a King, to that of the Raging of a Lion: But his
Favors are as the Dew upon the Grass, which that we may endeavor, every one
in his particular Station, to cultivate and deserve, are my sincere Wishes.

FINIS.

