A DISSWASIVE FROM THE SIN OF DRUNKENNESS.

By JOSIAH WOODWARD, D.D.

LANCASTER: Printed and Sold by W DUNLAP, in QUEEN STREET, 1755

A DISSWASIVE etc.
THE Vice of Intemperance is such an Enemy to all that is Virtuous and
Religious in Man, yea, to all that is Decent and Man-like, that all Mankind
ought to rise up with Indignation against it, as a Thing that degrades them
from the Honor of Human Nature, and renders them more vile than the very
Beasts.

The poor senseless Brutes may by Accident be overcome with strong Liquors,
because they have no Reason to govern their Appetites, no Sense of Duty or
Shame, no Foresight of Danger, nor Fear of a future Judgment: And when the Dog
turns to his Vomit, or the Swine wallows in the Mire, they do but act according
to their Nature. But for the noble Creature MAN, that is made after the Image
of GOD, and ranked in Dignity next to the glorious Angels: Man, that has Reason
to inform him in the Will of his Creator, and a Conscience to awaken his Care
to comply with it; yea, for a Christian, that has the Vows of God upon him, and
stands fair for an eternal Kingdom; I say, for this wise and noble Creature to
part with his Reason, his Conscience, his Heaven; his God, for a little Drink
more than he needs, yea, for such an Excess of it as tends to his present Pain,
Disorder, and Shame, as well as to eternal Torment, is a most desperate Pitch
of Sin and Folly, such as all People, when in their Senses, cannot choose but
condemn even with Passion; and every body must grant, that no Kindness in the
World can be more seasonable or more valuable, than that which tends to lift
Men out of the Mire of this noisome Sin, and to bring them to the sweet and
honorable Estate of Christian Sobriety.

And this is the Work of our blessed Religion, according to that Exhortation
of the Holy Scriptures, Ephesians. v.18. Be not drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess;
but be filled with the spirit. As if it were said. Know your divine Advantages,
ye that live in the State of the Gospel, and be not as Swine, which trample the
richest Paerls under their Feet. Ye, who now Rave and Blaspheme by Reason of
Excess of Wine, may, by a due Use of the Means of Grace, come to be filled with
the holy Spirit, and to be happy in the Service and Favor of God, like the
holy Angels. Wherefore consider the infinite Value of your heavenly Birthright,
and do not sell it, with Esau, for a few sensual Draughts, lest, with him, when
you come to see the Folly of it, ye weep bitterly, and perhaps eternally.

It is the Misery of fallen Man, that his Soul is sunk into the Flesh, and is
prone to follow carnal Inclinations, yea, to make Provision for the Flesh, to
fulfill the Lusts thereof; which is, both in Nature and Religion, as absurd and
horrible as for a Prince to wait on his Slave, or for a Man to be trampled
under the Feet of his Horse. Now, it is the Work of Reason, Religion, and the
Grace of God, to amend this Disorder, by reducing the lower Faculties of the
Soul into a just Obedience to the superior, and making both of them subject and
obedient to the Will and Glory of God. And whereas sensual Pleasures are the
usual Baits whereby Men are ensnared to Intemperance, and as it were bewitched
to it, through the Inordinacy and Folly of their fleshly Minds, it is absolutely
necessary to Salvation, that through the powerful Assistance of the holy Spirit
of God in the due Observance of the Gospel Rules of Temperance, Abstinence, and
Mortification, our Bodies should be kept in such Order and Regulation, that
they may be fit Instruments of our Souls in our Endeavors to serve and glorify
God. And herein consists the Virtue and Grace of Sobriety, namely, in
prescribing just Bounds to sensual Pleasure; that we be not drawn to Excess in
Eating, Drinking, or other natural Actions, through the Enticemet of those
agreeable Pleasures that attend them.

As to the particular Case before us, that of Drinking to excess; it has
pleased God to make many Sorts of Liquors gustful and pleasant to our Taste,
that we might thereby be induced to acknowledge the Goodness of God, who gives
us of his good Ceatures, as well for our Delight, as for our Necessity. But
here our Sobriety must stand on its Guard, to see that we keep to the Rules of
Moderation, and be not drawn to Excess by the Humor of the Company, or the
Pleasantness of the Liquor.

Our bountiful Creator has provided many Sorts of Wines, and other generous
Liquors, for the Entertainment of Men, to be Cordials to us under the
Indispositions of our frail Bodies, and an Antidote to the over-heavy
Afflictions which may befall us, Psalm. civ.15. Prove. xxxi.6. In these Cases,
Wine, and such like spirituous Liquors, are of excellent use to the Convenience
of Human Life. And a Christian is in this Respect more kindly dealt with than
the Rechabite or Mohammedan. But here is the Misery: What God has bountifully
given us for good Ends, sensual Men abuse to base and pernicious Purposes.
What God gives us for Cheerfulness, Men abuse to Drunkenness and Excess* and
then our Cordial is turned into Poison, and our Wine into the Gall of Asps:
For where Drunkenness prevails, all Virtue must needs decay, and all Vice is in
a Way to thrive.

It is through the Preaches which this Sin has made, that a great Part of that
Flood of Sin, which all sober People complain of, has broken in upon us, And
till this Vice ceases to be modish and common, yea till it be duly exposed and
suppressed, by the just Execution of the Laws made for that Purpose, all other
Expedients of a Reformation of Manners will very much fail of their Design. And
since such a Reformation would be the greatest Blessing that can come upon us,
it will behove all wise and virtuous Persons to bring such Offenders to the
Correction of the Magistrate, as will not otherwise be reclaimed.

This Vice does a Person so much Damage, both as a Man and as a Christian, that
where there is any degree of Sense, Reason, or Conscience left, it must needs
make some Impression upon him, to consider the Mischiefs which attend it.

But because all Motives and Endeavors to repress this, or any other Vice,
will be in vain, without the Efficacy of the Spirit of Holiness, I beseech the
God of all Grace to accompany the following Considerations with his holy
Spirit, that we may become mighty through his Grace, to silence the Excuses, and
mortify the Inclinations of Men to this Vice, and to raise in all that Read
them, a most vehement and lasting Indignation against it. In order to which I
shall in the first Place, consider the Mischiefs it does us as Men, and in the
second Place, the mischiefs it does us as Christians.

I. It injures us as we are Men, by depriving us of the Use of Reason, which is
the Excellency and the very Distinction of Men from Brutes. The wisest Person
under the Disorder of Drink becomes a Fool, and commits a thousand Vanities and
Indiscretions. The Drunkard has not the Speech, the Carriage, nor the Civility
of a Man; but is wild, disorderly, and extravagant.

Man, as he is rational and wise, bears the Image of God; but Intemperance
blots out that divine Resemblance; in so much that the most despicable
Creature, even a Dog, a Toad, a Serpent, bear more of the Image of God, than a
drunken Man or Woman. For these Creatures, though mean, are what God made them;
but a Person overcome with Drink, is altogether unlike to, and more
contemptible than even the meanest Creature of God's making. He has turned his
Glory into the similitude of the Ox that eareth Grass, or rather of the Swine
that wallows in the Mire. It is usually said of a Person in Drink that he is
not himself; and it is true, for he does not act by the humane Principles of
Reason or Conscience; but rather by the sordid Appetites of a shameless Beast,
or the raving Fury of one that is possessed by the Devil: So that he is no longer
fit for human Conversation, but is a mere Nuisance and Disturbance to all that
are about him; the Grief of some, and the Laughter of others. And the best that
can be done for him is, to lay him somewhere out of the way, till Time and
Sleep have recovered his lost Senses. And then surely, when his Understanding
returns to him, (as to Nebuchadnezzar) it will be as an Arrow to his Breast, to
think what a Beast he has been, and how many shameful Pranks he has played.

And it is not only for the present that this Vice disorders the Understanding,
but the Custom and Habit of it many times utterly besots Men, and makes them
Children in Understanding even to their Death. Where Sensuality is accustomed
to domineer over Reason, it will at last establish its Authority, and the Beast
will exercise Dominion over the Man: Which leads us to a second Consideration.

II. This Vice makes People vile and contemptible in the Sight of all Men: Even
their Servants and Inferiors deride and contemn them, and the very Boys in the
Streets make their Sports with them. Their ridiculous Behavior moves the
Laughter of vain People; whilst others, who consider the Matter better, cannot
but mourn over the poor besotted Creature, and are ashamed that he should be
thought their Friend, or their Acquaintance. And indeed what Sight can be
sadder, than to see one, that is made capable of Communion with God, rendered
unfit for Society with Men; and to see a Man selling the Honor and Dignity of
his Nature, and his hopes of eternal Bliss, for the Pleasure of a little
Liquor, whilst it is running over his Tongue. By this many Persons of Character
and Distinction do make themselves vile and mean, and they lose the Respect
which would otherwise be due unto them.

III. The Vice of Intemperance enflames Men's beastial Lusts and Passions, and
lays their Reason asleep, which ought to guard them. And then there will be
much the same Disorder, as when wild Beasts have slain their Keeper, and are
got loose. For indeed the Case is much the same, where unmortified Lusts and
Passions are heightened by strong Liquors, and no Reason nor Conscience is left
to curb and control them. Hence comes Impudence and Shamelessness in the most
unseemly Sins; like fed Horses, they proclaim the Impurity of their Hearts, and
the Fury of their Lusts, in the very Streets, as well as when they assemble by
Troops in the Houses of Harlots, (Jer. v. 7.) Even so good a Man as Lot, when
overcome with Wine, had utterly lost all Regard to Decency and Honor; and in
this Disorder, even Noah himself behaved unseemly.

IV. It exposes Persons to causless Broils and Quarrels. Many People fall out
in their Cups, they know not why nor how; insomuch that the wise Man would have
it taken notice of as a Thing common to a Proverb, that he who sits long, till
Wine inflame him and his Companions, is like to have Wounds without Cause,
(Prove. xxiii.20.) When the Spirits of men are fired by immoderate Drinking,
they soon blaze out into a Passion at the least Affront, though but an imaginary
one; and then the Blood of the Party is often shed to quench it. How many
Murders have been committed at Taverns, within a few Years? And how great will
the Cry be for Vengeance, where two such Sins as Drunkenness and Murder call
at once to Heaven for Justice? How often have Men killed their nearest
Relations or dearest Friends in their Drink, for which they have been ready to
kill themselves when they came to reflect upon it in their sober Thoughts? It
was in such a Debauch as this that Alexander killed Clitus, one of the dearest
and faithfullest Friends he had; and that for doing one of the kindest Offices
of Friendship, that is, Reproving.

V. In the next Place, it creates diverse kinds of Diseases, and makes this
present Life both short and painful. For excessive Drinking brings Surfeits, --
Fevers, -- Dropsies, -- Palsies, -- an aching Head, -- an ill Stomach, and what
not? Some indeed, that are of a strong Constitution, may bear up longer than
others under the Disorder it brings to their Bodies; but to all it is Poison,
though it works more slowly upon some than others; and it fails not in the End to
bring down their Heads with Sorrow to the Grave.

It has long been observed, and it is, alas! too manifest, that if the Sword
has slain its Thousands, Intemprance has slain its Ten Thousands: And in many
of those who make a shift to outlive the common Practice of it, we see such
manifest Decays of their Strength, Vigor, Wit, and Sense, that God seems to
hang them up alive in Chains, to affright others from such ill Courses. The
good God persuade all that are concerned to take Warning thereby.

VI. A Person in the Disorder of Drink is unable to shun the most apparent
Danger. His Eyes are bemisted, that he cannot discern the Danger of a Pit or
Precipice that lies before him, nor know his Friend from his Enemy. How many
have fallen from their Horses, or tumbled into Pits, or fallen into Ponds, or
been burnt in their Beds, in a Fit of Intemperance? Yea, their own Weakness
seems to threaten their Life; they reel and stagger like an Infant; they
stumble at every Stone that lies in their Way, and are ready to fall to their
Ruin. And if by these, or any such Accidents, they come by their Death, in what
a woeful Condition must they appear before God, having died in the very Act of
abusing His Mercies, and transgressing His Will?

VII. It begets in them a Contempt of Sobriety and sober Persons. The Psalmist
complains that he was the Song of the Drunkards, (Psalm. lxix.12.) When Nabal
was in his Wine, he railed upon David the Anointed of God, as if he were a
Runaway from his Master, (1 Samuel xxv.10.)

I might add, that it causes People to be imposed upon in their Dealings, and
renders them a Prey to every designing Cheat. It makes them unfit for any
Trust, and for any public Office in Council or War. It also blasts their
Reputation and Esteem in the World; for there is scarce any Name more infamous
than that of a Sot, or a common Drunkard.

And after all, it is a very wasteful Vice; it is never maintained but by
unnecessary Expense, great Waste of Time, and Neglect of Business. How many
starve the Backs and Bellies of their Families, to maintain this expensive
Vice? Insomuch that Solomon makes it a Proverb, that the Drunkard and the
Glutton shall come to Poverty, (Prove. xxiii.21.)

Thus we see some of the Mischiefs of this Vice to us as Men: But alas! The one
Half of its Damages is not yet cast up; for if we look on this Sin, with the
enlightened Eyes of a Christian, we shall see far greater Mischiefs done by it.
For,

1. It drives away the Holy Spirit of God. This is taught us by the Apostle in
the Scripture before mentioned, Ephesians. v.18. Be not drunk with Wine, wherein is
Excess; but be filled with the Spirit. Where the dis-junctive Particle [ but]
shows us, that we cannot enjoy both together. Our Excess will drive away our
Sanctifier and Comforter. He is too delicate to dwell with the nasty spewing
Drunkard. For what Communion has Light with Darkness? or Christ with Belial? 2
Cor. vi.15. Surely, if any deserve the Name of Sons of Belial, (that is, Men
without Yoke, Restraint, or Government) these are the Persons; for they are the
most rude and ungovernable of all others. And besides,

2. This Vice unfits us for every spiritual and religious Action. The poor
besotted Wretch cannot so much as think one sober Thought, or receive any Good
by the pious Advice of others. What Order can there be in that Family, where
the Master of it is Drunk? Is such a one fit to pray with his Family, or to
instruct them in the Duties of Religion! May he not tremble to touch any holy
Thing in such a polluted Condition? Has he not reason to dread the Vengeance of
a Holy God upon such a disorderly Aproach to Him? Nadab and Abihu, the Priests,
the Sons of Aaron, are supposed to have drank too much when they offered
strange Fire before the Lord; because it is imediately added, Lev. x.9, 10.
That neither Aaron, nor his Sons, should drink any Wine nor strong Drink, when
they went into the Tabernacle, lest they die for it. It was always held as an
Abomination to carry Swine's Flesh into the Temple; which seems to teach us,
that all Persons of impure and ungoverned Appetites, are utterly unfit for
Communion with the Holy God.

3. This Vice does very sadly waste the Conscience. It is of a dulling,
besotting Nature: It drowns all serious Thought and Reflection, where it grows
to a Habit. How many have gone out at this Door into all Exorbitancies and
Debauchery? It often betrays Men to profane Swearing Lying, Passions, filthy
Language and Actions, and to any III. He is (as Solomon says) like one that
lies on the Top of a Mast, in which Case he cannot stir, without endangering
his Life, Prove. xxiii.34* so a Person that is Drunk, will be like to do every
thing amiss that he sets himself to, and to be overcome by every Temptation
that lies in his Way.

4. Intemperance pulls down dreadful Wrath upon the Person that is guilty of
it, in this Life, and that to come. The Book of God is so full of Woes against
it, that they appear like a Multitude of Spears set in array against the Person
that treads in this forbidden Path. Woe to the Crown of Pride, the Drunkards of
Ephraim, Isa. xxviii.1. Woe unto them that rise up early in the Morning that
they may follow strong Drink, that continue until Night, till Wine inflame
them, Isa. v.11. Woe unto him that gives his Neighbor Drink, that put thy
Bottle to him, and make him drunken also, that thou may see his Nakedness.
Thou art filled with Shame for Glory; the Cup of the Lord's right Hand shall be
turned unto thee, and shameful Spewing shall be on thy Glory, Hab. ii.15. No
Drunkard shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. vi.10. Surely, where there is
not perfect Infidelity, these Terrors of the Lord will in some measure overawe
Men. For it is very dismal to consider through what crooked and uneasy Paths they
pass on to the Place of Everlasting Torment; where their Mouths will probably
be parched with greater Heat than others, in Proportion to their former
Excesses, and they will for ever want a Drop of cold Water to cool their
Tongues. And then, it will be but little Comfort to think of the Bottles and
Barrels that they have drank in waste in their former Life; yea, that very
Thought will for ever give Fuel to their Flames.

Let those that are strong to drink Wine, or strong Drink, consider this; and
such as entice or compel others to drink more than is fit. It is so natural to
leave every one to his Liberty in this Point, that a Heathen Emperor provided
for it by the Law, Esth. i.8. The Drinking (at a most generous Entertainment)
was according to the Law; none did compel.

These Things being considered, we even beseech Men, by all that is dear to
them in both Worlds, to disdain a base Vice, which adds so much to their
present Reproach and Damage, and to their eternal Torment and Confusion.

We persuade you by the Love ye bear yourselves, my Brethren, as ye desire the
Continuance of your present Life and Health; as you regard the Honor of Human
Nature, or tender your Reputation, that you abhor a Vice, which destroys all
these Enjoyments.

Yea, we entreat you by that which ought to be dearer to you than your Lives,
even by the Love and Fear of the great and good God, as you value his Favor,
and would not fall under his everlasting Vengeance, that you would instantly
discard this destructive Vice, and that you would watch and be sober.

Come out of the senseless Amusements of this besotting Sin, my Brother; shun
the Company, the Drink, and the Occasion which leads you into this Snare, and
thereby into the bottomless Pit. Look up to Heaven, I beseech you, before it be
utterly lost; frequent the Company of good and sober People, and entreat them
to watch over you, and to admonish you in the Lord; and above all, beg the
gracious Conduct of God's Holy Spirit, by earnest and continual Prayer; and be
sure to frequent all God's holy Ordinances, and to improve all good Motions put
into your Heart from above. And think often upon the Mischiefs of this Sin in
both Worlds, with an awakened Expectation of a Judgment to come.

But if our most affectionate Perswasives take no Place upon you, we must then,
in pure Affection to you, try the Power of other Restraints; as we deal with
our best Friends, when they are bereaved of the Use of their Reason. And we
cannot but entreat all sober Persons, as they would do you Good, or do Honor
to God, that they would put you to Shame before the Magistrate, to restrain you
from destroying yourself, and pulling down Calamities and Judgments upon the
Public. If you saw a Person in a furious or drunken Fit, casting Firebrarnds
upon all the Houses he came near, you would think all those People worthy of
great Blame that did not lay hold on him, and bring him to Justice. And in very
Truth, every scandalous Transgressor does greater Mischief to his Neighbor;
for by Reason of these Things, where they abound without control, the
righteous Judgments of God come upon a Land, 'till it be made a Reproach and a
Desolation.

Upon the Whole: If no Entreaty nor Affliction upon Earth will reclaim this
excessive Lover of his Drink, a very short Time will convince him of the
Unreasonableness and sad Consequence of so doing; even when he shall receive a
Summons by some Disease, or some sudden Accident, (perhaps of his own
procuring) to appear before his great and terrible Judge: Then will a Cup of
Trimbling be put into his Hands, as in the Case of Belshazzer, and he must
drink of the Cup of God's Wrath for ever. Then will the most besotted Wretch
begin to think soberly both of Vice and Virtue; and cry out of the Folly of
pleasing himself in that sottish Way of Life, which first robbed him of his
Reason, then of his Conscience, then of his God, and then of his Heaven.

The prudent Man foreseeth the Evil, and hides himself; but the Simple pass on
and are punished, Prove. xxii.3.

FINIS.
Those who incline to encourage the Printing or Re-printing of useful Books,
may have them done on very reasonable Terms by the Printer hereof.

Just Published, and to be Sold by the Printer hereof.
I. Remarks upon Swearing, by T. Clark. II. The Principles of the Christian
Religion in Verse, for Children, by P. Doddridge, III. An Earnest Persuasive to
the Observance of the Lord's Day, by I. Woodward, D. D. IV. A Kind Caution to
profane Swearers, by Josiah Woodward, D. D. V. The Pennsylvania PRIMER,
Compiled for Country Schools, and is the best and most Useful now Extant. VI.
The Larger CATECHISM, agreed upon by the Assembly of Divines, etc. VII. The
Shorter Catechism, with the Proofs thereof out of the Scriptures, etc VIII. The
Shorter Catechism with Notes, which briefly Explain the more difficult Words
and Phrases contained in it, by the late Isaac Wa^ts, D. D. IX. The Shorter
Catechism, of the Reverend Assembly of Divines at Westminster, for the
Instruction of Youth.

