An ACT for the better Ordering and Regulating such as are willing and desirous
to be united for military Purposes within this Province.
Whereas this Province was first settled by, and a Majority of the Assemblies
have ever since been of, the People called Quakers, who, though they do not, as
the World is now circumstanced, condemn the Use of Arms in others, yet are
principled against bearing Arms themselves; and to make any Law to compel them
thereto, against their Consciences, would not only be to violate a Fundamental
in our Constitution, and be a direct Breach of our Charter of Privileges, but
would also, in Effect, be to commence Persecution against all that Part of the
Inhabitants of the Province; and for them, by any Law, to compel others to bear
Arms, and exempt themselves, would be inconsistent and partial; yet, forasmuch
as by the general Toleration, and Equity of our Laws, great Numbers of People
of other religious Denominations are come among us, who are under no such
Restraint, some of whom have been disciplined in the Art of War, and
conscientiously think it their Duty to fight in Defense of their Country, their
Wives, their Families, and Estates; and such have an equal Right to Liberty of
Conscience with others;

And whereas a great Number of Petitions from the several Counties of this
Province have been presented to this House, setting forth, That the Petitioners
are very willing to defend themselves and their Country, and desirous of being
formed into regular Bodies for that Purpose, instructed and disciplined under
proper Officers with suitable and legal Authority; representing withal, that
unless Measures of this kind are taken, so as to unite them together, subject
them to due Command, and thereby give them Confidence in each other, they
cannot assemble to oppose the Enemy, without the utmost Danger of exposing
themselves to Confusion and Destruction:

And whereas the voluntary assembling of great Bodies of armed Men, from
different Parts of this Province, on any occasional Alarm, whether true or
false, as of late has happened, without Call or Authority from the Government,
and without due Order and Direction among themselves, may be attended with
Danger to our neighboring Indian Friends and Allies, as well as to the
internal Peace of the Province:

And whereas the Governor has frequently recommended it to the Assembly, that,
in preparing and passing a Law for such Purposes, they should have a due Regard
to scrupulous and tender Consciences; which cannot be done where compulsive
Means are used to force Men into military Service:

Therefore, as we represent all the People of the Province, and are composed of
Members of different religious Persuasions, we do not think it reasonable that
any should, through a Want of legal Powers, be in the least restrained from doing
what they judge it their Duty to do for their own Security, and the Public
Good; We, in Compliance with the said Petitions and Recommendations, do offer
it to the Governor to be Enacted; And be it Enacted by the Honorable Robert
Hunter Morris, Esquire, with the KING's Royal Approbation, Lieutenant Governor
under the Honorable Thomas Penn and Richard Penn, Esquires, true and absolute
Proprietors of the Province of Pensilvania, and of the Counties of Newcastle,
Kent, and Sussex, upon Delaware, by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province, in General Assembly met,
and by the Authority of the same, That, from and after the Publication of this
Act, it shall and may be lawful for the Freemen of this Province to form
themselves into Companies, as heretofore they have used in Time of War without
Law; and for each Company, by Majority of Votes, in the Way of Ballot, to choose
its own Officers; to wit, a Captain, Lieutenant, and Ensign, and present them
to the Governor or Commander in Chief, for the Time being, for his Approbation;
which Officers so chosen, if approved and commissioned by him, shall be the
Captain, Lieutenant, and Ensign, of each Company respectively, according to
their Commissions; and the said Companies being divided into Regiments by the
Governor or Commander in Chief, it shall and may be lawful for the Officers so
chosen and commissioned for the several Companies of each Regiment to meet
together, and, by Majority of Votes, in the Way of Ballot, to choose a Colonel,
Lieutenant Colonel, and Major, for the Regiment, and present them to the
Governor or Commander in Chief, for his Approbation; which Officers so chosen,
if approved and commissioned by him, shall be the Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel,
and Major, of the Regiment, according to their Commissions, during the
Continuance of this Act.

Provided always, That if the Governor or Commander in Chief shall not think
fit to grant his Commission to any Officer so first chosen and presented, it
shall and may be lawful for the Electors of such Officer to choose Two other
Persons in his stead, and present them to the Governor or Commander in Chief;
One of whom, at his Pleasure, shall receive his Commission, and be the Officer,
as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That, as soon as the
said Companies and Regiments are formed, and their Officers commissioned, as
aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful to and for the Governor or Commander in
Chief, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels,
and Majors, of all the Regiments, being for that Purpose by him called and
convened, or by and with the Advice and Consent of a Majority of the said
Officers that shall be met and present together on such Call, to form, make,
and establish, Articles of War, for the better Government of the Forces that
shall be under their Command, and for bringing Offenders against the same to
Justice; and to erect and constitute Courts-Martial, with Power to hear, try,
and determine, any Crimes or Offenses by such Articles of War, and inflict
Penalties, by Sentence or Judgment of the same, on those who shall be subject
thereto, in any Place within this Province: Which Articles of War, when made,
as aforesaid, shall be printed and distributed to the Captains of the several
Companies, and by them distinctly read to their respective Companies; and all
and every Captain, Lieutenant, Ensign, or other Freeman, who shall, after at
least Three Days Consideration of the said Articles, voluntarily sign the same,
in Presence of some One Justice of the Peace, acknowleging his having perused,
or heard the same distinctly read; and that he has well considered thereof, and
is willing to be bound and governed thereby; and promises Obedience thereto,
and to his Officers accordingly; shall thenceforth be deemed well and duly
bound to the Observance of the said Articles, and to the Duties thereby
required, and subject to the Pains, Penalties, Punishments, and Forfeitures,
that may therein be appointed for Disobedience, and other Offenses.

Provided always, That the Articles, so to be made and established, shall
contain nothing repugnant, but be as near as possible conformable, to the
military Laws of Great Britain, and to the Articles of War made and established
by His Majesty, in pursuance of the last Act of Parliament for punishing Mutiny
and Desertion; the different Circumstances of this Province compared with Great
Britain, and of a voluntary Militia of Freemen compared with mercenary standing
Troops, being duly weighed, and maturely considered.

Provided also, That nothing in this Act shall be understood, or construed, to
give any Power or Authority to the Governor or Commander in Chief, and the said
Officers, to make any Articles or Rules that shall in the least affect those of
the Inhabitants of the Province, who are conscientiously scrupulous of bearing
Arms, either in their Liberties, Persons, or Estates; nor any other Persons, of
what Persuasion or Denomination soever, who have not first voluntarily and
freely signed the said Articles, after due Consideration, as aforesaid.

Provided also, That no Youth under the Age of Twenty-one Years, nor any bought
Servant, or indented Apprentice, shall be admitted to inroll himself, or be
capable of being enrolled in the said Companies or Regiments, without the
Consent of his or their Parents or Guardians, Masters or Mistresses, in Writing
under their Hands, first had and obtained.

Provided also, That no Inlistment or Inrolment of any Person, in any of the
Companies or Regiments to be formed and raised as aforesaid, shall protect such
Person in any Suit or civil Action brought against him by his Creditors or
others, except during his being in actual Service in Field or Garrison; nor from
a Prosecution for any Offense committed against the Laws of this Province.

Provided also, That no Regiment, Company, or Party, of Volunteers shall, by
virtue of this Act, be compelled or led more than Three Days March beyond the
inhabited Parts of the Province; nor detained longer than Three Weeks in any
Garrison, without an express Engagement for that Purpose first voluntarily
entered into, and subscribed, by every Man so to march or remain in Garrison.

This Act to continue in Force until the Thirtieth Day of October next, and no
longer.

AN ACT (Passed in Pensilvania 22 Nov. 1755.) For the better Ordering and
Regulating such as are willing and desirous to be united for Military Purposes
within this Province.


