THE Advantages and Disadvantages OF THE Marriage-State, etc.

Third Edition.

LONDON, Printed etc.

BOSTON; Reprinted, and Sold by Green and Russell, at their Office in
Queen Street; and by P. Freeman in Union-street. 1757.

THE Advantages and Disadvantages OF THE Marriage-State, As entered into with
Religious or Irreligious Persons. Represented under the Similitude of a DREAM.

By the Reverend Mr. John Johnson.

The Third Edition.

LONDON, Printed etc. (...)

THE Advantages and Disadvantages OF THE MARRIAGE-STATE, etc.
SINCE Vision and Prophecy are sealed up, and no Man has Liberty to add any
Thing to the Words of the Book of the Revelation of Jesus Christ; all Dreams,
Omens, Signs, Tokens, pretended Visions, and Revelations, or any kind of
Prognostications whatsoever, and Observations upon them, are to be esteemed
nothing at all but Delusions of the Devil; whereby the Prince of Darkness
deceives weak Minds, who are seeking more after the Chaff than the Wheat.

But though the most High God severely reproves all such as pretend to
Predictions or Knowledge of Secrets, by Interpretations of Dreams; yet as Men
dream, they may lawfully tell their Dreams to one another, without any Design
to deceive by them. I shall therefore take Liberty to relate the following one.

I fancied myself traveling in the Eastern Parts of the World; and, at last,
coming to the City of Old Babylon, where I was much amused in viewing the
Curiosities of the Place, as the Tower, the Wall, the Gates, the Streets, the
Palace, the River, the Images in the Plain of Dura, etc. I observed the City,
and it appeared in different Views. In one Part the People were entirely taken
up in Revellings, Feastings, Diversions, splendid Appearances, and enjoying
themselves. In the other Part they were more reserved, and were much taken up
in a demure Dress and Behavior; in the Decency of their Houses and Streets,
and in the Regularity of their Towers and Fortifications, etc. But without any
Appearance of Dangers, Alarms, or Molestations, they seemed all entirely at
Ease.

Howbeit, when I had almost satiated myself with gazing at the particular
Shows; I thought to take a Prospect of the whole City together. So I walked to
a rising Ground belonging to it, but a little retired from the Crowd; where I
saw a Booth, which I took to be built on purpose for the Convenience of taking
Prospects, and I went directly to it; and at the Door I saw an old Man, of whom
I inquired if he had ever a Prospect-Glass, whereby I might be favored with a
full View of that royal City, which I supposed to be the Metropolis of the
World. He told me if I pleased to take a deliberate Observation, I might
perhaps have different Apprehensions of that splendid City, than I had at
present. For he assured me it was so full of intestine Perplexity, caused by
Envy, Malice, Excess, and Corruption, that the Inhabitants had no real
Satisfaction in themselves; and it was only by those Extravagancies and
Amusements which had seen, they kept themselves from perpetual ^istraction. He
then fetched out his Protective, and told me if I pleased he would show ^e the
Situation of the Place; whereby I might ^e convinced that its Condition was not
so happy, ^or its Glory so majestic as I imagined. So I ^ook a distinct View
on the South Side; and the Foundation of the Place appeared to be built upon
nothing but Bogs and Quicksands, which could not possibly sustain the
Buildings; but ere long they must inevitably sink. I again took a View on the
North Side; and I found the Foundation was all bituminous and sulphurous
Matter, interspersed with subterraneous Fire, which appeared ready in a Moment
to break forth into Flames. He then bid me look to the East; and I saw a very
formidable Army approaching the City, with full Power and Commission to destroy
it; and they spread themselves around with Fury, like the roaring of the Sea.
And there was a Trembling upon all the Hills, the Rivers, the Trees, and all
the Fields round about; but all the Inhabitants of the City continued in a
Stupefaction.

When I had beheld and deliberated on these Things, it filled me with such
Astonishment as almost caused my Bowels to turn within me. Such was my
Disappointment, and the Horror that seized me, that I thought I was neither
able to bear the Sight, nor fly from i^, nor stand my Ground. And I asked the
old Man if I might lodge all Night in that Booth. But he told me it was not a
Place for Lodging, nor would any Person in his right Mind think it safe to
sleep so near the City; but if I pleased, I might come in and rest myself a
little. And when I entered, I found four young Men very carefully perusing a
Map; seeming to make very particular Remarks, and diligent Observations, and
would some times earnestly enquire the old Man's Judgment, to inform them of
the Meaning of some Things. Whereupon I enquired what Piece it was that so much
attracted their Attention. They told me it was the Map of Babylon and Canaan,
with all the Roads between the two Places. And they having had a full Prospect
of the same Things which I had just now beheld; and being determined to leave
their native Country, and travel to the latter Place, was the Reason of their
present Enquiries. And the old Man being a native of Canaan, and acquainted
with both Countries, as well as the Roads from one to the other, they
frequently applied to him for Instruction in Things difficult.

These four young Men appeared so like each other in their Apparel, their
Speech, and Behavior, as well as some of their Features, that I verily took
them all to have been own brothers; and knew not any thing to the contrary,
until I became acquainted with a certain Person who had some Knowledge of the
Places where they were born, and of the Register-books. He informed me that two
of them were Sons of the Bondwoman, but the other two were Sons of the
Freewoman.

So I observed them, and they all made Preparation with seeming vigorous
Resolution for their proposed Journey. And amongst other Consultations with the
old Man (their Instructor) they ^arnestly craved his Advice, whether it were
expedient for each of them to take along with him a Female Companion? Which he
very cheerfully encouraged them to do, provided they were such as were disposed
to go the same Way, and had their Hearts engaged to seek the same Country along
with them. But otherwise he admonished them (by all Means) to avoid such
Companions as had no Knowledge of or Delight in the Way they designed to travel.

He pointed out to them many Difficulties in the Way where the Company of
Strangers would be of very dangerous Consequence; told them the Need they would
find of strengthening and encouraging in the Way, rather than hindering and
discouraging; and reasoned much upon the Evil that would attend (in many
Respects) such Companions as took no Delight in the Way; and compared it with
the Advantages they might expect in the Company of such as took Pleasure, and
would endeavor to animate them therein. He further informed them in many
Instances, what bad Effects Travelers, who had formerly gone that Way, had
found from disagreable Companions. And that (to prevent the like
Inconveniences) the King of the Country had made a Law that none of his
Subjects should join with Strangers to be Companions in that Journey. And
therefore he earnestly cautioned (whatever they did) to be exceeding careful in
their Choice.

I waited to see what Influence this Advice would have upon the Minds of these
young Men. But I observed, that (at the first) none of them seemed to relish
his Counsel; for they had all either contracted some Acquaintance with, or
placed their Fancy upon Maids who were Natives of Babylon, to whom their Hearts
were very inclinable. But the more they appeared engaged in their Affections,
the more their Instructor insisted on the Dangers and pernicious Consequences
which were most certain to attend their having such Companions. And withal told
them the King had appointed one to attend them in their Journey, whose Name was
Self-Denial, without whose Company it would be impossible ever to reach the
Borders of Canaan. And that to choose a Stranger for a Companion, would be such
an Insult to him (at the first setting out) as might cause Misunderstanding all
the Way. For his Part, he told them, that to pretend to travel to Canaan, and
to choose a Babylonia^^ or a Companion, was such a Contradiction, that he could
not but very much doubt the Sincerity of their Hearts. For if it was possible
at all for a sincere Traveller to choose such a Companion; (as he would not be
too bold in his Assertions) yet he was very certain it could not be so long as
they continued in the right Use of their Reason. And he must discharge his
Conscience in giving them timely Admonition, etc.

I observed the Event of these Consultations; and I found the eldest Son of the
Bondwoman could not be moved by all these Arguments. But resolutely chose one
who was an utter Stranger to the Paths, nor hall any Delight or Desire thereto.
And when he had covenanted with her, she proved so averse to going along with
him, and so ^^uctant to his pursuing his intended Journey, ^^at she prevailed
upon him to desist from his ^^rpose. So he settled with her in Babylon; and
^^ey were both there when the City was destroyed, ^^d perished together in the
Ruins.

But the younger Brother (Son of the Bond-^oman) took a little more Regard to
the Counsel ^^ven him, and seemed more heedful in his Choice; ^^d (in a slight
Manner) sought to get a Compani^^n that would be willing to go along with him.
^o at last he met with one who appeared complia^^e to his Desire, though she
had no knowledge (...) the Way, nor any Desire to it, only it seemed a ^atter
indifferent; and therefore as he was incli^ed to undertake the Journey, she
would conde^^end to compliment him with her Company. ^his pleased the young Man
very well, as he ^^ought he should both gratify himself in the ^hoice of a
Companion, and also act conformable (...) his Directions. But he did not
consider, that ^hile her Mind was possessed with such Indiffer^^cy, her Company
must needs be very unpro^^able: However, they joined Hands. And she (...) good
as her Word) complimented him with her ^^mpany; and they set out both together,
as if ^^ey would proceed on the Journey, But her in^^fferent Mind soon
prevailed so as to cool his warm ^^fections, and caused their Advances to be
very ^^^w. They would frequently sit down in the ^^^ade, and sometimes divert
themselves with Tri^^^s, and often turn aside out of the Way, which ^^^ade
their Progress very small. And this manner of loitering prevailed more and
more, until at last they came to a low Valley, by the Brink of the River
Euphrates, where they turned aside and fell asleep; and while they slept, there
arose a Swell in the River, and the Flood swept them both away.

As for the younger Son of the Freewoman, when he had heard the Admonitions,
they made some deep Impressions upon his Mind, and filled him with some awful
Apprehensions. For he was convinced of the pernicious Consequences, which would
attend such Company, and appeared very solicitous to avoid them. But (how it
was, I have now forgotten, whether before these Considerations, he had
contracted a Correspondence, and had not Resolution to deny himself; or whether
afterward, by Dalliance, and giving Latitude to his Fancy, he forgot himself)
some Way or other, he proved to be entangled with a Daughter of the Chaldees:
which betwixt the Instructions he had received, and his own unguarded
Affections, caused some Strugglings in his Mind. For though the Person was of a
complacent Disposition; and did not seem at all reluctant to the Things he had
in View; yet he plainly perceived, she had no real Taste to them; and that her
innate Disposition was more to Babylon than Canaan. She had never been
convinced of the Misery and Ruin approaching her native Country; nor had she
ever been acquainted with the Pleasures, and Delights of that Land which he was
seeking after; nor had she any Desire to the Way. But his strong Inclination
stimulated him to reason upon every Thing in the most advantageous and
promising Light; and to ^t the most favorable Construction upon every
^^^cumstance, as thus; "That her Complacence was such that she would not be any
Hinderance, or Molestation to him. That by his Example, he might engage her
mind, to that which she had no Inclination to at present. That those
Engagements which he should enter into with her, were of another Nature; and
might be performed without interfering immediately with the Concerns of his
Journey. That it was very hard to be prohibited from the Enjoyment of one, who
(in all other Respects) appeared so desirable. And that probably he might never
find a Companion complete in every point, etc." (...) short, the young Man
persisted in these kinds (...) Reasoning, until he had almost stupefied his
^^^enses. But still, could not free himself from con^^^ncing and dreadful
Apprehensions of the Evil of (...) king so indirect a Step, and the
Inconveniences which ^ere certain to attend it. Until at length a ^solute
Passion prevailed, so far that his Eyes were ^rkned, and he scarce perceived
the Day from the ^ight. And during this Obstruction of his Senses; (...) went
one Evening, after both Sun and Moon ^ere gone down; and joined Hands with this
Ba^ylonian. But when the Sun arose in the Morning, ^^^d he was a little come to
himself, he then be^^me sensible of the Rashness of his Adventure; ^ut it was
too late to recall it. He was now ware, into what Snares he had brought
himself; (...) what Difficulties he was involved; and that Incommodities must
attend his Journey; ^^d that now he had no Way left, but to make the best he
could of the Matter; and to grapple with it, as well as it should please God to
enable him.

So after some anxious Thoughts and bitter Reflections, he endeavored to
smother his Grief as well as he could, and betook himself to his Jou^ney;
exerting his utmost Skill, and Power, to take his Companion along with him. But
alas, when he attempted to lead her into the Way, he found she had no Feet; she
could not move a Step further than he must carry her; and a heavy Burden she
proved. So I observed some of his Travel. And when he met with Dangers,
Distresses, or Disappointments, he would begin to express his Grief, and to
unbosom his Mind to his Companion; but she had no Ears, no Understanding, nor
Heart to sympathize with him; nor was she capable of being made to know the
Nature of his Complaints. If he was beset with Robbers, wild Beasts, Serpents,
or any Annoyance, he would sometimes make his Complaint to her; but she could
neither assist, nor comfort him. If he wanted Direction in any Part of his Way;
she could not give him any Counsel. If he was sick, or wounded, and wanted
Cordials, or Oil for his Wounds, she had no Hands to administer any Relief. And
as she never was capable of yielding him any Succor, or Comfort in his
Sufferings, neither was she ever capable of partaking of any of his Enjoyments.
If he met with any Gardens of Spices, or refreshing Springs by the Way, he
would offer her to eat, or drink with him; but she had no Taste. If he found
sweet Flowers, he would pluck, and give them to her; but she had no Smell, nor
^^uld have any Delight in them. If he had any ^^elightful Prospects by the Way;
he would en^eavour to show them to his Companion; but she ^ad no Eyes. If he
met with any Fellow-Travel^ers by the Way, he would invite her to enjoy their
Company; but she was never sociable with himself, or any other Person, who
spoke the Language ^f Canaan; for it was a Language which she could ^ot learn,
Thus, whatever Grief befell him, or whatever Enjoyments he was favored with in
all ^is Journey, he never found any Sympathy, or Congratulation from her; nor
was she of the least ^se to him all the Way; nor were her Affections ^ver
moved, any otherwise, than sometimes to ^uppose, and sometimes to show a
Disgust, or Distur^ance of Mind.

But as she had no Life, Capacity, Sense, nor Activity in the chosen Path; she
had so much the ^ore Vivacity in Things pertaining to her own Clement. So that
when she could draw him aside ^ut of the Way, she would discover such a
Spright^^ne^s;s in all her senses; be so pleasant and divert^ng, and all Parts
of her Conversation so engaging, that it often prevailed upon him to turn aside
with ^er, and proved a very great Hindrance to him in ^is Journey. For though
it was not in his Power ^o find any Thing in his Way that would divert ^r
influence her Mind; yet she frequently found ^ut something in her own Path
which did divert and insensibly draw away his Heart, by which he ^as many times
entangled and laden with thick Clay.

Another Thing I observed, that after he had be^un his Journey, the King of
Israel (whose Subject he was) sent him some young Lambs to feed; with a strict
Charge to teach them diligently in the Way, and bring them up in his Nurture,
and Admonition. But the Performance of this Command was rendered impracticable;
for as he instructed them to go right, she induced them to wander; as he
endeavored to gather them, she scattered them; and as he fed them with
wholesome Food, she would surfeit them with poisonous Herbs. So, which Way the
King disposed of them afterward, I never knew; but they never prospered under
his Care.

Thus her Company never yielded him the least Benefit or Assistance, through
his whole Journey; but was an Allay to all his Joys, and an Aggravation to all
his Sorrows. And it frequently caused him very much Regret of Mind, to think of
his own unadvised Engagement; and of the much Neglect in Duty, Wandering, and
lost Time, which it had been the Occasion of to him; as well as to observe, the
wretched Stupefaction of her Mind, which was incapable of sharing in any of his
blessed Enjoyments; or of being affected with any of his Calamities. Insomuch
as it turned his pleasant Journey, into a wearisome Travel, through a lonesome
Wilderness.

But at last (through many dull Hours, Fatigues, and tiresome Steps) he arrived
near the Borders of the Land, upon the Bank of the River Jordan; where (in the
midst of the Stream) he beheld a Man in a rich priestly Vesture standing to
stop the Torrent, till he was passed over, which made him approach the River,
exceedingly transported with Joy. Yet (even here) he could not refrain from
^^ghing; when he found it was not possible for ^is Companion to go with him one
Step further. But the Glory of his Prince, now in view, and the ^oy of
approaching the promised Land, soon revived ^is Spirits, and made him with
Readiness leave her ^o pass the River. Here his Burdens dropped off, and all
his Clogs were left behind; he went on with ^resh Vigor, and Cheerfulness in
his Countenance, ^s if all Things were forgotten, but the Joy that ^as before
him. But as he was taking some of his ^ast Steps, just ready to set his Feet on
Canaan's ^hore; he looked behind him, and saw her sitting upon the Sand; and
beheld the River returning ^ith such an Over flow, as carried her along the
^^pid Stream into the Dead Sea.

As for the elder Brother (Son of the Free-Wo^an) when he had heard the
Instructions, and Ad^onitions, it wrought some serious Reflections in ^^s Mind;
and made him very deliberate. Not^ithstanding he was a Person of a bright
Genius, ^reat Vivacity, and a fine Taste, he determined to ^eny himself; so as
when he saw the Beauty, and ^raceful Mien, and heard the courteous Conversa^^on
of the Babylonish Maids, he would withdraw ^^om them, and turn away his Eyes,
lest his Heart ^ould be ensnared. However, It sometimes fell in ^^s Way, to
have Conversation with some who ^^peared very agreeable, and engaging; and ^ight
have some Influence on his Affections. ^pecially one, whose Person, Birth,
Circum^^^nces, Virtues, and Accomplishments, render^^^ her extremely agreeable;
and made her appear very promising, to make a valuable Companion. Insomuch,
that many of his Acquaintance greatly encouraged him, to pursue that
Opportunity, and not neglect so valuable a Prize. This made him a little
stagger; (for indeed she wanted no Accomlishment but he Language of Canaan to
make her just such an one, as his Heart could wish) and caused him to reason in
his own Mind, with such Interrogations and Replies, as these;

Q. Can I expect to find an Object more desirable, or one more likely to be a
happy Companion and a Help-meet?

A. She may prove so to a Person who can be conformable to stay with her in
Babylon; but as I am bound to another Country, I might find Bitterness in that
which would appear Happiness to another Person.

Q. But have I not Reason to hope that a Person of her refined Qualities, may
be endued with such Blessings as to make her a suitable Companion for me in my
Journey?

A. A Person may be accomplished with all the Refinements, Improvements, and
Excellencies of Babylon, so as to appear superior to many of the Citizens; but
if these be only the Accommodations of their own Country, they can only make a
gradual Difference between them and the most abject Peasants; whereas there is
necessarily a specifical Difference between a Babylonian and an Israelite.

Q. But is it not very censorious to look upon such a becoming worthy Person,
as no better than a meet Babylonian?

A. Inasmuch as the Difference is so great, that (...) Babylonian cannot become
a Subject of the King of Israel, unless he be formed anew* we cannot esteem
them any other, so long as there do not appear the specifical Features of the
select Nation; neither the Idiom of their Language, nor the Mein of their
Behavior, nor yet an earnest Enquiry after the desired Land. For we are not to
form our Conceptions of them different to the Descriptions given by the King's
Scribes.

Q. Is it not exceeding hard that I must deny myself an Object so agreeable?

A. The King of Glory denies nothing that is good, therefore if it were really
good, it would not be denied me; he only denies us those Things which he knows
would be evil, and it is a real Kindness to us to be denied of them. But
suppose, I thought it a real Good; it is hard that he should deny me one
Favor, who has given himself to me, with all Blessings in Heaven and Earth?

Q. What if I never find one so agreeable, who travels the happy Road?

A. If I had the Object now before me it must ^ntirely depend on the Blessing
of God, whether (...) should have any Enjoyment or not; and have I not more
Reason to expect a Blessing in the right Way than in the wrong? Beside, as no
good Thing is withheld, nor any Thing denied, but ^ut because it is Evil;
whatever God is pleased to bestow in his own Way, must be most agreeable.

Q. May not the valuable Qualifications attending this Person, be so blessed as
to be a Means to make me happy and useful in the Way, though she walk not in it
herself?

A. Have I any Reason to expect to be made happy by a Person who is an utter
Stranger to those Things wherein my Happiness consists? Or can I expect to find
Usefulness in this Way, from that which cannot be enjoyed or obtained without
going out of the Way? Beside, whatever Qualifications she is endued with, or
however valuable Accommodations she is possessed of, it never will be her
Inclination to employ those Excellencies to assist others in a Way which she
herself has no Delight in.

Q. But seeing her Disposition is so agreeably complaisant, and her Mind so
well qualified with natural Virtues, and decorated with so many acquired
Ornaments; is there any Reason to doubt but that a Person thus prepared will
have a Taste for learning and embracing the best Things? And may I not
therefore expect to be an Instrument to engage her Mind to walk the blessed way?

A. All the Accomplishments that a Person can possibly receive from Babylon,
can never prepare, qualify, nor dispose them for traveling to Canaan; nor will
it by any Means induce or incline any Person to receive the real Knowledge or
Love of that Country. Therefore those who are not powerfully called by the
King's Commandment, and inwardly attracted by a vital Influence, can never be
engaged by any other Motive or Persuasion whatsoever. For there is nothing in
the Nature of a Babylonian (without the Inchoation of new Principles) that is
capable of Attraction. But the more excellent her Accomplishments are, the more
strongly her Mind will be cemented to that Climate from whence she ^eceived
them. And on the other Hand, as I formerly was a Babylonian, (though now
blessed with new Principles) the old Tincture still remains in my Nature, which
(like so much Tinder) is ready ^o kindle with every Spark of Babylonish Fire.
Wherefore the greater Excellencies she is embellished with, the greater
Influence it will have to draw me aside into her Paths, and so put me in
perpetual Danger. For of this I am infallibly assured, that they will draw away
one's Heart.

When he had thus reasoned with himself, he made a full Pause; and appeared in
a strong Agitation of Mind; and a Paleness arose in his Face. And I heard him
sigh, and say to himself, Whither has my Mind been roving! And trembling, he
lift up his Eyes to Heaven; and earnestly cried, O God of all Grace, deliver me
from Temptation! And from that Time, he never would regard any of the Damsels
of the City. But said, He would wait till he should find a true Companion; and
till then he would walk alone.

So he went on his Way, rejoicing that he had escaped the Snare; and carrying
along with him, this Motto, "The Lord is my Portion;" enjoying great
Satisfaction in his own Mind; saying to himself, If my King sees it good for me
to walk alone, I know he will bless that State unto me; but if it be for my
good to enjoy a Companion, I know his Goodness will provide one for me, without
my going out of the Way to find one.

But as he was thus going on his Way, he observed a young Virgin, who was
walking the same Road; and he begun to desire to be favored with her Company;
but thought it advisable to be very deliberate; because many seem to walk the
same Road, which only go Part of the Way, and then turn off into some other
Path. Therefore he diligently observed, whether she closely attended to the
right Way. So he perceived her to take something out of her Bosom, and
diligently peruse it for a while, and then put it into her Bosom again, and
pursue the straight Path; whereupon he went up to her, and enquired where she
was bound. She told him she was setting her Face toward Zion. He asked her,
what it was she had been perusing? And she showed him, that it was the Map of
the Road; which she took along with her, for her Guide. He then began to
enquire further who she was, and whence she came; she told him, she was by
Birth a Chaldean; by Education and Conversation a Babylonian; but the King of
Israel had sent for her, to go forth to seek a better Country. He also asked,
what Expectations, or Encouragement she had, in taking such a Journey? she told
him, she had the King's Word, to make her an Inhabitant in his royal Palace,
when she arrived at the upper Bethel; and to grant her sufficient Defense, and
Sustenance, all the Way thither. He asked, if she could be fully satisfied in
the King's Veracity? she told him the Frauds, and Jealousies of Babylon, had
made such Impressions upon her Mind; that she had found it very difficult to
believe him that could not lie; but his Majesty had condescended to give her
the strongest Demonstrations of his Fidelity; so that now she was convinced,
she had no Reason to doubt his Goodness, for he had confirmed his Promise with
^n Oath, and had given her to see, that in his own Records, it was sealed with
Blood; and the Counter-Part he had written upon her Breast, and sealed it in
Characters of Life; and hitherto, she had found his Word verified to her, in
strongly defending, and abundantly supplying her; so that she could set to her
Seal, that he was true. Then, she also asked him diverse Questions, relating to
his Travels, and Enjoyments; and he likewise answered her, in a free and
satisfactory Manner. So that their Affections began to grow warm toward one
another: It was a very comfortable Interview; and their Minds were refreshed by
each other's Conversation.

And they appeared so agreeable one to another, that he began to think they
might be pleasant and profitable Companions all the Way. But first, he retired
for a while, to deliberate on the Conversation that had passed already. When
the more he thought of her Diligence, in the Pursuit of her Journey; and her
fixed Satisfaction concerning the End of it; her Understanding in those Things
laid down in the Map, for guiding her in the Way, and the Delight she appeared
to take in meditating on, and conversing about the Joys of the City of
Habitation, etc. the more he was satisfied that she was a Prince's Daughter
traveling to the royal Palace. And when he had lifted up his Eyes to Heaven,
and earnestly besought the most High God for Direction and a Blessing upon
further Conversation, he came again into her Company. And after some further
Discourse, he asked the Reason of her walking on her Journey alone? She told
him she found b^t few traveling the same Road; and she did not think it
expedient to turn aside or neglect her Way for any Company in the World. If she
met with Company, such as delighted in the Ways of Wisdom, she took Pleasure
therein; for by such Company her Heart was refreshed, and she thought herself
strengthened in her Journey thereby. But otherwise she chose rather to be
alone, at Leisure to divert herself in examining her Map; viewing the Springs
by the Way, with the Fruit Trees and sweet Flowers; hearing the Singing of
Birds; and meditating on the Glories of her Prince, and the Joys she should
have in his Presence, etc. So that as Company was pleasant when she could enjoy
it, the Delights in the Way supplied the want of Company when alone. And upon
the Whole, she neither was anxious to have Company, nor had any Aversion
against it; her Desire being to enjoy that only which might be most conducive
to forward her in the right Way.

Then he proposed, that since they had found each other's Conversation
comfortable and useful, it was his Opinion, it might be for their mutual
Advantage ^o jo^^ together, and engage to keep Company ^ll t^^ Way. She told
him it was not for Persons (...) their Profession to do any Thing rashly; she
would deliberate on it. So she retired and prostrated herself before the King
her Father, telling him the Matter, imploring Wisdom to direct, declaring
herself willing to enjoy, or be denied ^f any Thing, so it were according to
his Will, and ^ight be for his Honor. He told her she had ^lready been
informed, and well knew what man^er of Persons they must be with whom it would
^e expedient for Kings Daughters to keep com^any; therefore if she found the
Person to be one of the Blood Royal, and endued with princely Qua^^ties, she
was at her full Liberty, and moreover by ^im it should be esteemed Honorable.
So when these two Lovers met again and had deliberately consulted between
themselves all such Things as ^hey conceived necessary relating to such an
Engagement; and had duly considered the King's Statutes thereupon; and jointly
petitioned his Majesty's Presence with them, and his Blessing on their
Undertaking, they joined Hands with great Satisfaction and Serenity of Mind;
rejoicing to see themselves preserved from so many Snares, and thus happily
joined together by a divine Hand.

I then observed these two happy Companions, pursuing their Journey: And here I
saw verified ^n ancient Council; [a Help-meet.] For they were sincere Friends,
pleasant Companions, faithful Partners, and useful Assistants to each other. If
they met with Difficulties by the Way, they would take each other by the Hand
to support them. In Dangers, the^ would counsel, and stand by one another. In
Sorrows, they would sympathize, and comfort one another. If beset with Enemies,
one would watch while the other slept. If one were sick, the other would
comfort with cordials. If one were indisposed in Mind, the other would divert
with some sweet song, or Discourse concerning the pleasant Land. If one were at
(...) Loss, concerning any Part of the Way, the other would assist, in
searching and explaining the Directions. If one were ready to turn aside, the
other would caution, and admonish of the Danger. If one were employed in any
Service, the other would be ready to assist therein. If one found a refreshing
Spring by the Way, would call the other to come and drink. If one found any
refreshing Fruit, sweet Spices, or delightful Flowers would pluck and bring to
the other. If one heard any joyful Tidings, would come rejoicing and tell ^he
other. If one had any pleasant Prospects of the Kingdom, would endeavor to
show them to the other. If one was favored with an Audiance of the King, would
also remember and intercede for the other. And if one was blessed with any
special Favors, the other would congratulate, and rejoice on the Occasion. etc.

Then I was convinced, That two are better than one; and yet it was very
manifest, that they were no more Twain. For I knew not whether to call them two
Souls dwelling in one Body, or one Soul inhabiting two Bodies; but it appeared
very conspicuous that two were better than one.

So I continued observing this united Pair advancing in their Way; for they
greatly contributed to help each other forward; many Difficulties they
surmounted, and many rich Blessings they enjoyed as they traveled in the Way.
At last they arrived at a pleasant Hill in View of the Land of Promise, full of
Delights, refreshing Fruits, pure Streams, and desirable Entertainments. Here
they first sat ^own and rested in a delightful Arbor, blessing ^od and
congratulating one another in Considera^^on of their Enjoyments. And afterward
they ^scended to a Tower, where was a large Prospec^^ve Glass, from whence they
looked back upon ^abylon, and saw it all in Flames, and the ^ountry turned to
burning Pitch. Then they gave ^raise and Glory to God, for their wonderful
De^^verance, as well as for all the Deliverances they ^ad in the Way. Then they
took a Prospect of ^^e Land before them, and saw Jerusalem the royal ^lace, the
goodly Mountain of Lebanon, the ^uscers of Eshcol, and all the Rivers flowing
with ^ilk; and all the Hills dropping down sweet ^ine. Then they looked below
to the Streams of ^^dan, and beheld the great High Priest in his ^^ining Robes,
waiting to carry them over. They ^o heard the Inhabitants on the other Side
tri^phing, singing and shouting for Joy. Then ^ey also with Emulation lifted up
their Voices in ^^ngs of Praise, and Transports of Joy, to him that (...) and
that was, and that is to come; which raised ^y Mind to such an Extacy, that I
awoke, and be^^d it was a Dream.

But the Thing was c^rtain -- and the Inter^^^tation thereof sure.

FINIS.
PROPOSALS For Re-printing by Subscription, The Enigmatical Question, Proposed
and Answered by the Rev. Mr. JOHN JOHNSON. Being a Treatise Published in
London. 1755.
Psalm xlix. 4. I will incline mine Ear to a Parable.


Wherein,

I. The horrible Monster of Sin is livelily described*

II. A just Estimate is made of the Mischief done and Damage sustained by him.

III. The Person of accomplished Merit and perfect Qualification, sufficient to
attack, vanquish and totally destroy this Monster.

IV. A Demonstration, how full Reparation is made for all the Injury done, and
all the Misery brought into the World by this destroying Monster.

* The Book will contain about seven Sheets i^ Octavo, printed on a good Letter
and Paper The Price to Subscribers will be One Shilling an^ four Pence Lawful
Money per Book, with (...) seventh Gratis to those who subscribe for six.

Subscriptions are taken in by GREEN and RUSSELL at their Printing-Office in
Queen Street, and b^ P. FREEMAN, in Union-street.


