A SHORT ADDRESS TO Persons of all Denominations, OCCASIONED BY THE Alarm of an
Intended INVASION.

By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Countess of
HUNTINGDON.

I also will show my Opinion, Job xxxii. 10. LONDON: Printed, NEW YORK,
Reprinted, and Sold by H. GAIN, at the Bible and Crown in Queen Street, 1756.

A Short ADDRESS, etc.
MEN, BRETHREN and FATHERS,
THOUGH so many alarming Warnings, pathetick Exhortations, and suitable
Directions, have already been given both from the Press and Pulpit, by Way of
Preparitives to our late public Day of Humiliation; yet should one, who is
less than the least of all his Brethren, now that Solemnity is over, presume to
trouble his dear Countrymen with a short Address, by Way of Supplement to what
has already been offered, it is to be hoped none will be so unkind (...) to
look upon it altogether as supperfluous and ^eedless, much less be so
ungenerous as to censure it as proceeding from the Pride and Naughtiness of his
Heart. -- But should this be the Case, I shall make no other Apology (as I
think there needs no other) than that which David the youngest of the Sons of
Jesse made long ago upon a like Occasion, "Is there not a Cause?"

An insulting, enraged, and perfidious Enemy is now advancing nearer and nearer
to the British Borders. -- Not content with invading and ravaging our rightful
Sovereign King George's Dominions in America, our Popish Adversaries have now
the Ambition to attempt, at least to threaten, an Invasion of England itself;
hoping, no doubt, thereby not only to throw us into Confusion at Home, but also
to divert us from more effectually defeating their malicious Designs Abroad. --
That such a Design (however chimerical it may seem) is now actually on foot,
the Royal Proclamation lately issued forth renders it indisputable. -- Which
Proclamotion, as it plainly bespeaks his Majesty's paternal Care, does at the
same Time loudly call upon all his faithful and loving Subjects, not only to
stand upon their Guard, but also to exert their utmost Efforts, in Dependence
on Divine Protection, to prevent and render abortive such an unjust and daring
Enterprise.

Blessed be God, as a professing, though sinful People, we have lately taken one
effectual Step toward bringing about such a salutary End.

In Obedience to a Call from the Throne we have been humbling ourselves in the
most public and solemn Manner before the most High God -- And it is to be hoped
that the many Tears that were that Day shed, and the thousands and thousands of
Prayers that were then offered up* have long since been regarded by, and
entered into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath -- Infidels may perhaps laugh and
make themselves merry with such an Insinuation: But serious People (and to such
in a more peculiar Manner is this Address directed) will account it no Ways
enthusiastic to affirm that solemn Humiliations, whether performed by public
Communities in general, or Individuals in particular, have always met with such
a Divine Acceptance, as to obtain at least a Reprieve from, if not a total
Removal of, the threatened Evil. -- The deferring of an impending Judgment only
upon the hypocritical, but public Humiliation of a wicked Abe^ -- The mature
and providential Deliverance of the Jewish People from the cruel Plot of an
ambitious Haman, which Queen Easther, (...), and the other distressed Jews
^ought so earnestly for by bublic Fasting and Prayer -- And what is yet more,
the total and entire Suspension of the Destruction of Nineveh, that exceeding
great City, though so peremptorily denounced, upon the Fasting, Praying, and
Repenting of the King, Nobles and Commons, at the preaching of Jonah; These, I
say, not to mention many more that might be adduced from sacred Story, are most
pregnant, and, at the same Time, very encouraging Proofs, that those that
humble themselves shall in God's due Time be exalted; and that therefore, as a
Nation we may bodly infer, that the righteous Lord who delights to show himself
strong in behalf of those who are of an upright Heart, will favor, plead and
vindicate our righteous Cause.

I am very sensible that (...) Insinuations have been industriously published,
in order to lay all the Bl^me of this War upon us. -- But bold Assertions and
solid Proofs are two different Things* -- ^or it is plain, beyond all
Contradiction, that the French, fond of rivailing us both at Home (...) Abroad,
have most unjustly invaded his Majesty's Dominions in America; and have also
not (...) by the most vile Artifices and Lies been endeavoring to draw the Six
Nations of Indians from our Interest; but, in short, almost all their
Proceedings ever since the late Treaty of A^^ la Chapelle, have been little
else than Preparations for, or a tacit Declaration of War. -- But he that
sits in Heaven, as we may humbly hope, laughs them to Scorn; and, as he once
defeated the Counsel of Achitophel, and came down to confound the Language of
those aspiring Projectors who would fain have built a Tower, the Top of which
should reach even to Heaven; so we trust (whatever dark Providence may
intervene) that He will in the End frustrate the Devices of our Adversary's
most subtle Politicians, and speak Confusion to all their Projects, who, by
aiming at universal Monarchy, are more than attempting to erect a second Babel.

I have heard, or read somewhere of a Turkish General, who being called to
engage with a Christian Army that had broken through the most solemn Ties,
stood up at the Head of his Troops, and then drawing out the Treaty which they
had broken out of his Bosom, and holding it up in the Air, thus addressed the
Throne of Heaven: -- O Almighty Being, if Thou art, as they say Thou art, these
Christians God, Thou love what is right, and hate Perfidy; look down
therefore and behold this Treaty which they have broken; and, as thou can not
^avour what is wrong, render their Arms, O God, successless, and make mine
victorious. -- He ended -- Immediately the Sword was drawn -- The two Parties
vigorously engaged, and the perfidious Christians were beaten off the Field. --
Thus may our Protestant Generals, ^r at least their Chaplains, deal with our
Enemy's Forces, in Respect to the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle -- They, not we,
have broken it. -- They, not we, have been the Aggressors: -- And therefore,
notwithstanding we are looked upon as Heretics, and they fight under the
Banner of one who styles himself His Most Christian Majesty; a righteous God,
we trust, in Answer to Prayer, will humble France, and make the British Arms
both by Sea and Land more than Conquerers through his Love. -- It is true, (and
God knows, with Grief of Heart I speak it) praying is become too unfashionable
amongst our People in general, and among our military Men in particular; -- but
wherein either the Piety, and consequently true Policy, of such a Procedure
consists, I believe will be very difficult to determine. -- If we have Recourse
to Mr. Rollin's Ancient History, I believe we shall find that neither Darius,
Cyrus, Alexander, or indeed scarce any of the Egyptian, Grecian, Persian, or
Roman Generals, ever undertook any hazardous Enterprise, without making some
public Acknowledgement of a Deity. -- And if we consult that History of
Histories, that too much neglected Book (as Sir Richard Steel expresses
himself) emphatically called the Scriptures, we may always remark that those
heroic Worthies, who by Faith subdued Kingdoms, and put to Flight the Armies of
the Aliens, were Men of Prayer, as well as Men of Valor. -- And if our
Researches descend forwards down to our own Annals, we shall soon be satisfied,
that the British Arms were never more formidable than when our Soldiers went
forth in the Strength of the Lord, and with a Bible in one Hand, and a Sword in
the other, cheerfully fought under his Banner, who has condescended to style
himself a Man of War.

Such an Appellation as this, methinks, may sufficiently justify the Lawfulness
of bearing Arms, and drawing the Sword in Defense of our civil and religious
Liberties. -- For if God himself is pleased to style himself a Man of War,
surely in a just and righteous Cause (such as the British War at present is) we
may as lawfully draw our Swords, in order to defend ourselves against our
common and public Enemy, as a civil Magistrate may sit on a Bench, and condemn
a public Robber to Death. Our excellent Reformers, sensible of this, in the
thirty-second Article of our Church, after having declared that the Laws of the
Realm may punish Christian Men with Death, for heinous Offenses; immediately
subjoins, that it is lawful for Christian Men, at the Commandment of the
Magistrate, to wear Weapons and serve in the Wars. -- And therefore, what
Bishop Saunderson says of Study, may be likewise said of Fighting: Fighting
without Prayer, is Atheism, and Prayer without Fighting, is Presumption. -- And
I would be the more particular on this Point, because through a fatal
Scrupulosity against bearing Arms, even in a defensive War, his Majesty has
been, and is not yet out of Danger of losing that large, extensive, and that
lately most flourishing Province of Pennsylvania, the very Center and Garden of
all North America. -- But whilst I see such very scrupulous Persons grasping at
every Degree of worldly Power, and by all the Arts of worldly Policy laboring
to monopolize and retain in their own Hands all Parts both of the legislative
and executive Branches of Civil Government; to speak in the mildest Terms, we
may honestly affirm, that they certainly act a most inconsistent, and if not
prevented here at Home, to Thousands of their Neighbors, I fear a very fatal
Part. -- For, say what we will to the contrary, if we search to the Bottom of
Things, we may soon be convinced, that Civil Magistracy and defensive War must
stand or fall together. -- Both are built upon the same Basis; and there cannot
be so much as one single Argument urged to establish the one* which does not at
the same Time corroborate and confirm the other.

Far be it from me, who profess my self a Disciple and Minister of the Prince
of Peace, to sound a Trumpet for War: But when the Trumpet is already sounded
by a perfidious Enemy, and our King, our Country, our civil and religious
Liberties are all, as it were, lying at Stake, did we not at such a Season lend
our Purses, our Tongues, our Arms, as well as our Prayers, in Defense of them,
should we not justly incur that Curse which an inspired Deborah, when under the
immediate Influence of the Holy Spirit, once uttered, Curse ye Meroz, curse ye
bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the Help of the
Lord, to the Help of the Lord against the Mighty? -- Known unto God, and God
alone, are all our Hearts. -- Daily and repeated Experience convinces us, that
the greatest Talkers are not always the greatest Doers. -- How therefore any of
us may behave when put to the Trial, the Trial itself can only prove. -- But,
for my own Part, whatever my future Conduct may be, (and I know it will be
downright cowardly, if left to myself) yet upon the maturest Deliberation, I am
at present so fully convinced of the Justice of the British Cause, that
supposing it should be said of me, as it is of Zwinglius, (...) Praelio -- He
fell in Battle; -- I hope, if whilst the Silver Cords of Life are loosing, I
shall be attended by any who may be bewailing mine, as the Friends of Zwinglius
did his Misfortune, I should like him cry out, E^quid hoc infortuni^? -- Is
this a Misfortune? -- And not only so, but also with my expiring Breath add, as
he did, O faustum infortunium! O happy Misfortune! -- For, surely it is far
more preferable to die, though by a Popish Sword, and be carried from the Din and
Noise of War by Angels into Abraham's Bosom, than to be suffered to survive
only to drag on a wearisome Life, and to be a mournful Spectator, and daily
Bewailer of one's Country's Ruin.

Awful and tremendous are the Judgments that have lately been abroad. -- Twice
has the Earth on which this great Metropolis stands, unable as it were, any
longer to sustain the Weight of its Inhabitants Sins, been made to tremble and
totter under us. -- Since that, how amazingly has the Shock been extended! --
Africa (nor has America itself been exempted) has in a most destructive
Manner felt its dire Effects. -- And what a dreadful Consumption it has made
in various Parts of Spain, and, in a more especial Manner at Lisbon, the
Metropolis of Portugal, is beyond Conception, and beyond the Power of the most
masterly Pen to describe. -- It is to be questioned, whether the like has ever
been heard of since the Deluge. -- Surely nothing was wanting to figure out and
realize to that distressed People the Horror of the last Day, but the Sound of
the Trump, and the actual Appearance of the great Judge of Quick and Dead. --
But awful and tremendous as such Phaenomenas of Nature may be; yet, if we
consider the Consequences of Things, was even the like Judgment (which may God
avert) ^o befall us, it would be but a small one, in Comparison of our hearing
that a French Army, accompanied with a Popish Pretender, and Thousands of
Romish Priests, was suffered to invade, subdue and destroy the Bodies and
Substance, and, as the necessary Consequences of both these, to blind, deceive,
and tyrannize over the Souls and Consciences of the People belonging to this
happy Isle.

God forbid, that I should give flattering Titles to any; for in so doing, I
should provoke him to take away my Soul. -- But surely we must have Eyes that
see not, and Ears that hear not, as well as Hearts that do not understand, if
we do not know, and see, and feel, that in respect to our civil and religious
Liberties, we are undoubtedly the freest People under Heaven. -- And I dare
appeal to the most ungrateful and malicious Malecontent, to produce any Era in
the British Annals, wherein we have enjoyed such a continued Series of civil
and religious Liberty, as we have been favored with for these Twenty-eight
Years last past, under the mild and gentle Administration of our dread and
rightful Sovereign King George. -- Surely he has been a Nursing Father to
People of all Denominations; and however he may be denied it, yet he may
without a Complement, justly claim from the present, as well as future Age, the
deserved Title of GEORGE THE GREAT. -- But notwithstanding this such is the
Degeneracy of Human Nature, it must necessarily be expected, that in a Nation
grown wanton with Liberty like ours, there is a great Multitude of unhappy
Persons, who being Men of lax Principles, loose Lives, and broken Fortunes,
may, and will be so abandoned, as to break through all Restraints of Gratitude,
Loyalty and Religion, and, like Cataline and his wicked Confederates, be fond
of joining in any Change of Government, whereby they may entertain the most
distant Prospect of bettering their Fortunes, and gratifying their Ambition,
though it be at the Expense of their Country's Blood. -- This has been, and no
doubt still continues to be, the Fate of all Civil Governments in the World,
and consequently is no more than what we may expect, in Times of Tumult and
Danger, will be acted over again in our own Land by Men of such corrupt Minds.
-- But how any serious and judicious, much less religious and devout Person,
can be so stupid to all Principles of Self-Interest, and so dead even to all
Maxims of common Sense, as to prefer a French to an English Government; or a
Popish Pretender, born, nursed, and bred up in all the arbitrary and
destructive Principles of the Court and Church of Rome, to the present
Protestant Succession settled in the illustrious Line of Hanover, must be
imputed to nothing else but an awful infatuation. --

Hear ye, (if there be any into whose Hands this Address may fall, that are
desirous of such a Change) not to dwell entirely upon the many innumerable,
civil or temporal Losses we should sustain: Hear ye, I say, the mild and gentle
Language of one of his most Christian Majesty's late Declarations concerning
Religion.

"Being informed, that there have sprung up, and still are springing up, daily
in our Realm, a great Number of Preachers, whose sole Business is to stir up
the People to Rebellion, and to dissuade them from the Practice of the Roman
Catholic and Apostolic Religion; we do command that all Preachers, who shall
call Assemblies, preach in them, or discharge any other Function, be put to
Death; the Punishment appointed by the Declaration in July 1686, for the
Minister of the pretended reformed Religion, which we would not, for the
future, have any one esteem a mere Threatening, which will not be put in
Execution. We do likewise forbid our Subjects to receive the said Ministers or
Preachers, to conceal, aid, or assist them, or have directly or indirectly, any
Intercourse or Correspondence with them. We farther enjoin all those, who shall
know any of the said Preachers, to inform against them to the Officers of the
respective Places; the whole under Pain, in case of Trespass, of being
condemned to the Galleys for Life, if Men; and, if Women, of being shorn, and
shut up the Remainder of their Days in such Places as our Judges shall think
expedient; and whether they be Men or Women, under Pain of Confiscation."

After perusing this, read, read, I beseech you, the shocking Accounts of the
horrid Butcheries, and cruel Murders committed on the Bodies of many of our
Fellow Subjects in America, by the Hands of savage Indians, instigated thereto
by more than savage Popish Priests See a Pamphlet entitled, A brief View of the
Conduct of Pennsylvania for the Year. 1755
. -- And if this be the Beginning, what may we suppose the End will be, should
a French Power, or Popish Pretender, be permitted to subdue either us or them?
-- Speak, Smithfield, speak, and by thy dumb, but very persuasive Oratory,
declare to all that pa^^ by and over thee, how many English Protestant Martyrs
thou have seen burnt to Death in the Reign of a cruel Popish Queen, to whom the
present Pretender to the British Throne at least claims a kind of a distant
Kindred? -- Speak, Ireland, speak, and tell if thou can, how many Thousands,
and Tens of Thousands of innocent unprovoking Protestants were massacred in
cold Blood by the Hands of cruel Papists within thy Borders, about a Century
ago. Nay, speak, Paris, speak, (for though Popish, on this Occasion we will admit
thy Evidence) and say, how many thousands of Protestants were once slaughtered,
on Purpose, as it were, to serve up as a bloody Dessert to grace the Solemnity
of a Marriage Feast. -- But why go we back to such distant Aeras? -- Speak,
Languedoc, speak and tell, if thou can, how many Protestant Ministers have
been lately executed; how many more of their Hearers have been dragoon'd and
sent to the Galleys; and how many Hundreds are now, in consequence of the
abovementioned Edict, lying in Prisons, and fast bound in Misery and Iron, for
no other Crime than that unpardonable one in the Romish Church; I mean, hearing
and preaching the pure Gospel of the meek and lowly Jesus.

And think you, my dear Countrymen, that Rome, glutted as it were with
Protestant Blood, will now rest satisfied, and say, "I have enough?" -- No, on
the contrary having, through the good Hand of God upon us, been kept so long
fa^^ing, we may reasonably suppose, that the popish Priests are only grown more
voracious, and (like so many hungry and ravenous Wolves pursuing the harmless
and innocent Flocks of Sheep) with double Eagerness will pursue after, seize
upon, and devour their wished for Protestant Prey; and, attended with their
bloody Red-coats, those Gallick Instruments of Reformation, who know they must
either fight or die, will necessarily breathe out nothing but Threatening and
Slaughter, and carry along with them Desolation and Destruction* (...) all
(...) various Shapes and Tortures, go where they (...).

But I humbly hope, vile as we are, a gracious, long suffering and merciful
God, will not suffer us to fall into their blood-thirsty and cruel Hands. -- He
has formerly most remarkably interposed in England's Favor; and why should we
in the least doubt but that he will again reveal his Omnipotent Arm, and make
our Extremity to be his Opportunity to help and defend us against such
threatening and unjust Invaders? -- Invincible as the Spanish Armada was
supposed to be, and all powerful as the Pope, under whose broad Seal they
acted, might boast he was in Heaven or Hell, it is plain he had no Power over
the Water. For thou did blow, O Lord, with thy Wind, and the Enemy was
scattere^ -- And is not this God the same now as he was Yesterday? And will he
not continue the same for ever? Of whom then should the Inhabitants of
Great Britain be afraid? -- Blessed be God, if we look to second Causes, we
have a glorious Fleet, brave Admirals, a well-disciplined Army, experienced
Officers; and, if Occasion should require, Thousands and Thousands of hearty
Volunteers, with a Royal Hero, who has once been made happily instrumental to
save his Country from inpending Ruin, if not MAJESTY ITSELF prepared to head
them. -- And if by fasting from as well as for Sin, and by flying through a
living Faith, to the Merits of a dying, rising, ascended and interceding
Mediator, we can but make GOD our Friend, we need not fear what France and
Rome, and Hell with all its united Force can do unto, or plot against us. --
The Way of Duty is the Way of Safety. -- And if we are but found in the due Use
of proper Means, we may confidently leave the Issue and Event of Things with
God. -- Be that Event what it will (and I trust it will be a prosperous one) we
have a divine Authority to say unto the Righteous, It shall be well with them.
-- God's own People, amidst all the Wars and Rumors of Wars, may rest secure;
for they not only dwell under the Shadow of the most High, but have his own
royal Word for it, that all Things shall work together for their Good. -- And
not only so, but they may also be fully assured that all the malicious Efforts
and Designs of Men and Devils shall be so far from obstructing, that, on the
contrary, through the sure, though secret Hand of an ever-watchful, overruling,
and omnipotent Providence, they shall at present, (howbeit they think not so)
be made not only to subserve the present further Enlargement of HIS Interests,
who, in spite of all the Strivings of the Potsherds of the Earth, will hold
the Balance of UNIVERSAL MONARCHY in his own Hands; but at last shall terminate
in the full and complete Establishment and Perfection of that blessed Kingdom,
whose Law is Truth, whose King is Love, and whose Duration is Eternity. --
Fiat! Fiat!

FINIS.

