EXTRACT OF An ACT OF THE GENERAL-ASSEMBLY OF THE Colony of New York. Published
the 22d of March, 1760.

ENTITLED, An ACT for levying, paying, and clothing, Two Thousand Six Hundred
and Eighty effective Men, Officers included, for forming an Army of Twenty
Thousand Men, with the Forces of the neighboring Colonies, to reduce, in
Conjunction with His Majesty's Regular Troops, Montreal, and other Posts
belonging to the French in Canada; for emitting Bills of Credit for the Sum of
Sixty Thousand Pounds, and for sinking and cancelling the said Bills in short
Periods.

NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by W. Weyman, in Broad-street.

Anno trigesimo tertio GEORGII secundi Regis.
An ACT for levying, paying, and clothing, Two Thousand Six Hundred and Eighty
effective Men, Officers included, for forming an Army of Twenty Thousand Men,
with the Forces of the neighboring Colonies, to reduce, in Conjunction with
His Majesty's Regular Troops, Montreal, and other Posts belonging to the French
in Canada; for emitting Bills of Credit for the Sum of Sixty Thousand Pounds,
and for sinking and cancelling the said Bills in short Periods.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid* That the Treasurer of this
Colony shall, out of any of the Moneys aforesaid, in his Hands, pay unto John
Cruger, Beverly Robinson, and Peter Van Brugh Livingston, Commissaries
appointed.
Esquires, whom His Honor the Lieutenant Governor has been pleased to appoint
Commissaries and Pay-Masters to the Forces raised in this Colony, the Sum of
Forty Four Thousand Pounds, to be by them applied in the Payment of Two
thousand six hundred and eighty effective Men, Officers included, who are to be
employed in the Expedition aforesaid, after the following Rates, to wit, To
three Colonels Sixteen Shillings per Diem each. To three Lieutenant Colonels,
Fourteen Shillings per Diem each. To three Majors Twelve Shillings per Diem
each. To three Adjutants, being Lieutenants, Ten Shillings per Diem each. To
twenty-seven Captains, Ten Shillings per Diem each. To fifty-one Lieutenants,
Seven Shillings per Diem each. To three Quarter Masters, Three Shillings per
Diem each. To One hundred and eight Sergeants, One Shilling and Eight Pence per
Diem each. To Twenty seven Drummers, One Shilling and six Pence per Diem each.
To Eighty one Corporals, One Shilling and Six Pence per Diem each. And unto Two
thousand three hundred and seventy four private Men, One Shilling and three
Pence per Diem each; Deduction to be made for any Deficiency in that Number, by
Death, or otherwise. To be paid monthly, according to the Muster Rolls.
Which Forces they are hereby directed to pay, according to the Number that
shall be in actual Service, and not otherwise, which shall be ascertained by
the Muster Rolls of the respective Companies, monthly, delivered unto the said
Paymasters, upon the Oath of the several Captains of each Company, or the Oath
of the Commanding Officer thereof, at the Time of such Muster; which Oath the
said Paymasters, or either of them, or such other Person as the Governor or
Commander in Chief shall appoint, are hereby empowered and required to
administer, in the Words following, viz.

I A. B. do swear, Oath to prove the Muster Rolls.
that the Muster-Roll here produced by me, is just and true, and contains no
more, nor other Persons Names, than such who are really and truly inlisted in
my Company, and are now actually and really in the Service, on the present
Expedition. So help me GOD.

AND the said Paymasters are hereby further required and directed, to pay to
one Chaplain, Pay to Surgeons, and Allowance for Medicines.
attending the abovesaid Forces, Twelve Shillings per Diem. And to three
Surgeons, providing each two able Assistants, to attend the said Forces, the
Sum of Twenty Four Shillings per Diem each; and also to provide them with
proper Chests of Medicines to the Value of One hundred and twenty five Pounds
each.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Treasurer
shall, out of the Moneys aforesaid, Persons inlisting allowed 20 s. for each
Volunteer.
pay to every Officer, or other Person who shall procure to be inlisted, and
sworn into the said Service, an able bodied Voluntier, the Sum of Twenty
Shillings. And to each of the said Captains, as and for an Encouragement to the
Men who shall inlist under him or them respectively, the Sum of Fifteen Pounds,
And 15 l. Bounty to be paid to the Captain for the use of each Voluntier.
to be paid by him or them respectively, to each and every able bodied Man who
shall voluntarily inlist under him or them respectively, on the aforesaid
Service. Which said respective Sums shall be paid by the Treasurer, on Warrants
issued by the Governor, or Commander in Chief for the Time being, in Council.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Commissaries to provide
Clothing, Blankets, and Necessaries for the Force.
That the Treasurer of this Colony shall, out of the Moneys aforesaid, pay unto
the said Commissaries, the sum of Fifteen Thousand Pounds, to be by them
employed in purchasing Clothing, Blankets, and other Necessaries, for the Use
of the Forces to be raised by this Colony, on the aforesaid Expedition. Of the
due Disposition of all which aforesaid Sums of Money, they the said Paymasters
shall render just and true Accounts, on Oath, to the Governor or Commander in
Chief for the Time being, the Council, or the General Assembly, when by them,
or any of them thereunto required.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Treasurer
shall, out of the aforesaid Moneys, pay the following Sums, viz. Allowance to
the Field Officers over and above their Pay.
To each of the three Colonels, the Sum of Seventy Pounds, to furnish their
respective Tables. To each of the three Lieutenant Colonels, the Sum of Fifty
Pounds, for the like Purpose. And to each of the three Majors, the Sum of Forty
Pounds, for the like Purpose.

AND to the End there may be no Deficiency in the Forces to be furnished by
this Colony, on the aforesaid Service, BE IT ENACTED by the Authority
aforesaid, That in Case a sufficient Number of Volunteers do not offer by the
Twenty Eighth Day of April next, Number wanting to complete the Forces on the
28th of April to be detached from the Militia.
to complete the full Number of Two Thousand Five Hundred and Eighty Men,
including Officers, it shall and may be lawful, for His Honor the Lieutenant
Governor, or Commander in Chief for the Time being, and he is hereby enabled
and empowered, to supply the Deficiency by Detachments, to be made from the
Militia of the several and respective Cities and Counties of this Colony, where
such Deficiency may happen. Always Provided, That no more Men shall be detached
from the said several Cities and Counties, than according to the following
Proportions, to wit, From the City and County of New York, Three Hundred and
Twelve effective Men. From the City and County of Albany, Quotas of Men to be
furnished by the several Counties.
Four Hundred and Twenty Four effective Men. From Kings County, Sixty Eight
effective Men. From Queens County, Three Hundred effective Men. From Suffolk
County, Two Hundred and Eighty Nine effective Men. From Richmond County,
Fifty-one effective Men. From Westchester County, Three Hundred and Eighty Nine
effective Men. From Duchess County, Three Hundred and Eighty Nine effective
Men. From Ulster County, Two Hundred and Twenty Eight effective Men. And from
Orange County, One Hundred and Thirty effective Men.


AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or
Persons whatsoever, is or are by this Act, exempted from being detached for the
Service required by this Act, Persons exempted from being detached.
except the several Branches of the Legislature, and their necessary Officers;
His Majesty's Attorney General; the Colony Treasurer; High Sheriffs; and Clerks
of Courts; Magistrates, Ministers of the Gospel; the Officers of His Majesty's
Customs; and Persons under sixteen, and above sixty Years of Age.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Method of making the
Detachments.
That the several and respective Colonels, or next commanding Officers, of the
several and respective Regiments of the Militia within this Colony, shall
forthwith, after receiving the Orders of His Honor the Lieutenant Governor, or
Commander in Chief for the Time being, for detaching the Number of Men wanting
according to the aforesaid Proportions, send for all the Captains, or next
commanding Officers, of all the several Companies, as well regimented as
unregimented, Troops of Horse included, of the several and respective Cities
and Counties, to attend them at such Time and Place, as the said Colonels, or
next commanding Officers, shall appoint, with their several and respective
Lists, on Oath, of their Companies, and of every other Person in their District
or Beat, not exempted by this Act. Which Oath, the Colonel, or next commanding
Officer, in his respective County, shall be, and is hereby empowered to
administer in the following Words,

I A. B. do swear, that the List I now deliver, contains the Names of all the
Men from Sixteen Years of Age to Sixty (not exempted by an Act, entitled, An
ACT for levying, paying, and clothing, Two Thousand Six Hundred and Eighty
effective Men, Oath:
Officers included, for forming an Army of Twenty Thousand Men, with the Forces
of the neighboring Colonies, to reduce, in Conjunction with His Majesty's
Regular Troops, Montreal, and other Posts belonging to the French in Canada;
for emitting Bills of Credit for the Sum of Sixty Thousand Pounds, and for
sinking and cancelling the said Bills in short Periods) in my Company or Beat,
according to the Best of my Knowledge.

From which Lists, the several and respective Colonels, or next commanding
Officers, together with the other Field Officers, shall proportion the Number
of Men to be furnished by each Company respectively, according to the Numbers
contained in the said Lists. And the said several and respective Captains, or
next commanding Officers for the respective Cities and Counties, with the
Assistance of a Field Officer of each respective City and County, shall, within
Six Days thereafter, take the proper Measures for detaching the Number allotted
to each Company respectively, by such Time as shall be appointed by His Honor
the Lieutenant Governor, or Commander in Chief for the Time being, for that
Purpose, each able bodied Man who shall, before the said Detachment be made,
enter voluntarily into the said Service, out of any of the said Companies, to
be allowed Part of the Quota of such Company. And if any Dispute shall arise
among any of the said Companies, concerning the Number of Volunteers entered
into the said Service, out of the said Companies, the same shall be examined
into, and finally settled by the respective Colonels, or other Field Officers
of the City and County where the Dispute may arise.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That when any of the
said Captains, or next commanding Officers, shall order their Companies to
meet, Persons warned and not appearing to forfeit 20 l.
in order to raise the Quota of Men alloted to them respectively, every Person
duly warned to appear, either personally, or by Notice left at his Place of
Residence, not only those belonging to the said respective Companies, but such
other as reside within the said Beat or District, not exempted by this Act, who
shall not attend at such Time and Place as shall be appointed by the said
Captain, or next commanding Officer respectively, shall forfeit and pay the Sum
of Twenty Pounds; or if it shall appear, by a proper Certificate, that the
Offender or Offenders is, or are one of the People called Quakers, And if
Quakers, to forfeit L. 8.
they shall, on Account of the tender Regard the Legislature of this Colony has
to scrupulous Consciences, pay the Sum of Eight Pounds, and no more.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all free Negroes,
and mustee and mulattoe Freemen, within this Colony, Free Negroes etc. liable
to detached.
shall be, and hereby are made liable to be detached on the aforesaid Service,
by the Captain or Captains, or next commanding Officer or Officers, within
whose respective Beats or Districts they do, or may reside, notwithstanding any
Indenture or Indentures of Servitude they, or any of them may be under.

AND WHEREAS some Persons in several Parts of this Colony, have deserted from
the Service of the former Campaigns: BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority
aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful for the several Militia Captains,
Deserters in the two last Campaigns to be apprehended and sent on the present.
or next Commanding Officers, out of, or by whose Company they were inlisted or
detached, to take and seize all such Deserter or Deserters, wherever they can
be found within this Colony, and send them on the aforesaid Service, as Part of
the Quota to be furnished by their respective Companies.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, being Residents in any County of this Colony, Persons inlisted, to be
allowed as Part of the Quota of the County they reside in, though inlisted for
any other County.
shall, after the Publication of this Act, be inlisted in or for any other
County than that whereof they are Residents, such Person or Persons so
inlisted, shall be allowed to be Part of the Quota of that County whereof they
are Residents. And if any Dispute shall arise between two Counties upon that
Head, such Dispute shall be examined into, and finally settled by such Person
or Persons, as his Honor the Lieutenant Governor, or Commander in Chief for
the Time being, shall appoint.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons within this Colony shall, Persons found out of their proper County
without a sufficient Reason, may be detached where found.
after the Orders for making the said Detachments be issued, and before the
said Detachments be completed, be found in any Part of this Colony to which
they do not belong, and shall not be able to give a satisfactory Account of
himself, or themselves, and the Business they are upon, to the Captain of the
District or Beat within whose Limits he or they shall be found; it shall and
may be lawful for such Captain, or next Commanding Officer, to detach such
Person or Persons on the aforesaid Service, as Part of the Number he is to
furnish out of his Company.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Persons detached and
refusing the Service, to be deemed as Deserters.
That if any Person or Persons so detached, shall refuse the said Service, he
or they so refusing shall be deemed Deserters, and shall be proceeded against
and punished according. But may send a Man in their Stead.
Always Provided, That it shall and may be lawful for the Person so detached as
aforesaid, to procure an able-bodied Man to go in his Room and Stead, and on
his producing such to the Officer or Officers, appointed to Command the Company
in which the said detached Person was to go, or to the Person or Persons
appointed to Muster the said Men, he the said detached Person shall be
discharged from that Service.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That in Case any Person
or Persons whatsoever, Penalty for harboring Persons detached or inlisted.
shall harbor, secret, or conceal any Person detached or inlisted as
aforesaid, and absenting himself from the said Service, he, she, or they so
offending, shall forfeit the Sum of Twenty Pounds.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons whatsoever, shall directly or indirectly obstruct the said Detachments
being made, Or for obstructing the Detachments, or discouraging Persons from
inlisting.
or shall discourage or hinder any Person from inlisting voluntarily into the
said Service, or shall, under any Pretense whatsoever, otherwise than by due
Process of Law, detain any such Person who shall hereafter inlist voluntarily,
or be detached into the said Service, though the said Person be a Servant or
Apprentice, he, she, or they so offending, shall respectively forfeit the Sum
of Fifty Pounds.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Captain, or
next Commanding Officer of a Company of Militia, or any Person properly
authorized to inlist Volunteers on the aforesaid Service, Servants and
Apprentices, may be detached, or inlisted, and the Officer if sued may plead
the general Issue.
or receive the Persons detached, shall be prosecuted by any Master or Mistress
of a Servant or Apprentice, for detaching or inlisting his, her, or their
Servant or Apprentice in the aforesaid Service, or for retaining them in the
said Service; it shall and may be lawful for such Officer so detaching, or such
Person so inlisting, or retaining such Servant or Apprentice, to plead the
General Issue, and give this Act in Evidence; and the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs
in such Suit or Suits, shall not recover in any such Suits, but pay all Costs.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Colonel, or
Field Officer, Penalties on the Officers of the Militia, for not putting this
Act in Execution.
shall neglect or omit to do what is enjoined him or them by this Act, they
shall respectively forfeit the Sum of Two hundred Pounds. And any Captain, or
Subaltern Officer, who shall neglect to do what is enjoined him by this Act,
shall forfeit the Sum of One hundred Pounds. And every Noncommissioned Officer,
who shall omit or neglect the Service required of him by his Captain, or next
commanding Officer, in executing this Act, shall forfeit the Sum of Fifty
Pounds. All which Forfeitures, Forfeitures how to be recovered and applied.
shall be immediately levied on the Goods and Chattles of the said Defaulters
respectively, by Warrant or Warrants, issued by one of the Judges of the
Inferior Courts of Common Pleas, of the respective County or Counties where the
said Forfeitures shall arise, or by one of the Judges of the Supreme Court, in
the City of New York, on due Proof made thereof before him: Which Warrants
shall be directed to and executed by the Sheriff or Sheriffs of the several
Cities and Counties respectively. The said Forfeitures when levied, shall be
paid into the Hands of the Supervisors of the said respective Counties, or the
City Treasurer of the City of New York, and be by them applied for and toward
the Payment of the necessary Charges of each respective City and County; and
all other Forfeitures laid by this Act, shall immediately be levied on the
Goods and Chattles of the Defaulters respectively, or on the Goods and Chattels
of their Masters or Mistresses, by Warrant or Warrants under the Hands and
Seals of the Captain, or next commanding Officer of each respective Company,
directed to a Sergeant or Corporal of his Company, to be applied by the said
Captain, or next commanding Officer, either for the encouraging of Volunteers,
or toward the Reimbursement of those in his Company who have contributed
thereto. And where no Goods or Chattels are to be found, the aforesaid
Defaulter or Defaulters respectively, shall be committed to Goal, there to
remain without Bail or Main-prize, for the Space of six Months, or until the
said Forfeitures, with all Costs and Charges attending the same, shall be fully
paid.

AND, that none of his Majesty's Subjects, who are inclined to go upon the
Service aforesaid, may be impeded, or debarred from entering voluntarily
therein, or being detached, prevented from going thereon; Persons enlisted or
detached not liable to be taken in a Process for a Debt under L 50.
BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person who shall inlist, or
enter himself a Volunteer in the said Service, or being detached thereon,
shall, during the same, be liable to be taken therefrom, by any Process or
Execution whatsoever, other than for some criminal Matter, unless for a Debt,
or other just Cause of Action. And unless, before the taking out of such
Process or Execution, not being for a criminal Matter, the Plaintiff or
Plaintiffs therein, or some other Person or Persons in his or their Behalf,
shall make Affidavit before one or more Judge or Judges of the Court of Record,
or other Court out of which such Process or Execution shall issue, or before
some Person authorized to take Affidavits in such Courts, that to his or their
Knowledge, the original Sum justly due and owing to the Plaintiff or
Plaintiffs, from the Defendant of Defendants, in the Action or Cause of Action
on which such Process shall issue, or the original Debt for which such
Execution shall be issued out, amounts to the Value of Fifty Pounds, current
Money of the Colony of New York, over and above all Costs of Suit in the same
Action, or in any other Action on which the same has been or shall be grounded:
A Memorandum of which Oath, shall be endorsed on the Back of such Process or
Writ, for which Memorandum, or Oath, no Fee shall be taken. And if any Person
shall nevertheless be arrested contrary to the Intent of this Act, it shall and
may be lawful for one or more Judge or Judges of such Court, upon complaint
made thereof by the Party himself, or by any of his superior Officers, to
examine into the same, by the Oath of the Parties, or otherwise, and by Warrant
under his or their Hands and Seals, to discharge such Soldier so arrested or
detained, contrary to the Intent of this Act, without paying any Fee or Fees,
upon due Proof made before him or them, that such Soldier so arrested or
detained, was duly inlisted for the Service, or detached thereon, as
aforesaid; and was arrested and detained contrary to the Intent of this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authrrity aforesaid, Persons inlisting or
detained in Goal for a Debt under L 50, to be discharged.
That any Person or Persons who are willing to inlist, and shall accordingly
inlist for the Service aforesaid, or being detached therein, who are now
detained in Goal, upon Execution or any Process in any Civil Action, where the
original Cause of Action did not amount to the Sum of Fifty Pounds, shall, upon
a Certificate of such his or their Inlistment or Detachment being produced to
any Judge or Judges of the Court from whence such Process issued, be discharged
from Imprisonment, without paying Fees. Provided nevertheless, That such
Discharge shall not be deemed an Extinguishment of any such Debt, but any
Plantiff or Plantiffs may be at Liberty to proceed to Judgment and Execution
against the Goods of any such Defendant, and also against their Person or
Persons, after he or they shall be discharged from the said Service, in the
same Manner as if such Debtor had not been released from Imprisonment.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or Persons
whatsoever engaged in the Service aforesaid, shall be detained therein longer
than to the first Day of November next.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That as well those that enter
voluntarily, Companies detaching or producing non effective Men, to furnish
able bodied Men in their Stead.
as those that may be detached in the said Service, shall be mustered, viewed
and examined by such Person or Persons, and at such Time and Place, as his
Honor the Lieutenant Governor, or Commander in Chief for the Time being, shall
appoint. And in Case any of them be found on such Examination, unfit for such
Service, the Company or Companies producing such unfit Person or Persons, shall
be obliged to supply their Places with other fit and able bodied Men.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Clause against Mutiny and
Desertion.
That in Case any Person or Persons whatsoever, engaged in the Service
aforesaid, either as Officers or Soldiers, shall, at any Time during the said
Service, desert therefrom, or shall begin, excite, cause, or join in any Mutiny
or Sedition in the Company to which he does belong, or in any other Company
engaged in the said Service, or shall hold Correspondence with any Rebel or
Enemy of his Majesty, or give them Advice or Intelligence by Letters, Messages,
Signs or Tokens, or any Manner of Way whatsoever, or shall strike or use any
Violence against his superior Officer, being in the Execution of his Office, or
shall refuse to obey any lawful Command of his superior Officer, they shall
respectively suffer Death, or such other Punishment as shall be inflicted by a
Court Martial: Which Court Martial shall be held, constituted and appointed, by
Commission from his Honor the Lieutenant Governor, or Commander in Chief for
the Time being, under the Great Seal of this Colony.

AND whereas some able bodied Men may abscond, and secret themselves before the
said Forces be completed, to prevent their being detached on the aforesaid
Service. BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the several and
respective Militia Captains or next commanding Officers, shall be, and hereby
are fully empowered, authorized, required and directed, with such Force as they
shall think necessary, to make diligent and strict Search for all such
absconded Persons belonging to their respective Companies, or whose usual
Residence is within their respective Districts or Beats, and take, seize, and
secure all such absconded Persons as they can meet with, wherever they can be
found, in the several and respective Counties they belong to, and send them on
the aforesaid Service, as Part of the Quota to be furnished by their respective
Companies. And in Case any of the absconded Persons shall not be found before
the March of the Forces to the General Rendezvous, it shall and may be lawful
for the said several and respective Captains, or next commanding Officers
respectively, with such Force as they shall find necessary, to take, seize and
secure all such absconded Persons, as shall or may afterward be found, and
send them on the aforesaid Service as Recruits, for the Forces furnished by
this Colony, on the aforesaid important Service, unless he or they shall pay
Twenty Pounds, to his or their respective Captains, to be applied to the use of
such Person or Persons, proportionably, as have contributed toward the
procuring the Inlisting of Persons in their respective Companies for the
Service aforesaid.


