LITTLE CHILDREN Invited to Jesus Christ, A Sermon preached in Hanover County,
Virginia, May 8, 1758.

WITH An Account of the late remarkable Religious Impressions among the
STUDENTS in the College of New Jersey,

By SAMUEL DAVIES, A. M.

The Fourth Edition.



BOSTON Printed and Sold by T. and J. FLEET, at the Heart and Crown, in
Cornhill, 1758.

FLEET
MARK X. 14. But when Jesus saw it, (...) was much displeased, and said un^^
them, Suffer the little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not: For of
such is the Kingdom of God.


THE Return of this blooming Season of the Year puts me in Mind of my Duty
toward my young Friends in this Congregation; those growing Shoots, those
blooming Flowers of human Nature. -- To you therefore, my dear Youth, I would
now address myself: And would do it with all the Tenderness of a fatherly Heart.

AMONG you, I hope, I shall not meet with Discouragement, of the samd king,
which I often meet with in my Addresses to others. Among you, I hope, I shall
not find any Veterans in Sin, confirmed and hardened in Wickedness by a long
Practice; though, alas! we sometimes meet with the shocking Curiosity of one
young in Years, but old in Sin. Among you, I hope to find that Tenderness of
Heart, and those soft impressible Passions, which are so peculiar to your Age,
and which may render you more susceptive of religious Impressions, than those
whose Hearts are at once hardened by Age. and by a long Habit of Sinning; these
Circumstances afford me Encouragement. But alas! even among you, soft and
pliable as you are, I expect great Discouragements, though of another Kind. You
are gay, merry and thoughtless; and cannot bear to fix your Thoughts upon such
disagreeable Subjects; and flatter yourselves it is time enough for you to
submit to the Mortification of attending to them, as you advance farther in
Life. Your Passions and Appetites are strong and unruly: Your Hopes warm and
sanguine. And therefore I am afraid sundry of you will hardly allow me a
serious Hearing, though our for an Hour. However, whether you hear, or whether
you forbear, I must endeavor to deliver my Message to you, in the Name of God.

IT is a very encouraging Thought, that the blessed Jesus has a very tender
Regard for such young Creatures. This he showed in his warm Resentment against
those that would have kept them from his Arms, while he dwelt among Men.

SOME of his Friends brought their young Children to him, that he might touch
them, or lay his Hands upon them, as a Sign of his blessing them, after the
Manner of the Patriarchs and Prophets, in their solemn Benedictions. But his
Disciples, thinking it beneath the Dignity of so great and divine a Prophet, to
be troubled and teazed with little Children; and apprehending that such
thoughtless Creatures could receive no Advantage from him, rebuked their
Parents, and would have sent them away. This must be a very affecting
Discouragement to Parents to find themselves forbid to come to Christ, and that
by his Disciples, who ought to have introduced them, and encouraged their
Application. But when Jesus saw the dear little Creatures sent away from him,
he was greatly displeased. If good Men through Mistake, and bad Men through
obstinate Wickedness discourage these young Immortals in coming to Christ, he
himself is willing they should come, and warmly resents it, when any Hindrance
is thrown in their Way. This gracious Shepherd takes special Care of the Weak
and Young in his Flock; he gathers the Lambs in his Arms, and carries them in
his Bosom. Hence he tells his Disciples and all around him, Suffer the little
Children to come unto me, and forbid them not. They are all welcome to my Arms:
And the little Sinners stand in need of a Savior.

WHEN he says, Suffer them to come, and forbid them not, he does not mean,
merely, that they should not hi^der or discourage them; but he means, that they
should positively assist and encourage them to come to him; and that Parents
should be so far from hindering them, that they should b^ing them themselves.

THIS (...) particularly addressed (...), and through them, to all the
Ministers of the Gospel. And I feel its Obligation binding me in particular to
this agreeable Duty. Indeed the lovely Forms, the Blooms of Reason, and the
engaging little Actions of those amiable Creatures, whom I now address, might
win the Affection even of a stranger, and excite him to perform every kind
Office in his Bower for them.

OUR Savior adds a Reason why he would have little Children suffered to come
to him, which is, For of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. This may be understood
in two Senses. It may either signify the Gospel Church, which is often called
the Kingdom of Heaven, and even the heavenly Church consists of such little
Children as these: Such little Creatures are admitted as Members into this
divine Society, and are entitled to its Privileges. And therefore, Christian
Parents ought to bring them to me; and it is their Duty to come as soon as they
are capable of acting. Therefore forbid them not, but encourage them. Or it may
signify the Church of God, both in its earthly and heavenly State, consists of
such Persons; that is, of Persons, who resemble little Children in Temper; who,
like them are humble, meek, pliable, forgiving, easily appeased, teachable. I
rather choose this Sense, because the Connection seems to lead to it; for the
very next Words are, Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the
Kingdom of God as a little Child, he shall not enter therein. This is also
agreeable to what he says elsewhere, when he makes a little Child an Emblem of
the Christian Temper. ( Matt. xviii, 2, 3, 4.) Jesus called a little Child unto
him, and set him in the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you, except
ye be converted, and become as little Children, ye shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little
Child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven. In this View the Argument
is conclusive: For if Children have some Dispositions, in which even Men must
resemble and imitate them, before they can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven;
then certainly Children are capable of being brought to Jesus, and it is their
Duty to come to him.

You see, my dear Children and Youth, that you have a Right, and that it is
your Duty, to come to Jesus. Therefore, oh! come to him: Come to him this very
Day, without Delay.

BUT here, I hope, you start a very proper Question, What is it to come to
Christ? or, in what Sense are we to understand this Phrase, as it may be
applied to us now, since he is removed from our World?

COMING to Christ, in my Text, did indeed mean a bodily Motion to him: And this
was practicable, while he tabernacled in Flesh among Men. But even then, it
signified much more. It signified coming to him as a divine Teacher, to receive
Instruction; as a Savior, to obtain eternal Life; and as the only Mediator.
through whom guilty Sinners might have Access to God. It signified a Motion of
Soul toward him, correspondent to the bodily Motion of coming: A Motion of the
Desires, a Flight of tender Affections toward him. In this View it is still
practicable to come to Christ; and it is our Duty in these latter Da^s, as much
as it was theirs who were his Contemporaries upon Earth. It is in this View I
now urge it upon you: And in this View it includes the following Particulars:

1. A clear Conviction of Sin; of Sin in Heart, in Word, and in Practice; of
Sin against Knowledge; against alluring Mercies and fatherly Corrections; of
Sin against all the strongest Ties to Duty. Without such a Conviction of Sin,
it is impossible you should fly to him as a Savior: (...) came not to call the
Righteous, but (...) Repentance.

2. AN affecting Sense of Danger, upon the Account of Sin. You cannot fly to
him as a Savior, till you see your extreme Need of Salvation; and you cannot
so your Need of Salvation. till you are sensible or your Danger; sensible that
you are every Moment liable to everlasting Condemnation, and have no Title at
all to the divine Favor.

3. AN humbling Sense of your own Inability to save yourselves by the Merit of
your own best Endeavors. I do not mean, that you should neglect your best
Endeavors; or that you should not exert your utmost Strength in every good
Work, and in the earnest Use of all the Means of Grace: For you never will come
to Christ, till you are brought to this. But I mean that while you are doing
your utmost, you must be sensible, that you do not deserve any Favor at all
from God on that Account, and that you neither can nor do make any Atonement
for your Sins by all your good Works; but that God may justly condemn you
notwithstanding. Till you are sensible of this, you will weary yourselves in
vain, in idle self-righteous Efforts to perform the Work which Jesus came into
the World to perform, and which he alone was able to do; I mean, to make
Atonement for your Sin, and to work out a Righteousness to recommend you to
God. It is an eternal Truth, that you will never come to Christ as a Savior,
till you are deeply sensible there is no Salvation in any other; and
particularly that you are not able to save yourselves.

4. AN affecting Conviction, that Jesus Christ is a glorious, all sufficient,
and willing Savior: that his Righteousness is perfect. equal to all the
Demands of the divine Law, and sufficient to make Satisfaction for all our
Sins, and procure for us all the Blessings of the divine Favor; that he is
able and willing to save to the uttermost all thut come unto God by him, and
that he is freely offered in the Gospel to all that will accept him, however
unworthy, and however great their Sins. Indeed it is an eternal Truth, that
though Multitudes perish, it is not for want of a Savior. There is a Savior
all sufficient, and perfectly willing; and this you must be convinced of before
you can come to him.

5. AN entire Dependence upon his Merits alone for Acceptance with God.
Sensible that you have no Merit of your own, on which to depend; and sensible
also that Jesus is a sure Foundation, on which you may safely venture your
eternal All, you must cast all your Dependence and fix your entire Trust on
Him. You will as it were hang about him, as the only Support for your sinking
Soul, and plead his Righteousness as the only Ground of your Acceptance with
God. This is so unnatural to a proud self-confident Sinner, that you must be
brought very low indeed, thoroughly mortified and self-emptied, before you will
submit to it.

6. A cheerful Subjection to Him as your Ruler; and a voluntary Surrender of
yourselves to his Service. If you come to Him at all, it will be as poor
penitent Rebels, returning to Duty, with Shame and Sorrow, and fully determined
never to depart from it more. To embrace Christ as a Savior, and yet not
submit to Him as our Ruler; to trust in his Righteousness, and in the mean time
disobey his Authority; this is the greatest Absurdity, and utterly inconsistent
with the wise Constitution of the Gospel.

AND now, my dear young Friends, I hope even your tender Minds have some Ideas
what it is to come to Christ. And therefore, when I exhort you to it, you know
what I mean. Come then, come to Jesus: Ye little tender Lambs, come to the
great Shepherd of Israel who loves to crrry such as you in his Bosom. Come,
deeply sensible of your Sins. Young a^ you are, you have been guilty of Sins
beyond Number. You have spoken many bad Words, you have been peevish, sullen;
angry, obstinate, disobedient to Parents, wild, thoughtless, and too full of
Play. And which is worse than all, you have bad Hearts. Must they not be very
bad Hearts, that are so little inclined to think of the great God, and love
Him, who made you a few Years ago, and who has ever since been bestowing a
thousand blessings upon you every Day? Must they not be very bad Hearts, that
are so little inclined, or rather so averse, to Prayer, to Reading, and to the
Service of God in general? That are so unwilling to think seriously of God and
Eternity? That are so strongly inclined to Sin, and childish Follies and
Vanities? You cannot but know, my dear young Creatures, that this is your Case;
and therefore, believe it, you are Sinners, great Sinners. Yes, though your Forms
are lovely, and your pretty little Actions very engaging, yet you are very
guilty Creatures. Therefore come to Jesus as Sinners.

COME also sensible of your Danger. Believe it, while you have no Interest in
Christ, while you do not love God, and delight in his Service, you are in
Danger every Moment of Falling into Hell. The Threatenings of the Law of God are
in full Force against you. The great God is justly angry with you every Day.
The Lions of Hell are going about seeking to devour you. You have no Title to
Heaven, and no Security of the present Life. Children and Youth die, you know,
as well as the Aged, Yes the cold Hand of Death may seize you, lively, gay and
merry as you are. And oh! WHERE are YOU THEN? Therefore come to Jesus as
perishing Sinners, deeply sensible of your Danger. Come to Him, as a drowning
Man catches at a Plank or Rope to save him. Cry to Him, Save me, Lord; I
perish. I stand upon the sl^ppery Brink of Ruin, ready every Moment to tumble
in. Oh! stretch out thy Hand and save me.

COME to him deeply sensible of your own utter Helplessness. Pray, read,
repent, attend upon all the Means of Grace; do every good Work. But despair of
ever saving yourselves by the Merits of these Things. Be sensible that all your
Righteousnesses are but as filthy Rags: that after you have done all, you are
but unprofitable Servants, and deserve no Reward at all from God. While you are
full of yourselves, self-sufficient and presumptuous, you can never come to
Christ. And oh! that you might this Day obtain a just View of your lost and
helpless Situation in yourselves! Even then, you would have no Ground for
Despair: For though you are helpless in yourselves, yet God has la^d Help for
you upon One that is mighty. Therefore,

COME to Jesus as an all-glorious, all-sufficient and willing Savior. Oh! that
you did but see his infinite Glory and Beauty! Then I need speak no more to
you, you would of yourselves give yourselves up to him forever. Your Hearts
would be instantaneously captivated by his irresistible Charms. Oh! that you
were but sensible of his All Sufficiency! then you would no more hesitate and
doubt whether you might venture your eternal All into his Ha^^^. You would be
fully convinced that you might most securely trust Him with ten thousand Souls,
if you had them. Oh! that you were sensible, how willing he is to save you! you
would no longer doubt whether he would receive such guilty Creatures as you.
Can you hear him declare over and over, "Him that con^eth to me. I will in no
wise cast out." Can you hear that Prayer for his Murderers, from his dying
Lips, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they are doing. Nay, Can ^ou
see him agonizing on a Cross for you, and yet question, whether he is willing
to save you? Oh! if he be not willing, more than willing, why these
affectionate Assurances and kind Invitations? Why this Labor and Sorrow? Why
these Tears, these Agonies, this Expense of Blood? Believe it, He is willing,
He is eagerly desirous to receive the Vilest and most Guilty among you, if you
are but willing to come to Him. Therefore come to Him, as to an all-glorious,
all-sufficient, and most willing Savior.

COME to Him also with a full Dependence upon Him for Acceptance with God, and
every Blessing. Trust in Him, though He should slay you. Venture your All upon
Him. Lean upon Him, as you are coming out of this Wilderness. Renounce all
Dependence upon your own Righteousness, Build no longer upon that Quicksand, or
you sink forever. But behold, God has laid in Zion for a Foundation a Stone, a
tried Stone, a precious Cornerstone, a sure Foundation; and here you may
safely build the high Fabric of your immortal Hopes.

FINALLY: Come to Him as to your Ruler and King. Yield yourselves willing
Subjects to his Laws for the future. Let every Thought become a willing Captive
to Him. Let his Will be your Rule. Let his Law regulate your Temper and
Conduct; direct you to what you should love and hate. what you should desire
and avoid; what you should do and forbear.

THUS come to Jesus Christ, my dear young Creatures, and he will certainly
receive you into the Arms of his Favor; and there he will bear you safe
through this World, till he lodge you forever in his blessed Bosom. I know you
cannot come to him in your own Strength; but it is your Duty, and it is in your
Power to endeavor to come to Him. And it is in the Use of your best
Endeavors, and in that Way only, that you have any Reason to expect the
Assistance of divine Grace to enable you.

THEREFORE, come, come! The Spirit of God in this sacred Book, and in your
Consciences, and the Bride, the Church of Christ, say Come; and I that have
heard it, and all the Ministers of The Gospel, say Come And let him that is
athirst for the Blessing of the Gospel, come; and whosoever will, let him come,
and take the Water of Life freely. Rev. xxii. 17.


Do you need Arguments to excite you to come? Then my Text will furnish you
with sundry of great Weight.

1. JESUS was highly displeased with those that would have kept little Children
from him. And how much more will He be displeased with you, if you keep
yourselves from Him, by your own voluntary Act? Let others do what they can to
hinder you, you may go to Him in Spite of them. But if yourselves continue
unwilling, your Case is desperate; you commence your own Executioners, and die
by your own Hands. Must not Jesus resent it, when he spreads his Arms to
receive you; and yet, you refuse to come to Him? And are you willing to in^ur
the Wrath of the Lamb? Are you willing to rouse Him into a Lion, to tear you to
Pieces? Are you willing to cast yourselves out of Favor with the only
Saviour^^ If you offend that only Friend, and turn him into an Enemy, who can
befriend you? Must you not perish without ^^medy ^ Oh! that you would seriously
confider, my dear Youth: what it is to ^u^n the blessed Jesus against you!
better the whole Universe be against you than He,

2. JESUS commands others to suffer little Children to come to Him; and not to
forbid them. And how much more does he command you? If others should suffer
you, then how much more ought you to suffer your selves to come to Christ? Oh!
will you throw Obstructions in your own Way? Are Parents, are Ministers, are
all around you, obliged to suffer you, and even encourage you to come to
Christ? Are you (...) Liberty, do you think, to forbid yourselves^ Surely the
Duty, in the first Place, lies upon you. Therefore, Oh! come to Him without
Delay.

BUT as this Part of my Text may he applied with peculiar Propriety to Parents,
I must make a short digressive address to them. -- Fathers and Mothers! "O
suffer your little Children to come to Jesus, and "forbid them not." -- Forbid
them not, by your own Examples. Let them not see you neglect Jesus Christ
yourselves, and going on is Sin: For this will be the greatest Hindrance you
can cast in their Way. Forbid them not, by discouraging the Appearances of
Thoughtfulness, and serious Impressions on their tender Minds. -- Forbid them
not, by flattering them with false Hopes, and healing their Wound slightly,
speaking Peace to them without good Reason; but endeavor to make them sensible
of their Sinfulness and Danger, and their extreme Need of a Savior; of the
Difficulty of Conversion, and a Course of strict Religion: in short, let them
know the Truth of their Case.

I told you before, that this Prohibition "forbid them not," implies an
Injunction positively to encourage and assist them in coming to Christ.
Therefore, Parents, do all you can by Instruction, by Example, by Prayer to
God, and by every Means in your Power, to bring your dear Children to Christ.
Remember He has laid his Commands upon you; and dare you disobey, especially,
when the same Duty is enforced upon you by the strongest Ties of Nature?

BUT I return to you. my young Friends, to whose Service I have devoted this
Hour. And my last Motive to you derived from the Text is,

3. "Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven." This, I told you, may be taken in two
Senses; and in both it may be a strong Inducement to you to come to Christ.

IF the Meaning be, that the Church of God consists of Persons, who in Temper
and Disposition resemble little Children, then it is natural to reflect how
much you are obliged to come to Christ, that the amiable Qualities you have,
may be finished and complete. You already have many lovely Dispositions, and
even a Stranger might see many Things in you that might engage his Heart. Even
a Saint must resemble you in some Things, and be as a little Child, as a
Preparative for Heaven. But alas! you want one Thing; and that is, inward
Holiness. And without this, all your amiable Qualities are utterly deficient,
and leave you guilty, vile, loathsome Creatures, in the Sight of God. Without
this, you are really but gilded Masses of Corruption and Deformity. But should
you come to Jesus, He would put his Comeliness upon yon. He would make you
all-glorious within: He would complete your Character, and ^ender you
all-excellent throughout. But alas! if you come not to him, the agreeable
Qualities you have, will gradually decay, and you will degenerate into
downright unmingled Wickedness. When you sink into the infernal Regions, you
will contract the very Genius and Temper of a Devil; all the Remains of Virtue,
and whatever of the Image of God you may have retained since the Fall, will
drop from you. Thus "from him that bath not, shall be taken away even that
which he has."

BUT if we consider this Reason, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, as
signifying, that the Gospel Church upon Earth, and even the heavenly Church,
consists of little Children as well as Adults, then what a great Inducement may
this be to you to labor to be of their happy Number? Why should not you enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven as well as others? There Is young Abijah, in whom was
found some good Thing toward the Lord God of Israel, even the wicked Family of
Jeroboam. There are Jeremiah and John the Baptist, who were sanctified from the
Wo^^^. There is Timothy, who from a Child knew (...) Holy Scriptures. There are
Thousands of little Creatures, who just stayed long enough upon Earth, to know
themselves, and their God and Savior, and have their depraved Nature changed,
and then winged their willing Flight to Heaven. It is not to my present Purpose
to enquire into the future State of those that die in Infancy before they are
capable of Reason. But as to the many who die in their earlier Days, when
Reason has begun to dawn, they are considered as moral Agents, and rewarded
according to their Works: And we have good Reason to hope, that sundry of them
in their short Space of Life, are effectually prepared for a happy Eternity. I
have myself seen promising Appearances of such early Piety, in various Places.
And O! when shall I be so happy as to see many such Appearances among the dear
Children and Youth in my Congregation? Why should not young Sinners come to
Christ from Hanover, as well as other Places? Many of you lately heard from the
Lips of a very sincere and zealous Preacher, the Rev. Mr Robert Henry, Minister
in Lunenburg, Virginia; that in his Congregation near ^we^t^ Youths, some of
them not above nine or twelve Years old, were under very promising Impressions
of Religion, and earnestly pressing into the Kingdom of God. And are not young
Sinners among us, as much concerned to come to Jesus, as in Lunenburg? Is Sin
only a local Evil? O^ is Jesus only a local Savior? I mean, is not Sin a^
pernicious an Evil, and is not Jesus as ^eedful and as amiable a Savior; in
one Place as another? O! my dear Youth, shall other Ministers have the Pleasure
of leading the tender Lambs of their Flocks to Jesus, while your p^or Minister
is lest to weep over you as the willing Prey of Sin and Sa^an? Shall Heaven be
peopled with young Immortals from other Places, while the Youth among as are
crowding the slippery down-hill Road to Ruin? O! who can bear the Thought! O!
that you would suffer me this Day to snatch you as Brands out of the Burning,
before you catch Fire, and blaze unquenchably!

I have another Inducement of this Kind to communicate to you, which is indeed
the best Piece of News I have heard this long Time^ It is in a Letter I
received two Days ago from one of the best of Men, and m^ favorite Friend in
Pennsylvania; I mean the Reverend Mr. Samuel Finley, Tutor of a large ^cadem,
(where some finish their Education, and others prepa^e themselves for the
C^^lege) and one of the T^ust^es of N^ss^^-Hall or New Jersey (...) above 100
Miles from (...) And I cannot communicate it to you with more (...) and
Simplicity (...) is an Answer to (...) had seat h^^ some Account ^ lately
received from my British Correspondents, of a remarkable Revival of Religion in
England, especially among the Clergy of the esta^lished Church. He proceeds
thus: -- I thank you for the Extracts from your English Letter, etc. They
raised my heavy Heart a little while, and furnished Materials for Conversation.
I greatly rejoice that the Lord Jesus has put in my power to make you a large
Compensation for the good News you sent me. I can show you greater Things than
even those, as they appeal to me more unexampled and surprising. God has done
great Things for us, whereof we are glad. By this Time you stand a (...) to
discover what these glorious Tidings are. Why, no less than that our gracious
Redeemer has poured out his holy Spirit upon the St ^ents at our College (i. e.
the College of New Jersey) not one, of all who were present, neglected; and
they were in Number Sixty The whole House, say my Correspondents, was a Bochim
(a Place of Weeping) Mr. William Tennant, who was on the Spot, sa^s, he never
saw any in that Case, who had more clear Views of God, Themselves, their
Defects, their Impotence and Misery, than they had in general -- that there
never was, he believes, in one House, more genuine Sorrow for Sin, and longing
for Jesus -- that this glorious Work was gradual, and spread like the
increasing Light of the Morning -- that is, was not begun by the ordinary Means
of Preaching, nor promoted by alarming Methods; yet so great was their
Distress, that he judged it Improper to use any Arguments of Terror in Public,
lest some should sink under the Weight -- (...) makes this gracious Visitation
the more remarkable was, that a little (...) some of the Youth had given a
greater Loose to their Corruptions th^^ was ordinary among them. A Spirit of
Price and Contention prevailing, to the gr^^^ Grief and even Discouragement of
the worthy President -- that there was no public Outcries, but a decorous
silent Solemnity -- that before he came away, several had received something
like the Spirit of Adoption, being tenderly infected with a Sense of redeeming
Love, and thereby disposed and determined to endeavor af^^^ universal Holiness.

MR. Treat, and Mr. G. Tennant tell me in theirs, that the Concern appeared
rational, solid, and scriptural, and that in a remarkable Degree. I was
informed by some of the Students, who had been my Pupils, that this religious
Concern first began with the Son of a very considerable Gentleman of New York.
The Youth was dangerously sick in College, and on that Occasion awakened to a
Sense of his Guilt: His Discourse made some Impression on a few others; and
theirs again on others; and so it became almost general, before the good
President, or any others knew any thing of it. As soon as it became public,
Misrepresentations were spread abroad, and some Gentlemen sent to bring their
Sons Home: but upon better Information, the most were sent back again -- The
wicked Companions of some young Gentlemen left no Methods untried to recover
them to their former Excess of Riot; and with two or three they have been
lamentably successful.

Mr. D^^ield, a worthy young Minister, in^^^med (...) the other Day, that a
v^ry hopeful (...) through the Jerseys, especially among young People. In
several Letters from Philadelphia, from Mr. G. Tennant, and others, I have
Assurance of a Revival there, for which good People are blessing God. Lawyer
Stockton informs me, that he is certified by good Authority, of a gracious Work
of God at Yale-College in New Haven.

SAY now, my dear Brother, are not these glorious Things? Are they not beyond
Expectation? Can you believe for Joy? It is true that the Lord has thus
appeared? or is it only a pleasing Dream? It is true! it is a Reality!

Bound every Heart; and every Bosom burn!

THIS is the joyful News, my Brethren, which I had to communicate to you; and I
hope I received it in Season, as a proper Supplement to this Discourse. Shall
this excite you to Emulation? You see Religion is not the Concern of the Old,
or the Ignorant, or Poor only. Here were young Creatures -- Scholars in a
College, where Learning is carried to as great Perfection already, as any where
in America. -- Scholars, the Sons of Gentlemen of Note and Fortune. -- here
these were made to mourn for Sin, and cry and long for Jesus. And why will you
not make this your Concern?

BUT Oh! how vain are all my Endeavors, while God withholds the Influences of
his Spirit? The Students in the College of New Jersey had heard many masterly,
solemn, and pungent Discourses from their worthy President, and many that
preached occasionally to them: but all this had no Effect. The Work must not
begin, till sick Boy becomes the Instrument. This make the Finger of God more
conspicuous, and show that the "Excellency of the Power is his." Oh! if he
would but please to pour out his spirit upon us, hard and ^ad as we are, we
should soon selent and revive. -- Blessed Spirit! descend into this Valley of
^^y Bones, breath on these slain, that they may live.

THE agreeable Piece of History I have communicated to you opens to us a very
encouraging Prospect with regard to Posterity, and the Churches in general.
From the College of New Jersey, you and many other Congregations expect
Supplies, when I and my Brethren, who are now acting our Part upon the Stage of
Life, have made our Exit, and are silent and forgotten in the Dust. And when.
"the Fountain is purified," we have Reason to hope, that "pure Streams" will
issue from thence, to water the Garden of God. O let us be thankful for so
important and ex^^^sive a Blessing.

AND now, my dear You^^^, I am just about taking Leave of you: and therefore, I
want you to come to some Determination. You are the Seed of the Church: and to
you we look for the Preservation of Religion in this Place, when its present
Supports are broken, and mouldred into Dust. The World is arrived to an
intolerable Height of Wickedness, and we long to see Matters take a new Tom.
To you we look for this blessed Revolution: For as to Veteran Sinners, they are
so accustomed to do Evil, that there is little more Prospect of their
Reformation, than of the Aethiopian's changing ^is Skin, or the Leopar^ (...)
of Sinners. (...) he generally (...) is very uncertain, and (...) your
Business, (...) hour Delay, you may be in Eternity, you may ^^ in H^ll ^^ever
you are aware. Where Groo^ (...) ^^guments is her^? And (...) shall ^one of
them have any Weight upon you?

LET me now conclude with a very reasonable (...) to my young Friends; and that
is, that as soon as you get home this Evening, you would go by yourselves, though
it were but for a Quarter of an Hour, and seriously think over what you have
heard, and pray to God to bless it to you, My Children and Youth, your
Affectionate Minister make this Petition to you and were it necessary, would
present it on his Knees to the meanest of you. Spend a little Time this Evening
in Prayer, in examin^^g whether ever you have come ^o Christ or not and in
meditating on the (...) of your Sou^s. Can you refuse a (...) so reasonable,
and so interesting to yourselv^^? If you are hard^ enough to do it, I shall
only warn you in the fatherly Language of S^^omon. You will mourn at the last,
and say, How have I (...) Instruction, and my Heart despised Reproo^^ and have
(...) the (...) of my Teachers, nor i^^^ined mine (...) to them that (...).

FINIS.

