A Most Unaccountable RELATION OF ONE MISS Sarah Green, A WIDOW, Living at
Beesly, in the County of WORCESTER.

Who following the wicked Practice of Witchcraft for some Time, did at last
sell herself, Soul and Body, to the Devil for fourteen Years, and when the Time
was near expired, she being very sad, sent for her two Children and some
Ministers, and discovered the Matter at large, desiring their Prayers and good
Endeavors for the Recovery of her Soul, which was performed accordingly,
though to no Purpose; for upon the last Day of the Term, about Midnight* April
ye 14th, 1747, she was suddenly struck dead by an infernal Spirit in the Shape
of a Bear, to the Terror and Astonishment of all then present.

With the Heads of a SERMON suitable on this Occasion.

Printed in the Year M.DCC.LXII.

A most UNACCOUNTABLE RELATION.
THAT there are really Magicians, Conjurers and Witches, who have Commerce and
Familiarity with evil Spirits, is so clear and plain, both from holy Scripture,
Councils, Canons, and Civil Laws in all Nations, that none but those Athiests,
who would persuade themselves there are no Spirits, and consequently no other
Life after this, ever denied it; since the reality of this Converse with
Spirits, their appearances and possessions has been so clearly demonstrated,
not only in former Ages, but also in this, by Persons of most acute Judgment
and Learning, wherein they have fully answered all Objections to the contrary,
so that I need not enter any further into Controversy, but shall only give you
an Account of one Mrs. Sarah Green, living at Beesley, in the County of
Worcester, who was a Person very well brought up, and descended out of a good
Family: At twenty Years of age she was married to Mr. Thomas Green, a Farmer of
a good Estate, who had by her two Children, a Son and a Daughter, his Son being
brought up a Clergyman. After they had been married near sixteen Years, Mr.
Thomas Green died, having settled his Estate upon his two Children, and left a
Competency sufficient for the Maintenance of his Wife, but she being a very
proud woman, thought the Substance left for her Support not sufficient to
maintain her Pride and Greatness; in a little Time after she fell into great
Discontent, retiring herself from all Company, and by the strong Temptations of
the Devil, she was drawn into the wicked Practice of Witchcraft, and in a short
Time after, sold herself Soul and Body to the Devil, for fourteen Years, for
the Enjoyment of worldly Pleasures, and to have her Desires satisfied: She was
often suspected by several Persons to follow the wicked Practice of Witchcraft,
because if they happened to have any Difference with her, they commonly
received Damage, either by Hurt to their Cattle or other Things; but in regard
no certain Proof could be made, People durst not speak their Opinion openly,
but near the End of this fourteen Years she grew very sad and heavy, and
sending for her two Children, and three able Ministers, she with abundance of
Tears spoke thus to them: I have by my wretched Fate, followed Witchcraft
several Years, and have sold myself both Soul and Body to the Devil for
fourteen Years, only for the Pleasures of this World, and to have my Desires
satisfied during that Time; but now all my Pleasures and Delights are come to
their last Period; for there remains only three Days of that Time; and then I
shall be carried away by infernal Spirits, into those everlasting Flames that
will never have an End. And as the Devil was the Author of this my Wickedness,
by persuading me to it, so he will likewise be the Punisher thereof. I desire
you therefore that you would not cease to pray for me, but take me into the
Church, and let there be used Psalms and Prayers for five Nights together; and
if you can keep me safe during that Time, the Danger will be over. All these
Things they performed, but it prevailed nothing, for the first two Nights the
Ministers began to sing Psalms about her, they heard terrible Noises, which
frightened them very much, the third Night the Noise of those Spirits who came
for Destruction, was so great that the very Foundation of the Church was
shaken, and about Midnight a Spirit very dreadful and terrible in Shape
resembling a Bear, but larger, appeared visible unto them, which suddenly
struck the Woman dead on the Floor; where she lay 'till the next Day, as on
Examination made into this Matter by the Coroner and Jury.

We whose Names are hereafter mentioned do testify this Relation to be true;
and desire that it may be published as a Timely warning to all People.

Sir John Aldridge, Bart. Sir George Scroope, Bart. Richard Bilson, Esquire John
Feet, Esquire


The Heads of the SERMON on this OCCASION.
xvi. Chapter of Matthew, and 26 Verse, For what is a Man profited if he shall
gain the whole World and lose his own Soul? Or what will a Man give in exchange
for his Soul?


AMongst the many good Sermons that have been preached or published for the
Salvation of Men's Souls, surely no Subject can be more proper than that which
teaches us to consider our latter End, by amending our Lives, and living
Soberly, Righteously, and Goldly in this present Life, that we may be partakers
of Eternal Happiness in the Life to come. And indeed if Men were so wise as to
consider their latter End, it would be their chief Motive to them to leave
their Sins and Wickedness, considering that the Soul never dies, but must have
a Being to all Eternity, and that there are but two Places for it to go to,
either Heaven or Hell, for behold the Day comes that shall burn as an Oven,
and all the Proud yea, and all that do wickedly shall be Stuble, and the Day
comes that shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts, and shall neither
leave them Root nor Branch, Mat. iv. 10. While a Man lives in Wickedness and
Impiety, he has not so much as the hopes or assurance of eternal Salvation;
and as touching this unhappy Woman, if she had lived a more sober and godly
Life, and instead of spending her precious Time in Pride and other ungodly
Courses, had spent it in reading the Scriptures, in Prayers, and hearing of
Sermons, then she would have been able to overcome and withstand the Temptation
and Delusions of the Devil, by which Means she had never come to such a
dreadful End; and we hope this terrible Example will be sufficient Warning to
all wicked profane Persons, how they dare to provoke God in such a dreadful
Manner; and will be a Means to move all wicked Persons every where to amend
their Lives. Many strange Judgments and Warnings have happened in this Age. All
which being rightly considered, ought to put us in mind of Amendment of Life,
and that our Tho'ts ought always to be on our latter End, and that there is a
great Necessity for us to turn from our Sins and Wickedness, or else our Case
hereafter will be dangerous, as more plainly appears, Luke xiii. 3, 5. Except
ye repent ye shall all likewise perish. So that if we continue in our Sins
without Repentance, our Savior expressly tells us what will be the Consequence
thereof, Let us therefore resolve to turn from our evil Ways, while the Door of
Mercy is open, that so we may escape the Wrath to come. God might have cut us
off before these awakening Judgments came, by which the Lord calls to the
Inhabitants of the Earth to learn Righteousness, so that thereby all wicked
Persons might be awakened, and come out of that gross Darkness, and also all of
us from a vain wicked and loose Conversation. Now as other Nations have had
proofs of God's displeasure, by the Plague that has broke out amongst them, so
God in a wonderful Manner, has not only given us warning, ^^t also time and
space of Repentance; therefore let us seek the Lord while he is to be found,
that we may be ready prepared for his coming, lest that Day should come upon us
unawares. Watch therefore for ye know not what Hour your Lord does come, Matt.
xxiv. 42. We had need always to watch over ourselves, and be constantly upon
our Guard, that there we may be able to overcome the Temptations of our Ghostly
Enemy, who goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking who he may devour.

Certain it is, that it is appointed for all Men once to die and after that
come to Judgment. Then how happy will it be for them that die well, watch
therefore over yourselves that you may avoid Sin, which is the Wages not only
of Temporal but of Eternal Death. No one is sure how long he has to live,
therefore to live well is the greatest Happiness, that when the Lord comes we
may be found ready to meet him, and go with him into everlasting Rest. Then the
Terrors of Death shall not lay hold of you, nor the Flames of Hell affright
you, though Heaven and Earth pass away with great Noise and fervent Heat, the
Skies all flaming, and the World consumed with Fire, no Evil shall come nigh
you; the Lord shall come with thousand of Angels and Saints to judge the Earth,
whilst the wicked ones shall call for Rocks and Mountains to hide them from his
Face; but shall be to you a refreshing Water in a thirsty Land when you hear
him say well done thou good and faithful Servant, enter thou into thy Master's
Joy; you shall be placed with the Sheep on the right Hand, and when the Wicked
shall go into everlasting Fire prepared for the DEVIL and his Angels, you that
have watched the Hour of his coming, and prepared yourselves to receive him,
shall ascend triumphantly with him, to sit down at his right Hand in Glory.
Though the Sun be darkened and the Moon turned into Blood, and the Stars fall from
Heaven in that great and eternal day of the Lord, your Bodies shall raise
gloriously from the dust to be united to the Soul, and not a Hair of your Head
shall be diminished: you shall receive the Reward of your Labor. For Eye has
not seen, nor Ear heard, nor has it entered the Heart of Man to conceive those
Things that are laid up for the Righteous, nor the Torments those feel that by
wilful sinning shall fail of that Happiness.

The Judgments and Exhortations mentioned, ought to make a deep Impression on
our Minds, and give us sober Thoughts: The which, God of his infinite Mercy
give us that we may be always prepared for our latter End. The Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, be with you all evermore, AMEN.

FINIS.

