REPORT OF THE CASE BETWEEN Thomas Forsey, AND Waddel Cunningham.

THE REPORT of an ACTION OF Assault, Battery and Wounding, TRIED IN THE SUPREME
COURT of JUDICATURE FOR THE PROVINCE OF NEW YORK, In the TERM of OCTOBER 1764,
BETWEEN Thomas Forsey, Plaintiff, AND Waddel Cunningham, Defendant.

NEW YORK: Printed by JOHN HOLT, in the Year 1764.

PREFACE.
AS it is not the Design of the following Sheets to cast the popular Odium on
either of the Parties, but merely to expose the Attempt to obtain Redress in
behalf of the Defendant, and in his Absence, against a legal Determination of
the Suit, by a Method entirely new, unconstitutional and illegal; a particular
Detail of the Evidence on both Sides is carefully avoided.

The strange and unnatural Construction which has been lately given to his
Majesty's Royal Order, with a View to countenance the Appeal sought for in
behalf of the Defendant, and the dangerous Tendency of such a Construction, are
the Objects which the Editor has in View. This Construction must indeed be
alarming to every British Subject; who, among the many invaluable Privileges,
by which he is distinguished from the Subjects of other Princes, will naturally
esteem a Trial by his Peers as one of the greatest -- In short it is a
Construction which subverts the ancient and fundamental Law of the Land,
renders all Property in the Colonies precarious and of little Value, and the
Method of obtaining Justice extremely dilatory, and extensively ruinous to the
Litigants.

But to show the pernicious Consequences of this Construction, Arguments need
not here be urged -- His Honor the Chief Justice has, in the legal Discharge
of his important Trust, assigned such Reasons, as must be sufficient to expose
the false and pernicious Doctrine, that the Crown by its Instruction designed
to change the Laws of the Land, or to execute Justice by other Means than are
known in the Mother Country.

As such of the Proceedings in this Cause as are here submitted to the public
Scrutiny, were had in the King's Courts of Justice; (...) Editor thought it his
Duty, to improve the Opportunity which the Law gives him, of commanding
authenticated Copies, to communicate them to the World. By this Means, as well
those who are entitled to enjoy, as those whose Duty it is to protect them in
the Possession of, their invaluable Rights and Privileges, may be apprised of
this unexampled Attempt to divert the Channel of Justice.

Thomas Forsey, against Waddel Cunningham. Report of an Action of Assault,
Battery and Wounding, tried in the Supreme Court of New York, October 1764.
THIS Suit was brought for a violent Assault, Battery, and Wounding, committed
by the Defendant on the Plaintiff, on the 28th Day of July 1763. The Chief
Justice, on a Petition and Affidavit of the Violence of the Battery, gave his
Order for holding the Defendant to Bail, in L.5000.

Upon the Return of the Writ in October Term 1763, the Plaintiff declared, in
the usual Form; and after an Imparlance to January Term following, the
Defendant pleaded the general Issue, Not Guilty.

In April Term 1764, the Defendant moved the Court for a struck Jury, which
Motion was granted, and a Jury was accordingly struck during the Term.

In October Term following, the Cause came on regularly, to be tried by the
Jury that had been struck at the Defendant's Request.

The Trial lasted near twelve Hours, in the Course of which, the Proof of the
Battery was so full and clear, that the Defendant relied only on some Evidence
in Mitigation of Damages, in the Production of which, the fullest and fairest
Scope was given to him.

There were three Gentlemen, of Council for the Plaintiff, and four for the
Defendant; the Witnesses on both Sides were very fully and circumstantially
examined, and the Evid^nce as fully and circumstantially summed up by the
Council, for both Parties: The Jury went from the Bar late in the Evening, and
returned to it the next Morning with their privy Verdict; by which they found
the Defendant Guilty of the Trespass, Assault, Battery and Wounding charged in
the Plaintiff's Declaration; and assessed the Plaintiff's Damages, at one
thousand five hundred Pounds, and his Costs at six Pence.

On Saturday, the last Day of the Term, the Defendant's Council moved the
Court, to set aside the Verdict, for the Largeness of the Damages; but the
Court conceiving that the Damages were not excessive, rejected the Motion, and
ordered Judgment to be entered for the Plaintiff. The Defendant being absent
beyond Sea, Robert R. Waddel who acts for him under a Letter of Attorney, then
came up to the Bench; and presented to the Judges, a Petition to admit an Entry
of an Appeal to the Governor and Council, and a Bond with Security, as grounded
upon the Instruction. The Court suffered no Entry to be made, and returned the
Papers; declaring no such Appeal would lie, and that the Instruction was not
designed to favor any other, than a Removal by Writ of Error -- The
Instruction is in these Words.

Our Will and Pleasure is, that you or our Commander in Chief of our said
Province for the Time being, do in all civil Causes on Application being made
to you, or the Commander in Chief for the Time being for that Purpose, permit
and allow Appeals from any of the Courts of common Law in our said Province,
unto you or the Commander in Chief, and the Council of our said Province; and
you are for that Purpose to issue a No other than a Writ of Error, has ever
been until the present Instance, issued in this Province.
Writ in the Manner which has been usually accustomed, returnable before
yourself and the Council of our said Province, who are to proceed to hear and
determine such Appeal; wherein such of our Council as shall be at that Time
Judges of the Court, from whence such Appeal shall be so made to you our
Captain General, or to the Commander in Chief for the Time being, and to our
said Council as aforesaid, shall not be permitted to vote upon the said Appeal;
but they may nevertheless be present at the hearing thereof, to give the
Reasons of the Judgment given by them in the Causes wherein such Appeals shall
be made. Provided nevertheless that in all such Appeals, the Sum or Value
appealed for, do exceed the Sum of three hundred Pounds Sterling, and that
Security be first duly given by the Appellant, to answer such Charges as shall
be awarded, in Case the first Sentence be affirmed; and if either Party shall
not rest satisfied with the Judgment of you or the Commander in Chief for the
Time being and Council as aforesaid, Our Will and Pleasure is, that they may
then appeal unto us in our Privy Council; Provided the Sum or Value so appealed
for unto us, exceed five hundred Pounds Sterling, and that such Appeal be made
within fourteen Days after Sentence, and good Security given by the Appellant,
that he will effectually prosecute the same, and answer the Condemnation; as
also pay such Costs and Damages as shall be awarded by us in Case the Sentence
of you or the Commander in Chief for the Time being and Council, be affirmed:
Provided nevertheless, where the Matter in Question relates to the taking or
demanding any Duty payable to us, or to any Fee of Office or annual Rent, or
other such like Matter or Thing, where the Rights in Futuro may be bound, in
all such Cases you are to admit an Appeal to us in our Privy Council, though
the immediate Sum or Value appealed for, be of a less Value, and it is our
further Will and Pleasure, that in all Cases where by your Instructions you are
to admit Appeals to us in our Privy Council, Execution be suspended until the
final Determination of such Appeals, unless good and sufficient Security be
given by the Appellee, to make ample Restitution of all that the Appellant
shall have lost by Means of such Judgment or Decree, in Case upon the
Determination of such Appeal, such Decree or Judgment should be reversed, and
Restitution awarded to the Appellant.

A true Copy, examined by Gw. BANYAR, D. Cl. Con.

A few Days after, the Costs de Incremento were taxed, and Judgment signed by
Mr. Chief Justice; but before finishing the Taxation, he was served with an
Instrument in writing, under the Great Seal of the Colony, in the Words
following.

GEORGE the Third, by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To our Chief Justice and other our Judges of our Supreme Court of Judicature
for our Province of New York, in North America; and to all and every our
Officers of the same Court, either Judicial or Ministerial, and to every of
them as well as to all others whom it may concern, GREETING:
WHEREAS of our Royal Dignity and by our Instructions to our Captain General
and Governor in Chief of our Province of New York aforesaid for the Time being,
ALL APPEALS from any of our Courts of Law within the said Province should be
heard and determined before our said Governor and Council; and now, on the Part
of Waddel Cunningham, against whom a Verdict was given in a Plea of Trespass
and Assault, at the Suit of Thomas Forsey, at our Supreme Court, holden for our
said Province of New York, the Twenty sixth Day of Octo. Instant; we command
you and every of you, therefore, that you and every of you, wholly forbear
proceeding or taking any Step further against the said Waddel Cunningham, on
the said Verdict, until the Cause and Merits thereof be heard before our
Governor and Council of the Province of New York aforesaid, (agreeable to, and
in Conformity with our said Royal ^^^^^^ctions as aforesaid, bearing Date the
Sixth Day of July, one thousand seven hundred and sixty-one, in the first Year
of our Reign) as you will answer the same at your Peril; nor shall you in any
wise omit acquainting him the said Thomas Forsey herewith, returnable in
Fourteen Days from the Date hereof, before our Governor and Council at Fort
George, in the City of New York, in our Province of New York aforesaid, where
you shall then have this Writ. WITNESS the Honorable CADWALLADER COLDEN, Esquire
at our Fort in New York aforesaid, the thirty-first Day of October, in the year
of our Lord, one thousand seven hundred and sixty-four, and in the fifth Year
of our Reign.

A true Copy examined with the Original, By Gw. BANYAR, D. Cl. Con.

The Chief Justices proceeded to finish the Taxation, notwithstanding the
Service of this Instrument, and signed the Judgment. This Instrument was also
served on the Clerk of the Supreme Court, who in Consequence thereof refused to
seal the Plantiff's Execution, which was tendered to him for the Purpose; and
by this Means the Plaintiff is hitherto prevented from levying his Damages and
Costs. A few Days after, another Instrument, under the same Seal, was served on
the Chief Justice, in the Words following,

GEORGE the Third, by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
King, Defender of the Faith, etc, To our Chief Justice and other the Judges of
our Supreme Court of Judicature, for our Province of New York, in
North America, and to all other the Officers of our same Court, whom it shall
or may concern, GREETING: WHEREAS by our Writ to you, and every of you
directed, we lately commanded you, that all further Proceedings should be
stayed on the Verdict, obtained against Waddel Cunningham, at the Suit of
Thomas Forsey, on a certain Plea of Trespass and Assault, tried by the Jurors
of our Sovereign LORD, the now King, at our last Supreme Court, holden for our
Province aforesaid, until the Merits and Matter thereof should be heard before
our Governor and Council of our said Province, for the Time being, (agreeable
to our Royal Instructions, in the said Writ mentioned) on the Appeal of the
said Waddel Cunningham; in Consequence whereof, and for the fully enabling our
said Governor and Council, to determine the Matter of the said Verdict; We
further command and strictly enjoin you, and every of you, that laying aside
all other Matters and Things whatsoever, you cause all and every the
Proceedings against the said Waddel Cunningham, whether by Bill, Plaint, or
otherwise, whereon the said Verdict was obtained, to be brought before our said
Governor and Council, at Fort-George, in our City of New York, and Province
aforesaid, at the Return of the said Writ, being the fourteenth Day of this
Instant November, as you will answer the Neglect at your Peril; and that you
have then there this Writ, returnable on the same Day, and at the same Place.
WITNESS the Honorable CADWALLADER COLDEN Esquire, our Lieutenant Governor, and
Commander in Chief of our Province of New York aforesaid, the second Day of
November, in the Year of our Lord, one thousand seven hundred and sixty four,
and in the fifth Year of our Reign. The Chief Justice, on the Day mentioned for
their Return, delivered the two Instruments to the Lieutenant Governor and
Council, and assigned his Reasons for not returning them in Form, and requested
Time to reduce those Reasons to writing, which he afterward delivered in, to
the Governor and Council.

But that they may have their proper Weight, it seems expedient to prefix to
them the Oath which the Judges take at the Time of their Appointment, which is
in these Words.

YE shall swear, that well and lawfully ye shall serve our LORD the King and
his People, in the Office of Justice, and that lawfully ye shall counsel the
King in his Business, and that ye shall not Counsel nor assent to any Thing
which may turn him in Damage or Disherison by any Manner, Way, or Color, and
that ye shall not know the Damage or Disherison of him, whereof ye shall not
cause him to be warned by yourself, or by other; and that ye shall do equal Law
and Execution of Right to all his Subjects, rich and poor, without having
Regard to any Person; And that you take not by yourself, or by other, privily,
nor apertly, Gift, nor Reward, of Gold nor Silver, nor of any other Thing which
may turn to your Profit, unless it be Meat or Drink, and that of small Value,
of any Man that shall have any Plea or Process hanging before you, as long as
the same Process shall so be hanging, nor after, for the same Cause; and that
ye take no Fee, as long as ye shall be Justice, nor Robes of any Man, great or
small, but of the King himself; and that ye give none Advice, nor Counsel to no
Man, great nor small, in no Case where the King is Party; And in case that any
of what Estate or Condition they be, come before you in your Sessions with
Force and Arms, or otherwise, against the Peace, or against the Form of the
Statute thereof made, to disturb Execution of the common Law, or to menace the
People, that they may not pursue the Law, that ye shall cause their Bodies to
be arrested and put in Prison; and in Case they be such that ye cannot arrest
them, that ye certify the King of their Names, and of their Misprision hastily,
so that he may thereof ordain a convenable Remedy; And that ye by yourself, nor
by other, privily nor apertly maintain any Plea or Quarrel hanging in the
King's Court, or elsewhere in the Country, And that you deny to no Man common
Right, by the King's Letters, nor none other Man's, nor for none other Cause,
and in Case any Letters come to you contrary to the Law, that ye do nothing by
such Letters, but certify the King thereof; and proceed to execute the Law --
notwithstanding the same Letters; and that ye shall do and procure the Profit
of the King and of his Crown, with all Things where ye may reasonably do the
same; and in Case ye be from henceforth found in Default in any of the Points
aforesaid, ye shall be at the King's Will, of Body, Lands and Goods, thereof to
be done as shall please him.

So help you GOD.

The above is a true Copy of the Oath administered to, and taken by the Judges
of the Supreme Court of the Province of New York, in April, 1763. Examined with
the Records in Lib. Commissions, C. Page 250.

Examined this 1st November, 1764. By Gw. BANYAR, D. Secr'y.



The Steps taken on the Exhibition of the Chief Justice's Reasons, and the
Reasons themselves will appear, from the following Minutes of that Day.

At a Council held at Fort-George, in the City of New York, on Monday the
Nineteenth Day of November, 1764. PRESENT, The Hon. Cadwallader Colden, Esquire
Lieut. Governor, etc. Mr. Horsmanden, Mr. Watts, Mr. De Lancey, Earl of
Stirling, Mr. Apthorpe, Mr. Read.

Waddel Cunningham, against Thomas Forsey.
MR. Chief Justice read and delivered into the Court, his Reasons for not
making Return on the Writs issued in this Cause, and then withdrew. Which
Reasons were ordered to be entered, and are as follow:

REASONS offered by Daniel Horsmanden, Esquire Chief Justice of the Province of
New York, to his Honor the Lieutenant Governor and the Honorable His
Majesty's Council for the said Province, against returning an Instrument under
Seal, whereby all Proceedings on the Verdict lately obtained by the said Thomas
Forsey, against the said Waddel Cunningham in the Supreme Court, are commanded
to be stayed, and another Instrument under Seal, whereby the Justices of the
said Supreme Court are commanded to cause the Proceedings whereon the said
Verdict was founded, to be bro't before tne Lieutenant Governor and the Council.
I beg Leave to perfix a State of the Proceedings between the Parties, not
only, the more clearly to avail myself of those Reasons, but also, in
Compliance with my Oath of Office, by which I am bound to certify the King's
Majesty, of the Proceedings, on which those Instruments (which I consider as
Letters in Delay of Justice) are said to be grounded.

On Wednesday last, I brought into this Court those Letters, and as both the
Prohibition, and Command, appeared to me unwarrantable, I thought it my Duty to
obey neither, but to lay the Instruments before you, and to assign my Reasons,
for the Part I acted, on this new, and extraordinary Occasion. -- The Liberty
you gave me to reduce the Substance of what I then offered to Writing, as it
affords me an Opportunity, to express myself with greater Perspicuity, is an
Indulgence, for which I return your Honor and the Council my hearty Thanks.

The Suit which occasioned those Letters to the Judges (for they are directed
to us all) was an Action of Trespass brought in the Supreme Court; in which the
Plantiff Forsey declared for an Assault, Battery, and wounding, to his Damage
L.5000; upon which the Cause was at issue on the Plea of not Guilty; and the
Jurors in the last Term of October, found for the Plantiff, and assessed his
Damages at L. 1500.

The Panel consisted of a special Jury of Freeholders, at the Defendant's
Request -- No Challenges were made to either of them -- The Trial took up
twelve Hours -- No Evidence that was offered, by either Party was refused to be
admitted by the Court -- All the Judges were upon the Bench -- The Plantiff had
three, and the Defendant four Gentlemen attending as their Council -- The
Proofs were largely summed up on both Sides; and the Bar, and Country, must
unanimously declare, that the Trial was regular, and solemn; and conducted with
the utmost Fairness and Deliberation.

On the 27st of the Month, though the last Day of the Term, on which no special
Motions are made, the Council for the Defendant were indulged with a Motion for
a new Trial. But no Reason being assigned, but a Complaint that the Damages
were excessive (which did not appear to the Court to be well founded) and the
Trespass being very atrocious, and the Proofs clear, the Court overruled the
Motion.

It affords strong Ground of Presumption that the Process and Pleadings are
regular, since no Writ of Error has been yet offered to us -- The Verdict of
the Jury must therefore be the sole Cause of Complaint; and Relief against
that, is now expected from your Honors.

This seems to be founded upon an erroneous Interpretation of the thirty second
Instruction, given by his Majesty to the Governor of this Province: A
Construction which I could not countenance, by an Obedience to the Letters sent
to me; for the following Reasons,

I. Because it supposes the Royal Order to aim at altering the ancient and
wholesome Laws of the Land.

By the common Law of England the Trial of Facts is entrusted to the Jury; and
the Power to declare the Law upon them, is committed to the King's Judges --
These are distinct Provinces; and the Limits between them guarded by invariable
Usage and the most incontestible Authorities -- The Errors of the Judges may be
corrected by superior Judicatories; as for Instance, those of the King's Bench
in the Exchequer Chamber, and by the House of Peers -- But in all those
Removes, the Verdict of the Jurors suffers no Re-examination, but is final and
decisive: -- This is the Law at Home.

The Supreme Court here proceeds in the Main, according to the Practice of the
Courts at Westminster; and the Common Law of England, with the Statutes
affirming, or altering it, before a Legislature was established here, and those
passed since such Establishment, expressly extended to us, with our legislative
Acts (which are not to be repugnant to the Laws of England) constitute the Laws
of this Colony: And though there are many Instances of Judgments, reversed and
affirmed, in a Course of Error, before the Governor and Council, I do affirm,
with the highest Confidence, that not one Verdict was ever re-examined by any
superior Judicatory in the Province.

An Attempt then to re-examine the Verdict of a Jury, is repugnant to the Laws,
both of England and this Colony -- This is well known to the Crown; -- and to
suppose that his Majesty designed to change the Law, and that too in one of its
most important Articles, is certainly absurd, and being dangerous both to the
Prerogatives of the Crown and the Liberty and Safety of the Subject; it is in
my humble Opinion highly criminal to assert, that the King's Order has any such
Aim. Nor,

II. Is there any Shadow of Reason, from the Words of the Instruction, to
countenance such a bold Interpretation.

It Is true, the Governor is to permit and allow Appeals from the Courts of
common Law; and who can deny, but that in Common Speech, the bringing of a Writ
of Error, as it carries the Cause from a lower to a superior Tribunal, is an
Appeal? -- And surely that must be the best Explication, which satisfies the
Term, without altering the Law; especially if we consider that the Royal
Instructions, given before the Year 1753, adopted that very Term, as applicable
to Cases of Error, the Words of the former Instructions running thus: You are
to allow Appeals, in Case of Errors, from any of the Courts of Common Law and
that such is the meaning of the Appeals mentioned in the present Instruction as
it is understood by his Majesty in Council, will appear from the case of Gordon
-- and Lowther, 2d Lord Raymond 1447. Add to this that the present Instruction,
does itself refute the Interpretation upon which this Measure is founded; for
you will be pleased to observe, 1st. That the Truth is, that all the Appeals we
have had (I except none) have been in Error, and prosecuted by Writs of Error,
and it being his Majesty's Pleasure that the Governor upon Appeals shall issue
a Writ in the Manner which has been usually accustomed. No other Appeal, than
by such Writ, is directed.

2dly. The Judges of the Supreme Court, though Members of the Council, are
forbid to Vote on the Decision above: for which I can assign no other Reason,
than because they are supposed to have prejudiced the Cause, especially as
Leave is nevertheless given them, to render the Reasons of their Judgment, as
the Judges do in England, upon Error brought before the Peers. And as they are
only Judges of the Law and not Triers of the Facts; these Clauses evidently
imply, that the Appeal given, is only in Error, and not upon the Verdict of the
Jury.



Besides this, numberless Objections against a contrary Construction may be
drawn ab Inconvenienti, -- Permit me to mention a few;

I. Who is ignorant that in the Courts of Common Law, the Evidence of the
Witnesses to the Jury, is all viva voce? -- It results therefore, that they can
transmit nothing but a Transcript of the Record, which contains no Part of the
Proofs -- The Court above, remains then uninformed of the Facts upon which The
Verdict was given, and cannot adjudge upon them without a Re-examination of the
Witnesses, against that Attempt several Objections instantly occur. -- I will
hint at but two; 1st. The Cause must be made Res integra: For the Want of
written Memorials of the first Evidence, renders it impossible to confine the
Proofs above, to what they were in the first Production to the Jury. -- And so
the Trouble and Charge of the Trial to the Parties, Court and Country, were all
to no Purpose, -- And,

2dly. It tends to open a Flood-Gate to Perjury: -- For both Parties being now
apprised of the Proofs which were secret 'till the first Trial, every Effort
will be made to blacken the Character of the most material Witnesses, and to
supply all former Deficiencies.

And from these Sources such Streams will flow, as would extort the Groans of
all, who delight in the due Administration of Justice.



IIdly. The Appeal contended for, impeaches the Wisdom of our Law in that
distinguishing Article of Trials by Jury; since all Verdicts in Causes above
the Value of L. 300 Sterling would be worse than in Vain.

IIIdly. It will encourage a Spirit of Litigiousness; and introduce Idleness,
to the Ruin of many Families, and the great Impoverishment of the Country.

IVthly. The Expense attending such Appeals will be intolerable -- As the
Proofs before the Governor and Council must necessarily be reduced to Writing,
to Form what Civilians call the Apostella, for the next Remove of the Cause to
his Majesty in privy Council; It will follow, that according to their Usage,
there must also be Interrogatories, cross Interrogatories, Examinations, and
cross Examinations, and the Production of Exhibits -- And he that is acquainted
with the Process of the civil Law Courts, will readily agree, that the Evidence
introduced on a common Law Trial, of Twelve or Twenty-four Hours, especially,
when Titles to real Estates are in Question, and Deeds offered, will, if
reduced to Writing, swell the Apostels, to a Size so enormous, that the Trouble
and Cha^g^ of (...), will often surpass the Value of the Thing in demand. And
it may be of Use to observe here, (as a farther Proof, that it was not the
Object of the Instruction, to allow Appeals upon the whole Merits;) that you
have not Officers to transact the Business, that would thereby be introduced;
the Court of the Governor and Council, having neither a Register, nor Examiner,
to this Day, appointed by the Crown.

V. It would be impossible for those Courts of Appeal to discharge the Duty to
which they would in such Case be obliged. -- The Governor and Council must sit
de Die in Diem all the Year round, for the Business of their Colony -- And how
then can his Majesty in privy Council, besides attending to the arduous Affairs
of his Kingdoms, examine all the tedious Complaints brought up from all the
Provinces for his Royal Decision?

VI. To what an amazing Insecurity and Danger must the Subject according to
this Project, be reduced and exposed?

Let me specify a few Instances; 1st. As the Expense, so the Delays, will be
infinite -- How great then the Encouragement for Contention? What wrongful
Possessor and debauched Tenant, will give up his unjust Defense? What
Trespasser will pay the Damages of an injured Plantiff, when as in this Case,
the Death of either Party is the perpetual Extinction, not only of the Suit
depending, but the very Cause of Action? What Loser will not appeal upon the
bear Presumption that the first Witnesses against him may be dead, or absent,
on the new Trial?

2d. Witnesses of good and bad Characters, will have, in Effect, equel Credit
with the Judges; for they and those by whose Testimony they are to be
supported, or discredited, will all be unknown by the Judges, who are to
pronounce upon their Evidence on Appeal.

3d. New Modes of introducing Proof will necessarily establish new Rules
relative to them; and as all special Laws, cannot be foreseen nor provided for;
the Subject will be tried by new Laws, and often by Laws unpromulged; or to
speak more properly, by the Dictate of Power without Law.

These are some of the Reasons which induce me to be of Opinion, that the
King's Instructions do not countenance the Exercise of any Judicial Authority
to reverse the Verdict of a Jury: -- And as they give me the fullest
Satisfaction, -- I shall forbear assigning any other, though there are many --
The first is sufficient for us, who sit as Judges -- The Law warrants no such
Letters, as those which the Defendant sued out, and delivered to me -- We have
taken the Oath, prescribed by the Statute of the 18 of Ed. 3. and have sworn to
deny no Man common Right, by the King's Letters, nor none other Man's, nor for
none other Cause, but to proceed to execute the Law notwithstanding the same
Letters.

Upon the whole therefore, I cannot avoid complaining of these Letters, as an
unwarrantable Abuse of the King's Name, and his Judges -- He that sued them out
did it at his Peril, and ought to answer the Contempt. -- They are not only
against Law, but couched in Term^ very disrespectful: We are commanded to obey
at our Peril; and as an Outrage upon all the Rules of Decorum, one Part of the
abject Duty injoined upon us is, to notify the Plantiff, Forsey, even of the
Indignity offered us.

I have only to add, that as the Power of administering Justice, is one of the
most important of all Powers, it ought not to be assumed without the clearest
Authority -- None of your Predecessors ever heard an Appeal from the Verdict of
a Jury -- My long Residence in the Colony, and Seat on the Bench, and at the
Board of Council, have given me Opportunities for some considerable Experience;
and I know of no Attempt 'till this, to bring such an Appeal: And from the
Refusal of Counsel to support the Defendant's Application, you may naturally
conclude, that the whole Body of the Law consider it as illegal -- Whether a
single Word in the Royal Instructions will warrant your assuming this great and
important Power, I submit to your own Deliberations; not doubting but that many
Objections will arise in your own Minds, which have been omitted by me, and
might have been suggested by my Brother Justices, who are now unfortunately all
out of Town.

19th November, 1764. DANIEL HORSMANDEN.

Whereupon a Motion was made, that the other Judges of the Supreme Court, to
whom the said Writs were also directed, might be desired to give the Reasons of
their Conduct -- Resolved in the Affirmative; and the Reasons of the Conduct of
the other Judges, are hereby desired to be given to this Court accordingly --
And it being then moved that the Opinion of some of the Gentlemen of the Law
might be desired on the following Question; Whether a Court can, by the Crown,
be legally constituted in this Colony, to hear civil Causes, in a Way of
Appeal, from a Common Law Court, according to the Course of the civil Law, upon
the whole Merits, and re-examine the Evidence given to a Jury, and reverse, or
control their Verdict?

The Opinions of Messieurs Livingston, Smith, jun. Hicks, Scott, and Duane,
were desired on the said Question; and the said Gentlemen, (except Mr. Hicks
who was not present) in Court, severally delivered their Opinion in the
Negative.

Whereupon it was moved, that the Attorney General might deliver his Opinion,
on this Question; --

Whether the Crown has by the Thirty-second Instruction, constituted a Court in
this Colony, to hear civil Causes, in a Way of Appeal from the Courts of Common
Law, according to the Course of the civil Law, upon the whole Merits, and
re-examine the Evidence given to a Jury, and reverse or control their Verdict?

And the Attorney General being ordered to give his Opinion on the said
Question, He declared he was of Opinion, the Crown meant by the Thirty second
Article of its Instructions, to constitute the Governor and Council a Court of
Errors, and not a Court of Appeals in the Latitude the Question supposes.

A true Copy, examined by Gw. BANYAR, D. Cl. Con.

At a Council held at Fort George, in the City of New York, on Wednesday the
Twelfth Day of December, 1764. PRESENT, The Hon. CADWALLADER COLDEN, Esquire,
Lieutenant Governor, etc. Mr. WATTS, Mr. WALTON, Mr. DE LANCEY, Earl of
STIRLING, Mr. APTHORPE, Mr. READ, Mr. MORRIS.

Waddel Cunningham, against Thomas Forsey, ON APPEAL.
A Letter from Mr. Justice Jones was read, informing his Honor the Lieutenant
Governor, and the Gentlemen of the Council, that the Writs referred to in the
Order, by which he is desired to give the Reasons of his Conduct, had not been
delivered to him, nor had he seen any such in the Hands of any other Person;
and therefore, that it is impossible for any Man to give the Reasons of his
Conduct, in a Matter that never fell under his Consideration: Whereupon it is
the Opinion of this Court, that Mr. Justice Jones be desired, and he is hereby
desired to give his Reasons to this Court, on Wednesday the 26th Instant, why
the Appeal moved for in this Cause, in the Court below, was not allowed; or
whether according to the Laws and Constitution of England, an Appeal from the
Verdict of the Jury, on the whole Merits of this Cause, could lie? And it is
ordered that a Copy hereof be served on Mr. Justice Jones.

Then Mr. Justice Smith was desired, pursuant to the Request in Council, of the
10th of November last, to give the Reasons of his Conduct, etc.

Whereupon he spoke to the Effect following;

THAT having been out of Town, on the 19th of November last, he had had no
other Notice of the Request in Council, than by perusing a Copy of the Minute
of that Day, attested by the Clerk; but being by his Seat in Council, obliged
to assist in Government when called; and by his Office as Justice, to be of
Council for the King, and accountable for his Conduct in the Supreme Court; he
was willing, without any Delay, to Answer any Question that might reasonably
and lawfully be proposed to him. To this End, finding the Question as connected
with the preceding Matter so general, that were he to give his Answer in Terms
as general as the Question, he conceived he should Disappoint the just and
reasonable Expectation of this Honorable Court. Therefore, he had considered
the Matter more at large, than would strictly suffice to answer that Question
in the Terms proposed; and hoped he was able to Answer immediately, any
particular Question upon the subject Matter then depending, relating to his
Conduct in the Supreme Court.

Whereupon the said Justice was desired by the Court, to give his Reasons why
he did not allow the Appeal in the Behalf of Waddel Cunningham, at the Suit of
Thomas Forsey, from the Verdict in that Cause, to the Governor and Council, and
Cause the same to be entered there as had been moved.

To which he answered:

That the Appeal from the Verdict of a Jury, was what the Supreme Court could
take no Notice of. Because,

FIRST, The Judges by their Commission, were only constituted Judges of Law,
and limited in their Proceedings by the course of Practice, in three of the
great Courts of Law at Westminster, and no Appeal from any Verdict, taken in
either of those Courts, was ever known to have been allowed or entered there.

To Evince this, he prayed that his Commission might be read from the Record,
which was accordingly read in the Words following, to wit:

GEORGE the Third, by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
King, Defender of the Faith, and so forth.
To our trusty and well beloved William Smith, Esquire GREETING:
We reposing especial Trust and Confidence in your Loyalty, Learning, and
Integrity; have assigned, constituted, and appointed, and we do by these
Presents, assign, constitute, and appoint you, the said William Smith, to be
our third Justice of our Supreme Court of Judicature, of and in our Province of
New York in America; giving, and by these Presents granting, unto you the said
William Smith, full Power and Authority in our said Supreme Court, to hear and
determine all Pleas whatsoever, civil, criminal, and mixed, according to the
Laws, Statutes, and Customs, of that Part of our Kingdom of Great Btitain,
called England, and the Laws of our said Province of New York, not being
Repugnant thereto; and Executions of all Judgments of our said Court, to award;
and to act and do all Things which any of our Justices of either Bench, or
Barons of the Exchequer, in that Part of our Kingdom of Great Britain, called
England, may or ought to do; and to make such Rules and Orders in our said
Court, as shall be judged Convenient and Useful, and as near as may be,
agreeable to the Rules and Orders of our Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas,
and Exchequer, in that Part of our Kingdom of Great Britain called England. To
have and to hold the said Office, and Place of third Justice, of our said
Supreme Court, of and in our said Province of New York, in America; with all
and singular the Rights, Privileges, Advantages, Saleries, Profits, Fees, and
Perquisites, unto the said Office of third Justice belonging, or in any Wise
apurtaining, or which of Right ought to belong or appertain to the said Office,
in as full and ample Manner, as any third Justice of our said Supre^^ ^^^rt,
heretofore has, or of Right ought to have enjoyed the same, to you the said
William Smith, for and during our Pleasure. In Testimony whereof, we have
caused these our Letters to be made Patent, and the great Seal of our Province
of New York, to be hereunto affixed. WITNESS our trusty and well beloved Robert
Monckton, Esquire our Captain General and Governor in Chief, in and over our
Province of New York, and the Territories depending thereon in America; Vice
Admiral of the same, and Major General of our Forces, by and with the Advice of
our Council of our said Province, at our Fort in our City of New York, the
sixteenth Day of March, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Sixty-three, and of our Reign the Third.

CLARKE.

Upon which Commission, the said Justice observed, that as he was constituted a
Justice of the Supreme Court, and that the Power and Authority granted to him,
was to hear, try, and determine, according to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs,
of that Part of the Kingdom of Great Britain called England; it was plainly a
Law Commission, and that he was only authorized and empowered to award
Executions of all Judgments of the said Court, and to act and do, all Things
which any of his Majesty's Justices of either Bench, or Barons of the
Exchequer, in that Part of the Kingdom of Great Britain called England, might
or ought to do; and to make such Rules and Orders in the said Court, as should
be judged Convenient and Useful; and as near as might be, agreeable to the
Rules and Orders of the Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer in
England. But unless it did appear, that these Courts allowed Appeals from
Verdicts taken in those Courts, which he was very sure they did not, he did not
see it possible for the Judges of the Supreme Court of this Province to allow
such an Appeal in that Court, without doing what their Commissions would not
Warrant. And upon this Commission, limitting his Power to the Rules of the
common Law, he grounded his first Reason, why he did not allow the Appeal from
the Verdict, as prayed to be entered in the Supreme Court.

The said Justice also observed, as a second Reason for his Conduct, that
formerly it had been practiced, that the Justices of the Supreme Court, who had
held their Offices by like Commission with his, had only been sworn as to their
Oath of Office, by such general Words as these:

Ye swear, that you will well and truly execute the Office of a Justice of the
Supreme Court, according to the best of your Skill and Understanding. So help
you God. But the Chief Justice, Mr. Justice Livingston, and himself, being
desired to attend the Governor, to take the Oaths appointed by Law, and receive
their Commissions, and being willing, (if they accepted those Commissions) not
to want any legal Qualification, and to give all the Security to his Majesty
and the People of this Province, which the Law required for the due Execution
of the said Offices, informed Governor MONCKTON, who disliked that general
Form, that there was a more extensive Oath proposed in the Books, and mentioned
the Oath in the 18th of Ed. III. often referred to upon this Subject, which
they produced, alleging, that it required some Explanation, and the concluding
Words, which contained an Invocation (as used in the Church of Rome), of the
help of all Saints, must be altered, because their Religion as Protestants, and
the Declaration enjoined by Law, declared such Invocation to be Superstitious
and Idolatrous. The fixing and settling the Explanation, and the said
Alteration, took up three or four Days, and at length, it was taken with such
Explanation, as had been given and agreed to, according to the Words in the
Book, which are also entered upon Record, which the said Justice prayed might
be read, which was Read accordingly, in the Words following, to wit:

YE shall swear, that well and lawfully ye shall serve our LORD the King and
his People, in the Office of Justice, and that lawfully ye shall counsel the
King in his Business, and that ye shall not Counsel nor assent to any Thing
which may turn him in Damage or Disherison by any Manner, Way, or Color, and
that ye shall not know the Damage or Disherison of him, whereof ye shall not
cause him to be warned by yourself, or by other; and that ye shall do equal Law
and Execution of Right to all his Subjects, rich and poor, without having
Regard to any Person; And that you take not by yourself, or by other, privily,
nor apertly, Gift, nor Reward, of Gold nor Silver, nor of any other Thing which
may turn to your Profit, unless it be Meat or Drink, and that of small Value,
of any Man that shall have any Plea or Process hanging before you, as long as
the same Process shall so be hanging, nor after, for the same Cause; and that
ye take no Fee, as long as ye shall be Justice, nor Robes of any Man, great or
small, but of the King himself; and that ye give none Advice, nor Counsel to no
Man, great nor small, in no Case where the King is Party; And in Case that any
of what Estate or Condition they be, come before you in your Sessions with
Force and Arms, or otherwise, against the Peace, or against the Form of the
Statute thereof made, to disturb Execution of the common Law, or to menace the
People, that they may not pursue the Law, that ye shall cause their Bodies to
be arrested and put in Prison; and in Case they be such that ye cannot arrest
them, that ye certify the King of their Names, and of their Misprision hastily,
so that he may thereof ordain a convenable Remedy; And that ye by yourself, nor
by other, privily nor apertly maintain any Plea or Quarrel hanging in the
King's Court, or elsewhere in the Country, And that you deny to no Man common
Right, by the King's Letters, nor none other Man's, nor for none other Cause,
and in Case any Letters come to you contrary to the Law, that ye do nothing by
such Letters, but certify the King thereof; and proceed to execute the Law --
notwithstanding the same Letters; and that ye shall do and procure the Profit
of the King and of his Crown, with all Things where ye may reasonably do the
same; and in Case ye be from henceforth found in Default in any of the Points
aforesaid, ye shall be at the King's Will, of Body, Lands and Goods, thereof to
be done as shall please him. Upon which, it being observed by the Court, that
the said Oath was very extensive and solemn, the said Justice said it is so,
and that lest through Surprise or Forgetfulness he might deviate from it, he
found it necessary frequently to read it, especially before the holding the
Supreme Court, and on the Circuits; and observed, that as his Oath of Office,
as well as his Commission, respected only the common Law and its Proceedings,
and could not admit him, by any possible Construction, to decide or determine
by any other Law; and as the common Law knew not of any such Appeal from a
Verdict to any other Court than that wherein it was taken, he held himself
obliged by his Oath, to refuse any Entry of the Appeal from the Verdict as
offered, and that if he had allowed that Appeal, he should have acted not only
without Authority, but contrary to his Oath; for these Reasons, he could not
allow the Appeal as offered, and which he hoped would appear to be a full
Answer to this Question; adding therewith, if he had sat in a Court of
Admiralty, or any Court from whence Appeals are allowed to a superior
Jurisdiction, he should doubtless upon Motion, have allowed them according to
the Law and Practice of such Courts.

After which, the said Justice was desired to give the Reasons of his Conduct,
with Regard to the Writs referred to in the Question proposed on the 19th of
November last.

To which he answered:

As to the first Writ directed to the Chief Justice, and other Judges of his
Majesty's Supreme Court, commanding them, and every of them, wholly to forbear
Proceeding, or taking any Step further against the said Waddel Cunningham, on
the said Verdict, until the Cause and Merits thereof be heard before the
Governor and Council, etc.

The said Justice acknowledged that he had been duly served with that Writ, and
had compared the Copy thereof with the Original at the Time of Service; but as
there had been no Application made to him in that said Cause, to do any Thing
in Consequence of the said Verdict, since the Service of the said Writ, he had
done nothing in it; but according to what he had heard, it was likely that the
Validity or Legality of that Writ would come into Question in the Supreme
Court; therefore, he was in their Honors Opinion, whether it would be proper
that at present he suspend his Judgment on that Point, as extrajudicial
Opinions ought to be given very sparingly, and with great Caution, if at all,
lest in Consequence of such Opinion, Suits should be promoted, Maintenance
encouraged, and the Judgment of the Justice himself forestalled, and the Public
otherwise receive some Damage.

However, if the Court insisted upon his giving an Opinion on the Legality of
that Writ, he was ready to give it: To which the Court agreed, that the Reason
offered was sufficient, why any Opinion at present on that Writ, should not be
desired.

And then as to the second Writ, reciting the former, and Commanding the Chief
Justice, and other the Judges of the Supreme Court, that they cause all and
every the Proceedings against the said Waddel Cunningham, whether by Bill,
Plaint, or otherwise, whereon the said Verdict was obtained, to be brought
before the Governor and Council, etc.

The said Justice declared, that he had not been served with that Writ, and had
only a Copy of it delivered to him; but understood that the Writ had been
delivered to the Chief Justice, to whom Returns on Writs of Error do properly
belong; and as that Honorable Board had heard the Chief Justice's Reasons, why
he did not make any Return of the Proceedings of the Supreme Court on that
Writ, he also was in their Opinion, whether it was necessary for him to give
his own Opinion concerning that Writ; but this also at present was not desired.
Mr. Justice Livingston then delivered his Reasons in Writing, which were
ordered to be entered, and are as follow:

BEING desired by your Honors, to give you the Reasons of my Conduct, in
refusing to return two Instruments under Seal, directed to the Chief Justice,
and the other Judges of the Supreme Court; by one of which, all Proceedings on
a Verdict obtained by Thomas Forsey, against Waddel Cunningham, are commanded
to be stayed; and by the other, for the more fully enabling the Governor and
Council to determine the Matter of the said Verdict; we are further commanded,
as we will answer the same at our Peril, to Cause all the Proceedings against
the said Waddel Cunningham, to be brought before the Governor and Council.

I beg Leave to observe, that my Conduct might easily be justified, by showing
that I had no Notice of those Letters, till the Chief Justice had refused to
return them, after which no legal Return could be made, for a Writ must ever be
returned by those to whom it is directed. But because I believe your Honors,
in the Request you made us, did not intend so much to call upon us for a
Justification of our Conduct, as to receive the Opinion of the Judges in an
Affair of the greatest Importance, and to be informed whether in our
Explanation of the Instruction on which those Instruments seem to be founded,
we agree with the Chief Justice; I shall with the greatest Willingness
endeavor to answer your Expectations. -- Had the Chief Justice in the least
doubted in what Manner he ought to have acted on the Receipt of these
Instruments, he would have waited till the Return of the other Judges out of
the Country permitted a Consultation; but he thought, and it is by what I can
learn the Opinion of every one of us, that the Case admitted no Dispute.

For it is evident, that the Course of the Law, by which the Prerogatives of
the Crown, and the Rights of the Subject, are defined and secured, must at all
Times be free and uninterrupted; and this is so particularly provided for, that
by the Oath we have taken, we are to deny no Man Right by the King's Letters,
nor none other Man's, but to proceed notwithstanding such Letters. This was not
intended however, to prevent the staying of Execution after Judgment, by Writs
of Error; for the Correction of Errors is not a Delay, but a Furtherance of
Justice.

The first Instrument appears to me, a very great Abuse of the King's Name and
Authority. It commands us in Terms very disrespectful, and not such as are
usual in Writs directed to us, wholly to forbear Proceeding or taking any
further Step against the said Waddel Cunningham, on the Verdict obtained
against him. The Illegality of which will appear from these three Observations.

1st. It commands us not to do that, which the Law, our Duty, and common
Justice to the Parties, oblige us to do; for had a Writ of Error been brought,
we should have still been obliged to proceed to Judgment, and the signing of
the Roll: And though it is allowable to bring Writs of Error before Judgment,
this being the common Practice to prevent Execution, yet the Writ has no Effect
till after Judgment; before that, the Party having received no Injury.

2dly We are to forbear till the Merits of the Verdict are heard before y^^^
Honors; but the Roll being with us, and no proper Method being taken to bring
the Cause before you; this Prohibition might for any Thing which could appear
to the Judges, have been perpetual, to the great Grievance of the Party
concerned, and the Delay of Justice. Therefore the Chief Justice could not have
refused to sign the Roll when it was required, notwithstanding this Prohibition.

3dly. Your Honors are incompetent Judges of the Merits of the Verdict,
because it is impossible to inform you of the Grounds on which the Jury founded
it, since they sometimes are guided by what they know of their own Knowledge;
especially in what relates to the Characters of the Witnesses, of which they
coming from the Neighborhood, are the most proper Judges.

The other Instrument, as well as the first, is directed "to our Chief Justice,
and the other Judges of our Supreme Court, and to all the other Officers of our
said Court, whom it may concern; so that if we had made the Return required, we
must have joined with all the Officers of the Court, or the Return would not
have been good: Whether this be fit or decent, I leave to your Honor's
Consideration.

But waving the Defects of Form, of which there are many others, I shall
observe on the Purport and Design of this Instrument, and show that it was
impossible for us to make such a Return as seems to be required. Previous to
which, I shall make a few Observations on the Instruction on which it is
founded.

The Intention of this Instruction appears to me no more than a Direction to
your Honors, when you should suffer a Writ of Error to be brought, and when
you are to dismiss the Cause. I have frequently read this Instruction on this
Occasion, and it amazes me to find that any Person should think it liable to a
different Explanation. What gives Rise to the Construction on which these
Instruments are founded, is the frequent Use of the Word Appeal; but how
slender a Foundation this is, must appear from the Instructions before the Year
1753, quoted by his Honor the Chief Justice, which direct that you shall allow
Appeals in Cases of Error from the Courts of Law; where the Word Appeal means
nothing else but Writs of Error; and accordingly on all such Appeals, Writs of
Error have been brought. -- After this comes the Instruction in Question, and
says, you shall allow Appeals from the Courts of common Law, only in some
certain Cases, to wit, When the Value of the Thing appealed for exceeds the Sum
of Three Hundred Pounds Sterling. What can this mean, but such an Appeal as was
meant by the former Instruction? and in this Sense it seems to have been
understood by your Honors; otherwise you would not have suffered it to be made
a Question, whether you ought to take Cognizance of a Cause brought before you
by Writ of Error, when the only Objection was, that the Thing appealed for, did
not amount to Three Hundred Pounds Sterling: An Instance of this Kind I was
Witness to last Wednesday; for if the Instruction must be understood to relate
to Appeals in the civil Law Form, Writs of Error would have stood upon the same
Footing they did before this Instruction was given. In this Explanation and
Acceptance of the Word, your Honors are justified by the Use of it in common
Parlance, and though this be not frequent among Lawyers, yet it is some times so
used. Dr. Cowel in his Interpretor, on the Word Appeal, says it is used in the
common, as in the civil Law, to signify the Removal of a Cause from an Inferior
Judge to a Superior; and his Honor the Chief Justice has shown you that it was
so understood by the King in Council. -- The Truth is, both in the civil and in
the common Law, the Word is used in these two Senses, to signify an Accusation,
and an Appeal from a Judgment, but as in the common Law, (which is more
particular in it is Distinctions than any other) there are four Methods of
Appeal from a Judgment, to wit, By Writ of Error, Writ of false Judgment, Writ
of Attaint, and Audita querela, and as these have but little Similiarity with
each other, so that the Law which regards the one, rarely affects the other,
Lawyers have seldom Occasion to use the Word, which signifies the Genus, but
speak generally of one or other of the Species; and the Word Appeal is
appropriated to signify a particular Accusation. But as it is very probable
that this Instruction was not drawn by a Lawyer, and we know it was given for
the Direction Gentlemen not much versed in Law Terms; it is very probable that
it is here used, in the common Acceptance of the Word, to signify any Removal
of a Cause, from one Court to another; and this with more Propriety, as it may
intend to include two of the Species above mentioned, a Writ of Error, and a
Writ of false Judgment; the latter of which is a Remedy against an erroneous
Judgment, in a Court not of Record.

This being the plain Meaning, and certainly the most legal Explanation of this
Instruction, a Writ of Error should have been sent, and then your Honors would
have had the Record before you: By the Instruction you are to send the usual
Writ, and we as Judges dare not obey any other than such as are warranted by
Law. All Others we must look upon as Letters contrived to delay or obstruct the
Course of Justice.

But it may be asked, what Remedy shall the Party have, who is aggrieved by an
unjust Verdict, or an Error in Fact. -- To which the Answer is, he may have a
Writ of Error, to try the Fact in the same Court; or he may have his Writ of
Attaint, or according to the usual Practice, move the Court for a new Trial; or
he may have his Audita querela: All which are competent Remedies according to
the Nature of the Case, without carrying the Matter before another Judicatory:
Because, the Judges are not concerned in any Errors in Fact, but such as may be
made Part of the Record by a Bill of Exceptions, if the Party pleases, and
consequently they still remain indifferent, and therefore an Appeal from their
Judgment is unnecessary.

But what makes it evident, that the King did not intend by the above
Instruction to alter the Law, and the Methods of Proceeding in the Supreme
Court is this, The Instruction is not directed to the Judges of that Court, and
therefore was not intended to regulate their Conduct: They must still determine
and act according to Law, and nothing can be more absurd than to suppose, that
they must have Recourse to a Governor's Instructions, to spell out their Duty
from such Scraps of them as he shall think proper to communicate. Further, it
is evident, that Writs of Error were only meant by this Instruction.

I. Because it directs the Governor to issue a Writ in the Manner which has
been usually accustomed, and this is the usual Writ, and no other has been used.

II. This will bring up all that the Justices of the Supreme Court can send,
and therefore any other Writ must be useless. Nothing else is in our Power at
present, but the Record, and that we are ready to send as soon as it is
properly demanded. In civil Law Courts, the Evidence is reduced to Writing, and
therefore, upon an Appeal, may be transmitted. But send to us as many Letters
as you please, and let them contain Terms still more menacing than those sent
us upon this Occasion, if the Law did not fully justify us in our Refusal to
return them, our Excuse would be Nil dat, quod non habet. The Evidence went to
the Jury, most of it was delivered viva voce, and it is impossible for us to
retain it in our Memories: Should we make Records of all that was said by each
Witness, in every Trial, the Labor would be endless, and the whole Year would
not suffice for the Trial of the Causes which yearly arise, though the Court
should sit every Day, and the Country be obliged to a perpetual Attendance.

But as the Chief Justice has sufficiently shown the Inconveniences which must
attend this new Practice; I shall not enlarge on them, though many others might
be mentioned that would result from altering the Law, in so essential a Point
as Trials by Juries.

I have as much as possible in giving your Honors these Reasons for my
Conduct, avoided saying any Thing the Chief Justice has already observed;
because I would not trespass on your Patience, by an unnecessary Repetition.
But he has been so copious, and has treated the Matter so well, that I have not
been able to avoid sliding into some of them.

Upon the Whole, it appears to me a very unsafe Interpretation of this
Instruction, to say, that his Majesty designed by it to establish such a Court,
as has been altogether unknown to Englishmen, since the glorious Revolution.
That he intended (except in Causes thought too trifling to admit of an Appeal)
to deprive his Subjects in this Colony of their indisputable Right to Trials by
Juries, one of the most ancient Privileges of Englishmen, confirmed to them by
the great Charter, essential to, and the grand Palladium of their Liberties.

Such a Supposition would be extremely injurious to his Majesty, and the Memory
of his Royal Grandfather, in whose Time this Instruction was first given,
especially as the Monarchs of the illustrious House of Hanover, could never be
justly charged with taking a single Step toward infringing the Liberties of
their People.

December 12, 1764. ROBERT R. LIVINGSTON.

At a Council held at Fort George, in the City of New York, on Wednesday the
26th Day of December, 1764. PRESENT, The Hon. CADWALLADER COLDEN, Esquire,
Lieutenant Governor, etc. Mr. WATTS, Mr. WALTON, Mr. DE LANCEY, Mr. READ, Mr.
MORRIS.

Waddel Cunningham, against Thomas Forsey, ON APPEAL.
A Letter from Mr. Justice Jones, dated the 21st Instant, in Answer to the
Question on which he was desired, by Order of this Court of the 12th Instant,
to give his Opinion, was read, and is as follows, viz.

I Have received from Mr. Banyar, the Copy of the Minute of Council, made at
the Council held at Fort-George, in the City of New York, on Wednesday the 12th
Instant; by which I am desired to give my Reasons, why the Appeal moved for in
the Cause of Waddel Cunningham, against Thomas Forsey, in the Court below, was
not allowed; or whether according to the Laws and Constitution of England, an
Appeal from the Verdict of the Jury, on the whole Merits of this Cause, could
lie? In answer to the first Part, I have only to acquaint your Honor, and the
Gentlemen of the Council, that I happened not to be in Court, the last Day of
the Term, when the Appeal was moved for: As to the Second, viz. Whether
according to the Laws and Constitution of England, an Appeal from the Verdict
of the Jury, on the whole Merits of this Cause, could lie? -- In Answer to this
Question, I must declare to your Honor, and the Gentlemen of the Council, that
in all my reading, on the Laws and Constitution of England, I cannot recollect
that I have ever met with any Thing in Favor of such an Appeal. On the
Contrary, the known Rule is, ad Quaestionem Juris respondent Judices, ad
Quaestionem Facti respondent Juratores. The Book entitled The Law of Errors, P.
4, says, it is a known Rule in our Books, a Judgment being once given in Curia
Domini Regis, ought not to be reversed, nor avoided but by Error, or Attaint,
for all Matters of Fact at common Law, are decided by a Jury of Twelve Men,
against whom if they err in their Judgment, the Party grieved may bring
Attaint. The Writ of Attaint lay originally at common Law, and is affirmed with
some Alterations by the Statute of the 23d of HENRY the Eighth, C. the 3d; and
in Wood's Institute of the Laws of England, P. 637, is thus described; A Writ
of Attaint lies against a Jury, and is to examine whether a Jury of twelve Men
gave a false Verdict, or contrary to Evidence, in a Court of Record upon Issue
joined: That upon Conviction of the Jury, the Judgment following upon it may be
reversed. This appears to me to be the only Method formerly used to set aside
or avoid the Verdict of a Jury; but as Wood says, in the same Place, is now
almost out of Use; and instead thereof, Motions are usually made for new Trials
when a Verdict is given contrary to Evidence; which seems to be the present
Practice in the Courts at Westminster, and is the Practice of the Supreme Court
here: In removing a Cause from one Court to another for Matter of Error, the
common Method I take to be by Writ of Error, though sometimes by Certiorari, and
the Proceedings on such Writs, are in Relation to the Errors of the Judges, in
Matters of Law; and are not to have Respect to the Verdict of the Jury, as
appears to me from the Statute of the 27th of ELIZABETH, C. 8th, how erroneous
Judgments in the King's Bench, upon certain personal Actions may be redressed;
where Verdicts are expressly excepted^ -- I therefore give it as my Opinion,
that according to the Laws and Constitution of England, the Appeal mentioned in
the Question could not lie.

DAVID JONES.


At a Council held at Fort George, in the City of New York, on Wednesday the
9th Day of January, 1765. PRESENT, The Hon. CADWALLADER COLDEN, Esquire,
Lieutenant Governor, etc. Mr. WATTS, Mr. WALTON, Mr. DE LANCEY, Mr. READ, Mr.
MORRIS.

Waddel Cunningham. against Thomas Forsey, ON APPEAL.
THE Reasons of the Gentlemen of the Council, why the Appeal in this Cause
cannot be received; as also farther Reasons of Mr. Justice Livingston, in
Support of his Opinion already delivered in this Cause, were, read.

At a Council held at Fort George in the City of New York, on Friday the 11th
Day of January, 1765. PRESENT, The Hon. CADWALLADER COLDEN, Esquire, Lieutenant
Governor, etc. Mr. WATTS, Mr. WALTON, Mr. DE LANCEY, Earl of STIRLING, Mr.
READ, Mr. MORRIS.

Waddel Cunningham, against Thomas Forsey, ON APPEAL.
HIS Honor the Lieutenant Governor required the Opinion of the Council on the
following Question.

Whether by the 32d Instruction, the King has directed his Governor to permit
and allow Appeals in all civil Causes, from the Courts of common Law within
this Province; and whether his Majesty has by the same Instruction, directed
his Governor and Council to hear and determine such Appeals?

Whereupon the Council declared, that as the King's Judges, and the most able
Council in the Law in the Province, have given their Opinion, that no other
than an Appeal on Error, can lie by this Instruction; they are unanimously of
Opinion, no other Appeal than on Error, is the Intention or Meaning of the
Crown by this Instruction, and that they cannot take Cognizance of any other
Appeal.

His Honor the Lieutenant Governor declared his Dissent from the said Opinion,
and signified he would give his Reasons for such his Dissent to his Majesty's
Ministers.

Whereupon a Motion was made, that the Reasons offered by the Council in this
Cause, on Wednesday last, should be entered, which were ordered to be entered
accordingly, and are in the Words following:

Waddel Cunningham, Claiming to be Appellant against Thomas Forsey.
HIS Majesty's Council for the Province of New York, as constituting with the
Governor or Commander in Chief for the Time being, the Court established by his
Majesty's royal Predecessors, and referred to in his present Majesty's 32d
Instruction; conceiving it to be a Question of the utmost Importance, whether
by Virtue of that, or any precedent royal Instruction, they are authorized in
Conjunction with his Honor the Lieutenant Governor, to hold Cognizance of this
Cause, on an Appeal upon the Merits, from the Verdict of a Jury?

On this momentous Topic, the Lieutenant Governor, and the Council, have taken
the utmost Pains to form a Judgment, by which Justice may be distributed to the
Subject, consistent with the known and established Laws of the Land, and the
true Sense and Meaning of the royal Instructions.

In this Veiw, as it is a Case of the first Impression, the Court unanimously
called upon the Judges of the Supreme Court, and several Counsel of the best
Reputation in their Profession, who have all concurred in Opinion, that we are
not authorized either by Law or by any of the royal Instructions, in several
Instances so evidently grounded on the Laws of England, to hold jurisdiction of
this Cause, as it is now brought before us. The Court has besides those Aids,
given every Advantage to a Point of so great Moment, which the most mature
Consideration could afford: And that it may appear upon what Reasons his
Majesty's Council have the Unhappiness to differ in Opinion from his Honor the
Lieutenant Governor, they beg Leave to consider the Reasons urged by him in
Favor of the Appeal, as it is now brought before us; and to subjoin such
Answers to those Reasons, as it is conceived the Law will warrant.

His Majesty's Council humbly hope, that they cannot better Recommend
themselves to his royal Approbation, than by making the Law of the Land the
Rule of their Conduct, in the Execution of every Part of the important Trust
committed to them; and flatter themselves, that their Dissension in Sentiment
from his Honor, as it is founded on the clearest Law, will be a full
Demonstration of their Fidelity to the best of Princes.

In this material Division in the Sentiments of this Court; his Majesty's
Council are of Opinion, that his Honor's Reasons will, if literally
incorporated into this their Answer, appear in a View, the most advantageous of
which they are capable: And as we with the utmost Willingness submit the
Reasons of our Judgment to the Consideration of those, who by Law are invested
with a Power to correct our Errors, and control our Determinations, we flatter
ourselves that his Honor would not decline the same Tribunal; and as we
presume the Law must at last determine upon this Difference, so also we
conceive that such Determination can best be made upon a fair State of the
Contrast.

In the Pursuit of this Method, his Honor's Reasons will be reduced into as
many different Paragraphs, as their Subject Matter naturally dictates; to each
of which his Majesty's Council will offer such Answers, as their Duty to their
Prince, and the Laws of the Land clearly and undeniably suggest. The first
Paragraph is as follows:

An Error I conceive runs through all the Arguments I have heard on this Subject,
in not distinguishing between the Laws and the Execution of them: The executory
judicial Powers are certainly in the Crown: The King is the Fountain of
Justice: The Power of erecting Courts of Justice is consequently in the Crown.
The King may give them such Modes of Proceeding, such Extent of Authority and
Jurisdiction, as he thinks most proper for obtaining Justice, in the Countries
where such Courts are erected, suited to the Circumstance of the Country; and
it may be done without the least Alteration of the Law, by which such Courts
must Judge. This is evident in our Colonies; every Colony has different Courts
and Modes of Proceeding from those in other Colonies; and all of them different
from the Courts in England; yet the same common Law has its full Force in all
of them. In Answer to this we observe:

That we think the Distinction which his Honor supposes between the Laws and
the Execution of them, in the Sense urged in his Rersons, is groundless. For
though we agree with him, that the Law must essentially and unalterably be the
same, unless changed by legislative Act, (which the Distinction taken by him
necessarily supposes) and that judicial Powers are in Supposition of Law in the
Crown, that the King is the Fountain of Justice, and the Power of erecting
Courts is in the Crown: Yet we beg Leave to deny his Inference, that the King
may give them such Modes of Proceeding, such Extent of Authority and
Jurisdiction as he thinks proper, as well as that such Modes may be introduced
as have hitherto been unknown, without the least Alteration of the Law, by
which such Court must Judge.

For, 1st, we conceive that though the Crown has Authority to erect and
constitute Courts, 6 Rep. 11. -- Wood's Inst. 447. Vin. tit. Prerogative, P.
561, No. 8.
yet every Court must have such a Jurisdiction, and must be so modelled in its
essential Parts, as to have a known and common Law Jurisdiction.

2dly. Wherever such new modelled Courts are essentially different from those
known in the Law, the Law must necessarily and of Course be altered; as the
Maxim wisely speaks, Mutata Forma prope interemitur Substantia rei; for
Instance, were the Lieutenant Governor's Supposition just, that his Majesty's
32d Instruction did intend that this Court as a Court of Appeals, should have
Cognizance of Matters of Fact, already settled and determined by a Jury, it
would alter the Law in the grand and essential Point of Trials by Juries, Law
Er. 4. -- Cro. Ja. 335, 336 -- Trials per pais, 6th Ed. 227, 228. Vaug^an 148,
149.
whose Verdicts by the Laws of England, are the only Means by which Facts can
be determined, and would amount to a Reversal of the common Law Maxim, ad
Quaestionem Juris respondet Judices, ad Quaestionem Facti respondent Juratores.

3dly. Though different Methods of Proceeding in the different Colonies, are
rather assumed by them than warranted by Law, and yet the principal Difference
between them is perhaps in Matters of Form, (in which all the various Courts of
Law in England do also differ); but the essential Parts of every common Law
Court, to wit, a Jury to determine the Facts, and Judges to speak the Law, are
to be found, in all the Courts of Law of every Colony.

His Honor in the next Paragraph observes, that In all the Colonies Appeals to
the King lie -- this is essential to the Prerogative of the Crown, without
which the Dependence of the Colonies cannot be preserved. The preserving the
Dependence of all the Dominions of the Crown, the Parliament of Great Britain
evidently had in View, in the Act of the 6th of GEORGE the 1st. for the better
securing the Dependency of Ireland; but as this Matter is of great Importance,
I shall consider it more distinctly.

His Majesty's Council observe on this Paragraph, that the Word Appeal is used
without settling its Definition: If by it is intended an Appeal upon Matters of
Fact, they cannot help observing it is a Petitio Principii. That in all the
Colonies an Appeal in the confined Sense of the Word (and in the only proper
Sense in which it is known in the Law of England, to wit, from the Judgment of
the Judges in Matters of Law, will lie to the King as present in Supposion of
Law) in all his Courts, cannot be doubted. And in this Sense an Appeal is
clearly both essential to the Prerogative of the Crown, and absolutely
necessary for maintaining the Dependence of the Colonies, as the inferior upon
Great Britain, as the Superior Dominion; and these indeed are the only Reasons
why an Appeal in any Sense of the Word will lie. For thus the greatest Lawyers
reason on the Subject.

As such Dominions are not Parcel of, but Dominions dependent on Great Britain,
no remedial Writs between Subject and Subject will lie, from the superior to
the inferior Dominion; as they do from the Courts of Westminster to any of the
Counties of England, except Writs of Error. But if the Errors of Judges in the
dependent Dominion might not be corrected by some Judicatory in the Kingdom on
which it depends, these Consequences would follow, to wit.

1st. That the Law appointed or permitted to such inferior Dominion, might be
insensibly changed within itself, without the Assent of the Dominion superior.

2dly. That Judgments might be then given to the Disadvantage or lessening of
the Superiority; which cannot be reasonable: and to make the Superiority to be
only of the King, but not of the Crown of Great Britain, as King James once
would have it in a Case concerning Ireland.

Therefore it necessarily follows, that Writs of Error into all Dominions
belonging to Great Britain, upon the ultimate Judgments there given into the
King's Courts of England, to reverse or affirm Judgments, are necessary to
support a Dependence, Vaughan's Repo. 401.402.
and are the only Writs that lie concerning Property between Subject and
Subject.

But that Appeals upon Matters of Fact, are not necessary to support the
Dependence in Question, is obvious at first View, for whether a Question of
Fact be determined between Subject and Subject, either in the Affirmative or
Negative, cannot possibly affect such Dependence.

As to the Statute for securing the Dependence of Ireland, we cannot conceive
how his Honor should think of applying it to the present Case; for,

1st. It contains not a single Word in Relation to the Colonies, and therefore
we cannot see the Propriety of the Assertion, that in the passing of that Act,
the Parliament of Great Britain, had in View the preserving the Dependence of
all the Dominions of the Crown.

2dly. That Act as far as it provides for securing the Dependence of Ireland,
directs nothing more than that the House of Lords in Ireland shall not have any
Jurisdiction to judge, affirm or reverse, any Judgment, Sentence, or Decree,
made or given there, or in other Words, that they were not a Court of Appeals,
either in Law or Equity. The Statute therefore cannot be understood to have
intended a Change or Alteration in the Law, by giving the Subject in Ireland a
Right of appealing from the Verdict of a Jury. In the next Paragraph his Honor
observes, that,

By the Word Appeal in Law is meant the removing the Cause from an inferior to
a superior Judicatory: By Writ of Error the Cause is not removed, but some
disputed Points in Law are determined, and which may have no Relation to the
Merits of the Cause. -- Appeals to the King in Person were by the common Law,
both before and after the Conquest, and are confirmed by Magna Charta, nulli
vendemus, nulli negabimus, nec deferemus Justitiam, relates especially to
Appeals, in which the King was Judge; for to sell, deny, or delay Justice, can
have no reference to any Person, other than a Judge: The Complaint was, that
large Sums of Money were demanded for Writs of Appeal, and at other Times they
were denied or delayed. To remedy these Complaints, this Clause was made Part
of the great Charter; thereby the Subject's Right to Appeals is confirmed, not
taken away.

We agree with the Lieutenant Governor, that by an Appeal in Law, is meant the
Removal of a Cause from an inferior to a superior Judicatory.

But in Opposition to his Opinion, we beg Leave to show in a few Words, that by
Writ of Error the Cause and its Merits are removed, for the Record itself which
contains the whole Pleadings between the Parties, the Issue, the Verdict, and
the Judgment is removed; and the Errors essential in the Law in either Part of
the Record are corrected, and the Judgment in the Whole is either reversed or
affirmed. -- Thus then the Merits in Law arising from the Matters of Fact,
contained in the Record, must necessarily receive their Determination in a
Court of Errors; nor can it justly be supposed, that constitutional Courts have
been erected with Power to lay their Hands on the Proceedings in a Cause only
to furnish an Opportunity for handling some disputed Points in Law, which have
no Relation to the Merits of the Cause: Every Error therefore, which is
corrigible by Law, must, in Supposition of Law, be essential to the Merits of
the Cause; otherwise Writs of Error, instead of being constitutional Remedies,
would necessarily and essentially contravene those Words of the great Charter
nulli negabimus, nulli differemus Justitiam vel Rectum. Thus then we conceive,
that the Distinction set up by his Honor between Appeals and Writs of Error,
is groundless; and that a Writ of Error is an Appeal upon the Merits in Law;
Salk. 511. Comb. 276. -- ^ Lord Ray, 1447. -- Hal^^ History com. Law, 48. --
Id. 150.^1. Sp^rsim,
in which Sense the Word Appeal is clearly understood in the Books, as may be
shown from a great Number of Authorities.

But as his Honor has been pleased in this Paragraph to furnish a Comment on
the Chapter of Magna Charta, a Passage from which we have mentioned, we must
take the Liberty to oppose it with another Comment on the same Words, given by
the great Lord Coke, which clearly shows, 1st. That this Chapter cannot concern
the King's Personal Administration of Justice on Appeals upon Matter of Fact,
but the Administration of Justice by his known and ordinary Courts; in all
which, the King, though not in Fact, yet in Supposition of Law is present, which
is the Reason that the King himself, in the Words of the Charter, declares, he
will not do what he intends his Court shall not; 2 Inst. 46.
And thus speaks the great Oracle of the Law; no Man shall be condemned at the
King's Suit, either before the King in his Bench, where the Pleas are Coram
Rege, (and so are the Words, nec super eum ibimus to be understood) nor before
any other Commissioner or Judge whatsoever; and so are the Words, nec super eum
mittemus to be understood, but by the Judgment of his Peers, that is his
Equals, and according to the Law of the Land; and from this Paraphrase the
Author says, the Sense of the other Clause; we will deny, sell, or refuse
Justice to no Man, is distinctly understood: And upon the same Clause he
further observes thus; Ib. 55.
This is spoken in the Person of the King, who in Judgment of Law in all his
Courts is present, and repeating these Words, Nulli vendemus, etc. Or,

2dly. These Words as they have been expounded by other Acts of Parliament
intend that, by no Means common Right or common Law should be disturbed or
delayed, Ib. 56:
not though it be commanded under the great Seal (as in the present Case) or by
privy Seal, Order, Writ, Letters, Message, or Commandment whatsoever, either
from the King or any other; and that the Justices shall proceed (as in this
Case they have done) as if no such Writs, Letters, Order, Message, or other
Commandment were come to them.

And thus it appears clearly from the best Comment on the Subject, that his
Honor in applying this Chapter of Magna Charta, to the supposed Appeal, in
which the King was the Judge, has misunderstood the Text: We are therefore at a
Loss to discover from whence his Honor has collected the Reason upon which he
alleges this Chapter of the great Charter was grounded, (to wit) That large
Sums of Money were demanded for Writs of Appeal; and at other Times, they were
denied or delayed, or that this Clause was made Part of the great Charter, to
confirm the Subject's Right to Appeals.

Before we proceed to a particular Consideration of the rest of his Honor's
Reasons, it will be necessary to extract and refute a latent Distinction which
implicitly runs through most of them: It is this, That though the Colonies are
entitled to the Ancient common Law of England, as it stood before the Time of
the great Charter, yet none of the Laws which took Place since that important
Era, do extend to the Colonies.

This Distinction we conceive may be refuted by observing:

1st. That it has been solemnly adjudged before the King in Council, that in
all Colonies the Subjects carry with them the Laws of England, and therefore as
well those that took Place after, Salk. 411. 2 Mod. 47.
as those which were in Force before the passing of the great Charter. -- 2
Peer W.

2dly. That by the Statute of 7 and 8, W. III. the Laws of England, as they
then were, and as they should appear to be thereafter, are made the Standards
of Law in the Colonies; as,

3dly. They are also by one of his present Majesty's Instructions, in which the
Gov^^^or or Commander in Chief is directed to take Care that no Man's Life,
Members, Freehold, or Goods, be taken away or harmed, otherwise than by
established and known Laws, not repugnant to, but as much as may be, agreeable
to the Laws of England, pursuant to which Adjudication, Statute, and
Instruction,

4thly. The Laws of England in themselves, and in the Manner of administering
them, have been the Measure of Right and Wrong between Subject and Subject in
this Colony, from its first Settlement, down to the present Day; and will
doubtless be maintained as such, agreeable to the Coronation Oath established
by the Statute of the 1 W. and M. Statute 1, Chap. 6, Sec. 2. according to
which, the King swears to govern the People of England, and the Dominions
thereunto belonging according to the Statutes in Parliament agreed on, and the
Laws and Customs of the same.

Notwithstanding which, the Lieutenant Governor evidently proceeds upon the
abovementioned Distinction, in his next Paragraph, which is in these Words:

At the Time of the great Charter, all the Property of the Nation was
determined in the Hundred Court, County, or Sheriff's Court, and Baron's Court;
and if the Party could not obtain Justice in those Courts, he might appeal to
the King, who would do him Justice -- To do Justice was also Part of the
ancient Coronation Oath.

Upon which we observe:

1st. That if by the Law of England no such Appeal as he maintains did lie in
England, at the Time of the Settlement of this Colony, it could not for the
Reasons we have assigned ever lie here. --

2dly. We must take the Liberty to observe, that the Lieutenant Governor when
he asserted, that at the Time of the great Charter, all the Property of the
Nation was determined in the Hundred Counts, etc. must have forgot the great
Courts at Westminster, and the Justices in Air, for to suppose that the Courts
at Westminster and in Air, were then in Being, and without Employment, is
really difficult; that however, the King's Bench and common Pleas existed
before the great Charter, appears from 11 Chapter of the Charter itself, which
runs thus, Communia Placita non sequuntur Curiam nostram sed tenentur in aliquo
certo Loco: The same Point is manifested by the next Chapter, which runs thus,
Justitiarii de Banco, that is, 2 Inst. page 21. etc.
the Justices of the Court of common Pleas are expressly named: as also by my
Lord Coke's Comments upon those Chapters. And with Respect to all the four
great Courts at Westminster, 10 Ed. 4 fo. 53 8 Rep. pref. 16
it was adjudged so early as in the Reign of Edward IV. that they were all by
the common Law. In the Time of R. I. Pleas of Land were indifferently held in
the King's Bench and common Pleas; Hales history of com. law, 146.
and though in the Reign of his Father, King H. II. the Administration of common
Justice had by the Practice of the Subject, who was apt to seek Justice nearer
Home than in the Courts of Westminster, been almost wholly drawn to the County
Courts, Hundred Courts, and Courts Baron; yet Justices in Air were in that
Prince's Reign appointed by Act of Parliament, who were Missi per singulos
Angliae Comitatus, and juraverunt quod cuilibet Jus suum conservarent illaesum.

And that the Kings of England never did since the Era, that is often Times,
though unjustly called the Norman Conquest, 4 Inst. 73.
administer Justice in Person, is evident from a Passage in the ancient Book,
called the Mirror of Justice, which contains the Law as it stood above 1200
Years ago, and has in it a Passage in old French, which translated runs thus:
the Kings used to do right in Person to all the Subjects, or by their Chief
Justices, but now they Decree Justice by their Justices Errant Commissioned for
all Pleas; and my Lord Coke, Mir. Chap. 2, ^.
in extracting the Substance of this ancient Author in his Preface to his 3d
Rep. says, in this Book in Effect appears the whole Frame of the ancient
common Law of this Realm; and then proceeds to Instance the Truth of this
Observation, by exhibiting from the Mirror a Sketch of the Authority of all the
common Law Courts; among which are the Four great Courts at Westminster, and
particularly the Court of King's Bench, of which he speaks thus; The King's
Bench, Chief Justices holding Pleas of the King, and soon after the Office of
Chief Justice belonged to redress, and punish by Writ, the wrongful Judgments,
Wrongs and Errors of other Justices, and to Cause to come before the King, the
Parties and the Record, etc. that is before the King, because he always sat in
Person in his Bench; though the Judges rendered the Judgments: And from this
Passage it appears to a Demonstration, that the King's Bench before the
Conquest, enjoyed the Power of correcting by Writ, that is by Writ of Error,
the wrongful Judgments and Errors of all other Courts; which in truth appear to
be the only Appeal, (except in criminal Matters, where the Word is used in a
different Sense) that was ever known in the Law.

In the Reign of King John, the Business of the inferior Courts gradually
diminished, and the Business of Moment came to the great Courts; Hales Hist.
Com. Law, 15^.
these gave a ready Far to Writs of false Judgment, which was the Appeal the
Law allowed from erroneous Judgments in the County, and other inferior Courts;
and by these Writs, a Variety of which may be found in the Register, nothing
but the Record of the Cause which was made for the Purpose, was sent up: And
these must be the Appeals alluded to by his Honor; which however appear to be
in the Nature of Writs of Error; and were used to bring up the Judgments of the
inferior Courts into the Courts at Westminster; where the Errors in Law, in the
Judgments of those lower Judicatories were corrected by the King's Judges, and
not by the King himself. --

But it may not be amiss to take Notice here, of what the Lieutenant Governor
says on the Subject of the Court of Hustings, or the Mayor's Court of London.
-- In the Mayor and Sheriff's Court, commonly called the Hustings, where all
the Property of the Citizens is determined, a Writ of Error does not lie, but
an Appeal: In Consequence of which, the King appoints Commissioners, who are to
do full and speedy Justice. They do not only reverse, or affirm the Judgment of
the Hustings, but they give such Judgment as the Hustings ought to have given.
The Jurisdiction of the Hustings is by common Law; and Writs of Error do not
lie in any Court whose Jurisdiction is by common Law, but an Appeal does.

Upon which we observe, that the Lieutenant Governor is again mistaken in
supposing that an Appeal lies from the Hustings to Commissioners in Matters of
Fact, and that those Commissioners do full and speedy Justice upon the whole
Merits, both in Fact and Law. On the Contrary, it will appear from the Perusal
of the Books on the Subject, that they act merely as a Court of Errors, in
either reversing, or affirming the Judgment of the Hustings. New. Not. Brev.
53. H.
Fitzherbert asserts, that if an erroneous Judgment be given in the Courts
before the Sheriff of London only, the Party grieved shall have a Writ of Error
out of Chancery, directed unto the Sheriffs, to bring the Record before the
Mayor and Aldermen, in the Hustings of London; and there the Record shall be
examined; and if there be Error, they shall reverse the Record there, by the
Custom of the said City: And if erroneous Judgment be given in the Hustings in
London, Idem. 55 E. 4 Inst. 247.248.
before the Mayor and the Sheriffs there, then the Party who will sue to
reverse the Judgment, shall come into the Chancery, and there sue a
Commission," directed to Persons to examine the Record and Process, and the
Errors, and thereupon to do Right. New. Not. Brev. 55. G.
And a Man shall have a Commission to examine the Errors in a Judgment given in
the Hustings in the Time of another King, and in the Time of another Mayor, and
other Sheriffs. And in the same Chapter, the Author speaks repeatedly of suing
Writs of Error, and Commissions to remove the Judgments of the Mayor and
Sheriffs of London, and of correcting the Errors of their Judgments. And from
the several Forms of Writs and Commissions of Error to the Hustings, contained
in that Chapter, it appears clearly that they are essentially and substantially
the same as Writs of Error in other Cases, and to other Courts. And we suppose
that the Lieutenant Governor's Mistake on this Subject, proceeded from the Use
of the Word Commission, instead of Writ, though in Fact and Truth, every Writ of
Error is more properly a Commission than a Writ. Law of Errors 2 and 3.


His Honor in the Sixth Paragraph observes, that,

From the Nature of the Courts, which existed by common Law, it is evident,
that the Distinction now in Use, between Writs of Error and Appeals, could not
then exist; because there was no such Distinction then, between the Jury and
the Judges, as now in the Courts of Westminster. By common Law the Jury was
absolutely Judge of both Law and Fact. This is still evident in the Sheriff's
Court, Coroner's Court, and in the House of Peers: Appeals must extend to the
whole Merits, where there was no Distinction between the Verdict of the Jury,
and the Judgment of the Court, as it is evident by common Law there is not.
Upon which his Majesty's Council Remark, that,

Proofs are not wanting in the Books to show that Juries were in Use, even
among the ancient Britons; that as Juries now do, so did they of all Times try
the Matters of Fact; that as they r^w are in some Sense Judges of Law, where
they take upon themselves to find general Verdicts, so were they anciently; and
by the ancient common Law they were no more Judges of Fact solely, than they
now are: The Evidence formerly was never reduced to Writing any more than it
now is, to wit, on Demurrers and special Verdicts; in which the Law was always
reserved for the Determination of the Court; and the Maxim, ad Quaestionem
Juris respondent Judices, ad Quaestionem Facti respondent Juratores, is an
ancient common Law Maxim: To suppose therefore that there is now a Distinction
between Appeals and Writs of Error, which did not anciently exist, appears to
us altogether groundless; the Truth is, no such Distinction now does, or ever
did exist. Nor do we conceive, that the Instances adduced from this Sheriff's
Court, Coroner's Court, and House of Peers, are at all pertinent: In the two
first, Facts are settled in the same Manner as they are in the Courts of
Westminster, to wit, by a Jury; and in the House of Peers, nothing but Matters
of Law, except where the Appeal is from the Equity Side of the Chancery, or
Exchequer, in which the Proceedings by the Law of the Land are to be in the
Pretorian Method, and the Evidence reduced to Writing, are ever determined
there; it being below their Dignity to try Matters of Fact. Salk. 511.


His Majesty's Council conceive, that his Honor is mistaken in his Opinion,
that Writs of Error were introduced into the Courts of Westminster, long after
the great Charter. The Paragraph in which this is contained runs thus:

Writs of Error I have Reason to believe were introduced into the Courts of
Westminster, long after the Time of the Great Charter -- Courts are known to
assume Powers, which did not originally belong to them. -- Judge Coke says,
boni Judicis est amp^iure Jurisdictionem. If these assumed Powers are found
beneficial, they become confirmed by Usage; such are Writs of Error: But as
they are not by common Law, they are confined to the Courts, where such Usage
prevails. For this Reason, and their being useful they were extended by Acts of
Parliament to other Courts and Places, where such Usage did not prevail. -- The
Necessity of an Act of Parliament, sufficiently shows, that they are not by
common Law: This is made more evident by what I think is universally agreed,
with Respect to the Islands of Jersey and Guernsey, where Judicial Trials are
by Jury; that in Case any Party is aggrieved by any Sentence, or Judgment,
there he is to have his Remedy by Appeal, to the King in his Privy Council; and
that Judgments are not to be examined by Writs of Error. The Reason given is,
that though these Islands are Parcel of the Dominions of the Crown of England,
they are not Parcel of the Realm of England. The like Observation is made with
Respect to the Isle of Man.

Upon this Paragraph his Majesty's Council Remark, that, they have already
shown, that Writs of Error were by the common Law; and as a further Proof,
refer to the Register of Writs, which was undoubtedly compiled before the
Conquest: This Book, by which most of the Writs still in Use are framed,
contains a great Variety of Writs of Error: The Power of trying Errors has not
therefore been assumed, but belongs to the King's Courts, from Time Immemorial;
nor can the Maxim boni Judicis est ampliare Jurisdictionem, mean any Thing more
than that Judges are in the Distribution of Justice, to exercise every possible
Power, which the Law will warrant. And as the Correction of Errors is by the
common Law, it extends to all Times and to every common Law Court; the
Distinction therefore, that Writs of Error do not lie in the Colonies, which is
grounded on the other baseless Distinction, that nothing but the ancient common
Law of England extends to the Colonies, must also appear to be without
Foundation; and the supposed Necessity of an Act of Parliament, to give Writs
of Error in certain Cases, which is in evident Allusion to the 31st of El.
Chap. I, whereby the Exchequer is authorized to hear and correct the Errors of
the King's Bench, is entirely groundless; for nothing is clearer than that
before that Statute, Writs of Error did lie from the King's Bench, to the House
of Lords: The Statute therefore was not to give a Writ of Error where it did
not lie before; but to carry a Case of Errors through the Exchequer to the House
of Lords, instead of removing it immediately to that august and final Tribunal,
as was the Practice by the common Law.

Nor does the Argument in Support of the Position, that Writs of Error did not
lie at the common Law, receive any Weight from the Instance assigned,
concerning Appeals from Jersey and Guernsey; for my Lord Hale, from whose
History of the common Law, his Honor has probably collected this Instance,
unfolds the Reasons upon which an Appeal lies from these Islands, to the King
in privy Council, which are these; those Islands were Part of the Duchy of
Normandy; by the Laws of which Duchy, an Appeal did lie to the Duke in his
Council; and as after the Annexation of that Duchy to the Crown, the Laws of
Normandy continued unaltered, and the King of England, was Duke of Normandy,
the Appeal must of Course be to him in Privy Council.

Besides, this Instance does not show that a Writ of Error, did not lie to
those Islands, but the Contrary is rather to be supposed; because they had
Trials by Juries, and therefore it is to be presumed, that an Appeal from their
Courts, lies in the same Cases as in the Courts of England, to wit, on Errors
in Law only; in short, my Lord Hale, clearly intends to show the Reason, why an
Appeal lies from those Islands to the King in Council, and not the Nature of
that Appeal, which must be presumed, if the same Word, in the same Author, is
to be understood in the same Sense, to mean in Case of Error only: Besides, as
a Proof of this Matter it is certain, that a Writ of Error did lie to the
King's Courts at Calais, which was not Parcel of the Dominions of England, but
a distinct Dominion, dependent on the Crown of Great Britain: Vin. Tit. Error,
P. 484, No, 22, 4, Inst. 282: As to the Isle of Man, it was anciently an
independent Kingdom, governed by its own Laws, which have never been changed to
this Day; and in that Island, a Writ of Error is not known in their Law.

But as a Proof, that whatever the Laws of a dependent State may be, they are
not to be changed by Authority of the Crown; it appears in the Books, that the
Crown can only appoint Judges by Commission, to redress Injustice and Wrong,
according to the Law and Justice of the Isle. 4. Inst. 285.

The Three next Paragraphs, as they concern the Charters of some of the
neighboring Colonies, we shall take the Liberty to consider as one; they are
these;

In the Charter unto William Penn, of Pennsylvania, the following Clause is
inserted, saving and reserving to us, our Heirs, and Successors, the Receiving,
Hearing and Determining of the Appeal or Appeals, of all or any Person or
Persons, of, in, or belonging to the Territories aforesaid, or touching any
Judgment to be there made or given.

By the Charter of the Massachusetts Bay, the King has reserved to his Subjects
there, the Right of appealing to the King in his Privy Council, from the
Sentence or Judgment of any Court, or Judicatory in that Province.

In Connecticut, as I am informed, Appeals to the King are not reserved by
their Charter; nevertheless the Subject there on his Petition to the King,
obtains the Benefit of an Appeal by the King's Mandatory Writ; Obedience to
which has never been refused.

Upon these Instances his Majesty's Council remark,

1st. That the Law of the Land, and not the Practice of other Colonies is to be
their Guide; nor can such Practice conclude the Subject's Right in this Colony.
It is a known Maxim, Actus me invito factus, non est Actus meus.

2dly. That though the Charters of Pennsylvania and Massachusetts, reserve to the
King the Right of hearing Appeals, it must be in such Manner as the common Law
will authorize, that is in Cases of Error only; and therefore nothing can be
argued from the Practice of those Colonies. If they as well as Connecticut,
have gone into Mistakes in Law, their Conduct can be no Rule for us, Fortior
enim est Dispositio Legis quam Hominis; and we have his Honor's Declaration at
another Time on this Occasion, that Errors when discovered, ought not to be the
Ground of future Proceedings, but must be corrected. With Respect to the
Massachusetts and Connecticut, it is well known that they have, by Laws of
their own making, and in evident Deviation from the Laws of England, in the
Construction of their Courts, given them (...) Power of Appeal in Matters of
Fact, from the highest to the lowest: It is not therefore to be wondered at,
that in those Colonies, as well as in others, (in which we conceive the Law of
England is not so well understood, nor has been so strictly adhered to as in
this Colony) they have run into the erroneous Practice of appealing on Matters
of Fact, to the King in Privy Council. And we cannot but be of Opinion, that
his Majesty's Lieutenant Governor and Council, of this Colony, in the Execution
of their important Trust, ought in Obedience to his Majesty's Instructions, and
the Statute of the 7. and 8. of W. 3. to be guided by the known and established
Laws of England, and not by the uncertain, and perhaps groundless Proceedings
in other Colonies.

We cannot therefore agree with the Lieutenant Governor, when he says, in the
next Paragraph.

It is evident from what has been said, that no Writ of Error, can by the
common Law lie in the Colonies, because they are not Parcel of the Realm of
England. No Act of Parliament has extended Writs of Error to the Colonies. The
King has not given Authority to the Governor and Council of this Province, to
hear and determine on Writs of Error -- but has given them Authority to hear
and determine on Appeals; their Authority is therefore clearly confined to
Appeals, by which the whole Cause is brought before them, in order that if need
be, it may be transmitted by farther Appeal, to the King in his Privy Council.
-- By what Authority, is the Governor and Council of New York, appointed Judges
in Error? I can see none -- If neither Error nor Appeal lies, the Supreme Court
becomes uncontrollable. In Opposition to which, his Majesty's Council are of
Opinion, that Writs of Error did lie by the common Law, and that no other
Writs, than Writs of Error, would lie by the common Law, from the inferior
Dominion; because the Latter is not Parcel of, but depends on the Former; and
that they lie ex Necessitate, because the Law may not be changed, nor the
Prince govern the inferior Dominion, which he holds Jure Coronae, otherwise
than by the Laws of the superior Dominion: That the Power of this Court, does
not alone depend on his present most graciour Majesty's Royal Instructions, but
was conferred in its original Constitution, by the Instructions of his royal
Progenitors, and Predecessors, by which we are expressly and only authorized to
take Cognizance, of Cases of Error. That the Court being thus constituted, no
Writ was necessary to be expressly directed, by royal Instructions, for Quando
aliquid mandatur, mandatur et omne, per quod pervenitur ad illud.

That his present Majesty's Instruction, has a necessary Relation to former
Instructions, because it concerns a Court, which had a Being before the issuing
of the present Instruction; and because it has a necessary Reference to the
ancient Practice of this Court, in directing the usual Writ to be issued; that
this Court has no Authority to hear, and determine on Appeals not known in the
Law; and by Writ of Error, the Judges of the Supreme Court will be effectually
controuled; because by the Law of the Land, they can only err in Matters of
Law, upon which either a Demurrer, special Verdict, or Bill of Exception, will
in all Cases furnish this Court in the Exercise of its proper Jurisdiction,
with every Opportunity of correcting their Mistakes in Law.

But as his Honor has thought proper, to consider more particularly what was
offered by those Judges in Construction of his Majesty's 32d Instruction, it
will be proper to set forth the Paragraphs on that Head, and give them a
particular Answer, they run in these Words:

What has been said I think sufficient -- But to remove all Difficulties I can
on this Head, I shall next consider the Construction, which the Judges of the
Supreme Court have put on the King's Instruction; for their Purpose they have
gone back to preceding Instructions; though I think that no Argument from thence
can be conclusive. It is said that the Words, in Case of Errors, being added in
the former Instructions, after the Word Appeal, the Sense of this last Word
must be restrained to show, that the Design of the Instruction is to confine
the Governor and Council to the Rules observed on Writs of Error. But in Law,
the Word Appeal has a certain and determined Signification: The Word Error is
often taken generally to signify any Mistake, and it cannot be confined to the
Sense in which Error, is used in a Writ of Error, since no Writ of Error lies
in the Colonies.

The next Argument, is from the following Words, in the Instruction, to issue a
Writ in the Manner, which has been usually accustomed: The Meaning must
certainly be in the Manner usually accustomed in Appeals, not in the Manner
usually accustomed in this Place, as is pretended; for when the first
Instruction was given, there could be no accustomed Manner in this Place, and
it cannot at any Time be intended, if the accustomed Manner was erroneous as it
certainly is, if it be by Writ of Error. Besides, the Usage in this Place is so
weak, and of so short Continuance, that it can be of no Force.

But that the Word Appeal, in the Instruction, is taken in its proper Sense, is
evident from the other Words in the Instruction, which cannot he applied to a
Writ of Error, viz. Appellant and Appellee, Terms never used on a Writ of
Error, and the Word Condemnation, which indicates a new Judgment on the Merits.

His Majesty's Council have already remarked, that this Court was not erected
by his present Majesty, but was many Years ago, erected and confirmed as a
Court of Errors in express Terms, by his Majesty's royal Predecessors and
Progenitors: In this View it was a proper common Law Court, at the Time when
his present Majesty issued his royal Instruction.

And therefore, though we agree that the Word Appeal, has in Law a certain and
determined Sense, yet as that Word in its legal Sense* is necessarily confined
to Matters of Law, and as his Majesty's Council dare not give into so bold an
Opinion, that his Majesty by his Instruction, intended to change the Law, and
introduce Appeals upon Matters of Fact, unknown to the Laws of England; they
think it their Duty to understand the Word Appeal in the present, as the Word
Appeal, in Cases of Errors ought to be understood in the former Instruction:
And though his Honor does not understand the Word Errors, in the former
Instructions, as having any Relation to Writs of Error, but in the vulgar Sense
as signifying any Mistake, whether in Law or Fact; yet we cannot but be of
Opinion, that the Word ought to be taken in its legal Sense; because any other
Appeal is not known in the common Law, than an Appeal for Errors in Law, and we
think it our Duty to make the Law, and not vulgar Practice, the Rule for
construing as well the former, as the present royal Instruction; and that the
more particularly, because the very Purport and Design of both, appear to be
the Correction of the Judgments of the Courts of Law, for which Reason the
Judges of those Courts are expressly prohibited from voting in the Court of
Appeals, though they may attend to assign the Reasons of their Judgments; and
this not only proves (as the Judges have justly observed) that the Appeal
intended in his Majesty's 32d Instruction, must be on Matters in which they are
incompetent, by having rendered their Judgment already, to wit, on Matters of
Law, but also that the Appeals directed being from Courts of Law, and from the
Judgments of those Courts, in the rendering of which Judgments there cannot in
the Nature of Things be any thing corrigible, but Errors in Law; the Words
Appeal in Cases of Errors, in the old Instruction, and the Word Appeal in the
present Instruction, must be understood in the same Sense. Nor can we think it
just to attempt to prove that the Word Errors in the old Instruction is not to
be taken in its legal Sense, by asserting, that Writs of Error do not he in the
Colonies, because, whether they will lie or not, is to be determined by that
Instruction. For if thereby a Court of Errors is established, as it clearly is,
the Writ of Error is of Course given by necessary Implication, agreeable the
Maxim already mentioned; Quando aliquid mandatur, mandatur, and omne per quod
pervenitur ad illud, and another Maxim to the same Effect, quicunque aliquid
alicui concedit, concedere videtur, et id sine quo Res ipsa esse non potest,
and it is evident, that Writs of Error are essential to Courts of Error,
because they can exercise no Jurisdiction in Erro^^, but by a Writ of Error, to
bring the Cause before them.

What his Honor has been pleased to remark, on the Clause in his present
Majesty's Instruction, whereby the Governor or Commander in Chief is directed
to issue, a Writ in the Manner which has been usually accustomed, might be
fully answered, by simply observing, that though we should agree with the
Lieutenant Governor, that those Words must intend in the Manner usually
accustomed in Appeals: Yet as the common Law knows of no other Appeals than for
Errors in Matters of Law, the Writ usually accustomed by the Law of England,
must be the Writ intended, which in Appeals from Courts of Record is a Writ of
Error.

But besides this, it may not be amiss to observe, that his Honor's reasoning
on this Head, is grounded on a palpable Mistake in Fact; for the old
Instruction does not contain such a Clause as he supposes.

The Chain of reasoning therefore on this Point is justly this; by the old
Instruction a Court of Errors is expressly erected, and consequently the same
Instruction gives a Writ of Error by necessary Implication; the Court of
Appeals spoken of in the present Instruction, must necessarily be the Court of
Errors mentioned in the old Instruction, because it directs the accustomed
Writ, and therefore the accustomed Writ mentioned in the present Instruction,
must necessarily intend the Writ of Error implicitly given by the other, and
used in Consequence thereof, in a Course of Practice for many Years: So that
there can be no Reason to suppose that the Writ which has been usually issued
was erroneous, or that the issuing of that Writ at present, must defend solely
on what he supposes to be the short, though continued Usage in this Colony.

And that Appeals for Error will lie in the Colonies, and that the Practice of
bringing them has been long since used in the Colonies, and approved of by the
King in privy Council, will appear from the Case of one Jeoffry Jones, which
was an Ejectment for Lands, brought in the Reign of King William III. in
New Jersey, and in which Cause a Verdict was found and Judgment given, and the
Judgment was on an Appeal to his Majesty in privy Council, afterward reversed
for Error.

Hence therefore the Argument drawn from the Words Appellant and Appellee in
the royal Instruction, must be of little Weight; for besides that the old
Instruction, which expressly, and only relates to Cases of Error, contains the
same Words, it is evident, that if, in Law, the carrying up of a Cause by Writ
of Error, is an Appeal, the Party Plaintiff must be the Appellant, and the
Defendant the Appellee: Nor will the Word Condemnation, in the Instruction,
furnish the least. Argument in Favor of the Lieutenant Governor's
Construction; because, by that Word, is indisputably intended the Judgment in
the Court below, as will appear from the whole Clause, which directs, that the
Appeal shall be allowed, if the Party Appellant gives Security; (1st) to
prosecute his Appeal to Effect: 2dly, to answer the Condemnation, and pay the
Damages and Costs, it the first Sentence be affirmed. His Honor next proceeds
to consider some, and not the most conclusive Arguments urged by the Judges, ab
inconvenienti, upon which he Remarks thus;

The next Arguments against Appeals are from Inconveniency; though they be not
material, yet as they may have more Weight than they ought to have, they
deserve a distinct Answer.

The first is from the great Expense Appeals must occasion; to this may be
answered, that in the Colonies, where Appeals are in Use, and where preparatory
to an Appeal, the Evidence of Witnesses is at the Desire of either Party taken
down in Writing, in the common Law Courts, the Expense is not near so great, as
in common Suits in this Province; this Expense then must be owing to some other
Cause.

It is again objected, that if Appeals be allowed, the Governor and Council,
and afterward the Privy Council in England, must sit every Day in the Year, to
hear and determine them. -- The Supreme Court in this Province sits at most
only six Weeks, in the whole Year; suppose an Appeal in every Cause, (an absurd
Supposition) the Trial on Appeal cannot take up so much Time as in the Supreme
Court, for the Formalities to bring the Cause to Issue, are unnecessary in
judging on the Merits.

With Respect to his Honor's Remarks upon the Argument drawn from the Expense
that would attend Appeals, in the Pretorian Way, it may be answered; that though
the Prosecution of common Suits, in the neighboring Colonies, is less
expensive than in this Colony, yet we are far from believing, that the Charge
of prosecuting an Appeal in those Colonies would be less expensive, than the
Trial of an ordinary Cause in this. And though the Law is generally cheaper in
ordinary Cases, in those Colonies, than in this, yet we conceive that the
little Expense which there attends a common Suit, is one of the greatest Evils
under which they labor; as by that Means great Encouragement is given to a
litigious Spirit, and has been so far improved to the Disadvantage of the
Colony of Connecticut, that Three Thousand Six Hundred Writs have been returned
at the Sessions of one of their County Courts; which we believe may be truly
said, to exceed the Number of Writs that are issued communibus Annis by all the
Courts of this Colony, from the highest to the lowest. But at the same Time we
are of Opinion, that though the great Cheapness of Law is a real Disadvantage to
any Country; yet we think that the Encouragement of Appeals in the Pretorian
Way, would be an Expense too excessive to be born by the Subject; and therefore
would furnish just Ground for the Argument ab inconvenienti.

The Argument urged by the Judges, from the Inconvenience that would attend a
continual Session of the Governor and Council, and of the King in privy
Council, for hearing and determining Appeals, we think has been greatly
misunderstood; for with Respect to the Governor and Council, if they are to be
a Court of Appeals in the Sense cont^nde^ for by his Honor, they must take
Cognizance not only of Appeals from the Supreme Court, but from all the Circuit
Courts, County Courts, City Courts, and Borough Courts, throughout the Colony,
which would completely furnish them with Business for the whole Year; and, as
to Appeals to his Majesty in privy Council, if they were permitted to lie on
Matters of Fact, from all the numerous Colonies in his Majesty's Dominions, it
is not to be doubted that the privy Council would be obliged to set every Day
in the Year, to hear and determine them.

But his Honor has in his Reasons omitted the Consideration of those of the
Arguments ab inconvenienti which have the greatest Weight. We cannot however
avoid concluding with the Judges, that the Appeal contended for, would render
the Expense of Trials by Jury useless, and therefore intolerable, and by making
the Cause on Appeal, Res integra, would open a Flood-Gate to Perjury, encourage
a Spirit of Litigiousness, and introduce Idleness, to the Ruin of many
Families, and the great Impoverishment of the Country, and would be attended
with the utmost Danger to the Subject, in the Transmission of original Deeds;
the Inspection of which is often Times absolutely necessary (as where a Razure
is the Gift of the Controversy) in Order to do Justice to the Cause: Besides
this, the Benefit of a View not only appointed by the common Law, but by
Statute, in Land Trials, would be lost to the Subject, on every such Appeal.
And therefore, as long as there is any truth in the Maxim, quod est
inconveniens and contra Rationem, non est permissum in Lege, an Appeal on
Matters of Fact, being attended with these Inconveniences cannot lie. --

His Honor proceeds next, to consider what he allows to be the principal
Objection against an Appeal on Matters of Fact, on which he speaks thus.

"I come now to the principal Objection, and which has the greatest Weight,
that by Judgment on Appeals, the great Privilege of Trial by Jury is taken
away, the great Privilege which Englishmen enjoy above all other Nations: On
this Head several Things deserve Consideration."

1st. The Character of the Persons who Judge on Appeals; the Gentlemen of the
Council in this Province, and the privy Council in England, where on hearing of
Appeals, the Lord high Chancellor, the Chief Justices of both Benches, and the
Lords of greatest Skill and Knowledge in the Law, usually attend: With such
Judges, the Verdict of the Jury-will always have its just Weight: Few Men in
any difficult Case would not rather trust to such Judges than to the usual
Juries in this Country. It is evident from the 33d Instruction, that the King
really intended the Benefit of his People, not any Advantage to himself, by
ordering Appeals; for the 33d Instruction, gives an Appeal in Cases of
excessive Fines in a less Sum, than in Cases of Property: And the King must
have designed that the Merits of the Cause should come before him by the
Appeal, otherwise he cannot Judge whether the Fine be excessive or not.

I believe that there is not a Man in this Province conversant in the Courts of
common Law, who will not allow, that many iniquitous or false Verdicts have
been given in it, and thereby great Injustice done. By the Laws of England
every Wrong has its Remedy; what is the Remedy in this Case? They tell us the
Judge will give a new Trial: But this Remedy depends upon the Will and Pleasure
of the Judge; if he will not, the Subject has no Remedy. The Law of England
abhors all arbitrary Power, and therefore the King has given his Subjects in
the Colonies a Right to Appeal from every iniquitous Verdict, without depending
on the good Will or Pleasure of any Judge. If no Appeals are allowed from the
Supreme Court of New York, the Court must become uncontrollable; however
agreeable this may be to Judges fond of Power, it must be terrible to the
People under their Jurisdiction.

His Majesty's Council are seriously of Opinion, that the Privilege of Trials
by Juries, which Englishmen enjoy above all other Nations, is in Truth a great
and excellent Privilege: It is a Privilege which stands recommended by the
Experience of many Ages, and by the tenderest Regard of our Ancestors, for
whose Judgment we have the highest Veneration: It is in short the Birthright
of every British Subject, and ought to be maintained with the most unrelenting
Firmness: But what is still more, it stands fixed, irrevocably fixed, by the
known and established Laws of the Land, which the most cogent Reasons can never
enable a Governor and Council to alter. Little therefore will it avail in
Favor of an Appeal, that the Characters of those who would in such Case be the
Judges, are conspicuously eminent and unexceptionable, or that iniquitous
Verdicts are sometimes given by Juries, or that Men in a difficult Case would
rather submit their Property to the Judgment of the Former than the Latter; for
besides, that none can be so competent Judges of the Matters of Fact as those
of the Neighborhood, who are acquainted with the Parties, and the Witnesses,
and often Times with the Matter in Controversy itself; and besides also the
great Security to the Subject, which consists in submitting the Trial of Facts
to one Set of Men, and the Determination of the Law upon those Facts to
another, (which are Reasons that at first View give a Preference to Trials by
Juries) the Impossibility of a Change, even in Favor of a Method, if any such
could be devised, that would deserve a Preference, must be a sufficient Answer
to any Thing that can be offered on this Head. The Governor and Council are Jus
dicere and non Jus dare, and their judicial Capacity seems to have been
designed in the original Constitution of this Colony, and in Imitation of the
House of Lords, as the dernier Resort in the Colony, subject however to the
Correction of a superior Judicatory in England, as essentially necessary for
the Preservation of our Dependence; nor can the Crown (we say it with the most
profound Submission) change the Law of the Land, because the King can do no
Wrong. Any Thing short of Legislative Authority, would be inadequate to so
important a Purpose, and though his Majesty may have thought proper to grant
Appeals in Cases of Fines, and that perhaps in the Sense contended for by the
Lieutenant Governor; yet, this is not in Derogation of the Rights of the
Subject, but the Effect of his Majesty's Royal Clemency. By the Policy of Law,
all Fines belong to the Crown, and as the King may remit them when he pleases,
either in Part or in the Whole, he may without affording them any Cause of
Complaint, and in Ease of the Subjects, direct such a Method of enquiring into
the Merits of the Cause, as he thinks proper, to enable him to judge on the
Quantum of the Fine imposed.

With Respect to unjust or iniquitous Verdicts, the common and Statute Law of
England, as well as the Practice of the King's Courts, have provided ample
Security against them; for besides the Remedy by new Trials which his Honor
supposes to be inadequate to the Evil, because it depends upon the Will and
Pleasure of the Judge; the heavy Sentence which the Law inflicts by Attaint
upon Juries who give iniquitous Verdicts, must be an effectual Redress; the
Verdicts impeached by Attaint, being Matters of Fact, are corrected by another
Jury of Twenty-four Men, and the Manner of the Correction proves the strict
Attachment of the Law to the Rule, ad Quaestionem Facti, respondent Juratores,
the Reversal of the Judgment given in the first Instance, which is always the
Consequence of an Attaint prosecuted with Effect, furnishes the most ample
Security to the Subject, and satisfies the Demands of the Laws of England,
which abhor all arbitrary Power.

The evil Consequences of dishonest Verdicts being therefore so effectually
guarded against by Law, we cannot be of Opinion that his Majesty ever intended
by a Deviation from the established Law of the Land, to give his Subjects in
the Colonies a Right to Appeal from iniquitous Verdicts, in a Method unknown in
the Law, and never applied in Ease of the Subjects in the Mother Country, who
are doubtless entitled to an equal Share of the Royal Favor with his Majesty's
American Subjects; and that in every Instance of Practice, wherein Errors in
Fact are to be corrected, the Office is by Law imposed on a Jury of the
Country, is manifested in every Case of Error, Quod coram vobis residet; for
when a Man assigns Errors in Fact, he ought to put himself upon the Country,
for the Jurors shall only be Triers of that, and not the Judges, Yelv. 58. Law
of Er. 10.

And on audita Querela, which is also grounded on Matter of Fact, a Jury is
ever to determine; as if a Release of a Debt given after Judgment, is alleged
by the Party in Bar of Execution, a Jury must try the Fact, whether the Release
was executed or not.

In short, the common Law knows of no other Appeals on Matters of Fact from
common Law Courts, than by Attaint, Error, Quod coram vobis residet, and Writ
of audita Querela, on all which, Juries determine; while on the other Hand, a
Cause of Errors in Law is never brought before the Judges, but by Writ of
Error, false Judgment, or Certiorari, and from Courts of Record, such as our
Supreme Court is, by Writ of Error only, 2. Bacon, Abr. Title Errors 189.

His Majesty's Council are far from maintaining that no Appeals should be
allowed from the Supreme Court of New York, nor can we believe that the Judges
of that Court did ever affect so dangerous an Exemption; on the Contrary, we
are of Opinion with those Judges, that Appeals by Writs of Error, will
undoubtedly lie from their Judgments, and will effectually prevent that Court
from becoming uncontrollable.

The Method of Trials by Juries we think of so much Consequence, that we cannot
dismiss the Subject, without animadverting on the Close of his Honor's
Reasons, which were they well grounded, would naturally bring this excellent
Method of Trial into Discredit. His Words are these;

Many of the Counties of England, though they be not of so great Extent of
Territory, are more considerable in Numbers of People, Dignity of Persons, and
Value of Property, than this Province is; therefore all the Inconveniences may
happen in this Province, which did in the Counties of England, while all the
Property in those Counties were determined by Judges of the same County. I
shall recite them in the Words of Lord Chief Justice Hale, viz.

All the Business of any Moment was carried by Factions, and Parties: For the
Freeholders being generally the Judges, and conversing one among another, and
being as it were the Chief Judges, not only of the Fact, but of the Law; every
Man that had a Suit there, sped according as he could make Parties, and Men of
great Power and Interest in the County, did easily overbear others in their own
Causes, or in such wherein they were interested, either by Relation of Kindred,
Tenure, Service, Dependence, or Application; the Remedy against these Evils
which then prevailed, was by Appeal to the King.

Upon this we observe:

That the Evils thus complained of by Lord Hale, happened in a very remote
Period, when Ignorance and Barbarity overspread the Nation in general; in the
Reign of Henry II. which commenced above 600 Years ago, Learning was wholly
engrossed by the Lawyers and the Clergy; the Freeholders of the Counties who
were the Suitors to the inferior Courts, were both Triers of the Facts, and
sole Judges of the Law; and in Courts where Ignorance presided, and the Judges
were of inferior Rank, and owed this Service by the Tenure of their Estates
under the me^ne Lord, it was not to be wondered at, That Business was carried
by Parties and Factions, nor that every Man sped in his Suit according as he
could make Parties, or had Interest in the County; but that the Ignorance of
the Judges, and not the ill Consequence resulting from Trials by Juries, is the
Evil complained of by Lord Hale, Hale's Hist. of c^m. Law. 140.
appears clearly from the Account he gives in the same Page, of the Method
taken by the King to Redress the Evil; therefore says the Author, The King took
another and more effectual Course, for in the 23d Year of his Reign, by Advice
of his Parliament, held at Northampton, he instituted Justices itinerant,
dividing the Kingdom into six Circuits, and to every Circuit, allotting three
Judges, knowing or experienced in the Laws of the Realm. Nor can it be thought
probable, that so eminent and able a Judge as Lord Hale, could be so
inconsistent with himself, as to disparage a Method of Trial, which he has
taken Pains to display in every possible advantageous Point of Light; and for
this Purpose, has devoted a whole Chapter in his excellent Book, called, See
Chap. 12.
The History of the common Law of England; a Chapter sufficient to convince
every reasonable Man, of the peculiar Advantages attending the most excellent
Method that ever was devised by human Prudence, for the Trial and Determination
of all Facts.

To sum up the Whole, his Majesty's Council are clearly of Opinion, 1st. That
omitting the Defects contained in the Instruments under Seal, by which an
Appeal is sought in the present Case, an Appeal from the Verdict of a Jury,
taking the Word in any Sense, is not known in the Law of England, it having
been the established and continual Practice, from Time immemorial, to try and
determine all Facts by Juries.

2dly. That the Statute of the 7 and 8 W. III. has erected the Laws of England,
which were in Force at the Time of the Settlement of this Colony, as the
Standard of Law in the Colony. 3dly. That his Majesty's Instruction, in which
the Governor or Commander in Chief is directed to take Care, that no Man's
Life, Members, Freehold, or Goods be taken away, or harmed, otherwise than by
established and known Laws, not repugnant to, but as much as may be, agreeable
to the Laws of England, (which is similar to every Instruction hitherto known
to us, that has been issued on that Subject since the passing of that Statute)
is supported by the aforesaid Statute, and is calculated to enforce an
Obedience to it.

4thly. That in Consequence of the aforesaid Statute and Instructions, not only
the Laws of the Colony, but the Practice of it is Courts, have always been in
the strictest possible Conformity to the Laws of England, and the Practice of
the King's Courts there.

5thly. That an Extention of the Laws of England, and the Practice of the
King's Courts there, as transferred to this Colony by the said Statute, and
enforced by the aforesaid Instruction, has been further enforced by solemn
Adjudication before the King in privy Council.

6thly. That the Terms of his Majesty's 32d Instruction, have a necessary
Reference to such Appeals as were known to the Law of England, and had been
long used in this Colony; and that no other Appeals than in Cases of Error in
Law (which are the only Cases of Appeal provided for in former Instructions)
have, until the present Instance, ever been brought here.

7thly. That the Appeal intended by the said 32d Instruction, must (...) the
Words of the Instruction themselves, necessarily be an Appeal from the Judgment
of the Judges in Matters of Law, and that if the Instruction had intended an
Appeal from the Verdict of a Jury, in the ^^^ning of which, the Judges are
never concerned, they, as being the most competent Judges of a Verdict founded
on Evidence given before them, would never have been excluded from sitting in
the Court above.

8thly. That though strictly speaking, there are several Species of Appeals,
known in the Law, which are therefore generally called by their peculiar Names,
yet the Instances are numerous in the Books, to prove that the carrying up of a
Cause by Writ of Error, is in Law called an Appeal.

9thly. That wherever an Appeal is on Matters of Fact, as in Attaint, audita
Querela and Error, Quod coram vobis residet, the Errors are corrected, not by
the Judges, but by the Inquest of a Jury.

10thly. That therefore, a Departure from the established Law of the Land, in
giving such a Construction to the Terms of his Majesty's 32d Instruction, as
would make this Court cognizant of the Cause, as it is now attempted to be
brought before us, that is, on Errors in Fact, would do Violence to the true
Sense of this, as well as the other Instruction of his Majesty, by which
constitutional Jurisdictions, and the same Measures of distributing Justice, as
are established in England, are clearly intended to be transferred to this
Colony.

11thly, and LASTLY. That Appeals on Matters of Fact, would not only be
inconsistent with Law, the Royal Instructions, and the standing Practice of
this Colony, but would be burdensome and ruinous to the Subject, by rendering
the first Trial useless, procrastinating Justice, enhancing the Costs of Suit,
and opening a wide Door for Perjury on the second Trial.

And in Cases wherein the Decision would turn upon an Inspection of Deeds,
would render it impossible to administer Justice in the last Remove, without
subjecting the Party to the utmost Danger of losing the most valuable Evidence
of his Title; and in Causes wherein Views may be necessary, would deprive the
Subject of the Benefit secured to him by Law. And for these Reasons, we are of
Opinion, that this Appeal cannot be received.

ORDERED,

That the further Reasons of Mr. Justice Livingston, offered on Wednesday last,
in Support of his former Opinion in this Cause, be entered in the Minutes;
which are as follow:

May it Please your Honors,
BEFORE your Honors proceed to determine the most important Point that ever
was before any Court in this Province; a Point on which the Rights of the
People, and consequently the future Prosperity of this Colony in a great
Measure depend;

I beg you would indulge me with a few Words, in order to confirm what I have
already said, when in Compliance with your Request I gave you the Reasons of my
Conduct. Your Honors are sensible that this Battery, raised against the Laws
by which we have been so long governed, and a settled Practice which has
obtained for so great a Number of Years, and which is exactly conformable to
the Practice in England, is founded on the single Word Appeal in the 32d
Instruction; and on the Supposition, that nothing else could be understood by
it but such Appeals as are agreeable to the Practice of civil Law Courts: For
if it was possible to understand it in any other Sense, no one would suppose
that the whole System of our Law, which has been built up by the Wisdom of so
many Ages, was intended to be overturned by this single Word. In order to show
how groundless this Supposition was, I observed to your Hono^^, that Writs of
Error, and the several other Reliefs provided for by the ^^ws of England,
against a Judgment, were properly termed Appeals; though that Word was but seldom
used, for the Reasons I then mentioned. And for Proof, I relied on the
authority of Dr. Cowel: I own this Authority to be but slender, because he was
more of a Civilian than a common Lawyer; but as I was but just returned from
the Country, and had but little Time amidst the Multiplicity of Business which
a long and unexpected Absence crowded upon me, to prepare for this
extraordinary Occasion, it was the best I could then produce, though I was sure
what I asserted was well founded. I could indeed have produced several other
Dictionaries, but as they all made Use of the very Words of Cowel, and referred
to no Authorities, I laid no great Stress on them. I have now an Opportunity of
confirming what I then said, by one of the best Authorities in the Law, my Lord
Chief Justice Hale: And for that purpose I beg Leave to read two Passages in
his History of the common Law, Page 150, and Page 48. [Here they were read.]
These Authorities I suppose will be a full Confirmation of what I have
advanced; and will show that this Appellant is very much mistaken in his
Explanation of this Instruction.

For let it be admitted, as I think it certainly must after what I have shown,
that there are Appeals at common Law as well as in the civil Law, is it not
evident to a Demonstration, that when it says you shall admit Appeals from the
Courts of common Law, that it must mean such Appeals as are known to the common
Law? And if Writs of Error are called Appeals in the common Law, to prove which
an unexceptionable Authority has just been produced, and the Instruction says,
that for the Purpose of Appeals, you are to issue a Writ in the Manner which
has been usually accustomed; does it not appear clear as the Sun, that Writs of
Error, or such Writs as are known to the common Law, are hereby directed to be
issued? The contrary Explanation must appear to your Honors very unnatural, to
wit, though there are Appeals by the common Law, as well as in the civil Law,
yet, when it says you are to admit Appeals from common Law Courts, it means you
are to admit them in the civil Law Form. It means you are to direct the common
Law Courts to change the whole Form of their Proceedings in order to comply
with the Instruction, and to form a motley Court which shall partake of the
Inconveniences of both the others, and enjoy the Advantages of neither. It
means when it directs you to send the usual Writ, that you shall send such a
Writ, as both for Matter and Form never was sent to any common Law Court
before. It must be evident then, that this can never b^ (...) Meaning of the
Instruction.

Since your Honors have indulged me thus far, I beg Leave to read a few Lines
farther in the same Book. The second Reason this great Lawyer gives, why Causes
should not come before the Parliament, in the first Instance is, because by
that Means the Subject would lose his Trial per Pares, and consequently his
Attaint, in Case of a Mistake in Point of Issue or Damages, to both which he is
entitled by Law. Here we see Chief Justice Hale positively says, that the
Subject is entitled to a Trial by his Equals, that is, by a Jury, and also to
his Attaint in Case of a Mistake in Point of Issue or Damages. If this be a
good Reason in the Case here mentioned, it is also a good Reason against trying
the Merits of Verdicts in the Court pretended to be erected by this
Instruction; for though this does not deprive the Subject of a Trial by a Jury,
yet it does much worse, it puts him to all the Inconveniences of that Trial,
renders it prodigiously more expensive than ever; and then makes it entirely
useless. And it takes away the Remedy by Attaint, which is also here said to be
the Subject's Right; for to what Purpose would it be to bring an Attaint
against a Jury for giving a Verdict, which whatever it may cost, is not worth
one Farthing to either Party, since the Matter must be finally determined by
another Set of Judges; who for all Matters of Moment will become the standing
Jury in all Cases without being liable to any such Penalty. And thus we should
be deprived of Privileges which his Honor agrees with every Body else we ought
to enjoy, because they are such as we are entitled to by the common Law, in the
most confined Sense of the Word.

It Is true it may be said, that the Right to bring an Attaint is not to be
considered, because in a very long Series of Years, no such Action has been
brought. But it cannot be denied, that the Privilege of a Subject to the Laws
of England is very great, in this, that he cannot be divested of any Part of
his Property but by the Judgment of his Peers, and they not only under the
sacred Obligation of an Oath, but also under the Danger of an Attaint if they
give a false Verdict. And this is a Privilege no Man in his Wits will ever
willingly part with, who knows its Value.

For whatever Contempt may be put on Juries, in the Law they are of the highest
Estimation, and no one ought to pretend to be wiser than the Law. The greatest
Men have ever valued it as the best Way of trying Facts. And the Lord
Chancellor himself, when a Fact is in Issue before him, delivers it to the
King's Bench to be tried by a Jury. But the Advantages of this Trial by Juries,
are so well described by Chief Justice Hale, in his 12th Chap. of the History
of the common Law, already read in this Court, that I dare not presume to do
Injury to the Subject, by Encomiums unworthy of its Excellency.

This Chief Justice, on whom no Man who has not made the Law his Study, ought
to be ashamed to pin his Faith, prized Trials by Juries so highly, that in
order to show the Excellency of the common above the civil and other Laws, he
pitches upon this and Descents, as two of its principal Perfections.

Therefore, your Honors will put too great a Value on this Privilege, to
regard, in determining this most important Point, what is done in other
Colonies; because, they have no Power to alter our Laws. If Causes are brought
up by Way of Appeal from Verdicts in some of them; if two or three
contradictory Verdicts are taken in the same Cause in others; your Honors will
clearly see the Absurdity of such a Practice; and while you leave them to plead
either Ignorance or Necessity for not conforming to the Laws of England,
expressly enjoined by his Majesty's Instructions to his Governors, you will
zealously support, according to his most gracious Majesty's Intentions, and
Favor to us, every Practice consonant to those whosesome Laws.

Neither is this Appeal in any Manner favored by Magna Charta, and therefore
nothing surprised me more than to find that quoted in Favor of an Appeal. The
Clause nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus, aut deferemus Justitiam, does no more
prove that the King is to try every Cause himself, than every Writ or Pleading
does, which supposes him present in all his Courts of Justice. This appears
from my Lord Coke's Comment on those Words. And to show how little Magna Charta
favors such an Appeal as this, I will read the whole Clause from which these
Words are taken, and a Part of my Lord Coke's Comment upon it. The Clause runs
thus, Nullus liber Homo capiatur, vel imprisonetur, aut disseisiatur de libero
Tenemento suo, vel Libertatibus, vel liberis Consuetudinibus suis; aut
utlagetur, aut exuletur, aut aliquo Mode destruatur; nec super eum ibimus, nec
super eum mittemus, nisi per legale Judicium Parium suorum, vel per Legem
Terrae; nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus, aut deferemus, Justitiam, vel rectum.
On which my Lord Coke says, "against this ancient and fundamental Law, and in
the Face thereof, I find an Act of Parliament made, that as well Justices of
Assize as Justices of Peace, without any finding or Presentment by the Verdict
of twelve Men, upon a bare Information for the King before them made, should
have full Power and Authority by their Discretions, to hear and determine all
Offenses and Contempts committed or done by any Person or Persons, agiainst the
Form, Ordinance and Effect of any Statute made and not repealed, etc. by Color
of which Act shaking this fundamental Law, it is not credible what horrible
Oppressions and Exactions to the Undoing of infinite Numbers of People were
committed by Sir Richard Empson, Knight, and Edmund Dudley, being Justices of
Peace throughout England; and upon this unjust and injurious Act, (as commonly
in like Cases it falls out) a new Office was created, and they made Masters
of the King's Forfeitures. But at the Parliament holden in the First Year of H.
VIII. this Act 11, H. VII. is recited, and made void and repealed and the
Reason thereof is yielded, for that by Force of the said Act it (...)
manifestly known, that many sinister and crafty, feigned and forg^d
Informations, had been pursued against diverse of the King's Subjects, to their
great Damage and wrongful Vexation: And the ill Success hereof, and the fearful
End of these two Oppressors, should deter others from committing the like, and
admonish Parliaments, that instead of this ordinary and precious Trial per
Legem Terrae, they bring not in absolute and partial Trials by Discretion." In
short, whoever will support a Practice of this Nature, ought by no Means to
refer to Books of the Law; for the Laws of England abhor it, and bear Testimony
against it in every Page. Neither can it be supported by advancing new
Principles, such as these. 1st. The common Law extends to the Plantations, but
the Statute Law does not. 2dly. The Laws of England extend to the Plantations,
but the Execution being in the King, he can erect what Courts for the
Distribution of Justice he pleases. Principles new as these are, unheard,
unthought of, before this important Trial between Thomas Forsey and Waddel
Cunningham, one would think needed some Proof, some Authority at least to
establish them; for certainly they are not self-evident Propositions. But
nothing of the Sort have I heard. On the Contrary, it is supposed by all
Civilians, that Colonies carry out with them the Laws of their Mother Country.
And if they do, they must take those with them, which are in Force at the Time
they emigrate, because they are familiar and known. They can never upon their
Emigration be obliged to have Recourse to those Rudiments of Law, which were
first formed by their Mother Country. They can hardly be supposed to be so well
acquainted with Antiquity as to know what they are. Neither can any good Reason
be given, why they should not reap the Advantages of all the Improvements made
by succeeding Ages. Besides, no Man can draw the Line between those Laws which
stand upon the Authority of Acts of Parliament, and that of the common Law: For
many Things are by common Law which first commenced by Acts of Parliament; many
seem to stand on the Authority of Acts of Parliament, which were before by
common Law. So that this Principle, if adopted, would produce more Confusion
than a sudden Repeal of all Laws: By these Means the Trials by Battle, and Fire
Ordeal, would be again introduced. In short it is not possible to suppose that
our most gracious Sovereign, when by his Instructions he directed that the Laws
should be administered in a Method as nearly as possible according to the Laws
in England, intended we should conform to all the Adsurdities of an ignorant
Age. No, his gracious Intentions doubtless were, that we should enjoy the
Benefit of those Laws, which by the Improvement of many Ages were wrought up to
the highest Perfection, and by this he conferred on us the greatest Blessing
which his princely Wisdom could bestow, and took the best Method of securing
the Dependence of the Colonies. So preposterous is it to suppose that it would
be secured by depriving the People of this Colony of the Laws of England.

As for the other Principle, that the King can erect what Courts he pleases for
the Distribution of Justice, it is not only contrary to Law, but it is big with
the most dangerous Consequences. The King it is true is the Fountain of
Justice, and the Execution of the Law is in him, by the Constitution of
England; but the Mode of dispensing it is fixed by Law, and unalterable, but by
Act of Parliament. He may erect as many new Courts as he pleases, but they must
determine according to the Course of the common Law, and proceed on Facts found
by Juries. But that he can erect Courts which shall have a Power to try Causes
in what Manner they please, must appear extremely shocking to an English Ear,
and to any one who has the least Idea of the English Constitution. This is
expressly provided against by Magna Charta, as appears by the Authority just
now read. On this Principle a Court similar to the Inquisition might be
erected, and Torture introduced. By these Means the grand Difference between an
English Subject, and a Subject of France, or Spain, or Turkey, would be
annihilated; for that consists more in the Mode of administering Justice to
them, than in the Laws themselves. Happy for us we live under a Monarch
patriotic and beneficent, who glories in being the Sovereign of Freemen, not
of Slaves; and will reject with Abhorrence every Prerogative which may be
exerted to the Ruin of his Subjects. Of this we had an ample Proof, when one of
the first Acts of his Reign was to secure the Independence of the Judges, by
parting with what was an undoubted Prerogative of his Crown; and I dare venture
to prophesy that whoever seeks to recommend himself to his most gracious
Majesty's Favor, by undertaking to prove that his Subjects are no better
secured in their Liberties and Estates than those of the most absolute
Monarchs, will appear to have taken the worst Way of making his Court. --

Before I conclude, as in the Prosecution of this Scheme, not only Juries but
the Practisers of the Law, and the Judges have been treated with Disrespect;
Justice obliges me to say, that I have a pretty general Acquaintance with the
Practisers, especially with those that are most eminent, and that from what I
have observed of their Conduct, I can declare, that I know none who do not
behave themselves with a Candor, Integrity, and Disinterestedness, which does
Honor to their Profession. And of this they have on this Occasion exhibited a
Proof. They suppose the Appeal now brought illegal and injurious to the
Country, and for that Reason, not one of them could be prevailed on to give his
Assistance to, but all rejected the Project with Disdain. This will long be
remembered to their Honor.

As for the Judges they or some of them are reproached, as forgetting their
Duty in endeavoring to raise the Passions: On which I shall observe in the
Words of a great Lawyer; that a Judge is not to be defamed or vilified with
Respect to his Parts, Fitness for his Place, etc. for if this were allowed, it
would be impossible to keep in the People that Veneration for their Persons,
and Submission to their Judgments, without which it is impossible to execute
the Laws with Vigor and Success. What Grounds there are for accusing them of
raising the Passions I know not. When such Principles are advanced as tend to
overturn a Constitution, of which every Englishman is fond, his Resentment will
naturally be raised; and when the Mischiefs arising from such Principles are
either shown or hinted at, his Anger will be still more inflamed. But who ought
to be accused of raising the Passions when this is the Case, I must submit to
the serious Consideration of your Honors. Certainly our Duty obliges us to
present to your Honors a full View of the Inconveniences which must attend
this Alteration of the Law.

It does a peculiar Honor to Juries, Lawyers, and Judges, that those who
impeach their Conduct, declare against the Laws of England, that excellent
System which can hardly be considered without Admiration, or spoke of without
Rapture, and which our most Gracious King is so far from endeavoring to
deprive us of, that he has particularly directed his Governors to conform to
them as much as possible, by an Instruction, which lately and accidentally came
to our Knowledge, whereby his Governor or Commander in Chief, is directed to
take Care that no Man's Life, Member, Freehold, or Goods, be taken away or
harmed in this Province otherwise than by the established and known Laws, not
repugnant to, but as nearly as possible, conformable to the Laws of England.
This shows the Propriety of the Observation, that the Judges ought not to be
directed in their Duty by such Scraps of Instructions as may from Time to Time
be communicated to them: For had we been directed in our Conduct by the
Thirty-second Instruction, and misunderstood it, to signify in Appeal against a
Verdict, we should have introduced a Practice, not only contrary to this
Instruction by which the Laws of England are enforced, but to make Use of the
Words of the Oracle of the Law, contrary to and in the face of Magna Charta.
This Instruction alone I should imagine would be a sufficient Inducement to
your Honors, to support the Practice of the Law here, in every Thing which is
consonant to the Laws at Home.

The ^^st Thing I beg Leave to trouble your Honors with is, an Act of
Parliament passed in the 4th Henry IV. Chap. 23, which runs thus: Whereas as
well in Plea real, as in Plea personal, after Judgment given in Cour^^ of our
Lord the King, the Parties be made to come upon grievous Pain, sometime before
the King himself, sometime before the King's Council, and sometimes to the
Parliament, to answer thereof, of new, to the great impoverishing of the
Parties aforesaid, and in the subversion of the common Law of the Land. It is
ordained and stablished, that after Judgment given in the Courts of our Lord
the King, the Parties and their Heirs, shall be thereof in Peace until Judgment
be undone by Attaint, or Error, if there be Errors, as has been used by the
Laws in the Times of the King's Progenitors.

This Act I hope will be sufficient to answer the Objections of the most
scrupulous; for it appears not only to be made in order to prevent such Appeals
as are now contended for, but also in Affirmance of the common Law. So that I
confidently expect your Honors will unanimously reject this Appeal, and
approve of our Conduct.

ROBERT R. LIVINGSTON.

At a Council held at Fort George in the City of New York, on Wednesday the 23d
Day of January, 1765. PRESENT, The Hon. CADWALLADER COLDEN, Esquire, Lieutenant
Governor, etc. Mr. WATTS, Mr. DE LANCEY Mr. READ, Mr. MORRIS.

Waddel Cunningham, against Thomas Forsey.
A Petition of Robert R. Waddel, was presented and read, and is in the Words
following:

To the Hon. CADWALLADER COLDEN, Esquire Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief
of the Province of New York, and Territories depending thereon in America; and
the Honorable his Majesty's Council. Judges of the Court of Appeals of the
said Province.
The humble Petition of Robert Ross Waddel, of the City of New York, Merchant,
legal Representative of Waddel Cunningham, is most respectfully presented,

Setting forth,

THAT in an Action of Trespass, Assault and Battery, commenced in the Supreme
Court of Judicature for said Province, by Thomas Forsey against Waddel
Cunningham, a Verdict was given against the Defendant, for One Thousand and
Five Hundred Pounds Damages, besides Costs of Suit, which Damages your
Petitioner, who is Attorney for the Defendant, conceiving excessive and
unreasonable, desired the Attorney and Counsel in the Cause, to Appeal from the
said Verdict unto your Honors, as a Court of Appeals; which was absolutely
refused by the said Attorney and Counsel.

That thereupon your Petitioner applied to George Harrison, Esquire a Notary
Public, attending in Court at the Request of your Petitioner, to move the Court
for such Appeal, which he did accordingly, requesting the Court to make a
Minute of his Motion, which was refused for the present^ but the Court declared
they would consider of it till next Morning, when the Defendant's Counsel
advised a Motion to be made to set aside the Verdict, the Damages being
excessive, which being made accordingly, the Court resolved not to grant it.

That thereupon a Paper in Writing was delivered to the Court, praying the
Defendant might be allowed to appeal from the Verdict and Judgment thereupon,
and a Bond tendered at the same Time, with good and sufficient Security to pay
unto the Appellee, all such Damages, Costs and Charges, as should be awarded,
adjudged, or decreed by your Honors on said Appeal, agreeable to the 32d
Article of his Majesty's Royal Instructions to his Excellency Governor
Monckton; a Copy whereof certified by the Deputy Clerk of his Majesty's
Council, was also presented to the Court: Which Prayer and Request, as also
your Petitioner's further Request then made, that the Court would be pleased to
admit and Order an Entry to be made of such Motion for an Appeal, and the
Tender of such Security as aforesaid, were also refused by the Court.

And as your Honors have already declared that an Appeal from the Verdict and
Judgment as aforesaid, cannot be brought before your Honors, as a Court of
Appeals; your Petitioner most humbly begs Leave to apply to your Honors, to
grant an Appeal to his Majesty in his privy Council -- To that End therefore,

Your Petitioner most humbly prays, your Honors will be pleased to allow an
Appeal to his Majesty in his privy Council; and if such Appeal is allowed, that
your Honors will be pleased to order Excecution to be suspended, until said
Appeal is determined by his Majesty and Council; and that your Honors will be
pleased to assign your Petitioner Counsel, in Order to bring said Appeal
properly before his Majesty and Council;

and your Petitioner, as in Duty bound, will ever pray, etc. ROBERT R. WADDEL.
New York, 22 d January, 1765.
A sufficient Number of the Members, exclusive of the Judges, not attending,
the Consideration of the said Petition, is ordered to be deferred until
Wednesday next.

At a Council held at Fort George, in the City of New York, on Wednesday the
6th Day of February, 1765, PRESENT, The Hon. CADWALLADER COLDEN, Esquire,
Lieutenant Governor, etc. Mr. WATTS, Mr. WALTON, Mr. DE LANCEY, Mr. READ, Mr.
MORRIS.

Waddel Cunningham, against Thomas Forsey.
Upon the Petition offered by Robert Ross Waddel, as legal Representative of
Waddel Cunningham,

THE Council are of Opinion, that the same being entered upon the Minutes of
the former Transactions on the Appeal offered to be brought before the
Lieutenant Governor and the Council, he have Copies of all the Proceedings
relating to the same, and of this Opinion, for the Use of his Principal,
whereby he may be enabled to seek such Redress as he conceives his Case may
require: But as the Council were, and still are of Opinion, from the best
Information they have been able to obtain, that no such Appeal lies to the
Lieutenant Governor and Council, The Council apprehend the Lieutenant Governor
and Council unauthorized to direct further upon the Prayer of this Petition.

His Honor the Lieutenant Governor dissented to the said Opinion, which is
entered accordingly.

The preceding are true Copies, examined by Gw. BANYAR, D. Cl. Con.

FINIS.

