A PROTEST, Presented to the HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY, By the Subscribers, at the
Close of the late Debate there, concerning the sending MR. FRANKLIN As an
Assistant to our AGENT, at the Court of Great Britain.
WE whose Names are hereunto subscribed, do object and protest against the
Appointment of the Person proposed as an Agent of this Province, for the
following reasons.

First. Because we believe him to be the Chief Author of the Measures pursued
by the late Assembly, which have occasioned such Uneasiness and Destraction
among the good People of this Province.

Secondly. Because we believe his fixed enmity to the Proprietors will preclude
all Accommodations of our Disputes with them, even on just and reasonable
Terms; -- So that for these two Reasons, we are filled with the most affecting
Apprehensions, that the Petitions lately transmitted to England, will be made
use of to produce a Change of Government, contrary to the Intention of the
Petitioners; the greatest part of whom, we are persuaded, only designed thereby
to obtain a Compliance with some equitable Demands. -- And thus, by such an
Appointment, we, and a vast Number of our most worthy Constituents, are
deprived of all hopes of ever seeing an End put to the fatal Dissentions of our
Country; it being our firm Opinion, that any further Prosecution of the
Measures for a Change of Government at this Time, will lay the Foundations of
unceasing Feuds, and all the Miseries of Confusion, among the People we
represent, and their Posterity. -- This step gives us the more lively
Affliction, as it is taken at the very Moment, when we are informed by a Member
of this House, that the Governor has assured him of his having received
Instructions from the Proprietors, on their hearing of our late Dispute, to
give his Assent to the Taxation of their Estates in the same manner that the
Estates of other Persons are to be taxed, and also to confirm, for the Public
use, the several Squares, formerly claimed by the City; On which Subjects, we
make no doubt, the Governor would have sent a Message to the House, if this had
been the usual Time of doing Business, and he had not been necessarily absent
to meet the Assembly of the lower Counties. -- And therefore we cannot but
anxiously regret that, at a Time when the Proprietors have shown such a
Disposition, this House should not endeavor to cultivate the same, and obtain
from them every reasonable Demand that can be made on the part of the People,
in vigorously insisting on which, we would most earnestly unite with the rest
of the House.

Thirdly. Because the Gentleman proposed, we are informed, is very unfavourably
thought of by several of his Majesty's Ministers; and we are humbly of Opinion,
that it will be disrespectful to our most Gracious Sovereign, and
disadvantageous to ourselves and our constituents, to employ such a Person as
an Agent.

Fourthly. Because the Proposal of the Person mentioned, is so extremely
disagreeable to a very great Number of the most serious and reputable
inhabitants of this Province of all Denominations and Societies (one Proof of
which is, his having been rejected, both by this City and County at the last
Election, though he had represented the former in Assembly for 14 Years that we
are convinced no Measure this House can adopt, will tend so much to inflame the
Resentments and imbitter the Divisions of the good People of this Province, as
his appointment to be our Agent -- And we cannot but sincerely lament, that the
Peace and Happiness of Pennsylvania should be sacrificed for the Promotion of a
Man, who cannot be advanced but by the Convulsions of his Country.

Fifthly. Because the unnecessary haste with which this House has acted in
proceeding to this Appointment (without making a small Adjournment, though
requested by many Members, to consult our Constituents on the Matters to be
decided, and) even before their Speaker has been presented to the King's
Representative, though we are informed that the Governor will be in Town the
Beginning of next Week; -- may subject us to the Censures and very heavy
Displeasure of our most gracious Sovereign and his Ministers.

Sixthly. Because the Gentleman proposed, has heretofore ventured, contrary to
an Act of Assembly, to place the The Money here meant was a Sum granted by
Parliament as an Indemnification for part of our Expenses in the late War,
which by Act of Assembly was ordered for its better Security to be placed in
the Bank.
public Money in the Stocks, whereby this Province suffered a loss of L.6000;
and that Sum, added to L.5000 granted for his Expenses, makes the whole Cost of
his former Voyage to England, amount to ELEVEN THOUSAND POUNDS; which expensive
kind of Agency we do not choose to imitate, and burden the Public with
unnecessary loads of Debt. For these and other Reasons we should think
ourselves guilty of betraying the Rights of Pennsylvania, if we should
presumptuously commit them to the Discretion of a Man, against whom so many and
just Objections present themselves.

Lastly. We being extremely desirous to avert the Mischiefs apprehended from
the intended Appointment, and as much as in us lies to promote Peace and
Unanimity among us and our Constituents, do humbly propose to the House, that
if they will agree regularly to appoint any Dr. Fothergill was mentioned by the
Subscribers as a proper Person.
Gentlemen of Integrity, Abilities, and Knowledge in England, to assist Mr.
Jackson as our Agent, under a Restriction not to present the Petitions for a
Change of our Government, or any of them, to the King or his Ministers, unless
an express Order for that Purpose be hereafter given by the Assembly of this
Province; we will not give it any Opposition: But if such an Appointment should
be made, we must insist (as we cannot think it a necessary one) that our
Constituents, already laboring under heavy Debts, be not burdened with fresh
Impositions on that Account; and therefore, in Condescension to the Members,
who think another Agent necessary, we will concur with them, if they approve of
this Proposal, in paying such Agent at our own Expense.

JOHN DICKINSON, DAVID Mc. CANAUGHY, JOHN MONTGOMERY, ISAAC SAUNDERS, GEORGE
TAILOR, WILLIAM ALLEN, THOMAS WILLING, GEORGE BRYAN, AMOS STRETTELL, HENRY
KEPPELE.

October 26, 1764.

