MR. HOBBY's ADVICE TO HIS PEOPLE FROM THE GRAVE.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by Z. Foul, at his Printing-Office in BACK-STREET.
Price 2d.

MR. HOOBY's ADVICE, etc.
Dearly beloved in Jesus Christ,
BEFORE these lines reach you, the hand that writes them, will be mouldering in
the dust. Receive them, not as from mine house upon earth; -- but within it,
dated from the grave, that house appointed for you, and all the living, dead
Abel yet speaks, -- he only speaks, that he may bring you to that precious
Blood which speaks better things than the blood of Abel, crying aloud for
pardon, peace, reconciliation and salvation. God is my witness, you were my
past concern; God grant you may be my future joy. That concern, and the hope of
this joy, is the cause of these lines, which as they find you now looking
toward a resettlement, so are designed through divine grace, to assist you
therein.

REALIZE, my dearly beloved, that it is a great work you are entering upon and
a great blessing that you stand in need of. Look upon your families look upon
your dear children, that you must quickly leave behind you, and, with the most
importunate concern, realize how greatly their safety, welfare, comfort and
happiness, for time and for eternity may turn upon your receiving such a
blessing. Realize again, the opposition you are likely to meet with in your way
to it. My death, I doubt not, gives satan more life. The scythe that cuts down
God's ministers, makes way for the enemy to sow tares, and furnishes him with
the prospect of a large harvest. Oh! be strongly on your guard against a mind
prepared to receive them. And therefore put away all pride, anger, envy,
headiness, selfishness and the like, suchlike tempers are his hope, and your
amazing danger. Yet however greatly concerned, be not distressed. God lives
God loves, and Christ intercedeth. A proper concern for yourselves is a proof
of the divine concern for you; and while the blood of Christ is precious to
you, fear not that he will leave you destitute of a faithful pastor, the
purchase of that blood -- That you may obtain which, let me solemnly charge you
to begin with prayer and fasting, and humiliation. God lays his beams in the
waters; so must you too, in the deep waters of repentance, if you would have
him dwell with you, in that house of his which is the church. From him comes
every good gift, and especially that great good, a pastor after his own heart.
But he will be sought to, for it. Oh go to him, and be glad that you may do so.
Pour out your tears, and your souls into his bosom. Confess your sins before
him, particularly whatever has been amiss in your conduct toward your former
pastors. And especially your carelessness to profit by their ministrations.
Acknowledge God's justice in taking them away, and your own unworthiness of
another. Yet plead with him, his goodness, mercy, his promise and that how
great soever is your unworthiness, the more divinely bright will his grace
appear in overcoming it. You must see your own unworthiness, of such a
blessing, if you may expect to receive it; and your acknowledging that
unworthiness is the way to the blessing. Not only pray, but continue in
prayers; feel your own want, and wrestle with God for the supply of it. Wrestle
till you prevail. If you will take no denial, God will give you no refusal.
There is a kind of omnipotency in prayers yea, may I not say it overcomes
omnipotence itself, disarms God of his anger and extorts that language from
him, Commad ye me.

AND now having sought to God. -- In the next place take council of men;
especially of the Minsters of Christ round about you: many of whom, blessed be
God, are of amiable capacity, gracious integrity, and who will naturally care
for your state. But beware of poor lowspirited, selfish and false advisers. Be
well advised in yourselves, in order to your receiving the best advice of
others. -- And now supposing you to have made application to some gentleman
with a veiw to settle. -- Be ye watchful. -- Be watchful over yourselves,
against all prejudice, one way or another. Especially be watchful over your
affections; these often blind the understanding, and blind the judgment. Don't
judge of a minister as you do of a bell, by the mere sound, nor by mere outward
appearances; such as air, manner, address, delivery and the like. These,
however pleasing, are but the mere work of nature, or the business of art. It
is not all gold that glistens. Take heed how ye hear -- In the next place be
watchful of him. Watch narrowly his preaching. Take heed what you hear. Examine
whether his preaching be close, pungent, and particular; or only large, vague
and general; whether by bringing in bad principles, he do not corrupt the truth
of Christ and endanger your souls; or whether he do not cunningly conceal his
principles for the present, that so he and his bad principles may creep in
unawares together. Do you hear any thing of the imputation of Adam's sin, and
of Christ's righteousness, the depravity of man's nature, and the necessity of
efficacious grace; does he preach Christ, as the all in all of man, his wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption; if, not, shun him as you would a
post. -- Again be watchful over his conduct whether it discovers sincerity and
honesty, wisdom and prudence, the reason of a man, the judgment of a scholar,
the grace of a christian, and the exemplariness of a minister. -- Again, be
watchful to know his principles as a divine: here let me charge you, as you
will answer it at the great day, that you don't settle in the dark, and never
was greater need of such a charge, than at this day; because never greater
danger of the gospel of God's grace; it being perverted into a gospel without
any grace at all. You have a right to know his principles. And if you neglect
this right, I fear God is blinding in order to destory you. Remember how and
what you have received and heard, and hold fast. Religion, I am confident, will
be likely to live, as those doctrines, which, for distinction sake, are called
calvinistic, live, or so die, as they die. And if upon examination of the
matter you find that the man's principles are not settled, I beseech you settle
not yet the man. -- Once more, be watchful not only that the principles of the
man be good, but that he be also a good man himself; that he have a good heart,
as well as a good head. -- Endeavor that the man of your choice be also one
whom the Lord has chosen to himself. God may indeed make use of a bad man to
bring about good designs; but it is not likely that one who is but a vessel in
which he has no pleasure should be used as a vessel of honor to bear God's
name and grace unto his people: no; such an one is a chosen vessel; them that
honor God, will God honor. However, much caution and modesty is to be used in
this matter, and much christian charity; for though it would be egregious folly
in you to commit the care of your souls to one that manifested no care of his
own; yet there may be much censoriousness in determining that he has no such
care, or does not manifest it: and where there is this censoriousness, there is
always pride; and where pride is, there is a demonstration that you have not
taken sufficient care of your own souls. Here therefore let your zeal be
accompanied with the meekness of wisdom. Prudence is profitable to direct.
Furthermore, in order to abtain this desired blessing, not only watch and pray,
consult and advise, but also wait too. Such a mine is not easily dug. Such a
blessing is not presently obtained. Guard therefore against all precipitancy.
Take time and you will not only do it the better, but do it the sooner. A few
months may deceive you into anxiety, when a longer time may open your eyes to
your full quiet and satisfaction. The apostle requires that a deacon be first
proved or tried. Of how much more grand importance is it that a gospel bishop
should be so. How immense the riches committed to their trust. I humbly trust
that the ministers of Christ will be careful that they do not lay hands
suddenly upon any man. And I solemnly charge you as from the world of eternity,
that you do not lift up your hands suddenly for any man.

AND now my beloved people, to hasten to a long farewell. Having given you that
advice, which my love and concern for you have inspired, and which I am
persuaded the Spirit of God approves; and in the humble hope that you will
obtain the blessing I so earnestly desire for you; let me request and demand in
the name of Christ my dear Master, that you think nothing too much to do for
such a pastor; and did you know the heart of a minister, you would think so
indeed, and by every method, endeavor to sooth and ease it. Before you receive
these lines, I shall be free from the danger of a selfish spirit myself, and
the suspicion of it in you. It Is your interest I am seeking, and if you are
dear to your pastor, as you will be if you choose such an one as I have pointed
out, Oh! let him be dear to you; if he preaches to you the true gospel, he
deserves to live of the gospel. Though he can merit nothing of his master, yet
he in his name merits much of you. If he sows to you in spirtiual thing, don't
think it much if he reap of you carnal things -- A rich minister, I readily
grant, has always been the bane of religion; but let me assure you, that an
impoverished ministry always will be so. Beware of Jeroboam's priests, lest
discontented with their condition, they become Jeroboams themselves. Let your
minister have enough to keep him chose in his study, that he may serve God and
you without distraction; to give honorably to him is to do honor to God and
get good to yourselves, -- And now having vented the love of a friend, and the
heart of a pastor, hearken to my last words, which speak to you in this wise.

DEARLY Beloved, See that you fall not out by the way. Be of one mind as far as
possible: if not, be of one heart. Put on as the elect of God, bowels of
mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one
another, forgiving one another; if any man have a quarrel against any, even as
Christ forgave you, so also do ye; and above all these things, put on charity,
which is the bond of perfectness, and let the peace of God rule in your hearts.
To whose blessing I earnestly commend you in Chirst Jesus, praying that all
you, and I, may meet as his right hand, and spend an eternity in praising him,
and God his father for him,

This is the last farewell of your Once affectionate pastor, W. HOOBY, Now no
more

FINIS.

