Mr. GAY's SERMON, At the Funeral of Three Young Men.

THE Author had no Design of publishing this Discourse when he delivered it,
and declined the first Motions that were made for it: But as several have of
late earnestly requested, and a large Number have publicly manifested a Desire
that it might be printed, it is now made Public; hoping (...) the Importance of
the Subject will engage the Reader's Attention, and, through the divine
Blessing, excite a due Regard to his immortal Interest.

E. G.

The Sovereignty of GOD, in determining Man's Days, or the Time and Manner of
his Death; Illustrated and Improved, IN A SERMON, Preached at SUFFIELD, May 22d
1766. AT THE FUNERAL OF Three YOUNG MEN, Who were killed by LIGHTNING, MAY
20th, 1766.

By EBENEZER GAY, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Suffield.

Is there not an appointed Time to Man upon Earth? Are not his Days also like
the Days of an Hierling? Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him? Who will
say unto him, What do thou?

JOB. HARTFORD: Printed by THOMAS GREEN, at the Heart and Crown, opposite the
Courthouse, M,DCC,LXVII.

A Funeral Discourse.
JOB XIV. 5. SEEING HIS DAYS ARE DETERMINED, THE NUMBER OF HIS MONTHS ARE WITH
THEE, THOU HAVE APPOINTED HIS BOUNDS THAT HE CANNOT PASS.


DEATH, is a melancholy Subject to employ our Meditations; yet a Subject we
have daily Occasion, with all Seriousness, to bear upon our Minds, and are
frequently invited, by particular Occurrences of divine Providence, to
contemplate: It is a Change so certain, and, withal, so very important, viewed
in itself, and its Consequences, that it highly concerns the Living to enter
into the most frequent and affecting Consideration of it. It Is peculiarly fit
and (...) do, when we are presented with Instances of Mortality; especially
such remarkable and striking Instances the^^of, as loudly admonish us of our
exceeding Frailty, and utter uncertainty of Life, and naturally suggests a
Variety of useful Thoughts and Reflections. Such is the awful Occurrence of
divine Providence which has brought us together at this Time. The Occasion is
indeed very solemn and sorrowful, and demands our most serious and awakened
Attention. We are here presented with such a Spectacle as our Eyes never saw
before -- with such a Scene of Mourning and Woe, as we are unused to, considered
in all its Circumstances. Behold! there lie the Corpses of three YOUNG MEN,
lately cut down in the Prime of Life not in the ordinary Way, but by one
instantaneous Blow, quick and sudden as the Lightning's Flash! There sit the
sorrowful Parents, and other surviving Relatives of the Deceased, deeply
touched with the sudden and shocking Event, and sadly bewailing their Loss;
whose Affliction bespeaks our friendly Sympathy and Compassion, in some such
Language as that in Job xix. 21. Have Pity upon me, have Pity upon me, O ye my
Friends, for the Hand of God has touched me. And shall we not all be affected
with this sorrowful Event, and, as both the Law of Nature and Christianity
dictates, lament the sudden and untimely Death of these young Men, and mourn
with them that mourn?

BUT then it behooves both the Bereaved, and Us, to regulate our Thoughts,
Affections, and Behavior, on this sorrowful Occasion, by the Rules of Piety and
Virtue, and to manifest a due Reverence and Regard to GOD, the supreme Governor
of the World, and righteous Disposer of all Events; by whose just Decree, and
unchangable Appointment, the Sentence of Death is passed upon all Mankind, and
whose all-governing Providence determines the Number of every Man's Days, and
the particular Time, and Manner of his Death. Accordingly I have chosen the
Words of the Text, now read, to entertain you with, on this mournful Occasion.
Seeing his Days are determined, the Number of his Months are with thee, thou
host appointed his Bounds that he cannot pass. They are the Words of pious Job,
which he uttered in the Day of his sore Calamity, when he was greatly
oppressed, in Body and Mind, with the Miseries of human Life. In the 1st and 2d
Verses, he expresses an affectionate and sorrowful Sense of the Brevity,
Troubles, and Uncertainty of human Life: Man that is born of a Woman, is of few
Days, and full of Trouble: He comes forth like a Flower, and is cut down; he
flees also as a Shadow, and continues not. This he represents as a general or
universal Case. And, in the Text, he uses several Expressions, importing the
divine Sovereignty, and Prerogative, in disposing of Man, determining the (...)
of his Days and Months upon Earth, and fixing the Period of Life, beyond which
none can pass. This Truth, well attended to, affords seasonable and useful
Reflections, proper to influence and direct our Temper and Behavior, under the
troublesome Occurrences that befall us; and may serve, especially, to compose us
to Resignation and Contentment, under sorrowful Bereavments. The Truth then, to
be illustrated and improved, is this, viz.

That Man's Days upon Earth (...) of his Months, are precisely determined
(...), and the Time and Manner of his Death fined, which he cannot pass or
avoid. I. I shall say Something by Way of Illustration of this Truth. And then,
II. Make some Improvement of it.
I. I shall say Something by Way of Illustration of this Truth. That Mankind
are Mortal, and destined to a short Continuance here, is indisputable Fact. The
Sentence of Death is passed upon all Men, without any Limitation, or
Distinction. And however different they may be, in other Respects, there is
this one Event, that comes alike to them. Is there not an appointed Time to Man
upon Earth? Are not his Days also as the Days of on Hireling? Job vii. 1. It is
appointed unto Man once to die, Heb ix. 27. The Cause hereof is assigned by St.
Paul, Romans v. 11. Wherefore, as by one Man Sin entered into the World, and
Death by Sin; and so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned. But
though Death be the common Lot of All, and none are exempted from it, yet there
is a great Variety, as to the Time, Manner, and Circumstances of it, considered
with Respect to Individuals. There is no stated Time, no certain Number of
Days, Months, or Years fixed, to which every One lives that is born into the
World, and beyond which no One does pass; but Some are destined to a longer,
and Others to a shorter Stay in the World. This Matter is under the immediate
Conduct of a most wise and righteous Providence, and all Things, relative to it
are adjusted by the unerring Wisdom of the supreme Lord of All, and sovereign
Disposer of all Events that take Place in the World. In GOD's Hand is the Life
and Breath of all Mankind; and he claims it as his Prerogative to kill, and to
save alive. Every Man that comes into the World, is entirely dependant upon GOD
for his Preservation and Continuance in Life. He that gave us Life, and Being,
limits the Time of Life to every One, according to the Pleasure of his own
Will. The Time when, the Manner how, and the Place where, he shall make his
Exit, is determined by Him. His Days even the Number of his Months are with
God, and, determined by him, the Bounds to which he shall come, and beyond
which he shall not pass, are fixed by his unchangable Appointment. GOD, as the
Author of Life and Death, acts herein with sovereign Power and Freedom, and a
wise and uncontrollable Dominion, Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him?
Who will say unto him, What do thou? Job ix 12.
Death, in every Instance and in every Form, is GOD's providential Act: And,
whenever he issues forth the dread Command, and requires our Souls of us, we
must obey; nor can we, by any Means or Power whatever, resist his Will, escape
the fatal Stroke, or put off the Execution of it to a longer Period. There is
no Man that has Power over the Spirit, to retain the Spirit; neither has he
Power in the Day of Death: And there is no Discharge in that War. Eccl. viii. 8.
GOD does not, in this Part of his Administration, proceed by any fixed Rule,
discoverable by us, or that lie, open to our View; whereby we can know before
Hand, the Time, Place, or Circumstances of our own, or another's Death. This we
can know and determine only by the Event; yet we have no Reason, upon this, or
any other Account, to doubt, but that GOD always acts agreeable to his own
fixed Plan, and that every Person's Death, usual as it may seem to us, or by
(...) it is effected, takes Place exactly in (...) Time and Manner that is
pre-determined by Him, and as best suits with the Scheme of his perfect and
all-wise Providence. In many Instances, indeed, GOD gives previous Notice and
Admonition of approaching Death, by Sickness and Diseases; but oftentimes he
surprises Persons in a sudden and unexpected Manner, and cuts them off
unawares: So that although Nothing is more certain than Death and the Living
know that they shall die, yet scarce any Thing is more uncertain, as to us,
than the Time and Manner of this Change. We are exceeding frail, at best, and
liable to be destroyed by innumerable Means, which we can neither foresee, nor
avoid. For (as the wise Preacher has justly observed, Eccl. ix. 12.) Man also
knows not his Time, as the Fishes that are taken in an evil Net, and as the
Birds that are caught in the Snare; so are the Sons of Men snared in an evil
Time, when it falls saddenly upon them. And agreeable hereunto, he elsewhere
gives us this Caution, Boast not thyself of Yo-Morrow, for thou know not
what a Day may bring forth. Prove. xxvii. 1.
So ignorant and uncertain are we about future Events, that no Man, be the
Prospect ever so fair and promising, knows what shall happen to him in Time to
come -- what a Day, or an Hour, or even the very next Moment, will bring forth
-- whether he shall be dead, or alive, in this World, or the next. Death,
though a very great Change, may be sudden and instantaneous. We see, in Fact,
that it is without any Order, as to its Course and Manner of Proceedure; not
seizing One after another in a regular Succession, according to their Age, or
Place of Abode; but taking One here, and Another there; now an old, then a
young Person, as the sovereign Lord of All has determined; and that, in a
Variety of Ways, and by different Means, Persons are removed out of the Land of
the Living: Some are carried off by accute Distempers, others by lingering
Diseases -- some by the Hand of Violence, Others by sudden and unexpected
Occurrences. It is manifest to the Observation of all Mankind, that Some die in
early Infancy; Some in Childhood; Some in the Bloom and Vigor of Youth; Some in
their full Strength, being wholly at Ease, having their Breasts full of Milk,
and their Bones moistened with Morrow; and Some in the Midst of their Days and
Usefulness; while Others live to a good old Age, and come to the Grave as a
Shock of Corn in its Season. In a Word, the Arrows of Death, the King of
Terrors, fly so promiscuously among our mortal race, that no Age, Rank or
Condition of Men, is secure therefrom. And no Man, secure, as he may seem to be
of Life, knows how soon the Summons may be sent to him to depart. Indeed, the
Time and Manner of our Death is to us such an impenetrable Secret, as to leave
us in the greatest Uncertainty. And it is wisely so ordered in divine
Providence, that we may be made the more sensible of our continual Dependence
upon GOD, and more circumspect and diligent in the Duties of Life, and may
learn not to put too much Trust and Confidence in ourselves, or in any Man of
like Frailty, whose Breath is in their Nostrils; but to place our Hope and
Dependence upon the Lord Jehovah, with whom is everlasting Strength -- to
commit ourselves to him in Welldoing, and refer it to him, to order and
dispose, both of Us, and of all Ours, as, in his infinite Wisdom, he shall
judge it to be right and best, most for his own Glory, and our eternal Interest
and Welfare.

The Truth contained in the Words of the Text thus illustrated, I proceed,

II. To make some Improvement of it.

1. This Truth suggests to our View and Consideration, another and future State
of Existence, after the present Life shall be terminated. For since this Life
is so short and uncertain, and the Number of our Days is determined by GOD,
which we cannot pass, we may be morally certain, that we were made and
designed, not for this World only, but also for another, a better and more
certain and lasting State of Enjoyment. For is it reasonably to be imagined,
that the infinitely wise and good Author of our Beings has made such Creatures
as we are, endowed with such Capacities and Desires, as all worldly Things and
Enjoyments cannot fully satisfy; or, that he should place us in such a short,
frail, dying World as this, which is so full of Vexation and Trouble, and where
no perfect Rest and Happiness is to be expected, without providing some better
Things for us to come? The Perceptions, Reflections, and Enjoyments of the
Soul, the superior Part of our Frame, are some of them such as clearly in
licate its Distinction from, its Superiority to, and Independence on the Body,
and that it may exist separate from, and independent on it: Nor can we, from
the Death and Dissolution of the Body, certainly infer the Death and
Destruction of the Soul: On the Contrary, the Capacities and Desires, the
Years, and Hopes of the Soul, strongly argue, not only its Spirituality, but
its Immortality too; and that there is a future State, after this which is
finished at Death, wherein the Soul shall exist, and God, the moral Governor of
the World, will more fully administer Judgment to every One, according to his
Deeds, than it appears he does in this World, upon the Supposition, that this
is the only State, in which Men have to live. So far we may go upon the
Principles of Reason: But this is far from being the clearest Evidence we have
in the Case. The Book of divine Revelation affords a more clear and certain
Intelligence of a future State. This brings Life and Immortality to Light, 2 Timothy i. 10.
and assures us that it is appointed unto Man once to die, but after this the
Judgment; Heb. ix. 27.
wherein every Man shall give Account of himself to God, Romans xiv. 12.
and shall receive the Things done in his Body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad. 2 Cor. v. 10.
In short, we are most plainly instructed in the Gospel of CHRIST, that he came
into the World, that whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have
everlasting Life, John iii, 16.
that he has abolished Death, 2 Timothy i. 10.
and triumphed over it by his own Death and Resurrection. (Col. ii. 15. Heb.
ii. 14, 15.) that he both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord
both of the Dead and the Living; Romans xiv. 9.
that there is a Place of Happiness, a Kingdom of Glory, a Heaven of perfect
and endless Joys, prepared for the Righteous after Death, and a strange
Punishment, a Hell of everlasting Woe and Misery provided for the impenitently
wicked; that he is ordained of GOD, to be the final Judge of Quick and Dead;
Acts x. 42.
yea, that GOD has appointed a Day in the which he will judge the World in
Righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained for this Purpose; whereof he
has given Assurance unto all Men, in that he has raised him from the Dead;
(...) xvii. 31.
and that he will then render unto every Man according to his Deeds: To them,
who by patient Continuance in Well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and
Immortality; eternal Life: But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey
the Truth, but obey Unrighteousness, Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and
Anguish; Romans ii. 6, 7, 8, 9.
and that the Hour is coming, in the which all that are in their Graves shall
hear his Voice, and shall come forth, they that have done Good, unto the
Resurrection of Life, and they that have done Evil, unto the Resurrection of
Damnation. John v. 28, 29.
From all which it most evidently appears, that Death does not put a Period to
our Existence, but is attended with the most awful and important Consequences
-- Consequences far more interesting, and of infinitely greater Concernment to
every Man, than any Thing in this World is, or can be: That when the Soul quits
the Body, and leaves it to moulder and return to the Dust, from whence it was
taken, it immediately takes its Flight into the World of Spirits, and returns
to GOD who gave it, to be disposed of to a State of complete and endless
Happiness or Misery, according to its true State and Character, when it existed
in, and left the Body. And that, when the Lord JESUS CHRIST shall descend from
Heaven, with Power and great Glory, to judge the World, Death and Hell shall
deliver up the Dead which are in them, and the whole World of Saints and
Sinners shall be brought before the awful and august Tribunal of JESUS CHRIST;
not only their Souls, but their Bodies too, though differently modified, and
fitted to their respective Uses and Ends: The Former of which, i. e. the
Saints, he will openly acknowledge and acquit, and, with the most endearing
Tenderness and Love, say unto them, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World. Matt. xxv. 34.
But the Latter, i. e. the Wicked, he will disown and reject, and say unto
them, with the most stern and unrelenting Justice, Depart from me, ye Cursed,
into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. V. 41.
In Consequence hereof, These shall go away into everlasting Punishment: but
the Righteous into Life eternal. V. (...).
Since these are the certain after Consequences of Death, and as Death leaves
us Judgment will find us, it is of the utmost Importance to be well prepared
for Death, so as to avoid the miserable, and share in the happy Consequences of
it, in the future and eternal World. And so,

2. This Truth suggests to us the Wisdom and Necessity of being always prepared
for Death. To any One that considers Death in itself, and its important
Consequences, it must appear to be a Matter of the greatest Concernment to
prepare for it. Though we cannot avoid it, yet we may be so prepared to meet it,
as that the Sting and Terrors of it will be much allayed, if not wholly taken
away, and the after Consequences will be most happy and joyful as it will put a
Period to our sinning and suffering, at the same Time that it does to our
Lives, and open a Passage for our Souls into the Paradisaic State, the Mansions
of consummate Glory and Felicity above. And since it is altogether uncertain
when, how soon, or in what Manner, we shall be called to meet Death, it
certainly behooves us to be continually upon our Watch, and always ready, lest,
coming suddenly, it should find us unprepared, to our great Astonishment, and
everlasting Disappointment. But the Question then is, What is the necessary
Preparation for Death? To which I answer, The Faith, and Hope, and Holiness of
the Gospel. As it is the Gospel (...) brings Life and Immortality to Light, so
to this we (...) indebted, and should have Recourse, for Instruction in the Way
to Life and Happiness. This teaches us (...) Peace with God, and future and
immortal Glory and Blessedness in the Kingdom of Heaven, is to be had only in
and through the Lord JESUS CHRIST.; who came into the World, by the Appointment
of GOD the FATHER, that the World through him might be saved. John iii. 17.
He has died for us, to free us from Sin and Death, and to reconcile and bring
us unto God: He has abolished Death, and laid a sure Foundation for our final
Release from the Power of it: He has purchased, and is gone before to prepare
Mansions of Bliss and Glory, in the Kingdom of Heaven for all his sincere
Followers; that they may be with him hereafter, where he is, to behold his
Glory, and to share in the inconceivable Blessedness of his Kingdom. And in
Order to be prepared for Death, and a blessed Immortality after Death, it is
necessary that we put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no Provision for the
Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof: Romans xiii. 14.
That we not only exercise that humble, cordial Faith in him, as our Savior and
Lord, whereby we shall be united to him as Members of his Body, and interested
in his great and precious Promises; but that we also put on these Graces and
Virtues of Mind and Life, which are the necessary Concomitants and Effects of
such a Faith, and requisite to our being attempered to, and prepared for, the
heavenly State and World: For that is a State of perfect Holiness and Love, and
every Thing that is morally good. And as ever we hope to enter into that happy
State and World, and to enjoy it as our future Portion, it is requisite that we
return to GOD, in this Life, by unfeigned Repentance, through JESUS CHRIST, the
great and only Mediator between GOD and us; and exercise that Faith, Trust, and
Hope in him, which works by Love, and purifies the Heart, and, through the
sanctifying Influences of his holy Spirit, Cleanse curselves from all
Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Harness in the Fear of GOD. 2
Cor. vii. 1.
Then we shall be prepared for Death; and, whenever we shall fall beneath the
Stroke of it, we shall fall into the Hands of a merciful GOD, and a faithful
REDEEMER; who will safely conduct, and readily receive, our disembodied Souls
to the unspeakable Felicities, and triumphant Glories of the heavenly World;
and finally ransom our Bodies from, and give us the Conquest over Death and the
Grave. And that we may be actually, as well as habitually prepared for this
important Change, so as to be able to meet it with Serenity and Joy, it
concerns us to be circumspect and diligent in our christian Calling -- to be
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord, 1 Cor. xv. 58.
and making continual Progress in the christian Temper and Life, by the
vigorous Exercise and Practice of the several Virtues, which constitute and are
effential to it: For so only can we, upon any solid and rational Ground, hope
for, and expect, an Entrance to be administered unto us abundantly, into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST. 2 Pet. i. 11.
And happy are those pious, humble, and obedient Believers in JESUS CHRIST, who
are thus prepared for their greet and last Change. For, dismal as this Event
may appear, in itself, the after Consequences will be happy for them; such as
may well dispel the Fears and Terrors of it, and afford them abundant Support
and Consolation. The Consideration and Hope, that when they are absent from the
Body, they shall be present with the LORD in Heaven, in that happy and glorious
State prepared in CHRIST JESUS for them, where there is no more Sin nor Sorrow,
no more Pain nor Death; but where all Tears shall be wiped from their Eyes; and
that their mortal Bodies, which they put off, and commit to the Grave, shall
hereafter be raised up to a glorious Immortality, is most supporting,
comforting, and animating, under all the Burdens and Ills of Life, and the
Prospects of Death. And Death, whenever, or in whatever Manner it comes, will
be so far from being any real Disadvantage to them, that it will be the Period
of their sinning and sorrowing; and will open the Way for them, into that
Fullness of Joy, which is in GOD's Presence, and to those Rivers of Pleasures
which flow at his Right Hand, forever more.

3. This Truth teaches us the amazing Stupidity and Folly of secure and
carnally minded Sinners, who seek their Happiness in this Life, and neglect all
necessary Preparation for a Future. That reasonable and immortal Creatures, who
have an eternal Interest at Stake, should be so thoughtless and negligent about
it, and spend their Time and Care about those worldly Gratifications and
Enjoyments, which unfit them for Death, and expose them to all the miserable
Consequences of it, may well be accounted strange, and is truly lamentable. And
yet how many are there, who see others die, yea, die suddenly, and know that
they must soon die, that go on in carnal Ease and Security, in worldly
Festivity and Joy, as if they were in no Danger, and Tomorrow shall be as this
Day, and much more abundant? What amazing holly is this! For will all this
Concern for the present Life, and Unconcernedness for the Future, prevent or
put off a single Moment, the Stroke of Death? No, verily: We find it true in
Fact, that such are taken away, as well as others; and oftentimes in the Midst
of their Days, or in the Vigor of Youth, and in the Height of their Mirth and
Jollity, and worldly Hopes and Expectations. And Death, whenever it comes,
takes them unawares, and unprepared. And, how know thou, O Tool! who art
ready to promise thyself a long Life, and much Good to be enjoyed -- to boast
of thy earthly Possessions, and to sing a Requiem to thy Soul, as having Goods
laid up for many Years; how know thou, I say, but that sudden and unexpected
Death will speedily put an End to all thy present Enjoyments, and future
Expectations: Nay, can you be sure, that this very Night your Soul will not be
required of you? And should this be the Case, what will become of you! Where
will your naked, guilty Soul fly, to hide itself from the Face, and be secured
from the Vengeance of your offended GOD and SAVIOR, who has Power, not only to
kill the Body, but also to (...) both Soul and Body in (...) for ever? How
great and astonishing is the Misery of such careless and obstinate Sinners, who
will not be awakened and reformed, or persuaded to come to CHRIST for Life,
till Death overtakes them, and cuts off all Opportunity herefor? How must the
Thoughts of Death, and Judgment to come, in the Hours of cool Reflection,
affect them, damp their earthly Joys and Pursuits, and inject the most (...)
Fears into their Souls? And Oh! with what Consternation will they receive the
Summons of Death, and meet this King of Terrors! How will all their earthly
Comforts and Prospects vanish and sadly disappoint their Hopes! How will their
guilty Fears be alarmed! How will their Countenances change, and their Thoughts
sorely trouble them, the Joints of their Loins be loosed, and their Knees smite
one against another, as did the riotous Prince's of Babylon, at the
Handwriting on the Wall of his Palace! How often have those, who, in the Time
of Health and Prosperity, have set Death and Hell at Defiance, been seen to be
sore affrighted at the Apprehension, when under the Arrest of Death; and heard
to rear out, in the utmost Distress and Anguish, as if the Pains of the second
Death had already seized upon them! And, verily, it is a doleful Situation, to
be upon the Verge of Eternity, encountering the last Enemy, Death, with all our
Sins and Guilt upon us! Well may impenitent and unpardoned Sinners, if they
have their Reason and Senses about them, be astonished and tremble with sore
Amazement! Sure I am, it is enough to terrify the boldest Offender, and, if he
has a proper Sense of his Condition, at such a Time, he must needs shudder, and
shrink back with Horror, at the dismal Prospect! Sir, Death, Judgment and Hell,
now appear too serious and weighty Points to be made any longer the Subjects of
Mockery and Derision. Now the Man's Sins, with their aggravating Circumstances,
are brought to his Remembrance, and Guilt, like an insupportable Weight,
presses hard upon him: Convictions, which he can no longer ward off, strike
home: Conscience resumes its Office, collects its Force, and reads him a most
dreadful and shocking Lesson: Shame, Confusion, and guilty Fears, seize his
troubled Mind, and miserably haunt and wreck his expiring Soul: Remorse,
Anguish and Despair, and the Worm that never dies, direfully prey upon his
trembling and astonished Mind, and he finds no Rest for his Soul. Look which
Way he will, he sees no Refuge, where he can hide himself, and be safe. If he
looks Upwards, behold an affronted GOD and JUDGE, frowning in Anger, and armed
with Terrors, ready to take speedy Vengeance on him! If he looks Downward, lo,
Hell, with all the Plagues and Torments of the second and eternal Death, lies
open to his View! The Sight and Remembrance of a forgotten, abused, and
affronted GOD and SAVIOR, fills him with a Dread worse than Death, to appear
before him! Instead of Intercessions for Mercy, he is filled with Self-Reproach
and Condemnation; or if he lifts up a Cry for Mercy, it is with mis-giving
Fears, and Despair of being heard. And, when he quits the Stage of Life, he
finds his Punishment and Misery equal to, or rather exceeding, his most fearful
Apprehensions: He is rejected and condemned by his almighty Judge, and
sentenced to depart from the blisful Presence of GOD, and the Lamb, into
everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. O! that careless and
presumptuous Sinners, who continually lie exposed to (...) this inexpressible
Shame, Fear, and Misery, would seriously think hereof, before it be too late to
make their Escape, by effectual Repentance, and turning unfeignedly from all
their Iniquities unto GOD, through JESUS CHRIST.

4. This Truth affords a most powerful Argument and Motive for Patience,
Submission, and Resignation, under afflictive (...) sorrowful Bereavements of
near and dear Friends and Relatives. Not only the Consideration, that we are
righteously subjected to Calamities and Death, for our Apostasy from, and
Disobedience to GOD; but also, that our Times are in his Hand, and the Number
of our Days, together with the Time and Manner of our Death, are determined by
him, should reconcile us to all the Adversities that befall (...) in Life, and
to that great and unavoidable Change, Death, which is hastening upon us. And,
in particular, when any of our dear Friends and Relations, upon whom we had
great Hope and Dependence, are cut down by the Hand of Death, either in the
common and ordinary Method, or in a Time, Way, and Manner, which we did not
expect, and under some peculiar and aggravating Circumstances; the Belief and
Consideration, that the Time, Manner and Circumstances of their Death are
determined and ordered by the wise, righteous and sovereign Lord of All, should
silence every murmuring and repining Thought and Disposition, and compose us to
Contentment, Patience and Resignation. GOD certainly has a Right to take from
us whatever he has given us, when, and how he pleases. And it is sit and
reasonable he should govern the World, according to his own infinite Wisdom,
Rectitude, and Goodness, and not according to our own capricious Humors, and
fond Desires. Whenever, therefore, he bereaves us of those Friends, Relatives,
and Enjoyments, which we most of all valued and delighted in, it becomes us, as
far as possible, to be quiet, and submissive, and to think GOD's Time, and Way,
in depriving us of them, the fittest and best. So the pious Psalmist behaved
under severe Trials and Rebukes of divine Providence. I was dumb, I opened not
my Mouth, because thou did it. And thus holy Job conducted himself, under his
repeated and sorrowful Bereavements; when he received the heavy Tidings, by one
Messenger after another, that his Cattle, and his Servants, and all his
Children, were destroyed in one Day: For so it is recorded of him Job i. 20,
21. Then Job arose, and rent his Mantle, and shaved his Head, and sell down
upon the Ground, and worshipped; and said, Naked came I out of my Mother's
Womb, and naked shall I return (...): The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken
away; (...) be the Name of the Lord. And it is added, V. 22. (...) this Job
sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. And herein is he a Pattern of that
Reverence, Patience, and Submission, which is evermore due to GOD from us,
under such Bereavements, and afflictive Dispensations of his Providence. And
this leads me, in the last Place,

5. To take Notice of the sudden and awful Deaths, we are now lamenting, and
the Bereavements of those, who are now sorrowing for the Loss of Children and
Brethren, taken from them. It is, indeed, an awful, alarming, and speaking
Providence, that those three young Men, whose Bodies lie there dead, wrapped in
Grave-cloathes, and enclosed in Coffins, ready to be interred, were so suddenly
blasted by Lightning from Heaven, and, in a moment, sent into Eternity. Two of
the Persons, James and Jonathan Bagg, one aged 19, and the other 17 Years, were
only Brothers, and very likely young Men of sober Character and Behavior. Their
Father died when they were very young; and their Mother is since married to
Capt. Asaph Leavit. One Daughter only sarvives. The other Person was (...)
Remington, jun.
This awful Rebuke of Heaven, must needs sit heavy, and make a deep Impression,
upon the bereaved Families and Relatives; especially upon those who are
deprived of their two Sons, and of all their Hopes and Expectations from them;
the Fate and the Loss of which is peculiarly, and most of all distressing to
the disconsolate Mother, and the afflicted Sister, her only surviving Daughter.
The Hand of GOD is heavy upon you, my Friends, and it is a bitter Cup, which he
has given you to drink. We heartily sympathize with you -- we condole your
Loss -- and wish you all the Grace that you need, for your Support and
Consolation, Instruction and Guidance, under this severe Trial. Mourn and
grieve you may, and tenderly resent your Bereavement; but you may not, you must
not murmur against GOD, nor repine at his Providence. They lived their
appointed Time -- they died in the Manner which GOD determined; and it behooves
you to be still, and resigned and to know that it is GOD that has done it --
to be humble under his mighty Hand -- and to improve his providential Dealings,
to the Purposes of his Glory, and your own eternal Good. Very speaking is the
Language (...) divine Providence to you, in this Rebuke, which it concerns you
diligently to attend and hearken unto. GOD is hereby teaching you what you now
find by sorrowful Experience, that these dear departed Creatures, which were so
much your Comfort, Joy and Hope, were but broken Cisterns, frail, and uncertain
Enjoyments; and giving you the most sensible Conviction of the Folly of placing
your chief Dependence on any such like mortal and fleeting Things. GOD is
hereby also teaching you his own Sovereignty, and All Sufficiency. By cutting
off these earthly Comforts and Hopes, he not only shows his sovereign Dominion,
but also his All Sufficiency; that he is able to support you, to direct your
Paths, and to make you comfortable and (...) in himself, without those Friends
and Helpers (...) you might be ready to think you could not spare, and do
without. And, by the Failure of these earthly Streams of Comfort and Delight,
he directs and leads you to place your Thoughts and Affections upon Himself,
the eternal Source, and unfailing Fountain of all Good and Felicity; to view
his endearing Name, and Characters, by which he has revealed himself, with
greater Attention and Delight than ever; and to place your supreme Trust and
Hope in him, as your best Friend, your surest Guide and Comforter, your
all-sufficient Helper and Refuge, and your eternal Portion and Inheritance.

Moreover, GOD is hereby putting your Love, Duty and Submission to him to the
Test. He does, as it were, address you, on this trying Occasion, as our SAVIOR
did Simon Peter, John xxi. 15. Love thou me more than these? More than these
earthly Friends, which I have taken from you? Have you that supreme Love and
Regard to me, and to my all-disposing Will, that you can part with them, at my
Call, without murmuring and repining, and acquiesce in this Dispensation of my
Providence? Can you say, in the present Case, with a placid Submission, as our
suffering SAVIOR did, when the Sorrows of Death compassed him about, The Cup
which my Father has given me to drink, shall I not drink it? John xxi. 11. In
a Word, GOD is hereby calling upon you to raise your Thoughts and Affections
from Earth to heavenly Things -- to mind the empty, vain, and transitory
Enjoyments of this World less, and to pursue the substantial and important
Things of the future, with greater Ardor and Diligence -- to look not so much
at the Things which are seen, which are temporal, as to the Things which are
not seen, and are eternal -- to improve your Time, Talents, and Opportunities,
in doing the Will of GOD, in seeking after an Interest in his Favor and
Friendship, and making Preparation for a Life of complete and endless Happiness
beyond the Grave -- to be growing wiser and better, more holy, humble,
resigned, and heavenly; that you may be prepared for Death, whenever it shall
come, and enter through this gloomy Vale, into the Regions of everlasting Light
and Joy. May you attend to these Lessons of divine Providence, and not be so
overwhelmed with Grief and Sorrow, as to neglect, or misimprove these
Instructions: May divine Support, Consolation, and Instruction, be afforded to
you, in Proportion to your Trials and Wants: And may you be enabled to endure
this chastening, with such a pious, humble and resigned Spirit and Behavior, as
that it may yield unto you the praceable Fruit of Righteousness, and be a
happy Means of working out for you a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of
Glory, in the World of everlasting Recompense and Reward.

I would now address myself, in a few Words, to this Assembly. We are met
together, my Friends, on a very solemn and sorrowful Occasion, as the sad
Spectacle before our Eyes shows: May our Hearts be deeply affected, and
suitably impressed with it: And may we take the Warning that is now given us,
to prepare, and always be ready for Death; which, however distant we may be apt
to think it to be, may be very near, and suddenly come upon us. But I would, in
a more especial Manner, endeavor to excite the Attention of my younger Friends
and Hearers to this speaking Providence, and to stir you up to a wise and early
Care and Concern for your Souls, and a suture State. Often, to my certain
Knowledge, have you, who belong to this Congregation, been put in Mind of your
Frailty and Mortality, and Liableness to be cut down by sudden and untimely
Death; and admonished of the Importance of being always prepared for it, and of
the Folly and Danger of living thoughtless and unconcerned about it: And I
doubt not, but this is like (...) the (...) of others here present. And now you
have, before your Eyes, some of the most striking Instances of the Frailty and
Uncertainty of human Life. Let me ask you, Have you any more Security of Life,
than those who lie there had, a Moment before the forked Lightning struck them
breathless, and motionless? Might it not have been, and may it not soon be your
unhappy Lot to be as those young Men are? And will you, nevertheless, still
presume upon Life, and, upon this Presumption, go on in Security and Carnality,
neglecting to make speedy and necessary Preparation for Death? How inexcusable,
and (...) Expression miserable will you be, if, after this, Death should
overtake you suddenly, and unprepared? If the Number of your Days and Months,
determined by GOD, should run out, and be finished, before you have made your
Peace with him, and secured an Interest in CHRIST JESUS, and the great
Salvation proposed and offered to you in the Gospel? O! that your Eyes might
this Day affect your Hearts, and that, by the concurring Influences of the Word
and Spirit of GOD, with this awakening Providence, you might be effectually
roused out of your thoughtless and secure Frame, and engaged, henceforward, to
think on your Ways, and turn your Feet into GOD's Testimonies: Yea, to make
Haste, and make no Delay, to seek and to serve the LORD, your Maker and
Redeemer, in Sincerity and Truth; and to get into such a Preparation and
Readiness for Death, that, should it come speedily and suddenly upon you, it
might be safe and happy for you, and your disembodied Spirits may be wafted
from the Confines of this sinful and troublesome World, to the Heaven of
perfect and everlasting Rest and Blessedness.

To conclude: May we all, whether older or younger, be excited, by this
monitory Providence, to work out (...) Salvation with Fear and trembling, and
to give all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, that we may be
(...) of our Judge in Peace; lest, otherwise, our Lord, (...) suddenly, should
find us sleeping and unprepared, to (...) everlasting Disappointment, Shame and
Confusion; and that we may meet, and pass through this great and (...) Change
of Nature, whenever it shall happen, with Cynosure and Resignation, and the
solid Joy and Hope of (...) Blessedness; and that, when these frail Tabernacle
of our Bodies shall be dissolved, our immortal Souls may, under the safe Convoy
of holy Angels, ascend to our GOD and SAVIOR, into these spacious and happy
Mansions, prepared for us; where we shall die no more, but shall live and reign
with CHRIST, for ever and ever: Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, through
Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior; to whom be Glory and Dominion for ever.
AMEN.


