A SERMON ON THE Nature and Necessity OF CONVERSION.

By MATHER BYLES, D. D. Pastor of a Church in BOSTON.

-- Go -- TURN the Disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just.

Luke 1.17. BOSTON: Reprinted by EDES and GILL, in Queen Street, M,DCC,LXIX.

THE Nature and Necessity OF CONVERSION.
MATTHEW. xviii. 3. Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as
little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.


THE main Subject which our Lord JESUS CHRIST insisted on in the constant
Course of his Ministry* was, the Necessity of Conversion and the New Birth.
When Nicodemus came to converse with him, he took the First Opportunity to
surprise the Honorable Rabbi with this most important Doctrine: Except a man
be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of GOD, Joh. iii. 3. And here in my
Text, when the ambitious Disciples came to him to determine a Dispute which
they had been no doubt warmly engaged in; Which of them should be the greatest
in the Kingdom of Heaven? Nay, says our Lord, Not too fast! Except ye be
converted, and become as little Children, ye shall not so much as enter in
there at all. Pride, and Strife, and Emulations, are no Preparatives for that
World. Nor the Kingdom of Grace below, nor the Kingdom of Glory above, is to be
entered with this unmortified, aspiring Temper. Conversion, Humility, and a new
Life, must make us meet for that Inheritance in Light. CHRIST himself has
determined this Matter, and it therefore comes to us with all Authority and
Conviction. Let us then attend earnestly to the Illustration and Application of
the Words.

Except ye be converted, says the Text. Conversion, and to be converted, are
Phrases often found in the Holy Scriptures; and our Salvation turns upon our
right understanding what they mean. The Literal Sense of the word Conversion
then is no more than this, turning about. And this is the meaning of the Word
in this Place: and so it is explained in many other Texts. Sinners are called
upon to turn: and this Short Word comprizes in it all Salvation. Let us
meditate a little here, and endeavor to understand it well.

Man was at first created holy and happy in the Enjoyment of GOD. The Soul of
Adam was filled with Thoughts of GOD, and love to him. The Glory of GOD was his
End in all that he did. A Sense of GOD, Love to GOD, and Satisfaction in the
Will of GOD, made up the Happiness of Adam in Paradise. The Soul was satisfied
and crowded with the Enjoyment of the Infinite Being; and a Sense of his
Glories, and his Love.

But no sooner did Adam sin, and renounce this Happiness, than GOD forsook him,
and he was left destitute and empty. That Soul which was once filled full of
GOD, has now in it a vast Chasm. We feel indeed our want of Happiness: But our
dark Minds know not where to find it. The Desire remains: but the Satisfaction
is lost and gone. Our Souls feel something wanting. There Is a vast Hollow there
without any thing to fill it up. It is constantly craving, Give, Give. That Is
the Reason that Men are never perfectly easy and at Rest. They are forever
pursuing that Happiness which they constantly miss of. GOD is gone, and
Happiness with Him: and they try to fill up the empty Space, with every thing
they can lay their Hands on. Riches, and Honors, and Sensual Pleasures, these
they fancy will make them happy. They try; and try again; and repeat their
trial: But they still meet a Disappointment. They think; If ever I obtain such
a thing I shall be satisfied: If ever I get into such Circumstances, I shall
set down contented. They obtain what they desire, and are just where they were
before. Then they put off the Point of Happiness a little further, and still
think on some Temporal Good which they have not yet enjoyed. If they obtain
this too, they are still disappointed. Thus they go on from one Deceit to
another, till Death overtakes them, before they have tried their last Project.
This has been the Case of all Mankind, a very few excepted, from Adam until
now: Nor will Men take Warning after all. All past Examples, and all their own
Experience to this Moment, will make no lasting Impression on them. They have
lost their Happiness in GOD? they wander from Creature to Creature in Pursuit
of it. Madness is in their Hearts while they live; and after that they go down
unto the Dead. I am not at all wandering from my Text, in these Observations,
but making clear the Way to it.

Conversion then lies here. The Man as he is pursuing Happiness in Creatures,
is stopped short, and convinced that these will not do* GOD gives him a New
Sight of things. He sees an End of all Perfection below GOD. He sees he is
undone every where else. Now his Will is renewed. He turns about: (THAT IS
CONVERSION) he TURNS ABOUT to God, and from this Time seeks all Happiness in
Him alone. He says, Who shall show me any Good? and he replies, Lord, lift thou
up the Light of thy Countenance upon me. Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? and
there is none upon Earth that I desire besides Thee. For ever after this Turn
of Soul, the Man is set upon pleasing GOD: upon yielding to the Will of GOD:
upon approving himself in the Sight of GOD. He never seeks his Happiness in the
Creature any more. He may indeed, under the Power of Temptation, cast a wishing
Look at them: But he recalls it in a Moment. He never can rest easy one Moment
short of the Favor of GOD. Like the Needle touched by the Magnet, still
pointing Northward. When it is shaken indeed and tossed about, it trembles, it
wavers, it vibrates, it varies a Point this way and that, but it never fixes
but right North again. So a Soul thus touched by the SPIRIT of GOD, may be tossed
by Temptations, and the Hurries of the World, and look this Way and that among
the Creatures, till the Violence of the Shock is over, but it never fixes;
never rests, till it points full and steady to GOD again. This short Paragraph
is, I think, a full and clear Account.

We all are seeking Happiness. Every Natural Man seeks for it somewhere below
GOD. Conversion is, The Man seeing he is infinitely wrong, turns about to GOD
again to seek his whole Satisfaction there. I hope I have now said enough in a
few Words to explain the Matter, and show what Conversion is. Before we
proceed, we may make one or two solemn and affecting Reflections.

From what we have heard, we perceive that Conversion is out of our own Power.
It is impossible for us to convert ourselves; or for all the Angels in Heaven
to do it for us. To convince you of this, Let the Natural Man make the
Experiment. Try this Moment. Try and see whither you can bring your Hearts to
this, to renounce all Happiness in every thing but the Favor of GOD; to let
GOD order for you; to have no Will of your own; to be swallowed up, and
ravished with his Will, whatever it is. Can you renounce every mortal Idol? Can
you leave this World, and all the low Delights of it, to go to a World where
you will have none of them, but the Love of GOD will swallow you up? These
things are so distant from an unrenewed Heart, that they look like wild
Paradoxes to it. The Man finds he cannot bring his Heart to this; and he thinks
no Body ever could. And yet, there is not a Good Man upon Earth, but knows a
little what this means. He knows a little what it is to love GOD; to have his
Happiness in GOD; to exult that the Will of GOD is done. Not a Good Man upon
Earth, but would gladly leave all the Delights of Life, only to be made
perfectly holy. Nay, all he fears in Death is, lest it should not convey him to
World of perfect Holiness. Could he be sure that consummate Holiness would be
to him the immediate Consequent of Death, he would die cheerfully, without a
Struggle or a Groan. Seeing then that Conversion is not in our own Power, let
us repair to GOD for it. Sensible, and amazed at our own Incapacity, let us
take to our selves Words and pray with repenting Ephraim, Jer. xxxi. 18. Turn
thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my GOD. Be sensible of
the sinful Nature which still carries us away from him. Be sensible of that
first Sin, by which we departed from him, and pray, Psalm. lxxx. 19. Turn us
again, O Lord GOD of Hosts, and cause thy Face to shine and we shall be saved.
To see our Impotency is the first Step toward Conversion

We here see our Necessity of JESUS CHRIST We cannot turn again to GOD without
Him. No man can come to the Father but by Him. The Enmity between GOD and us is
irreconcilable but by CHRIST. Out of him GOD is a consuming Fire. We may indeed
feel the Want of Happiness, but we should never dare to go to GOD for it. He
would be our Enemy, and we should hate him for it. False Notions of the Divine
Justice and Mercy could never bring us truly to him: And true ones would only
drive us farther from him. So that set CHRIST aside, and there can be no
Conversion.

We learn also the Honors of the HOLY GHOST. He is the Agent who performs this
Work. One Reason that Men fall Short of this saving Change, is the not
acknowledging him as they ought. Did men regard the Operation of the Holy
SPIRIT more, there would be more frequent Converts. Men are apt to trust to
their own Strength when they set about the Work of Conversion. They rob the
Spirit of GOD of his Glory, and so it all comes to nothing. He it is who makes
this great Change in men. He must be the Almighty GOD then: and we should
honor him as so.

You see how many mistake in their Notions of Conversion. Some think that to be
converted is only to profess the Christian Religion. They fancy that to turn
from Heathenism to Christianity is all that is implied in it. To talk of a
Baptized Person's being afterward converted they think is Cant and
Superstition. This is the modern (I wish I could not add, the obtaining and
fashionable) Scheme. If we speak of our being Converted, they ask, why what
were you before? Jews, or Turks, or Heathen? Alas, the fatal Mistake! We are
all undone in our Natural State, unless we know what Conversion means. We are
all naturally departing from GOD, and seeking Happiness in something below him.
If ever we are happy then, it must be by our stopping here, and turning about
to him. Conversion does not consist, in embracing a new Sect, or Party: in
Baptism, or Approach to the Lord's Table; or any external Privilege, or
Advantage, or Alteration. No; it consists in turning from the Creature to GOD.

We see also the Propriety of the Expression in the Text, Except ye become as
Little Children. Conversion implies such a Change as will bring us to begin our
Life anew. We must become as Little Children: modest, unambitious, teachable as
they. Like them, we must be born again; we must begin to live again: begin
another kind of Life: pursue a quite different End, by quite different
Measures. Like a weaned Child, must be weaned from Creatures, and the things we
were formerly fond of. But I would not enlarge here.

I proceed

To show what we are to understand by the Kingdom of Heaven, spoken of in the
Text. Except ye be converted, and become as little Children, ye shall not enter
into the KINGDOM OF HEAVEN. I shall not be long in explaining this Phrase. The
Kingdom of Heaven, and the Kingdom of GOD, are principally used in the
Evangelists for the State of the Gospel in This World; or the Rewards of it in
the Future. Sometimes it means the Kingdom of Grace; and sometimes the Kingdom
of Glory. And I suppose that though the Text may ultimately refer to the Latter,
yet it takes in the former also. And therefore we shall consider them both.

Except we be converted and become as little Children, we shall not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven.

Without this we cannot enter into the Kingdom of Grace. God cannot receive us
as his Favorites even in This World, till we have had this Change passed upon
us. He will take no Delight in us, while we openly neglect him, and set up Self
and Creatures in his Throne. We may indeed belong to his Kingdom of Mercy, and
he may have Designs for our Salvation before our Conversion: But we are by no
means Subjects in this Kingdom of Grace before this. By no means entitled to
his Special Favors, and the Objects of his peculiar Delight.

We may indeed belong to the Visible Kingdom of CHRIST in the World, and not be
savingly Converted. We may be Members of his Church here, and eat and drink in
his Presence, and yet he know nothing of us. But here too, in order to our
being worthy Guests at this sacred Feast, Conversion is a necessary
Preparation. Friend how came thou in hither, not having a wedding Garment?

But

Without this Conversion before we cannot enter into the Kingdom of Glory. Rev.
xxi. 27. There shall in no wise enter into it, any thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination. And not only has GOD declared this, all over
his New Testament, but it is impossible even in the Nature of the Thing. The
principal Happiness in the Kingdom of Glory is, in being perfectly conformed to
the Will of GOD: And this, we know, is only attainable by Conversion. We
entertain juster Ideas of Heaven, when we apprehend it as a State than a Place.
There is indeed such a glorious Place; but we know not where, or what it is.
But as to the Temper and Happiness of this Holy World, this every Good Man
feels a little of in his own Breast. What do they do in Heaven? What do they
Enjoy there? Truly they praise GOD; they love GOD; they seek their whole
Happiness in GOD; and are perfectly conformed to his Will. And now, how can an
Unconverted Man enter that glorious World? His whole Soul is bent upon Self and
Creatures; here he terminates, and he knows nothing further. Should such a Soul
but once get into the Mansions of Glory, he would be like a Swine in a Golden
Palace: He Would be quite out of his Element; and long for the Puddle and the Mire
again. Like Uzziah with his Leprosy in the holy place, 2 Chronicles. xxvi. 20. And
Azariah the chief Priest, and all the Priests looked upon him, and behold he
was leprous in his Forehead, and they thrust him out from thence, yea, himself
hasted also to go out. So would be the Case of the Polluted Soul in the Holy
Heavens. Not only would the holy Angels, and Just Spirits drive him out from
among them, but he himself would haste also to go out. What should he do there?
His Soul has no turn to this Sort of Happiness. Unmortified Lusts and raging
Appetites, Pride, and Sensuality, and Self-Will would be a Hell in his own
Bosom, amidst all the Glories of Heaven. His whole Nature must be changed; he
must be converted, and begin a New Life, or he could never enter into that
blessed State. Verily I say unto you* Except ye be converted, and become as
little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Thus I have endeavored as clearly as I could, to explain and demonstrate the
Doctrine, and I come now to the Sole^^ Application.

Shall not the Unconverted enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Where then shall
they go? They must go somewhere. They are in Being, and they must exist for
ever. Here they cannot always live: In a few Days more they must leave the
Earth; not suffered to tarry by Reason of Death. To Heaven they cannot go. They
have no Part there; nothing to do there; The voice of CHRIST, like a Flaming
Sword, guards the Passage against them. Verily I say unto you, they shall not
enter there. Well then, what will become of them! O fearful, destitute, ruined
State! The infallible Word of GOD informs us where the miserable Creatures must
take up their Eternal Lodging, Matt. xxv. 46. These shall go away into
everlasting Punishment. Mark ix. 43, 48* into the Fire that never shall be
quenched: where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched. Rev. xiv. 10,
11. The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of GOD, which is poured out
without mixture, into the cup of his Indignation, and he shall be tormented
with Fire and Brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the
presence of the Lamb; and the Smoke of their Torment ascends up for ever and
ever; and they have no rest day nor night. He that overcomes, indeed, shall
inherit all things: He that is converted and has his Nature changed, shall
enter into the World of Glory: But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the
abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters* and
all liars, shall have their Part in the lake which burns with Fire and
Brimstone which is the second Death, Rev. xxi. 7, 8. See now the Place to which
the unconverted must go! See the gloomy Landscape of that infernal World* And O,
are we not amazed? are we not in Agony, about our escape from this Ruin? Who
can dwell with devouring Fire? who can dwell with everlasting Burnings? Is not
the Case awful and dreadful? And do not our Hearts quiver, and our Souls sink
and die within us? Behold* Life and Death set before us: Eternal Life, and
Eternal Fire; and are they insignificant Things! O the Madness! if they make no
Impression upon us. On the one Hand we are informed, Repent and be converted*
and your Sins shall be blotted out; on the other, Except ye be converted ye
shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Nay, we must take up our
eternal Abode in the World of Darkness, and Fire, and Chains. Ah! miserable
Case of Unconverted Men! Who would not fear, who would not fly their Doom? And
therefore,

Shall we not, my Brethren, labor instantly after the Conversion which alone
can save us?

Turn ye, Turn ye, why will ye die. Consider the matter* and debate it with
your own Hearts. Conversion begins in serious Consideration. I thought on my
ways, and turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies, was the good old way, Psalm.
cxix. 59. Let us then go alone, and put the Case to our selves, Am I converted
or not? What Happiness am I pursuing; a Happiness in the Creature, or a
Happiness in the Enjoyment of GOD? Can I think that the Possession of any
Temporal Good can make me Happy? Have I not often made the Experiment already;
and have I not as often been disappointed? And why should I try any more? Is it
not high Time for me to turn about, and see if I cannot find that Happiness in
GOD, which till now I have in vain sought for in Objects below him? Propose
these Questions to your own Souls, and see what answer your Conscience will
frame upon them.

Now be convinced that you cannot give this Turn to your selves. Learn to feel
and be sensible how attached to Self and Creatures you are. Mourn it, and
confess it before GOD, and tell him how undone you are without his Almighty
Grace* Plead with Him, in Tears and Agony, to change your vile Nature: to turn
you savingly to Himself. Be importunate, be restless till you find this done
for you: Till you find a Soul entirely forsaking the Creature and pursuing its
whole Satisfaction in GOD alone. 'Till CHRIST appears transcendently dear and
lovely to you; and you can joyfully leave this World to go to His Arms and his
Bosom. This divine and saving Turn of Soul, may be given to you, as you are in
the Use of these appointed Means laboring to obtain it.

And let those of us who have been converted, live becoming the Change we are
under. Be thankful, be joyful: thankful to the God who has turned us, and
joyful that we are passing to Heaven. Let us labor more and more after the
Heavenly Temper: Love GOD more; think on him* work for him, long and wish to be
with him. If ever we find a prevailing Fondness for Creatures after this; if
ever we find our Wills going to rebel, or our Desires tend to this World; let
us immediately check the inordinate Affection, and say, No. I have renounced
these long ago. I have chosen GOD for my Portion, and his Will for my Law long
ago. GOD forbid, that after having escaped the Snare, I should be again taken
and entangled therein. No, No, farewell Creatures; no more shall you tempt me
from my true Happiness. Farewell the Riches I once coveted; the Applause I once
grasped after; the Pleasures that looked so charming. Farewell Felicity on
Earth: and welcome the Will of my GOD: welcome Everlasting Life. Welcome the
Good Things of Earth, which my GOD pleases to give me: But adieu all Thoughts
of Happiness in the Possession of these. Welcome Afflictions too; the Gifts of
my GOD, and the Purchase of my SAVIOR. Shall I receive Good at his Hands, and
not receive Evil? It Is the Cup which my Father gives me, why should I not drink
it! Other Lords have had Dominion over me: But what have I any more to do with
Idols?

And while we are thus awakening the Piety of our own Souls, how should we pity
a miserable World about us? Unhappy Creatures! they know not what this Love to
GOD means. They never felt what it was to be resigned to the Will of GOD, and
swallowed up in his Love and his Praises. They are, as we once were, chained
down to Sense and Creatures; and have no Idea of Conversion and the New Birth.
You may talk to them eternally of these things; but they discern them not: you
had as good go to explain the Mystery of Colors to a Man born blind. Ah, Poor
Men! how should we pity and pray for them: How should we contrive to show them
their Danger and Misery; and labor with them to make their escape? Remember,
He that converteth a Sinner from the Error of his Way, shall save a Soul from
Death. Sure we never need envy them the little Good they possess: But O how
should we admire the Free Grace which has distinguished us from them! There Is
no Room for boasting in the Case. It Is all sovereign, and all free: To GOD
belongs the Glory; and to us Wonder, and Gratitude, and Humility.

We draw on toward a Conclusion. And how can we leave off better than with a
View of that Heavenly World spoken of in the Text? This then shall close the
whole.

What a Holy and Happy Place is the Kingdom of Heaven? There is not one sinful
Person, not one sinful Frame in that World. The Spirits of Just men are made
perfect before they are admitted there. Though the Good Man here loves GOD above
all, and chooses his Portion in him, yet this gracious Temper is often shocked
and broken by Temptations and Indwelling Sin. But There is no Sin, no
Corruption, no Tempter. All the Employment, all the Conversation, and every
Thought is about GOD and his Glories. Alleluia, for the Lord GOD omnipotent
reigns! This is the Language, the Temper, the Employment, the Felicity of
Heaven. There, they are filled with all the Fullness of GOD. There, GOD is all
in all. In that happy World, every Inhabitant, and every Object, glorifies GOD
and is filled with his Glory. His Perfections and his Love take them entirely
up; and nothing also is seen, or heard, or thought of. O happy, happy State!
The Converted Soul knows a little what this means: but what it fully is, (...)
not now, we shall know hereafter. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor can the
Heart of man conceive it all.

These, ye Converted Souls, are the Joys set before you! These are the Glories,
and this the Felicity reserved in Heaven for you. Here you perceive a little
Taste of it (...) your Conformity to the Will of GOD; There you shall set down
to the full Feast, and be perfectly conformed to his Will. Here the Joy of the
LORD enters into you; There you shall enter into the Joy of your Lord.

AMEN.
Felicity Found and Fixed.
I.
BY Evening Floods my Songs have rose,
Amid the waving Trees,
Calm as the peaceful Floods repose,
And gentle as the Breeze.
II.
There often I Have had my LORD my Guest,
Ye Shades, my Joys proclaim!
I Have poured my Raptures in his Breast,
He felt the mutual Flame.
III.
Oh! how his ardent Bosom beats!
His Eyes enchanting shine!
"I Am my Beloved's, he repeats,
"And my Beloved's mine.
IV.
"The Cross, with all its various Smart,
"And killing Pangs I bore;
" 'Twas all to win and six thy Heart,
"Never to forsake me more.
V.
Can thou, my Soul, fired with these Charms,
After a Rival rove!
Can, thou, in thy inconstant Arms,
Embrace another Love!

