A SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY THROUGH FRANCE AND ITALY.

BY MR. YORICK.

VOL. I.

MDCCLXVIII.

A SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY, etc. etc.
-- THEY order, said I, this matter better in France --

-- You have been in France? said my gentleman, turning quick upon me with the
most civil triumph in the world. -- Strange! quoth I, debating the matter with
myself, That one and twenty miles sailing, for it is absolutely no further from
Dover to Calais, should give a man these rights -- I Will look into them: so
giving up the argument -- I went straight to my lodgings, put up half a dozen
shirts and a black pair of silk breeches -- "the coat I have on, said I,
looking at the sleeve, will do" -- took a place in the Dover stage, and the
packet sailing at nine the next morning -- by three I had got sat down to my
dinner upon a fricassee'd chicken so incontestably in France, that had I died
that night of an indigestion, the whole world could not have suspended the
effects of the All the effects of strangers (Swiss and Scotch excepted) dying
in France, are seized by virtue of this law, though the heir be upon the spot --
the profit of these contingencies being farmed, there is no redress.
Droits d'aubaine -- my shirts, and black pair of silk breeches -- portmanteau
and all must have gone to the King of France -- even the little picture which I
have so long worn, and so often have told thee, Eliza, I would carry with me
into my grave, would have been torn from my neck. -- Ungenerous! -- to seize
upon the wreck of an unwary passenger, whom your subjects had beckoned to their
coast -- by Heaven! SIRE, it is not well done; and much does it grieve me, it is
the monarch of a people so civilized and courteous, and so renowned for
sentiment and fine feelings, that I have to reason with --

But I have scarce set foot in your dominions --

CALAIS.
WHEN I had finished my dinner, and drank the King of France's health, to
satisfy my mind that I bore him no spleen, but, on the contrary, high honor
for the humanity of his temper -- I rose up an inch taller for the
accommodation.

-- No -- said I -- the Bourbon is by no means a cruel race: they may be misled
like other people; but there is a mildness in their blood. As I acknowledged
this, I felt a suffusion of a finer kind upon my cheek -- more warm and
friendly to man, than what Burgundy (at least of two livres a bottle, which was
such as I had been drinking) could have produced.

-- Just God! said I, kicking my portmanteau aside, what is there in this
world's goods which should sharpen our spirits, and make so many kind-hearted
brethren of us, fall out so cruelly as we do by the way?

When man is at peace with man, how much lighter than a feather is the heaviest
of metals in his hand! he pulls out his purse, and holding it airily and
uncompressed, looks round him, as if he sought for an object to share it with
-- In doing this, I felt every vessel in my frame dilate -- the arteries beat
all chearily together, and every power which sustained life, performed it with
so little friction, that 'twould have confounded the most physical preciense in
France; with all her materialism, the could scarce have called me a machine --

I Am confident, said I to myself, I should have overset her creed.

The accession of that idea, carried nature, at that time, as high as she could
go -- I was at peace with the world before, and this finished the treaty with
myself.

-- Now, was I a King of France, cried I -- what a moment for an orphan to have
begged his father's portmanteau of me!

THE MONK. CALAIS.
I HAD scarce uttered the words, when a poor monk of the order of St. Francis
came into the room to beg something for his convent. No man cares to have his
virtues the sport of contingencies -- or one man may be generous, as another
man is puissant -- sed non, quo ad hanc -- or be it as it may -- for there is
no regular reasoning upon the ebbs and flows of our humors; they may depend
upon the same causes, for ought I know, which influence the tides themselves --
'twould often be no discredit to us, to suppose it was so: I am sure at least for
myself, that in many a case I should be more highly satisfied, to have it said
by the world, "I had had an affair with the moon, in which there was neither
sin nor shame," than have it pass altogether as my own act and deed, wherein
there was so much of both.

-- But be this as it may. The moment I cast my eyes upon him, I was
predetermined not to give him a single sons; and accordingly I put my purse
into my pocket -- buttoned it up -- set myself a little more upon my center,
and advanced up gravely to him: there was something, I fear, forbidding in my
look: I have his figure this moment before my eyes, and think there was that in
it which deserved better.

The monk, as I judged from the break in his tonsure, a few scattered white
hairs upon his temples, being all that remained of it, might be about seventy
-- but from his eyes, and that sort of fire, which was in them, which seemed
more temperate by courtesy than years, could be no more than sixty. -- Truth
might lie between -- He was certainly sixty-five; and the general air of his
countenance, notwithstanding something seemed to have been planting wrinkles in
it before their time, agreed to the account.

It was one of those heads, which Guido has often painted -- mild, pale --
penetrating, free from all commonplace ideas of fat contented ignorance
looking downwards upon the earth -- it looked forwards; but looked, as if it
looked at something beyond this world. How one of his order came by it, heaven
above, who let it fall upon a monk's shoulders, best knows: but it would have
suited a Bramin, and had I met it upon the plains of Indostan, I had reverenced
it.

The rest of his outline may be given in a few strokes; one might put it into
the hands of any one to design, for 'twas neither elegant or otherwise, but as
character and expression made it so: it was a thin, spare form, something above
the common size, if it lost not the distinction, by a bend forwards in the
figure -- but it was the attitude of entreaty; and as it now stands presented
to my imagination, it gained more than it lost by it.

When he had entered the room three paces, he stood still; and laying his left
hand upon his breast, (a slender white staff with which he journeyed being in
his right) -- when I had got close up to him, he introduced himself with the
little story of the wants of his convent, and the poverty of his order -- and
did it with so simple a grace, -- and such an air of deprecation was there in
the whole cast of his look and figure -- I was bewitched not to have been
struck with it --

-- A better reason was, I had predetermined not to give him a single sous.

THE MONK. CALAIS.
-- IT IS very true, said I, replying to a cast upwards with his eyes, with
which he had concluded his address -- it is very true -- and heaven be their
resourse who have no other but the charity of the world, the stock of which, I
fear, is no way sufficient for the many great claims which are hourly made upon
it.

As I pronounced the words great claims, he gave a slight glance with his eye
downwards upon the sleeve of his tunick -- I felt the full force of the appeal
-- I acknowledge it, said I -- a coarse habit, and that but once in three
years, with meagre diet -- are no great matters; and the true point of pity is,
as they can be earned in the world with so little industry, that your order
should wish to procure them by pressing upon a fund which is the property of
the lame, the blind, the aged and the infirm -- the captive who lies down
counting over and over again the days of his afflictions, languishes also for
his share of it; and had you been of the order of mercy, instead of the order
of St Francis, poor as I am, continued I, pointing at my portmanteau, full
cheerfully should it have been opened to you, for the ransom of the unfortunate
-- The monk made me a bow -- but of all others, resumed I, the unfortunate of
our own country, surely, have the first rights; and I have left thousands in
distress upon our own shore -- The monk gave a cordial wave with his head -- as
much as to say, No doubt, there is misery enough in every corner of the world,
as well as within our convent -- But we distinguish, said I, laying my hand
upon the sleeve of his tunick, in return for his appeal -- we distinguish, my
good father! betwixt those who wish only to eat the bread of their own labor
-- and those who eat the bread of other people's, and have no other plan in
life, but to get through it in sloth and ignorance, for the love of God.

The poor Franciscan made no reply: a hectic of a moment passed across his
cheek, but could not tarry -- Nature seemed to have had done with her
resentments in him; he showed none -- but letting his staff fall within his
arm, he pressed both his hands with resignation upon his breast, and retired.

THE MONK. CALAIS.
MY heart smote me the moment he shut the door -- Psha! said I with an air of
carlessness, three several times -- but it would not do: every ungracious
syllable I had uttered, crowded back into my imagination: I reflected, I had no
right over the poor Franciscan, but to deny him; and that the punishment of
that was enough to the disappointed without the addition of unkind language --
I considered his gray hairs -- his courteous figure seemed to re-enter and
gently ask me what injury he had done me? -- and why I could use him thus -- I
would have given twenty livres for an advocate -- I have behaved very ill; said
I within myself; but I have only just set out upon my travels; and shall learn
better manners as I get along.

THE DESOBLIGEANT. CALAIS.
WHEN a man is discontented with himself, it has one advantage however, that it
puts him into an excellent frame of mind for making a bargain. Now there being
no traveling through France and Italy without a chaise -- and nature generally
prompting us to the thing we are fittest for, I walked out into the coach yard
to buy or hire something of that kind to my purpose: an old A chaise, so called
in France, from its holding but one person.
Desobligeant in the furthest corner of the court, hit my fancy at first sight,
so I instantly got into it, and finding it in tolerable harmony with my
feelings, I ordered the waiter to call Monsieur Dessein the master of the hotel
-- but Monsieur Dessein being gone to vespers, and not caring to face the
Franciscan whom I saw on the opposite side of the court, in conference with a
lady just arrived, at the inn -- I drew the taffeta curtain betwixt us, and
being determined to write my journey, I took out my pen and ink, and wrote the
preface to it in the Disobligeant.

PREFACE. IN THE DESOBLIGEANT.
IT must have been observed by many a peripatetic philosopher, that nature has
set up by her own unquestionable authority certain boundaries and fences to
circumscribe the discontent of man: she has effected her purpose in the
quietest and easiest manner by laying him under almost insuperable obligations
to work out his ease, and to sustain his sufferings at home. It is there only
that she has provided him with the most suitable objects to partake of his
happiness, and bear a part of that burden which in all countries and ages, has
ever been too heavy for one pair of shoulders. It Is true we are endued with an
imperfect power of spreading our happiness sometimes beyond her limits, but
it is so ordered, that from the want of languages, connections, and
dependencies, and from the difference in education, customs and habits, we lie
under so many impediments in communicating our sensations out of our own
sphere, as often amount to a total impossibility.

It will always follow from hence, that the balance of sentimental commerce is
always against the expatriated adventurer: he must buy what he has little
occasion for at their own price -- his conversation will seldom be taken in
exchange for theirs without a large discount -- and this, by the by, eternally
driving him into the hands of more equitable brokers for such conversation as
he can find, it requires no great spirit of divination to guess at his party --

This brings me to my point; and naturally leads me (if the see-saw of this
Disobligeant will but let me get on) into the efficient as well as the final
causes of traveling --

Your idle people that leave their native country and go abroad for some reason
or reasons which may be derived from one of these general causes.

Infirmity of body, Imbecility of mind, or Inevitable necessity.
The first two include all those who travel by land or by water, laboring with
pride, curiosity, vanity or spleen, subdivided and combined in infinitum.

The third class includes the whole army of peregrine martyrs; more especially
those travelers who set out upon their travels with the benefit of the clergy,
either as delinquents traveling under the direction of governors recommended
by the magistrate -- or young gentlemen transported by the cruelty of parents
and guardians, and traveling under the direction of governors recommended by
Oxford, Aberdeen and Glasgow.

There is a fourth class, but their number is so small that they would not
deserve a distinction, was it not necessary in a work of this nature to observe
the greatest precision and nicety, to avoid a confusion of character. And these
men I speak of, are such as cross the seas and sojourn in a land of strangers
with a view of saving money for various reasons and upon various pretenses: but
as they might also save themseves and others a great deal of unnecessary
trouble by saving their money at home -- and as their reasons for traveling
are the least complex of any other species of emigrants, I shall distinguish
these gentlemen by the name of Simple travelers.


Thus the whole circle of travelers may be reduced to the following Heads.

Idle Travelers, Inquisitive Travelers, Lying Travelers, Proud Travelers,
Vain Travelers, Splenetic Travelers.
Then follow the Travelers of necessity.

The delinquent and felonious Traveller,

The unfortunate and innocent Traveller.

The simple Traveller,

And last of all (if you please) The Sentimental traveller (meaning thereby
myself) who have traveled, and of which I am now sitting down to give an
account -- as much out of necessity, and the besoin de voyager, as any one in
the class.

I am well aware, at the same time, as both my travels and observations will be
altogether of a different cast from any of my forerunners; that I might have
insisted upon a whole nitch entirely to myself -- but I should break in upon
the confines of the vain traveller, in wishing to draw attention toward me,
till I have some better grounds for it, than the mere novelty of my vehicle.

It is sufficient for my reader, if he has been a traveller himself, that with
study and reflection hereupon he may be able to determine his own place and
rank in the catalogue -- it will be one step toward knowing himself; as it is
great odds, but he retains some tincture and resemblance, of what he imbibed or
carried out, to the present hour.

The man who first transplanted the grape of Burgundy to the Cape of Good Hope
(observe he was a Dutch man) never dreamt of drinking the same wine at the
Cape, that the same grape produced upon the French mountains -- he was too
phlegmatic for that -- but undoubtedly he expected to drink some sort of vinous
liquor; but whether good, bad, or indifferent -- he knew enough of this world
to know, that it did not depend upon his choice, but that what is generally
called Chance was to decide his success: however, he hoped for the best, and in
these hopes, by an intemperate confidence in the fortitude of his head, and the
depth of his discretion, Mynheer might possibly overset both in his new
vineyard; and by discovering his nakedness, become a laughing stock to his
people.

Even so it ^^^es with the poor Traveller, sailing and posting through the
politer kingdoms of the globe in pursuit of knowledge and improvements.

Knowledge and improvements are to be got by sailing and possing for that
purpose; but whether useful knowledge and real improvements, is all a lottery
-- and even where the adventurer is successful, the acquired stock must be used
with caution and sobriety to turn to any profit -- but as the chances run
prodigiously the other way both as to the acquisition and application, I am of
opinion, that a man would act as wisely, if he could prevail upon himself, to
live contented without foreign knowledge or foreign improvements, especially if
he lives in a country that has no absolute want of either -- and indeed, much
grief of heart has it often and many a time cost me, when I have observed how
many a soul step the inquisitive Traveller has measured to see sights and look
into discoveries; all which, as Sanco Panca said to Don Quixote, they might
have seen dry-shod at home. It is an age so full of light, that there is scarce
a country or corner of Europe whose beams are not crossed and interchanged with
others -- Knowledge in most of its branches, and in most affairs, is like music
in an Italian street, whereof those may partake, who pay nothing -- But there
is no nation under heaven -- and God is my record, (before whose tribunal I
must one day come and give an account of this work) -- that I do not speak it
vauntingly -- But there is no nation under heaven abounding with more variety
of learning -- where the sciences may be more fitly wooed, or more surely won
than here -- where art is encouraged, and will so soon rise high -- where
nature (take her all together) has so little to answer for -- and, to close
all, where there is more wit and variety of character to feed the mind with --
Where then, my dear countrymen, are you going. --

-- We are only looking at this chaise, said they -- Your most obedient
servant, said I, skipping out of it, and pulling off my hat -- we were
wondering, said one of them, who, I found, was an inquisitive traveller, --
what could occasion its motion. -- 'Twas the agitation, said I coolly, of
writing a preface -- I never heard, said the other, who was a simple traveller,
of a preface wrote in a Desobligeant. -- It would have been better said I, in a
vis a vis.

-- As an English man does not travel to see English men, I retired to my room.

CALAIS.
I Perceived that something darkened the passage more than myself, as I stepped
along it to my room; it was effectually Mons. Dessein, the master of the hotel,
who had just returned from vespers, and, with his hat under his arm, was most
complaisantly following me, to put me in mind of my wants. I had wrote myself
pretty well out of conceit with the Desobligeant; and Mons. Dessein speaking of
it, with a shrug, as if it would no way suit me, it immediately struck my fancy
that it belonged to some innocent traveller, who, on his return home, had left
it to Mons. Dessein's honor to make the most of. Four months had elapsed since
it had finished its career of Europe in the corner of Mons. Dessein's
coachyard; and having sallied out from thence but a vampt-up business at the
first, though it had been twice taken to pieces on Mount Sinnis, it had not
profited much by its adventures -- but by none so little as the standing so
many months unpitied in the corner of Mons. Dessein's coach-yard. -- Much
indeed was not to be said for it -- but something might -- and when a few words
will rescue misery out of her distress, I hate the man who can be a churl of
them.

-- Now was I the master of this hotel, said I laying the point of my
forefinger on Mons Dessein's breast, I would inevitably make a point of
getting rid of this unfortunate Desobligeant -- it stands swinging reproaches
at you every time you pass by it --

Mon Dieu! said Mons. Dessein -- I have no interest -- Except the interest,
said I, which men of a certain turn of mind take, Mons Dessein, in their own
sensations -- I Am persuaded, to a man who feels for others as well as for
himself, every rainy night, disguise it as you will, must cast a damp upon your
spirits -- You suffer, Mons. Dessein, as much as the machine --

I have always observed, when there is as much sour as sweet in a compliment,
that an Englishman is eternally at a loss within himself, whether to take it,
or let it alone: a Frenchman never is: Mons. Dessein made me a bow.

C'est bien vrai, said he -- But in this case I should only exchange one
disquietude for another, and with loss: figure to yourself, my dear Sir, that
in giving you a chaise which would fall to pieces before you had got half way
to Paris -- figure to yourself how much I should suffer, in giving an ill
impression of myself to a man of honor, and lying at the mercy, as I must do,
d'un homme d'esprit.

The dose was made up exactly after my own prescription; so I could not help
taking it -- and returning Mons. Dessein his bow, without more casuistry we
walked together toward his Remise, to take a view of his magazine of chaises.

In the STREET. CALAIS.
IT must needs be a hostile kind of a world, when the buyer (if it be but of a
sorry post-chaise) cannot go forth with the seller thereof into the street to
terminate the difference betwixt them, but he instantly falls into the same
frame of mind and views his conventionist with the same sort of eye, as if he
was going along with him to Hyde-park corner to fight a duel. For my own part,
being but a poor sword's-man, and no way a match for Monsieur Dessein, I felt
the rotation of all the movements within me, to which the situation is incident
-- I looked at Monsieur Dessein through and through -- eyed him as he walked
along in profile -- then, en face -- thought he looked like a Jew -- then a
Turk -- disliked his wig -- cursed him by my gods -- wished him at the devil.

-- And is all this to be lighted up in the heart for a beggarly account of
three or four louis d'ors, which is the most I can be overreached in? -- Base
passion! said I, turning myself about, as a man naturally does upon a sudden
reverse of sentiment -- base, ungentle passion! thy hand is against every man,
and every man's hand against thee -- heaven forbid! said she, raising her hand
up to her forehead, for I had turned full in front upon the lady whom I had
seen in conference with the monk -- she had followed us unperceived -- Heaven
forbid indeed! said I, offering her my own -- she had a black pair of silk
gloves open only at the thumb and two fore-fingers, so accepted it without
reserve -- and I led her up to the door of the remise.

Monsieur Dessein had diabled the key above fifty times before he found out he
had come with a wrong one in his hand: we were as impatient as himself to have
it opened; and so attentive to the obstacle, that I continued holding her hand
almost without knowing it; so that Monsieur Dessein left us together with her
hand in mine, and with our faces turned toward the door of the Remise, and
said he would be back in five minutes.

Now a colloquy of five minutes, in such a situation, is worth one of as many
ages, with your faces turned toward the street: in the latter case, it is drawn
from the objects and occurrences without -- when your eyes are fixed upon a
dead blank -- you draw purely from yourselves. A silence of a single moment
upon Monsieur Dessein's leaving us, had been fatal to the situation -- she had
infallibly turned about -- so I begun the conversation instantly. --

-- But what were the temptations, (as I write not to apologize for the
weaknesses of my heart in this tour, -- but to give an account of them) --
shall be described with the same simplicity, with which I felt them.

THE REMISE DOOR. CALAIS.
WHEN I told the reader that I did not care to get out of the Desobligeant,
because I saw the monk in close conference with a lady just arrived at the inn
-- I told him the truth; but I did not tell him the whole truth; for I was full
as much restrained by the appearance and figure of the lady he was talking to.
Suspicion crossed my brain, and said, he was telling her what had passed:
something jarred upon it within me -- I wished him at his convent.

When the heart flies out before the understanding, it saves the judgment a
world of pains -- I was certain she was of a better order of beings -- however,
I thought no more of her, but went on and wrote my preface.

The impression returned, upon my encounter with her in the street; a guarded
frankness with which she gave me her hand, showed, I thought, her good
education and her good sense; and as I led her on, I felt a pleasurable
ductility about her, which spread a calmness over all my spirits --

-- Good God! now a man might lead such a creature as this round the world with
him! --

I had not yet seen her face -- 'twas not metarial; for the drawing was
instantly set about, and long before we had got to the door of the Remise,
Fancy had finished the whole head, and pleased herself as much with its sitting
her goddess, as if she had dived into the TIBER for it -- but thou art a
reduced, and a seducing slut; and albeit thou cheatest us seven times a day
with thy pictures and images, yet with so many charms do thou do it, and thou
deckest out thy pictures in the shapes of so many angels of light, it is a shame
to break with thee.

When we had got to the door of the-Remise, she withdrew her hand from across
her forehead, and let me see the original -- it was a face of about six and
twenty -- of a clear transparent brown, simply set off without rouge or powder
-- it was not critically handsome, but there was that in it, which in the frame
of mind I was in which attached me much more to it -- it was interesting; I
fancied it wore the caracters of a widowed look, and in that state of its
declension, which had passed the two first paroxysms of sorrow, and was quietly
beginning to reconcile itself to its loss -- but a thousand other distresses
might have traced the same lines; I wished to know what they had been -- and
was ready to enquire, (had the same bon ton of conversation permitted, as in
days of Esdras) " What aileth thee? and why art thou disquieted? and why is thy
understanding troubled?" -- In a word, I felt benevolence for her; and resolved
some way or other to throw in my mite of courtesy -- if not of service.

Such were my temptations -- and in this disposition to give way to them, was I
left alone with the lady with her hand in mine, and with our faces both turned
closer to the door of the Remise than what was absolutely necessary.

THE REMISE DOOR. CALAIS.
THIS certainly, fair lady! said I raising her hand up a little lightly as I
began, must be one of fortune's whimsical doings: to take two utter strangers
by their hands -- of different sexes, and perhaps from different corners of the
globe, and in one moment place them together in such a cordial situation, as
friendship herself could scarce have achieved for them, had she projected it
for a month.

-- And your reflection upon it, shows how much, Monsieur, she has embarassed
you by the adventure. --

When the situation is, what we would wish, nothing is so il-timed as to hint
at the circumstances which make it so: you thank fortune, continued she -- you
had reason -- the heart knew it, and was satisfied; and who but an English
philosopher would have sent notices of it to the brain to reverse the judgment?

In saying this, she disengaged her hand with a look which I thought a
sufficient commentary upon the text.

It is a miserable picture which I am going to give of the weakness of my
heart, by owning, that it suffered a pain, which worthier occasions could not
have inflicted. -- I was mortified with the loss of her hand, and the manner in
which I had lost it carried neither oil nor wine to the wound: I never felt the
pain of a sheepish inferiority so miserably in my life.

The triumphs of a true feminine heart are short upon these discomfitures. In a
very few seconds she laid her hand upon the the cuff of my coat, in order to
finish her reply; so some way or other, God knows how, I regained my situation.

-- She had nothing to add.

I forthwith began to model a different conversation for the lady. Thinking
from the spirit as well as the moral of this, that I had been mistaken in her
character; but upon turning her face toward me, the spirit which had animated
the reply was fled -- the muscles relaxed, and I beheld the same unprotected
look of distress which first won me to her interest -- melancholy! to see such
sprightliness the prey of sorrow. -- I pitied her from my soul; and though it
may seem ridiculous enough to a torpid heart, -- I could have taken her into my
arms, and cherished her, though it was in the open street, without blushing.

The pulsations of the arteries along my fingers pressing across hers, told her
what was passing within me: she looked down -- a silence of some moments
followed.

I fear, in this interval, I must have made some slight efforts toward a
closer compression of her hand, from a subtle sensation I felt in the palm of
my own -- not as if she was going to withdraw hers -- but, as if she thought
about it -- and I had insallibly lost it a second time, had not instinct more
than reason directed me to the last resource in these dangers -- to hold it
loosely, and, in a manner as if I was every moment going to release it, of
myself; so she let it continue, till Monsieur Dessein returned with the key;
and in the mean time I set myself to consider how I should undo the ill
impressions which the poor monk's story, in case he had told it her, must have
planted in her breast against me.

THE SNUFF BOX. CALAIS.
THE good old monk was within six paces of us, as the idea of him crossed my
mind; and was advancing toward us a little out of the line, as if uncertain
whether he should break upon us, or no. -- He stepped, however, as soon as he
came up to us, with a world of frankness; and having a horn snuff box in his
hand, he presented it open to me -- You shall taste mine -- said I, pulling out
my box (which was a small tortoise one) and putting it into his hand -- It Is
most excellent, said the monk; Then do me the favor, I replied, to accept of
the box and all, and when you take a pinch out of it, sometimes recollect it
was the peace offering of a man who once used you unkindndly, but not from his
heart.

The poor monk blushed as red as scarlet. Mon Lieu! said he, pressing his hands
together -- you never used me unkindly. -- I should think, said the lady, he is
not likely. I blushed in my turn; but from what movements, I leave to the few
who feel to analyze -- Excuse me, Madam, replied I -- I treated him most
unkindly; and from no provocations -- It Is impossible, said the lady. -- My
god! cried the monk with a warmth of asseveration which seemed not to belong to
him -- the fault was in me, and in the indiscretion of my zeal -- the lady
opposed it, and I joined with her in maintaining it was impossible, that a
spirit so regulated as his, could give offense to any.

I knew not that contention could be rendered so sweet and pleasurable a thing
to the nerves as I then felt it. -- We remained silent, without any sensation
of that foolish pain which takes place, when in such a circle you look for ten
minutes in one another's faces without saying a word. Whilst this lasted, the
monk rubbed his horn box upon the sleeve of his tunick; and as soon as it had
acquired a little air of brightness by the friction -- he made a low bow, and
said, 'twas too late to say whether it was the weakness or goodness of our
tempers which had involved us in this contest -- but be it as it would -- he
begged we might exchange boxes -- In saying this, he presented his to me with
one hand, as he took mine from me in the other; and having kissed it -- with a
stream of good nature in his eyes he put it into his bosom -- and took his
leave.

I guard this box, as I would the instrumental parts of my religion, to help my
mind on to something better; in truth I seldom go abroad without it; and often
and many a time have I called up by it the courteous spirit of its owner to
regulate my own, in the justlings of the world; they had found full employment
for his, as I learnt from his story, till about the forty-fifth year of his
age, when upon some military services ill requited, and meeting at the same
time with a disappointment in the tenderest of passions, he abandoned the sword
and the sex together, and took sanctuary, not so much in his convent as in
himself.

I feel a damp upon my spirits, as I am going to add, that in my last return
through Calais, upon enquiring after Father Lorenzo, I heard he had been dead
near three months, and was buried, not in his convent, but, according to his
desire, in a little cimetiery belonging to it, about two leagues off: I had a
strong desire to see where they had laid him -- when, upon pulling out his
little horn box, as I sat by his grave, and plucking up a nettle or two at the
head of it, which had no business to grow there, they all struct together so
forcibly upon my affections, that I burst into a flood of tears -- but I am as
weak as a woman; and I beg the world not to smile, but pity me.

THE REMISE DOOR. CALAIS.
I HAD never quitted the Lady's hand all this time; and had held it so long,
that it would have been indecent to have let it go, without first pressing it
to my lips: the blood and spirits, which had suffered a revulsion from her,
crowded back to her, as I did it.

Now the two travelers who had spoke to me in the coach-yard, happening at
that crisis to be passing by, and observing our communication, naturally took
it into their heads that we must be man and wife at least; so stopping as soon
as they came up to the door of the Remise, the one of them, who was the
inquisitive traveller, asked us, if we set out for Paris the next morning? I
could only answer for myself, I said; and the lady added, she was for Amiens.
We dined there yesterday, said the simple traveller -- You go directly through
the town, added the other, in your road to Paris. I was going to return a
thousand thanks for the intelligence, that Amiens was in the road to Paris;
but, upon pulling out my poor monk's little horn box to take a pinch of snuff
-- I made them a quiet bow, and wished them a good passage to Dover -- they
left us alone --

-- Now where would be the harm, said I to myself, if I was to beg of this
distressed lady to accept of half of my chaise? and what mighty mischief could
ensue?

Every dirty passion, and bad propensity in my nature, took the alarm, as I
stated the proposition -- It will oblidge you to have a third horse, said
AVARISE, which will put twenty livres out of your pocket. -- You know not who
she is, said CAUTION -- or what scrapes the affair may draw you into, whispered
COWARDICE --

Depend upon it, Yorick! said DISCRETION, 'twill be said you went off with a
mistress, and came by assignation to Calais for that purpose --

-- You can never after, cried HYPOCRISY aloud, show your face in the world --
or rise, quoth MEANNESS, in the church -- or be any thing in it, said PRIDE,
but a lousy prebendary.

-- But it is a civil thing, said I -- and as I generally act from the first
impulse, and therefore seldom listen to these cabals, which serve no purpose,
that I know of, but to encompass the heart with adamant -- I turned instantly
about to the lady --

-- But she had glided off unperceived, as the cause was pleading, and had made
ten or a dozen paces down the street, by the time I had made the determination;
so I set off after her with a long stride, to make her the proposal with the
best address I was master of; but observing she walked with her cheek half
resting upon the palm of her hand -- with the slow, short-measured step of
thoughtfulness, and with her eyes, as she went step by step, fixed upon the
ground, it struck me, she was trying the same cause herself. -- God help her!
said I, she has some mother-in-law or tartufish aunt, or nonsensical old woman,
to consult upon the occasion, as well as myself: so not caring to interrupt the
process, and deeming it more gallant to take her at discretion than by
surprise, I faced about, and took a short turn or two before the door of the
Remise, whilst she walked musing on one side.

In the STREET. CALAIS.
HAVING, on first sight of the lady, settled the affair in my fancy, "that she
was of the better order of beings" -- and then laid it down as a second axiom,
as indisputable as the first, that she was a widow; and wore a character of
distress -- I went no further; I got ground enough for the situation which
pleased me -- and had she remained close beside my elbow till midnight, I
should have held true to my system, and considered her only under that general
idea.

She had scarce got twenty paces distant from me, ere something within me
called out for a more particular inquiry -- it brought on the idea of a further
separation -- I might possibly never see her more -- the heart is for saving
what it can; and I wanted the traces through which my wishes might find their way
to her, in case I should never rejoin her myself: in a word, I wished to know
her name -- her family's -- her condition; and as I knew the place to which she
was going, I wanted to know from whence she came: but there was no coming at
all this intelligence: a hundred little delicacies stood in the way. I formed a
score different plans -- I here was no such thing as a man's asking her
directly -- the thing was impossible.

A little French debonaire captain, who came dancing down the street, showed
me, it was the easiest thing in the world; for popping in betwixt us, just as
the lady was returning back to the door of the Remise, he introduced himself to
my acquaintance, and before he had well got announced, begged I would do him
the honor to present him to the lady -- I had not been presented myself -- so
turning about to her, he did it just as well by asking her, if she had come
from Paris? -- No: she was going that rout, she said. -- Vous n'etez pas de
Londre? -- She was not, she replied -- Then Madame must have come through
Flanders. -- Apparamment vous etez Flammande? said the French captain. -- The
lady answered, she was. -- Peutetre, de Lisle? added he -- She said, she was
not of Lisle. -- Nor Arras? -- nor Cambray? nor Ghent? -- nor Brussels? She
answered, she was of Brussels.

He had had the honor, he said, to be at the bombardment of it last war --
that it was finely situated, pour cela -- and full of noblesse when the
imperialists were driven out by the French (the lady made a slight curtsy) --
so giving her an account of the affair, and of the share he had had in it -- he
begged the honor to know her name -- so made his bow.

-- Et Madame a son Mari? -- said he looking back when he had made two steps --
and without staying for an answer -- danced down the street.

Had I served seven years apprenticeship to good breeding I could not have done
as much.

THE REMISE. CALAIS.
AS the little French captain left us, Mons. Dessein came up with the key of
the Remise in his hand, and forthwith let us into his magazine of chaises.

The first object which caught my eye, as Mons. Dessein opened the door of the
Remise, was another old tattered Disobligeant: and notwithstanding it was the
exact picture of that which had hit my fancy so much in the coach-yard but an
hour before -- the very light of it stirred up a disagreeable sensation within
me now; and I thought 'twas a churlish beast into whose heart the idea could
first enter, to construct such a machine; nor had I much more charity for the
man who could think of using it.

I observed the lady was as little taken with it as myself: so Mons. Dessein
led us on to a couple of chaises which stood abreast, telling us as he
recommended them, that they had been purchased by my Lord A. and B. to go the
grand tour, but had gone no further than Paris, so were in all respects as good
as new -- They were too good -- so I passed on to a third, which stood behind,
and forthwith began to chaffer for the price -- But 'twill scarce hold two,
said I, opening the door and getting in -- Have the goodness, Madam, said Mons.
Dessein, offering his arm, to step in -- The lady hesitated half a second, and
stepped in; and the waiter that moment beckoning to speak to Mons. Dessein, he
shut the door of the chaise upon us, and left us.

THE REMISE. CALAIS.
C'EST bien comique, it is very droll, said the lady smiling, from the
reflection that this was the second time we had been left together by a parcel
of nonsensical contingencies -- ce'st bien comique, said she --

-- There wants nothing, said I, to make it so, but the comic use which the
gallantry of a Frenchman would put it to -- to make love the first moment, and
an offer of his person the second.

It Is their fort: replied the lady.

It is supposed so at least -- and how it has come to pass, continued I, I know
not; but they have certainly got the credit of understanding more of love, and
making it better than any other nation upon earth: but for my own part I think
them errant bunglers, and in truth the worst set of marksmen that ever tried
Cupid's patience.

-- To think of making love by sentiments!

I should as soon think of making a genteel suit of clothes out of remnants; --
and to do it -- pop -- at first sight by declaration -- is submiting the offer
and themselves with it, to be sifted, with all their pours and contres, by an
unheated mind.

The lady attended as if she expected I should go on.

Consider then, madam, continued I, laying my hand upon here is --

That grave people hate love for the name's sake --

That selfish people hate it for their own --

Hypocrites for heaven's --

And that all of us both old and young, being ten times worse frightened than
hurt by the very report -- What a want of knowledge is this branch of commerce
a man betrays, whoever lets the word come out of his lips, till an hour or two
at least after the time, that his silence upon it becomes tormenting. A course
of small, quiet attentions, not so pointed as to alarm -- nor so vague as to be
misunderstood, -- with now and then a look of kindness, and little or nothing
said upon it -- leaves nature for your mistress, and she fashions it to her
mind. --

Then I solemnly declare, said the lady, blushing -- you have been making love
to me all this while.

THE REMISE. CALAIS.
MONSIEUR Dessein came back to let us out of the chaise, and acquaint the lady,
the Count de L -- her brother was just arrived at the hotel. Though I had
infinite good will for the lady, I cannot say, that I rejoiced in my heart at
the event -- and could not help telling her so -- for it is fatal to a
proposal, Madam, said I, that I was going to make you --

-- You need not tell me what the proposal was said she, laying her hand upon
both mine, as she interrupted, me. -- A man my good Sir, has seldom an offer of
kindness to make to a woman, but she has a presentiment of it some moments
before --

Nature arms her with it, said I, for immediate preservation -- But I think,
said she, looking in my face, I had no evil to apprehend -- and to deal frankly
with you, had determined to accept it. -- If I had -- (she stopped a moment) --
I believe your good will would have drawn a story from me, which would have
made pity the only dangerous thing in the journey.

In saying this, she suffered me to kiss her hand twice, and with a look of
sensibility mixed with a concern she got out of the chaise -- and bid adieu.

In the STREET. CALAIS.
I NEVER finished a twelve-guinea bargain so expediously in my life: my time
seemed heavy upon the loss of the lady, and knowing every moment of it would be
as two, till I put myself into motion -- I ordered post horses directly, and
walked toward the hotel.

Lord! said I, hearing the town clock strike four, and recollecting that I had
been little more than a single hour in Calais --

-- What a large volume of adventures may be grasped within this little span of
life by him who interests his heart in every thing, and who, having eyes to
see, what time and chance are perpetually holding out to him as he journeyeth
on his way, misses nothing he can fairly lay his hands on. --

-- If this will not turn out something -- another will -- no matter -- it is an
assay upon human nature -- I get my labor for my pains -- it is enough -- the
pleasure of the experiment has kept my senses, and the best part of my blood
awake, and laid the gross to sleep.

I pity the man who can travel from Dan to Beersheba, and cry, It Is all barren
-- and so it is; and so is all the world to him who will not cultivate the
fruits it offers. I declare, said I, clapping my hands chearily together, that
was I in a desert. I would find out wherewith in it to call forth my affections
-- If I could not do better, I would fasten them upon some sweet myrtle, or
seek some melancholy cypress to connect myself to -- I would court their shade,
and greet them kindly for their protection -- I would cut my name upon them,
and swear they were the loveliest trees throughout the desert: if their leaves
withered, I would teach myself to mourn, and when they rejoiced, I would
rejoice along with them.

The learned SMELFUNGUS traveled from Boulogne to Paris -- from Paris to Rome
-- and so on -- but he set out with the spleen and jaundice, and every object
he passed by was discolored or distorted -- He wrote an account of them, but
'twas nothing but the account of his miserable feeling.

I met Smelfungus in the grand portico of the Pantheon -- he was just coming
out of it -- It Is nothing but a huge cockpit Vide S -- 's Travels.
, said he -- I wish you had said nothing worse of the Venus of Medicis, replied
I -- for in passing through Florence, I had heard he had fallen soul upon the
goddess, and used her worse then a common strumpet, without the least
provocation in nature.

I popp'd upon Smelfungus again at Turin, in his return home; and a sad tale,
of sorrowful adventures had he to tell," wherein he spoke of moving accidents
by flood and field, and of the cannibals which each other eat: the
Anthropophagi -- he had been flayed alive, and bedevil'd, and used worse than
St. Bartholomew, at every stage he had came at --

-- I Will tell it, cried Smelfungus, to the world. You had better tell it, said
I, to your physician.

Mundungus, with an immense fortune, made the whole tour; going on from Rome to
Naples -- from Naples to Venice -- from Venice to Vienna -- to Dresden, to
Berlin, without one generous connection or pleasurable anecdote to tell of; but
he had traveled straight on looking neither to his right hand or his left,
lest Love or Pity should seduce him out of his road.

Peace be to them! if it is to be found; but heaven itself, was it possible to
get there with such tempers, would want objects to give it -- every gentle
spirit would come flying upon the wings of Love to hail their arrival --
Nothing would the souls of Smelfungus and Mundungus hear of, but fresh anthems
of joy, fresh raptures of love, and fresh congratulations of their common
felicity -- I heartily pity them: they have brought up no faculties for this
work; and was the happiest mansion in heaven to be allotted to Smelfungus and
Mundungus, they would be so far from being happy, that the souls of Smelfungus
and Mundungus would do penance there to all eternity.

MONTRIUL.
I HAD once lost my portmanteau from behind my chaise, and twice got out in the
rain, and one of the times up to the knees in dirt, to help the postilion to
tie it on, without being able to find out what was wanting -- Nor was it till I
got to Montriul, upon the landlord's asking me if I wanted not a servant, that
it occurred to me, that that was the very thing.

A servant! That I do most sadly, quoth I -- Because, Monsieur, said the
landlord, there is a clever young fellow, who would be very proud of the honor
to serve an Englishman -- But why an English one, more than any other? -- They
are so generous, said the landlord -- I Will be shot if this is not a livre out
of my pocket, quoth I to myself, this very night -- But they have wherewithal
to be so, Monsieur, added he -- set down one livre more for that, quoth I -- it
was but last night, said the landlord, qu'un my Lord Anglois presentoit un ecu
a la fille de chamber -- tant pis, pour Madile Janatone, said I.

Now Janatone being the landlord's daughter, and the landlord supposing I was
young in French, took the liberty to inform me, I should not have said tant pis
-- but, tant mieux Tant mieux, toujours, Monsieur, said he, when there is any
thing to be got -- tant pis, when there is nothing. It comes to the same thing,
said I. Pardonnez moi, said the landlord.

I cannot take a fitter opportunity to observe once for all, that tant pis and
tant mieux being two of the great hinges in French conversation, a stranger
would do well to set himself right in the use of them before he gets to Paris.

A prompt French Marquis at our ambassador's table demanded of Mr. H --, if he
was H -- the poet? No, said H -- mildly -- tant pis replied the Marquis.

It is H -- the historian, said another -- tant mieux, said the Marquis. And
Mr. H --, who is a man of an excellent heart, returned thanks for both.

When the landlord had set me right in this matter, he called in La Fleur,
which was the name of the young man he had spoke of -- saying only first, That
as for his talents, he would presume to say nothing -- Monsieur was the best
judge what would suit him; but for the fidelity of La Fleur, he would stand
responsible in all he was worth.

The landlord delivered this in a manner which instantly set my mind to the
business I was upon -- and La Fleur, who stood waiting without, in that
breathless expectation which every son of nature of us have felt in our turns,
came in.

MONTRIUL.
I AM apt to be taken with all kinds of people at first sight; but never more
so, than when a poor devil comes to offer his service to so poor a devil as
myself; and as I know this weakness, I always suffer my judgment to draw back
something on that very account -- and this more or less, according to the mood
I am in, and the case -- and I may add the gender too, of the person I am to
govern.

When La Fleur entered the room, after every discount I could make for my soul,
the genuine look and air of the fellow determined the matter at once in his
favor; so I hired him first -- and then began to inquire what he could do: but
I shall find out his talents, quoth I, as I want them -- besides, a Frenchman
can do every thing.

Now poor La Fleur could do nothing in the world but beat a drum, and play a
march or two upon the fife. I was determined to make his talents do; and cannot
say my weakness was ever so insulted by my wisdom, as in the attempt.

La Fleur had set out early in life, as gallantly as most Frenchmen do, with
serving for a few years; at the end of which, having satisfied the sentiment,
and found moreover, That the honor of beating a drum was likely to be its own
reward, as it opened no further track of glory to him -- he retired a ses
terres, and lived comme il plaisoit a Dieu -- that is to say, upon nothing.

-- And so, quoth Wisdom, you have hired a drummer to attend you in this tour
of yours through France and Italy! Psha! said I, and do not one half of our
gentry go with a hum-drum compagnon du voyage the same round, and have the
piper and the devil and all to pay besides? When man can extricate himself with
an equivoque in such an unequal match -- he is not ill of -- But you can do
something else, La Fleur? said I -- O qu'oui! -- he could make spatterdashes,
and play a little upon the fiddle -- Bravo! said Wisdom -- Why, I play a bass
myself, said I -- we shall do very well -- You can shave, and dress a wig a
little, La Fleur? -- He had all the dispositions in the world -- It is enough
for heaven! said I, interrupting him -- and ought to be enough for me -- So
supper coming in, and having a frisky English spaniel on one side of my chair,
and a French valet, with as much hilarity in his countenance as ever nature
painted in one, on the other -- I was satisfied to my heart's content with my
empire; and if monarchs knew what they would be at, they might be as satisfied
as I was.

MONTRIUL.
AS La Fleur went the whole tour of France and Italy with me, and will be often
upon the stage, I must interest the reader a little further in his behalf, by
saying, that I had never less reason to repent of the impulses which generally
do determine me, than in regard to this fellow -- he was a faithful,
affectionate, simple soul as ever trudged after the heels of a philosopher; and
notwithstanding his talents of drum-beating and spatter-dash-making, which,
though very good in themselves, happened to be of no great service to me, yet was
I hourly recompensed by the festivity of his temper -- it supplied all defects
-- I had a constant resource in his looks in all difficulties and distresses of
my own -- I was going to have added, of his too; but La Fleur was out of the
reach of every thing; for whether 'twas hunger or thirst, or cold or nakedness,
or watchings, or whatever stripes of ill luck La Fleur met with in our
journeyings, there was no index in his physiognomy to point them out by -- he
was eternally the same; so that if I am a piece of a philosopher, which Satan
now and then puts it into my head I am -- it always mortifies the pride of the
conceit, by reflecting how much I owe to the complexional philosophy of this
poor fellow, for shaming me into one of a better kind. With all this, La Fleur
had a small cast of the coxcomb -- but he seemed at first sight to be more a
coxcomb of nature than of art; and before I had been three days in Paris with
him -- he seemed to be no coxcomb at all.

MONTRIUL.
THE next morning La Fleur entering upon his employment, I delivered to him the
key of my portmanteau with an inventory of my half a dozen shirts and silk pair
of breeches; and bid him fasten all upon the chaise -- get the horses put to --
and desire the landlord to come in with his bill.

C'est un gareon de bonne fortune, said the landlord, pointing through the
window to half a dozen wenches who had got round about La Fleur, and were most
kindly taking their leave of him, as the postilion was leading out the horses.
La Fleur kissed all their hands round and round again, and thrice he wiped his
eyes, and thrice he promised he would bring them all pardons from Rome.

The young fellow, said the landlord, is beloved by all the town, and there is
scarce a corner in Montriul where the want of him will not be felt: he has but
one misfortune in the world, continued he, "He is always in love." -- I am
heartily glad of it, said I, -- 'twill save me the trouble every night of
putting my breeches under my head. In saying this, I was making not so much La
Fleur's eloge, as my own, having been in love with one princess or another
almost all my life, and I hope I shall go on so, till I die, being firmly
persuaded, that if ever I do a mean action, it must be in some interval betwixt
one passion and another: whilst this interregnum lasts, I always perceive my
heart locked up -- I can scarce find in it, to give Misery a six pence; and
therefore I always get out of it as fast as I can, and the moment I am
re-kindled, I am all generosity and good will again; and would do any thing in
the world either for, or with any one, if they will but satisfy me there is no
sin in it.

-- But in saying this -- surely I am commending the passion -- not myself.

A FRAGMENT.
-- THE town of Abdera notwithstanding Democritus lived there trying all the
powers of irony and laughter to reclaim it, was the vilest and most profligate
town in all Thrace. What for poisons, conspiracies and assassinations --
libels, pasquinades and tumults, there was no going there by day -- 'twas worse
by night.

Now, when things were at the worst, it came to pass, that the Andromeda of
Euripides being represented at Abdera, the whole orchestra was delighted with
it; but of all passages which delighted them, nothing operated more upon their
imaginations, than the tender strokes of nature which the poet had wrought up
in that pathetic speech of Perseus, O Cupid, Prince of God and men, etc. Every
man almost spoke pure iambics the next day, and talked of nothing but Perseus
his pathetic address -- "O Cupid! prince of God and men" -- in every street of
Abdera, in every house -- O Cupid! Cupid! -- in every mouth, like the natural
notes of some sweet melody which drops from it whether it will or no -- nothing
but Cupid! Cupid! prince of God and men -- The fire caught -- and the whole
city, like the heart of one man, opened itself to Love.

No farmacopolist could sell one grain of helebore -- not a single armourer had
a heart to forge one instrument of death -- Friendship and Virtue met together,
and kissed each other in the street -- the golden age returned, and hung over
the town of Abdera -- every Abderite took his oaten pipe, and every Abderitish
woman left her purple web, and chastely sat her down and listened to the song --

'Twas only in the power, says the Fragment, of the God whose empire extends
from heaven to earth, and even to the depth of the sea, to have done this.

MONTRIUL.
WHEN all is ready, and every article is disputed and paid for in the inn,
unless you are a little soured by the adventure, there is always a matter to
compound at the door, before you can get into your chaise; and that is with the
sons and daughters of poverty, who surround you. Let no man say, "let them go
to the devil" -- it is a cruel journey to send a few miserables, and they have
had sufferings enough without it: I always think it better to take a few sous out
in my hand; and I would counsel every gentle traveller to do so likeways: he
need not be so exact in setting down his motives for giving them -- they will
be registered elsewhere.

For my own part, there is no man gives so little as I do; for few that I know
have so little to give: but as this was the first public act of my charity in
France, I took the more notice of it.

A well-a-way! said I, I have but eight sous in the world, showing them in my
hand, and there are eight poor men and eight poor women for 'em.

A poor tattered soul without a shirt on instantly withdrew his claim, by
retiring two steps out of the circle, and making a disqualifying bow on his
part. Had the whole parterre cried out, Place aux dames, with one voice, it
would not have conveyed the sentiment of a deference for the sex with halt the
effect.

Just heaven! for what wise reasons have thou ordered it, that beggary and
urbanity, which are at such variance in other countries, should find a way to
be at unity in this?

-- I insisted upon presenting him with a single sous, merely for his politesse.

A poor little dwarfish brisk fellow, who stood over against me in the circle,
putting something first under his arm, which had once been a hat, took his
snuff box out of his pocket, and generously offered a pinch on both sides of
him; it was a gift of consequence, and modesty declined -- The poor little
fellow pressed it upon them with a nod of welcomeness -- Prenez en -- prenez,
said he, looking another way; so they each took a pinch -- Pity thy box should
ever want one! said I to myself; so I put a couple of sous into it -- taking a
small pinch out of his box, to enhance their value, as I did it -- He felt the
weight of the second obligation more than that of the first -- 'twas doing him
an honor the other was only doing him a charity -- -- and he made me a bow
down to the ground for it.

-- Here! said I to an old soldier with one hand, who had been campaigned and
worn out to death in the service -- here is a couple of sous for thee -- Vive le
Roi! said the old soldier.

I had then but three sous left: so I gave one, simply pour l'amour de Dieu,
which was the footing on which it was begged -- The poor woman had a dislocated
hip; so it could not be well, upon any other motive.

Mon cher et tres charitable Monsieur -- There Is no opposing this, said I.

My Lord Anglois -- the very sound was worth the money -- so I gave my last
sous for it. But in the eagerness of giving, I had overlooked a pauvre
honteaux, who had no one to ask a sous for him, and who, I believed, would have
perished, ever he could have asked one for himself: he stood by the chaise a
little without the circle, and wiped a tear from a face which I thought had
seen better days -- Good God! said I, -- and I have not one single sous left to
give him -- But you have a a thousand! cried all the powers of nature, stirring
within me -- so I gave him -- no matter what -- I am ashamed to say how much,
now -- and was ashamed to think, how little, then: so if the reader can form
any conjecture of my disposition as these two fixed points are given him, he
may judge within a livre or two what was the precise sum.

I could afford nothing for the rest, but, Dieu vour benisse -- Et le bon Dieu
vous benisse encore -- said the old soldier, the dwarf, etc. The pauvre hontaux
could say nothing -- he pulled out a little handkerchief, and wiped his face as
he turned away -- and I thought he thanked me more than them all.

THE BIDET.
HAVING settled all these little matters, I got into my post-chaise with more
ease than ever I got into a post-chaise in my life; and La Fleur having got one
large jackboot on the far side of a little bidet Post horse.
, and another on this (for I count nothing of his legs) -- he canter'd away
before me as happy and as perpendicular as a prince. --

-- But what is happiness! what is grandeur in this painted scene of life! a
dead ass, before we had got a league, put a sudden stop to La Fleur's career --
his bidet would not pass by it -- a contention arose betwixt them, and the poor
fellow was kicked out of his jack-boots the very first kick.

La Fleur bore his fall like a French christian, saving neither more or less
upon it, than, Diable! so presently got up and came to the charge again astride
his bidet, beating him up to it as he would have beat his drum.

The bidet flew from one side of the road to the other, then back again -- then
this way -- then that way, and in short every way but by the dead ass. -- La
Fleur insisted upon the thing -- and the bidet threw him.

What Is the matter, La Fleur, said I, with this bidet of thine? -- Monsieur,
said he c'est un cheval le plus opiniatre du monde -- Nay, if he is a conceited
beast, he must go his own way, replied I -- so La Fleur got off him, and giving
him a good sound lash, the bidet took me at my word, and away he scamper'd back
to Montriul. -- Peste! said La Fleur.

It is not mal a propos to take notice here, that though La Fleur availed himself
but of two different terms of exclamation in this encounter -- namely, Diable!
and Peste! that there are nevertheless three, in the French language; like the
positive, comparative, and superlative, one or the other of which serve for
every unexpected throw of the dice in life.

Le Diable! which is the first, and positive degree, is generally used upon
ordinary emotions of the mind, where small things only fall out contrary to
your expectations -- such as -- the throwing once doublets -- La Fleur's being
kicked off his horse, and so forth -- cuckoldom, for the same reason, is always
Le Diable*

But in cases where the cast has something provoking in it, as in that of the
bidet's running away after, and leaving La Fleur aground in jack-boots it is the
second degree.

It Is then Peste!

And for the third --

-- But here my heart is wrung with pity and fellow-feeling, when I reflect
what miseries must have been their lot, and how bitterly so refined a people
must have smarted to have forced them upon the use of it. --

Grant me, O ye powers which touch the tongue with eloquence in distress! --
whatever is my cast, grant me but decent words to exclaim in, and I will give
my nature way.

-- But as these were not to be had in France, I resolved to take every evil
just as it befell me without an exclamation at all.

La Fleur, who had made no such covenant with himself, followed the bidet with
his eyes till it was got out of sight -- and then, you may imagine, if you
please, with what word he closed the whole affair.

As there was no hunting down a frightened horse in jack-boots, there remained
no alternative but taking La Fleur either behind the chaise, or into it. --

I preferred the latter, and in half an hour we got to the post house at
Nampont.

NAMPONT. THE DEAD ASS.
-- AND this, said he, putting the remains of a crust into his wallet -- and
this, should have been thy portion, said he, had thou been alive to have
shared it with me. I thought by the accent, it had been an apostrophe to his
child; but 'twas to his ass, and to the very ass we had seen dead in the road,
which had occasioned La Fleur's misadventure. The man seemed to lament it much;
and it instantly brought into my mind Sancho's lamentation for his; but he did
it with more true touches of nature.

The mourner was sitting upon a stone bench at the door, with the ass's panel
and its bridle on one side, which he took up from time to time -- then laid
them down -- looked at them and shook his head. He then took his crust of bread
out of his wallet again, as if to eat it; held it some time in his hand -- then
laid it upon the bit of his ass's bridle -- looked wistfully at the little
arrangement he had made -- and then gave a sigh.

The simplicity of his grief drew numbers about him, and La Fleur amongst the
rest, whilst the horses were getting ready; as I continued sitting in the
post-chaise, I could see and hear over their heads.

-- He said he had come last from Spain, where he had been from the furthest
borders of Frauconia; and had got so far on his return home, when his ass died.
Every one seemed desirous to know what business could have taken so old and
poor a man so far a journey from his own home.

It had pleased heaven, said he, to bless him with three sons, the finest lads
in all Germany; but having in one week lost two of the eldest of them by the
smallpox, and the youngest falling ill of the same distemper, he was afraid of
being bereft of them all; and made a vow, if heaven would not take him from him
also, he would go in gratitude to St Jago in Spain.

When the mourner got thus far on his story, he stopped to pay nature her
tribute -- and wept bitterly.

He said, Heaven had accepted the conditions; and that he had set out from his
cottage with this poor creature, who had been a patient partner of his journey
-- that it had eat the same bread with him all the way, and was unto him as a
friend.

Every body who stood about, heard the poor fellow with concern -- La Fleur
offered him money. -- The mourner said, he did not want it -- it was not the
value of the ass -- but the loss of him. -- The ass, he said, he was assured
loved him -- and upon this told them a long story of a mischance upon their
passage over the Pyrenean mountains which had separated them from each other
three days; during which time the ass had sought him as much as he had sought
the ass, and that they had neither scarce eat or drank till they met.

Thou have one comfort, friend, said I, at least in the loss of thy poor beast;
I am sure thou have been a merciful master to him -- Alas! said the mourner, I
thought so, when he was alive -- but now that he is dead I think otherwise -- I
fear the weight of myself and my afflictions together have been too much for
him -- they have shortened the poor creature's days, and I fear I have them to
answer for. -- Shame on the world! said I to myself -- Did we love each other,
as this poor soul but loved his ass -- 'twould be something --

NAMPONT. THE POSTILLION.
THE concern which the poor fellow's story threw me into, required some
attention: the postillion paid not the least to it, but set off upon the pave
in a full gallop.

The thirstiest soul in the most sandy desert of Arabia could not have wished
more for a cup of cold water than mine did for grave and quiet movements; and I
should have had an high opinion of the postillion had he but stolen off with me
in something like a pensive pace. -- On the contrary, as the mourner finished
his lamentation, the fellow gave an unfeeling lash to each of his beasts, and
set off clattering like a thousand devils.

I called to him as loud as I could, for heaven's sake to go slower -- and the
louder I called the more unmercifully he galloped. -- The deuce take him and
his galloping too -- said I -- he will go on tearing my nerves to pieces till he
has worked me into a foolish passion, and then he will go slow, that I may enjoy
the sweets of it.

The postillion managed the point to a miracle: by the time he had got to the
foot of a steep hill about half a league from Nampont, -- he had put me out of
temper with him -- and then with myself, for being so.

My case then required a different treatment; and a good rattling gallop would
have been of real service to me. --

-- Then, prithee get on -- get on, my good lad said I.

The postillion pointed to the hill -- I then tried to return back to the story
of the poor German and his ass -- but I had broke the clue -- and could no more
get into it again, than the postillion could into a trot. --

-- The deuce go, said I, with it all! Here am I sitting as heartily disposed
to make the best of the worst, as ever wight was, and all runs counter.

There is one sweet lenitive at least for evils, which nature holds out to us;
so I took it kindly at her hands, and fell asleep; and the first word which
roused me was Amiens.

-- Bless me! said I, rubbing my eyes -- this is the very town where my poor
lady is to come.

AMIENS.
THE words were scarce out of my mouth, when the Count de L***'s post-chaise,
with his sister in it, drove hastily by: she had just time to make me a bow of
recognition -- and of that particular kind of it, which told me she had not yet
done with me. She was as good as her look; for, before I had quite finished my
supper, her brother's servant came into the room with a billet, in which she
said, she had taken the liberty to charge me with a letter, which I was to
present myself to Madame R*** the first morning I had nothing to do at Paris.
There was only added, she was sorry, but from what penchant she had not
considered, that she had been prevented telling me her story -- that she still
owed it me; and if my rout should ever lay through Brussels, and I had not by
then forgot the name of Madame de L*** -- that Madame de L*** would be glad to
discharge her obligation,

Then I will meet thee, said I, fair spirit! at Brussels -- it is only returning
from Italy through Germany to Holland, by the rout of Flanders home -- 'twill
scarce be ten posts out of my way; but were it then thousand! with what a moral
delight will it crown my journey, in sharing in the sickening incidents of a
tale of misery told to me by such a sufferer? to see her weep! and though I
cannot dry up the fountain of her tears, what an exquisite sensation is there
still left, in wiping them away from off the cheeks of the first and fairest of
women, as I Am sitting with my hankerchief in my hand in silence the whole night
besides her.

There was nothing wrong in the sentiment; and yet I instantly reproached my
heart with it in the bitterest and most reprobate of expressions.

It had ever, as I told the reader, been one of the singular blessings of my
life, to be almost every hour of it miserably in love with some one; and my
last flame happening to be blown out by a whiff of jealousy on the sudden turn
of a corner, I had lighted it up afresh at the pure taper of Eliza but about
three months before -- swearing as I did it, that it should last me through the
whole journey -- Why should I dissemble the matter? I had sworn to her eternal
fidelity -- she had a right to my whole heart -- to divide my affections was to
lessen them -- to expose them, was to risk them: where there is risk, there may
be loss -- and what will thou have, Yorick! to answer to a heart so full of
trust and confidence -- so good so gentle and unreproaching?

-- I will not go to Brussels, replied I, interrupting myself -- but my
imagination went on -- I recalled her looks at that crisis of our separation
when neither of us had power to say Adieu! I looked at the picture she had tied
in a black ribband about my neck -- and blushed as I looked at it -- I would
have given the world to have kissed it, -- but was ashamed -- and shall this
tender flower, said I, pressing it between my hands -- shall it be smitten to
its very root -- and smitten, Yorick! by thee, who have promised to shelter it
in thy breast?

Eternal fountain of happiness! said I, kneeling down upon the ground -- be
thou my witness -- and every pure spirit which tastes it, be my witness also,
That I would not travel to Brussels, unless Eliza went along with me, did the
road lead me toward heaven.

In transports of this kind, the heart, in spite of the understanding, will
always say too much.

THE LETTER* AMIENS.
FORTUNE had not smiled upon La Fleur: for he had been unsuccessful in his
feats of chivalry -- and not one thing had offered to signalize his zeal for my
service from the time he had entered into it, which was almost four and twenty
hours. The poor soul burned with impatience; and the Count de L***'s servant's
coming with the letter, being the first practicable occasion which offered, La
Fleur had laid hold of it; and in order to do honor to his master, had taken
him into a back parlour in the Auberge, and treated him with a cup or two of
the best wine in Picardy; and the Count de L***'s servant in return, and not to
be behind hand in politeness with La Fleur, had taken him back with him to the
Count's hotel. La Fleur's prevenancy (for there was a passport in his very
looks) soon set every servant in the kitchen at ease with him; and as a
Frenchman, whatever be his talents, has no sort of prudery in showing them, La
Fleur, in less than five minutes, had pulled out his fife, and leading off the
dance himself with the first note, set the fille de chamber, the maitre
d'hotel, the cook, the sucllion, and all the household, dogs and cats, besides
an old monkey, a dancing: I suppose there never was a merrier kitchen since the
flood.

Madame de L***, in passing from her brother's apartment to her own, hearing so
much jollity below stairs, rung up her fille de chamber to ask about it; and
hearing it was the English gentleman's servant who had set the whole house
merry with his pipe, she ordered him up.

As the poor fellow could not present himself empty, he had loaden'd himself in
going up stairs with a thousand compliments to Madame de L***, on the part of
his master -- added a long apocrypha of inquires after Madame de L***'s health
-- told her, that Monsieur his master was au desespoir for her re-establishment
from the fatigues of her journey -- and, to close all, that Monsieur had
received the letter which Madame had done him the honor -- and he has done me
the honor, said Madame de L***, interrupting La Fleur, to send a billet in
return.

Madame de L*** had said this with such a tone of reliance upon the fact, that
La Fleur had not power to disappoint her expectations -- he trembled for my
honor -- and possibly might not altogether be unconcerned for his own, as a
man capable of being attached to a master who could be a wanting en egard vis a
vis d'une femme; so that when Madame de L*** asked La Fleur if he had brought a
letter O qu'oui, said La Fleur: so laying down his hat upon the ground, and
taking hold of the flap of his right side pocket with his left hand, he began
to search for the letter with his right -- then contrariwise -- Diable! -- then
sought every pocket -- pocket by pocket, round, not forgetting his fob --
Peste! -- then La Fleur emptied them upon the floor -- pulled out a dirty
cravat -- a handkerchief -- a comb -- a whip lash -- a nightcap -- then gave a
peep into his hat -- Quelle etourderie! He had left the letter upon the table
in the Auberge -- he would run for it, and be back with it in three minutes.

I had just finished my supper when La Fleur came in to give me an account of
his adventure: he told the whole story simply as it was; and only added, that
if Monsieur had forgot ( par hazard) to answer Madame's letter, the arrangement
gave him an opportunity to recover the faux pas -- and if not, that things were
only as they were.

Now I was not altogether sure of my etiquette, whether I ought to have wrote
or no; but if I had -- a devil himself could not have been angry 'twas but the
officious zeal of a well-meaning creature for my honor; and however he might
have mistook the road -- or embarrassed me in so doing -- his heart was in no
fault -- I was under no necessity to write -- and what weighed more than all --
he did not look as if he had done amiss.

-- It Is all very well, La Fleur, said I.

-- 'Twas sufficient. La Fleur flew out of the room like lightening, and
returned with pen, ink, and paper, in his hand; and coming up to the table,
laid them close before me, with such a delight in his countenace, that I could
not help taking up the pen.

I begun and begun again; and though I had nothing to say, and that nothing
might have been expressed in half a dozen lines, I made half a dozen different
beginnings, and could no way please myself.

In short, I was in no mood to write.

La Fleur stepped out and brought a little water in a glass to dilute my ink --
then fetched sand and seal-wax -- It was all one -- I wrote and blotted, and
tore off, and burnt, and wrote again -- Le Diable l'emporte! said I half to
myself -- I cannot write this self-same letter; throwing the pen down
despairingly as I said it.

As soon as I had cast down the pen, La Fleur advanced with the most respectful
carriage up to the table, and making a thousand apologies for the liberty he
was going to take, told me he had a letter in his pocket wrote by a drummer in
his regiment to a corporal's wife, which, he durst say, would suit the occasion.

I had a mind to let the poor fellow have his humor -- Then prithee, said I,
let me see it.

La Fleur instantly pulled out a little dirty pocket book crammed full of small
letters and billet-doux in a sad condition, and laying it upon the table, and
then untying the string which held them all together, run them over one by one,
till he came to the letter in question -- La voila! said he, clapping his
hands: so unfolding it first, he laid it before me, and retired three steps
from the table whilst I read it.

THE LETTER.
MADAME,
JE suis penetre de la douleur la plus vive, et reduit en meme temps au
desespoir par ce retour imprevu du Corporal qui rend notre entrevue de ce soir
la chose du monde la plus impossible.

Mais vive la joie! et toute la mienne sera de penser a vous.

L'amour n'est rien sans sentiment.

Et le sentiment est encore moins sans amor.

On dit qu'on ne doit jamais se desesperer.

On dit aussi que Monsieur le Corporal monte la guard Mecredi* alors ce sera
mon tour.

Chacun a son tour.

Et attendant -- Vive l'amour! et vive la bagatelle!

Je suis MADAME, Avec toutes les sentiments les plus respecteux et les plus
tendres tout a vous, JAQAES ROQUE.


It was but changing the Corporal into the Count -- and saying nothing about
mounting guard on Wednesday -- and the letter was neither right or wrong -- so
to gratify the poor fellow, who stood trembing for my honor, his own, and the
honor of his letter, -- I took the cream gently off it, and whipping it up in
my own way -- I sealed it up and sent him with it to Madame de L * * * -- and
the next morning we pursued our journey to Paris.

PARIS.
WHEN a man can contest the point by dint of equipage, and carry all on
floundering before him with half a dozen lackies and a couple of cooks -- it is
very well in such a place as Paris -- he may drive in at which end of a street
he will.

A poor prince who is weak in cavalry, and whose whole infantry does not exceed
a single man, had best quit the field; and signalize himself in the cabinet, if
he can get up into it -- I say up into it -- for there is no descending
perpendicular amongst 'em with a " Me voici! mes enfans" -- here I am --
whatever many may think.

I own my first sensations, as soon as I was left solitary and alone in my own
chamber in the hotel, were far from being so flattering as I had prefigured
them. I walked up gravely to the window in my dusty black coat, and looking
through the glass saw all the world in yellow, blue, and green, running at the
ring of pleasure -- The old with broken lances, and in helmets which had lost
their vizards -- the young in armor bright which shone like gold, beplumed
with each gay feather of the east -- all -- all tilting at it like fascinated
knights in tournaments of yore for fame and love. --

Alas, poor Yorick! cried I, what art thou doing here? On the very first onset
of all this glittering clatter, thou art reduced to an atom -- seek -- seek
some winding alley, with a tourniquet at the end of it, where chariot never
rolled or flambeau shot its rays -- there thou may solace thy soul in
converse sweet with some kind grisset of a barber's wife, and get into such
coteries! --

-- May I perish! if I do, said I, pulling out the letter which I had to
present to Madame de R * * *. -- I Will wait upon this lady, the very first thing
I do. So I called La Fleur to go seek me a barber directly -- and come back and
brush my coat.

THE WIG. PARIS.
WHEN the barber came, he absolutely refused to have any thing to do with my
wig: 'twas either above or below his art: I had nothing to do, but to take one
ready made of his own recommendation.

-- But I fear, friend! said I, this buckle will not stand. -- You may immerge it,
replied he, into the ocean, and it will stand --

What a great scale is every thing upon in this city! thought I -- the utmost
stretch of an English periwig-maker's ideas could have gone no further than to
have dipped it into a pail of water -- What difference! it is like time to
eternity.

I confess I do hate all cold conceptions, as I do the puny ideas which
engender them; and am generally so struck with the great works of nature, that
for my own part, if I could help it, I never would make a comparison less than
a mountain at least. All that can be said against the French sublime in this
instance of it, is this -- that the grandeur is more in the word; and less in
the thing. No doubt the ocean fills the mind with vast ideas; but Paris being
so far inland, it was not likely I should run post a hundred miles out of it,
to try the experiment -- the Parisian barber meant nothing.

The pail of water standing besides the great deep, makes certainly but a sorry
figure in speech -- but 'twill be said -- it has one advantage -- it is in the
next room, and the truth of the buckle may be tried in it without more ado, in
a single moment.

In honest truth, and upon a more candid revision of the matter, The French
expression professes more than it performs.

I think I can see the precise and distinguishing marks of national characters
more in these nonsensical minutiae, than in the most important matters of
state; where great men of all nations talk and stalk so much alike, that I
would not give nine-pence to choose amongst them.

I was so long in getting from under my barber's hands, that it was too late of
thinking of going with my letter to Madame R*** that night: but when a man is
once dressed at all points for going out, his reflections turn to little
account, so taking down the name of the Hotel de Modene where I lodged, I
walked forth without any determination where to go -- I shall consider of that,
said I, as I walk along.

THE PULSE. PARIS.
HAIL ye small sweet courtesies of life, for smooth do ye make the road of it!
like grace and beauty which beget inclinations to love at first sight; it is ye
who open this door and let the stranger in.

-- Pray, Madame, said I, have the goodness to tell me which way I must turn to
go to the Opera comique; most willingly, Monsieur, said she, laying aside her
work.

I had given a cast with my eye into half a dozen shops as I came along in
search of a face not likely to be disordered by such an interruption; till at
last, this hitting my fancy, I had walked in.

She was working a pair of ruffles as she sat in a low chair on the far side of
the shop facing the door --

-- Tres volentieres; most willingly, said she, laying her work down upon a
chair next her, and rising up from the low chair she was sitting in, with so
cheerful a movement and so cheerful a look, that had I been laying out fifty
louis d'ors with her, I should have said -- This woman is grateful

You must turn, Monsieur, said she, going with me to the door of the shop, and
pointing the way down the street I was to take -- you must turn first to your
left hand -- mais prenez guarde -- there are two turns; and be so good as to
take the second -- then go down a little way and you will see a church, and when
you are past it, give yourself the trouble to turn directly to the right, and
that will lead you to the foot of the pont neuf, which you must cross -- and
there, any one will do himself the pleasure to show you --

She repeated her instructions three times over to me with the same good
natured patience the third time as the first; -- and if tones and manners have
a meaning, which certainly they have, unless to hearts which shut them out --
she seemed really interested, that I should not lose myself.

I will not suppose it was the woman's beauty, notwithstanding she was the
handsomest grisset, I think, I ever saw, which had much to do with the sense I
had of her courtesy; only I remember, when I told her how much I was obliged to
her, that I looked very full in her eyes -- and that I repeated my thanks as
often as she had done her instructions.

I had not got ten paces from the door, before I found I had forgot every
tittle of what she had said -- so looking back, and seeing her still standing
in the door of the shop as if to look whether I went right or not -- I returned
back, to ask her whether the first turn was to my right or left -- for that I
had absolutely forgot. -- It is possible! said she, half laughing. -- It Is very
possible, replied I, when a man is thinking more of a woman, than of her good
advice.

As this was the real truth -- she took it, as every woman takes a matter of
right, with a slight courtesy.

-- Attendez! said she, laying her hand upon my arm to detain me, whilst she
called a lad out of the back-shop to get ready a parcel of gloves. I am just
going to send him, said she, with a packet into that quarter, and if you will
have the complaisance to step in, it will be ready in a moment and he shall
attend you to the place. -- So I walked in with her to the far side of the
shop, and taking up the ruffle in my hand which she laid upon the chair, as if
I had a mind to sit, she sat down herself in her low chair, and I instantly sat
myself down beside her.

-- He will be ready, Monsieur, said she, in a moment -- And in that moment,
replied I, most willingly would I say something very civil to you for all these
courtesies. Any one may do a casual act of good nature, but a continuation of
them shows it is a part of the temperature; and certainly, added I, if it is
the same blood which comes from the heart, which descends to the extremes
(touching her wrist) I am sure you must have one of the best pulses of any
woman in the world -- Feel it, said she, holding out her arm. So laying down my
hat, I took hold other fingers in one hand, and applied the two fore-fingers of
my other to the artery --

-- Would to heaven! my dear Eugenius, thou had passed by, and beheld me
sitting in my black coat, and in my lack-a-day-sical manner, counting the
throbs of it, one by one, with as much true devotion as if I had been watching
the critical ebb or flow of her fever -- How would thou have laughed and
moralized upon my new profession? -- and thou should have laughed and
moralized on -- Trust me, my dear Eugenius, I should have said, there are worse
occupations in this world than feeling a woman's pulse. -- But a Grisset's!
thou would have said -- and in an open shop! Yorick --

-- So much the better: for when my views are direct, Eugenius, I care not if
all the world saw me feel it

THE HUSBAND. PARIS.
I HAD counted twenty pulsations, and was going on fast toward the fortieth,
when her husband coming unexpected from a back parlour into the shop, put me a
little out in my recouing -- 'Twas no body but her husband, she said -- so I
began a fresh score -- Monsieur is so good, quoth she, as he passed by us, as
to give himself the trouble of feeling my pulse -- The husband took off his
hat, and making me a bow, said, I did him too much honor -- and having said
that, he put on his hat and walked out.

Good God! said I to myself, as he went out -- and can this man be the husband
of this woman?

Let it not torment the few who know what must have been the grounds of this
exclamation, if I explain it to those who do not.

In London a shopkeeper and a shopkeeper's wife seem to be one bone and one
flesh: in the several endowments of mind and body, sometimes the one, sometimes
the other has it, so as in general to be upon a par, and to tally with each
other as nearly as man and wife need to do.

In Paris, there are scarce two orders of beings more different: for the
legislative and executive powers of the shop not resting in the husband, he
seldom comes there -- in some dark and dismal room behind, he sits commerceless
in his thrum nightcap, the same rough son of nature that nature left him.

The genius of a people where nothing but the monarchy is salique, having ceded
this department, with sundry others, totally to the women -- by a continual
higgling with customers of all ranks and sizes from morning to night, like so
many rough pebbles shook long together in a bag, by amicable collisions, they
have worn down their asperities and sharp angels, and not only become round and
smooth, but will receive, some of them, a polish like a brilliant -- Mosieur le
Mari is little better than the stone under your foot.

-- Surely -- surely man! it is not good for thee to sit alone -- thou wast
made for social intercourse and gentle greetings, and this improvement of our
natures from it, I appeal to, as my evidence.

-- And how does it beat, Monsieur? said she. -- With all the benignity, said
I, looking quietly in her eyes, that I expected -- She was going to say
something civil in return -- but the lad came into the shop with the gloves --
A propos, said I, I want a couple of pair myself.

THE GLOVES. PARIS.
THE beautiful Grisset rose up when I said this, and going behind the counter,
reached down a parcel and untied it: I advanced to the side over against her:
they were all too large. The beautiful Grisset measured them one by one across
my hand -- It would not alter the dimentions -- She begged I would try a single
pair, which seemed to be the least -- She held it open -- my hand slipped into
it at once -- It will not do, said I, shaking my head a little -- No, said she,
doing the same thing.

There are certain combined looks of simple subtlety -- where whim, and sense,
and seriousness, and nonsense, are so blended, that all languages of Babel set
loose together could not express them -- they are commnicated and caught so
instantaneously, that you can scarce say which party is the infecter. I leave
it to you men of words to spell pages about it -- it is enough in the present
to say again, the gloves would not do; so folding our hands within our arms, we
both rolled upon the counter -- it was narrow, and there was just room for the
parcel to lay between us.

The beautiful Grisset looked sometimes at the gloves, then side-ways to the
window, then at the gloves -- and then at me. I was not disposed to break
silence -- I followed her example, so I looked at the gloves then to the
window, then at the gloves, and then at her -- and so on alternately.

I found I lost considerably in every attack -- she had a quick black eye, and
shot through two such long and silken eye-lashes with such penetration, that she
looked into my very heart and reins -- It may seem strange, but I could
actually feel she did.

-- It is no matter, said I, taking up a couple of the pairs next me, and
putting them into my pocket.

I was sensible the beautiful Grisset had not asked above a single livre above
the price -- I wished she had asked a livre more and was puzzling my brains how
to bring the matter about -- Do you think, my dear Sir, said she, mistaking my
embarassment, that I could ask a sous too much of a stranger -- and of a
stranger, whose politeness, more than his want of gloves, has done me the
honor to lay himself at my mercy? -- M'en croyez capable? -- Faith! not I,
said I; and if you were, you are welcome -- so counting the money in her hand,
and with a lower bow than one generally makes to a shopkeeper's wife, I went
out, and her lad with his parcel followed me.

THE TRANSLATION. PARIS.
THERE was no body in the box I was let into but a kindly old French officer. I
love the character, not only because I honor the man whose manners are
softened by a profession which makes bad men worse; but that I once knew one --
for he is no more -- and why should I not rescue one page from violation by
writing his name in it, and telling the world it was Captain Tobias Shandy, the
dearest of my flock and friends, whose philanthropy I never think of at this
long distance from his death -- but my eyes gush out with tears. For his sake,
I have a predilection for the whole corpse of Veterans; and so I strode over the
two back rows of benches, and placed myself beside him.

The old officer was reading attentively a small pamphlet, it might be the book
of the opera, with a large pair of spectacles, As soon as I sat down, he took
his spectacles off, and putting them into a shagreen case, returned them and
the book into his pocket together, I half rose up, and made him a bow.

Translate this into any civilized language in the world -- the sense is this:

Here Is a poor stranger come into the box -- he seems as if he knew no body;
and is never likely, was he to be seven years in Paris, if every man he comes
near keeps his spectacles upon his nose -- it is shutting the door of
conversation absolutely in his face -- and using him worse than a German.

The French officer might as well have said it aloud; and if he had, I should
in course have put the bow I made him into French too, and told him, I was
sensible of his attention, and returned him a thousand thanks for it.

There is not a secret so aiding to the progress of sociality, as to get master
of this short hand, and be quick in rendering the several turns of looks and
limbs, with all their inflections and delineations, into plain words. For my
own part, by long habitude, I do it so mechanically, that when I walk the
streets of London, I go translating all the way; and have more than once stood
behind in the circle, where not three words have been said, and have brought
off twenty different dialogues with me, which I could have fairly wrote down
and sworn to.

I was going one evening to Martini's concert at Milan, and was just entering
the door of the hall, when the Marquesina di F*** was coming out in a sort of a
hurry -- she was almost upon me before I saw her; so I gave a spring to one
side to let her pass -- She had done the same, and on the same side too; so we
ran our heads together: she instantly got to the other side to get out. I was
just as unfortunate as she had been; for I had sprung to that side, and opposed
her passage again -- we both flew together to the other side, and then back --
and so on -- it was ridiculous; we both blushed intollerably; so I did at last
the thing I should have done at first -- I stood stock still, and the
Marquesina had no more difficulty, I had no power to go into the room, till I
had made her so much reparation as to wait and follow her with my eye to the
end of the passage -- She looked back twice, and walked along it rather
side-ways, as if she would make room for any one coming up stairs to pass her
-- No, said I -- that is a vile translation: the Marquesina has a right to the
best apology I can make her; and that opening is left for me to do it in -- so
I ran and begged pardon for the embarassment I had given her, saying it was my
intention to have made her way. She answered she was guided by the same
intention toward me -- so we reciprocally thanked each other. She was at the
top of the stairs; and seeing no chichesbee near her, I begged to hand her to
her coach -- so we went down the stairs, stopping at every third step to talk
of the concert and the adventure -- Upon my word, Madame, said I when I had
handed her in, I made six different efforts to let you go out -- And* I made
six efforts, replied she, to let you enter -- I wish to heaven you would make a
seventh, said I -- With all my heart said she, making room -- Life is too short
to be long about the forms of it -- so I instantly stepped in, and she carried
me home with her -- And what became of the concert, St. Cecilia, who, I
suppose, was at it, knows more than I.

I will only add, that the connection which arose out of that translation, gave
me more pleasure than any one I had the honor to make in Italy.

THE DWARF. PARIS.
I HAD never heard the remark made by any one in my life, except by one; and
who that was, will probably come out in this chapter; so that being pretty much
unprepossessed, there must have been grounds for what struck me the moment I
cast my eyes over the parterre -- and that was, the unaccountable sport of
nature in forming such numbers of dwarfs -- No doubt, she sports at certain
times in almost every corner of the world; but in Paris, there is no end to her
amusements -- The goddess seems almost as merry as she is wise.

As I carried my idea out of the opera comique with me, I measured every body I
saw walking in the streets by it -- Melancholy application! especially where
the size was extremely little -- the face extremely dark -- the eyes quick --
the nose long -- the teeth white -- the jaw prominent -- to see so many
miserables, by force of accidents driven out of their own proper class into the
very verge of another, which it gives me pain to write down -- every third man
a pigmy! -- some by ricketty heads and hump backs -- others by bandy legs -- a
third set arrested by the hand of nature in the sixth and seventh years of
their growth -- a fourth, in their perfect and natural state, like dwarf
apple trees: from the first rudiments and stamina of their existence, never
meant to grow higher.

A medical traveller might say, it is owing to undue bandages -- a splenetic
one, to want of air -- and an inquisitive traveller, to fortify the system, may
measure the height of their houses -- the narrowness of their streets, and in
how few feet square in the sixth and seventh stories such numbers of the
Bourgoisie eat and sleep together; but I remember Mr. Shandy the elder, who
accounted for nothing like any body else, in speaking one evening of these
matters, averred, that children, like other animals, might be increased almost
to any size, provided they came right into the world; but the misery was, the
citizens of Paris were so cooped up, that they had not actually room enough to
get them -- I do not call it getting any thing, said he -- it is getting nothing
-- Nay, continued he, rising in his argument, it is getting worse than nothing,
when all you have got, after twenty or five and twenty years of the tenderest
care and most nutritious aliment bestowed upon it, shall not at last be as high
as my leg. Now, Mr. Shandy being very short, there could be nothing more said
upon it.

As this is not a work of reasoning, I leave the solution as I found it, and
content myself with the truth only of the remark, which is verified in every
lane and by-lane of Paris. I was walking down that which leads from the
Carousal to the Palais Royal, and observing a little boy in some distress at
the side of the gutter, which ran down the middle of it, I took hold of his
hand, and helped him over. Upon turning up his face to look at him after, I
perceived he was about forty. -- Never mind, said I; some good body will do as
much for me when I am ninety,

I feel some little principles within me, which incline me to be merciful
toward this poor blighted part of my species, who have neither size or
strength to get on in the world -- I cannot hear to see one of them and upon;
and had scarce got seated beside my old French officer, ere the disgust was
exercised by seeing the very thing happen under the box we sat in.

At the end of the orchestra, and betwixt that and the first side box, there is
a small esplanade left, where, when the house is full, numbers of all ranks
take sanctuary. Though you stand, as in the parterre, you pay the same price as
in the orchestra. A poor defenseless being of this order had got thrust some
how or other into this luckless place -- the night was hot, and he was
surrounded by beings two feet and a half higher than himself. The dwarf
suffered inexpressibly on all sides; but the thing which incommoded him most,
was a tall corpulent German, near seven feet high, who stood directly betwixt
him and all possibility of his seeing either, the stage or the actors. The poor
dwarf did all he could to get a peep at what was going forwards, by seeking for
some little opening betwixt the German's arm and his body, trying first one
side, then the other; but the German stood square in the most unaccommodating
posture that can be imagined -- the dwarf might as well have been placed at the
bottom of the deepest draw-well in Paris; so he civilly reached up his hand to
the German's sleeve, and told him his distress -- The German turned his head
back, looked down upon him as Goliath did upon David -- and unfeelingly resumed
his posture.

I was just then taking a pinch of snuff out of my monk's little horn box --
And how would thy meek and courteous spirit, my dear monk! so tempered to bear
and forbear! -- how sweetly would it have lent an ear to this poor soul's
complaint!

The old French officer seeing me lift up my eyes with an emotion, as I made
the apostrophe, took the liberty to ask me what was the matter -- I told him
the story in three words; and added, how inhuman it was.

By this time the dwarf was driven to extremes, and in his first transports,
which are generally unreasonable, had told the German he would cut off his long
queue with his knife -- The German looked back coolly and told him he was
welcome if he could reach it.

An injury sharpened by an insult, be it to who it will, makes every man of
sentiment a party: I could have leaped out of the box to have redressed it. --
The old French officer did it with much less confusion; for leaning a little
over, and nodding to a sentinel and pointing at the same time with his finger
to the distress -- the sentinel made his way up to it. -- There was no occasion
to tell the grievance -- the thing told itself; so thrusting back the German
instantly with his musket -- he took the poor dwarf by the hand and placed him
before him. -- This is noble! said I, clapping my hands together -- And yet you
would not permit this, said the old officer, in England.

-- In England, dear Sir, said I, we sit all at our ease.

The old French officer would have set me at unity with myself, in case I had
been at variance, -- by saying it was a bon mot -- and as a bon mot is always
worth something at Paris, he offered me a pinch of snuff.

THE ROSE. PARIS.
IT was now my turn to ask the old French officer What was the matter? for a
cry of Haussez les mains, Monsieur l' Abbe, re-echoed from a dozen different
parts of the parterre, was as unintelligible to me, as my apostrophe to the
monk had been to him.

He told me, it was some poor Abbe in one of the upper loges, who he supposed
had got planted perdu behind a couple of grissets in order to see the opera,
and that the paterre espying him, were insisting upon his holding up both his
hands during the representation. -- And can it be supposed, said I, that an
ecclesiastic would pick the Grisset's pockets? The old French officer smiled,
and whispering in my ear, opened a door of knowledge which I had no idea of.

Good God! said I, turning pale with astonishment -- is it possible, that a
people so smit with sentiment should at the same time be so unclean, and so
unlike themselves -- Quelle grossierte! added I.

The French officer told me, it was an illiberal sarcasm at the church, which
had begun in the theater about the time the Tartuffe was given in it by Moliere
-- but, like other remains of Gothic manners, was declining -- Every nation,
continued he, have their refinements and grossiertes, in which they take the
lead, and lose it of one another by turns -- that he had been in most
countries, but never in one where he found not some delicacies, which others
seemed to want Le POUR, et le CONTRE se trouvent en chaque nation; there is a
balance, said he, of good and bad every where; and nothing but the knowing it
is so can emancipate one half of the world from the prepossessions which it
holds against the other -- that the advantage of travel, as it regarded the
seavoir vivre, was by seeing a great deal both of men and manners; it taught us
mutual toleration; and mutual toleration, concluded he, making me a bow, taught
us mutual love.

The old French officer delivered this with an air of such candor and good
sense, as coincided with my first favorable impressions of his character -- I
though it I loved the man; but I fear I mistook the object -- 'twas my own way of
thinking -- the difference was, I could not have expressed it half so well.

It is alike troublesome to both the rider and his beast -- if the latter goes
pricking up his ears, and starting all the way at every object which he never
saw before -- I have as little torment of this kind as any creature alive; and
yet I honestly confess, that many a thing gave me pain, and that I blushed at
many a word the first month -- which I found inconsequent and perfectly
innocent the second.

Madame de Rambouliet, after an acquaintance of about six weeks with her, had
done me the honor to take me in her coach about two leagues out of town -- Of
all women, Madame de Rambouliet is the most correct; and I never wish to see
one of more virtues and purity of heart -- In our return back, Madame de
Rambouliet desired me to pull the cord -- I asked her if she wanted any thing
-- Rien que pisser, said Madame de Rambouliet --

Grieve not, gentle traveller, to let Madame de Rambouliet p -- ss on -- And,
ye fair mystic nymphs! go each one pluck your rose, and scatter them in your
path -- for Madame de Rambouliet did no more -- I handed Madame de Rambouliet
out of the coach; and had I been the priest of the chaste CASTALIA, I could not
have served at her fountain with a more respectful decorum.

END OF VOL. I.
A SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY THROUGH FRANCE AND ITALY.

BY Mr. YORICK.

VOL. II.

M,DCC,LXVIII.

THE FILLE DE CHAMBER PARIS.
WHAT the old French officer had delivered upon traveling, bringing Polonius's
advice to his son upon the same subject into my head -- and that bringing in
Hamlet; and Hamlet, the rest of Shakespeare's works, I stopped at the Quai de
Conti in my return home, to purchase the whole set,

The bookseller said he had not a set in the world -- Comment! said I; taking
one up out of a set which lay upon the counter betwixt us. -- He said, they
were sent him only to be got bound, and were to be sent back to Versailles in
the morning to the Count de B * * * *.

-- And does the Count de B * * * * said I, read Shakespeare? C'est un Esprit
fort; replied the bookseller. -- He loves English books; and what is more to
his honor, Monsieur, he love the English too. You speak this so civilly, said
I, that it is enough to oblige an Englishman to lay out a Louis d'or or two at
your shop -- the bookseller made a bow, and was going to say something, when a
young decent girl of about twenty, who by her air and dress, seemed to be fille
de chamber to some devout woman of fashion, came into the shop and asked for
Les Egarments du Coeur and de l'Esprit: the bookseller gave her the book
directly; she pulled out a little green satin purse run round with a ribband
of the same color, and putting her finger and thumb into it, she took out the
money, and paid for it. As I had nothing more to stay me in the shop, we both
walked out at the door together.

-- And what have you to do, my dear, said I, with The wanderings of the heart,
who scarce know yet you have one? nor till love has first told you it, or some
faithless shepherd has made it ache, can thou ever be sure it is so. -- Le
Dieu m'en guer^! said the girl. -- With reason, said I -- for if it is a good
one, it is pity it should be stolen: it is a little treasure to thee, and gives a
better air to your face, than if it was dressed out with pearls.

The young girl listened with a submissive attention, holding her satin purse
by its ribband in her hand all the time -- It Is a very small one, said I,
taking hold of the bottom of it -- she held it toward me -- and there is very
little in it, my dear, said I; but be but as good as thou art handsome, and
heaven will fill it: I had a parcel of crowns in my hand to pay for Shakespeare;
and as she had let go the purse entirely I put a single one in; and tying up
the ribband in a bow-knot, returned it to her.

The young girl made me more a humble courtesy than a low one -- 'twas one of
those quiet, thankful sinkings where the spirit bows itself down -- the body
does no more than tell it. I never gave a girl a crown in my life which gave me
half the pleasure.

My advice, my dear, would not have been worth a pin to you, said I, if I had
not given this along with it: but now, when you see the crown, you will remember
it -- so don't, my dear, lay it out in ribbands.

Upon my word, Sir, said the girl, earnetsly, I am incapable -- in saying
which, as is usual in little bargains of honor, she gave me her hand -- En
verite, Monsieur, je mettrai cet argent apart, said she.

When a virtuous convention is made betwixt man and woman, it sanctifies their
most private walks: so notwithstanding it was dusky, yet as both our roads lay
the same way, we made no scruple of walking along the Quai de Conti together.

She made me a second courtesy in setting off, and before we got twenty yards
from the door, as if she had not done me enough before, she made a sort of a
little stop to tell me again -- she thanked me.

It was a small tribute, I told her, which I could not avoid paying to virtue,
and would not be mistaken in the person I had been rendering it to for the
world -- but I see innocence, my dear, in your face -- and soul befall the man
who ever lays a snare in its way!

The girl seemed affected some way or other with what I said -- she gave a low
sigh -- I found I was not empowered to enquire at all after it -- so said
nothing more till I got to the corner of the Rue de Nevers, where we were to
part.

-- But is this the way, my dear, said I, to the hotel de Modene? she told me
it was -- or, that I might go by the Rue de Guineygaude, which was the next
turn. -- Then I Will go, my dear, by the Rue de Guineygaude, said I, for two
reasons; first I shall please myself, and next I shall give you the protection
of my company as far on your way as I can. The girl was sensible I was civil,
and said, she wished the hotel de Modene was in the Rue de St. Pierre -- You
live there? said I. -- She told me she was fille de chamber to Madame R * * *
*! Good God said I, it is the very lady for whom I have brought a letter from
Amiens -- The girl told me that Madame R * * * *, she believed expected a
stranger with a letter, and was impatient to see him -- so I desired the girl
to present my compliments to Madame R * * * *, and say I would certainly wait
upon her in the morning.

We stood still at the corner of the Rue de Nevers whilst this passed -- We
than stopped a moment whilst she disposed of her Egarments de Coeur, etc. more
commodiously than carrying them in her hand -- they were two volumes, so I held
the second for her whilst she put the first into her pocket; and then she held
her pocket, and I put in the other after it.

It Is sweet to feel by what fine-spun threads our affections are drawn together.

We set off a-fresh, and as she took her third step, the girl put her hand
within my arm -- I was just bidding her -- but she did it of herself with that
undeliberating simplicity, which showed it was out of her head that she had
never seen me before. For my own part, I felt the conviction of consauguinity
so strongly, that I could not help turning half round to look in her face, and
see if I could trace out any thing in it of a family likeness -- Tut! said I,
are we not all relations?

When we arrived at the turning up of the Rue de Guineygaude, I stopped to bid
her adieu for good an all, the girl would thank me again for my company and
kindness -- She bid me adieu twice -- I repeated it as often; and so cordial
was the parting between us, that had it happened any where else, I am not sure
but I should have signed it with a kiss of charity, as warm and holy as an
apostle.

But in Paris, as none kiss each other but the men -- I did, what amounted to
the same thing --

-- I bid God bless her.

THE PASSPORT. PARIS.
WHEN I got home to my hotel, La Fleur told me I had been enquired after by the
Lieutenant de Police -- The duce take it! said I -- I know the reason. It is
time the reader should know it, for in the order of things in which it
happened, it was omitted; not that it was out of my head; but that had I told
it then, it might have been forgot new -- and now is the time I want it.

I had left London with so much precipitation, that it never entered my mind
that we were at war with France; and had reached Dover, and looked through my
glass at the hills beyond Boulovne, before the idea presented itself; and with
this in its train, that there was no getting there without a passort, Go but to
the end of a street I have a mortal aversion for returning back no wiser than I
sat out; and as this was one of the greatest efforts I had ever made for
knowledge, I could less bear the thoughts of it: so hearing the Count de * * *
* had hired the packet, I begged he would take me in his suite. The Count had
some little knowledge of me, so made little or no difficulty -- only said, his
inclination to serve me could reach no further than Calais; as he was to return
by way of Brussels to Paris: however, when I once passed there, I might get to
Paris without interruption, but that in Paris I must make friends and shift for
myself. -- Let me get to Paris, Monsieur le Count, said I -- and I shall do
very well. So I embarked, and never thought more of the matter.

When Le Fleur told me the Lieutenant de Police had been enquiring after me --
the thing instantly recured -- and by the time Le Fleur had well told me, the
master of the hotel came into my room to tell me the same thing, with this
addition to it, that my passport had been particularly asked after: the master
of the hotel concluded with saying, he hoped I had one. -- Not I, faith! said I.

The master of the hotel retired three steps from me, as from an infected
person as I declared this -- and poor Le Fleur advanced three steps toward me,
and with that sort of movement which a good soul makes to succor a distressed
one -- the fellow won my heart by it; and from that single trait, I know his
character as perfectly, and could rely upon it as firmly, as if he had served
me with fidelity for seven years.

Mon seignior! cried the master of the hotel -- but recollecting himself as he
made the exclamation, he instantly changed the tone of it. -- If Monsieur, said
he, has not a passport ( apparament) in all likelihood he has friends in Paris
who can procure him one. -- Not that I know of, quoth I, with an air of
indifference. -- Then certes, replied he, you will be sent to the bastile or the
chatelet, ou moins. Poo! said I, the king of France is a good natured soul --
he will hurt no body. -- Cela n'empeche pas, said he -- you will certainly be
sent to the bastile tomorrow morning. -- But I Have taken your lodgings for a
month, answered I, and I Will not quit them a day before the time for all the
kings of France in the world. La Fleur whispered in my ear, that no body could
oppose the king of France.

Pardi! said my host, ces Messieurs Anglois sont des gens tres extraordinaires
-- and having both said and sworn it. -- he went out.

THE PASSPORT. The Hotel at Paris.
I COULD not find in my heart to torture La Fleur's with a serious look upon
the subject of my embarrassment, which was the reason I had treated it so
cavalierly: and to show him how light it lay upon my mind, I dropped the subject
entirely; and whilst he waited upon me at supper, talked to him with more than
usual gaiety about Paris, and of the opera comique -- La Fleur had been there
himself, and had followed me through the streets as far as the bookseller's
shop; but seeing me come out with the young fille de chamber, and that we
walked down the Quai de Conti together, La Fleur deemed it unnecessary to
follow me a step further -- so making his own reflections upon it, he took a
shorter cut, and got to the hotel in time to be informed of the affair of the
Police against my arrival.

As soon as the honest creature had taken away, and gone down to sup himself, I
then began to think a little seriously about my situation. --

-- And here, I know, Eugenius, thou will smile at the remembrance of a short
dialogue which passed betwixt us the moment I was going to set out -- I must
tell it here.

Eugenius, knowing that I was as little subject to be overburthened with money
as thought, had drawn me aside to interrogate me how much I had taken care for;
upon telling him the exact sum, Eugenius shook his head, and said it would not
do; so pulled out his purse in order to empty it into mine. -- I Have enough in
conscience, Eugenius, said I. -- Indeed, Yorick, you have not, replied Eugenius
-- I know France and Italy better than you -- But you don't consider, Eugenius,
said I, refusing his offer, that before I have been three days in Paris, I
shall take care to say or do something or other for which I shall get clapped
up into the Bastile, and that I shall live there a couple of months entirely at
the king of France's expense. -- I beg pardon, said Eugenius, drily: really, I
had forgot that resource.

Now the event I treated gaily came seriously to my door.

Is it folly, or nonchalance, or philosophy, or pertinacity -- or what is it in
me, that, after all, when La Fleur had gone down stairs, and I was quite alone,
that I could not bring down my mind to think of it otherwise than I had then
spoken of it to Eugenius?

-- And as for the Bastile! the terror is in the word -- Make the most of it
you can, said I to myself, the Bastile is but another word for a tower -- and a
tower is but another word for a house you cannot get out of -- Mercy on the
gouty! for they are in it twice a year -- but with nine livres a day, and pen
and ink and paper and patience, albeit a man cannot get out, he may do very well
within -- at least for a month or six weeks; at the end of which, if he is a
harmless fellow his innocence appears, and he comes out a better and wiser man
than he went in.

I had some occasion (I forget what) to step into the courtyard, as I settled
this account; and remember I walked down stairs in no small triumph with the
conceit of my reasoning -- Beshrew the sombre pencil! said I vauntingly -- for
I envy not its powers, which paints the evils of life with so hard and deadly a
coloring. The mind sits terrified at the objects she has magnified herself,
and blackened: reduce them to their proper size and hue she overlooks them --
It Is true, said I, correcting the proposition -- the Bastile is not an evil to
be despised -- but strip it of its towers -- fill up the fosse -- unbarricade
the doors -- call it simply a confinement, and suppose it is some tyrant of a
distemper -- and not of a man which holds you in it -- the evil vanishes, and
you bear the other half without complaint.

I was interrupted in the hey-day of this soliloquy, with a voice which I took
to be of a child, which complained it could not get out. -- I looked up and
down the passage, and seeing neither man, woman, or child, I went out without
further attention.

In my return back through the passage, I heard the same words repeated twice
over; and looking up, I saw it was a starling hung in a little cage. -- I cannot
get out -- I cannot get out, said the starling.

I stood looking at the bird: and to every person who came through the passage
it ran fluttering to the side toward which they approached it, with the same
lamentation of its captivity -- I cannot get out, said the starling -- God help
thee! said I, but I Will let thee out, cost what it will; so I turned about the
cage to get to the door; it was twisted and double twisted so fast with wire,
there was no getting it open without pulling the cage to pieces -- I took both
hands to it.

The bird flew to the place where I was attempting his deliverance, and
thrusting his head through the trellis, pressed his breast against it, as if
impatient -- I fear poor creature! said I, I cannot set thee at liberty --
"No," said the starling -- "I cannot get out -- I cannot get out," said the
starling.

I vow, I never had my affections more tenderly awakened; or do I remember an
incident in my life, where the dissipated spirits, to which my reason had been
a bubble, were so suddenly called home. Mechanical as the notes were, yet so
true in tune to nature were they chanted, that in one moment they overthrew all
my systematic reasonings upon the Bastile; and I heavily walked up stairs,
unsaying every word I had said in going down them.

Disguise thyself as thou will, still slavery! said I -- still thou art a
bitter draught and though thousands in all ages have been made to drink of
thee, thou art no less bitter on that account. -- it is thou, thrice sweet and
gracious goddess, addressing myself to LIBERTY, whom all in public or in
private worship, whose taste is grateful, and ever wilt be so, till NATURE
herself shall change -- no tint of words can spot thy snowy mantle, or chymic
power turn thy scepter into iron -- with thee to smile upon him as he eats his
crust, the swain is happier than his monarch, from whose court thou art exiled
-- Gracious heaven! cried I, kneeling down upon the last step but one in my
ascent -- grant me but health, thou great Bestower of it, and give me but this
fair goddess as my companion -- and shower down thy mitres, if it seems good
unto thy divine providence, upon those heads which are aching for them.

THE CAPTIVE. PARIS.
THE bird in his cage pursued me into my room; I sat down close to my table,
and leaning my head upon my hand, I begun to figure to myself the miseries of
confinement. I was in a right frame for it, and so I gave full scope to my
imagination.

I was going to begin with the millions of my fellow creatures born to no
inheritance but slavery; but finding however affecting the picture was, that I
could not bring it near me, and that the multitude of sad groups in it did but
distract me. --

-- I took a single captive, and having first shut him up in his dungeon, I
then looked through the twilight of his grated door to take his picture.

I beheld his body half wasted away with long expectation and confinement, and
felt what kind of sickness of the heart it was which arises from hope deferred.
Upon looking nearer I saw him pale and feverish: in thirty years the western
breeze had not once fanned his blood -- he had seen no sun, no moon in all that
time -- nor had the voice of friend or kinsman breathed through his latice --
his children --

-- But here my heart began to bleed -- and I was forced to go on with another
part of the portrait.

He was sitting upon the ground upon a little straw, in the furthest corner of
his dungeon, which was alternately his chair and bed: a little calender of
small sticks were laid at the head notch'd all over with the dismal days and
nights he had passed there -- he had one of these little sticks in his hand,
and with a rusty nail he was etching another day of misery to add to the heap.
As I darkened the little light he had, he lifted up a hopeless eye toward the
door, then cast it down -- shook his head, and went on with his work of
affliction. I heard his chains upon his legs, as he turned his body to lay his
little stick upon the bundle -- he gave a deep sigh -- I saw the iron enter
into his soul -- I burst into tears -- I could not sustain the picture of
confinement which my fancy had drawn -- I startled up from my chair, and
calling La Fleur, I bid him bespeak me a remise, and have it ready at the door
of the hotel by nine in the morning.

-- I Will go directly, said I, myself to Monsieur Le Duke de Choiseul.

La Fleur would have put me to bed; but not willing he should see any thing
upon my cheek, which would cost the honest fellow a heart ache -- I told him I
would go to bed by myself -- and bid him go do the same.

THE STARLING. ROAD TO VERSAILLES.
I GOT into my remise the hour I proposed: La Fleur got up behind, and I bid
the coachman make the best of his way to Versailles.

As there was nothing in this road, or rather nothing which I look for in
traveling. I cannot fill up the blank better than with a short history of this
self-same bird, which became the subject of the last chapter.

Whilst the Honorable Mr. * * * * was waiting for a wind at Dover it had been
caught upon the cliffs before it could well fly, by an English lad who was his
groom; who not caring to destroy it, had taken it in his breast into the packet
-- and by course of feeding it, and taking it once under his protection, in a
day or two grew fond of it, and got it safe along with him to Paris.

At Paris the lad had laid out a livre in a little cage for the starling, and
as he had little to do better the five months his master stayed there, he
taught it in his mother's tongue the four simple words -- (and no more) -- to
which I owned myself so much it is debtor.

Upon his master's going on for Italy -- the lad had given it to the master of
the hotel -- But his little song for liberty, being in an unknown language at
Paris -- the bird had little or no store set by him -- so La Fleur bought both
him and his cage for me for a bottle of Burgundy.

In my return from Italy I brought him with me to the country in whose language
he had learned his notes -- and telling the story of him to Lord A -- Lord A
begged the bird of me -- in a week Lord A gave him to Lord B -- Lord B made a
present of him to Lord C -- and Lord's C's gentleman sold him to Lord D's for a
shilling -- Lord D gave him to Lord E -- and so on -- half round the alphabet
-- from that rank he passed into the lower house, and passed the hands of as
many commoners -- But as all these wanted to get in -- and my bird wanted to
get out -- he had almost as little store set by him in London as in Paris.

It is impossible but many of my readers must have heard of him; and and if any
by mere chance have ever seen him I beg leave to inform them, that that bird
was my bird -- or some vile copy set up to represent him.

I have nothing further to add upon him, but that from that time to this I have
borne this poor starling as the crest to my arms. -- Thus.

-- And let the heralds officers twist his neck about if they dare.

THE ADDRESS. VERSAILLES.
I SHOULD not like to have my enemy take a view of my mind, when I am going to
ask protection of any man: for which reason I generally endeavor to protect
myself; but this going to Monsieur Le Duc de C***** was an act of compulsion --
had it been an act of choice, I should have done it, I suppose, like other
people.

How many mean plans of dirty address as I went along, did my servile heart
form! I deserved the Bastile for every one of them.

Then nothing would serve me, when I got within sight of Versailles, but
putting words and sentences together, and conceiving attitudes and tones to
wreath myself into Monsieur le Duc de C*****'s good graces -- This will do --
said I -- just as well, retorted I again, as a coat carried up to him by an
adventurous tailor, without taking his measure -- Fool! continued I -- see
Monsieur le Duc's face first -- observe what character is written in it, take
notice in what posture he stands to hear you -- mark the turns and expression*
of his body and limbs -- And for the tone -- the first sound which comes from
his lips will give it you; and from all these together, you will compound an
address at once upon the spot, which cannot disgust the Duke -- the ingredients
are his own, and most likely to go down.

Well! said I, I wish it well over -- Coward again! as if man to man was not
equal, throughout the whole surface of the globe; and if in the field -- why
not face to face in the cabinet too? And trust me, Yorick, whenever it is not
so, man is false to himself; and betrays his own succors ten times, where
nature does it once. Go to the duc de C**** with the bastile in thy looks -- My
life for it, thou will be sent back to Paris in half an hour, with an escort.

I believe so, said I -- Then I Will go to the Duke, by heaven! with all the
gaity and debonairness in the world. --

-- And there you are wrong again, replied I -- A heart at ease, Yorick, flies
into no extremes -- it is ever on its center. -- Well! well! cried I, as the
coachman, turned in at the gates -- I find I shall do very well: and by the
time he had wheeled round the court, and brought me up to the door, I found
myself so much the better for my own lecture, that I neither ascended the steps
like a victim to justice, who was to part with life upon the topmost, -- nor
did I mount them with a skip and a couple of strides, as I do when I fly up,
Eliza! to thee, to meet it.

As I entered the door of the saloon, I was met by a person who possibly might
be the maitre d'hotel, but had more the air of one of the under secretaries,
who told me the Duc de C**** was busy -- I am utterly ignorant, said I, of the
forms of obtaining an audience, being an absolute stranger, and what is worse
in the present conjuncture of affairs, being an Englishman too. -- He replied,
that did not increase the difficulty. -- I made him a slight bow, and told him,
I had something of importance to say to Monsieur le Duc. The secretary looked
toward the stairs, as if he was about to leave me to carry up this account to
some one -- But I must not mislead you, said I -- for what I have to say is of
no manner of importance to Monsieur le Duc de C**** -- but of great importance
to myself. -- C'est une autre affair, replied he -- Not at all, said I, to a
man of gallantry. -- But pray, good sir, continued I, when can a stranger hope
to have access? In not less than two hours, said he, looking at his watch. The
number of equipages in the court yard seemed to justify the calculation, that I
could have no nearer a prospect -- and as walking backwards and forwards in the
saloon without a soul to commune with, was for the time as bad as being in the
bastile itself, I instantly went back to my remise, and bid the coachman drive
me to the cordon bleu, which was the nearest hotel.

I think there is a fatality in it -- I seldom go to the place I set out for.

LE PATISSER. VERSAILLES.
BEFORE I had got halfway down the street, I changed my mind: as I am at
Versailles, thought I, I might as well take a view of the town; so I pulled the
cord, and ordered the coachman to drive round some of the principal streets --
I suppose the town is not very large, said I -- The coachmen begged pardon for
setting me right, and told me it was very superb, and that numbers of the first
dukes and marquises and counts had hotels -- The Count de B****, of whom the
bookseller at the Quai de Conti had spoke so handsomely the night before, came
instantly into my mind. -- And why should I not go, thought I, to the Count de
B**** who has so high an idea of English books, and Englishmen -- and tell him
my story! so I changed my mind a second time -- In truth it was the third; for
I had intended that day for Madame de R**** in the Rue St. Pierre, and had
devoutly sent her word by her fille de chamber that I would assuredly wait upon
her -- but I am governed by circumstances -- I cannot govern them: so seeing a
man standing with a basket on the other side of the street, as if he had
something to sell, I bid La Fleur go up to him and enquire for the Count's
hotel.

La Fleur returned a little pale; and told me it was a Chevalier de St. Louis
selling pates -- It is impossible, La Fleur! said I. -- La Fleur could no more
account for the phenomenon than myself; but persisted in his story: he had seen
the croix set in gold, with its red ribband, he said, tied to his button-hole
-- and had looked into the basket and seen the pates which the Chevalier was
selling; so could not be mistaken in that.

Such a reverse in man's life awakens a better principle than curiosity: I
could not help looking for some time at him as I sat in the remise -- the more
I looked at him -- his croix and his basket, the stronger they wove themselves
into my brain -- I got out of the remise and went toward him.

He was begirt with a clean linen apron which fell below his knees, and with a
sort of a bib went half way up his breast; upon the top of this, but a little
below the hem, hung his croix. His basket of little pates was covered over with
a white damask napkin; another of the same kind was spread at the bottom; and
there was a look proprete and neatness throughout; that one might have bought
his pates of him, as much from appetite as sentiment.

He made an offer of them to neither: but stood still with them at the corner
of a hotel, for those to buy who chose it, without solicitation.

He was about forty-eight -- of a sedate look, something approaching to
gravity. I did not wonder -- I went up rather to the basket than him, and
having lifted up the napkin and taken one of his pates into my hand -- I begged
he would explain the appearance which affected me.

He told me in a few words, that the best part of his life had passed in the
service, in which, after spending a small patrimony, he had obtained a company
and the croix with it; but that at the conclusion of the last peace, his
regiment being reformed, and the whole corpse, with those of some other
regiments, left without any provision -- he found himself in a wide world
without friends, without a livre -- and indeed, said he, without any thing but
this -- (pointing, as he said it, to his croix) -- The poor Chevalier won my
pity, and he finished the scene, with winning my esteem too.

The king, he said, was the most generous of princes, but his generosity could
neither relieve or reward every one, and it was only his misfortune to be
amongst the number. He had a little wife, he said, whom he loved, who did the
patisserie; and added, he felt no dishonor in defending her and himself from
want in this way -- unless Providence had offered him a better.

It would be wicked to withold a pleasure from the good, in passing over what
happened to this poor Chevalier of St. Louis about nine months after.

It seems he usually took his stand near the iron gates which lead up to the
palace, and as his croix had caught the eye of numbers, numbers had made the
same enquiry which I had done -- He had told them the same story, and always
with so much modesty and good sense, that it had reached at last the king's
ears -- who hearing the Chevalier had been a gallant officer, and respected by
the whole regiment as a man of honor and integrity -- he broke up his little
trade by a pension of fifteen hundred livres a year.

As I have told this to please the reader, I beg he will allow me to relate
another out of its order, to please myself -- the two stories reflect light
upon each other, and it is a pity they should be parted.

THE SWORD. RENNES.
WHEN states and empires have their periods of declension, and feel in their
turns what distress and poverty is -- I stop not to tell the causes which
gradually brought the house Do You**** in Britany into decay. The Marquis Do You****
had fought up against his condition with great firmness; wishing to preserve,
and still show to the world some little fragments of what his ancestors had
been -- their indiscretions had put it out of his power. There was enough left
for the little exigencies of obscurity -- But he had two boys who looked up to
him for light -- he thought they deserved it. He had tried his sword -- it
could not open the way -- the mounting was too expensive -- and simple economy
was not a match for it -- there was no resource but commerce.

In any other province in France, save Britany, this was smiting the root for
ever of the little tree his pride and affection wished to see re-blossom -- But
in Britany, there being a provision for this, he availed himself of it; and
taking an occasion when the states were assembled at Rennes, the Marquis,
attended with his two boys, entered the court; and having pleaded the right of
an ancient law of the duchy, which, though seldom claimed, he said, was no less
in force; he took his sword from his side -- Here -- said he -- take it; and be
trusty guardians of it, till better times put me in condition to reclaim it.

The president accepted the Marquis's sword -- he stayed a few minutes to see
it deposited in the archives of his house -- and departed.

The Marquis and his whole family embarked the next day for Martinico, and in
about nineteen or twenty years of successful application to business, with some
unlooked for bequests from distant branches of his house -- returned home to
reclaim his nobility and to support it.

It was an incident of good fortune which will never happen to any traveller,
but a sentimental one, that I should be at Rennes at the very time of this
solemn requisition: I call it solemn -- it was so to me.

The Marquis entered the court with his whole family: he supported his lady --
his eldest son supported his sister, and his youngest was at the other extreme
of the line next his mother. -- he put his handkerchief to his face twice --

-- There was a dead silence. When the Marquis had approached within six paces
of the tribunal, he gave the Marchioness to his youngest son, and advancing
three steps before his family -- he reclaimed his sword. His sword was given
him, and the moment he got it into his hand he drew it almost out of the
scabbard -- 'twas the shining face of a friend he had once given up -- he
looked attentively along it, beginning at the hilt, as if to see whether it was
the same -- when observing a little rust which it had contracted near the
point, he brought it near his eye, and bending his head down over it -- I think
I saw a tear fall upon the place: I could not be deceived by what followed.

I shall find, said he, some other way, to get it off.

When the Marquis had said this, he returned his sword into its scabbard, made
a bow to the guardians of it -- and, with his wife and daughter and his two
sons following him, walked out.

O how I envied him his feelings!

THE PASSPORT. VERSAILLES.
I FOUND no difficulty in getting admittance to Monsieur Le Count de B****. The
set of Shakespears was laid upon the table, and he was tumbling them over. I
walked up close to the table, and giving first such a look at the books as to
make him conceive I knew what they were -- I told him I had come without any
one to present me, knowing I should meet with a friend in his apartment who, I
trusted, would do it for me -- it is my countryman the great Shakespeare, said
I, pointing to his works -- et ayez la bonte, mon cher ami, apostrophizing his
spirit, added I, de me fair cet honneur la. --

The Count smiled at the singularity of the introduction; and seeing I looked a
little pale and sickly, insisted upon my taking an arm-chair: so I sat down;
and to save him conjectures upon a visit so out of all rule, I told him simply
of the incident in the bookseller's shop, and how that had impelled me rather
to go to him with the story of a little embarassment I was under, than to any
other man in France -- And what is your embarrassment? let me hear it, said the
Count. So I told him the story just as I have told it the reader --

-- And the master of my hotel, said I, as I concluded it, will needs have it,
Monsieur le Count, that I shall be sent to the Bastile -- but I have no
apprehensions continued I -- for in falling into the hands of the most polished
people in the world, and being conscious I was a true man, and not come to spy
the nakedness of the land, I scarce thought I laid at their mercy. -- It does
not suit the gallantry of the French, Monsieur le Count, said I, to show it
against invalids.

An animated blush came into the Count de B****'s cheeks, as I spoke this -- Ne
craignez rien -- Don't fear, said he -- Indeed I don't, replied I again --
besides, continued I a little sportingly -- I have come laughing all the way
from London to Paris, and I do not think Monsieur le Duc de Choiseul is such an
enemy to mirth, as to send me back crying for my pains.

-- My application to you, Monsieur le Compte de B**** (making him a low bow)
is to desire he will not.

The Count heard me with great good nature, or I had not said half as much --
and once or twice said -- C'est bien dit So I rested my cause there -- and
determined to say no more about it.

The Count led the discourse: we talked of indifferent things; -- of books and
politics, and men -- and then of women -- God bless them all! said I, after
much discourse about them -- there is not a man upon earth who loves them so
much as I do: after all the foibles I have seen, and all the satires I have
read against them, still I love them; being firmly persuaded that a man who has
not a sort of an affection for the whole sex, is incapable of ever loving a
single one as he ought.

Heh bien! Monsieur l'Anglois, said the Count, gaily -- You are not come to spy
the nakedness of the land -- I believe you -- ni encore, I dare say, that of
our women -- But permit me to conjecture -- if, par hazard, they fell all your
way -- that the prospect would not affect you.

I have something within me which cannot bear the shock of the least indecent
insinuation: in the sportability of chitchat I have often endeavored to
conquer it, and with infinite pain have hazarded a thousand things to a dozen
of the sex together -- the least of which I could not venture to a single one,
to gain heaven.

Excuse me, Monsieur Le Count, said I, -- as for the nakedness of your land, if
I saw it, I should cast my eyes over it with tears in them -- and for that of
your women (blushing at the idea he had excited in me) I am so evangelical in
this, and have such a fellow feeling for whatever is weak about them, that I
would cover it with a garment, if I knew how to throw it on -- But I could
wish, continued I, to spy the nakedness of their hearts, and through the
different disguises of customs, climates, and religion, find out what is good
in them, to fashion my own by -- and therefore am I come.

It is for this reason, Monsieur le Compte, continued I, that I have not seen
the Palais royal -- nor the Luxembourg -- nor the Facade of the Louvre -- nor
have attempted to swell the catalogues we have of pictures, statues, and
churches -- I conceive every fair being as a temple, and would rather enter in,
and see the original drawings and ^^^se sketches hung up in it, than the
transfiguration of Raphael itself.

The thirst of this, continued I, as impatient as that which inflames the
breast of the connoisseur, has led me from my own home into France -- and from
France will lead me through Italy -- it is a quiet journey of the heart in
pursuit of nature, and those affections which rise out of her, which make us
love each other -- and the world, better than we do.

The Count said a great many civil things to me upon the occasion; and aded
very politely how much he stood obliged to Shakespeare for making me known to
him -- but, a-propos, said he -- Shakespeare is full of great things -- He
forgot a small punctilio of announcing your name -- it puts you under the
necessity of doing it yourself.

THE PASSPORT. VERSAILLES.
THERE is not a more perplexing affair in life to me, than to set about telling
any one who I am -- for there is scarce any body I cannot give a better account
of than of myself; and I have often wished I could do it in a single word --
and have an end of it. It was the only time and occasion in my life, I could
accomplish this to any purpose -- for Shakespeare lying upon the table, and
recollecting I was in his books. I took up Hamlet, and turning immediately to
the grave-diggers scene in the fifth act, I laid my finger upon YORICK, and
advancing the book to the Count, with my finger all the way over the name --
Me* Voici! said I.

Now whether the idea of poor Yorick's skull was put out of the Count's mind,
by the reality of my own, or by what magic he could drop a period of seven or
eight hundred years, makes nothing in this account -- it is certain the French
conceive better than they combine -- I wonder at nothing in this world, and the
less at this; inasmuch as one of the first of our own church, for whose candor
and paternal sentiments I have the highest veneration, fell into the same
mistake in the very same case. -- He could not bear, he said, to look into
sermons wrote by the king of Denmark's jester. -- Good, my lord! said I -- but
there are two Yorick's. The Yorick your lordship thinks of, has been dead and
buried eight hundred years ago; he flourished in Horwendillus's court -- The
other Yorick is myself, who have flourished my lord in no court -- He shook his
head -- Good God! said I, you might as well confound Alexander the Great, with
Alexander the Copper-smith, my lord -- 'Twas all one he replied --

-- If Alexander king of Macedon could have translated your lordship, said I --
I Am sure your lordship would not have said so.

The poor Count de B**** fell but into the same error.

-- Et, Monsieur, est il Yorick? cried the Count. -- Je le suis, said I. --
Vous? -- Moi -- moi qui ai l'honneur de vous parler, Monsieur le Compte -- Mon
Dieu! said he, embracing me -- Vous etes Yorick.

The Count instantly put the Shakespeare into his pocket -- and left me alone in
his room.

THE PASSPORT. VERSAILLES.
I COULD not conceive why the Count de B**** had gone so abruptly out of the
room, any more than I could conceive why he had put the Shakespeare into his
pocket -- Mysteries which must explain themselves are not worth the loss of
time, which a conjecture about them takes up: 'twas better to read Shakespeare;
so taking up, " Much Ado about Nothing," I transported myself instantly from
the chair I sat in to Messina in Sicily, and got so busy with Don Pedro and
Benedick and Beatrice, that I thought not of Versailles, the Count, or the
Passport.

Sweet pliability of man's spirit, that can at once surrender itself to
illusions which cheat expectation and sorrow of, their weary moments! -- long
-- long since had ye numbered out my days, had I not trod so great a part of
them upon this enchanted ground: when my way is too rough for my feet, or too
steep for my strength, I get off it, to some smooth velvet path which fancy has
scattered over with rose-buds of delights; and having taken a few turns in it,
come back strengthened and refreshed -- When evils press sore upon me, and
there is no retreat from them in this world, then I take a new course -- I
leave it -- and as I have a clearer idea of the Elysian fields then I have of
heaven, I force myself, like Eneas, into them -- I see him meet the pensive
shade of his forsaken Dido -- and wish to recognize it -- I see the injured
spirit wave her head, and turn off silent from the author of her miseries and
dishonours -- I loose the feelings for myself in hers -- and in those
affections which were wont to make me mourn for her when I was at school.

Surely this is not walking in a vain shadow -- nor does man disquiet himself
in vain, by it -- he oftener does so in trusting the issue of his commotions to
reason only. -- I can safely say for myself, I was never able to conquer any
one single bad sensation in my heart so decisively, as by beating up as fast as
I could for some kindly and gentle sensation, to fight it upon its own ground.

When I had got to the end of the third act, the Count de B**** entered with my
passport in his hand. Mons. le Duc de C****, said the Count, is as good a
prophet, I dare say, as he is a statesman -- Un homme qui rit, said the duke,
ne sera jamais dangereuz. -- Had it been for any one but the king's jester,
added the Count -- I could not have got it these two hours. -- Pardonnez moi,
Mons. Le Compte, said I -- I am not the king's jester. -- But you are Yorick?
-- Yes, -- Et vous plaisantez? -- I answered, indeed I did jest -- but was not
paid for it -- 'twas entirely at my own expense.

We have no jester at court, Mons. Le Compte, said I, the last we had was in
the licentious reign of Charles the IId -- since which time our manners have
been so gradually refining, that our court at present is so full of patriots,
who wish for nothing but the honors and wealth of their country -- and our
ladies are all so chaste, so spotless, so good, so devout -- -- there is
nothing for a jester to make a jest of --

Voila un persiflage! cried the Count.

THE PASSPORT. VERSAILLES.
AS the Passport was directed to all lieutenant governors, governors, and
commandants of cities, generals of armies, justiciaries, and all officers of
justice, to let Mr. Yorick, the king's jester, and his baggage, travel quietly
along -- I own the triumph of obtaining the passport was not a little tarnished
by the figure I cut in it -- But there is nothing unmixt in this world; and
some of the gravest of our divines have carried it so far as to affirm, that
enjoyment itself was attended even with a sigh -- and that the greatest they
knew of, terminate in a general way, in little better than a convulsion.

I remember the grave and learned Bevoriskius, in his commentary upon the
generations from Adam, very naturally breaks off in the middle of a note to
give an account to the world of a couple of sparrows upon the out edge of his
window, which had incommoded him all the time he wrote, and at last had
entirely taken him off from his genealogy.

-- It Is strange! writes Bevoriskius; but the facts are certain, for I have had
the curiosity to mark them down one by one with my pen -- but the cock-sparrow
during the little time that I could have finished the other half this note, has
actually interrupted me with the reiteration of his caresses three and twenty
times and a half.

How merciful, adds Bevoriskius is heaven to his creatures!

Ill fated Yorick! that the gravest of thy brethren should be able to write
that to the world, which stains thy face with crimson, to copy in even thy
study.

But this is nothing to my travels -- So I twice -- twice beg pardon for it.

CHARACTER. VERSAILLES.
AND how do you find the French? said the Count de B****, after he had given me
the passport.

The reader may suppose that after so obliging a proof of courtesy, I could not
be at a loss to say something handsome to the enquiry.

-- Mais pass, pour cela -- speak frankly, said he; do you find all the
urbanity in the French which the world give us the honor of? -- I had found
every thing I said, which confirmed it -- Vraiment, said the Count. -- Les
Francois sont polis -- To an excess, replied I.

The Count took notice of the word excess; and would have it I meant more than
I said. I defended myself a long time as well as I could against it -- he
insisted I had a reserve, and that I would speak my opinion frankly.

I believe, Mons. le Compte, said I, that man has a certain compass, as well as
an instrument; and that the social and other calls have occasion by turns for
every key in him; so that if you begin a note too high or too low, there must
be a want either in the upper or under part, to fill up the system of harmony
-- The Count de B**** did not understand music, so desired me to explain it
some other way. A polished nation, my dear Count, said I, makes every one its
debtor; and besides urbanity itself, like the fair sex, has so many charms; it
goes against the heart to say it can do ill; and yet, I believe, there is but a
certain line of perfection, that man, take him altogether, is empowered to
arrive at -- if he gets beyond, he rather exchanges qualities than gets them. I
must not presume to say, how far this has affected the French in the subject we
are speaking of -- but should it ever be the case of the English, in the
progress of their resentments, to arrive at the same polish which distinguishes
the French, if we did not lose the politesse de coeur, which inclines men more
to human actions, than courteous ones -- we should at least lose that dictinct
variety and originality of character, which distinguishes them, not only from
each other, but from all the world besides.

I had a few of king William's shillings as smooth as glass in my pocket; and
foreseeing they would be of use in the illustration of my hypothesis, I had got
them into my hand, when I had procceded so far. --

See, Mons. le Compte, said I, rising up, and laying them before him upon the
table -- by jingling and rubbing one against another for seventy years together
in one body's pocket or another's, they are become so much alike, you can
scarce distinguist one shilling from another*

The English, like ancient medals kept more apart, and passing but few peoples
hands, preserve the first sharpnesses which the fine hand of nature has given
them -- they are not so pleasant to feel -- but in return, the legend is so
visible, that at the first look you see whose image and superscription they
hear. -- But the French Mons. le Compte, added I, wishing to soften what I had
said, have so many excellencies, they can the better spare this -- they are a
loyal, a gallant, a generous, an ingenious, and good tempered people as is
under heaven -- if they have a fault -- they are too serious.

Mon Dieu! cried the Count, rising out of his chair.

Mais vous plaisantiz, said he, correcting his exclamation. -- I laid my hand
upon my breast, and with earnest gravity assured him, it was my most settled
opinion.

The Count said he was mortified, he could not stay to hear my reasons; being
engaged to go that moment to dine with the duc de C****.

But if it is not too far to come to Versailles to eat your soup with me, I
beg, before you leave France, I may have the pleasure of knowing you retract
your opinion -- or, in what manner you support it. -- But if you do support it,
Mons. Anglois, said he, you must do it with all your powers, because you have
the whole world against you. -- I promised the Count I would do myself the
honor of dining with him before I set out for Italy -- so took my leave.

THE TEMPTATION. PARIS.
WHEN I alighted at the hotel, the porter told me a young woman with a band-box
had been that moment enquiring for me. -- I do not know, said the porter,
whether she is gone away or no. I took the key of my chamber of him, and went
up stairs, and when I had got within ten steps of the top of the landing before
my door, I meet her coming easily down.

It was the fair fille de chamber I had walked along the Quai de Conti with:
madame de R**** had sent her upon some commissions to a merchande de modes
within a step or two of the hotel de Modene; and as I had failed in waiting
upon her, had bid her inquire if I had left Paris; and if so, whether I had not
left a letter addressed to her.

As the fair fille de chamber was so near my door she turned back, and went
into the room with me for a moment or two whilst I wrote a card.

It was a fine still evening in the latter end of the month of May -- the
crimson window curtains (which were of the same color of those of the bed)
were drawn close -- the sun was setting and reflected through them so warm a
tint into the fair fille de chambre's face I thought she blushed -- the idea of
it made me blush myself -- we were quite alone; and that superinduced a second
blush before the first could get off.

There is a sort of a pleasing half guilty blush, where the blood is more in
fault than the man -- it is sent impetuous from the heart, and virtue flies
after it -- not so call it back, but to make the sensation of it more delicious
to the nerves -- 'is associated. --

But I Will not describe it. -- I felt something at first within me which was not
in strict unison with the lesson of virtue I had given her the night before --
I sought five minutes for a card -- I knew I had not one. -- I took up a pen --
I laid it down again -- my hand trembled -- the devil was in me.

I know as well as any one, he is an adversary, whom if we resist, he will fly
from us -- but I seldom resist him at all; from a terror, that though I may
conquer, I may still get a hurt in the combat -- so I give up the triumph, for
security; and instead of thinking to make him fly, I generally fly myself.

The fair fille de chamber came close up to the bureau where I was looking for
a card -- took up first the pen I cast down, then offered to hold me the ink:
she offered it so sweetly, I was going to accept it -- but I durst not -- I
have nothing, my dear, said I, to write upon. -- Write it, said she, simply,
upon any thing. --

I was just going to cry out, then I will write it, fair girl! upon thy lips.
--

If I do, said I, I shall perish -- so I took her by the hand, and led her to
the door, and begged she would not forget the lesson I had given her -- she
said, indeed she would not -- and as she uttered it with some earnestness, she
turned about, and gave me both her hands, closed together, into mine -- it was
impossible not to compress them in that situation -- I wished to let them go;
and all the time I held them, I kept arguing within myself against it -- and
still I held them on. -- In two minutes I found I had all the battle to fight
over again -- and I felt my legs and every limb about me tremble at the idea.

The foot of the bed was within a yard and a half of the place where we were
standing -- I had still hold of her hands -- and how it happened I can give no
account, but I neither asked her -- nor drew her -- nor did I think of the bed
-- but so it did happen, we both set down.

I Will just show you, said the fair fille de chamber, the little purse I have
been making today to hold your crown. So she put her hand into her right
pocket, which was next me, and felt for it sometime -- then into the left --
"She had lost it." -- I never bore expectation more quietly -- it was in her
right pocket at last -- she pulled it out; it was of green taffeta, lined with
a little bit of white quilted satin, and just big enough to hold the crown --
she put it into my hand -- it was pretty; and I held it ten minutes with the
back of my hand resting upon her lap -- looking sometimes at the purse,
somesomes on one side of it.

A stitch or two had broke out in the gathers of my stock -- the fair fille de
chamber, without saying a word, took out yer little hussy, threaded a small
needle, and sewed it up -- I foresaw it would hazard the glory of the day: and
as she passed her hand in silence across and a cross my neck in the maneuver,
I felt the laurels shake which fancy had wreathed about my head.

A strap had given way in her walk, and the buckle of her shoe was just falling
off -- see, said the fille de chamber holding up her foot -- I could not for my
soul but fasten the buckle in return, and putting in the strap -- and lifting
up the other foot with it, when I had done to see both were right -- in doing
it too suddenly -- it unavoidably threw the fair fille de chamber off her
center -- and then --

THE CONQUEST
YES -- and then -- Ye whose clay-cold heads and lake warm hearts can argue
down or mask your passions -- tell me, what trespass is it that man should have
them? or how his spirit stands answerable, to the father of spirits, but for
his conduct under them?

If nature has so wove her web of kindness, that some threads of love and
desire are entangled with the piece -- must the whole web be rent in drawing
them out? -- Whip me such stoics, great governor of nature! said I to myself --
Wherever thy providence shall place me for the trials of my virtue -- whatever
is my danger -- whatever is my situation -- let me feel the movements which
rise out of it, and which belong to me as a man -- and if I govern them as a
good one -- I will trust the issues to thy justice, for thou have made us --
and not we ourselves.

As I finished my address, I raised the fair fille de chamber up by the hand,
and led her out of the room -- she stood by me till I locked the door and put
the key in my pocket -- and then -- the victory being quite decisive -- and not
till then, I pressed my lips to her cheek, and, taking her by the hand again,
led her safe to the gate of the hotel.

THE MYSTERY. PARIS.
IF a man knows the heart, he will know it was impossible to go back instantly
to my chamber -- it was touching a cold key with a flat third to it, upon the
close of a piece of music, which had called forth my affections -- therefore,
when I let go the hand of the fille de chamber, I remained at the gate of the
hotel for some time, looking at every one who passed by, and forming
conjectures upon them, till my attention got fixed upon a single object which
confounded all kind of reasoning upon him.

It was a tall figure of a philosophic serious, a dust look, which passed and
repassed sedately along the street, making a turn of about sixty paces on each
side of the gate of the hotel -- the man was about fifty-two -- had a small
cane under his arm -- was dressed in a dark drab-coloured coat, waistcoat, and
breeches, which seemed to have seen some years service -- they were still
clean, and there was a little air of frugal proprete thoughout him. By his
pulling off his hat, and his attitude of accosting a good many in his way, I
saw he was asking charity; so I got a sous or two out of my pocket ready to
give him, as he took me in his turn -- he passed by me without asking any thing
-- and yet did not go five steps further before he asked charity of a little
woman -- I was much more likely to have given of the two -- He had scarce done
with the woman, when he pulled off his hat to another who was coming the same
way. -- An ancient gentleman came slowly -- and, after him, a young smart one
-- He let them both pass, and asked nothing: I stood observing him half an
hour, in which time he had made a dozen turns backwards and forwards, and found
that he invariably pursued the same plan.

There were two things very singular in this, which set my brain to work and to
no purpose -- the first was, why the man should only tell his story to the sex
-- and secondly -- what kind of story it was, and what species of eloquence it
could be, which softened the hearts of the women, which he knew it was to no
purpose to practice upon the men.

There were two other circumstances which entangled this my mystery -- the one
was, he told every woman what he had to say in her ear, and in a way which had
much more the air of a secret than a petition -- the other was, it was always
successful -- he never stopped a woman but she pulled out her purse, and
immediately gave him something.

I could form no system to explain the phenomenon.

I had got a riddle to amuse me for the rest of the evening, so I walked up
stairs to my chamber.

THE CASE OF CONSCIENCE. PARIS.
I WAS immediately followed up by the master of the hotel, who came into my
room to tell me I must provide lodgings else where. -- How so, friend? said I
-- He answered, I had had a young woman locked up with me two hours that
evening in my bedchamber, and 'twas against the rules of his house. -- Very
well, said I, we'll all part friends then -- for the girl is no worse -- and I
am no worse -- and you will be just as I found you. -- It was enough, he said,
to overthrow the credit of his hotel. -- Voyez vous, Monsieur, said he,
pointing to the foot of the bed we had been sitting upon. -- I own it had
something the appearance of an evidence: but my pride not suffering me to enter
into any detail of the case, I exhorted him to let his soul sleep in peace, as
I resolved to let mine do that night, and that I would discharge what I owed
him at breakfast.

I should not have minded, Monsieur, said he, if you had had twenty girls --
It Is a score more, replied I, interrupting him, than I ever reckoned upon --
Provided, added he, it had been but in a morning. -- And does the difference of
the time of the day at Paris make a difference in the sin? -- It made a
difference he said in the scandal. -- I like a good distinction in my heart;
and cannot say I was intolerably out of temper with the man. -- I own it is
necessary, reassumed the master of the hotel, that a stranger at Paris should
have the opportunities presented to him of buying lace and silk stockings and
ruffles, et tout cela -- and it is nothing if a woman comes with a band box. --
OF my conscience, said I, she had one; but I never looked into it. -- Then,
Monsieur, said he, has bought nothing -- Not one earthly thing, replied I. --
Because, said he, I could recommend one to you who would use you en conscience.
-- But I must see her this night said I. -- he made me a low bow and walked
down.

Now shall I triumph over this maitre de hotel, cried I -- and what then? --
Then I shall let him see I know he is a dirty fellow. -- And what then? -- What
then! -- I was too near myself to say it was for the sake of others. -- I had
no good answer left -- there was more of spleen than principle in my project,
and I was sick of it before the execution.

In a few minutes the Grisset came in with her box of lace -- I Will buy nothing
however, said I, within myself.

The Grisset would show me every thing -- I was hard to please: she would not
seem to see it; she opened her little magazine, laid all her laces one after
another before me -- unfolded and folded them up again one by one with the most
patient sweetness -- I might buy -- or not -- she would let me have every thing
at my own price -- the poor creature seemed anxious to get a penny, and laid
herself out to win me, and not so much in a manner which seemed artful, as in
one I felt simple and caressing.

If there is not a fund of honest cullibility in man, so much the worse -- my
heart relented, and I gave up my second resolution as quietly as the first --
Why should I chastise one for the trespass of another? if thou art tributary to
this tyrant of an host, thought I, looking up in her face, so much harder is
thy bread.

If I had not had more than four Louis d'ors in my purse, there was no such
thing as rising up and showing her the door, till I had first laid three of
them out in a pair of ruffles.

-- The master of the hotel will share the profit with her -- no matter -- then
I have only paid as many a poor soul has paid before me for an act he could not
do, or think of.

THE RIDDLE. PARIS.
WHEN La Fleur came up to wait upon me at supper, he told me how sorry the
master of the hotel was for his affront to me in bidding me change my lodgings.

A man who values a good night's rest will not lay down with enmity in his
heart if he can help it -- So I bid La Fleur tell the master of the hotel, that
I was sorry on my side for the occasion I had given him -- and you may tell
him, if you will, La Fleur, added I, that if the young woman should call again,
I shall not see her.

This was a sacrifice not to him, but myself, having resolved, after so narrow
an escape, to run no more risks, but to leave Paris, if it was possible, with
all the virtue I entered in.

C'est deroger a noblesse, Monsieur, said La Fleur, making me a bow down to the
ground as he said it -- Et encore Monsieur, said he, may change his sentiments
-- and if ( par hazard) he should like to amuse himself -- I find no amusement
in it, said I, interrupting him. --

Mon Dieu! said La Fleur -- and took away.

In an hours time he came to put me to bed, and was more than commonly
officious -- something hung upon his lips to say to me, or ask me, which he
could not get off: I could nor conceive what it was; and indeed gave myself
little trouble to find it out, as I had another riddle so much more interesting
upon my mind, which was that of the man's asking charity before the door of the
hotel -- I would have given any thing to have got to the bottom of it; and
that, not out of curiosity -- it is so low a principle of enquiry, in general, I
would not purchase the gratification of it with a two-sous piece -- but a
secret, I thought, which so soon and so certainly softened the heart of every
woman you came near, was a secret at least equal to the philosopher's stone:
had I had both the Indies, I would have given, up one to have been master of it.

I tossed and turned it almost all night long in my brains to no manner of
purpose; and when I awoke in the morning I found my spirit as much troubled
with my dreams, as ever the king of Babylon had been with his; and I will not
hesitate to affirm, it would have puzzled all the wise men of Paris, as much as
those of Chaldea, to have given its interpretation.

LE DIMANCHE. PARIS.
IT was Sunday; and when La Fleur came in, in the morning, with my coffee and
role and butter, he had got himself so gallantly arrayed, I scarce knew him.

I had covenanted at Montreal to give him a new hat with a silver button and
loop, and four Louis d'ors pour s'adoniser, when we got to Paris; and the poor
fellow, to do him justice, had done wonders with it.

He had bought a bright, clean, good scarlet coat and a pair of breeches of the
same -- They were not a crown worse, he said, for the wearing -- I wished him
hanged for telling me -- they looked so fresh, that though I knew the thing could
not be done, yet I would rather have imposed upon my fancy with thinking I had
bought them new for the fellow, than that they had come out of the Rue de
friperie.

This is a nicety which makes not the heart sore at Paris.

He had purchased moreover a handsome blue satin waistcoat, fancifully enough
embroidered -- this was indeed something the worse for the services it had
done, but 'twas clean scoured -- the gold had been touched up, and upon the
whole was rather showy than otherwise -- and as the blue was not violent, it
suited with the coat and breeches very well: he had squeezed out of the money,
moreover, a new bag and a solitaire; and had insisted with the fripier, upon a
gold pair of garters to his breeches knees -- He had purchased muslin ruffles,
bien brodees, with four livres of his own money -- and a pair of white silk
stockings for five more -- and to top all, nature had given him a handsome
figure, without costing him a sous.

He entered the room thus set off, with his hair dressed in the first style,
and with a handsome bouquet in his breast -- in a word, there was that look of
festivity in every thing about him, which at once put me in mind it was Sunday
-- and by combining both together, it instantly struck me, that the favor he
wished to ask of me the night before, was to spend the day, as every body in
Paris spent it, besides. I had scarce made the conjecture, when la Fleur, with
infinite humility, but with a look of trust, as if I should not refuse him,
begged I would grant him the day, pour fair le galant vis a vis de sa
maitresse.

Now it was the very thing I intended to do myself vis a vis Madame de R**** --
I had retained the remise on purpose for it and it would not have mortified my
vanity to have had a servant so well dressed as la Fleur was to have got up
behind it: I never could have worse spared him.

But we must feel, not argue in these embarrassments -- the sons and daughters
of service part with liberty, but not with nature in their contracts; they are
flesh and blood, and have their little vanities and wishes in the midst of the
house of bondage, as well as their taskmasters -- no doubt, they have set
their self denials at a price -- and their expectations are so unreasonable,
that I would often disappoint them, but that their condition puts it so much in
my power to do it.

Behold l -- Behold, I am thy servant -- disarms me at once of the powers of a
master. --

-- Thou shall go, la Fleur! said I.

-- And what mistress, la Fleur, said I, cant'st thou have picked up in so
little a time at Paris? La Fleur laid his hand upon his breast, and said 'twas
a petite demoiselle at Monsieur le Compte de B****'s -- La Fleur had a heart
made for society; and, to speak the truth of him let as few occasions slip him
as his master -- so that some how or other; but how -- heaven knows -- he had
connected himself with the demoisselle upon the landing of the staircase,
during the time I was taken up with my Passport; and as there was time enough
for me to win the Count to my interest, la Fleur had contrived to make it do to
win the maid to his -- the family, it seems, was to be at Paris that day, and
he had made a party with her, and two or three more of the Count's household,
upon the boulevards.

Happy people! that once a week at least are sure to lay down all your cares
together; and dance and sing and sport away the weights of grievance, which bow
down the spirit of other nations to the earth.

THE FRAGMENT. PARIS.
LA Fleur had left me something to amuse myself with for the day more than I
had bargained for, or could have entered either into his head or mine.

He had brought the little print of butter upon a current leaf; and as the
morning was warm, and he had a good step to bring it, he had begged a sheet of
waste paper to put betwixt the current leaf and his hand -- As that was plate
sufficient, I bad him lay it upon the table as it was, and as I resolved to
stay within all day I ordered him to call upon the traiteur to bespeak my
dinner, and leave me to breakfast by myself.

When I had finished the butter, I threw the current leaf out of the window,
and was going to do the same by the waste paper -- but stopping to read a line
first, and that darwing me on to a second and third -- I thought it better
worth; so I shut the window, and drawing a chair up to it, I sat down to read
it.

It was in the old French of Rabelais's time, and for ought I know might have
been wrote by him -- it was moreover in a Gothic letter, and that so faded and
gone off by damps and length of time, it cost me infinite trouble to make any
thing of it -- I threw it down; and then wrote a letter to Engenius -- then I
took it up again, and embroiled my patience with it afresh -- and then to cure
that, I wrote a letter to Eliza. -- Still it kept hold of me; and the
difficulty of understanding it increased but the desire.

I got my dinner; and after I had enlightened my mind with a bottle of
Burgundy, I at it again -- and after two or three hours poring upon it, with
almost as deep attention as ever Gruter or Jacob Spon did upon a nonsensical
inscription, I thought I made sense of it; but to make sure of it, the best
way, I imagined, was to turn it into English, and see how it would look then --
so I went on leisurely, as a trifling man does, sometimes writing a sentence --
then taking a turn or two -- and then looking how the world went, out of the
window; so that it was nine o'clock at night before I had done it -- I then
begun and read it as follows.

THE FRAGMENT. PARIS.
-- Now as the notary's wife disputed the point with the notary with too much
heat -- I wish, said the notary, throwing down the parchment, that there was
another notary here only to set down and attest all this --

-- And what would you do then, Monsieur? said she, rising hastily up -- the
notary's wife was a little fume of a woman, and the notary thought it well to
avoid a hurricane by a mild reply -- I would go, answered he, to bed. -- You
may go to the devil, answered the notary's wife.

Now there happening to be but one bed in the house, the other two rooms being
unfurnished, as is the custom at Paris, and the notary not caring to lie in the
same bed with a woman who had but that moment sent him pell-mell to the devil,
went forth with his hat and cane and short cloak, the night being very windy,
and walked out ill at ease toward the pont neuf.

Of all the bridges which ever were built, the whole world who have passed over
the pont neuf must own, that it is the noblest -- the finest -- the grandest --
the lightest -- the longest -- the broadest that ever conjoined land and land
together upon the face of the terraqueous globe. --

By this, it seems, as if the author of the fragment had not been a Frenchman.
The worst fault which divines and the doctors of the Sorbonne can allege
against it, is, that if there is but a cap-full of wind in or about Paris, it is
more blasphemously sacro Dieu'd there than in any other aperture of the whole
city -- and with reason, good and cogent Messieurs; for it comes against you
without crying guard d'eau, and with such unpremeditable puffs, that of the few
who cross it with their hats on, not one in fifty but hazards two livres and a
half, which is its full worth.

The poor notary, just as he was passing by the sentry, instinctively clapped
his cane to the side of it, but in raising it up the point of his cane catching
hold of the loop of the sentinel's hat hoisted it over the spikes of the
ballustrade clear into the Seine --

-- It Is an ill wind, said the boatsman, who catched it, which blows no body
any good.

The sentry peing a gascon incontinently twirled up his whiskers, and levelled
his harquebuss.

Harquebusses in those days went off with matches; and an old woman's paper
lanthorn at the end of the bridge happening to be blown out, she had borrowed
the sentry's match to light it -- it gave a moment's time for the gascon's
blood to run cool, and turn the accident better to his advantage -- It Is an ill
wind, said he, catching off the notary's castor, and legitimating the capture
with the boatman's adage.

The poor notary crossed the bridge, and passing along the rue de Dauphine into
the sauxbourgs of St. Germain, lamented himself as he walked along in this
manner:

Lukeless man! that I am, said the notary, to be the sport of hurricanes all my
days -- to be born to have the storm of ill language levesi'd against me and my
profession wherever I go -- to be forced into marriage by the thunder of the
church to a tempest of a woman -- to be driven forth out of my house by
domestic winds, and despoiled of my castor by pontific ones -- to be here,
bare-headed, in a windy night at the mercy of the ebbs and flows of accidents
-- where I am to lay my head? -- miserable man! what wind in the two-and-thirty
points of the whole compass can blow unto thee, as it does to the rest of thy
fellow creatures, good!

As the notary was passing on by a dark passage, complaining in this sort, a
voice called out to a girl, to bid her run for the next notary -- now the
notary being the next, and availing himself of his situation, walked up the
passage to the door, and passing through an old sort of a saloon, was ushered
into a large chamber dismantled of every thing but a long military pike -- a
breast plate -- a rusty old sword, and a bandoleer, hung up equidistant in four
different places against the wall.

An old personage, who had hitherto been a gentleman, and unless decay of
fortune taints the blood along with it was a gentleman at that time, lay
supporting his head upon his hand in his bed; a little table with a taper
burning was set close beside it, and close by the table was placed a chair --
the notary sat him down in it; and pulling out his ink-horn and a sheet or two
of paper which he had in his pocket, he placed them before him, and dipping his
pen in his ink, and leaning his breast over the table, he disposed every thing
to make the gentleman's last will and testament.

Alas! Monsieur le Notaire, said the gentleman, raising himself up a little, I
have nothing to bequeath which will pay the expense of bequeathing, except the
history of myself, which, I could not die in peace unless I left it as a legacy
to the world, the profits arising out of it, I bequeath to you for the pains of
taking it from me -- it is a story so uncommon, it must be read by all mankind
-- it will make the fortunes of your house -- the notary dipped his pen into
his ink-horn -- Almighty director of every event of my life! said the old
gentleman, looking up earnestly and raising his hands toward heaven -- thou
whose hand has led me on through such a labyrinth of strange passages down into
this scene of desolation, assist the decaying memory of an old, infirm, and
broken hearted man -- direct my tongue, by the spirit of thy eternal truth,
that this stranger may set down naught but what is written in that Book, from
whose records said he, clasping his hands together, I am to be condemned or
acquitted! -- the notary held up the point of his pen betwixt the taper and his
eye --

-- It is a story, Monsieur le Notaire, said the gentleman, which will rouse up
every affection in nature -- it will kill the humane, and touch the heart of
cruelty herself with pity --

-- The notary was inflamed with a desire to begin, and put his pen a third
time into his ink-horn -- and the old gentleman turning a little more toward
the notary, began to dictate his story in these words --

-- And where is the rest of it, La Fleur? said I, as he just then entered the
room.

THE FRAGMENT AND THE Nosegay.
BOUQUET. PARIS.
WHEN La Fleur came up close to the table, and was made to comprehend what I
wanted, he told me there were only two other sheets of it which he had wrapped
round the stalks of a bouquet to keep it together, which he had presented to
the demoiselle upon the boulevards -- Then, prithee, La Fleur, said I, step
back to her to the Count de B****'s hotel, and see if you can get -- There is
no doubt of it said La Fleur -- and away he flew.

In a very little time the poor fellow came back quite out of breath, with
deeper marks of disappointment in his looks than could arise from the simple
irreparability of the fragment -- J^ste ciel! in less than two minutes that the
poor fellow had taken his last tender farewell of her -- his faithless mistress
had given his gage d'amour to one of the Count's footmen -- the footman to a
young sempstress -- and the sempstress to a fiddler with my fragment at the end
of it -- Our misfortunes were involved together -- I gave a sigh -- and La
Fleur echoed it back again to my ear --

-- How perfidious! cried La Fleur -- how unlucky! said I. --

-- I should not have been mortified, Monsieur, quoth La Fleur, if she had lost
it -- Nor I, La Fleur, said I, had I found it.

Whether I did or no, will be seen hereafter.

THE ACT OF CHARITY. PARIS.
THE man who either disdains or fears to walk up a dark entry may be an
excellent good man, and fit for a hundred things; but he will not do to make a
good sentimental traveller. I count little of many things I see pass at broad
noon day, in large and open streets. -- Nature is shy, and hates to act before
spectators; but in such an unobserved corner, you sometimes see a single short
scene of here is worth all the sentiments of a dozen French plays compounded
together -- and yet they are absoluetly fine; -- and whenever I have a more
brilliant affair upon my hands than common, as they suit a preacher just as
well as a hero, I generally make my sermon out of 'em -- and for the text --
"Capadosia, Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphilia" -- is as good as any one in
the Bible.

There is a long dark passage issuing out from the opera comique into a narrow
street: it is trod by a few who humbly wait for a fiacre Hackney-coach.
, or wish to get off quietly o'foot when the opera is done. At the end of it,
toward the theater, it is lighted by a small candle, the light of which is
almost lost before you get halfway down, but near the door -- it is more for
ornament than use: you see it as a fixed star of the least magnitude; it burns
-- but does little good to the world, that we know of.

In returning along this passage, I discerned, as I approached within five or
six paces of the door, two ladies standing arm in arm, with their backs against
the wall, waiting, as I imagined, for a fiacre -- as they were next the door, I
thought they had a prior right; so edged myself up within a yard or little more
of them, and quietly took my stand -- I was in black, and scarce seen.

The lady next me was a tall lean figure of a woman of about thirty-six; the
other of the same size and make, of about-forty; there was no mark of wife or
widow in any one part of either of them -- they seemed to be two upright vestal
sisters, unsapp'd by caresses, unbroke in upon by tender salutations: I could
have wished to have made them happy -- their happiness was destined, that
night, to come from another quarter.

A low voice, with a good turn of expression, and sweet cadence at the end of
it, begged for a twelve-sous piece betwixt them, for the love of heaven. I
thought it singular, that a beggar should fix the quota of an alms -- and that
the sum should be twelve times as much as what is usually given in the dark.
They both seemed astonished at it as much as myself. -- Twelve sous! said one
-- a twelve-sous piece! said the other -- and made no reply.

The poor man said, he knew not how to ask less of ladies of their rank; and
bowed down his head to the ground.

Poo! said they -- we have no money.

The beggar remained silent for a moment or two, and renewed his supplication.

Do not, my fair young ladies, said he, stop your good ears against me -- Upon
my word, honest man! said the younger, we have no change -- Then God bless you,
said the poor man, multiply those joys which you can give to others without
change! -- I observed the elder sister put her hand into her pocket -- I Will
see, said she, if I have a sous -- A sous! give twelve, said the supplicant;
nature has been bountiful to you, be bountiful to a poor man.

I would, friend, with all my heart, said the younger, if I had it.

My fair charitable! said he, addressing himself to the elder -- What is it but
your goodness and humanity which makes your bright eyes so sweet, that they
outshine the morning even in this dark passage? and what was it which made the
Marquis de Santerre and his brother say so much of you both as they just passed
by?

The two ladies seemed much affected; and impulsively at the same time they
both put their hands into their pocket, and each took out a twelve-sous piece.

The contest betwixt them and the poor supplicant was no more -- it was
continued betwixt themselves, which of the two should give the twelve-sous
piece in charity -- and to end the dispute, they both gave it together, and the
man went away.

THE RIDDLE EXPLAINED. PARIS.
I Stepped hastily after him: it was the very man whose success in asking
charity of the women before the door of the hotel had so puzzled me -- and I
found at once his secret, or at least the basis of it -- 'twas flattery.

Delicious essence! how refreshing art thou to nature! how strongly are all its
powers and all its weaknesses on thy side! how sweetly do thou mix with the
blood, and help it through the most difficult and torturous passages to the
heart!

The poor man, as he was not straightened for time, had given it here in a large
dose: it is certain he had a way of bringing it into less form, for the many
sudden cases he had to do with in the streets, but how he contrived to correct,
sweeten, concentre, and qualify it -- I vex not my spirit with the inquiry --
it is enough, the beggar gained two twelve-sous pieces -- and they can best
tell the rest, who have gained much greater matters by it.

PARIS.
WE get forwards in the world not so much by doing services, as receiving them:
you take a withering twig, and put it in the ground; and then you water it,
because you have planted it.

Mons. Le Compte de B****, merely because he had done me one kindness in the
affair of my passport, would go on and do me another, the few days he was at
Paris, in making me known to a few people of rank; and they were to present me
to others, and so on.

I had got master of my secret, just in time to turn these honors to some
little account; otherwise, as is commonly the case, I should have dined or
supped a single time or two round, and then by translating French looks and
attitudes into plain English, I should presently have seen, that I had got hold
of the convert Plate, napkin, knife, fork, and spoon.
of some more entertaining guest; and in course, should have resigned all my
places one after another, merely upon the principle that I could not keep them.
-- As it was, things did not go much amiss.

I had the honor of being introduced to the old Marquis de B****: in days of
yore he had signalized himself by some small feats of chivalry in the Cour
d'amour, and had dressed himself out to the idea of tilts and tournaments ever
since -- the Marquis de B**** wished to have it thought the affair was
somewhere else than in his brain. He could like to take a trip to England, and
asked much of the English ladies. Stay where you are, I beseech you, Mons. le
Marquise, said I -- Les Messrs. Angloise can scarce get a kind look from them
as it is. -- The Marquis invited me to supper.

Mons. P**** the farmer general was just as inquisitive about our taxes. --
They were very considerable, he heard -- If we knew but how to collect them,
said I, making him a low bow.

I could never have been invited to Mons. P****'s concerts upon any other terms.

I had been misrepresented to Madame de Q*** as an esprit -- Madame de Q*** was
an esprit herself; she burnt with impatience to see me, and hear me talk. I had
not taken my seat, before I saw she did not care a sous whether I had any wit
or no -- I was let in, to be convinced she had. -- I call heaven to witness I
never once opened the door of my lips.

Madame de Q**** vowed to every creature she met, She had never had a more
improving conversation with a man in her life.

There are three epochas in the empire of a French-woman -- she is coquette --
then deist -- then dvote: the empire during these is never lost -- she only
changes her subjects: when thirty-five years and more have unpeopled her
dominions of the slaves of love, she re-peoples it with slaves of infidelity --
and then with the slaves of the church.

Madame de V**** was vibrating betwixt the first of these epochas: the color
of the rose was shading fast away -- -- she ought to have been a deist five
years before the time I had the honor to pay my first visit.

She placed me upon the same sopha with her, for the sake of disputing the
point of religion more closely. -- In short Madame de V*** told me she believed
nothing.

I told Madame de V***it might be her principle; but I was sure it could not be
her interest to level the outworks, without which I could not conceive how such
a citadel as hers could be defended -- that there was not a more dangerous
thing in the world, than for a beauty to be a deist -- that it was a debt I
owed my creed, not to conceal it from her -- that I had not been five minutes
sat upon the sopha besides her, but I had begun to form designs -- and what is
it, but the sentiments of religion, and the persuasion they had existed in her
breast, which could have checked them as they rose up.

We are not adamant, said I, taking hold of her hand -- and there is need of
all restraints, till age in her own time steals in and lays them on us -- but,
my dear lady, said I, kissing her hand -- it is too -- too soon --

I declare I had the credit all over Paris of unperverting Madame de V***. --
She affirmed to Mons. D*** and the Abbe M***, that in one half hour I had said
more for revealed religion, than all their Encyclopedia had said against it --
I was listed directly into Madame de V***'s Conterie -- and she put off the
epoch of deisin for two years.

I remember it was in this Conterie, in the middle of a discourse, in which I
was showing the necessity of a first cause, that the young Count de Faineant
took me by the hand to the furthest corner of the room, to tell me my solitaire
was pined too strait about my neck -- It should be plus badinant, said the
Count, looking down upon his own -- but a word, Mons. Yorick, to the wise --

-- And from the wise, Mons. le Compte replied I, making him a bow -- is enough.

The Count de Faineant embraced me with more ardour than ever I was embraced by
mortal man.

For three weeks together, I was of every man's opinion I met. -- Pardi! ce
Mons. Yorick a autant d'esprit que nous autres. -- Il raisonne bien, said
another. -- C'est un bon enfant, said a third. -- And at this price I could
have eaten and drank and been merry all the days of my life at Paris; but 'twas
a dishonest reckoning -- I grew ashamed of it -- it was the gain of a slave --
every sentiment of honor revolted against it -- the higher I got, the more was
I forced upon my beggarly system -- the better the Coterie -- the more children
of art -- I languished for those of nature: and one night, after a most vile
prostitution of myself to half a dozen different people, I grew sick, -- went
to bed -- ordered La Fleur to get me horses in the morning to set out for Italy.

MARIA. MOULINES.
I NEVER felt what the distress of plenty was in any one shape till now -- to
travel it through the Bourbonnis, the sweetest part of France -- in the hey-day
of the vintage, when nature is pouring her abundance into every one's lap, and
every eye is lifted up -- a journey through each step of which music beats time
to labor, and all her children are rejoicing as they carry in their clusters
-- to pass through this with my affections flying out, and kindling at every
group before me -- and every one of 'em was pregnant with adventures.

Just heaven! -- it would fill up twenty volumes -- and alas! I have but a few
small pages left of this to crowd it into -- and half of these must be taken up
with the poor Maria my friend, Mr. Shandy, met with near Moulines,

The story he had told me of that disordered maid, affected me not a little in
the reading; but when I got within the neighborhood where she lived, it
returned so strong into my mind, that I could not resist an impulse which
prompted me to go half a league out of the road to the village where her
parents dwelt to enquire after her.

It Is going, I own, like the Knight of the Woeful Countenance, in quest of
melancholy adventures -- but I know not how it is, but I am never so perfectly
conscious of the existence of a soul within me, as when I am entangled in them.

The old mother came to the door, her looks told me the story before she opened
her mouth -- she had lost her husband; he had died, she said, of anguish, for
the loss of Maria's senses about a month before -- She had feared at first, she
added, that it would have plundered her poor girl of what little understanding
was left -- but, on the contrary, it had brought her more to herself -- still
she could not rest -- her poor daughter, she said, crying, was wandering
somewhere about the road.

-- Why does my pulse beat languid as I write this? and what made La Fleur,
whose heart seemed only to be turned to joy, to pass the back of his hand twice
across his eyes, as the woman stood and told it? I beckoned to the postilion to
turn back into the road.

When we had got within half a league of Moulines, at a little opening in the
road leading to a thicket, I discovered poor Maria sitting under a poplar --
she was sitting with her elbow in her lap, and her head leaning on one side
within her hand -- a small brook ran at the foot of the tree.

I bid the postilion go on with the chaise to Moulines -- and La Fleur to
bespeak my supper -- and that I would walk after him.

She was dressed in white, and much as my friend described her, except that her
hair hung loose, which before was twisted within a silk net. -- She had,
superadded likewise to her jacket, a pale green ribband which fell across her
shoulder to the waist; at the end of which hung her pipe. -- Her goat had been
as faithless as her lover; and she had got a little dog in lieu of him, which
she had kept tied by a string to her girdle; as I looked at her dog, she drew
him toward her with the string. -- Thou shall not leave me, Sylvio, said she.
I looked in Maria's eyes, and saw she was thinking more of her father than of
her lover or little goat; for as she uttered them the tears trickled down her
cheeks.

I sat down close by her; and Maria let me wipe them away as they fell with my
handkerchief. -- I then steeped it in my own -- and then in hers -- and then in
mine -- and then I wiped hers again -- and as I did it, I felt such
undescribable emotions within me, as I am sure could not be accounted for from
any combinations of matter and motion.

I am positive I have a soul; nor can all the books with which materialisis
have pestered the world ever convince me of the contrary.

MARIA.
WHEN Maria had come a little to herself, I asked her if she remembered a pale
thin person of a man who had sat down betwixt her and her goat about two years
before? She said, she was unsettled much at that time, remembered it upon two
accounts -- that ill as she was she saw the person pitied her; and next, that
her goat had stolen his handkerchief, and she had beat him for the theft -- she
had washed it, she said, in the brook, and kept it ever since in her pocket to
restore it to him in case she should ever see him again, which, she added, he
had half promised her. As she told me this, she took the handkerchief out of
her pocket to let me see it; she had folded it up neatly in a couple of vine
leaves, tied round with a tendril -- on opening it, I saw an S marked in one of
the corners.

She had since that, she told me, strayed as far as Rome, and walked round St.
Peter's once -- and returned back -- that she found her way alone across the
Apennines -- had traveled over all Lombardy without money -- and through the
flinty roads of Savoy without shoes -- how she had borne it, and how she had
got supported, she could not tell -- but God tempers the wind, said Maria, to
the shorn lamb.

Shorn indeed! and to the quick, said I; and wast thou in my own land, where I
have a cottage, I would take thee to it and shelter thee: thou should eat of
my own bread, and drink of my own cup -- I would be kind to thy Sylvio -- in
all thy weaknesses and wanderings I would seek after thee and bring thee back
-- when the sun went down I would say my prayers, and when I had done thou
should play thy evening song upon thy pipe, nor would the incense of my
sacrifice be worse accepted for entering heaven along with that of a broken
heart.

Nature melted within me, as I uttered this; and Maria observing, as I took out
my handkerchief, that it was steeped too much already to be of use, would needs
go wash it in the stream. -- And where will you dry it, Maria? said I -- I Will
dry it in my bosom, said she -- 'twill do me good.

And is your heart still so warm, Maria? said I.

I touched upon the string on which hung all her sorrows -- she looked with
wistful disorder for some time in my face; and then, without saying any thing,
took her pipe, and played her service to the virgin -- The string I had touched
ceased to vibrate -- in a moment or two Maria returned to herself -- let her
pipe fall, -- and rose up.

And where art thou going, Maria? said I. -- She said to Moulines. -- Let us
go, said I, together. -- Maria put her arm within mine, and lengthening the
string to let the dog follow -- in that order we entered Moulines.

MARIA. MOULINES.
THOUGH I hate salutations and greetings in the market place, yet when we got
into the middle of this, I stopped to take my last look and last farewell of
Maria.

Maria, though not tall, was nevertheless of the first order of fine forms --
affliction touched her looks with something that was scarce earthly -- still
she was feminine -- and so much was there about her of all that the heart
wishes, or the eye looks for in woman, that could the traces be ever worn out
of her brain, and those of Eliza's out of mine, she should not only eat of my
bread, and drink of my own cup, but Maria should lay in my bosom, and be unto
me as a daughter.

Adieu, poor luckless maiden! -- imbibe the oil and wine which the compassion
of a stranger, as he journieth on his way, now pours into thy wounds -- the
being who has twice bruised thee can only bind them up for ever.

THE BOURBONNOIS.
THERE was nothing from which I had painted out for myself so joyous a riot of
the affections, as in this journey in the vintage, through this part of France;
but pressing through this gate of sorrow to it, my sufferings has totally
unfitted me: in every scene of festivity I saw Maria in the back ground of the
piece, fitting pensive under her poplar* and I had got almost to Lions before I
was able to cast a shade across her --

-- Dear sensibility! source inexhausted of all that is precious in our joys, or
costly in our sorrows! thou chainest thy martyr down upon his bed of straw --
and it is thou who lifts him up to HEAVEN -- eternal fountain of our feelings!
-- it is here I trace thee -- and this is thy divinity which stirs within me --
not, that in some sad and sickening moments, my soul shrinks back upon herself,
and startles at destruction -- mere pomp of words! but that I feel some
generous joys and generous cares beyond myself -- all comes from thee, great --
great SENSORIUM of the world! which vibrates, if a hair of our heads but falls
upon the ground, in the remotest desert of thy creation. -- Touched with thee,
Eugenius draws my curtain when I languish -- hears my tale of symptoms, and
blames the weather for the disorder of his nerves. Thou giv'st a portion of it
sometimes to the roughest peasant who traverses the bleakest mountains -- he
finds the lacerated lamb of another's flock -- This moment I beheld him leaning
with his head against his crook, with piteous inclination looking down upon it
-- Oh! had I come one moment sooner! -- it bleeds to death -- his gentle heart
bleeds with it --

Peace to thee, generous swain! -- I see thou walk off with anguish -- but
thy joys shall balance it -- for happy is thy cottage -- and happy is the
sharer of it -- and happy are the lambs which sport about you.

THE SUPPER.
A SHOE coming loose from the fore-foot of the thill-horse, at the beginning of
the ascent of Mount Taurira, the postilion dismounted, twisted the shoe off,
and put it in his pocket; as the ascent was of five or six miles, and that
horse our main dependence, I made a point of having the shoe fastened on again,
as well as we could; but the postilion had thrown away the nails, and the
hammer in the chaise box, being of no great use without them, I submitted to go
on.

He had not mounted half a mile higher, when coming to a flinty piece of road,
the poor devil lost a second shoe, and from off his other fore-foot; I then got
out of the chaise in good earnest; and seeing a house about a quarter of a mile
to the left hand, with a great deal to do, I prevailed upon the postilion to
turn up to it. The look of the house, and of every thing about it, as we drew
nearer, soon reconciled me to the disaster. -- It was a little farm-house
surrounded with about twenty acres of vineyard, about as much corn -- and close
to the house, on one side, was a potagerie of an acre and a half, full of every
thing which could make plenty in a French peasants house -- and on the other
side was a little wood which furnished wherewithal to dress it. It was about
eight in the evening whew I got to the house -- so I left the postilion to
manage his point as he could -- and for mine, I walked directly into the house.

The family consisted of an old grey-headed man and his wife, with five or six
sons and sons-in-law and their several wives, and a joyous genealogy out of 'em.

They were all sitting down together to their lentil-soup; a large wheaten loaf
was in the middle of the table; and a flaggon of wine at each end of it
promised joy through the stages of the repast -- 'twas a feast of love.

The old man rose up to meet me, and with a respectful cordiality would have me
sit down at the table; my heart was sat down the moment I entered the room; so
I sat down at once like a son of the family: and to invest myself in the
character as speedily as I could, I instantly borrowed the old man's knife, and
taking up the loaf cut myself a hearty luncheon; and as I did it I saw a
testimony in every eye, not only of an honest welcome, but of a welcome mixed
with thanks that I had not seemed to doubt it.

Was it this; or tell me, Nature, what else it was which made this morsel so
sweet -- and to what magic I owe it, that the draught I took of their flaggon
was so delicious with it, that they remain upon my palate to this hour?

If the supper was to my taste -- the grace which followed was much more so.

THE GRACE.
WHEN supper was over, the old man gave a knock upon the table with the haft of
his knife -- to bid them prepare for the dance: the moment the signal was
given, the women and girls ran all together into a back apartment to tie up
their hair -- and the young men to the door to wash their faces, and change
their sabots; and in three minutes every soul was ready upon a little esplanade
before the house to begin -- The old man and his wife came out last, and,
placing me betwixt them, sat down upon a sopha of turf by the door.

The old man had some fifty years ago been no mean performer upon the vielle --
and at the age he was then of, touched it well enough for the purpose. His wife
sung now-and-then a little to the tune -- then intermitted -- and joined her
old man again as their children and grandchildren danced before them.

It was not till the middle of the second dance, when, from some pauses in the
movement wherein they all seemed to look up, I fancied I could distinguist an
elevation of spirit different from that which is the cause or the effect of
simple jollity. -- In a word, I thought I beheld Religion mixing in the dance
-- but as I had never seen her so engaged, I should have looked upon it now, as
one of the illusions of an imagination which is eternally misleading me, had
not the old man, as soon as the dance ended, said, that this was their constant
way; and that all his life long he had made it a rule, after supper was over,
to call out his family to dance and rejoice; believing, he said, that a
cheerful and contented mind was the best sort of thanks to heaven that an
illiterate peasant could pay --

-- Or a learned prelate either said I.

THE CASE OF DELICACY.
WHEN you have gained the top of mount Taurira, you run presently down to Lions
-- adieu then to all rapid movements! It Is a journey of caution; and it fares
better with sentiments, not to be in a hurry with them; so I contracted with a
Voiturin to take his time with a couple of mules, and convey me in my own
chaise safe to Turin through Savoy.

Poor, patient, quiet, honest people! fear not; your poverty, the treasury of
your simple virtues, will not be envied you by the world, nor will your valleys
be invaded by it. -- Nature! in the midst of thy disorders, thou are still
friendly to the scantiness thou have created -- with all thy great works about
thee, little have thou left to give, either to the scithe or to the sickle --
but to that little, thou grantest safety add protection; sweet are the
dwellings which stand so sheltered.

Let the way-worn traveller vent his complaints upon the sudden turns and
dangers of your roads -- your rocks -- your precipices -- the difficulties of
getting up -- the horrors of getting down -- mountains impracticable -- and
cataracts, which roll down great stones from their summits, and block up his
road -- The peasants had been all day at work in removing a fragment of this
kind between St. Michael and Madane; and by the time my Voiturn got to the
place, it wanted full two hours of completing before a passage could any how
be gained: there was nothing but to wait with patience -- 'twas a wet and
tempestuous night; so that by the delay, and that together, the Voiturin found
himself obliged to take up five miles short of his stage at a little decent
kind of an inn by the road side.

I forthwith took possession of my bedchamber -- got a good fire -- ordered
supper; and was thanking heaven it was no worse -- when a voiture arrived with
a lady in it and her servant-maid.

As there was no other bedchamber in the house, the hostess, without much
nicety led them into mine, telling them, as she ushered them in, that there was
no body in it but an English gentleman -- that there were two good beds in it,
and a closet within the room which held another -- the accent in which she
spoke of this third bed did not say much for it -- however, she said, there
were three beds, and but three people -- and she durst say, the gentleman would
do any thing to accommodate matters -- I left not the lady a moment to make a
conjecture about it -- so instantly made a declaration I would do any thing in
my power.

As this did not amount to an absolute surrender of my bedchamber, I still
felt myself so much the proprietor, as to have a right to do the honors of it
-- so I desired the lady to sit down -- pressed her into the warmest seat --
called for more wood -- desired the hostess to enlarge the plan of the supper,
and to favor us with the very best wine.

The lady had scarce warmed herself five minutes at the fire, before she began
to turn her head back, and give a look at the beds; and the oftener she cast
her eyes that way, the more they returned perplexed -- I felt for her -- and
for myself; for in a few minutes, what by her looks, and the case itself, I
found myself as much embarrassed as it was possible the lady could be herself.

That the beds we were to lay in were in one and the same room, was enough
simply by itself to have excited all this -- but the position of them, for they
stood parallel, and so very close to each other as only to allow space for a
small wicker chair bewtixt them, rendered the affair still more opprossive to
us -- they were fixed up moreover near the fire, and the projection of the
chimney on one side, and a large beam which crossed the room on the other,
formed a kind of recess for them that was no way favorable to the nicety of
our sensations -- if any thing could have added to it, it was, that the two
beds were both of 'em so very small, as to cut us off from every idea of the
lady and maid lying together; which in either of them, could it have been
feasible, my lying besides them, though a thing not to be wished, yet there was
nothing in it so terrible which the imagination might not have passed over
without torment.

As for the little room within, it offered little or no consolation to us;
'twas a damp cold closet, with a half dismantled window shutter, and with a
window which had neither glass or oil paper in it to keep out the tempest of
the night. I did not endeavor to stifle my cough when the lady gave a peep
into it; so it reduced the case in course to this alternative -- that the lady
should sacrifice her health to her felings, and take up with the closet
herself, and abandon the bed next mine to her maid -- or that the girl should
take the closet, etc. etc.

The lady was a Piedmontese of about thirty, with a glow of health in her
cheeks. -- The maid was a Lyonose of twenty, and as brisk and lively a French
girl as ever moved. -- There were difficulties every way -- and the obstacle of
the stone in the road, which brought us into the distress, great as it appeared
whilst the peasants were removing it, was but a pebble to what lay in our ways
now -- I have only to add, that it did not lessen the weight which hung upon
our spirits, that we were both too delicate to communicate what we felt to each
other upon the occasion.

We sat down to supper; and had we not had more generous wine to it than a
little inn in Savoy cold have furnished, our tongues had been tied up, till
necessity herself had set them at liberty -- but the lady having a few bottles
of Burdundy in her voiture sent down her Fille de Chamber for a couple of them;
so that by the time supper was over, and we were left alone, we felt ourselves
inspired with a strength of mind sufficient to talk, at least, without reserve
upon our situation. We turned it every way, and debated and considered it in
all kind of lights in the course of a two hours negotiation; at the end of
which the articles were settled finally betwixt us, and stipulated for in form
and manner of a treaty of peace -- and I believe with as much religion and good
faith on both sides, as in any treaty which as yet had the honor of being
handed down to posterity.

They were as follows:

First. As the right of the bedchamber is in Monsieur -- and he thinking the
bed next to the fire to be the warmest, he insists upon the concession on the
lady's side of taking up with it.

Granted, on the part of Madame; with a proviso, that as the curtains of that
bed are of a flimsy transparent cotton and appear likewise too scanty to draw
close, that the Fille de Chamber, shall fasten up the opening, either by
corking pins, or needle and thread, in such manner as shall be deemed a
sufficient barrier on the side of Monsieur.

2dly. It is required on the part of Madame, that Monsieur shall lay the whole
night through in his robe de chamber.

Rejected: inasmuch Monsieur is not worth a robe de chamber; he having nothing
in his portmanteau but six shirts and a black silk pair of breeches.

The mentioning the silk pair of breeches made an entire change of the articles
-- for the breeches were accepted as an equivalent for the robe de chamber, and
so it was stipulated and agreed upon that I should lay in my black silk
breeches all night.

3dly, It was insisted upon, and stipupulated for by the lady, that after
Monsieur was got to bed, and the candle and fire extinguished, that Monsieur
should not speak one single word the whole night.

Granted; provided Monsieur's saying his prayers might not be deemed an
infraction of treaty.

There was but one point forgot in this treaty, and that was the manner in
which the lady and myself should be obliged to undress and get to bed -- there
was but one way of doing it, and that I leave to the reader to devise;
protesting as I do it, that if it is not the most delicate in nature, it is the
fault of his own imagination -- against which this is not my first complaint.

Now when we were got to bed, whether it was the novelty of the situation, or
what it was, I know not; but so it was, I could not shut my eyes; I tried this
side and that, and turned and turned again, till a full hour after midnight;
when nature and patience both wearing out -- O my God! said I --

-- You have broke the treaty, Monsieur, said the lady, who had no more slept
than myself -- I begged a thousand pardons -- but insisted it was no more than
an ejaculation -- she maintained 'twas an entire infraction of the treaty -- I
maintained it was provided for in the clause of the third article.

The lady would by no means give up her point, though she weakened her barrier by
it; for in the warmth of the dispute, I could hear two or three corking pins
fall out of the curtain to the ground.

Upon my word and honor, Madame, said I -- stretching my arm out of bed by way
of asseveration --

-- (I was going to have added, that I would not have trespassed against the
remotest idea of decorum for the world) --

-- But the Fille de Chamber hearing there were words between us, and fearing
that hostilities would ensue in course, had crept silently out of her closet,
and it being totally dark, had stolen so close to our beds, that she had got
herself into the narrow passage which separated them, and had advanced so far
up as to be in a line betwixt her mistress and me. --

So that when I stretched out my hand, I caught hold of the Fille de Chambre's.

END OF VOL. II.

