A VISION OF HELL, AND A DISCOVERY OF SOME OF THE CONSULTATIONS AND DEVICES
THERE In the YEAR, 1767.

BY THEODORUS VAN SHEMAIN.

And the Lord said unto Satan whence come thou? Then Satan answered the LORD,
and said, From going to and fro in the Earth, and from walking up and down in
it.

JOB, i. 7. -- Your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about
seeking whom he may devour.

1 Pet. v. 8. -- Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light.

2 Cor. xi. 14. Lest Satan should get an Advantage of us: for we are not
ignorant of his Devices,

2 Cor. ii. 11. -- The Things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to
Devils and not to God.

1 Cor, x. 20. NEW HAVEN: Reprinted, 1770.

A Vision of Hell, and a Discovery of some of the Consultations and Devices
there.
IN the month of May in the Year 1767, in a morning after I had been some time
out of bed, I was musing upon the low state of religion, and the great progress
of vice; I considered how the Devils would rejoice and triumph in the decay of
piety, and in the flood of immorality that threatened to deluge the world. --
While I was thus musing, I sell into a sort of trance, I was certainly not a
sleep; my fancy and imagination were most lively, and yet I retained m^ memory
and reason perfectly, I seemed to have a visionary view, or clear
representation of hell, or the world of miserable spirits My mind was strangely
enlarged to view and comprehend things -- Hell, seemed a fire, as large as all
this world, surrounded with impenetrable walls: the gate was very wide and was
continually open, but guarded by the strongest and cruelest devils: and the
brightest flame of the hotest fire seemed to stream out of the gate an amazing
length: in the midst of this immense fire were innumerable devils, and
miserable souls of Adam's race.

I perceived the devils came to this world and returned to hell often. They
came here to tempt, seduce, and destroy mankind. and returned to hell to
consult and contrive the most effectual methods to ruin souls. Their greatest
malignity was against God, and Jesus Christ. Their malicious desire, and cursed
endeavor, was to dishonor God, and prevent Christ having glory among mankind.
I perceived their principal design in promoting sin, and bringing sinners to
hell, was to disappoint God, reflect dishonor on the methods of his grace, and
prevent Christ's being glorified by the salvation of sou^s. The devils were
much elated with pride, and filled with boasting, that their empire in this
world, was larger than Immanuel's and that they had more servants and subjects
than he; and that Christ's laws and authority, were so little regarded.

The devils held consultation upon many subjects. I perceived they had been in
deep consultation upon several methods to dishonor God. But they were just
entering upon a new subject, as I had this vision of Hell. Two principal devils
had then just returned from this world, to the infernal pit. The one was
Moloch, the other Lucifer. The devils assembled to hear what success, and to
consult upon further measures -- The damned souls were in multitudes all
around, and as often as they pleased, might attend, and hear the debates of the
devils, for there was no privacy there.

The consultation which they held, while I had this vision, was concerning the
Gospel ministry, and the sabbath, or Lord's day. They employed their infernal
wisdom in devising how they might most effectually defeat God's end and design
in both these.

I shall give a faithful narrative of their consultation and determinations.
But to make my account the more intelligible, it may be proper (...), to give
the names and characters of some of the p^^^cipal devils. I shall mention only
some of the chief. Their names were Beelzebub, Lucifer, Moloch, Apollion,
Mammon, Dagon, Belial, Baal, and Nisroch.

As to their character, it is to be observed, that they have all a skill and
disposition to any, and all evil: but yet most of them are peculiarly disposed
to promote some particular sin and vice, more than others. Indeed, Beelzebub the
chief, is so skilled in all iniquity, and so bent and disposed to all that is
bad, that there is no devil in hell exceeds him, in any one evil. Lucifer's
peculiar character is to act as an angel of light, and induce to evil under a
show or false appearance of good. Moloch, is the devil that vehemently tempts,
and urges people to all vice in an open, bold, daring manner, leading them to
commit sin, with impudence, or without shame. Apollion, is the devil of
cruelty, who tempts to malice and revenge, and peculiarly delights in the
misery of mankind. Mammon, is continually tempting men to covetousness, and to
make this world their treasure and delight. Dagon, is the devil of sloth, who
tempts men to sloth and negligence in religion, and to sink into a dead sullen
despair of any good. Belial, is the devil that tempts to disobedience and
obstinacy; and has peculiar influence with youth, who dis^bey their parents.
Baal, is an unclean devil, and excites to the indulgence of all sorts of
fleshly lusts, and vicious appetites. Nisroch, is the devil of pride, and is
continually tempting and exciting to that sin.

Moloch, and Lucifer, being just returned from this earth, as I observed, and
the devils being assembled, there consultation and devices were as follows.

Moloch. Hail, ye principalities and powers: let joy run through, the vault of
hell, such joy as this horrible pit can allow; for we have great success. Vice
abounds; Jehovah is dishonored; his laws are disregarded; Messiah is despised;
we have more subjects on earth, ye where the gospel is pre^ched, than he has.


Beelzebub. We feel the helish joy in all our hearts. But while we boast in the
success there has been, we must employ our infernal wisdom in contriving
something farther against Jehovah, and his government; for I shall never be
easy, till he is despised or neglected by every rational creature. We must try
by every diabolical art, to counteract the great design of Jesus Christ.


Apollion. We shall all heartily join in what is now proposed, that we may
bring millions to blaspheme him in hell to all eternity, ins^e^d of praising
him in heaven as he proposes.


Belz. The preaching of the gospel, is the detestable means of diminishing our
kingdom. We have long found by sad experience, that Faith comes by bearing,
what they call, the glad tidings of salvation. I wish we could some way defeat
the hell-hated design of a preached gospel, which is so adapted to attract the
hearts of sinners, and turn them from our interest.


Apollion. The institution of the sabbath, and the exercises of it, are also
hateful means of encroaching upon us, and diminishing our subjects; I wish it
was for ever abolished, and no sabba^^, or sabbath-exercises left.


Beelzebub. It Is worthy our angelic wisdom, to enter into a deep consultation at
this time, upon these two points, viz. how we may frustrate the design of the
preached gospel, and render u^^less the sabbath day.


Belial. We have all had opportunity to observe in ages past, that the
observance of the sabbath, and religion, stand and fall together.


Dagon. If we could by sloth, or any other way keep people from attending
public worship, our great end would in a good measure be answered, as to a
preached gospel, and the sabbath both. I propose therefore that we attempt this.


Beelzebub. My worthy associate who spoke last, has proposed, something very
proper in its place; but I think we ought not to depend upon that alone. Let us
lay our scheme deeper and larger; and try in many ways, which I am sure our
superior wisdom can devise, to defeat the design of preaching the gospel and
the sabbath.


Lucifer Excellent proposal! And let us take particular care to cover our
designs as much as possible, and give them such a coloring that mankind may
think them rational. We never succeed so well as when we act like angels of
light. Man is a rational creature, and though fallen, has yet that detestable
thing they call Conscience; which puts the soul into a strange commotion, when
sin appears in its proper color. I dread conscience more than any thing in
human nature, since the sall of man; therefore, in all we do, let us keep our
design as much as possible out of sight.


Belial. O, Lucifer son of the morning, we all perceive the wisdom of thy
advice. and let us attempt what Beelzebub has proposed, and i^ every way
possible, defeat the fatal tendency of a preached gospel. For we all observe,
that from the cities, towns, and congregations. where the gospel is clearly and
faithfully dispensed, there are fewer souls come to hell, than from other
places. The seats of glory, and felicity in heaven, from which we fell, are
filled up from time to time, with human souls, that go from places where that
detestable gospel is clearly exhibited.


Mammon. We all knew the difference between the places P -- l, and R -- S. In
one of these the gospel is clearly preached, by that detestable wretch K -- L
-- In the other, how little hurt is done to us, where Z -- R. pretends to
preach; but his life and doctrine are such, that we lose but little by him. Let
us therefore, if possible, prevent a clear, faithful, searching method of
preaching.


Belz. I think my friend, we are all agreed in the main design. Let us now
enter upon the properest means and most artful method to accomplish our
purpose. And as AI fear we shall never entirely set aside the gospel ministry,
I think one leading stop to accomplish our purpose, is, to induce bad men to
enter into the ministry. If people will have preaching, let us put forward
those that will answer our own purpose, or at m^st do us but little hurt, and
by that means we shall keep out those whom we have and sear.


Dagon. The gospel in the hand of a slothful man does us but little hurt.


Baal. No, nor in the hand of a sensualist.


Mammon. Nor, yet in the hand of a worlding.


Apol. My heart feels peculiar satisfaction when those who have the Character
of gospel ministers, are guilty of adultery, drunkenness, or other scandalous
sins: it gives a sort of support and encouragement to vicious persons, ^inks
the hearts of the good, and confirms ^^^idels; scarce any thing reflects more
dishonor upon the Son of God, and disgrace to his plan of Salvation.


Mammon. To promote our design, I think we ought to lead all Clergymen, whether
good or bad, to expect ^^y their calling) great things in this world, riche^,
honor, ease, and a state above the common level of mankind. Some who have not
entered the ministry with a principal rega^d to worldly things, yet have though it
that those things ought to be the fruit of their labor, and that they should
receive them in return.


Belial. Yes. and when they are disappointed, it affords a good occasion to
excite a quarrel between them and their people, and produce such prejudices,
alienations, and breaches, as greatly help our cause. Much may be done this
way, to prevent the growth o^^mmanual's kingdom.


Nisroch. By all means lead ministers to expect more wealth, ease, and respect
in the world than they will find. And be sure excite their wives, and families,
to expect great things, and find fault if they have them not. Their
disappointment, and the vexatious effects of it, will ^^et and discourage
Ministers, and excite uneasiness among people.


Apollion. Above all men in the world, I dread and ab^^r a Minster that goes
into his office, with an humble mind expecting much opposition and self-denial,
and determined to follow the example of his master Jesus. Such a man bode; ill
to our kingdom. But I perceive that upon hearing our device, some of those
d^m^ed ministers now with us in hell, are horribly pierced with anguish. Let us
a minute hear their groans and curses.


Damned Ministers. These cursed devils were our tempters and seducers, and ^ow
they are contriving to bring more after our example to this place of torment,
to increase the fire of hell. Ah, cursed fools that we were to go into the
ministry for the ^^ke of the world, and then indulge our lusts, ^rist^ with
divine things, and neglect souls; who through our carelessness are now here
loading ^s with their cu^^^s, and increasing our (...).


Apollion. We will increase your misery, and bring many of your b^on companions
to share with you in the proper fruits and effects of their sloth and luxu^y.

But let us return to our proper purpose. O ye principalities and powers of
hell! If we cannot keep all good men cut of the ministry, let us try to prevent
their doing much good when in.


Dagon. We should endeavor to bring ministers into such circumstances that
they will be tempted to negligence and sloth in their calling, especially to
neglect to visit and talk with people in private, upon spiritual and eternal
things.


Mam. This may in a good measure be accomplished by worldly care, and business
taken upon themselves; and people may be very easily led to compel ministers to
encumber themselves with the world, or to starve.


Nisroch. Ministers may be tempted to neglect a clo^^ application to the
conscience of their people in private, through fear of offending them, by which
offense a minister might lose some part of his worldly income, or suffer
reproach.


Dagon. I think I can succeed with some, to prevent their entering into
religious discourse in private houses, by strongly suggesting to them their own
weakness and inability to begin or carry on good conversation to advantage. It
may be infused into them that it will appear abrupt, strange, and unnatural,
not be though it prudent but rather discover weakness and folly.


Belz. Ministers may be tempted to slothfulness in Study, and content
themselves with a round of old truths, an hundred times repeated; by which we
can lead souls into new lu^king places of sin and deceit, which such a minister
will never discover. Thus souls will rest secure, and come to hell from such a
minister, though he preach truth every sabbath.


Dagon. I have often, and trust I shall yet influence many according to this
advice.


Belz. We are well agreed hitherto, and have determined what to do on the part
of ministers. But let us proceed and try what may be done by the people, or
laity, to defeat the design of the gospel ministry among them. And I think one
thing in general, should be to prejudice people against, or make them think ill
of their minister. If this can be thoroughly done, it will in a great measure
defeat the design of the ministry and sabbath both.


Lucifer. This advice is worthy the prince of devils. Several things already
determined will not fail to have this effect, while ministers live and act as
we have proposed. But in prosecution of this design, I would suggest, that some
of our worthy friends on earth, the children of Mammon, should industriously
spread abroad, and (...) that ministers have too much Sal^ry, and live too
high; that they (...) more at this world than the good (...) spend and naughty,
and not like (...) Jesus. These reports are ^^ly managed whether true to
prejudice people and prevent ministers doing good. And we have always such
friends in every city, town, and congregation, who will not fail to make these
reports look very plausible, even if false.


Mammon. We ought to encourage and instigate, those Friends which we have in
many places on earth, who in opposition to the Bible, and the reason and nature
of things, will strenuously insist and maintain, that for a minister to have a
salary, is to be an hireling, and to preach for wages.


Apollion. If we can bring people fully to believe, that ministers ought not to
have a salary, or stated support, sufficient for their comfortable subsistence,
we shall do much to overthrow the ministry; for Clergymen, poor wretches,
cannot subsist on nothing, any more than their fellow mortals.


Mammon. If we can bring people to withhold a proper maintenance, it will keep
ministers from many places, where otherwise they would be laboring to pull
down our kingdom, as they love to express it.


Moloch. I know hundreds of places on earth. that would now have faithful
laborious ministers, i^ people did but approve of them, and would give a
comfortable support: but now the stupid people from these places. come stocking
to these regions of fire, without having been enlightened, warned, and
disciplined by a faithful ministry.


Mammon. We must by all means, add this proposed discouragement to ministers.
for I love to see their hear's sink under a view of the ingratitude of their
people, and the little hopes of success among those who render evil for good.


Apollion. I have great encouragement upon the view (...) so many ways to
defeat the design of the g^spel ministers, that fatal means of recovering souls
from our kingdom in the upper world.


Beelzebub. Yes. true heart of cruelty! but we have not done yet. There are
further measures to defeat that detestable scheme of Jehovah, and his Missish.
Let us proceed.


Belial. Proceed we will, my worthy (...), I have some time been waiting to
propose (...) that will carry this matter further, in opposition to Jesus
christ. What I propose is easy to accomplish, that is, to raise evil reports,
falsehoods, and lies, concerning a minister, especially if he is faithful, and
spread these reports among the people. We have friends in every place, male and
female, who delight in this work.


Lucifer. These false reports have been very useful to us. But such stories
will be most effectual when they have the plausible appearance of truth. Unwary
careless people, will then readily receive and pass them as Truths. A lie is
good for nothing, if it has not the appearance of truth; especially against a
minister of an established chracter.


Apollion. I would add something here near a kin to what was last mentioned,
viz. to magnify and add to, the real faults of ministers; make mountains of
mole hills, and allow nothing for the frailties of human nature in them, but
make people think that their failings unfit them for their calling, and that
they may lawfully spread abroad their infirmities. This will prejudice people,
and sink the hearts of ministers.


Beelzebub. I love to hear the failings of any of Jehovah's servants magnified
and tossed about; especially the failings of ministers.


Moloch. I have this further to propose, that we should tempt and stir up
parents to talk against ministers, before their children. By this the young
ones will be prejudiced, and emboldened to contemn, and speak slightly of them;
and so the ministry become useless to the rising generation, and we know if
people are led to undervalue and slight divine things till they are advanced in
years, there is but little danger of our losing them afterward.


Belial. The advice of Moloch is much to the purpose. I have often observed the
effect of it among the young ones, to my great satisfaction. There is G -- D --
of H -- l, has practiced according to these suggestions; he repeats over with
satisfaction among his children, the falsehoods raised and spread abroad
concerning his minister and intimates that he has reason to believe they are
true. And his children are all malignant, bold, impudent despisers of their
minister, and promise fair to serve us to our mind, as long as they live.


Apollion. On the contrary; I know some of those detestable faintish sort of
people, who are set to oppose our kingdom, who will not before their children
so much as whisper any thing against their minister, lest the young ones should
be led to slight him, and undervalue the advice he gives them.


Nisroch. Ay, I know some squeamish creatures, who if they really think their
minister is wrong, will not let their children know it, least it should prevent
their getting good by his preaching. But we must try to defeat this faintish
prudence.


Baal. If we can get those falsehoods and evil reports of ministers, to the cars
of young ones, it will be much to our p^rpose if they are not conveyed by means
of their parents, though I like it best when they come in this channel.


Moloch. I have another thing to propose, which we have made much use of in
times past: and if times are now altered, that we cannot do as we have done,
yet we may do something to excellent purpose in amanner but little different.


Beelzebub. What is that, brave Moloch?


Moloch. Raise persecution against those hotheaded ministers who set
themselves to oppose our kingdom. We have those on earth who are very ready to
do this work for us. We have stopped many of their mouths, and shut up many
pulpits, which have echoed treason to our kingdom, and by this means
intimidated others so as to keep them in some tolerable bounds.


Beelzebub. It Is true, times are altered in the world: But sew magistrates, are
now inclined to persecute their subjects on account of religion, but much may
yet be done by way of persecution.


Moloch. Where we cannot move the civil power against them we must persecute
them with the tongue. We have those on earth that will say all manner of evil
against them, falsely (...) Christ's ^ake, o^ for their opposing our kingdom,
We have le, them know to their cost these many hundred years, that if they will
live godly in Jesus Christ, they shall suffer persecution.


Apollion. We may excite some of our brave friends on earth to injure ministers
secretly; burn their houses, destroy their goods, kill their creatures, raise
mobs against them, wound, maim them, and the like. This will intimidate the
wretches and make them keep within some bounds of moderation, and not dare to
attempt so openly to oppose our kingdom.


Moloch. If those opposers of our interest should after all, make bold; open,
resolute attempts, to defeat our design, and oppose any practices which we have
promoted among mankind. and the vices and vicious customs which we have made to
prevail, and we cannot persecute them in any other way; we must rise a clamor
and noise, make our friends talk big and high, bluster, threaten, and pretend
that these ministers are going to turn the world upside down, bring in
innovations, and strange regulations and practice, to deprive people of their
proper liberties and customs. By such means. many that would otherways oppose
us, will be affrighted, and choose to be moderate, and hold some degree of
friendship with our friends.


Apollion. Yes: I know many that would have been led to oppose our measures, if
some of our bold blustering fellows had not scared them. I am sure we can by
this means keep many of those detestable ministers in tolerable order, and make
them satisfy their consciences with some moderate reproofs from the pulpit,
without any real, resolute attempts to oppose us: And if they will but be
moderate, our cause is so prevalent in most places, that we have not much
reason to fear.


Beelzebub. If after all there should be some detestable opposes of our kingdom
who will not fear all the rage of (...) and hell, we must guard against them in
some more artful manner.


Lucifer. There is one important thing more to be considered, (...) I can
manage to peculiar advantage by acting as (...) of light.


Nisroch. What is that, brave Lucifer?


Lucifer. Stir up some enthusiastic, deluded, self-conceited people to censure
and condemn the ministers of Christ, as carnal unregenerate men and legal
preachers. There are numbers of people who through the pride of their bearts,
ignorance of themselves, and of the nature of religion, think they are more
religious than others: These may be improved as useful servants in our cause;
they pretend to great religion and sanctity, inward light and experience, so
that many people really think they have much religion, and understand it better
than common. These pretenders must be excited to censure and condemn ministers
as carnal, unregenerate, legal, and dull; that they have not the spirit, and do
not preach by experience; that if they have any grace, they have got away from
God; that it is unprofitable if not dangerous to hear them, yea, that it is very
dangerous to let awakened persons hear them.


Nisroch. That is right, thou angel of light. There is in that the appearance
of religion, that will readily take with many people who have really some true
religion. They will hearken to these high pretenders, and thereby be prejudiced
against their ministers.


Lucifer. I have used many, who are not our real friends, but the subjects of
Immanuel, as instruments to do us much service by this project. They have been
led to think their ministers ignorant and carnal, and censure them as such, and
then the whole weight of those good people's influence goes against the
minister; and other people argue thus, "Surely the minister is carnal and
legal, because such an one who is undoubtedly pious, censures him as carnal,
which he would not surely do if the minister was spiritual."


Nisroch. This scheme of opposing religion under a cloak of religion, is a
thing I greatly delight in: It has I am sure deluded and kept from the truth,
many thousands of souls who are now here with us in hell.


Damned Souls. Ye cursed devils, who once acted as angels of light, who stirred
up the pride and self conceit of our corrupt natures, and led us to think that
religion consisted in what it did not, and made us slatter and delude
ourselves, and refuse better light and conviction till it was too late. May
infinite vengeance make your hell the hottest possible to all eternity. What
could ye, cursed furies, propose by thus leading us to such misery and torment?


Apollion. We did it to prevent your serving and glorifying Jehovah: We did it
to disappoint Messiah, and reflect dishonor on him as a Savior, and bring you
to blaspheme him here in hell; and we will still do it to the utmost of our
noble powers, and superior wisdom, whilst we find we can employ many ways to
counter-act and frustrate his design.


Nisroch. I find what Lucifer just now proposed, is one of our most successful
methods, when there is a revival of religion in the world, and a general
concern upon the minds of mankind.


Lucifer. This art and method gives me more satisfaction, because this way we
counteract Jesus Christ when he sends his spirit to convince and awaken people.
We hereby undermine and defeat a work of grace, and in the end bring great
reproach upon vital religion: It prejudices many, and makes them then think
there is nothing in experimental religion, but that all is delusion or
hypocrisy; because after a while they see these high pretenders turn out to
have no religion, and often prove vicious.


Beelzebub. There is one thing more to our purpose, and that of great
importance, and I suppose the reason it has not before been mentioned by some
of you, is, that it is a thing that we are all very sensible of, and have in all
ages attended to, I mean leading ministers to preach damnable doctrines and
build souls upon a foundation that will in the end fail them, and leave them to
fall into hell. See what multitudes of damned souls now present, who came here
in this way.


Damned Souls. Ah, cursed Devils! Ah, cursed ministers! Ah, cursed selves! that
we who had the bible, and might have known better, should believe such
doctrines as were agreeable to our wicked hearts, our pride,
self-righteousness, and the very Justs of our nature; and think it was well
with us when it was not!


Nisroch. We are all so sensible of the propriety and success of what Beelzebub
has mentioned, that we shall always attend to it.

Well, is it not time to proceed to the other thing proposec, viz. the sabbath.


Belial. I have one thing more to propose concerning the gospel ministry, and
that is, that we by all means lead ministers to dispute with, contradict, and
censure one another; yea, contend, quarrel, anathematise, and excommunicate one
another. I think we may have great success in this way: Some of those
contradictions will tend to unhinge people's minds, especially the weak and
ignorant; they will be led to think that as one minister teaches one thing, and
another ^^other, there is no knowing what religion is, besides it keeps up
parties, and illwill, and alienation among ministers and people both.


Moloch. This is a noble subject to promote our cause. This, Messiah knew, and
therefore has said so much to his ministers and disciples, requiring them to
love one another, live in peace, be of one mind, and the like.


Belial. But in spite of Mossiah, I have succreded in all ages to promote and
keep op jars, contentions, and curses among ministers.


Apollion. O, what glorious prospects have we of defeating and dishonouring
jehovah! destroying mankind, and keeping low and contemptible the hateful
kingdom of jesus Christ on earth! How many ways have we to accomplish our end?
My heart feels bellish satisfaction in the prospect of success -- I want to
hear what will be proposed as to the sabbath.


Beelzebub. The sabbath is a day that I hate; it has proved the detestable means
of depriving us of many thousans, if not millions of souls. We have before
observed, that religion flourishes or falls in proportion as the sabbath is
observed or not. It Is the hateful day in which people not only hear the word
preached, but heads of families catechize and instruct their children and
servants, and lay in young minds those principles which we find hard to root
out. Where this day is observed, we cannot by all our hellish art prevent some
truths striking the conscience of sinners.


Moloch. The sabbath is the horrible day that suggests so many awakening truths
to conscience, that I cannot, as otherways I might, induce souls to sin with
boldness.


Baal. Sad truth! On that day the enemies of our kingdom thunder such things in
the ears of sinners, and make conscience so timorous, that I cannot succeed
with them as I should if they would live but a few months without a sabbath. I
hate the weekly return of that day.


Mammon In those cities and places where the sabbath is neglected or
disregarded, we find almost all the souls come to hell: But where it is
observed, we lose subjects in a manner that makes me gnash my teeth with rage.


Beelzebub. We are all too sensible of the fatal tendency of that institution.
Let us now therefore employ our infernal wisdom in devising methods, so far as
we can to defeat the design of it. And I would propose in the fust place, that
we should induce some of our friends on earth by sophistical arguments, and
under a pretense of religion, to show that there is no sabbath by God's
appointment under the gospel dispensation: So that by this means people may not
think themselves under obligation to observe it.


Lucifer. This is well proposed. If in this respect we can act as angels of
light, we shall succeed in the best manner; then conscience will not be alarmed
with sabbath breaking, and I dread conscience above any thing on earth. We have
those friends among men, some through mistake, and some through design, who under a
pretense or notion of gospel freedom, proclaim themselves free from the
obligations of the sabbath. We must influence them to insist upon this freedom,
and under a notion of being very spiritual, and holy at all times, reject the
sabbath as a legal thing, tending to spiritual bondage and superstition.


Moloch. We have had a succession of Friends on earth above one hund^ed years,
who have bravely denied and opposed the sabbath. They have done worthily and
had very considerable success. There are many thousands now, who have no regard
in their conscience to the sabbath; and if they do not make so much opposition
to it as they have done, yet their children are likely to be bro't up in the
parents way of thinking: and we hope the number will increase.


Belial. We have another set of friends the R-g- ns, who bestir themselves with
more zeal in our cause, both against the ministry and the sabbath. We must by
all means promote and instigate this set of men: They do much wherever they
come, to interrupt people upon the sabbath, and prevent the proper exercises of
that day: They will make much opposition, noise and clamor about the sabbath;
and will from time to time draw some to their way of thinking, especially the
children brought up in their families, will re^ain their parent's notions; and
if we gain no more than this by it, we should exert our selves to promote this
sect to the utmost.


Lucifer. I approve of brother Belial's opinion. But if we could lead these
R-g-reens to be a little more subtle and plausible, they would do us more
service, for they have acted so zealously for us, that they have in many things
gone so contrary to reason and common sense, that they prevent their doing us
so much service as otherways they might.


Beelzebub. I have another thing to propose respecting the sabbath, that is,
that we try to keep up as many different sentiments about it as we can. This
will cause divisions, disputes, and confusion. If people will have a sabbath,
let us try to make them differ about the day; some hold it is one day of the
week, and others another; and as much as possible be very confident in their
sentiments, and censure and condemn one another. Where there is much dispute
and contradiction it keeps people's minds unsettled, and leads some more
careless ones to think, there is not much in the sabbath.


Dagon. All good advice, ye princes of hell! But still the sabbath will be
believed by many; let us therefore consult now we may defeat the design of it
where it is believed. And I would propose to keep people from public worship,
through negligence, sloth or vice: For if people by their own (...) will absent
themselves from public worship, and neglect the means God has appointed, the
sabbath will not much hurt our interest. I can induce many to ab^^nt themselves
through sloth; I find mankind more and more inclined to comply with this
temptation.


Beelzebub. Apply all your sluggish art brother Dagon, induce many to stay at
home, and sleep and stretch themselves in ease, at least part of the day, and
quiet their consciences with a thought that the sabbath was designed for a day
of rest.


Dagon. I have had, and trust shall still have, wonderful success in leading
people to think that half the day is enough to a^end public w^rship: And I fled
after they have offe^^ed God by sloth, or something worse one part of (...)
day, there is little danger of their (...) good the other part, if they do
(...).


Moloch. What we have before proposed concerning (...) will go far (...) (...)
They will easily find (...) themselves from the worship of God if they do not
like (...) minister.


Mammon. There are ^ther temptations which if urged artfully will do much
service; particularly, that we have several s^rts of m^n to settle their
accounts and adjust their secular business on the sabbath.


Beelzebub. That proposal ought to be attended to.


Mammon. This may be done by degrees. We may at first make them think something
of this is necessary. And when they once begin, the same necessity will lead
them to it again and again, till they will not be afraid nor ashamed to make a
constant practice of it: Thus not only lawyers, physicians, and merchants, but
many others will spend the day in settling and adjusting their accounts, and
preparing for more public business on other days of the week.


Baal. I would propose, that Mammon should tempt people in the country to walk
over their fields and plantations on that day, and view their crops, creatures,
fences, and the like. This will be more agreeable to many than attending public
worship: And if any should fault them for not attending the word preached, they
can easily excuse themselves, by saying, they can read as good a sermon at home
as they can hear at church.


Moloch. We must by all means promote and increase a practice, which to the joy
of my heart, I find we have already had considerable success in: A practice
which I hope to make make very prevalent; I mean going into company, drinking,
gaming, and whoring upon the sabbath.


Baal. I have prevailed with many, to prefer this day for visiting their
mistresses and prosecuting lewdness: And I think I shall in some places soon
make it a principal time for drinking and gaming.


Apollion. It Is most agreeable to have men spend this day in vain company,
drinking, gaming, whoring, and such like practices; because they are then not
only guilty of these vices in themselves, but have the additional guilt of
sabbath braking, and neglect of public worship. so that Jehovah is peculiarly
dishonored, his laws trampled upon, and his gospel despised.


Lucifer. What cause have we to rejoice, O ye principalities and powers, that
by our wisdom and influence. we can so successfully defeat Jehovah and his Son;
that we can bring to mere nothing the gospel ministry and the sabbath, and fill
these horrid regions with thousands and millions of Messiah's kindred in the
slosh, whose curses and blasphemies are music in our ears Their hearts and
tongues are not employed in praising Jehovah, and his Christ, but in accusing
and blaspheming, and shall be so to all eternity.


Beelzebub. Thy joy: O Lucifer, is worthy the noble powers of hell. But we have
not done with the sabbath. After all, many will pay some regard to the day, and
attend public worship: It remains that we consider how we shall prevent their
getting any good on that day.


Dagon. In the first place, I will, suggest to them that as the sabbath is a
day of rest, they may lie in bed late that morning, and indulge their case, so
that by this means they shall have little or no time for reading or praying;
scarce have time to dress, in order to show themselves at church, and after
all, be so late that service shall be great part over, before they arrive.


Nisroch. We must by all means induce them to employ their tho'ts and spend
much time in dressing, decking, and adorning themselves. There is L --. G. and
G --. B. and a thousand others, who scarce think of any thing on sabbath
morning, except of dressing, and contriving to appear to advantage in public.
This is a noble perversion of the sabbath, and contradiction of what Messiah
requires of them.


Apollion. Nothing I hate worse, than to see some faintish opposers of our
kingdom, spend the sabbath morning in reading, meditation, and praying for a
blessing on the word to be preached.


Nisroch. By what we have proposed about dress, several ends are answered, as,
I. It prevents reading, hearing, and prayer. II. It leads them to idolize
themselves. III. It fits them to take the attention of others at church. IV. It
fills them with vanity, and offends their maker, that they are not likely to
get much good by preaching.



Moloch. Another thing which we ought by all means to attempt, is, to influence
persons to vain and simple discourse in going to, and from the house of God,
and between exercises of public worship. Some my be tempted to talk upon, and
contrive frolicks; some tell stories; some talk of their farms, oxen, horses,
and the like; some of their merchandise, and other business in life, and even
innumerable other subjects.


Apollion. The mind being engaged about those things in going to church, will
dwell upon them in time of service, so as to neglect any attention to the
truths delivered; and we know that no good is got by any preaching that is not
attended to.


Baal. May we not to our advantage induce young persons of different sexes, to
walk, or fit together, laugh and play, and thus spend the sabbath. This is
contrary to the holy design of the day, and so fills the mind with fin and
vanity, and there is not much danger that the consciences of such persons will
be struck with any truths of the word preached.


Mammon. Some people may be induced to make their assembling on the sabbath a
season to transact their worldly business: especially they who live distant in
the country. There is D --. Q --. harnesses his carriage, takes a son or two,
and sometimes a neighbor, and with cheerful chat passes eight or ten miles to
church. There he meets persons with whom he can do many errands, and transact
much business. By the opportunity of seeing a number of persons, he does more
wordly business that day than he could any other way. He attends church two or
three hours, and thinks he is a good Christian, without knowing what
Christianity i^. We must try to increase this practice: This is so contrary to
Jehovah's command of not thinking their own tho'ts, nor finding their own
pleasures on his day, that he is provoked to leave them to greater hardness or
wickedness.


Lucifer. This is agreeable advice; I would add this further here, viz That
after public worship, people who think they dare not allow themselves in vice,
should be induced to visit friends and neighbors, be cheerful and talk upon
common affairs. This will wonderfully help to banish from the mind any truths
that might have some entrance in the time of hearing. It will also prevent
their looking into the b^ble, or other books, or attending to any private
exercise of worship, that God requires upon the sabbath. Many will make these
visits without scruple of conference, who would be afraid and ashamed to go in
to profane company.


Beelzebub. I have heard your proposals with great satisfaction; but still
something remains. In the very time of hearing, when the word is preached and
inculcated by our enemies, then is the great danger. Mankind have ears to hear,
and they are rational creatures; there are such awakening and affecting truths
delivered: Truths that in such an awful and interesting manner concern them,
that it seems almost impossible that rational creatures should be careless, and
not attend, and be affected; we cannon ourselves but wonder that they are not.
Let us therefore, by all means in the very time of hearing, use all our art,
and throw into their minds, without ceasing, all sorts of evil thoughts, most
suited to their corrupt nature. If we can shield and secure the conscience in
the time of hearing, we shall not have much reason to fear.


Dagon. I can engage for some. The sermon shall not proceed five minutes,
before they shall begin to nod, or lay down their heads and sleep secure; and
it shall then be the same to them, whether the truth's delivered be awakening
or not.


Apollion. And let it be thought an affront, or at least an unmannerly or
impertinent thing, for any to jog or wake a neighbor in this case. Many are
more afraid of offending by awakening others, than of letting them come to hell
by sleeping.


Nisroch. I can engage for numbers. If they sleep not, they shall think as
little what the preacher says as if they did. Some shall be fully engaged in
viewing the dress and habits of others: New clothes, and new fashions will
employ their thoughts; others shall think of themselves and their own dress and
finery, and how others view and admire them; others shall be diverted by a
roving eye and mind, attending to every thing to be seen and heard, except what
the preacher says.


Baal. I can engage for some, who having hearts and eyes of adulters, shall
view the objects of their lusts, and have no remorse at letting their hearts
run freely upon their sin even in the house of God.


Mammon. I can do much with some others, by suggesting worldly covetous
thoughts, so that their hearts shall be far enough from the place they are in,
or any thing that the preacher says.


Beelzebub. How few will be left to serve Jehovah! Rejoice ye princes of hell.
How disappointed shall Messiah be I He and his ministers may go on to complain
that they labor in vain, and spend their strength for naught; while we labor
with abundant success, we reap a plentiful harvest, souls flock to hell in
multitudes: Jehovah's hateful name, his laws, his day, and institutions are and
shall be slighted, profaned and trampled upon. -- Ye noble powers of hell, is
not our consultation now ended? Let us set out our several ways; walk up and
down in the earth, and exert ourselves to the utmost.


Damned Souls. What fools were we! And what fools are others now on earth! to
give way to the suggestions of devils, and the lusts of our hearts; especially
when we knew better, and were often warned, and had conscience to check us!


Beelzebub. Fools ye were, and we cannot but wonder at your folly and madness,
when ye had heaven in view, reason and conscience to assist you, many
invitations and motives to influence. We cannot but wonder at the folly of
mankind: But since there are such fools, by whom we can dishonor God, we
rejoice, and will use their folly and wickedness to destroy themselves and
dishonor Messiah.


Damned Souls. Oh! what multitudes of souls will now come to hell to increase
our torment. Our partners in sin, whom we lately left, will soon be here to add
^o our misery. Oh, cursed cruel devils thus to ruin and torment us. Oh, how do
we wish we could escape hence, if it was but one hour to give notice, to
sinners on earth, of the many devices of devils, that the poor souls might not
come to this place of torment.


Apollion. Hah, but you are confined safe enough: We have you here, and her^ we
will torment you for ever. Not one of you shall depart a moment, to give the
least whisper in the ears of any mortal on earth -- When your companions come
hither they shall know and feel what you now do.


Just at this moment my vision vanished; my trance ceased; I returned to
myself, and found all had been but a vision. Yet sure I was it was a real
vision, and the views I had were real truths.

And now th^^ vision I publish, hoping it may be a warning and do some good. I
know the devils will spite me for it: Because I have given notice and warning
to poor sinners: have let them see their danger, what snares are laid for them,
and in what ways they are like to go to hell. Devil's will hate me for
discovering their designs and and plots; but I fear them not, while I trust in
God. They cannot go beyond their chain: And, oh, that poor sinners on earth
would shun the Devil's snares, and trust in God! they would surely find his
help and assistance. If they would resist the Devil, he would be made to fly
from them. Jesus Christ is stronger than Satan, and they that trust in him
shall overcome the evil one.

If I should hereafter be favored with any such like vision or discovery of
any other of the Devil's designs, I might probably think it my duty to acquaint
the world with it; especially if I find mankind make a good use of what is here
offered.

FINIS.

