THE GREAT SALVATION; AND THE Danger of Neglecting it.

A SERMON ON HEBREWS ii. 3.

By THOMAS WALSH.

WILMINGTON,

THE GREAT SALVATION, and c.
How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation? Heb. ii. 3.
THE LORD GOD has no Pleasure in the Death of a Sinner: For as he is loving t^
every Man, he would have all Men to come to the Knowledge of the Truth and be
saved. Go^ so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that all who
believe in Him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life. Therefore, as the
Apostle observes in the Context, w^ ought to give the more earnest Heed to the
Thing which we have heard, lest at any Time we should le^ them slip; for if the
Word spoken by Angels wa^ steadfast, and every Transgression and Disobedienc^
received a just Recompense of Reward; How sha^ we escape if we neglect so great
Salvation? Which at the first began to be preached by the Lord, an^ was
confirmed to us by them that heard him -- Thus the inspired Writer shows and
inforces, the ^xcellency and Preciousness of the Redemption which is in and
through our LORD JESUS CHRIST, ^ho of GOD is made unto us Wisdom, and
Righ^ousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption. from the Words of the Text I
shall Consider, I. That the Gospel Salvation is great. II. That the Neglecters
of this Salvation shall be ^rely punished. III. I shall make some Application.


I am to show that the Gospel Salvation is great.

And this will appear if we consider these Particulars.

1. Compare it with all other Deliverances that ever were wrought even by GOD
himself. 2. The Author of it. 3. The Means used to accomplish it. 4. The
Salvation itself, or the Benefits that accrue to us through JESUS CHRIST.
1. When GOD saved Noah in the Ark, it was ^onderful; but this Salvation is
much inferior (...) the Deliverance of our Souls from the Deluge of GOD's
Wrath, which we obtain by the Gospel. ^he Preservation of Lot from being
consumed (...) Sodom was miraculous; yet the Gospel's saving ^om the Veng^ance
of Eternal Fire is greater -- We may Instance in Daniel, and the three Children
in the fiery Furnace: Yet still all is not to ^e compared with the Deliverance
accomplished by ^SUS CHRIST, for those that receive Him; for ^e saves them from
the roaring Lion, and the fiery Furnace, the Smoke of which ascends up for
ever and ever.

2. The Author of this Salvation is described Isa. ix. 6. Even the mighty GOD,
the Father of Eternity, the Prince of Peace. It was not a Man, or an Angel; but
GOD manifest in the Flesh; yea, that GOD who is over all; of whom all Things
were made, and by whom all Things consist. GOD looked to see if there was any
to help, and there was not one that could recover Man from his Apostasy. He
must save Man Himself, or Man must perish for ever.

3. As to the Means which GOD used to accomplish Man's Salvation; He was made
in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, Romans viii. 3. That is, He took our human
Nature upon Him, with all its Miseries and Infirmities, Sin only excepted. This
appeared from His being a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief. And He not
only took on Him ou^ Nature, and suffered much Affliction and Temptation, for
near thirty-four Years; but He also laid down his Life for our Ransom. Without
shedding of Blood, there was no Remission; and, only the precious Blood of this
immaculate Lamb, could have put away Sin: and because of its inestimable Worth
it is called The Blood of GOD, Acts xx. 28.

4. The Salvation itself, or the Benefits that accrue unto those who are real
Christians, I shall consider these chiefly; for this indeed is the very Thing
intended by the Apostle. And

1. Through CHRIST we are saved from the Guilt of all our Sins. For there is no
Condemnation to them that are in CHRIST JESUS, Romans viii. 1. All that believe
in Him are justified from all Things. Acts xiii. 39. By being saved from the
Guilt of Sin, (...) mean, that free Redemption which the Sinner has ^n the
Blood of CHRIST, in the Moment he lays hold on the Promise by Faith. The Words
of St. Peter confirm this: To Him (i. e. to CHRIST) bear ^ll the Prophets
Witness, that whosoever believes ^n Him, should receive Forgiveness of Sins,
Acts x. ^3. This is the Gift of GOD. By Grace our Sins ^re forgiven; for by
Grace we are saved through ^aith, and tha^ ^ot of ourselves, it is the Gift of
GOD: not of Works, lest any Man should boast, Ephesians. ii. 9. CHRIST is the sole
Cause of our Justi^^cation. What He did, and suffered, and ever ^leads as our
High Priest, is the meritorious Cause ^f our Aceptance with God; and Faith is
the ^nly Condition on which we receive this Atone^ent, or, the Instrument by
which we apprehend ^^e Love and Righteousness of GOD, in CHRIST JESUS.

2. Through CHRIST, Believers are saved from ^^e Power of Sin. This is
copiously set forth by ^t. Paul, in the sixth Chapter to the Romans. Thus ^^ith
the Apostle, at the sixth Verse; Knowing ^^is, that our Old Man is crucified
with Him, that ^^e Body of Sin might be destroyed, that henceforth ^e should
not serve Sin. And again, at the 14th Verse, Sin shall not have Dominion over
you, for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. Even under that Grace that
brings Salvation and that leads you to renounce all Ungodliness, and
Worldly Desires. The Son has made you free. He has made you victorious over
Sin. You trample it under your Feet. You are crucified with CHRIST. Sin is
conquered, and Grace reigns through Righteousness. Those that receive Remission
of Sins, in the same Moment they rceive Power to forsake all outward Sin, and
to keep down inward Sin. The Law of the Spirit of Life, which is through CHRIST
JESUS, has made them free from the Law of Sin and Death.

3. Believers are saved through CHRIST from the Contagion of Sin; for He
destroys all the ^rks of the Devil. He brings in everlasting Righteousness.
He fully saves His People from their Sins. He heals all their Diseases, and
cleanses them from all Unrighteousness. This is largely promised and explained
in the thirty-sixth Chapter of Ezekiel, from the twenty-fifth to the
twenty-ninth Verse. GOD promises,

1. That He would cleanse them from all their Filthiness and Idols. 2. Give
them a new Heart and a right Spirit. 3. Give them His Spirit. 4. Cause them to
walk in His Statutes, to keep His Judgments, and to do them. 5. That they
should be saved from all their Uncleanness. This is the Rest that remains for
the People of GOD: for ageeable to these Words of the Prophet, are the Words of
the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. Col. 1. Tit. 2. All compared and joined together,
abundantly prove, That GOD's People who exercise themselves unto Godliness, are
not only a chosen Generation, and a Royal Priesthood; but also, an holy Nation,
a Peculiar People, who are called out of Darkness into mavelous Light, that
they may show forth the Virtues of CHRIST JESUS. Thus they are Partakers of a
divine Nature. The great and precious Promises are fulfilled in them.

4. They that are delivered from the Body of Sin and Death, are saved likewise
from Fear, from all Fear ^^at has Torment, 1 John iv. 18 1. From the Fear of
Man. 2. From the Fear of Death; for now ^hey can triumph, and say, O Death,
where is thy Sting! the Sting of Death is Sin; but their Sins ^re forgiven;
therefore the Fear of Death terrifies them no more. 3. From the Fear of Hell or
the Wrath of GOD. It is turned away, Isa. xii. 1.

5. Believers are saved from the Power of the Grave. This Corruption shall put
on Incorrup^ion, and this Mortal shall put on Immortality. The Bodies of the
Saints shall be fashioned like to the glorious Body of CHRIST, Phil. iii. 18.
Thus, O Grave, He will be thy Destruction.

6. The Saints are saved from Hell, and all Mi^ery. All Tears are wiped away
from their Eyes, Rev. vii. 17. They shall have Fullness of Joy, an^ Pleasures
for ever more. They are saved from Si^ and Hell, and Misery, into Happiness and
Glor^

II. I come in the second Place to show, the the Neglecters of this Salvation,
shall be sore^ punished; for as the Apostle says, If the Wor^ spoken by
Angels, on Mount Sinai, at the Promu^gation of the Law, was steadfast, and every
Tran^gression, and Disobedience, received a Just Recompense of Reward, How
shall we escape if w^neglect so great Salvation! That is, if we through
Carelessness or Stubbornness, neglect to make ou^ Calling and Election sure. If
we trample under Foot the Son of GOD, His Love in dying for us and esteem His
precious Blood (with which H^ seals His Covenant) an unholy, or common Thing.
The greater the Salvation is, the more grievous will the Damnation of those be
who neglect it. Nothing can possibly provoke the LORD GOD more, than that Men
should slight Hi^ Mercy, which He has so stupendously and wonderfully
manifested in CHRIST His Son. The Son must also be angry, that after all He has
done for His Vineyard, Men should make light of Hi^ Love, which He has showed
in dying for them. Bu^ to explain this Point more particularly. It is neceflary
to show, That impenitent Sinners of every kind, do not, and cannot escape the
Vengeance o^ GOD. And

1. Those that never seriously consider their lat^r End; that never cry for
Mercy, or Forgive^ess; those that despise the Grace of CHRIST, and have no
Relish for spiritual Things, have that which condemns them (...) their own
Breasts, even ^^at Monitor Conscience, which GOD has placed in ^he Soul, to
bear Witness against their ungodly ^eeds. Their own Hearts condemn them whether
^hey will or no. GOD shines often into their ^ouls, and shows them the Error of
their Ways, and the iminent Danger they are in. -- Therefore ^hey are like the
troubled Sea, whose Waters cast ^p Mire and Dirt. There is no Peace, says my
GOD, to the Wicked, Isa. lvii. 20, 21. The Wrath of GOD abides on them; they
are misera^le. They have no solid Joy, no permanent Plea^ure; for GOD has kept
Happiness in Himself, and He is resolved it never shall be given to the
Dis^bedient. All the Happiness of the Wicked is ^^ke the Morning Cloud, and
early Dew; there is a Curse on them, and on whatsoever they do. So that even in
this Life, God punishes those that a^use His Mercy.

And though the Ungodly may seem to be ^asy, and joyful, we know it is not so.
While ^here is Hardness of Heart, and Ignorance ^f CHRIST, the Soul must be
miserable; for ^s the Righteous have two Heavens, viz. A Heaven ^f Grace here,
and Heaven of Glory in the World to come; even so the Neglecters of the great
^alvation are in a Sense damned while they live; the Pangs of Hell get hold on
them; the Worm that dies not, is gnawing them; the Dogs of Hell are often let
loose on them; especially when they come to die; then they are confounded; all
their miserable Comforters forsake them: Die they must. O what breaking of
Bones is this? This is unto them the Beginning of that ^orrow that shall never
end. If they look back, they see nothing but Sin and Shame in all their Life:
if forward, Hell and Wrath are before them. If they look up, they must see an
angry GOD; and if down, an open Gulf! Undoubtedly, the Devil, and his Angels
are ready to seize on the Soul immediately. The Sinner is hedged in on every
Side.

2. But suppossing those that neglect the great Salvation could escape here,
they cannot escape in the World to come; for all their Works shall be brought
unto Judgment: They shall not go unpunished: ^o; strong is the Lord, who
Judges them; and He is righteous and terrible too. When the Day of His Wrath
is come, the Neglecters of the great ^alvation shall not be able to sit in
Judgment, nor and in the Congregation of the Righteous: The ^ooks shall be
opened; even their Consciences, to ^ar Witness against them. And another Book
^all be opened, that is, the Book of Remem^ance, where all their omissions, and
Commis^ns, and all their Vilenesses are registered. -- And ^en, Where shall the
Wicked and Ungodly ap^ar! This is the Day of Vengeance of our GOD, when His Son
shall be exalted on the holy Hill ^f Sion, to make His Enemies His Footstool.
Now he Wicked will call upon the Rocks, and the Mountains to fall upon them and
cover them from the Face of Almighty GOD! And in one Sense, they shall get the
Thing that they desire: for the Rocks will fall upon ^m to grind them to
Powder. Then shall they be bound in Bundles to burn them up, Matt. xiii. 30.

Again, The Vengeance of GOD will still pursue them; they shall be cast into
the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death, Rev.
xxi. 8. Where the Smoke of their Torments, ascend up for ever, and ever! Now
the Wicked are in their own Place: and because they would not have the Fear of
the LORD; they would not have CHRIST to reign^ over them; they rejected His
Counsel, and would none of His Reproof; therefore He laughs at their Calamity,
and mocks when their Fear comes. All the Curses of GOD; all the Threatmings in
the Bible, are now inflicted on them The Vials of GOD's Wrath are poured down
upon them. Here are Weeping and Lamentation an^ Woe. Thus they that neglect the
great Salvation shall go into everlasting Fire, and have their Portion with the
Devil and his Angels, where their Wor^ shall not die neither shall their fire
be quenche^ You see clearly the Wicked cannot Escape neith^ in the Day of
Judgment, or in Eternity. But GO^ will thus avenge himself on his Adversaries.

III. I come in the last Place to apply the preceding Considerations. And

1. You may observe how transcendent the Deliver^ance accomplished by CHRIST
is; how far superio^ to all those wonderful Works and Deliverances which GOD
wrought in old Times. We are now saved; saved in the Ark of the Covenant, eve^
CHRIST. He is our hiding Place and our Rock Isa. xxxii. 2. We are saved from a
Deluge of Wrat and Misery, much worse than that which destroye^ the old World;
but more of this hereafter.

2. Do you not discern two remarkable particula^ couched under the Second Head?
I mean concerning the Author of this Salvation. 1. Ho^heinous must Sin be in
the Sight of GOD! ^ would not let it go unpunished, though the Punis^ment fell
upon His well beloved Son! O, what complicated crime was that of Adam? And h^
great Evils are all our Sins, seeing no less a Pers^ than the Mighty GOD could
atone for them. Consider this, ye that talk of little Sins: See what cost to
redeem the fallen Race; and let a holy ^ dignation rise in your breast against
your Si^ Slay them, hate them, cast them all away ^ ever.

3. How infinite, how inconceivable was (...) Love of GOD toward Sinners, that
He sho^ give us His only begotten Son to redeem us fr^ Sin and Death, John iii.
16. LORD, What ^an that Thou should so regard him! O ^nners, see the love of
CHRIST to your poor Souls! ^hen no other Ransom could purchase, He gives
himself for us. He dies, the Just for the Unjust, ^bring us to GOD! See how He
bears our Sins His own Body on the Tree. Behold the Man! ^e Man of Sorrows, and
acquainted with Grief! as there ever Love or Sorrow like unto Thine, JESUS! O
Beloved, does not the Love of ^RIST constrain you to love Him! Can you any ^ger
neglect the great Salvation! Why will ye ^? O, why will ye persist in Sin? The
LORD Life has shed His precious Blood to save you! ^me, draw near unto Him: fly
to the Arms of ^s Love: hide you in his open Wounds. Do not ^y more think light
of His dying Love. Let it ^lt down your Subborness. O GOD give us ^ight of our
Sins, that we may abhor ourselves, ^d show unto us of the Things of JESUS! Now
^n away Thy wrath from us, and fill our Souls ^h Joy and Peace in believing.

4. I beseech you to consider with great Seri^ness, the great, the glorious
Salvation which is ^ered unto us by the Gospel. O, pray come, ^atever else you
neglect, do not neglect this! It ^uch to be desired! it is precious and lovely;
^ields us all good Things. To be saved from Guilt, and Power, and In-being of
Sin; from Fear of Death and Hell, and Wrath; in short, ^m all Misery: and
moreover, to be made Par takers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light: to
come to GOD's eternal Joy! O what a Salvation is this! My Brethren, seek it
while it may be found. Never rest, till your Souls are released from the
Bondage of Corruption, and brought into the Liberty of the Sons of GOD. Now is
the Time that the Grace of GOD must appear to you, to save you from all Sin?
The Blood and Righteousness of CHRIST must be applied, and brought into your
Souls. We must now know CHRIST for ourselves. Except He wash us, we have no
Part with Him. Wash us, O LORD, and make us clean! O deliver us from the Body
of this Death! Pray and cry, till you know that GOD is your Salvation. Cry for
the Spirit of Adoption, to purify your Hearts. Believe for the Remission of
your Sins. Do not deceive your own Souls. If CHRIST does not dwell in your
Hearts by Faith; if He does not shed abroad His Love there, your Faith, your
Religion is vain. If ever you enter into Glory, you must be justified, in the
Name of the LORD JESUS, and sanctified, by the Spirit of our God. All the Body
of Sin must be destroyed. That is, all old Thing must be done away, 2 Cor. v.
17. And this must be done here, even in the present World. For there is no
Work, nor Device, nor Wisdom, nor Knowledge in the Grave, whither we go.

5. Remember how it shall happen to all those that forget GOD. Those who are
disobedient, and despise the Riches of GOD's Grace They shall be punished both
in Time, and in Eternity. GOD has cursed them, and they cannot be blessed. They
shall have a trembling Heart, and failing of Eyes; neither shall they find Rest
for Body or Soul. My dear Friends, let me freely speak unto you; and do not
count me your Enemy for telling you the Truth. Have you not neglected this
Salvation? Have you not made light of the Message GOD has sent! He has warned
you to flee from the Wrath to come; but alas, you are many of you yet in your
Sins. O make no more lame Excuses. Let not your Farms, your Merchandise, or any
of the Cares of this Life, take up your Hearts, and all your Time. Count all
but Dross and Dung, in Comparison of the Saving Knowledge of CHRIST JESUS our
Lord. O kiss the Son, lest He be angry with you, and swear in His Wrath, you
shall never taste^ of His Supper!

Now pluck out the right Eye. Cut off the right Hand. Lay aside every Weight;
And whatever Sin does most easily beset you. Except you are thus minded; unless
you put this in Execution, You cannot escape the Damnation of Hell. GOD will
bring you to Judgment, O you stout-hearted stiff-necked Sinners! Ye Enemies of
GOD; ye Heirs of Woe; ye murderers of your own Souls. Repent, repent. Turn to
GOD while Mercy's Doo^ is open, before you are consigned over to the
Tormentors. -- You know you are not happy now No; How should you, while you
neglect the great Salvation? And the Misery you now feel in you Body and Mind,
is only the Beginning of Sorrows. Justice is punishing you. The Arm of the Lord
is lifted up to cut you down. You have cumbered the Ground, GOD knows, too long.

O GOD, in the Midst of Wrath, remember Mercy. Spare us good LORD, till we
recover our spiritual Health; till our Souls are washed in the Blood of the
Lamb. -- Do not say, "We cannot bear this Man; we hate him; he never prophesies
Good concerning us." I can prophesy no better concerning you, while you are
living in Rebellion against GOD. I dare not speak smooth Things to you. No; I
ask you, How can you stand before the righteous Judge? If He was now to require
your Soul of you, How could you answer before Him, for having neglected the
great Salvation? Would your vain and worldly Excuses satisfy Him? I warn you
this Day, to cast away your Transgressions. I call Heaven and Earth to witness
against you, that if you do not; these Words which you here this Day, will
increase your Damnation to all Eternity; and how then shall we dwell with
everlasting Burnings? O that my Head were Waters, and mine Eyes Fountains of
Tears, that I might weep over your dying Souls! O that I could persuade you to
be recon^iled to God!

And now lest any should utterly despair, let me tell you GOD is willing to
forgive you all. After all you Have done, He will take you into his favor.
Here is a great Salvation for great Sinners. Come, though your Sins be as
Scarlet, They can be made as white as Snow, in the Blood of CHRIST. Be
encouraged. Draw near and hear, and your Soul shall live. JESUS the Sinner's
Friend is ready to receive you. He came to save such poor, vile, helpless
Sinners as we are. Methinks your Hearts begin to relent. You seem desirous to
see JESUS. LORD carry on the Work Thou have begun.

Yet, says the LORD, I am willing to have Mercy upon you, to forgive all your
Sins, to heal all your Diseases. My Heart is filled with Mercy toward you. I
love you still; and I rejoice to bless you, and make you happy. And to convince
you of my great Love for your Souls, I gave my only begotten Son to die for
you. I have also sent you my Spirit, and Messengers to woo you, and beseech you
to be reconciled to Me. And O Sinners, will ye now hearken unto Me? Will ye b^
wise, and accept this Mercy? Will you be forgiven, and that freely? Are you
satisfied to cast away your Transgressions? and be made the Sons and Daughters
of the LORD Almighty? Can you hold out any more? Does not your Misery move you
(...) Does not my Love constrain you? O let something prevail! I am not willing
that any of you should perish. I swear unto you, I have no Pleasure i^ your
Death. O believe this, and now receive my Son. I give Him to you freely. Take
Him an^ use Him as you stand in Need of Him. Le^ Him be for Light, and for
Comfort, for Righteousness, and for Strength unto you. And moreover, I will
give you My Holy Spirit, to guide you and assist you; and still more, after I
have prepared you for Glory, I will give you a Crown and a Kingdom. You shall
sit at My Table and dwell in my House, and have the Privileges of Sons. Your
Sins shall not be mentioned to you. I will love you as though you had never
offended Me.

Now I say, O Sinner, If thou did here the LORD speak thus unto thee, sure
thou wouldes^ leave thy Sins, and accept of Mercy. Why the^ these are in
Effect, the very Words of GOD* He reasons with you, after this Manner. We^^ may
you and I make answer and say, it is true LORD I am a vile, weak Sinner. I
condemn myself* (...) abhor myself as in Dust and Ashes. And O my GOD, I admire
and embrace thy Mercy: I fly to Thee for Succor, and Salvation! I am destitute
of all Good. O be it unto me according to thy Word! Receive me graciously, and
love m^ freely. Sanctify me wholly, and save me eternally. Is this the Language
of thine Heart, O thou afflicted, and tossed with Tempest and no^ comforted? Be
of good Courage then; thou ar^ not far from the Kingdom of GOD. The Time o^
your Redemption is at hand. Come LORD JESUS* come quickly.

To conclude. I beseech you never to rest till your Hearts are thus broken;
till you are deeply sensible of your lost Estate, and fly to Him for Mercy. And
ye that know what is in your Heart, Cry, yea, cry mightily unto the LORD till
he gives you rest for your Soul. -- Again, you that are justified freely, through
the Redemption that is in JESUS CHRIST, see that ye walk as becomes the
Gospel. Be ye Followers of GOD as dear Children; and walk in Love, even the
Love of GOD and Man. Abound in every Good Word and Work. -- Your Prayers, and
Tears, and Hearing and Communicating, will not indeed merit heaven. JESUS CHRIT
has done this.

Yet you are called upon to walk in these Ordinances of GOD blameless. You are
created ^n CHRIST JESUS unto Good Works, in which God has appointed you should
walk. Do not therefore imagine that I have been making void the Law through Faith;
GOD forbid, for I know the Law is Holy, and the Commandment Holy, and Just and
Good: that is, if a Man use it lawfully; for the End that GOD gave it; namely
to be a Schoolmaster to bring us to CHRIST; and, after we are justified, to be
a Rule of Life unto us. Let us thus love the Law of the LORD, and keep the
Covenant of our GOD, that we may prove what is that Good, and acceptable and
perfect Will of GOD! To whom be the Glory, Kingdom and Dominion, through our
LORD JESUS CHRIST, World without End. Amen.


