CALM and RESPECTFUL THOUGHTS on the NEGATIVE of the CROWN on a SPEAKER chosen
and presented by the REPRESENTATIVES of the PEOPLE: Occasioned by some
PUBLICATIONS in the GEORGIA GAZETTE, of May and June 1772, wherein the late
ASSEMBLY of that PROVINCE is charged with encroaching on the RIGHTS of the
CROWN.
BY A FREEMAN. Pro Rege and Patria semper. Buckingham's Epitaph.
IT is a remark of a very considerable writer of our own, " that it cannot be
improper to canvass any constitutional question when decency is observed and
nothing advanced but on the credit of the best authorities, because in a
British country every man ought to be acquainted with the laws by which his
liberty and property are insured." Under the shelter of this observation some
remarks have been ventured abroad, which I humbly apprehend have been rather
condemned with severity, and replied to with personal reflections, than
canvassed or answered with calmness or strength of argument. As the sub^^^^
(...) ^ever has been ^^^^dly dropped by one of the (...) ^ould not now take pen
in hand could the other (...) ^een satisfied to enjoy his victory, without
continuing to load the late Assembly with reflections, which I will not say are
designed, but appear to have a tendency to set this province in the worst light
at home, and to render the late Representatives as odious as possible in this
province. My design is to take off the odium which is cast upon this province
as though it meant to invade the Prerogative of the Crown. If the late
Representatives have acted contrary to the sense of their Constituents they
will doubtless be marked for it at a next election; if the majority of
inhabitants should think the Crown has not a right of rejection, let their
arguments be first considered before they are accused of a design of
encroaching on the Prerogative.

I will own my obligations; the most li^^^ I received in this controversy has
been from that very writer, and, upon the most mature consideration, I must own
the right he contends for appears to me more problematical than ever. I will
however still leave this right as I found it (I always wished it should remain
unagitated) undetermined and undecided; but I hope I am not too sanguine to
flatter myself that those that read what may make against it will be convinced
they that hold the negative may still be honest men, and good and loyal
subjects, whether in a private character, or as the Representatives of a free
and loyal people. I design to mention some arguments which persuade me this
negative is not clearly established, and I shall take so much notice of the
arguments brought in support of it to examine whether they really prove what is
intended.

It may not be improper first to lay down a few general principles which are
universally allowed. It is agreed on all sides that the existence of a House of
Commons is now as necessary and essential to our Constitution as the existence
of a King and House of Lords. It is agreed that the Commons being the
Representatives of the people the people ought to choose them, the King and
Lords must not interfere in the choice, and any one duly chosen, and not by law
incapacitated, the election ca^^^^ be set aside. It is ^^^eed that the Crown
must call the House, issue (...) ^ction, and may adjourn, prorogue, or dissolve
the (...), but to reign without Parliament is contrary to the Constitution; to
dissolve wantonly, and without cause, is not against the Constitution, but it
seems an improper use of a very legal power. The design of a House of Commons
is to be a check on the Prerogative, and to watch over the rights of the
people. Prerogative is placed in the Crown that the people may not encroach on
the rights of the Crown. By the wisdom of the Constitution every branch of the
Legislature forms a mutual check upon the other, the people are a check upon
the Nobility, and the Nobility upon the people, while the King is a check upon
both, and his executive power is again checked and kept within due bounds by
the two Houses, through the privilege they have of enquiring into, impeaching,
and punishing the conduct of the King's evil Counselors. The House of Commons
is to consult for the good of the nation, and all moneys given to the King are
given only by the Commons; whatever is necessary for this purpose is their
undeniable privilege, for, unless they may freely consult, and do that for
which they are called together and constituted a House, the very purposes of
their meeting must be defeated. I suppose therefore it will not be denied, as
the Crown calls the Commons together for national purposes, the Commons so met
must have a right or privilege to every thing that appears necessary to answer
the purposes for which they are called and met together. This I take the true
idea of the privileges of the House, and as the House cannot subsist nor act
properly without them, to deny or curtail these privileges is attempting the
abolition of the House itself, and of course destroying the Constitution. The
fairest way therefore to judge of any claim of either branch of the Legislature
is to consider the effect it may have on the other branches, and whatever
clasheth with any known right or privilege of either King or any of the two
Houses cannot be constitutional, whatever would prevent the Crown in the
execution of those laws made by the Legislative cannot be supported, and if the
Crown has any power that may restrain freedom of debate, or abridge the liberty
of giving and granting in the House of Commons, or impede them in business,
otherwise than by adjournment, prorogation, or dissolution, I cannot see how
the House may be conceived free and independent in their deliberations.

I believe few men will deny any of these principles; let them be kept in
constant view when we enquire into the question whether the Crown has a right
to reject a Speaker duly chosen and presented for approbation.

The House of Commons must have a Speaker. All Assemblies met for consultation
have found it necessary to place one over themselves to keep up order and
regulate their debates; if 500 men were all to speak at once, and none have
authority to call them to order, the voice of wisdom must be lost in noise, and
prudent counsel swallowed up in confusion. Formerly both Houses are said to
have had but one Speaker between them, but as both Houses became more distinct,
and the Commons more important, they of course had a Speaker of their own, who
is so necessary that ordinarily they do no business without him.

This Speaker they must either choose themselves, or he must be placed over them
by the Crown. "The Speaker of the House of Lords is the Lord Chancellor or
Keeper of the Great Seal, or any other APPOINTED BY THE KING's COMMISSION; and
if none be so appointed, the House of Lords (it is said) may elect;"
Blackstone, vol. 1. p. 181. The Speaker of the House of Commons is chosen by
the House, but must be approved of by the King, ibid. "It is true the Commons
are to choose their Speaker," Coke. How far the King's approbation is necessary
is the question in dispute, but all agree that the Commons must choose their
Speaker, and it seems the choice is of more importance than presentation or
approbation, because without choice there can be no such thing as either.

The Speaker chosen ought to be a person properly qualified. If every Member of
Parliament ought to be independent and uninfluenced by any views of honor or
interest but the public good, the Speaker ought to be so much more. He ought
to be equally well acquainted with the privileges of the House and the rights
of Prerogative, and of sufficient fortitude to act consistent with both on
every occasion, neither courting popularity by disputing the just rights of the
Crown, nor have an eye to gain or promotion by betraying any right of the
subject. The election of any Member to be Speaker is a solemn declaration of
the House that they judge him the man best qualified for that business. I
believe it seldom, if ever, happened, that a Member was chosen Speaker the
first time of his serving as a Member. A person is usually pitched upon who,
from long experience, is well acquainted with the privileges and proceedings of
the House, and of whose abilities also the House have had long and sufficient
experience. The Speaker has been called a servant of the House, and as the King
has an undoubted right to choose, and must be the best judge of his own
servants, so the Commons are best acquainted with the character of every Member
of their House, and thereby best able to judge who is the fittest for any
particular business that may be assigned.

The Speaker sits in the House, not in the name or as a Commissioner of the
King, but (though his seat is a little raised) as a Member upon a par with the
rest, chosen and appointed by themselves; not to do any business for the King,
but their business, to be their mouth, regulate their debates, and execute
their orders; neither is he to have " eyes to see, or ears to hear, but as
directed by the House."

It is not denied by any that the Commons must choose, nor that their choice
ought to be free, and it has been allowed that they are not obliged to choose a
person nominated or recommended by the Crown, supposing the Crown should think
proper to recommend or make such a nomination, but as it has always been
customary to present the Speaker so chosen to the King for approbation, it is
hence concluded that the King may set aside the choice of his Commons, and
reject a Speaker so presented. If the want of such a right of rejection had any
apparent tendency to render some other absolute rights of the King more
precarious, or to endanger his Crown or the Constitution, the King ought
undoubtedly to have it, for he ought to have his right, and every thing that
may legally secure it; if the exercise of that right, though not necessary to
the King, might add to his greater dignity, and in no case whatever bring any
danger to the subject, I would in mere decency make a compliment of it to the
King; but if it should appear that the claim and exercise of that right had
even a distant tendency to hurt the subject, and wound the Constitution, I
would then wish that the King had and insisted to have all the just rights of
his Royal Prerogative, and no more.

That I may treat the question in the most inoffensive manner, I declare that I
mean not to write against the right claimed by the Crown; I only propose some
doubts which I shall be glad to see cleared up, and with pleasure will I join
all my fellow loyal subjects to acquiesce in any claim that may appear the
constitutional right of the Crown.

AS it is agreed on all hands the Commons must choose their Speaker, in the very
nature of things it seems implied that he whom they chose ought to be
considered as Speaker. Whom are they to choose? A Speaker. By whose authority
are they to choose him? By the King's command, and as the Representatives of the
people; if, after having thus received the King's command, and sitting as the
Representatives of the people, they have chosen a man to be Speaker, the person
so chosen is not what they chose him, it will be equally difficult to assert
what it seems just as difficult to deny, that they made a choice, or that they
had not authority to make the choice they actually have made.

It has been allowed "that the Commons may freely choose whom they please for
their Speaker, but asserted, "that the Crown, for its own preservation, has a
right to reject an improper person, ( Georgia Gazette, June 10.) By an improper
person here must be understood one whom the Commons thought proper, but who is
thought improper by the Crown. Now let any one ask himself whether he should
think he enjoyed the right of freely choosing whomsoever he pleased for his own
servant if another had the right to put a negative on the servant he had
actually chosen, under pretense of being improper for the service of him by
whom chosen, and thereby deprive him of his service at pleasure. To talk of a
free choice, which yet may be controuled and annulled by another, seems
inconsistent with the very nature of choice, and at most it can only be called
a freedom to choose upon condition that another do not invalidate the choice; if
the person chosen be equally acceptable to him that chooses and to him that must
approve, it matters very little by whom such a choice is made; but if
acceptable and necessary only to those by whom the choice was made, I cannot
see what their choice avails if it may be set aside at pleasure by another,
perhaps too it might be set aside for that very reason because the person
chosen is suspected of being more in the interest of those by whom he is chosen
than may be consistent with the designs of him by whom he is rejected.

These that choose a Speaker to do the business of the House have first been
chosen themselves to do the business of the nation; they are not met by their
own authority, nor to do their own business, nor the King's business, but the
business of the nation; they cannot debate the concerns of the nation without a
Speaker to direct and regulate their debates; but it is of infinite concern to
the nation that no man mislead, restrain, or impede their debates; a Speaker
might do all this, and were he to do it to serve the Crown, it would be in vain
to look to the Crown for relief, he would be a dead weight to them, and they
unable to help themselves; it seems therefore that the choice of a Speaker by
the Representatives should be as free and final as the choice of the people of
the Representatives who are to choose the Speaker.

The sitting of the Commons, though called by the King's writ; the privileges
of the House, though prayed for of the King; the freedom of debate; are all
matter of right, and not of favor; the very design of the House of Commons is
to prevent too extensive or an undue influence of the Crown; if any proceedings
of the House become matters of favor of the Crown, what becomes of the
intrinsic right and authority of the Commons? A Speaker was excepted against,
because, "if the King always should accept a person pitched upon by the House,
then it would be no great favor to be chosen a Speaker." Here the exception
against a Speaker was however sweetened with a reason being given; but if the
Speaker holds his place, not by the choice of the Representatives, but by the
favor of the Crown, it is then evident that the principal man in the House of
Commons holds his place under the favor and influence of that very power to
prevent whose too powerful influence, and restrain it within its proper bounds,
is, or ought to be, the principal object of the Representatives of a free
people.

The whole of the law and custom of Parliament has its original from this one
maxim, that whatever matter arises concerning either House of Parliament ought
to be examined, discussed, and adjudged, in that House to which it relates, and
not elsewhere, Blackstone Com. 1.163. In consequence of this the Commons may
judge void the elections of Members already sitting, and declare those duly
elected, who have not been returned so by the proper Officer; and it would seem
strange if they, who have a right to judge of every election in the kingdom,
should not have a right to choose their own Speaker, if they were judges who is
properly elected a Representative of the whole nation, and yet liable to have a
negative put on a choice made by themselves of their own servant. The House of
Commons have an undoubted right by their own act, and without any concurrence
or interfering of the Crown, to expel any of their Members, the Speaker not
excepted, for misbehaviour, the reason of which seems to be, as the Crown is
not supposed to interfere in elections, neither ought it in expulsions; but if
the Speaker holds his place by the King's favor and approbation, so as without
that he is not Speaker " pleno jure," it would seem strange that the Commons
should have a right to drive a man by their sole authority from a post where
they never could have placed him without the King's command and favor. To
depose a man from a post which he could not hold, nor be chosen to, but with
the King's approbation, seems to be a greater power than to choose their Officer
without, the King's approbation.

If the King has a right to reject a Speaker chosen, he must hold that right
either in virtue of some act of Parliament, or it must be a part of his Royal
Prerogative; the former was never asserted, the latter is the subject in
question.

Upon a supposition the King had a clear constitutional right to nominate, or
even impose a Speaker, as soon as the House meets, that right seems clearly
given up, by his ordering or giving the House leave to choose a Speaker
themselves. As it is said even the Lords may elect, unless the King appoints a
Speaker for them, it seems clearly to follow that the King requiring the
Commons to choose, he means that the person by them chosen shall actually be
Speaker, for they are not commanded to make choice of one or more persons of
whom the King may choose one, but simply and absolutely to choose a Speaker for
themselves. That the King does not interfere in the choice of a Prolocutor of
the Law vocation, which has been called a Parliament in miniature, I conclude,
because when Dr. Jane was preferred to Dr. Tillotson, King William did not
reject, though certainly not as agreeable to the King's principles, as that
excellent man Dr. Tillotson; and as elections are to be made, according to
Coke, sine prece, without prayer or gift, so he observes they ought also to be
made sine praecepto, without the King's command by writ or otherwise, and he
says an act for that purpose was a close and prudent salve, not only for that
sore, but for all other in like case, and is but an act declaratory of the
ancient law and custom of Parliament.

If we would argue from facts, but one instance has been produced where the
choice of the Commons was excepted against, and none whatever where the Commons
submitted to a rejection; but the case of Sir Edward Seymour will come in more
fully hereafter. It is difficult to conceive how the House may preserve freedom
in debate if they are not at liberty to choose the person by whom these debates
are to be directed. That they may choose any man whom the King shall approve is
in reality saying they may choose no man but whom the King approves, and that
would seem perfectly equivalent to they have no right to choose any man but whom
the King chooses; the King will not approve of any person but who he is morally
sure will enter into all his measures; it by any means, whether by influence,
nomination, choice, refusal of approbation of any other, the King gets a man of
such a cast in the chair of the House of Commons, the King then has so far the
direction, and a most powerful influence over the whole House. That a Speaker
may impede the business of the House in favor of arbitrary measures of the
Crown we have a striking instance in the Parliament 1673; the Commons
remonstrated against the marriage of the Duke of York with a Papist, which has
been productive of so much mischief to the nation, "To cut short these
agreeable attacks, the King resolved to prorogue the Parliament, and with that
intent came unexpectedly to the House of Peers, and sent the Usher to summon
the Commons. It happened that the Speaker and the Usher nearly met at the door
of the House, but the Speaker being within, some of the Members suddenly shut
the door and cried, To the chair, to the chair; while others cried, The black
rod is at the door. The Speaker was hurried to the chair, and the following
motions were instantly made -- The alliance with France is a grievance -- Evil
Counselors about the King are a grievance. -- There was a general cry, To the
question, to the question; but (behold now the benefit of a Speaker agreeable
to Charles II.) the Usher knocking violently at the door, THE SPEAKER LEAPT
FROM THE CHAIR, and the Parliament being prorogued gave the Duke leisure to
consummate his marriage. Rapin.
It is only in behalf of such a Speaker that it can be the Crown's interest to
contend. Such a Speaker, under pretense of calling to order, may interrupt the
freedom of debate, and stop an enquiry into any mal practice or escape; by a
sham sickness, or his absence from the House, an offender may escape; but,
supposing the Crown should reject a Speaker, on account of his being too
popular, or having too great an influence in the House, it would not only be
treating the body of Representatives as men that are not able to judge for
themselves, but it is apparent that the power of rejecting a man because he is
popular and disagreeable to the Crown is as dangerous a power in the hands of a
bad ruler as can well be imagined.

When a Speaker is presented to a King for approbation the King must either be
willing that all things should continue and proceed according to the known Laws
and Constitution of the land, or he must have contrary views; in the former
case he can hardly have any motive or cause to reject any person that is
presented, the Speaker alone can make no alteration, and if the Commons should
attempt any thing against the Crown a dissolution would legally ensue; but
should a ruler intend to make any alteration in the laws, a Speaker might be a
proper instrument in his hand for that purpose. The King it should seem can
have no reason or motive to reject any Speaker, but on a suspicion of his
having a stronger bias to the popular side than to the just Royal Prerogative;
but besides, that the King, in case of rejecting such a one, must also harbor
very hard thoughts of his Commons, it is easily seen what such a power might
lead to. Of a wise and good Prince nothing is to be apprehended, but against
wicked or weak Princes, or rather pernicious and evil Counselors, the people
can never be too much upon their guard.

It is not to be supposed, when a Speaker is presented, his character and
principles can be unknown to the King's Ministers, but supposing they were, I
cannot see how that should be any ground for rejection; if he is known to be a
fit tool the right of rejection will be immaterial, he will be sure not to be
rejected; if known to be a man zealous for the just rights and liberties of the
nation, a patriot Prince can have no thought to reject such an one; and that an
arbitrary Sovereign, who will not reject a man of a contrary stamp, should have
a right to reject the only man that is fittest to oppose him and serve the
nation, I think a very dangerous part of the Prerogative, and I am at a perfect
loss how to reconcile such a power with the spirit and design of the
Constitution of a free people.

These considerations I must own strongly influence me to doubt whether the
Crown has a constitutional right to set aside and reject a Speaker chosen by
the Representatives of the people. It is but fair, however, to hear what has
been said in support of this right, and I do not mean that the arguments in
favor of it should lose any of their force in my hands, I mean to represent
them in all their weight, and as to these arguments and my remarks valiant
quantum valere possunt, let them go as far as they may.

Two writers have appeared among us in favor of this claim of the Prerogative;
what NEUTER advanced, like his signature, is nothing neither here nor there;
but, as he talks of a contagious political delirium, I am much afraid he has
been in the neighborhood of the contagion, however I wish him well over.

I intend to consider every argument of G. B. si pergama dextra defendi
potuissent hac vice defensa fuissent. I dare say what books and arguments in
this cause are not found with him will in vain be looked for any where else in
this province.

Two passages have been quoted from Coke in support of this negative; Coke
says: " The Commons shall present their Speaker in the Upper House to the
King, who shall disable himself, and in most humble manner entreat the King to
command them to choose a more sufficient man." From this passage it is said to
appear that the new Speaker in the face of the whole House of Commons admits a
power of rejection in the Crown; but is not this rather a large conclusion from
small premises? Does not the Speaker's entreaty that the King would order a
fitter man to be chosen savor as much of compliment as any thing else? Does it
not at least look as much like compliment as like an acknowledgment of the
right of rejection? However, if this proves any such right, the argument I
conceive must stand thus: The Speaker is to disable himself, ( i. e. plead his
inability) and entreat the King to command the Commons to choose a fitter man;
therefore (because he pleads his inability, and wishes a fitter man may be
chosen) the Crown has a clear right to put a negative on any man the Commons
shall choose as their Speaker. I despair to convince that man of any thing,
except what he himself pleases, who can be convinced by such an argument. Coke
also says: " It is true the Commons are to choose, but seeing that after their
choice the King may refuse him, for avoiding of expense and time, and
contestation, the use is, (as in the conge d' eslier of a Bishop) that the King
does name a discreet and learned man, whom the Commons elect, but without their
election no Speaker can be appointed for them." The only expression in this
passage that may be construed in support of this claim is, that the King may
refuse. It has been observed that all this may mean no more than that the King
may do it though he has no constitutional right so to do; and to this it has
been answered, that Coke declares what he writes is grounded upon the authority
and reason of books, rolls of Parliament, and judicial records, and that to
make any objection against it is to make objections not against Coke, but
(forsooth) against the Constitution itself; but as no book, authority, reason,
parliamentary roll, or judicial record, has been produced older than this
passage, I apprehend all this, notwithstanding what Coke says with regard to
the King's may may be bare narrative still, and no legal declaration of what
the King may legally do; and I am the more inclined to doubt this matter,
because I find Coke does not always speak like a Legislator, or one that
declares the law; in this case, e. g. he says every Member of the House being
a Counselor, he should have three properties of the elephant -- that he has no
gall -- that he is inflexible and cannot bow -- and that he is of ripe and most
perfect memory. Now this seems a very good simile, but that any law declares a
Member of Parliament should be like an elephant I still doubt, though I think
all that write and act in public ought to be without gall, and all Legislators
inflexibly right. I don't know when Coke wrote, but should any writer now
assert, while the Parliament sits, the King has as much authority in the choice
of their Speaker as in the election of a Bishop by conge d' eslier, he would
hardly be in any danger of receiving the thanks of the House; but perhaps these
things may better suit the meridian of Georgia, and, great as the authority is,
I presume it is no treason to say that the Constitution is now better
understood than even a Coke explained it in the days of the Stuarts; and yet
after all he expressly says, though he seems to begin rather abruptly: True it
is the Commons must choose their own Speaker, and he cannot be appointed for
them. All that was thought law in the days of Coke has not been thought so
since. Sir Edward Coke, the great oracle of the English law, had not only
concurred witn all other Lawyers in favor of this Prerogative of dispensing
power, but seems even to believe it so inherent to the Crown that an act of
Parliament itself could not abolish it, because from the law of nature the King
has a right to the service of all his subjects. Hume's Hist. of England, vi.
394, On this principle Papists may be made Counselors in Grenada, and why not
in England? and men of known loyalty and approved abilities may be rejected as
Speakers. I dare say, however contemptibly G. B. may speak of those that do not
understand an ambiguous passage of Coke as he does, he will never set his name
to any proposition that with Coke declares the dispensing power legal. The
Revolution, as Hume justly observes, having put an end to these disputes, the
acquisition of real liberty showed the danger of the subsistence of such a
Prerogative.


I am really surprised at the stress that has been laid on the case of Sir
Edward Seymour, rejected by Charles II. in 1679. It has been said "he was
rejected," "the King never gave the matter up," "prorogued the House for a few
days," "that the House dropped the matter," which it seems they had mistaken,"
"and proceeded to the choice of another person," ( See Georgia Gazette for
April 29, 1772:) And again, ( Georgia Gazette for May 13) "that the King
asserted the right of nomination," "rejected one Speaker and nominated
another," and, N. B. because "the House declined to choose him prorogued them,"
"that the House did not assert their right but chused Gregory," "and did not
show a want of public spirit by impeding public business, had they done so it
is supposed Charles would have dissolved them, left they should serve him the
same trick that had been served his father:" And again, ( Georgia Gazette May
29) "that in the next session they repaired their mistake, and chose a
different person." Now, whoever puts all this together will naturally conclude,
that the Commons chose a Speaker disagreeable to the King, whom the King
rejected; that, on their not rescinding their choice, the King insisted on his
having such a right, and never gave it up, but prorogued them for some days,
and that then they dropped the matter, repaired their mistake, gave up their
claim so far that now "it cannot be said to be undecided," chose another person,
and so all was well, the King's right established, and whoever now thinks and
says otherwise is a fiery Republican, and as bad (or nearly) as the Long
Parliament. I do not mean to criticize upon this account given by an author of
whom it has been said "that he writes unsoured by party, and with an apparent
view to give candid information;" but I advise the reader next to peruse a
different account given by two authors who have never been deemed partial, and
who at least cannot be said to be influenced by our Georgia disputes.

Thus Rapin: The Parliament began with a warm dispute between the King and the
Commons about the choice of a Speaker. The Commons having chosen Mr. Edward
Seymour, the King, who knew Seymour was a particular enemy of the Earl of
Danby, refused his approbation, and ordered the Commons to proceed to a new
choice. The House was extremely displeased with this refusal, alleging, that
it was never known that a person should be excepted against, and no reason
given, and that the thing itself of presenting a Speaker to the King was but a
bare compliment. The King, on his side, insisted on the approbation or refusal
of a Speaker when presented to him as a branch of his Prerogative. During a six
days dispute, the Commons made several representations to the King, to which he
gave very short answers. At last, as the Commons would not desist from what
they thought their right, the King went to the Parliament, and prorogued it
from the 13th to the 15th, that is, for ONE day's interval between the two
SESSIONS. The Parliament meeting the 15th, the King ordered the Commons to
proceed to the choice of a Speaker; then, to avoid a revival of the dispute,
they chose Mr. William Gregory, Sergeant at Law, who was approved by the King.
Rapin, vol. 2. p. 703.

The account given in the Parliamentary Debates is still fuller:

The Chancellor, by the King's commands, ordered the House of Commons to
proceed to the choice of a Speaker, who was to be presented to the King the
next day; and being returned to their House, Colonel Birch did nominate and
recommend the Right Honorable Edward Seymour, Knight of the Shire for the
county of Devon, Treasurer of the Navy, one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, and Speaker of the last Parliament: Being a person acceptable to
the King, and one who for his great integrity, ability, and long experience in
the employment, was the fittest person for so great a trust. And Mr. Seymour
being unanimously called upon to the chair, was conducted thither by Sir Thomas
Lee, Sir Thomas Whitmore, and diverse other members, and being there placed, he
made a gratulatory speech to the House for their great kindness and affection
toward him, in their unanimous choice of him: But still he desired the House
that they would proceed to a new election, For the long sittings of the late
Parliament had so impaired his health, that he doubted he should not be well
able to undergo the service of the House as would be expected from him: But the
House not admitting of any excuse, confirmed their choice; upon which be
desired leave, That he might intercede with his Majesty, that he would be
pleased to discharge him of the duty.

But it appears, that he need not have been so urgent; for the King and the
Earl of Danby taking this choice to be an ill presage, that this Parliament
would begin where the last ended, were resolved not to approve of it: And as
soon as he appeared to be persented, the Lord Chancellor stood up, and said,
That if his Majesty should always accept a person pitched upon by the House of
Commons, then it would be no great favor to be chosen a Speaker; and therefore
his Majesty, being the best judge of persons and things, thought fit to except
against Mr. Seymour, as being fitly qualifyed for other services and
employments, without giving any reason to the persons choosing or the persons
chosen. And therefore he ordered them to fix upon some other person by
tomorrow morning, to be presented to the King for his approbation. The Commons
immediately returned back to their own House, where Sir John Ernly stood up and
acquainted them, He had orders from his Majesty to recommend Sir Thomas Meers
to them to be their Speaker, as a person well known in the method and practice
of Parliaments, and a person that he thought would be very acceptable and
serviceable to them. But the House in a great heat cried out, No, no! and fell
into a warm debate. Mr. Sacheverell said, It was never known that a person
should be excepted against, and no reason at all given, and therefore
concluded, that it was done purposely to gratify some particular persons. Mr.
Williams said for above a hundred years, it had not been known that a Speaker
presented was ever excepted against; and the thing itself of presenting him to
the King, as he humbly conceived, was but a bare compliment. Sir Thomas Clarges
alleged, that there were Parliaments long before there were Speakers chosen,
and afterward, for the ease of the House among themselves, they pitched upon a
Speaker. -- All our lives and liberties are preserved by this House, therefore
we are to preserve the liberties of it. Mr. Garraway objected, if Mr. Seymour
be rejected and no reason given, pray who must choose a Speaker, the King or we?
It is plain not we? -- Sir Thomas Lee said, we addressed ourselves to his
Majesty the last Parliament, as fearing his person to be in danger, but we
received no answer at all in a whole week; we were immediately prorogued
unexpectedly; and a little after dissolved, as unexpectedly; and I suppose, the
same persons that gave that advice, gave this also. Others concluded, that all
this was only for a bone of contention, fearing they should agree, and so
called to adjourn; which was soon agreed to.

These heats were so much the greater, because they reasonably supposed that it
was all occasioned by the Earl of Danby; whose power was not wholly at an end;
and between whom and Mr. Seymour there was a particular resentment. However,
the first thing resolved on the next day, being Saturday, was, That an humble
application be made to the King, to acquaint his Majesty, that the matter
yesterday delivered by the Lord Chancellor, relating to the Speaker, is of so
great importance, that this House cannot immediately come to a resolution
therein: And therefore do humbly desire his Majesty, that he will graciously be
pleased, to grant some further time for this House to take the matter into
consideration. And they ordered the Chancellor of the duchy, the Lord
Cavendish, the Lord Russel, and Sir Henry Capel, immediately to attend his
Majesty with this vote. Being returned in a short time, the Lord Russel
acquainted the House, That they had attended his Majesty, who was sitting in
Council; and that his Majesty, as soon as he was informed they were to wait
upon him from the House immediately came out, and received them with great
cheerfulness and kindness: And having delivered their message, his Majesty
retired to the Council Chamger, and coming out again, was pleased to return the
following answer by word of mouth, which they had reduced to writing: Gentlemen,
I HAVE considered of your message, and do consent to a further time, which I
appoint to be on Tuesday next, unless you shall find some expedient in the mean
time; for as I would not have my prerogative entrenched upon, so I would not do
any thing against the privileges of the House.


Upon the said Tuesday they drew up this humble Representation.

WE your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects, the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, do with all obedience return your Majesty most hearty
thanks for the favorable reception, and gracious answer your Majesty was
pleased to return to our late message; wherein your Majesty was pleased, not
only to allow us longer time, to deliberate of what was delivered to us by the
Lord Chancellor, relating to the choice of a Speaker, but likewise to express
so great a care not to infringe our privileges. And we desire your Majesty to
believe no subjects ever had a more tender regard, than ourselves, to the
rights of your Majesty, and your Royal Prerogative; which we shall always
acknowledge to be vested in the Crown, for the benefit and protection of your
people. And therefore for the clearing all doubts that may arise in your Royal
mind, upon this occasion now before us, we crave leave humbly to represent unto
your Majesty, That it is the undoubted right of the Commons to have the free
election of one of their Members to be their Speaker, and to perform the
service of the House: And that the Speaker so elected, and presented according
to custom, has by the constant practice of all former ages, been continued
Speaker and executed that employment, unless such persons have been excused for
some corporal disease, which has been alleged, either by themselves, or some
others in their behalf, in full Parliament. According to this usage, Mr. Edward
Seymour was unanimously chosen, upon the consideration of his great ability and
sufficiency for that place, of which we had large experience in the last
Parliament, and was presented by us to your Majesty, as a person we conceived
would be most acceptable to your Majesty's Royal judgment. This being the true
state of the case, we do in all humility lay it before your Majesty's view;
hoping that your Majesty, upon due consideration of former precedents, will
rest satisfied with our proceedings, and will think fit not to deprive us of so
necessary a Member, by employing him in any other service; but to give us such
a gracious answer, as your Majesty, and your Royal predecessors, have always
done heretofore upon the like occasions; that so we may, without more loss of
time, proceed to the dispatch of those important affairs, for which we were
called hither: Wherein we doubt not but we shall so behave ourselves, as to
give an ample testimony to the whole world of our duty and affection to your
Majesty's service, and of our care of the peace and prosperity of your kingdoms.

To this Representation the King immediately gave this short Answer:

Gentlemen,
ALL this is but loss of time; and therefore I desire you to go back again, and
do as I have directed you.


This giving no satisfaction to the House, the next day, March 12th, the
Commons, after a warm debate, d^^ up this following Address:

Most Gracious Sovereign,
WHEREAS by the gracious answer your Majesty was pleased to give to our first
message in Council, whereby your Majesty was pleased to declare a resolution,
not to infringe our just rights and privileges, we your Majesty's most dutiful
and loyal Commons were encouraged to make an humble representation to your
Majesty upon the choice of our Speaker, which on Tuesday last was presented by
some of our Members: We do, with great trouble and infinite sorrow, find by the
report made to us by those Members, at their return, that your Majesty was
pleased to give us an immediate answer to the same, without taking any further
consideration; which we are persuaded, if your Majesty had done, what we then
offered to your Majesty would so far have prevailed upon your Royal judgment,
as to have given your Majesty satisfaction in the reasonableness of our desire;
and preserved us in your Majesty's favorable opinion of our proceedings. And
since we do humbly conceive, that the occasion of this question has arisen
from your Majesty's not being truly informed of the state of the case; we
humbly beseech your Majesty to take the said representation into your further
consideration, and give us such a gracious answer, that we may be put in a
capacity to manifest our readiness to enter into these consultations which
necessarily tend to the preservation and welfare of your Majesty and your
kingdoms.


Upon reading this address to the King, he immediately gave this quick and
sharp return; Gentlemen, I will send you an answer tomorrow. Accordingly, as
he had often done before upon great difficulties, he resolved to put an end to
the dispute; and on the next morning, being Thursday the 13th of March, he came
to the House of Peers, and sending for the Commons, he immediately prorogued
the Parliament till Saturday following, after the Commons had sat without a
Speaker but six days. And thus the King found a way to gain his point, but with
very little advantage to his own business and affairs.

On the appointed day, March 15th, his Majesty came to the House of Peers in
his Royal robes, and the House of Commons attending, his Majesty was pleased to
put both Houses in mind of what he said to them at the opening of the
Parliament: And then the Lord Chancellor, by the King's command, directed the
Commons to return to their House, and to proceed to the choice of a Speaker.
And being returned, the Lord Russel put the House in mind of the King's
commands, and immediately recommended William Gregory Sergeant at law, as a
person, for his great learning and integrity, fit for the employment. And Mr.
Sergeant Gregory being unanimously called upon to the chair, he in a short
speech modestly excused himself, and desired of the House, that another might
be nominated; but no excuse being admitted, he was formally conducted to the
chair, by his two intimate friends, the Lord Russel and the Lord Cavendish, and
there confirmed in the place.

"On the Monday following, he was presented by the Commons to the King* in the
House of Lords, who without hesitation approved of the choice." Sir Edward
Seymour having so often been mentioned in this debate, it may not be amiss to
take some notice of his character as drawn by Burnet, and of his behavior as
Speaker: "In pride he had neither shame nor decency: He was violent against the
Court till he forced himself into good posts: He knew the House, and every man
in it, so well, that by looking about he could tell the fate of any question:
He was the most assuming Speaker that ever sat in the chair: If any thing was
put when the Court party was not well gathered together, he would have held the
House from doing any thing by a wilful mistaking or misstating the question; by
that he gave time to those who were appointed for that mercenary work to go
about and gather in all their party, and he would discern when they had got the
majority, and THEN he would very fairly state the question WHEN he was sure to
carry it." It is most likely that in favor of such a man the Court party would
exert all their influence to get him chosen, and very improbable that being
chosen the Commons would so strenuously have opposed his rejection, if they had
not thought it illegal and a dangerous precedent; but from this very instance
it appears to demonstration how essential it is to the regularity, freedom, and
just issue of national debates, that no such Speaker should by any means be
obtruded, or one of a contrary stamp be rejected. The Commons maintained their
claim as long as they were suffered to continue, and till a prorogation put an
end to all their proceedings. At the next session they might be the more
unwilling to revive their former choice because they could easily fix upon a
better man; Gregory was then chosen, and in the two succeeding Parliaments that
very Williams who had asserted that the presenting the Speaker to the King was
a bare compliment; the King did not show any resentment, but approved of him
without hesitation. The true reason of Seymour's rejection, who had been
Speaker before, was this: The Earl of Danby expected to be prosecuted for
things done by the King's order; the King, in order to secure him, granted him
a pardon in a very illegal manner; Seymour was looked upon as Danby's enemy,
and it was thought too dangerous that upon this occasion he should be Speaker;
hence the King rather excused himself for not admitting than harshly rejected
him; and thus it appears that this rejection was made with a manifest view to
obstruct public justice, (...) the right of rejection was never claimed nor
contended for but upon this single occasion, it does not seem to derive any
merit from the only instance when it was pleaded.


I shall not make many remarks on these accounts, but I cannot forbear
observing that the only instance where a Speaker appears rejected by the Crown
was in the reign of a Stuart, when there was a settled design against the
religion and liberties of the nation, which is far from being a presumption
favorable to such a claim; even then the King does not reject ex plenitudine
potestatis, but assigns as a reason that Sir Edward Seymour was proper for
other services; and yet the Commons tell the King, that to choose their Speaker
without being deprived of their choice is their undoubted right. When Charles
recommended another as one who he thought would be very acceptable and
serviceable to THEM, they cried, No, no, and never would nor did choose him; the
King wishes then to find an expedient, did not insist on his nomination, but
prorogued them for a single day, which was plainly done to compromise the
matter; when they met again, he recommended nobody, but Lord Russel, who
afterward fell a martyr to liberty, nominated Gregory, who was unanimously
chosen, and formally conducted to the chair, and there-confirmed in the place,
and Monday after the King approved of him without hesitation. Burnet, in his
memoirs, expressly says the point was settled, that the right of electing was
in the House, and that the confirmation was a thing of course.

The argument, that if the King has no right to reject he may be under a
necessity of admitting disagreeable persons into his presence, as persons may
be chosen disaffected to his Majesty's person and government, of which Wilkes
being made Sheriff is given as an example, I cannot think of any great
strength. I suppose the law calls no man disaffected who takes the oaths
prescribed by law, and if any should be personally disagreeable to the King
there is no necessity for his coming into his presence. Wilkes I believe never
did, but I conceive the Constitution disables no man to serve his country in
any place not in the gift of the Crown merely because he may be disagreeable to
the King. The same Parliament that chose Seymour deputed Lord Russel to the
King, who never was a friend to the King's measures, and yet Charles had more
grace than to receive him otherwise than politely. The right of rejecting a
disagreeable person can be of no manner of service to the Crown, unless it may
be exercised as often as a disagreeable person is chosen. Supposing the case to
happen, it can hardly be expected that a House so ill disposed as to choose a
disagreeable person at first would become so good-natured, by the afront of a
rejection, as to choose a person more agreeable in a second election; or,
supposing elections were repeated till the Commons gave way and chose a person
perfectly agreeable to the Crown, what must be the natural consequence to the
people? it can be no other than an express introduction of a Member would have
to represent the King. The Speaker is not the King's Representative, but if the
Crown insists none shall be Speaker but one that will obey the orders, or,
which may be just the same, is agreeable to the King, he might as well; in that
case the King would have an Officer in the House, introduced, not by bribery
and corruption, but by refusing to approve any other, and he might have the
casting vote in a place where he ought to have no vote at all.

That to present a Speaker for approbation implies a right of rejection has
been alleged with greater show; but that it is the Commons choice, and not the
King's approbation, that constitutes the Speaker, seems very plain, because he
is placed in the chair immediately after the election, and sometimes acts as
such some days before he is presented and approved of by the King. It would be
very indecent to vest him in the office, and place him in the chair, if after
all the King's negative might set aside the choice; and I would apply here what
Sir R. Atkins says with regard to a form observed at the same time when the
Speaker is presented, " That humble and modest way of the people's addressing
their Sovereign, -- for granting privileges," of which the right to choose and
have a Speaker seems necessarily one) " shows great reverence and becomes the
majesty of the Prince to be addressed to; but let it not be made an argument
that either the laws thereupon made, or the privileges allowed, are precarious,
and merely a favor, or may he refused them of right." There are many
presentations in law which allow not of rejection. The usual privileges,
without which the House cannot act nor subsist, must be asked for; but as this
is a petition not of favor, but of right, so it seems the approbation of a
^^^^ker is as much so. If the Constitution requires some application (...) the
King, it also obliges the Crown never to put a negative on some applications.
The new Speaker humbly PRAYS for the privileges of the House, but should any
Prince be so ill-advised as to look upon that application as a matter which he
may refuse, he might perhaps be informed that such a refusal implied no less
than a breach of the original contract between him and his people, and that in
this case it would be in vain to say that the power of giving (or approving)
also implies a power of refusing.

It has been said that this claim of the Crown was but once denied by
Parliament; I believe it was always denied; but it might as well have been said
it was but once claimed by the Crown. Some weight is laid on the circumstance
that a Speaker was recommended as acceptable to the King, but it seems the King
also recommended a man as one whom he supposed very acceptable to Parliament.
When a superior recommends to an inferior it is no argument that those to whom
he recommends have not a final choice. That a person (caeteris paribus) is
acceptable to the King may be no improper recommendation to or motive with his
electors.

To establish this claim of the Crown, it has been observed, that Speakers have
been disallowed, like Sir John Popham; but the case amounts to no more than his
excuse was admitted; formerly every Speaker begged leave of the House that he
might excuse himself to the King; this request of leave seems rather a proof
that the election of the House is looked upon as final than otherwise, and
Popham, though his excuse must have been very good, appears the only instance
in which it was admitted, and cannot be of much weight against so many
instances where no excuse was allowed. It is very certain the King did not
approve Seymour, but it is not less so that, in order to get rid of the choice,
he was obliged to prorogue the House, and that all he gained is, that the
Commons did not revive the dispute. The acquiescing of the Representatives of
New England under a negative put on their choice is entirely owing to the tenor
of their charter, and I am still of opinion that what rights the King reserved
to himself in that charter are not such as are the undoubted prerogative of the
Crown, but such as every Assembly or Parliament has a just claim to where the
contrary it not expressly stipulated by charter.

It has been advanced, that " when the King gave the Commons leave to choose a
Speaker he reserved to himself the right of rejecting a Speaker that might be
disagreeable to him, and that there was a compact between the King and Commons
for that purpose." This would be a strong argument indeed; but when and where
was that compact made? What author or historian speaks of it? What authority is
cited in proof of it? " Why it is natural to conclude," but is it not as
natural to conclude that, because no traces of any such compact are to be
found, and that the Commons always regularly chose their own Speaker, and that
not even an attempt was ever made to reject him, but in the case of Sir Edward
Seymour, and that then the King never made any mention of such an original
compact, but submitted to have his own nomination treated with a negative, and
approved of one chosen in opposition to his own former recommendation, that
therefore no (...) compact ever existed? And as this country it very "scarce of
(...)" I am clearly of opinion that book is not on this side of the (...) where
this compact stands upon record, but if a copy, or direction where this compact
may be found, is left with the Priter it shall be duly acknowledged, and, if
the owner chooses it, a promise given that his name shall not be mentioned.

I ought to take notice of one argument more, ( Georgia Gazette June 24:) " If
the Massachusetts Bay hold their provincial Legislation under charter, do not
we in this province hold it under his Majesty's commission and instruction to
his Representative? And if that charter has reserved the power of negation upon
their choice of a Speaker, will not the commissions and instructions to the
Governor of this province have the same effect? I conceive a very great
difference between his Majesty's instructions and charters; an Englishman I
should think entitled to English laws, which I suppose implies Legislation any
where and every where in the British dominions; that this right is prior to any
charter or instruction, and is held not by instructions to a Governor, but is
his natural right, which nothing but outlawry can deprive him of Whatever is
not law cannot be binding upon a British subject, and I suppose no man will say
that, because the King has an undoubted right to instruct his servants, that
therefore he has also a right to give instructions contrary to the
Constitution, or derogatory of the right of the subject; such an instruction a
Governor might look upon as a law to himself, but it is only the King can do no
wrong, and the reason is plain, because the King can do nothing against law or
the Constitution.

It has been said that a Speaker may have an undue influence to the prejudice
of the Crown; but he can have no undue influence to Speaker before he is really
such, and it cannot appear that he has any undue influence before he has
actually entered on his office, and in this case the Crown is sufficiently
guarded by its indisputable negative on every act of Legislature, and of
dissolution whenever it shall be thought necessary. By this also it would seem
as if the Crown had a right to reject a Speaker actually approved of whenever
his influence should become disagreeable, which doctrine I believe is entirely
new, perhaps not free from danger.

The Assembly of this province sometimes consisted only of 19 Members; 9 then
made a House, and 5 a majority; as the number of Representatives increased it
was thought necessary that the number to constitute a House should be increased
in proportion; 19 now make a House, and 10 a majority, to do any business
relating to the province. The remark that the strenuous advocate of the right
of negative makes upon this alteration is this: " Such resolutions (which by
the way were unanimous) could be made with no other view than the putting it in
the power of a few leading men to impede the public business by a secession
whenever they pleased; which remark, as I suppose it had not been made had any
Assembly subsisted, so every reader will judge with what justice and temperit
was made. That he wishes 5 men might have the power rather than 10 is
self-evident, and that 1 man may more easily influence 4 or 5 than 9 or 10 need
not be doubted.

I shall conclude with a citation from a debate in the House of Lords in 1675:
" The Lords plainly spoke out, That men had been, might and were likely to be,
in either House, too much for the King, as they called it, and that whoever did
endeavor to give more power to the King than the law and Constitution had
given, -- might justly be said (...) too much for the King, and to be corrupted
in his judgment by the (...) advantages and rewards, though when it is
considered that every (...) of the Crown toward absolute power lessens the
King in the love (...) of his people, -- a wise Prince will not think it a
service done him.


