THE MIGHTY DESTROYER DISPLAYED, IN SOME ACCOUNT OF THE Dreadfal HAVOC made by
the mistaken USE as well as ABUSE of DISTILLED SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS.

BY A LOVER OF MANKIND.

ECCLESIASTES vii. 29. Lo this only have I found, that God has made man up
right; but they have sought out many inventions.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, between Second and Third Streets in
Market-Street. M.DCC.LXXIV.

THE MIGHTY DESTROYER DISPLAYED, etc.
OBSERVING some years ago the dreadful havoc made by the excessive use of
distilled spirituous liquors in this part of the world, I was induced to insert
in one of the almanacks an extract of what had been written on that subject by
Dr. Hales, fellow of the Royal Society, containing his own remarks, with the
sentiments of several persons of note in the physical way; whose knowledge of
the nature of distilled liquors, as well as of their effects on the human
frame, best qualified them to give a right judgment thereon. And as the
excessive and indeed instaken use of these liquors continues, and rather
increases, on this Continent, it is thought a republication of those sentiments,
with some additions, may, through divine blessing, be beneficial to many;
particularly to some well minded people, who are under mistaken prejudices on
this most interesting subject. "My principal and indeed only motive," says this
benevolent author, is to endeavor to rouse the caution and indignation of
mankind, against those mighty destroyers and debasers of the human species,
fermented distilled spirituous liquors; those worse than infernal spirits,
which bewitch and infatuate the nations with their sorceries. -- An evil so
amazingly great, that did not woeful experience too fully prove it, it seems
incredible, that any whom it concerns could possibly be so negligent, as not to
use their utmost endeavors to suppress this destructive manbane.

That eminent physician Dr. Hossman expressly cautions against the use of
distilled spirituous liquors. "Because," says he, they are, above all things,
most unwholesome, being caustic burning spirits; which, by inflaming the
solids, and thickening the fluids, cause obstructions, which bring on many
fatal discases, such as hectic fevers, jaundice, dropsies, etc. whereby
multitudes are yearly and daily destroyed. He also observes, that they rot the
entrails, (...) as the liver, stomach and bowels; as it is evident, not only by
opening the hodies of those who are killed by drinking them, but also by what
is observed in Germany of the effect which the caustic, fiery, remaining wash
of the distillers, has on the guts of hogs; which are thereby so tendered, that
they cannot make puddings with them. -- He farther observes, That the flesh of
such hogs will not keep, even when salted, so well as the flesh of other hogs.
Dr. Cheyne, in his essay of health and long life, says, All people, who have
any regard to their health and lives, ought to tremble at the first cravings
for such poisonous liquors. The maladies begot by them, bring forth necessity
upon necessity of drams and gills; till, at last, a kind dropsy, nervous
convulsion, flux, if not a fever, or phrenzy, sets the poor soul free. It has
often raised in me the most melancholy reflections, to see the virtuous and
sensible, bound in such chains and fetters, as nothing less than omnipotent
grace or the unrelenting grave could release them from.

Doctor Short, in his history of mineral waters, page 225. says, The ofther I
reflect on the mischief done by distilled spirits, the more I am confirmed,
that the human race had been happier had drams never been known: and I cannot
help cordially joining with Doctor Allen, in his Synopsis Medici, A. 1633. That
the plentiful devouring of those spirits has killed as many thousands of men,
as there are stars in the sky. Nay, ten times ten thousands have died by these,
more than all the rest of the poisons whatever.

Doctor Lind, in his treatise on the scurvy, says, He observed most destructive
distempers to be much increased, even to mortality, by distilled spirituous
liquors; which sailors are too apt greedily to swallow down. And Doctor Hales
observes, from the remarks made to him by an eminent surgeon, That the stomachs
of great dram-drinkers were contracted into half the common natural size, and
hard; somewhat like leather, that had been held to the fire. The consequence of
which was, loss of appetite, and a wasting consumption.

It is pretended, that drams comfort, warm, and defend from the severity of
weather, to which men are sometimes exposed; without which, they say, they
should perish with cold; which is probably, in a great measure, true of those
who are habituated to drink them; the blood of such being thereby so much
impoverished, that it is well known many of the drinkers of drams are cold and
lifeless in the midst of summer, without frequent repetitions: this is what
some of them have owned. But on the other hand, how much more able are sober
persons to endure cold and hardships? their vital heat not being extinguished
by intemperance, does, by its kindly genial warmth, more effectually secure
them from the inclemency of the weather, than the false flash of a dram.
Besides, it is well known, that men did not perish in the coldest countries for
want of drams formerly, when they were not to be had. Of the undoubted truth of
this, Captain Ellis gives a full proof in the account of his voyage to Hudson's
Bay, page 199. Where he observes, That the natives on the very cold coast, of
that Bay, to whom the French are kinder than to sell distilled spirituous
liquors, are tall, hardy, robust and active; whereas those of them that are
supplied with drams from the English, are a meagre, dwarfish, indolent people,
hardly equal to the severity of the country, and subject to many disorders.

And as to the pernicious effects of spirituous liquors in very hot climates,
(as on the coast of Guinea) it is observed, that the French and Portuguese, who
do not indulge in distilled spirits, are healthy compared with the English;
who, drinking freely of spirits, etc. die fast. Thus, also, it is observed of
the women in the West Indies, that being sober, they live long; but it is often
otherwise with the men, who are more generally intemperate.

The unhappy dram-drinkers are so absolutely bound in slavery to these infernal
spirits, that they seem to have lost the power of delivering themselves from
this worst of bondage. How much then is it the bounden duty of those, who have
it in their power, to withold this destructive man-bane, either as parents,
masters, or rulers to the people committed to their trust.

Since then the evil is become so notoriously epidemical as to debilitate and
destroy multitudes, in most parts of the world; it behooves all, who have any
bowels of pity for their fellow creatures, more especially the governors of the
nations, as guardians and tender fathers, to guard the people committed to
their charge from this mighty destroyer. Can there be any consideration, of
sufficient weight, to the contrary. Is it found policy to encourage vice in the
people, because a present revenue arises from their debaucheries? Where will
the revenue be, when the people, who should pay them, are destroyed? Are not a
hardy, industrious healthy people, always found to be the most able to
contribute amply to the support of government? And will not temperance, in the
end, be found a more effectual means to increase the real wealth and strength
of a nation, than to make drunkenness the cheapest of vices? But if the
consideration of the inhumanity of being instrumental to the destruction of
multitudes, and in a manner, in some parts of the world, of whole nations, is
not of weight enough to influence; yet, sure, the awful consideration, that it
must needs be highly displeasing to our merciful Creator, to have his favorite
creature man thus debased, disgraced, and destroyed both in body and soul,
ought to have its due weight. Can it in reason be expected, that he will always
remain an unconcerned spectator of of such astonishing proceedings? And will he
not in mercy visit the nations for these things, to prevent the still much
greater ruin of future generations, in conformity to his usual method of
proceeding, when irregularities are arrived to great excesses? This disease has
now attained to so enormous a pitch, that it is much to be feared nothing less
than God's severe fatherly correction, will effectually cure it in many of the
nations; who seem as supine and unconcerned about it, as if only so many
thousands of locusts were destroyed thereby: for if in fifty or sixty years
this destructive pest has spread thus far and wide, how vastly greater will the
havoc amongst mankind be in an hundred years more, if some check be not put to
its career?

If it had been said, an hundred years ago, to any of the rulers of the
nations, that they should patiently, and even unconcernedly, see such
multitudes of their subjects destroyed both body and soul, and that only for
filthy lucre; would they not, with indignation, have said as Hazael did to
Elisha, 2 Kings viii. 13. But what is thy servant a dog, that he should do this
great thing? The plain truth is, that it is with the nations as it frequently
happens to private persons, that when they grow gradually from bad to worse,
they, at the same time, become more and more hardened, so as to be even
reconciled to practices for which they had at first the utmost detestation and
abhorrence; for familiarity takes away our attention, and robs things of their
power to strike strongly upon us.

Though thousands and tens of thousands perish every year by distilled
spirituous liquors, yet few appear to lay it effectually of heart, I must here
except the heads of the poor wild Indians, of the Six Nations situate back of
New York, and other parts of North America, who being sensible of the great
destruction made amongst them by distilled spirituous liquors, have long since,
and do still continue, earnestly to desire, that no such spirit should be sold
to their people. At a treaty held at Carlisle in this province, with the
deputics of the Six Nations, the Delawares and other western Indians, in the
year 1753, Scarrooyady, one of the chiefs of the Six Nations, speaking on
behalf of all the Indians present, expressed himself to the following effect,
viz. The rum ruins us: we beg you would prevent its coming in such quantities,
by regulating the traders. We never understood the trade was for whiskey A
spirit made of grain.
We desire it may be forbidden, and none sold in the Indian country; but that
if the Indians will have any, they may go amongst the inhabitants, and deal
with them for it. When these whiskey traders come, they bring thirty or forty
cags, puts them down before us, and make us drink, and get all the skins that
should go to pay the debts we have contracted, for goods bought of the fair
trader; and by these means, we not only ruin ourselves, but them too. These
wicked whiskey sellers, when they have once got the Indians in liquor, make
them sell their very clothes from their backs. In short, if this practice be
continued, we must be inevitably ruined. We most earnestly, therefore, beseech
you to remedy it. The Indian speaker gave, as is usual with them in matters of
moment, a treble string of wampum, in confirmation of this request. The
destructive effect of distilled spirits, have also extended their baneful
influence amongst the people of Africa. It is, in a great measure, through the
introduction of those infernal spirits, that the poor negroes have been as it
were bewitched, and prevailed upon to captivate their unhappy country people,
in order to bring them to the European market: hence devaslation, bloodshed and
misery have spread in their land; many thousands, and hundreds of thousands,
have been doomed to a miserable thraldom; and many, very many, brought to a
cruel and untimely end: innumerable instances might be mentioned, to confirm
this melancholy truth; of which I shall mention two, viz. Andrew Brue, the
noted French factor, who resided sixteen years in Guinea, tells us, That, in
general, brandy is the best commodity amongst the negroes, as they love it to
excess: that it is easy, from hence, to estimate the vast profit made by the
company, when its storehouse is well provided with this liquor. And Francis
Moor, the English factor, in his account of Africa, says, That it was to the
king of Barsailly's insatiable thirst for brandy, that his subjects freedom and
families were in so precarious a situation, etc. etc.

It is no uncommon thing for habitual rum-drinkers, when a sit of sickness
comes on, which they conclude will be their last, to desire to have plenty of
rum by them; by which means, they continue intoxicated till death: to so
astonishing and deplorable a sottish condition have they reduced themselves!
This is a case so calamitous to mankind, that to have a thorough sense of it,
and yet not to remonstrate, nor earnestly caution against it, is certainly as
criminal as it is unfriendly not to warn a blind person of a dangerous
precipice or pit; yet, alas! how unconcerned are the greatest part of mankind
at this most enormous ruin of multitudes! In trials for life, what diligence is
used to sind the occasion of the loss of one subject! What care will not a
faithful physician bestow for the preservation of one life! How did the wise
Romans honor him, who saved the life of one Roman citizen! But in the present
case, it is not one, nor one hundred, nor one thousand, but probably no less
than a million that peris;h, yearly, by this worst of plagues. How then dare
the governors of nations be unconcerned or silent in a cause in which humanity,
virtue, and the real welfare of mankind, both civil and religious, are so
deeply concerned? A cause, which tends not only to the weakening the faculties,
enervating the bodies of men, but also in debasing the species, and shortening
the lives of multitudes.

But the most afflictive and dreadful effect of the common use of distilled
spirituous liquors, are, that it not only heightens the passions of men and
depraves their morals; but what is insinitely worse, and ought to be an
awakening consideration, they become profane and abandoned, and to the last
degree regardless of their duty to God and man; the feelings of the mind are
gradually benumbed, and an insensibility to the healing insluence of religion
ensues.

The Almighty who has so curiously wrought our wonderful frame out of the dust,
knowing how prone we are to disorder it by irregularities, has of his tender
fatherly care of us, not only implanted in us a strong desire of life and
self-preservation, but has also striclly warned us to avoid all destructive
irregularities and vices, and to practice those virtues which are so well
adapted to our nature, that they have a direct tendency to give health to the
soul, as well as marrow to the bones, Prow. cxi. 8. Yet how is this delicate,
this curiously wrought frame, abused and disord red by repeated irregularities
of many kinds, but never before to the enormous degree that it has of late
years arrived at by the excessive abuse of these formented, distilled
spirituous liquors, which, by their mischievous effects, seem to claim Satan
himself for their author. The benevolent author first mentioned from whose
collection great part of the foregoing is collected, observes, That if any of
his readers should think the subject is overpressed, such are desired to
consider that the calamitous urgency of the case absolutely requires the most
pathetical expostulation, to rouse the attention and indignation of mankind,
against this greatest of all plagues that ever befell unhappy man, which is both
our sin and our most severe punishment.

Dr. Cheyne farther observes, That if only the profligate, the scoundrel, the
abandoned run into these excesses, it were as vain to endeavor to reclaim
them, as it were to stop a tempest, or calm a storm: But that now the vice is
become epidemical, since it has got not only among mechanics and tradesmen, but
among perions of the brightest, but among perions of the brightest genius, the
finest taste, and the most accomplished parts. And oh! that I could (adds the
doctor) give my conscience the lie in not mentioning them, even among the first
and least fallen part of the creation itself, and those of them too, of the
most elegant parts end the strictest virtuc, even of those who are in other
respects blameless. Since the case is so, it will not be amiss to show, to the
evidence of a demonstration, stration, the folly as well as fruitlestness of
such a course. A fit of the colic, or of the vapors; a family misfortune: the
death of a child, or of a friend, with the assistance of the nurfe or the next
neighbor, often gives rise and becomes the weighty causes of so fatal an
effect. A little lowness requires drops, which pass readily down under the
notion of physic: Drops beget drams, and drams beget more drams, till they come
to be without weight and without measure -- did this bewitching poison actually
cure or relieve them from time to time, something might be said to extenuate
the folly and the frenzy of such a course, but on the contrary, it heightens
and enrages all their symptoms and sufferings ever afterward, excepting the
few moments immediately after taking it down; and every dram begets the
necestity of two more to cure the ill effects of the first, and one minute's
indulgence they purchase with many hours of greater pain and misery, besides
making the malady more incurable. Low spiritedness itself is no disease;
besides there are remedies that will relieve it so long as there is any oil
remaining in the lamp. -- Exercise, abstinence and proper evacuations, with
time and patience, will continually make it tolerable; very often they will
perfectly cure. The running into drams is giving up the whole at once, for
neither laudanum nor arsenick will kill more certainly, although more quickly.

The mistaken use and grievous abuse of rum and other distilled spirits,
perhaps in no case appear more palpably than at the time of harnest, a business
which, under the Mosaic Dispensation, was particularly enjoined to be carried
on with humiliation and thanksgiving, and ought by all means, to be observed as
such under the gospel; but through the abuse of spirituous liquors, is made an
occasion of a greater abuse of the creature and dishonor of the Creator; this
arises, in many, from a mistaken persuasion that hard labor, particularly that
of the harvest field, cannot be carried on without a quantity of rum or other
distilied spirits; and in support of this opinion, we are frequently told of
the many people who have died in the field through extreme heat and fatigue,
and it is supposed that many more would die, if a plentiful use of spirituous
liquors was not allowed. But this I am persuaded is a great mistake, it being
much more likely that the free use of rum occasioned the death of those people;
the quantity they had swallowed down, sending a greater flow of spirits into
the head than the strength of the body could support. Indeed the repeated large
quantities of rum commonly drank during the whole time of harvest, keeps up the
blood in a continual ferment and sever, in which state people cannot have a
proper restorative sleep; their constitutions are thereby onervated, their
lives shortened, and an unfitness for religious impressions generally prevails.

These most solemn and weighty considerations, have induced some well minded
people to endeavor to lead, by their examples, their friends and neighbors
into a contrary practice; and under these attempts, experience has made in
manifest, that very little or no strong liquor is necessary at those times;
indeed they have been convinced that the harvest and other laborious work, can
be very well managed without making use of any spirituous liquors at all. If
such labor was carried on with steadiness and proper moderation, there would
certainly be no need of a recruit of strength being sought for by that means;
more frequent intervals of rest, with a little food, oftener allowed the
reapers, and small drinks; such as molasses and water made agreeable with a
little cider, small beer, or even milk and water, would fully enable them to
perform their work to their employer's satisfaction and their own advantage;
and the overplus wages they would receive, instead of the spirituous liquors
usually given, might be susticient to purchase bread for their families.

This sober and moderate manner of proceeding was certainly the general
practice in this province, for a considerable number of years after its first
settlement, when but small quantities of strong liquors, and often none at all
could be procured In a printed oration, not long since pronounced by Dr. Rush,
before the Philosophical Society of this city, we are told at page 65, Some of
you may remember the time, and your fathers have told those of us who do not,
when the diseases of Pennsylvania were as few and as simple as those of the
Indians. The food of the inhabitants was then simple; their only drink was
water; their appetites were restrained by labor: religion excluded the
influence of sickening passions: private hospitality supplied the want of
public hospitals: nature was their only nurse: temperance their principal
physician.
The people in those early times maintained their health, and were enabled to
perform their labor to satisfaction. But this did not long continue, the great
call for our provisions brought us into connections with those countries from
whence rum was procured; and the desire of gain has since in a progressive
increase, induced our traders to bring us plenty of distilled spirits, and
together with them diseases and death in return for our flour, and other useful
produce. So early as the year 1728, Extract from the Pennsylvania Cazette, for
the year 1728. Philadelphia, the 7th of the 41th month, 1728, we have the
following surprising though authentic account of rum imported in Pennsylvania
the last year.

6 Puncheons, 1556 Hogsheads, 927 Tierces, 276 Barrels,
Which, by computation is 224,500 gallons, of which there was exported but
^1400 gallons.

So that by a modest computation there has been cousumed in one year, at least
twenty five thousand pounds in rum. This excessive drinking of rum, as it has
slain its thousands, is likely to destroy its ten thousands, for by its
corrosive and fiery property, is debauches the stomach, dries up the radical
moisture, poisons the juices, inflames the blood; unsheaths the bowels,
debilitates the nerres and stepifies the brain.


we find the introduction and consumption of rum had made an amazing progress,
and began to rouse the attention of some of the considerate, may I not say, of
the lovers of their country in that day. And from the too apparent general use,
there is no room to suppose but that it has gone on in an increased proportion
to our numbers; though not now so easily ascertained, from the additional numbers
of ports, and various means of procuring it: Nor ought we to omit, in such
accounts, the large quantities of whisky and other liquors distilled amongst
ourselves from grain, fruit, and molasses, which cannot well be calculated.

I have heard of several thoughtful people who, from a persuasion that the
common method of giving spirituous liquors to laborers was exceeding hurtful,
have made it a condition with those they have employed, not to use any
spirituous liquors in their fields; these have had their work performed to good
satisfaction, and without any damage ensuing to their laborers. Nay, where
they have remained any considerable time with such employers, they have
generally acknowledged themselves sensible of the benefit arising from having
thus totally refrained the use of those liquors. A particular instance of this
kind occurred last summer, in the case of Joshua Evans, of Haddonfield; this
considerate person being convinced that the use of rum and other spirituous
liquors, was extremely hurtful to the laboring people; more especially during
the time of harvest, apprehended it to be his duty, to become an example in
opposition to this pernicious custom; and he concluded to run all risques of
loss and damage, which might happen to himself by the delay of bringing in his
harvest, rather than comply with a custom which he apprehended to be so
destructive of his fellow men.

He therefore offered sixpence per day more than other farmers, to such
laborers as were willing to assist in bringing in his harvest, on condition
that no spirituous liquors should be used in his fields. Notwithstanding the
singularity of such a proposal, a sufficient number of laborers offered
themselves, to whom he remarked, That the hurrying manner in which the people
drove on their labor in the harvest field, caused an unnatural ferment and
heat in their bodies, and of course an excessive thirst ensued, which often
occasioned their drinking water, or small liquors, in such immoderate degree as
to become hurtful and very dangerous, that this was generally assigned as a
person for the use of spirituous liquors: That, in order to avoid these
extremes, he proposed to lead them himself in the harvest work, desiring they
would go no faster than he did; they acted accordingly, and his corn was cut
down and brought in as well, if not better, than ever it had been before; and
though the people drank little but water or milk and water, choosing it rather
than cider and water, or small beer, which they were not used to; they went
through their business with satisfaction to him and themselves. This person has
pursued the same course with laborers he has hired for other work; who, though
accustomed to spirituous liquors, after having served him several days, have
frankly acknowledged they had done very well without them, finding themselves
in a better state both of body and mind, than when they began to work for him.

This is a plain instance in contradiction to the common prejudice, that
laboring people cannot with safety perform their work without using those
liquors. Several more examples might be instanced of some considerate people
who have made it a rule not to make any use of spirituous liquors, either
amongst their workmen in the prosecution of their trades, or on their
plantations. To these experience has shown, that their people could not only do
as well without it, but found themselves much better in health, and well
satisfied in mind.

Several physicians of eminence have declared themselves in favor of this
sentiment; amongst others, the celebrated doctor Buchan, in his Domestic
Medicine, or Family Physician, a work so well esteemed as to have been, within
these two years, twice reprinted in this city. At page 71, of the English
edition, he says, Many imagine that hard labor could not be supported without
drinking strong liquors. This, though a common, is a very erroneous notion. Men
who never tasted strong liquors are not only able to endure more fatigue, but
also live much longer than those who use them daily The few of these, who
notwithstanding their excess, may have attained to a considerable age, it is
most reasonable to suppose, would have lived much longer, had they been
temperate.
But suppose strong (...) did enable a man to do more work, they must
nevertheless waste the powers of life, and of course occasion premature old
age. They keep up a constant fever, which wastes the spirits, heats and
inflames the blood, and predisposes the body to numberless diseases.

At page, the same author tells us, That all intoxicating liquors may be
considered as poisons. However disguised, that is their real character, and
sooner or later they will have their effect. It is a prevailing opinion in
favor of drinking spirituous liquors at harvest, and other hard labor, that
it gives relief by throwing out the sweat. Now, moderate quantities of any
small liquor, even water itself, if not drank too cold, and particularly if
sweetened with molasses, and a little sour'd with some proper acid, would
certainly answer the purpose, without the bad effects which attend the use of
spirits.

It is well known that a pint of good molasses will, in distillation, afford
rather more than a pint of good proof rum; therefore must contain as much, if
not more real strength than the same quantity of rum, without any of its
noxious qualities; being then in the state the Almighty first formed it, the
fiery property so clothed and united with the earthy and balsamic parts, as to
cause it to be quite friendly to our nature, and not liable to intoxicate; as
the spirit alone will, when separated by distillation from the other parts.

Small beer or water mixed with some of our home made wines; or, as before
said, water mixed with a due quantity of molasses, made agreeably acid, to such
as choose it, by mixing it with a due proportion of cider, or some other acid
liquor, or even good vinegar We find by history, that the Roman soldiers in
their long marches, often through parching deserts, loaded with heavy armor,
used vinegar and water as the most suitable refreshment, they carried with them
two vessels, either of tin or leuther, the one filled with water, the other
with vinegar. It also appears from scripture, in the case of Ruth, when in the
learvest field of Boaz, that it was customary to make use of vinegar, as a
suitable refreshment in that labor. Ruth, chap. ii.

I was informed by a person who resided some time with the Indians, that they
made a drink with parched corn, which was very agreeable and refreshing. The
corn, after being parched, is pounded and sifted, the mealy part mixed in
water, with molasses or sugar, to this some proper acid might be added, which
would make it yet more agreeable and wholesome.


; milk and water, or even water itself, if used with caution, will answer all
the purposes of common drink for laboring people.

Amongst the several prejudices in favor of the mistaken use of spirituous
liquors, there is none gives it a greater sanction or support, than the
prevailing opinion, even with persons of reputation, that what they term a
moderate quantity of rum mixed with water, is the best and safest liquor that
can be drank; hence consirming it, that spirit in one form or other is
necessary. To such who have not been accustomed, and think they cannot
habituate themselves to drink water, there may appear to be some kind of plea
in this argument, especially to travelers, who often meet with beer, cider, or
other fermented liquors that are dead, hard, sour, or not properly fermented,
which tend to generate air in the bowels, producing colicks, etc. But I believe
if those persons suffered the weight of the subject, and the consequence of the
encouragement they thereby give to the use of these destructive spirits, to
take proper place with them, it might suggest the propriety, if not necessity,
of introducing a more salutary practice to themselves and families. That pure
fluid (water) which the benevolent father of the family of mankind points out
for general use, is so analogous to the human frame, that except in a very few
cases, people might with safety gradually use themselves to it: And as to such
well disposed people who still retain a favorable opinion for the use of
spirit mixed with water, ought they not, even from love to mankind, to
endeavor to refrain from, and example others against it, (on account of the
prodigious havoc made by the use of spirits) agreeable to the example set us
by the Apostle Paul, Cor. viii. 13. If meat make my brother to offend, I will
eat no flesh while the world stands, lest I make my brother to offend; how
much more then ought they to refrain from that which may tend to establish
mankind in a practice so generally destructive; more especially when they
consider the danger themselves are in, of increasing the quantity of spirit
with their water; as it has been observed, that the use of this mixture is
particularly apt, almost imperceptibly, to gain upon those who use it; so that
many otherwise good and judicious people, have, unwarily to themselves and
others, fallen with the common herd, a sacrifice to this mighty devourer. And
where water is met with, as is sometimes the case, which is scarce fit to
drink; its vain to think to remove the noxious qualities by mixing it with
spirit; for though bad water may be made more palatable by mixing spirit with it,
yet all the bad qualities of the water will remain, to which will only be
superadded the bad qualities of the spirit. There are many ways proposed by
which water may be helped without any such additions, as by filtration, through
porous stones, or through an earthen vessel, in the bottom of which there is a
quantity of sand, which retains the noxious mixture. Hard water may be made
soft by boiling, or by being exposed to the sun and air. Some propose mixing
water, which is impure, with loam; this being well stirred and left to settle,
the noxious parts will subside with the loam, and the water may be drawn off
clear and sit for use.

Dr. Cheyne in his treatise before mentioned, observes, That without all
peradventure, water is the primitive original beverage; as it is the only
simple fluid sitted for diluting, moistening and cooling -- the ends of drink,
appointed by nature, and happy had it been for the race of mankind, it other
mixed and artificial liquors had never been invented. It has been an agreeable
appearance to me, says this author, to observe with what freshness and vigor
those who, though eating freely of flesh meat, yet drank nothing but this
element, have lived in health, indolence, and cheerfulness to a great age.
Water alone is sufficient and effectual for all the purposes of human wantin
drink. Strong liquors were never designed for common use. They were formerly
kept in England, as other medicines are, in apotherearies shops. Speaking of
the effects of wine (a liquor in general much less hurtful than distilled
spirits) which he says to have been so much in use at the time he wrote, that
the better sort of people scarcely diluted their food with any other liquor, he
remarks, That as natural causes will always produce their proper eslects, their
blood was inslamed into gout, stone, and rheumatism, raging fevers, pleurisies,
etc. Water is the only dissolvent or menstruum, and the most certain diluter of
all bodies proper for food.

Doctor Short, in his discourse of the inward use of water, speaks much in its
commendation. He says, we can draw a very convincing argument of the excellency
of water, from the longevity and healthfulness of those who at first had no
better liquor, and the health and strength of body and serenity of mind of
those who at this day have no other common liquor to drink. Of this the common
people amongst the Highlands of Scotland, are a sussicient instance, amongst
whom it is no rarity to find persons of eighty, ninety, yea an hundred years of
age, as healthy, strong, and nimble, as wine or ale bibbers are at thirty-six
or forty I was informed by a person of credit, from his own observations in
Scotland, of the strength and hardiness of the common people there; and of
their ability to bear cold and fatigue; though the cold is great in winter, and
their support in some parts principally, if not wholly when abroad confined to
oatmeal and water; he has seen a shepherd laid down to rest on sleep on the
mountain, without any shelter, wrapped up in his played in cold snowy weather,
such as would have froze most other people.
The excellency of water, the doctor says, may be argued from the great success
people, otherwise despicable, have attained over other nations, while they
remained content with the product of nature for drink. Of this the Persian,
Grecian, and Roman monarchies are instances. This was also the case of our
ancestors, the Saxons, Danes, and Normans, whilst their manners remained
simple, and their food and drink such as nature had provided, they increased to
such a degree, that their country not being able to contain them, they were
obliged to send out swarms of people to seek for settlements in the more
southern parts of the world; these gradually settled themselves in the
different parts of the Roman empire: But since those Northern Kingdoms have
forsaken the wholesome customs of their forefathers, and habituated themselves
to the use of strong liquors, they are so enfeebled, and their numbers have so
much decreased, that many parts of their own country now remain uncultivated.
The rulers easy under the pecuniary advantages which arise, themselves enslaved
to the practice of drinking to excess, look without concern on this enormous
ruin of multitudes of their fellow men. Thus it is in Russia, where a vast
revenue is raised from distilled spirituous liquors, and a multitude of people
proportionably large, are destroyed thereby. Again says the doctor, There is a
ridiculous maxim used by drinkers, that water makes but thin blood, not fit for
business -- I say it is water only that can endue its drinkers with the
strongest bodies and most robust constitutions, where exercise or labor is
joined with it, since it best assists the stomach and lungs to reduce the
aliments into the smallest particles, that they may better pass the strainers
of the body, which separates the nutritious parts of the blood to be applied to
the sides of the vessels, and exercise invigorates the fibers and muscles;
whereas the rapid motion of the blood excited by drinking spirituous liquors,
can not fail of being prejudicial to the body, it will cause the watery parts
to dissipate and the remaining grow thick and tough, and the event be
obstructions, inflammations, imposthumations, etc. -- and though strong liquors
afford a greater flow of spirit for a short time, yet this is always followed
with as much lowness of spirit; so that to gain a necessary stock of spirits,
the person is obliged to repeat the same force, till he learns a custom of
drinking drams. In this we are confirmed, if we consider the great strength and
hardiness of poor rusticks in many parts of the world, whose provisions is
mostly vegetable food, and their drink water." The doctor adds, "That it often
happens that persons of tender, weakly, crazy constitutions, by refraining
strong liquors and accustoming themselves to drink water, make shift to spin
out many years.

Doctor Cadogan, in his treatise on the gout, lately printed in this city,
tells us, That water is the only liquor nature knows of, or has provided for
all animals, and whatsoever nature gives we must depend upon it, is best and
safest for us; accordingly we see that when we have committed any excess or
mistake of any kind, and suffer for it, it is water that relieves. Hence the
chief good of bath, spa, and many other medicinal waters, especially to hard
drinkers. It is that element that dilutes and carries off crudities and
indigestions, etc. the mineral virtues they contain may make them tolerable to
the stomach in their passage, but do, as I believe, little more in the body, it
is the water that cures. Wine was given us as a cordial.

Cheyne says he has known men of weak and tender constitutions, who could
neither eat nor digest upon drinking wine, who, by drinking at meals common
water heated, have recovered their appetites and digestion, etc. have thriven
and grown plump. Speaking of malt liquors, he gives it as his sentiment, that a
weak stomach can as readily, and with less pain, digest pork and pease soup, as
Yorkshire or Nottingham ale: he adds, That they are of so glutinous a nature as
to make excellent bird lime, and when simmered sometime over a gentle fire,
make the most sticking, and the best plaster for old strains that can be
contrived. Even the small beer that is commonly drank at London, if it be not
well boiled, very clear, and of a due age, must be hurtful to persons of weak
nerves and slow digestion.

Doctor Buchan tells us, The great quantity of viscid malt liquor drank by the
common people of England, cannot fail to render the blood sizy and unfit for
circulation, from whence proceed obstructions and inflammations of the lungs.
Those who drink ardent spirits or strong wine, do not run less hazard; these
liquors heat and inflame the blood, and tear the tender vessels of the lungs in
pieces.

Doctor Short, page 33, after describing the many distempers produced by
drinking of malt and other fermented liquors, adds, That seeing constitutions
differ, it is not to be expected that spirituous liquors should produce all the
same symptoms in one and the same person, yet that all drinkers have several of
them; and if they come not to that height, its because they afterward use
great exercise or hard labor, with sometimes thin diluting liquors, which
prevent their immediate hurting Doctor Edward Bancroft, in his natural history
of Guiana, which includes the colonies of Surinam, Barbices, etc. writes, That
the inhabitants derive no small assistance from the Indians -- some of whom
reside on almost every plantation. -- These Indians however, are debauched by
luxury and intemperance, and their manners but ill agree with those of the
Indians who have preserved their natural innocence and simplicity. They are
encouraged in their propensity to intemperance by the whites, who freely supply
them with rum, thereby to attach them more firmly to their service, which
confiderably impairs their health and diminishes their numbers. -- Speaking of
the diseases incident to the country, he says, These are as numerous as in
other countries, where they have been augmented by cookery, with its
stimulating, provocative arts, exciting inordinate appetites, by multiplying
the variety of dishes, which blended in the stomach, compose such an
incongruous medly, that the digestive organs cannot possibly assimilate the
pernicious mass to wholesome chyle. Nor has intemperate luxury been confined to
this single innovation. Water, the natural drink of (...) kind as of all other
animals, is now contaminated by the mixture of pernicious spirits, which have
p^^^^^ed one of the principal blesings of life. From this source are derived
those tribes of diseases which oppress humanity.
.

Its customary, and often necessary in the summer season, particularly in
afternoons, for people who are spent by labor or application, to have recourse
to some kind of refreshment. This is generally of two kinds, very different in
their nature and effect, viz. The one is a mixture of spirituous liquors, as
punch, grog, etc. or fermented liquors, as cider, beer, etc. The other is mild
and diluting, such as tea, or coffee, etc. The use of spirituous or fermented
liquors, for the reasons already given, are hurtful and dangerous; more
especially, as the sorrowful experience of many within knowledge, has taught
that there is very great danger of even sober people who use them, with what is
termed moderation, becoming habituated and gradually increasing their strength
and quantity, till it proves the ruin of themselves and families.

This caution can scarcely be too often repeatod, as it has been so frequently
the melancholy situation of persons, other wise valuable members of society.
But the use of mild diluting drinks, such as coffee, or the several sorts of
teas, either of our own produce or those brought from the Indies, may be truly
cermed innocent and friendly to our naturcs, and very proper to promote a good
perspiration and recruit our spirits when dissipated through application or
labor. And as the use of these innocent dilutors have not escaped censure,
more especially from persons who are attached to the use of spirituous or
fermented liquers; it may be agrecable to the reader, to hear the sentiments of
doctor Cheyne on the subject. And here it may be well to remark that these
observations were addressed to the people of England, where the heat not being
so great as in these parts, those restorative dilutent drinks are not so
frequently necessary. A dish or two of coffee, the doctor says, with a little
milk to soften it, in raw or damp weather, or on a waterish and phlegmatic
stomach, is not only innocent but a present relief. -- Tea (...) ^^ddling
priced is esteemed the (...)
, particularly Green, when light and softened with a little milk, if neither
too strong nor too hot, he looks upon as a very proper dilutent, very suitable
to cleanse the alimentary passages, and wash of the scorbutic and urinous
salts: He also recommends tea made of sliced orange or lemon, as one of the
best promoters of digestion after a full meal, or when people are dry between
meals. As to persons of weak and tender perves, who find that upon using of
these drinks with freedom, or in too great quantity, they fall into lowness and
trembling; such ought to use them with moderation and caution.

Again we know, says he, that warm water will most of any thing, promote and
assist digestion in persons of weak stomachs and tender nerves; by this alone I
have seen several such persons recover to a miracle, when cold mineral waters,
bitters, cordials, and drams have done rather harm than good. -- Tea is but an
infusion in water of an innocent plant: Innocent -- I says, because we find by
its taste, it (...) neither poisonous, deleterious, nor acrimonious qualities;
and we are certain from its use, in the countries it come from Chambers in his
dictionary of arts and sciences, (...) us, That the Chinese are always taking
(...), specially at meals; it is the chiefest treat (...) they regale their
friends. The most (...) it at least thrice a day.
, (which are larger than Europe) that they receive no damage from it; but on
the contrary, that it promotes both digestion and perspiration. The arguments
for its relaxing the coats of the stomach and bowels by its heat, are of no
force; for unless it be drank much hotter than the blood, it can do no hurt
that way. -- However, I would advise those who drink tea plentifully, not to
drink it much hotter than blood warm, whereby they will receive all its
benefits, and be secure against all the harm it can possibly do.

Doctor Engelbertus Kaempfer, physician of the Dutch embassy to the emperor of
Japan, in his account of that (...), giving a particular account of (...),
preparation, and use of tea; says, is so common in Japan, that travelers drink
scarce any thing else upon the road. -- The fresh gathered leaves are dried or
roasted over the fire in an iron pan, and when hot, rolled with the palm of the
hand on a matt, till they become curled. They have public roasting houses built
for this very purpose, and contrived so that every body may bring their leaves
to be coasted. The doctor makes no distinction between green and bohea; the
only difference from his account, arises from the different time of gathering.
The first, gathered whilse the leaves are tender, has the best flavor and is
most valuable; the second is less so: the last, gathered when the leaves are
full grown is the cheapest. He gives it as his sentiments, from his
observations of the effect of tea, that when properly prepared and of a due
age, it gently refreshes the animal spirits, and wonderfully chears and
comforts the mind; it opens obstructions, cleanses the blood, and more
particularly removes that tartarous matter which is the efficient cause of
gravelly and gouty disternpers. This he says it does so effectually, that he
never met with any who was troubled either with the gout or stone, amongst the
tea-drinkers of Japan. He adds that he is wholly of opinion that the use of
teas would be attended with the same success in the like eases, even in Europe,
were it not for an herediltary disposition, for either of these distempers
derived to some persons from their ancestors; and which is frequently chenished
and fomented by a too plentiful use of wine, beer, strong liquors and flesh
meats. It appears the use of tea meets with opposition in the East countries,
as well as amongst ourselves, from those persons whose practice contradicts the
use of these kinds of innocent diluting drinks: for the doctor remarks, That in
Japan the use of tea is very much cried down by those persons who are lovers of
sakii beer, which is there brewed from rice.

All the good qualities ascribed by the above mentioned physicians, to foreign
tea, may be as truly applied to teas made of our own country produce, such as
sage, balm, burnet, sassafrass, etc. etc. these I am persuaded would answer
all, if not more and better purposes than the foreign teas. But I spare to say
much on this head at present, lest by discouraging the use of any mild diluting
drink, (especially one in such general use, and which simply considered as a
diluent, must be acknowledged a good substitute,) any strength should be given
to the use of spirituous or fermented liquors in its stead.

We may also make a very good refreshing drink of the nature of coffee; from
roasted wheat, barley, rye, or chestnuts, full as agreeable, wholesome, and
nourishing, if not much more so than coffee itself.

Upon the whole (...) may be asked, What can be done toward preventing or
putting a check to the prodigious havoc made by the present use of spirituous
liquors? To this I shall reply with the respectable author first mentioned. Let
such lawmakers, governors, and rulers, who retain any love and pity for their
fellow men; let these be earnestly requested seriously, and solemnly to
consider, whether it is not their indispensable duty to use their utmost
endeavors, that a stop may be put to this dreadful calamity; let not the
apprehension of loss or any present inconveniency, deter any from doing their
duty in this respect, because there cannot any inconveniences possibly arise
from the redress of this grievance, which deserves to be named with those evils
which will be the undoubted consequence of its continuance. The reasons that
have hitherto prevailed to the countenancing of this most destructive practice,
ought surely to be rejected with scorn and indignation, when the welfare of
such vast numbers are so deeply concerned. What multitudes of lives would
thereby be saved, and what innumerable outrages, as thest, murder, etc.
prevented: To rectify which, were an apparently vain and fruitless attempt,
while drunkenness is made the cheapest of all vices. A vice which can no
otherwise be effectually prevented from raging with its present excessive
enormity, and spreading devastation all around, but by laying such high taxes
upon distilled spirituous liquors, as well those made amongst us, as those
imported from abroad, as will make the drinking it sufficiently expensive to
put it out of the reach of so great a number of insatiable drinkers, to use it;
at least in its present degree of strength. -- Alas, says he, how astonishing a
calamity is this, depraving the morals and shortening and destroying the lives
of such multitudes, probably no less than a million yearly all over the world
-- were but one fourth of this number yearly destroyed by raging pestilence,
with what earnest supplications would mankind deprecate so terrifying and sore
an affliction. How severe a judgment is it, when God leaves men to be their own
scourgers? with how unrelenting and unmerciful a heart do they execute the most
severe punishment upon themselves! -- Particulars who view this matter in its
full importance, will query, What can an individual or private man do in the
case? To these it may be observed, That as popular amendments consist wholly of
the actions of individuals, every one who is sincere in his desires, that a
remedy may be applied to this mighty evil, must, to the utmost of his power,
discourage the increase of spirituous liquors either by importation,
distillation, or otherwise, and not deceive themselves, or rather suffer the
God of this world to deceive them by means of the specious pretenses commonly
advanced; such as, That other people will be active in augmenting the quantity
if they do not; or, That however people may abuse themselves through excess, yet
what is deemed a moderate quantity, may lawfully be used; but it may casily be
shown, that these and other arguments commonly advanced, are vain, though
plausible pretenses; that the true motive is the desire of gain: That every new
importer and distiller, (and oh that the vender also may bring his situation to
the true balance) becomes a party to the evil; gives fresh strength to the
practice, by holding out an additional quantity, and of course making it in
some degree cheaper, at least easier for their fellow men to come at, to the
destruction of their brethren, children of the same father, and who as
christians they profess to love as themselves.

And as for such who, though convinced of the impropriety of the practice, yet
for fear of not having their labor performed, or for other reasons, cannot
prevail upon themselves to refrain giving it to their servants and laborers,
let these at least so weaken and qualify it, as to prevent its immediate
destructive effects.

A very eminent physician has given the following direction for the benesit of
those who have not wisdom enough left at once to abandon the odious and
pernicious practice of drinking distilled spirituous liquors, viz. By degrees
to mix water with the spirit; to lessen the quantity every day, and keep to the
same quantity of water, till in about the course of a week, nothing of the dram
kind be used along with the water. By this means the person will suffer no
inconveniency, but reap great benefit upon leaving off drams or spirits, as has
been tried by many. If any gnawing be left in the stomach upon quite leaving it
off, a little warm broth, weak tea, or any thing of that kind, will be of
service. The appetite always increases in a few days after leaving off drams,
unless by the too long continuance of them, the tone of the stomach is
destroyed. And when the stomach is thus affected, a cup of carduus, camomile
tea, wormwood or centaury every morning fasting and every evening, will be
found a good remedy.

Some GENERAL MAXIMS, mostly drawn from the foregoing, which as they cannot be
too obviously held up in the view of the young and inconsiderate, its hoped the
observant reader will excuse the repetition.

THE great rule of diet is to study simplicity: Nature delights in the most
plain and simple food; and every animal, except man, follows her dictates.

Nothing conduces more to health and long life, than abstinence and plain food,
with due labor.

Water alone is sufficient and effectual for all the purposes of human want in
drink: It is the universal dissolvent nature has provided, and the most certain
diluter of all bodies proper for food; quickens the appetite and strengthens
digestion most. Doctor Cheyne and doctor Cadogan.

Strong and spirituous liquors were never designed for common use: They were
formerly kept in England, as other medicines are, in apothecaries shops: If
freely indulged, they become a certain though slow poison. Cheyne.

All intoxicating liquors may be considered as poisons; however disguised, that
is their real character, and sooner or later they will have their effect.
Doctor Buchan.

Every act of intoxication puts nature to the expense of a f^ver, in order to
(...) the poisonous draught; when this is repeated almost every day, it is easy
to foresee the consequence.

Fevers occasioned by drinking, do not always go off in a day, they frequently
end in an inflammation of the breast, liver, or brain, and produce fatal
effects.

There is no danger in leaving off drinking strong liquours at once, the (...)
for continuing them being false and groundless. Cheyne.

Strong liquors do not prevent the mischiefs of a surfeit, nor carry it off so
safely as water, though they seem to give present relief. Cheyne.

Many imagine that hard labor could not be supported without drinking strong
liquors. This though a common, is a very erroneous opinion: Men who never tasted
strong liquors, are not only able to endure more fatigue, but also live much
longer than those who use them daily. Buchan.

Every thing that has past the fire, so that it has had due time to divide and
penetrate its parts, as in distillation, as far as it possibly can, retains a
caustic corrosive and burning quality ever afterward.

In the continued distilation of spirits, the action of fire is so strong as to
reduce them to liquid fire at last; which will of themselves evaporate in
visible flames and sumes. Cheyne.

The great quantity of viscid malt liquor drank by the common people of
England, cannot fail to render the blood sizy and unfit for circulation, from
whence proceed obstructions and inflammations of the lungs, etc. Buchan.

Malt liquors (excepting clear small beer of due age) are extremely hurtful to
tender and studious persons. Cheyne.

There are few great ale drinkers who are not phthisical, nor is that to be
wondered at, considering the glutinous and almost indigestible nature of strong
ale. Buchan.

Those who drink ardent spirits or strong wines do not run less hazard; these
liquors heat and inflame the blood, and tear the tender vessels of the lungs in
pieces. Buchan.

Doctor Cadogan in his late treatise on the gout, says, He cannot allow him to
be strictly temperate; who drinks any wine or strong liquors at all, unless it
be medicinally.

THE END.

