To the INHABITANTS of the City and County of NEW YORK.
MY FRIENDS AND FELLOW CITIZENS,
IT has frequently given Pain to every Well-Wisher of his Country, when it has
been observed, that in many of our public Assemblies, Party-Zeal, instead of
Public-Good, has evidently biased the Minds of those who have constituted these
Assemblies. Sensible of the pernicious Tendency of such Divisions, both with
Respect to our Transactions here (the Importance, of whose Consequences,
requires the coolest, calmest Deliberation) and to the Advantage it may give
our Enemies abroad, I am induced, as a Friend to the Liberties of America, to
offer my Mite to the public Fund; and well shall I consider it applied, if any
Man is thereby enabled to divest himself of that Prejudice which, to our Shame
and Dishonor it is spoken, has long held us in the worst of Slavery. The great
Importance of an Union amongst ourselves has been Theme of many a Patriot: All
assent to the Truth of the Proposition, and yet, strange as it may appear, but
few act as if influenced by what their Judgments seem to approve. To show the
particular Necessity of Unanimity, at this Period, is the Intention of the
present Address. You need not be informed, my Fellow Citizens, that Fifty-one
Gentlemen were by this City appointed, to be a Committee, to correspond with
the Committees of our Sister-Colonies; to inform them of the Transactions of
this Province, and to advise upon Means, the most proper to be pursued, in the
present critical Situation of our Liberties. This they have faithfully
performed. It has been agreed to by the different Colonies, that a Congress
ought to be held of Delegates from each Province, in order, unitedly, to point
out the Way in which we, Hand in Hand, should walk. Deputies in several Places
have been appointed, and various Modes, by which to choose ours, proposed. The
Mode, which admits of fewest Objections, is that, without Controversy, by which
the most unexceptionable Persons would be chosen; by which Confusion would be
avoided, and the Inhabitants satisfied.

Since our provincial Assembly could not be convened, what Body, my Brethren,
can be more fit to nominate Persons to represent you, in the grand political
Convention, than that, in whose Hands you have already entrusted very important
Concerns? They have accordingly nominated for your Approbation five Persons;
Men, whose Characters are unexceptionable; whose Abilities shine with unsullied
Luster, and whose Love for their Country, and Regard to its Liberties, cannot
be doubted. ISAAC LOW, JOHN ALSOP, JOHN JAY, PHILIP LIVINGSTON, and JAMES DUANE,
are the Gentlemen thus nominated, Men known to you all, and, no Doubt, by all
approved. -- Let us, my Countrymen, prove by our Conduct, on Thursday next,
when the public Approbation of these Persons will be asked, that we are
actuated by a real Regard to our Liberties -- that Party-Spirit, the Bane of
public Virtue, no longer influences us -- that we are united as one Body,
informed by one honest Soul. -- Let us not disapprove of those, of whom cool,
dispassionate Reason must approve: and by our Disunion give an Evidence to the
World, that our Strife is not, who will do his Country most Service (which
indeed should be our only Contention) but who, with the greatest Virulence,
will serve his Party. -- If we are divided, my Brethren, in the Choice of our
Delegates, the Body, of which they are to be Members, will be the less perfect;
its Resolutions will not be judged so obligatory on each Province; nor will its
Determinations be considered by our Enemies, as the Determination of America.
--

Tell me, my Countrymen, what Delegates can we require, if not Men of Probity,
Wisdom and Patriotism. These Qualities are universally allowed to be possessed
by the Persons whom your Committee have chosen, and by your Confirmation of
their Choice, you will prove yourselves Friends to Probity, to Wisdom, and your
Country.

AN AMERICAN.
JULY 5, 1774.

