Man of Real Sensibility: OR THE HISTORY OF SIR GEORGE ELLISON.

Dear SENSIBILITY! -- Source inexhausted of all that is precious in our Joys, or
costly in our Sorrows. -- It Is here I feel thee -- it is thy Divinity that stirs
within me. -- For that I feel some generous joy -- some generous care beyond my
self. -- All comes from Thee -- STERNE's Sentim. Journey. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED
by JAMES HUMPHREYS, JUNE. in FRONT-STREET. M DCC LXXIV.

PREFACE.
THE lives of good or eminent persons, have always been thought a very useful
study, as they set before us examples which may incite us to virtue, and trace
out to us a path, wherein emulation may induce us to walk. But the Author of
this little History, which is founded on fact presumes, that the life of a man,
more than ordinarily good, whose station and opportunies of acting are on a
level with a great part of mankind, might afford a more useful lesson than the
lives of his superiors, as being more within the reach of imitation.

THE HISTORY OF SIR GEORGE ELLISON.
SIR George Ellison's father was the younger son of an ancient and opulent
family, and as such received only a small proportion of his father's wealth,
but by his profession was enabled to live genteely. He dedicated all his
leisure hours to the care of his children's education: Their learning he left
to proper masters; the object of his attention was their hearts. He instructed
them fully in the Christian religion, and showed them that it was the best
foundation, as well as surest support of moral virtue.

Before his son George had completed his one and twentieth year, his family, by
the death of his wife and two children, was reduced to two sons and one
daughter. James his second son, was then but twelve, and his daughter fourteen
years old. This difference in their ages determined Mr. Ellison to trust in his
son George's hands two thirds of the sum of 4000l. of which he was possessed.
By so good a capital he hoped to secure the success of his eldest son, whose
disposition gave him reason to believe he should thereby do the best service to
his other children. He knew the young man to be perfectly sober, humane, and
generous, and at the same time an exceeding good oeconomist extremely diligent,
and well inclined to that care of, and attention to his affairs, so necessary
for those who undertake merchandise. And indeed, George, as he entered into
merchandise, he wished to pursue it in the most profitable manner, indifferent
as to any inconveniences which might attend it. He therefore endeavored to
settle correspondences with some of the less adventurous merchants, by whose
means he might negotiate a quick trade from Jamaica, where he intended to fix;
and the character he had established in the city, by his excellent behavior
during his apprenticeship with Mr. Lamont, an eminent merchant, rendered him
successful in both these articles; and with warm hopes, though tender concern,
he took leave of his father and this kingdom, well provided with correspondents
here, and recommendations to the principal people in Jamaica.

Five years after his first settling at Jamaica, he acquainted his father with
his resolution of returning the whole capital he set out with, observing the
hazard his brother and sister ran by his being entrusted with the whole; but,
that his father might not apprehend he was distressing himself, he further
informed him that he had now raised a capital of 6000l. to which he should
always think he had as good a title as himself.

If Mr. Ellison's good conduct gained him the esteem of his own sex, we may
easily suppose the other was not insensible of his merit; especially as it was
accompanied by a very fine person, a face handsome from great symmetry of
features, but still more from vivacity, sensibility, and sweetness of
countenance; a manner and address polite and engaging, and a turn for
conversation peculiarly agreeable. As the manners of Jamaica are not peculiarly
reserved, many intimations were given to him of the favorable disposition of
the Ladies; but his attention was so totally engaged by his business, that the
strongest hints were lost upon him; Yet the politeness of his behavior, and
the cheerfulness of his temper, so well concealed the coldness of his heart,
that to warm it seemed no impracticable attempt; and prudence, as well as
inclination, might dispose many to endeavor to gain the affections of so
worthy and so successful a young man. No woman had the mortification of
thinking she had a rival, till a widow Lady entered the lists.

This Lady was seven years older than Mr. Ellison, having completed her three
and thirtieth year. Though the bloom of youth was past, she was still handsome,
and behaved very prudently in the different states of life in which she had
appeared; was possessed of ten thousand pounds in money, and a plantation of no
less value. Mr. Ellison's friends persuaded him not to let slip so good an
opportunity of improving his fortune; since, without those advantages, her
character and person rendered it an eligible match. He listened, without
reluctance, to the advice of his friends, but, being sensible he should feel
double satisfaction if he had his father's sanction, he would not make any
direct address to the Lady, till he had received that necessary consent. His
father took the first opportunity of removing this impediment, sending not only
his consent but his approbation, accompanied with the warmest wishes for his
happiness.

Mr. Ellison, whose inclination for the Lady had increased with acquaintance,
received his father's letter with joy; and, now making an express declaration
of his attachment, the widow, without affected reluctance, accepted his
proposal, and the marriage was soon completed.

By the alteration of his fortune, Mr. Ellison found his sphere of action
extended; but (as is frequently the case) this gave him great uneasiness. The
thing which had chiefly hurt him during his abode in Jamaica, was the cruelty
used on one part of mankind, as if the difference of complexion excluded them
from the human race. He had not been married above a week before he gave great
offense to his wife and steward, by putting a stop to a most severe punishment,
just beginning to be inflicted on a great number of them, who, intoxicated with
the pleasures of a holy day, had not returned home at the time commanded. 'I
am, said he, determined, henceforward, to ease your steward of this part of his
business; the produce of the land he may still attend, but those who cultivate
it shall be my care; he is not fit to be trusted with any thing but what is
inanimate. And that you may not think I pay too high a price for this
indulgence of my compassion, or rather this compliance with my conscience, I
will endeavor to find a means of rendering our slaves obedient, without
violating the laws of justice and humanity.'

Mrs. Ellison was mortified to find her husband incorrigible in so material an
article, fearing least her fortune should suffer through his simplicity; but
humanity, when sufficiently warm and steady, seldom waits long for the power
and opportunity of exertion. He soon formed a plan, and set about the execution
of it with the utmost diligence. Afterward haranguing his slaves, 'While you
perform your duty, said he, I shall look upon you as free servants, or rather
like my children, for whose well-being I am ever anxious and watchful. I have
provided you with convenient habitations; given you a plentiful portion of all
necessaries; assigned to each a small share of peculiar property; taken care of
you in sickness; and considered your ease in health; I have increased your
liberty; promoted your amusements; and much lightened your punishments. But
still these are too heavy; I cannot feel myself so superior to any of my
fellow creatures, as to have a right of correcting them severely. I am
determined therefore, for the future, to abolish all corporal punishments. I
shall require nothing of you that can be properly thought a hardship; but, if
gratitude and prudence cannot bind you to good behavior, the first offense
shall be punished by excluding you from partaking of the next weekly holy days;
for the second fault you shall not only be deprived of your diversion, but of a
day's food; and, if these gentle corrections do not reform you, on the third
offense you shall be sold to the first purchaser, however low the price
offered; and this sentence is irreversible; no prayers, no entreaties, shall
move me. The man who, after so happy a change to his condition, can repeatedly
offend, is not worthy to be the object of my care; and shall become the
property of some master, whose chastisements may keep within the bounds of duty
the actions of that man, whose heart cannot be influenced by gratitude, or his
own true interest.'

Mr. Ellison's humanity had already gained the affections of his slaves, but on
this declaration they almost adored him, and in the strongest terms promised
him, and themselves likewise, never to offend so good a master, in such a
manner as to bring them under the heavy sentence he had pronounced against
those who persevered in disobedience. This was at that time the real sentiments
of their hearts, but human frailty had left scarcely the resolution of one
unbroken; yet few of them were so senseless as to incur the third punishment.
The first who was so unfortunate, when he found that the sentence was going to
be put in execution, was almost distracted, and was with difficulty restrained
from doing violence on himself. His importunate entreaties for pardon extremely
distressed Mr. Ellison. To deny the poor wretch a farther trial grieved him to
the soul; and yet he saw that a strict adherence to his first declaration was
absolutely necessary; he therefore resolved to endure the conflict, though not
unmoved, yet with unaltered purpose; and to show them that, in despite of his
compassion, which was too great to be concealed, he was still inflexible.

Mrs. Ellison, who met him as he returned from this unhappy wretch, was amazed
at his uneasiness. 'Surely, said she, you have no spirit, if you can pity such
an ungrateful creature. I hope you are sensible it is a great weakness to be so
tamely forgiving.' 'How (...) I think so, replied Mr. Ellison, when I see such
various proofs that the Being, in whom there is no weakness, who is all
perfection, is far more forgiving than any of his creatures? He is love and
mercy itself; can then any portion of the divine nature, that part of his image
which he stamped on man, be esteemed a failing! How much more disobedient are
the best of us to him, than our slaves are to us? Yet he does not crush us with
his power; he neither sends the lightnings to blast the offender, nor
pestilence to consume a sinful country; he bears with us year after year, gives
us frequent calls and admonitions to repentance, and leaves us a long season
for amendment.'

As Mrs. Ellison was not deficient in understanding, she saw there was some
truth in what her husband had said; but it was a truth her reason could more
easily perceive, than her heart feel, for it was steeled by habit.

Mr. Ellison, soon after his marriage, had desired his father to send him over
a proper person to teach reading, writing, and accounts; leaving him at liberty
as to the stipend, only desiring that the man might be sober and virtuous. As
soon as this person arrived, he gave him a neat house and established him
schoolmaster, sending all the children of his Negroe slaves to be under his
tuition. He caused them to be instructed in the principles of the Christian
religion, hoping thereby to civilize their manners, and rectify their
dispositions. This office he performed himself to those more advanced in years,
believing instruction would come with more authority and persuasion from him,
as they respected him as their master, and loved him for the happiness they
enjoyed in his service; and certainly such doctrine can scarcely fail of
proving persuasive, when the preacher's actions are so eminently conformable to
his precepts.

By plentiful food and a comfortable life, Mr. Ellison's Negroes became
stronger than any in the island; the natural strength of those who belonged to
other masters being consumed by hardships and hunger. His were therefore able,
with ease, to do so much more work, that he might have diminished their number,
if compassion had not prevented him. He had the satisfaction of seeing his
conduct succeed to his utmost wish. Negroes are naturally faithful and
affectionate, though, on great provocation, their resentment is unbounded, and
they will indulge their revenge, though to their own certain destruction.

Above a year passed away without his being obliged to sell another slave;
which gave him hopes he should never again be exposed to so painful an exertion
of his power. And the poor wretch, whose example had so good an effect on his
companions, had all that time suffered the usual severities under a hard
master. His self-reproaches made him doubly wretched, and, as he lived in a
plantation adjacent to Mr. Ellison's, he was a constant object of compassion to
his former companions, who frequently lamented his fate, and represented his
distress with such pathetic simplicity, as touched Mr. Ellison's compassionate
heart to so great a degree, that he resolved to re-purchase him at any price.
This he effected on more reasonable terms than he hoped, for the poor fellow's
dejection of spirits was such, that it undermined his health, and rendered him
so weak, that his master was very glad to get the price he had given for him.
When he was acquainted with his being again become Mr. Ellison's property, his
joy was near proving fatal, having entirely overpowered his spirits. A holy day
was given to all the slaves to welcome his return, and never was the
restoration of a Monarch celebrated with so much heartfelt, disinterested joy.

But, although the gratitude and assiduity of this poor fellow's future
behavior greatly rewarded his master, yet it produced a disagreeable event;
another slave was encouraged by it to flatter himself that Mr. Ellison would
never again exercise the same severity, since it had proved so painful to him;
but above all, not on one, who was particularly intelligent and useful, as this
slave knew himself to be. On this supposition, he extended his offense to a
third time, but was dreadfully surprised to find himself, notwithstanding his
most earnest entreaties, doomed to be sold. Before the day appointed for the
sale of the offender arrived, he was seized with a violent fever, and his
malady so increased as to render his recovery doubtful, and he was desirous not
to recover. Preferring death to slavery under another master, he refused to
take the remedies prescribed, and earnestly begged he might be suffered to die.
Mr. Ellison thought his condition would sufficiently excuse the reversing of
his sentence; so that the poor man now became as anxious to preserve, as he had
been before desirous of losing his life; and, his mind being at ease, he
recovered from his fever and his perverseness together.

Mrs. Ellison, before the expiration of the first year of their marriage,
brought him a very fine boy. Her fortune enabled him to extend his trade; and
his success therein always answered his wishes. But he was not free from
vexations; Mrs. Ellison, though a good sort of a woman, was one of those who
make bad companions in intimate society. She was so very fond of her husband,
that she was miserable if he was out of her sight. If, when abroad on business,
he did not return just at the hour she expected, he found her in agonies, lest
some misfortune had befallen him; and, with floods of tears, she reproached him
with insensibility of the pain she suffered, from his want of punctuality. If
he expressed an inclination to spend an evening with a friend, she was
inconsolable, and lamented his indifference If he paid the common attentions
which politeness required for any other woman, she was fired with jealousy.
When any generous action of his reached her ears, which could not but happen
frequently, she would most pathetically lament that, 'notwithstanding the fine
fortune she brought, her dear boy would be a beggar,' and upon all emergencies
she would say, that her first husband would not have used her so. Had Mrs.
Ellison openly showed an intention of enslaving her husband, she would have
found him better acquainted with the relative duties of matrimony, than to have
submitted to a disgraceful and unnatural yoke. But, when they were first
married, she restrained only with silken threads; the fetters were forged by
degrees. By the little endearments of excessive fondness, she would bring him
to compliance, when he raised objections from convenience, or politeness; and
unwilling to appear insensible of so much tenderness, he would sometimes delay
business, and break appointments. Every compliance of this sort rendered her
applications more frequent, and if he showed much reluctance, plaintive,
affectionate reproaches of want of love, strengthened the request. Every
conquest more fully convinced her of his weakness; she perceived that his
greatest fear was to give pain; that he could not bear without severe pangs, to
be the cause of uneasiness to any person; but, above all, to one who was
rendered susceptible of it, chiefly by her love for him.

Mr. Ellison, however, at length saw reason to suspect there was more of policy
than love in her behavior; but, before he conceived this suspicion, she had
brought him to a habit of compliance, which he could not shake often without a
stronger effort than the gentleness of his nature would suffer him to exert.

But, if he stood justified to himself, his friends passed a less favorable
sentence. They found themselves deprived of the most agreeable society the
place afforded, and were not a little angry with the occasion of it. Some,
seriously and sensibly, advised him to free himself from his bondage: Others
laughed at him for his pusillanimity. A secret consciousness that the advice
was good, and the ridicule just, made him receive both with great good humor,
but they were equally ineffectual; he eluded them in the best manner he could,
telling the first, that 'to throw off the restraint would give him more trouble
than he found in submitting to it;' and to the jesters he only said 'they must
not wonder if his long application to merchandise had taught him to see every
thing in the light of traffic; and his wife had bought him at so great a price,
that he though it she had a right to make the best of the purchase.' Her power over
him could not be a secret, but he had pride enough to wish to conceal the
uneasiness it gave him.

Mr. Ellison had other vexations, which increased with the age of his little
boy: He was equally the darling of both his parents, but they differed much in
their opinions as to the proofs of that affection. The child was naturally of a
passionate and stubborn temper, which his father saw with concern, and thought
it his duty to keep him within reasonable control; and, if possible, to
conquer faults, which, when strengthened by time and habit, must prove
incorrigible. Mrs. Ellison, on the contrary, called his passion spirit, and his
stubbornness constancy and steadiness, and could not bear he should receive the
least contradiction. She was continually puffing him up with the notion of his
consequence, representing all the people about him as his slaves, and making
them seek to please him by the most abject means. She taught him to look on
them in the same light as she herself did, as creatures destitute of all
natural rights, of sense and feeling. She was pleased to see him vent his
childish passions upon them, and was always ready to gratify his resentments
beyond his wish; and so successful were her endeavors, that, by the time he
arrived at the age of five years, he was a little fury, bursting with pride,
passion, insolence, and obstinacy. Mr. Ellison saw all this with a very
sensible concern; he endeavored to teach his wife the duty of a parent, and to
convince her that her indulgence rendered her the child's most pernicious
enemy; but, having never reasoned in her life, the faculty was too feeble to
enter into the force of his arguments; she was too perverse to attend, and too
weak to be convinced.

He then assumed an air to which she had hitherto been a stranger, and told
her, 'though he had sacrificed his own inclinations to her, she must not expect
to find the same easy temper in him when the welfare of his son was at stake;'
and in the most resolute manner declared, he would not suffer him to be made a
brute. Tears were now called to her aid; she wept for his cruelty, and lamented
the hatred he bore both to her and her child. But all these arts proved now
unavailing; Mr. Ellison's heart was too deeply engaged in the importance of the
cause of their contention, to be moved by any thing she could say; and he kept
so firmly to his point, that she began to think it advisable to calm him by a
seeming compliance, and that she, or her dear darling might not incur Mr.
Ellison's anger, she taught the boy to conceal his thoughts and inclinations,
and to assume such a manner in his father's presence, as for a little time gave
that affectionate parent great pleasure; but it was not long before he found,
that to his other faults his son had now added a degree of deceit and
hypocrisy, beyond what he imagined possible at so early an age; and that, while
he loved his mother for laying the foundation of his future misery, he beheld
him only as an object of terror and hatred. To be superiorly beloved was so
great a gratification to Mrs. Ellison's narrow and ungenerous mind, that she
rejoiced in every symptom of his dislike to his father, though beloved by her
as much as was consistent with such selfish principles as here is.

How truly unhappy is it for mankind that this difference in parents, in regard
to the education of their children, so generally prevails -- the mother fond of
her child to excess, yet, blinded by her fondness, indulges it without reason
-- and the father, tenderly dreading ing the ruin of his child, counteracting
the mother in its presence, while yet unable to judge of right or wrong. -- Mr.
Ellison's conduct, in this respect, was quite different; he was possessed of
such a forethought, and prudent constancy in the wrong he resolved to rectify,
as what is seldom (but which it could be wished were oftener) to be met with.
When he reproved Mrs. Ellison it was always in the absence of his child, and
then indeed, in such a sweet and persuasive manner, that had the child been
present and capable of reason, it must have been won over to its duty, and the
fondest affection for its father.

Mr. Ellison was convinced of what concern and great importance to its future
happiness and welfare depended on the education of his child. He was so
convinced of the pernicious principles that his son was imbibing, and of the
unhappy consequence of them, that rather than have submitted to it he would
have given up his own immediate and domestic quiet. He knew that the evil
habits imbibed at his son's age, took too deep a root, and if not checked in
time, were seldom to be conquered, either by religion, reason or persuasion. He
had too fatal an instance of it in Mrs. Ellison; educated in the islands, she
was familiarised to cruelty and hardened to any idea of sensibility -- she
could laugh at the sufferings of the poor blacks, and would frequently reproach
Mr. Ellison for his humanity toward them. Such also, were the principles she
would have instilled into her child. But Mr. Ellison's forecast of the natural
consequences of this, and how unhappy it must in future render, not only his
child, but all those with whom he might be connected, and more particularly
those under his immediate protection and care, put him on his guard to prevent
it.

When Mr. Ellison found, that all the care he could take toward rectifying his
son's temper was only made the occasion of introducing more evil into his
disposition, he determined, as the last resource, to send him into England with
a friend who was going thither; and there to have him placed at a school, under
the eye of his grandfather, who he knew would watch over him with the most
affectionate attention. To execute this resolution was a most painful talk.
Mrs. Ellison, at first, absolutely refused consenting to it; and to force on
her the grief of parting with her son, who was then but six years old, gave him
more poignant affliction than her heart was capable of feeling for any
misfortune whatsoever.

To remove her objections, he therefore proposed their following the child into
England, as soon as they could settle their affairs in such a manner, as might
enable them to bid a long adieu to Jamaica, without great detriment; but this
administered little consolation to Mrs. Ellison, as she had conceived a dislike
to England, which even her son's being there could not conquer; but forbearing
to declare this, imagining it would make her fondness for the child appear less
than she chose it should be thought, Mr. Ellison, after sending away his boy,
was very assiduous in hastening the means of their leaving the island;
supposing he therein gratified his wife as much as himself.

The most difficult part of his business was to get a steward, who would treat
his slaves with the same gentleness to which he had accustomed them; and he had
nearly settled his commercial affairs, before he saw any probability of finding
a person fit for that important office.

The first rumor of his intended departure caused the utmost consternation
among these poor creatures; they gathered round him, and falling on their
knees, in their imperfect English, cried out, 'Oh! massa, no go, no go; if go,
steward whip, beat, kill poor slave; no go, no go; you go we die.'

He assured them, that he looked upon them all as his children, and promised no
one should supply his place, that did not consider himself as their father.
Instead of being satisfied with this promise, they exclaimed, 'all fathers not
good; no father like you;' and such torrents of tears would accompany their
words, as frequently staggered his resolution. Notwithstanding the most
affectionate assurances he could give them, melancholy constantly sat on their,
before happy, countenances; at their holy day meetings, instead of indulging
the jollity of which they used to be so fond, their hours were spent in
lamenting their approaching misfortune, and laughter was now exchanged for
tears.

Business having called Mr. Ellison to Port Royal, he there heard lamented, the
misfortunes of Mr. Hammond, an English gentleman, who had been established
there above two years as a merchant in good credit. Mr. Hammond had just
received a 1000 l. in return for some commodities he had exported; and this sum
he insisted on an unsuccessful friend's taking for a time, in hopes it might
enable him to save his credit, and carry on his trade till affairs took a more
favorable turn.

By this well-timed loan, the poor man and his family were saved from
destruction; but losses by shipwreck, and other accidents, having successively
fallen on Mr. Hammond, he saw himself reduced into the situation from which he
had relieved his friend; with only this difference, that his was a single
distress; whereas a wife, and nine children, would have been sharers in the
misfortunes of the other. All Mr. Hammond's effects were seized, but proved
insufficient to discharge his debts. The creditors knew he had lent some money,
but were ignorant as to the exact sum: This they pressed him to call in;
promising, on the receipt of it, to discharge him from prison, even if it did
not quite amount to what was due to them.

Mr. Hammond could not support the thought of purchasing his liberty by
reducing so large a family to beggary; but, as he was sensible his creditors
had a just right to all his property, he offered to enter into the most binding
engagements to give up the sum to them, as soon as his friend could refund it
without ruin; and to make him pay them the established interest till that time;
but, enraged at this delay, they refused to accept his offer, and declared he
should remain their prisoner.

This story very much affected Mr. Ellison's compassionate heart; and in hopes
of finding some method of relieving the distress of so worthy a man, he went
the next day to the prison to visit him; and having undertaken to do his
utmost, to bring the creditors to agree to what he had offered, he negociated
the affair with great assiduity, but little success.

During the course of this transaction, having had many proofs of Mr. Hammond's
integrity and humanity, he acquainted him with his resolution of advancing the
thousand pounds lent to his friend, and becoming himself that Gentleman's
creditor; assuring Mr. Hammond that he should never ask for the payment, but
suffer his friend to suit his own convenience in that respect.

He then told Mr. Hammond, that he was sensible, though by this step he might
deliver him from prison, yet he should not secure him from distress; he
therefore begged leave to assist him in any course of life wherein he thought
proper to engage; adding, that he could not but wish he might accept the offer
he now made him of taking upon himself the direction of his plantation and
slaves, as he delayed his removal into England only till he could find a fit
person for his steward.

Mr. Hammond's heart overflowed with gratitude, as well for the transfer of the
debt of the thousand pounds, as for the kind offer he made him. The care of the
land, he said, would give him pleasure, and he believed he might acquit himself
tolerably well in it, but he knew himself totally unfit for the government of
slaves, the severities requisite to keep them in order being such, as he was
not only incapable of decreeing, but even of beholding.

Mr. Ellison, delighted with the sentiments he had expressed, as they confirmed
him in that opinion of his disposition, which had first inspired him with the
desire of leaving him his deputy when he should depart the island, told him,
that the difficulties he had been under in finding a steward, were occasioned
by the fears of having his slaves ill treated, who had always been used by him
more like children than servants, and had convinced him by their behavior,
that severity was not only unnecessary, but hurtful. He desired Mr. Hammond
therefore, if he had no other objection to the stewardship, to go home with
him, and after sufficient observation to give him his answer.

Mr. Hammond readily acquiesced. When he saw Mr. Ellison's conduct to his
slaves, and how great the difference thereby made between them, and all others
whom he had seen in that condition how much less abject their way of thinking;
how cheerful and assiduous they were in performing their duty; the quickness of
their apprehension; and in many, the nobleness of mind, and rectitude of
principle, which kind encouragement and fatherly instruction had given them, in
comparison of those who are stupefied by ill usage and oppression; he no longer
beheld the office he was invited to accept in a formidable light; but on the
contrary, his heart swelling with joy and transport at the happiness of the
poor slaves around him, he broke into the following soliloquy, which afforded
Mr. Ellison the highest satisfaction and delight.

"O Humanity! -- Heaven-born principle! -- true and never ceasing source of
bliss -- happy those, whose hearts are warmed with thy sweet and benign
influence! Blessed with the divine principle of thee, we forget ourselves, and
seek our dearest joys in bestowing happiness upon others. By thy divine
influence we tread the paths of peace, -- and are led in the dear and blessed
footsteps of Him, of whom thou art an all-glorious attribute. By thee we are
led to the true and delightful ways or piety and religion -- to the ways of
pleasantness -- and to the paths of peace."

Thrice happy that man, whose soul, impressed with the true principles of real
and pious sensibility, looks up to Heaven for an example for his conduct and
behavior in life. If blessed with affluence, his chief bliss is to make others
happy, and every time he relieves an object from distress, he feels a joy
unutterable; -- words want the power, and language the expression, to declare
the delightful satisfaction he feels: Or indeed, supposing poverty his lot,
and, that he has but little, yet, of that will he administer relief, and find
more comfort and real satisfaction, than the miser in his hoard or the spend
thrift in his pleasures.

With all his affluence, is it likely that Mr. Ellison, without that sweet and
heavenly sensibility that fired his soul, would have enjoyed any degree of the
happiness he did? Is it not through all his actions the chief instrument of his
bliss, leading him, as it were, step by step, to the summit of human perfection?

Mr. Ellison now saw the liberty of departing from Jamaica approach. His
mercantile affairs were the more easily settled by his brother's arrival in the
island; for, as soon as he had determined on his return to England, he wrote to
his father to send over his brother James, who had been likewise bred to
merchandise, as it would be in his power to settle him very advantageously, and
to establish him immediately in an extensive trade, by making over his
correspondents to him. He found the young man sensible, honest, and diligent;
and well deserving the encouragement he designed to give him.

Mrs. Ellison was indeed less pleased with her brother in-law, fearing her
husband might favor him too generously.

The young man was shocked to see the arbitrary power she exercised over her
husband, not immediately discerning, that there was one thing his brother
feared even more than his wife, the reproaches of his own conscience, and
though he sacrificed most worldly things to her caprices, yet there was a Being
whom he more carefully endeavored to please than her.

Affairs were in this situation when Mrs. Ellison was seized with a fever, at
that time almost epidemical. The attack was so violent, as from the first gave
little hopes of a recovery, and, notwithstanding the best medical assistance,
she died in a few days.

Mr. Ellison was sincerely afflicted at her death; her faults he had long
pitied and now forgot; while her virtues, or such as he imagined she possessed,
were engraven on his memory.

But his friends, while they endeavored to console him, comforted themselves
in believing, that though habit and gentleness of temper may teach a prisoner
to hug his chains, yet when taken off, he will soon grow sensible he is
relieved from a burden, and find the removal of constant constraint makes him
amends for the loss of many pleasures which accompanied it.

But they had not an opportunity of seeing this supposition verified, as Mr.
Ellison did not stay long enough in the island after his wife's death, to wear
off the grief he felt on the occasion.

In a short time, however, he became sufficiently himself to prosecute his plan
for settling every thing there to the best advantage. He found Mr. Hammond even
exceed his hopes; he soon gained the affection of the slaves; an open, humane,
and cheerful countenance giving them a prejudice in his favor, which his
conduct improved into a rational confidence.

He also beheld with delight, the improvement the children had received in the
school he had established. The master's salary was raised, and a young lad left
with him of a remarkable good disposition and understanding, as an assistant,
but with a secret view of qualifying him to succeed, in case the master should
die, or grow weary of the charge.

The schoolmaster's sister, upon invitation, being come over from England, was
made mistress of a school of Negroe girls, a charge wherein she acquitted
herself extremely well. The effect of their instructions was evident in the
conduct of the Negroes; for the ferocity of their tempers, their obstinacy, and
that resentful turn of mind, seemingly natural to them, were so softened by
religion, that it very seldom happened that any symptoms of them appeared.

By this time Mr. Ellison's brother James had entered into a very tender
attachment. The youth no sooner became acquainted with Miss Reynolds, a young
lady in the neighborhood, than he felt the influence of her charms; she was
not insensible of the merits of her lover, and they were so well agreed before
Mr. Ellison's departure, that James thought it proper to inform his brother of
his inclination.

A long acquaintance with Miss Reynolds had afforded him a good opportunity to
discern her merit; his brother could not have chosen a woman he so much
esteemed; her fortune, though not considerable, was sufficient to be of some
assistance in trade, and her prudence and economy were well suited to his
situation. He therefore very sincerely gave his approbation, had the marriage
celebrated with great elegance in his own house, and made a present to the
bride of all the jewels that belonged to his deceased wife. To his brother he
gave a house he had at Kingstown, with all his plate and linen, and the free
use of all his furniture; and to (...) Hammond he allowed 200 l. per annum,
with the liberty of living in his house, and many other privileges.

Having thus entirely settled, his affairs, he set sail for England, leaving
his friends and dependants most sensibly afflicted, and sharing in their grief,
though the desire of returning to his native country, of seeing his father and
his child, and of repairing a constitution much hurt by the heat of the
climate, made the change on the whole very desirable to him.

His voyage was swift and prosperous; and no dangers called off his thoughts
from the pleasure he felt in anticipating, in imagination, the joys he expected
from his return to his native land; but disappointments too often follow the
hopes which have risen to the highest point, and when we think we are just
ready to grasp our pleasures, they elude our touch, and leave us nothing but
regret.

Mr. Ellison had in his imagination formed many delightful scenes, between
himself and his father; the evening of whose days he hoped would be greatly
brightened by sharing his prosperity, and by his assiduous endeavors to amuse,
if he could not relieve, the infirmities of age. But all these flattering hopes
are put to flight on his arrival in port; a letter being delivered him there,
acquainting him that his father was very dangerously ill, not from sudden
sickness, but a gradual decline.

Old Mr. Ellison had taken care he should receive this intimation, to prepare
him for their first meeting, and render it less shocking; and, to make it still
less affecting, he had sent for his grandson home, in hopes that the joy of the
parent would mitigate filial sorrow. Nor was he totally disappointed; Mr.
Ellison could not be insensible of the pleasure of seeing his only child in
health, and in appearance improved, of which the dying man gave him all the
comfortable proofs he could recollect. But this, though it in some measure
alleviated his grief, scarcely sufficed to render it supportable.

The indulgence he had given his imagination, made the approaching death of his
father more grievious. He was greatly affected by the calm resignation of his
mind; the patience with which he supported his painful distemper; and the
cheerful and lively hopes of a blessed eternity, which in his eyes disarmed
death of all its terrors, and made him look on his last hour with the same
placidity, as on any one that preceded it; and so well supported him at the
fatal instant, as to render him scarcely sensible of the pains which usually
attend the separation of the soul from the body.

Mr. Ellison determined, as soon as he had settled his affairs, to fix in the
country. Sir William Ellison his cousin-german, invited him to his seat in
Dorsetshire, promising to show him several good houses, any of which were to be
hired or purchased; and Mr. Ellison was particularly inclined to fix his abode
in that country, as it had been the place of his family's former residence. He
had sent over, before he left Jamaica, 45000l. and, beside the interest of that
sum, he received 1200l. a year from his plantation, clear of all deductions.

On his arrival at his cousin's seat in Dorsetshire, he was received very
affectionately. Sir William had not seen him from the time he first left
England, but retained a great regard for him, founded on an early acquaintance
with his virtues. Though nearly related in blood, there was little resemblance
in the dispositions of these two gentlemen. Sir William was a man of sense and
integrity, but a humourist. He was now, at fifty years old, a bachelor; for
having been in his youth jilted by a woman he ardently loved, who, after all
preliminaries to their marriage was settled, left him for a man of larger
fortune, and more gaudy appearance, he had made a vow never more to address any
of the sex; and kept that vow better than is usually done by those who make it
in a fit of resentful rage and disappointment. His father died soon after, and
left him in the possession of 3000l. per annum, free from any encumbrances
whatsoever; the estate in good order, and the mansion house well furnished, and
above a year's income in cash.

Mr. Ellison, though well pleased with Sir William's reception and
conversation, finding he laid him under some restraint, determined not to make
his visit very long; and, therefore soon called upon the Baronet to fulfill his
promise, of showing him the houses which were to be purchased in that country.

After seeing them all, he fixed on one almost adjoining to Sir William's, and
purchased it with the estate belonging thereto, consisting of two farms of
about 150l. a year each.

The house was a large and good old mansion, in tolerable repair; but, having
stood empty near ten years, during the minority of the owner, was inwardly in
very bad order, and the gardens entirely gone to ruin. This circumstance much
lessened the price, but was no disagreeable thing to Mr. Ellison, who rather
chose to lay out the place to his own taste, than to pay for what the seller
might call improvements.

He immediately purchased it, and, being provided with a housekeeper who had
ample recommendations to him, he informed her, that a decent and regular
economy in his house was what he expected, as far from extravagance and
wastefulness as from parsimony. He would have his servants enjoy soberly all
the comforts of life, as he thought that to make them happy, was his first
duty; but this he knew was best done by order, regularity, and decent
frugality. He would have such a number of servants as could perform the
business of his house with ease, and therefore desired her to consider how many
servants would be requisite.

As for the state of the adjacent poor, being yet but little acquainted with
it, he could give no particular directions, but wished she would inform him of
what she heard on that point, and likewise ^^ntion to him the sort of relief
she judged more proper.

It may not be amiss to show how Mr. Ellison was circumstanced, as to a more
extensive neighborhood.

On the contrary side to Sir William's house lived Mr. Grantham, lawful heir to
the Duke of --, if that Nobleman died without children; which was now highly
probable, as he was above 60 years old, and his Duchess but little younger. Mr.
Grantham was indeed a very distant relation, yet was heir both to the estate
and title; but, this branch of that great family having fallen to decay, he
inherited from his father only 50l. a year. This he farmed himself, and lived
in the only house (...) had, which was little better than a common cottage. His
education had been on a level with his fortune, and his manners were those of a
plain honest farmer; yet regard for his birth, and compassion for his narrow
circumstances, procured him a due portion of (...) all the neighboring
gentlemen. His notions of family pride had an influence over him in the choice
of a wife. He thought he should disgrace his blood by marrying a farmer's
daughter, though with such a one he might have got a few hundred pounds, which
would have set him much at his ease; and, a Lieutenant dying in an adjacent
town where he was quartered, and leaving a daughter entirely unprovided for,
and greatly distressed, he thought her a wife much more suitable to the dignity
of his family. Captivated by her gentility rather than by her person, for she
was no beauty, he took a pride in addressing the Captain's daughter (for the
courtesy of a country town kindly bestows the title of Captain on every
officer) and she was glad to accept of any provision.

However, Mr. Grantham was more fortunate than he had reason to expect; his
wife proved very notable and industrious, only too prolific, having perpetuated
the family of the Granthams, of which the Duke and he were the last, by
bringing him five sons and three daughters; a number attended with great
difficulties in their narrow circumstances; but the thought that they might one
day be so many Lords and Ladies, was a sufficient consolation, and made them
behold so numerous a progeny with exultation.

At the distance of about two miles from Mr. Ellison's lived Mr. Allin; a
gentleman who inherited a good estate from his father, but, being extravagant
in his youth, had reduced it within very narrow bounds, and involved himself in
difficulties that had a good deal soured his temper, converting his
extravagance into parsimony. His society would not have been very eligible, had
it not been for an only daughter who kept his house, whose beauty,
accomplishments, and excellent qualities, rendered her the most distinguished
young woman in the whole country.

A little father off dwelt Mr. Blackburn, an old gentleman of great merit; who
by a due mixture of study and conversation, had greatly embellished an
admirable understanding.

On the other side of Mr. Ellison's house, and about five miles from it, lived
young Mr. Blackburn, son to the gentleman just mentioned; his father having
given him an estate with a good house upon it, on his marriage with a young
woman of family, but no fortune, whose beauty had captivated the young man; his
father being glad to encourage any rational inclination, in hopes the society
of a woman he loved might reform him from his vices. But success had not
answered his wishes; young Mr. Blackburn soon grew tired of his wife, and
returned to his bottle, to hunting, gaming, and women; and behaved with such
insolence to his father, when he reproached him for his dissolute course of
life, that he banished him his presence, and declared a resolution to
disinherit him. This breach had subsisted three years, when Mr. Ellison came
into the country; and the father still as much offended, and the son as far
from reformation, as ever.

These were Mr. Ellison's nearest neighbors, and first visitors, paying him
their compliments before he had got a room fit to receive them. But, as he
aimed at nothing farther than neatness and convenience, it was not long before
his house was as well furnished as he desired.

Mr. Ellison had two very particular attractions in his neighborhood; Mr.
Blackburn delighted his understanding; Miss Allin captivated his heart. But it
is probable, that even all Miss Allin's attractions might have proved
ineffectual, had they not found him in a state of leisure.

Business first, and then duty, had hitherto defended his heart; these shields
were now removed, and it lay open to Cupid's arrows; in such a defenseless
state it might have fallen a prey to half her perfections, and could not make
the least resistance. Nor indeed did he wish it; he yielded himself a willing
captive; for, as he had no desire to remain single, he with pleasure encouraged
an inclination for a woman he thought so well qualified to make him happy, and
whose narrow circumstances gave him reason to hope for a favorable reception.

An inclination we choose rather to encourage than repress is very quick in its
growth. Mr. Ellison had been settled but two months in Dorsetshire, when he
came to a resolution of asking Mr. Allin's permission to address his daughter,
giving him to understand that his fortune set him above all pecuniary demands.

The great advantages his daughter would find in such an union, would have made
Mr. Allin sufficiently eager to complete it, had he not been spurred on by the
last article, which however was a stronger incentive; for the miser in Moliere
was not more sensible of the charms of that part of a lover's address sans dot,
than Mr. Allin; Mr. Ellison therefore had not only his consent, but his good
wishes, and secretly all the influence of his authority.

Unfortunately the father's was not the only will of consequence in this case.
The joy Mr. Ellison felt on receiving the permission he asked was soon damped;
for, on explaining himself to Miss Allin, she burst into tears (having foreseen
from the manner in which she was left alone with him, what was to be the
subject of his conversation) and the more generously and nobly he expressed his
affection, the faster her tears flowed. Alarmed by the tenderest fears, he
begged to know the cause of her distress; but, before she could assume
sufficient power over herself to comply, they heard Mr. Allin coming toward
them; Dreading his presence, she requested her lover to conceal her uneasiness;
and, promising to lay her whole heart open to him the next time they met, she
made her escape by one door, as her father entered at another.

Mr. Ellison was not much better able than his mistress to support an interview
with the father; so that eluding his questions, in such a manner as gave him no
suspicions of what had passed, he pretended business that obliged him to return
home directly.

He shut himself up in his room, in a state of mind which the heart may guess,
but words cannot describe. He passed the night in an agitation and anxiety he
had before no conception of; the hope which self-flattery would sometimes
suggest, only served to prevent his exerting his reason to support what his
fears anticipated. He rose before the sun, with a resolution to know his fate
ere the day was over, but wished to learn it without Mr. Allin's knowledge.

Unable to contrive any means of effecting this desire, the restlessness of his
mind led him abroad; and the impulse of his heart directed him toward Mr.
Allin's house. He wandered in the adjacent fields a long time, uncertain what
methods to pursue, and fearing to create uneasiness to the woman for whom he
suffered so much.

At length Miss Allin, who had not rested much better than her lover, going to
the window in hopes new objects might divert her thoughts, saw him in a field
adjoining to the garden. The delicacy of her mind bore so great a resemblance
to his, that she imagined the cause which brought him thither, and, desirous to
conclude the interview before her father rose from his bed, she hastened to him
with as much speed as a person can use, who feels a very sensible affliction
for the pain she is going to give one, whom she sincerely esteems.

When he saw her approach, he had scarcely courage to meet her, dreading the
explanation he had so impatiently longed for. Maiden bashfulness, with some
mixture of concern on one side, and extreme agitation of spirits on the other,
rendered them equally unable to speak; but with common, though tacit consent,
they sat down together on a green bank at the foot of a tree; a l^^^ silence
ensued; and it is difficult to say when it would have ended, if Miss Allin had
not sooner recovered her spirits than her lover. She tempered the disagreeable
intelligence she was going to impart with very sincere expressions of concern,
at the necessity she saw herself under of giving him pain; professed a due
sense of his merit, and lamented that, when they first met, her heart was not
so free as his, since then, in all probability, they might have constituted
each other's happiness, instead of mutually destroying each other's peace.

She then told him that she had, with her father's consent, been engaged above
a year to Dr. Tunstall, a young physician in the neighborhood; and their
marriage had been so long deferred, only by the difficulties her father found,
or that his parsimonious temper made him imagine, in raising 2000l. the sum he
had promised to give with her: That she received the Doctor as her intended
husband at her father's command, when her heart was so little prejudiced in his
favor, that she could, without any severe pang, have been equally obedient,
had be ordered her never to see him any more; but, since she had considered it
as her duty and happiness to increase the little prepossession she had
conceived, the case was much altered, and she was now as strongly engaged to
him in affection, as in honor; An engagement she was determined not to
violate, though she despaired of seeing it fulfilled; for she had received an
express command from her father never to entertain the least acquaintance or
correspondence with Dr. Tunstall, but to look on Mr. Ellison as her husband,
and she feared he would never revoke the decree; since, beside the many
reasons, which she was sensible there was for preferring him to the Doctor, his
generosity had added one, that with her father was insurmountable, by declining
the acceptance of a fortune.

She proceeded to say, that she had nothing to expect but her father's anger,
which was impetuous and dreadful; all, therefore, she had to ask of Mr.
Ellison, who, she hoped would rather think her unfortunate than ungrateful,
was, that he would, as far as lay in his power, mitigate her father's rage, and
prevail with him to let her live peaceably in her present condition; for she
relinquished all hopes of changing it; and did it with the less concern, as she
imagined his partiality for her might render it more vexatious to him to see
her married to another, than merely to be disappointed of her himself.

It is unnecessary to describe the effect Miss Allin's words had upon Mr.
Ellison. She felt so lively a compassion for him, that she forgot her own
grief, and said every thing she thought might contribute to his consolation,
except what alone could prove effectual; but, as she was fully determined to
adhere strictly to her engagement, she carefully avoided giving him the least
room to hope a change in her sentiments.

As soon as his mind was a little composed, he took his leave; assuring her
that he would try every means to secure her peace, though he was not yet
sufficiently master of his thoughts, to see the manner in which it would be
most advisable for him to proceed.

Each returned to their respective houses, but with different sensations; she
found her heart much lightened, since she had acquainted her generous lover
with the state of it; but he carried back despair instead of uncertainty.

However, after some time spent in reflection, he grew resigned and patient,
and, notwithstanding his disappointment, he was ardently desirous to restore
Miss Allin to the happiness, of which he had for a time deprived her; and
resolved to perform his promise more effectually than she could expect.

Accordingly, three days after he had received his sentence from her, he sent
an invitation to Mr. Allin to dine with him; and took that opportunity of
acquainting him, that, since he was last at his house, he had learnt that Miss
Allin had long been engaged, with his consent, to Dr. Tunstall, and therefore
had resolved to desist from his pretensions; as he should think himself very
criminal, if, taking the advantage of a superiority of fortune, he should
attempt to deprive another of a blessing which must be so dear to him; and
indeed, he should have so bad an opinion of a woman who could be mercenary and
inconstant enough to break her word, though in his favor, as would render it
impossible for him to be happy with her.

Mr. Allin was much disconcerted at this declaration, and answered: He might do
as he pleased; but that as for Dr. Tunstall, if he intended to marry his
daughter, he must wait till business increased, or death put her in possession
of his little estate, for he found it impossible to raise a fortune for her,
without distressing himself.

From the account Mr. Ellison had heard of his circumstances, he easily
believed there was some truth in what he said; and told him he would remove
that objection, only desiring him to confirm his former consent with a good
grace, and not diminish the satisfaction of his daughter by an apparent
reluctance, or even the coldness of his compliance.

Mr. Ellison was not slow in executing his purpose. He wrote Miss Allin a
letter the next morning, wherein he enclosed a draught on his banker for 2000l.
His generosity went still farther; he feared her father would not acquit
himself properly in regard to her clothes; and considered that, as the income
of the man she married was very small, to be well equipped might prove
hereafter much to her convenience; he therefore sent his housekeeper to the
next great town, to buy silks, lace, cambrick, muslins, hollands, in such
abundance, as would not only enable her to make a very genteel appearance on
her marriage, but suffice for some years; and he chose to do it in this manner,
rather than to make her a present of the money, as the surest means of securing
her convenience, to which, moderation and generosity might have made her less
attentive.

The pleasure he felt in this disinterested conduct, almost extinguished for
the time the sense of sorrow; but the heart will have its due; when the
gratification began to deaden, vexation returned, and he could gladly have
excused a visit Dr. Tunstall made him, in order to return thanks for his
generosity; which Mr. Ellison learnt from him, was with great pain accepted by
Miss Allin; nor could any thing, but her father's express and absolute command,
have conquered her reluctance in this particular. The sight of a man, so much
happier than himself, brought so painful a comparison to Mr. Ellison's mind,
that the effect was visible to the Doctor, who could not blame the sensation,
though Mr. Ellison could scarcely forgive it in himself; and was hurt to find,
by this first instance, that he was capable of envy, a passion he had never
felt before.

His politeness, however, did not forsake him on so severe a trial; he
commanded both his countenance and words so well, as to give his happy rival a
kind, though melancholy reception; and, determined to conquer the sensation he
so much disapproved, he expressed an inclination to be sometimes favored with
his visits, though he must request him to excuse his returning them.

While Mr. Ellison flattered himself with the hopes of marrying Miss Allin, he
delayed settling his family in the order he intended, thinking it more
advisable to regulate the whole at once; but, when that prospect ^ani^^ed,
there no longer subsisted any reason for postponing it.

The knowledge he had of his son's impetuous temper, and bad qualities,
determined him to educate him at home. Whether he would there acquire an equal
share of learning as at school, he much questioned, but the rectifying his
heart appeared to him the most essential article toward his happiness; and, of
all knowledge that he most wished him to acquire, was the knowledge of himself,
and the means of governing his passions; in these points he thought he might be
better instructed under his own eye than at school; and, if thereby he could
render him an honest and amiable man, he should have good reason to be
contented, though he did not prove a learned one.

He had already begun to make proper inquiries after a well qualified tutor;
and was likely to succeed, as he had set no bounds to the salary. A gentleman
of excellent character, great learning, and amiable manners, having met with
some disappointments in the profession of physic, to which he was bred, was
very glad of so eligible a retirement, on a promised salary of 400l. a year;
and as Mr. Ellison was so great a master in the science of benevolence, that he
performed few actions that did not bear more than one good fruit, he had in
view the serving Mr. Grantham by the home education of his son, and therefore
made it a condition, that the tutor should teach as many boys as he pleased,
with the same care as his own. The little Granthams spent few beside their
sleeping hours at home; for, as their father's house almost joined to Mr.
Ellison's, they returned thither without inconvenience every night, coming
early the next morning; and having at Mr. Ellison's both their corporal and
mental food; the first of which was some ease to the narrow circumstances of
those good people, and the latter gave their father the most sincere joy, as he
now saw them in a way of being educated equal to their birth, and future
fortune, of which he had before utterly despaired. Indeed he found his expense
much lightened; for Mr. Ellison carefully provided them apparel, in every
respect equal to that worn by his own son; and was very watchful that the
latter assumed no superiority over them, to whom he showed him he was in
reality greatly inferior; but this was explained to him in the absence of the
Grantham's; for Mr. Ellison wished for their sakes the thought might not occur
to them; and exhorted their father and mother not to destroy one benefit
arising from their present low estate, which might greatly add to the happiness
of their lives, by instilling into their minds a pride that must be the source
both of private chagrin, and public contempt.

Mr. Ellison was not so wholly engaged either by private vexation, or domestic
business, as not to extend his attention to all his neighbors. The little
estate he had bought lay in three parishes, which gave him a knowledge of the
state of each.

He found the poor tax ran very high, and yet the poor were but ill taken care
of; the farmer was much burdened, the poor but little relieved.

All these inconveniences he endeavored to apply remedies to, which he did
effectually; and, besides relieving the wants of the poor, he promoted a spirit
of industry among them.

On other occurrences his benevolent disposition scarce knew any bounds; he
composed all differences in his neighborhood, was the father of the orphan, a
true friend to the distressed and helpless, a visitor of the sick and those who
were in prison, and many a debtor, that had not been so out of wantonness, he
delivered from the unrelenting pursuits of his creditors.

These scenes were indeed the great feasts of his soul; but all his hours
yielded him refined pleasures, because they were all spent in the exercise of
benevolence; a desire to do good to others, was so entirely his governing
principle, that, however engaged in business or pleasure, he never lost sight
of it, endeavoring to promote it by every action of his life.

Though temperance and virtue are the best preservatives of health, yet they
cannot secure to any one an uninterrupted state. Mr. Ellison, while employed in
assiduous endeavors to alleviate the sufferings of others, became himself the
object of compassion.

He was seized with a violent fever, which so far baffled the skill and care of
Dr. Tunstall, for whom he had sent on being first taken ill, that in three days
he was entirely delirious, and his life judged to be in great danger. The grief
of his friends and dependants is easier to be imagined than described; but none
felt more sincerely on the occasion than Mrs. Tunstall, whose gratitude
attached her very strongly to him, though she had never been in his company
since the morning that determined him to give up all pretensions to her.

She always waited the Doctor's return with impatient anxiety, and was greatly
affected by the account her husband gave her, in the beginning of the second
week of Mr. Ellison's illness, of the accident which had happened to his
housekeeper; who, by a fall down stairs, had put out her ankle, and must be
totally confined to her chamber; whereby Mr. Ellison was deprived of a very
careful, tender, and sensible nurse, which his situation rendered extremely
necessary, and yet the Doctor saw no means of procuring him one; any of the
servants, or people in the parish would have attended him with care and
affection, but their ignorance disqualified them for the trust.

Mrs. Tunstall was shocked to think of the danger he must run in such hands,
and, presuming that in his insane state of mind he would not know her, proposed
attending him herself, though it might prove very dangerous in her present
state, she being then in the eighth month of her pregnancy. The Doctor's
tenderness for his amiable wife, made him very unwilling to consent, but she
urged him with such persuasive importunity, that he at length, though
reluctantly, agreed to carry her to Mr. Ellison's that very day.

It is easy to imagine that Mrs. Tunstall must perform with the greatest
assiduity, an office she undertook out of gratitude. The only rest she allowed
herself was on a couch, in Mr. Ellison's chamber; she mixed all his medicines,
and gave him every thing he took, but was careful not to approach his bedside
on his first waking, lest sleep might calm his delirium, and expose her to his
knowledge.

She was seldom out of his chamber, except during one or two short visits she
daily made his housekeeper, for a whole week that he continued in the same
melancholy state; he then began to recover his senses, but was so weak and
spent, he took little notice of any thing that passed; she therefore prolonged
her attendance for some days, keeping out of his sight, but directing the
nurse, and watching that all proper care was taken; and she had the
satisfaction, before Mr. Ellison was well enough to discover there was any
other person than his nurse in the room, to see the housekeeper able to be
brought in, and take the same care she herself had done for some days;
whereupon with great joy she resigned her office, and returned home.

Every day confirmed her in this easy state of mind; for his recovery, though
slow was uninterrupted; and the many hearts which his extreme danger had
oppressed with grief and anxiety were relieved from their heavy burden; more
sensible than ever of the value of the man on whom their happiness depended, as
all their sensibility had been awakened by his illness.

Caution had been given to Sir. William and the housekeeper, not to disclose
Mrs. Tunstall's attendance; but the appearance of so strong an attachment, the
hazard she had run, and the uncommonness of the action, had made such an
impression on Sir William, that the utmost his prudence could effect, was to be
silent on the subject, till his cousin was pretty well recovered; and then news
being brought them, as they were sitting together, that Mrs. Tunstall was
brought to bed, he could not forbear observing, that she had but just had time
to recover her fatigue.

Mr. Ellison usually avoided entering into any conversation on a subject
wherein he felt himself too tenderly interested, but his sensibility on the
present occasion put him off his guard; and he enquired to what fatigue Sir
William alluded.

The Baronet could no longer resist the desire he felt of acquainting his
cousin with Mrs. Tunstall's extraordinary care of him, to which, Mr. Ellison
listened with equal surprise and pleasure. Her conduct on this occasion had the
effect she feared from it, if it came to his knowledge, for it awakened every
tender sensation; but these were not accompanied with the pain she thought
might attend them. He had brought himself to such a patient acquiescence in the
decrees of Providence, that, while he cherished the remembrance of her with
tenderness, his regret for his disappointment was calm and temperate. He
attributed her care to the gratitude of a noble mind, and felt ineffable
pleasure in so strong a proof, that his esteem was just.

Mr. Ellison, as the most likely means of perfecting his recovery, made some
excursions into different parts of the country, and it was for a considerable
time before he again settled at home.

At his return, he was shocked at the evils election-drunkenness had caused in
his neighborhood; and Dr. Tunstall particularly, being violent in politics,
and having exerted himself much during the contest, acquired such a habit of
drinking, and entered into intimacies with so many people who made it their
chief pleasure, that the love of it did not cease with the first inducement.

Mrs. Tunstall's situation was hereupon very melancholy. She daily beheld the
man she loved in the most disgustful condition; and, when not absolutely
intoxicated, the effects of the former night's debauch, so stupefied and
disordered him, that he was not capable of conversation, nor susceptible of
affection. Add to this, that the sensible decline of their circumstances, from
such a perpetual round of rioting, made her dread the consequences that must
attend it.

Mr. Ellison's humanity was of so quick and lively a kind, that it did not wait
to be informed of a person's particular sufferings; from comparing their income
with their necessary expenses, he knew when they were under any difficulties in
point of circumstances, and this induced him to prevail upon Mrs. Tunstall's
father to receive from him a proper supply for her use, as coming from himself.

However, Dr. Tunstall was not to be reclaimed, and he at last fell a victim to
his passion, being seized with a high fever, which, in a few days, put a period
to his life.

Had Mr. Ellison obeyed the impulse of his heart, he would have flown to the
disconsolate widow, and endeavored, by all the tender sensibilities that can
spring from friendship, to have soothed her grief; but he feared such a conduct
might appear scarcely decent; in one, whose sentiments were so well known; and,
while he acted only as a friend, her reputation might be wounded, by being
supposed so soon to receive the assiduities of a lover, and her delicacy
offended by any marks of regard, which might bear the appearance of so early a
renewal of his former addresses.

These considerations made him forbear visiting her for the present; and, when
he thought he might visit her with decency, the preference he often gave his
duties to the pleasures arising from her society, made her fancy his having no
views beyond the enjoyment of her friendship, till the expiration of the first
year of her widowhood, during which he had condemned himself to absolute
silence, concerning the situation of his heart; but, having given so much time
to worldly form, he was determined no longer to delay what was due to himself,
after having fulfilled all, that decorum could possibly expect; he, therefore
declared frankly to her, how little alteration time had made in his affection;
and entreated she would give him leave to hope, that she would listen to his
addresses with more complacency than when he first made them.

Mrs. Tunstall was somewhat surprised at Mr. Ellison's constancy, and not a
little puzzled in what manner to answer him; but, as he insisted on a reply,
she stammered out some expressions of the honor he did her, the greatness of
the advantages he thus offered her, and her high sense of the obligations she
lay under, which must incline her to wish to comply with any request of his.

This sort of cold reception was ill suited to the ardor of Mr. Ellison's
passion; he therefore begged that politeness, gratitude, and, above all,
interest, might be out of the question; for, though amiable virtues, yet his
heart was too delicate, or too capricious, to be contented with receiving them
in return for his warmest affections.

Mrs. Tunstall's situation was rendered the more perplexing, by being really
ignorant of the state of her own heart. She had only considered him as a most
amiable and worthy friend, and knew not whether she could with pleasure consent
to be united to him by a tenderer tie; however, she could safely promise all
his delicacy required, not to marry him except he became the free disinterested
choice of her heart. Mr. Ellison had no sooner received this assurance, than he
repented his request; but his, apprehensions were groundless.

Mrs. Tunstall was not quite so indifferent as she imagined; love seldom rises
to a blaze, till it is fanned with hope; and in a few other visits she declared
to him that she could no longer resist any inclination of his; on the contrary,
found her affection for him grow so entire, that she wished to have it made her
duty to love him with a warm and undivided heart.

Every circumstance now seemed to concur to make Mr. Ellison completely happy,
when, three days before that fixed on for his nuptials, he received a letter
from Mrs. Blackburn, informing him, that her husband was in the hands of the
sheriff's officers, and, if he did not take compassion upon him, he must be
immediately removed to prison, as they were not able to discharge the debt, and
the creditor refused to take Mr. Blackburn's bond, knowing his whole fortune
was mortgaged.

Fewer entreaties would have sufficed to bring Mr. Ellison to their relief. He
set out in all haste on horseback, but had not gone three miles, when his horse
threw him. He was at first entirely stunned by the fall; but pain in a short
time brought him to himself, and convinced him that his thigh was broke. His
servant sent off a messenger to a surgeon to meet him at his own house, and
with great difficulty got him home.

Mrs. Tunstall was shocked to the greatest degree at this melancholy news, and
immediately determined that the want of the marriage ceremony should not
prevent her attendance on him, during his confinement. She had once acted this
part from gratitude; and trusted she might now, without censure, be allowed to
perform it through affection. Her tender attentions greatly alleviated Mr.
Ellison's pains, but could not effect his cure; the third day after the
fracture, a mortification began, which gave the surgeons the most alarming
apprehensions.

Melancholy as his situation was, no dejection appeared in his countenance,
and, as soon as he apprehended his life was in danger, he considered of the
best methods of preventing others from suffering by his death. He charged on
his fortune the support of all the charities and benevolences he had
established. He discharged Mr. Blackburn's debt, and bequeathed ten thousand
pounds to Mrs. Tunstall; and, as his son's fortune could not fail of being
great, since Sir William's estate would come to him, he charged it with
annuities for all his dependants; he had not a servant to whom he did not leave
some token of his bounty, and, not confining his thoughts to England, obliged
his son to leave his Jamaica estate in the hands of his steward, as long as he
should live, providing for all the Negroes that should remain on the plantation
at the time of his steward's death.

His hardest trial was yet to come, the taking leave of his son and intended
spouse. For the form^^ ^^ felt a thousand fears, lest his unguided youth might
be led into some of the many errors to which that season of life is prone; and
he did not more grieve than fear to leave him. He recapitulated the substance
of all the instructions he had for so many years been inculcating, and
beseeched him with tears, and the tenderest caresses, to imprint them deeply on
his heart.

But his severest task was taking leave of Mrs. Tunstall, who approached his
bed more dead than alive. He bade her not grieve for him, since he trusted he
was going to the only place where he could find a happiness superior to what he
should have enjoyed in her society. Mrs. Tunstall had no power to answer but
with tears, which flowed plentifully over the hand she pressed between hers,
while kneeling by his bed side.

At night, when the surgeons examined his leg, they found the mortification, to
their surprise, had not advanced. The next day the symptoms appeared still a
little more favorable, and in a few days, beyond all expectation, he was
declared out of danger; and he now found that the life he could so contentedly
have parted with, was still extremely dear to him. But, had it indeed lost its
charms, it must have obtained new ones from the joy that was diffused over the
whole neighborhood.

Mrs. Tunstall was ever rejoicing over his restored life, or on her knees
giving thanks for so great a blessing, till Mr. Ellison was sufficiently
recovered to confirm at church the union of their hearts, which love had before
completed; an union which every succeeding day rendered more delightful, as a
fuller knowledge of each other's virtues, by increasing their esteem and
rational affection, more than compensated for some abatement of passion, which
must unavoidably be the consequence of possession, and that certainty of each
other's affections, which banishes all the fears and anxieties that fan the
fire of love, and increase the passion by vicissitude, mingling pains with its
pleasures.

Mr. Ellison had now no wish ungratified. Mrs. Ellison returned his affection
in the tenderest manner, and completed his happiness, by entering into all his
views, and assisting him in every work of humanity, wherein her heart was as
deeply engaged as his.

In a short time after Mr. Ellison's marriage Sir William died, and left him
heir to his estate and title.

His children, as they grew up, were all honorably married, and well settled
in the world; and, among the rest, the eldest of his daughters was married to
the eldest of the Grantham's sons, the old gentleman having for some time past,
enjoyed the title of Duke, with the estate, on the decease of his relation.

Thus lived Mr. Ellison, enjoying in sweet and contented retirement, the
highest bliss and self-satisfaction that human nature is capable of, and which
can only be obtained by a truly well spent and virtuous life: Deriving from a
pious and humane sensibility, that happy and constant serenity of conscience,
that is only the attendant on good actions. Guided by it, he was early led to
indefatigable industry, and a steady and prudent attention to business. This he
knew was not only the surest and most rational way to prosper in life -- but
also the most pleasing and self-satisfactory -- that it was not only the way,
whereby he could expect to place himself above dependency -- but that it was
likewise the only means which could enable him to gratify the utmost wish of
his heart -- the being able to relieve his fellow creatures.

His industry, as it was guided by a a generous prudence, and a constant and
steady adherence to the dictates of conscience and humanity, could not fail of
the greatest success; -- but although it raised him to the greatest affluence,
it did not raise him above himself -- he still retained the sentiments he at
first set out with, blessing and crowning with the most delightful happiness,
all around him -- He sought not the favors of the great, or the respect of the
affluent -- but the approbation of his own conscience. -- He delighted not in
the bustle of courts or of the world -- but, while he thought it his duty, he
gave himself to business, and pursued it with unwearied attention; and, being
favored by Heaven to the utmost of his wishes, he chose a retirement most
suitable to his inclination; where, sequestered from the noise and bustle of
life, he could gratify, unmolested, the purest desires of his soul, and enjoy
himself in peace and satisfaction -- where, envied by none -- but adored by all
-- he might be a father to the fatherless -- and a protector to the widow -- a
comforter to the afflicted -- and a friend to the whole human race.

We could not take leave of this worthy family at a better time, than when it
enjoys the utmost felicity the world can afford, lest, by some of those
unavoidable misfortunes, which in the course of time must befall every mortal
being, the scene may be overcast, and those who are now the happiest of
mortals, become objects of compassion.

FINIS.
Just Published, and To be Sold, By JAMES HUMPHREYS, Junr.
In Front-street, the lower corner of Black-horse Alley, elegantly printed in
Octavo, and embellished with a very elegant engraved copperplate FRONTISPIECE.

A Second American Edition OF THE SEARCH AFTER HAPPINESS, A Pastoral DRAMA: By
Miss HANNAH MORE, of Bristol in England.

WITH ARMINE AND ELVIRA, A LEGENDARY TALE, in TWO PARTS.

By Mr. CARTWRIGHT of London.

ALSO,

Cooke's Voyage round the World, 2 vols. 8 vo. School for Husbands, 2 vols. The
Child of Nature improved by Chance, a philosophical Novel 2 vols. At the same
Place may be had, All Kinds of STATIONARY and BLANKS.


