AN ESSAY ON PUBLIC SPEAKING, SHOWING THE GREAT USEFULNESS OF
CHRISTIAN-ORATORY, AND THAT READING IS NOT PREACHING. Collected from various
Authors.

And he closed the Book -- and he began to say unto them -- and all wondered at
the gracious Words that proceeded out of his Mouth

LUKE ^^ 20 21 22. PROVIDENCE: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOHN CARTER, AT SHAKESPEARE'S
HEAD, NEAR THE COURTHOUSE. M,DCC,LXXV.

AN ESSAY ON PUBLIC SPEAKING.
IT is only the elegant speaker, who can at once regale the eye with the view
of its most amiable object, the human form in all its glory; the ear, with the
original of all music; the understanding, with its proper and natural food, the
knowledge of important truth; and the imagination, with all that is beautiful
in nature and art -- For the orator's field is the universe, and his subjects
are all that is known of God and his works; of superior natures, good and evil,
and their works; and of inferior natures, and their's. -- In a consummate
speaker, whatever there is of corporal dignity or beauty, the majesty of the
human face divine, the grace of action, the piercing glance, or gentle
languish, or fiery flash of the eye; whatever of lively passion, or striking
emotion of mind; whatever of fine imagination, of wise reflection, of
irresistible reasoning; whatever excellent of human nature; all that the hand
of the Creator has impressed of his own image, upon the noblest creatures we
are acquainted with; all this appears in the consummate speaker to the highest
advantage. And whoever is proof against such a display of all that is noble in
human nature, must have neither eye, nor ear, nor passion, nor imagination, nor
taste, nor understanding.

THOUGH it may be alleged, that a great deal of gesture or action at the bar,
or in the pulpit, especially in the latter, is not wanted, nor is quite in
character; yet most certain it is, that there is no part of a man that has not
its proper attitude. The eyes are not to be rolled along the cieling, as if the
speaker were taking care how the flies behave themselves. Nor are they to be
cont^antly cast down upon the ground, as if he were before his judge, receiving
sentence of death. Nor are they to be fixed upon one point, as if he saw a
ghost. -- The arms of a preacher are not to be needlessly thrown out, as if he
were drowning in the pulpit; or brandished after the manner of the ancient
boxers, when they fought with their own shadows, to prepare themselves for the
olimpic contests. Nor on the contrary are his hands to be pocketed up, nor his
arms to hang by his sides, as if they were both withered. The head is not to
stand fixed, as if the preacher had a crick in his neck; nor is it to nod at
every third word, as if he were acting Jupiter.

A JUDICIOUS speaker is master of such a variety of decent and natural motions,
and has such a command of attitude, that he will not be long enough in any one
posture to offend the eye of the spectator. The matter he has to pronounce,
will easily suggest to him the propriety of changing his look, his posture, his
motion and tone of voice, which if they were to continue too long, would become
disagreeable to the beholders. But yet, he is not to be every moment changing
posture like a harlequin, nor throwing his hands about, as if he were showing
legerdemain tricks. And above all things, the public speaker is never to forget
the great rule, ARS EST CELARE ARTEM. It would be infinitely more pleasing, to
see him deliver himself with as little motion as an Egyptian mummy, than
distorting himself into all the violations of decorum, which affectation
produces; for art, seen through, is execrable. Modesty ought ever to be
conspicuous in the behavior of all, who exhibit themselves before the public.
Whatever of gesture or exertion of voice such persons use, they ought
apparently to be drawn into them, by the importance, spirit or humor of the
matter. For if the speaker uses any arts of delivery which appear plainly to be
studied, and unnatural, the effect will be, that his awkward and vain attempt
to work upon the passions of his hearers by means, of which he is not master,
will render him odious and contemptible to them. -- With what stiff and
pedantic solemnity do some public speakers utter thoughts so trifling, as to be
hardly worth uttering at all? And what unnatural and unsuitable tones of voice
and gestures do others apply, in delivering what, by their manner of
delivering, one would be apt to question, not only whether it is their own
composition, but whether they understand it? -- Nor is it to be expected, that
decorum of manner in preaching can ever be carried to any great perfection,
while reading is thought to be preaching For, what is a sermon, good or bad,
If a man reads it, like a lad?
To hear some people, when they preach,
How they run over all parts of speech,
And neither raise a word nor sink,
Our learned clergy, one would think,
Had taken schoolboys from the red,
To make ambassadors for God.
In point of sermons, if consist
Our English clergy make the best;
Yet this appears, we must consist,
Not from the pulpit, but the press.
They manage with disjointed skill
The matter well, the manner ill;
And, what seems paradox at first,
They make the best, and preach the worst.

-- If the Greek and Roman orators had read their sermons, the effect would
have been pretty much the same, as that which the reading of sermons produces
among us. The hearers might have, many of them, dropped asleep. In some foreign
countries, preachers are so much aware of the great disadvantage of reading,
that such as have weak memories have a prompter behind in the pulpit, out of
sight. -- However, it must be owned, that if preachers would take suitable
pains in committing to memory the substance of their discourses, so as not to
be slaves to written notes, and endeavor to gain a tolerable readiness at
extemporary amplification, their discourses might have effect, though the eye
should now and then be cast upon the notes, if not in a clumsy manner, and with
hesitation. -- To hear a judicious and elegant discourse from the pulpit, which
in print would make a noble figure, murdered by him who had learning and taste
enough to compose it, but having neglected the important part of his education,
knows not how to deliver it otherwise than with a dull tone, between singing
and saying, or with a nod of his head, to enforce, as with a hammer, every
emphatical word, or with the same unanimated monotony Having but one tone.
, in which he was used to repeat quae genus at school; what can be imagined
more lamentable! Yet, what is more common? Were the educators of youth intended
for the ministry, of the opinion of the prince of orators, viz. that delivery
is the first, second and third part of oratory, they would spare some time from
the many less necessary parts of school learning, to apply it to one so very
essential; without which, the weight of the most sacred subject, the greatest
depth of critical disquisition, the most unexceptionable reasoning, the most
accurate arrangement of matter, and the most striking energy of style, are all
lost upon an audience, who sit unaffected, and depart unimproved. From hence it
is, that while places of divine and public worship are almost empty, theaters
are crowded. Yet in the former the most interesting subjects are treated of,
and in the latter all is fiction. But it will not be otherwise, so long as the
speakers, in places of divine worship, take no more pains to enforce their
public instructions, and the most important truths, than if they delivered
fictions; while the speakers in theaters bestow so much pains, to make their
fictions seem to be true. -- It may be said that this observation has been made
before. The more is the pity. And it ought to be often made again and again,
until the fault be mended. -- Did preachers labor to acquire a masterly
delivery, places of public instruction would be as crowded as places of public
diversion. Rakes and infidels, merely to show their taste, would frequent them.
Could all frequent them, and none profit? It is common to hear complaints from
our clergy, of the inattention of their hearers, even to dozing, and sometimes
profound sleep. But where does this complaint fall at last? Even upon the
preachers themselves, who address their hearers with so much coolness and
infifference, as leaves them nothing to do but to go to sleep. Let the preacher
be but suitably animated, and exert himself, and he may desy his hearers to
sleep, or withdraw their attention for a moment.

THE clergy are likewise full of their complaints, of the little effect their
labors produce. -- Infidelity and vice, they say, prevail more than ever. But
what is the plain English of this complaint? Why are churches so poorly filled?
Why is it that those who attend, perhaps do it only for fashion's sake, and are
not much better than their neighbors? Why, truly, the clergy find people loath
to go to places of public instruction, to be disgusted, or lulled to sleep. And
when they have them there, they cannot persuade them to quit their vices and
follies, by lolling thirty or forty, or perhaps but twenty minutes, upon a
velvet cushion; and only reading to them a learned discourse. -- They cannot
warm them to the love of virtue, by a cold, illread pulpit harangue. They
cannot win their affections, while they neglect all the natural means for
working upon the human passions. They cannot kindle in them that burning zeal,
which is necessary for the most important of all interests, by talking or
rather reading only, with the coolness of a set of stoic philosophers,
concerning the terrors of the Lord, of the worm that dies not, of future glory,
honor and immortality, of everlasting kingdoms, and heavenly thrones. -- It is
common for preachers to plead their modesty, and fear of being accused of
affectation, in excuse of the dullness and the coldness of their manner of
addressing their hearers. But are those any hinderance to the elocution of the
actors, or even the actresses, who by study and practice get the better of
fear, and attain an elegant and correct utterance, and are indeed almost the
only speakers we have without appearance of affectation? But do our preachers
in general bestow any thought, or use any means of any kind, for improving
themselves in speaking? The younger part of the players rehearse and practice
over and over many times, and are long under the tuition of the principal
actors, before they appear in public. But there are perhaps no other public
speakers among us, who take such pains; though they bestow great pains in
improving themselves in learning; and yet of the two learning is less necessary
to a preacher, than skill in persuading. Let the reader only consider, that a
mechanic is under a master seven years at least, before he sets up for himself.
But the preacher goes into the pulpit at once, without ever having had one
lesson of instruction in that part of his art which is the chief and most
necessary, and without which all his other accomplishments are worth nothing,
toward gaining the great end of preaching. -- It may be alleged, and it often
has been alleged, by the clergy, that they cannot be expected to be great
orators for fifty or an hundred pounds a year. The answer is ready, are there
not many players who do not get more than the lower clergy? and yet they study
hard, and take great pains, for no greater gain or encouragement, and do
actually acquire such skill in speaking and performing, that for my part, if I
desired to have a composition of mine well spoken, I would put it into the
hands even of a secondrate stage player, rather than of almost any preacher I
ever heard. -- What could be imagined more elegant, if entertainment alone were
sought? What more useful, if the everlasting good of mankind were the object,
than the sacred office of preaching properly performed? Were the most
interesting of subjects treated with proper perspicuity, and adequate judgment,
and well-composed discourses delivered to the listening crowds, with that
dignity which becomes a teacher of divine truth, and with that energy and
pathos, which would show that the preacher spoke from his own heart, and really
meant to speak to the hearts of his hearers, should we not soon see the good
effects of such preaching? For mankind are not wood or stone. They may be
drawn. They may be allured. They may be roused and startled. The voice of an
able and well-accomplished preacher, thundering out the divine threatenings
against vice, would be in the ear of the offender as if he heard the sound of
the last trumpet, summoning the dead to judgment. And the gentle call of
mercy, encouraging the terrified and almost despairing penitent to look up to
his offended heavenly father, would be as the song of angels. -- A whole
multitude might as it were be lifted to the skies, and the world of spirits be
opened to the eyes of their minds. -- The terrors of that punishment which
awaits vice; the glories of that state to which virtue and true piety, through
divine grace, will raise the pious, might be, by a powerful preacher, rendered
present to their understandings, with such conviction, as would make indelible
impressions upon the hearts of the hearers, and work a substantial reformation
in their lives. The convincing and irrefragable proof, that real and important
effects might he produced by preachers, by a proper use of oratory, to the good
purposes of instructing and amending mankind, is, that oratory, in all times,
has been known actually to produce great alterations in men's ways of thinking
and acting. And there is no denying plain facts. No one can imagine that
oratory could have been so laboriously cultivated by statesmen, in all free and
flourishing governments, had they not found it useful to the state. But if any
one should allege that there is nothing in the power of preachers by means of
oratory, I would ask, does it not then follow, that the whole office of
preaching may as well be laid aside? For if good speaking will have no effect,
surely bad will have none. A Perecles, or a Demosthenes, could shake all
Greece, when they warned their countrymen against an invasion, or alarmed them
about the danger of their liberties, whilst our preachers can hardly keep their
hearers awake, when they stand forth in the name of God, to warn them against
the consequences of vice, so ruinous to individuals, so ruinous to nations; the
cause not only of the subversion of states and kingdoms, when luxury and
corruption spread their fatal contagion, and leave a people the unthinking prey
of tyranny and oppression, but of utter and irretrievable destruction, from the
presence of the Lord, and the glory of his power, when the trumpet shall sound,
and the dead shall be raised, and he shall sit upon the throne of judgment,
from whose face heaven and earth shall flee away.

IT may perhaps be objected, that sacred truth needs no ornament to set it off,
nor art to enforce it: That the apostles were artless and illiterate men, and
yet they gained the great end of their mission, the conviction of multitudes,
and the establishment of Christianity: And that therefore there is no necessity
of such attention to delivery, in order to qualify the preacher for his sacred
office, or to render his labors successful. -- To all this an answer it ready.
-- The apostles were not all artless and illiterate men. St. Paul, the greatest
and most general propagator of Christianity, is an eminent exception. He could
be no mean orator who confounded the Jews at Damascus; made a Prince, before
whom he stood to be judged, confess that he had almost persuaded him to become
a convert to a religion every where spoken against; threw another into a fit of
trembling, as he sat upon his judgment seat; made such a defense before the
learned court of Areopagus, as gained him for a convert, who was a member of
the court itself; struck a whole people with such admiration, that they took
him for the God of eloquence; and gained him a place in Longinus's list of
famous orators. Would the cold monotony of our English sermon-readers have
produced such effects as these? Surely it would not.

BUT farther it may be added, the apostles might very well spare human
accomplishments, having what was worth them all, the divine gift of working
miracles, which if our preachers had, we should not have much to say about
their qualifying themselves in elocution. But, as it is, public instruction is
the preacher's weapon, with which he is to combat infidelity and vice. But what
avails a weapon without skill to weild it? Therefore the preacher ought, above
all other public speakers, to labor to enrich and adorn, in the most masterly
manner, his addresses to mankind, his views, if as they ought to be, being the
most important.

WHAT grand point has the player to gain? Why, to draw an audience to the
theater. The pleader at the bar, if he lays before the judges and jury the true
state of the case, so as they may be most likely to see where the right of it
lies, has done his duty. The speaker in either house of Parliament has only to
consider that the good of his country may in a great measure depend upon his
tongue. But the infinitely important subject of preaching is the reformation of
mankind, upon which depends their happiness in this world, and throughout the
whole of their being. Of how great importance is it then, that the art of
preaching be carried to such perfection, that all may be drawn to places of
public instruction, and that those who attend them may receive benefit! And if
almost the whole of preaching, to any good effect, depends upon delivery, how
necessary is the study of delivery! That a good and lively delivery is
incomparably the most important part of public instruction, is plainly manifest
from this, that very indifferent matter, well delivered, will make a
considerable impression. But bad utterance will defeat the whole effect of the
noblest composition that ever was produced. While exorbitant appetite and
unruly passion within, while evil example, with alluring solicitation,
without, invite and ensnare the frail and thoughtless into guilt; shall virtue
and religion, preached from the pulpit, hold forth no charms to engage
votaries? Pleasure decks herself out with rich attire, and must Religion
present herself with every disadvantage, and must she appear quite unadorned?
What chance can she then have, in competition with an enemy so much better
furnished with every necessary invitation and allurement?

LET it be considered that our preachers do not address innocents in Paradise,
but thoughtless and habituated sinners. Mere cold reading will have but little
effect upon such. For weak is the hold which reason has on most men. Few of
mankind have able heads. All have hearts; and all hearts may be touched, if the
speaker is but master of his art. The business of the preacher is not so much
to inform the understanding, as to warm the heart. For there are few who do not
know their duty; to allure them to the doing it, is the difficulty. Nor is this
to be effected by cold reasoning. Accordingly the scripture orators are none of
them cold. They spoke in demonstration of the spirit, and with power, as having
authority, and not as the cold Scribes. Their addresses are such as hardly any
man can utter without warmth. It is true, the preacher is carefully to avoid
ostentation; he is not to preach himself, but Christ. But, at the same time, he
is to stir up every gift that is in him; to cry aloud, and not to spare; to
lift up his voice like a trumpet; to reprove, correct and instruct; to be
instant in season and out of season; to become, innocently, all things to all
men, and consequently to become and orator, if his hearers are not to be
affected by simple and unadorned truth, however weighty. What can people think
about the sincerity, or rather about the insincerity of the preacher, who is
cold, languid, and wholly unanimated in his public instructions; but is as warm
as other men, in the defense of an inconsiderable part of his estate? Would he
speak as calmly, as unconcernedly for his life, as he does in the cause of
virtue and religion? -- If it should be said by preachers, "the people will be
as much offended with us, if we over-act our part, as they are now indifferent
about attending our ministry; so that it will avail nothing to study and
practice a more lively delivery:" To this it may be answered, that a manner of
preaching may be used, which shall have ten times more life and vivacity in it
than the present, and yet, if it be not incorrect, or unnatural, be very safe
from all danger of exceeding due bounds, as to vivacity and force. And in fact
we do observe, that no preacher is admired, I do not mean by the mob, but by
people of education, whose delivery is dull and unanimated. -- The great Doctor
Delany, among other hints proper for a young preacher, said, that "whenever he
went up into a pulpit, he desired to look upon it as the last time he should
ever preach, or the last time that the people should ever hear him." If all
preachers, however dignified, went always up into their respective pulpits thus
impressed; they would then preach, as Appelles once said he painted, for
eternity. They would then act the part of true gospel Christian orators, and
not only calmly and coolly inform the understanding, but by persuasive and
pathetic address endeavor to move the affections, and warm the heart. To act
otherwise, bespeaks a sad ignorance of human nature, and such an inexcusable
indolence and indifference in the preacher, as must constrain his hearers to
suspect that the preacher, let him be who he will, only deals in the false
commerce of unfelt truth. The late pious and learned Doctor Isaac Watts,
speaking of words without spirit, and of preaching by written notes, said, that
paper, with the most pathetic lines written upon it, has no fear nor hope, no
zeal or compassion; it is conscious of no design, nor has any solicitude for
the success: And a mere reader, who coldly tells the people what his paper
says, seems to be as void of all these necessary qualifications, as his paper
is.

FINIS.

