COURAGE IN A GOOD CAUSE, OR The Lawful and Courageous Use of the SWORD.

A SERMON, Preached near Shippensburgh, in Cumberland County, on the 31st of
August, 1775, -- to a large Audience, in which were under Arms, several
Companies of Col. MONTGOMERY'S Battalion; and Published at their request.

By the Rev. ROBERT COOPER, A. M.

JEHOVAH-NISSI, i. e. The Lord my Banner EXODUS, xvii, 15. LANCASTER* PRINTED
BY FRANCIS BAILEY, 1775.

THE Author informs those Gentlemen, at whose request the following Sermon is
published, That the first Copy which was sent to the Press, was by Accident
lost; which has occasioned a delay of the publication.

A SERMON, etc.
Deuteromy XX. 1. When thou go out to battle against thine enemies, and
see horses and chariots, and a people more than thou, be not afraid of them;
for the Lord thy God is with thee, which brought thee up out of the land of
Egypt.
THAT mankind should in any case, be voluntarily active, in taking away the
lives of those of their own species, is a lamentable evidence and consequence
of human depravity. -- If man had retained his integrity, and continued in a
state of peace with heaven, no part of this earth would ever have been a seat
of war: Angels would have been his friendly guests, sentitive creatures his
willing servants* and the whole human race knit together in mutual love.
Apostate angels however inimicably disposed, might have envied, but could not
have impaired his happiness, or disturbed his peace. But human beings, by
joining with those degenerate spirits, in an impotent rebellion against God,
the rightful, righteous and good sovereign of the universe, have introduced
such calamity and confusion, that there is ordinarily more danger from the
injurious attempts of fellow creatures, than from all the beasts of prey. And
however the excellency of man consists, not in bodily strength, but mental
endowments; yet such disputes do sometimes arise, as must be decided, not by
strength of argument in deliberative assemblies, but by force of arms in the
field of battle.

Human affairs, on some occasions, come to be in such a situation, that we must
either submit to death, or intolerable injuries ourselves, or endeavor to
inflict death on the aggressors. In a word, an equitable and honorable peace,
can, at times, be obtained on no other condition, than that of engaging in a
bloody war; and there arises a necessity of taking such a method as must
inevitably remove some out of this world, in order that those who survive may
be the more comfortable; hence making war, or shedding the blood of those of
our own kind, comes to be a necessary business; and it is then as much our duty
to go to the field of battle, as at ordinary times, to go to the field of
labor.

And as the Jewish state was a theocracy, in which God gave them a complete
body of laws, respecting things both civil and sacred; so in our text and
succeeding context, we have a part of their martial law, or divine directions
respecting their militia. However different the weapons of war, whether
offensive or defensive, may have been in different ages and countries; and
consequently the art or manner of war, variable; yet what is recommended in our
text, namely, courage, has always been a necessary qualification in an
accomplished soldier. Intrepidity is as essential to the character of a good
warrior, as a disposition for dispassionate enquiry and cool deliberation is
necessarily contained in the idea of a good judge. And as all scripture has
been given by inspiration of God, and is in one respect or another profitable;
so the consideration of the passage which I have now read, cannot appear in
present circumstances unseasonable, -- We are reduced to the necessity of a
war, which will perhaps be more obstinate, and is certainly more disagreeable
in its nature, and extensive in its effects, than any in which, either the
whole or part of the American British colonies have heretofore been engaged. --
Since then, we know not, how soon even the husbandman, however agreeable their
employment is to themselves and useful to others, may be obliged to change the
implements of husbandry for the weapons of war, and march forth to battle; it
will certainly be comfortable for themselves, and hopeful for others, that they
take the field with that temper prescribed, and having the encouragement
contained in our text. -- For this purpose therefore, I shall show I. In what
cases it may not only be lawful, but duty to engage in war; and when called, go
forth to battle. II. What will afford, to a people, ground of expectation, that
God will be favorably with them in a war; and especially when going out to
battle. III. How, a well-founded apprehension of God's favorable presence,
tends to inspire with true courage -- and lastly, conclude with some practical
improvement.


(...) I look upon it superfluous to spend much time manifesting to my present
audience, the affir^^^^ve of the question -- Is war in any case law^^^^* A
defensive war, in which injurious attempts repelled by force, is founded upon
the prin^^^^^ of self-preservation, which the God of the universe has implanted
in our natures, in common with other living creatures. -- That war was lawful
under the Old Testament dispensation is so evident, that none who acknowledge
the authority of the Bible, can deny it. -- The apprehension that Christ has
under the New Testament entirely prohibited the use of the sword, has arisen
from a misunderstanding and wrong application of some of his precepts, which
were evidently designed by him to injoin meekness and a forgiving temper upon
his followers, and to prevent private retaliation and revenge. -- I will,
however, grant to those professing Christians, who declare against the use of
the sword in every case* that, as Christ's kingdom is spiritual and erected for
heavenly purposes; -- so no coercive measures ought to be used in promoting it,
under any pretense whatsoever. -- The subjects of Christ's kingdom, as such, or
considered in that capacity, ought to use no other means, in propagating
Christianity, but such as were used by Christ himself and his apostles; the
weapons of whose warfare, was not carnal but mighty. -- If we consider the
Christian, as such, purely with respect to his spiritual and eternal interests,
his panoply or complete armor is described in the sixth chapter of the Epistle
to the Ephesians; nor is he to repel injuries which only affect his spiritual
good, with any other, but these spiritual weapons. -- But as persons becoming
Christians, does not supercede their being considered as Mathematicians,
Astronomers, Mechanics or Laborers; so neither does it nullify the relations
and rights as men and civil subjects Now, although the Mathematician may not
pr^tend to either demonstrate or illustrate the tru^^ of Christianity* by
geometrical figures, or th^^rems; yet no one of common sense will alled^^ that
he may not use these, in mathematical quiries; so neither is it true, that
because Christians, as such, may not use the sword, in promoting Christianity,
or defending themselves against injuries which only respect their spiritual
interests, that therefore they may not, as men and civil subjects, use it in
defense of their country. -- It must also be granted, that probably the abuse
of warlike instruments, by professing Christians, pretending therewith to
subserve the interests of Christ's kingdom, in which case, they were indeed
unhallowed weapons; and the almost infinite mischiefs thence accruing, have
given occasion to running into the other extreme, and concluding that they were
not to be used at all.

It is also to be admitted, that making war, merely for the purpose of
enlarging an empire, kingdom or commonwealth; or for acquiring fame by
conquest, is altogether unlawful. -- Hence Alexander the great, rather deserves
the name of an invincible murderer, and successful plunderer, than that of an
illustrious hero.

It will therefore follow, that all the particular cases, in which a war can be
lawful, will come under one or other of these generals, viz. -- It must if it
be offensive, be undertaken by special commission from God, who has a right to
employ whom he pleases, as the executioners of his justice; or it must be
defensive, occasioned by some injury which respects our temporal interest,
either attempted or inflicted. -- As to the first of these, no war since
immediate revelation has ceased, can be in this respect, legitimate: Since no
nation can now produce a commission from God, to invade any other nation, from
whom they have received no injury. -- With regard to the second, it may take
place either between separate independent states, or different parts of the
same state.

1. When one state invades the lives, liberty or property of another, and
persists in the injurious conduct; or refuses to make reparation for injuries
already committed, then is it not only lawful but duty, for the invaded nation,
to go forth to battle against them; and commit the event to the Almighty God,
the judge of the universe. -- But here perhaps it will be queried -- Since it
belongs to the Supreme power, or governing part of a nation, to make war and
peace, how shall all of the nation, who may be called to bear arms, be certain
that there is cause sufficient to legitimate a war? To which it may be
answered, That ordinarily the injuries committed are so notorious, that all may
be acquainted with them: Or if this is not the case, unless it appear evident
that the war is not defensive, but offensive, the subjects must confide in the
integrity and equity of their rulers; and if the war be even unjust, on account
of some circumstances, well known to the rulers, but concealed from the
subjects, the rulers alone, in such a case, are chargeable with guilt. -- As
one man is not called to act in the sphere of another; so neither is he to be
accountable for another's mismanagement, further than he approves of, or
knowingly joins with him, in his culpable conduct. -- Notwithstanding, as the
avowed design of war, is the shedding of human blood: so it will tend much to
the satisfaction of a conscientious soldier, to have clear evidence, in his own
mind, that the war, in which he is engaged, is just and necessary.

2. A war may commence, betwixt different parts of the same state, and this is
usually called, civil-war; and it may be lawful and necessary to go forth to
battle against those of the same body politic, in two particular cases.

First, when part of a nation violate the original compact, break laws made
agreeable to the constitution of the society, throw off their allegiance to the
executive power of the state, and attempt to set up rulers of their own, or to
continue in a state of anarchy. This is usually called sedition or rebellion,
and when the insurgents are subdued, it is generally thought just, to treat
them with greater severity, than conquered enemies, when the war is with a
foreign state. And, indeed, when the attempts, of part of a state, are really
rebellious, it appears equitable, not only to go to war against them, but to
make such as survive, at least, the principal leaders, examples of justice, as
being guilty not only of injury, but of perfidy and ingratitude.

Second, when the governing part of a nation, attempt to abuse the power
committed to them, and instead of subserving the interests of the people,
endeavor to subvert the constitution, employing their influence and authority,
not for the good of the subjects, but to promote their own ambitious and
tyrannical designs; then is it, not only lawful, but duty, to oppose them, and
if they persist, to use the sword against them. I shall not enter deeply into
the proof of this position, which has not only been clearly illustrated, in
theory, but was found necessary in practice, in our own nation, at that
critical and memorable era, the revolution; since which time, the doctrine of
unlimited passive obedience and non-resistance has been exploded by Britons. --
I shall, however, observe a few things to prevent the abuse of it. -- And, in
the first place, agreeable to what has been before said, I think it is evident,
that Christians, as such, or considered as Christ's disciples, (...) never to
oppose civil-government, merely for ^he sake of its being unfavourable to the
principles of Christianity. -- If, in the nation, where, by the providence of
God, Christians are cast, the civil rulers are even Infidels, or being
professing Christians should apostatize from the faith; yet it appears evident
to me, from the nature of Christ's kingdom, and the scope of the New Testament,
that while the nation as such, acquiesce in their government, Christians, as
such, are both to acknowledge their authority, in civil things, and obey them
in all things, not contrary to Christ's laws; and where conscience forbids a
compliance with the precept, they must run the hazard of enduring the penalty,
if that should even be a violent and ignominious death. -- Christians, as such,
have no king or head of their society, but Jesus, and their attempting to
dethrone kings, merely for their being unfavourable to Christ's cause and
kingdom, and attempting to set up others to head and protect themselves, as
members of the Christian church, is high treason against king Jesus, as well as
rebellion against the state. -- Christ, as Messiah, and head of his church, has
no more appointed civil magistrates to be his vicegerents, over his church,
than he has appointed the pope of Rome to be Peter's successor, or his vicar.
-- If civil rulers, instead of professing and practicing Christianity, persist
in rejecting it; by the statute law of king Jesus, they will forfeit a throne
with him in heaven, and incur damnation; and do not by this, forfeit their
earthly preferments. -- These will belong to them, so long as their
constituents choose to continue them; and Christians, considered in that
capacity, constitute no civil rulers. -- As Christ's disciples, persons are
still to declare, that they have no king but Jesus, and at the same time
declare, that he is so far from having exempted them from subjection to civil
magistrates, that he has strictly injoined it upon them.

In the second place, it is not every transgression or defect, in civil
government, either with regard to legislation, or execution, that will warrant
resistance. -- That civil rulers, should universally and uninteruptedly act for
the common good, is indeed, agreeable in theory and very desirable, but like
Plato's republic, will no where be found, except in idea. -- And here I would
observe, that there is a great difference betwixt such wrong steps in
government, which although they are injurious to the subjects, yet are not
subversive of the constitution; and their bad effects but transient; and such
as have not only hurtful, but permanent effects; and if submitted to, will
entail evil upon succeeding generations, E. G. If government should order some
public edifice to be erected, which might be more for the gratification of
their own vanity, than any common utility, to the nation; and for this purpose,
impose a heavy but constitutional tax, for one year; this would be very
different from making a law, by which an equal sum should in all time coming be
paid, annually, into the public treasury. -- If government raise an army of
100,000, when perhaps ^0,000 might suffice for the emergency; this (...) far
from being equal to appointing a standing army of 100,000.

In the third place, even when the conduct of ^overnment is, as above stated,
if the circumstances of the case will admit, moderate measures, ^^ch as
representation, petition and remonstrance, ^^ght first to be tried. -- In all
cases, especially ^ith civil rulers, the sword should be the last re^^rt. --
But although I will not take it upon me to ^^aw a line, whereby in all
instances, it may be ^own exactly, where submission ought to end ^^d resistance
begin, this being determined, ra^^^r by common necessity than casuistic
divinity; yet that matters in a state, have been and may be in such extremity,
as to require this extraordinary remedy, is very manifest. -- And to suppose
that the persons of those, who are advanced to government, by the people,
thereby become, together with their favorites and implicit servants, so
sacred, that in all cases, it is criminal to use the sword against them, is
repugnant to the great principle of self-preservation, and establishing a
toleration of robbery and murder. -- There are certain rights derived from the
God of nature, which no man can transfer to another, even if he were willing.
-- He may indeed forfeit them, by his own mal-conduct; but it is absurd to
suppose, that he can be deprived of them, by the bad conduct of another. --
That any of our fellow creatures, by being with our own consent, appointed to
rule over us, for our and their good, thereby become licensed plunderers and
murderers, is a tenet both abominable and absurd. -- If it should be replied,
that, however, they may abuse their power, and escape in this life, God will
punish them in the world to come. -- This, I grant is a certain truth, but in
this case, altogether misapplied; because the sole and only end of civil
government, is that the present state may be more safe and comfortable; and
therefore, the remedy for its evils belongs to men in the present state. -- I
allow, indeed that as the great end of Christ's kingdom, is with regard to the
future state; so if men violate its laws, in such a way, as does not injure the
temporal enjoyments of mankind, no punishment which respects their temporal
enjoyments, is to be inf^^cted. -- If the spiritual weapons of the church prove
ineffectual, with such delinquent^ they must be left to abide the consequences
in the world to come. -- I shall only add, that when civ^^ rulers turn tyrants,
and oppress their subject^ their character is, at least, more odious than that
of such foreign invaders, as by their invasion violate no league or express
stipulation; because said civil rulers are guilty, not only of cruelty, but of
ingratitude and perfidy. -- And therefore, by the laws of nature, which never
can be superseded, they deserve punishment, and it is sometimes necessary to
remove them as intolerable nuisances.

II. There will be ground for a people to expect God favorably with them in a
war.

1. When they have clear evidence, that the war on their side is lawful and
necessary -- when it is not with ambitious, or avaricious veiws, of acquiring
honor, or wealth, by the destruction or poverty of others, who have not
injured them; but only to repel injurious attempts, or obtain reparation for
injuries received. This is absolutely necessary, in order to having any ground
of encouragement from God. For if any interprize be a violation of the rights
of our fellow creatures, and consequently a breach of God's law, as it would be
vain to expect his approbation and assistance, in such a case; so it would be
daring presumption, if not blasphemy, to ask his presence. If we would expect
the Lord graciously to accompany us, we must carefully observe not to turn
aside from what his holy law prescribes. If in any undertaking we deviate from
this, we have just reason to expect, that God, in that affair, will forsake us;
nay set himself against us. If the Israelites, contrary to the express command
of God, will ascend the hill, to sight with the Amalekites and Canaanites, they
shall return shamefully beaten; as may be seen Numb. 14th chap. latter part.

2. When those who in a lawful and necessary war go out to battle, are
themselves engaged in earnestly soliciting the divine presence. However prayer
is neither to be supposed to produce any change in God, nor to have any thing
in it meritorious of the favors asked, nor to convey information to God of
things with which he was unacquainted; yet it is a powerful medium, for the
obtaining of blessings, both temporal and spiritual. There is little reason to
conclude, that God will give, what persons don't think worth while humbly and
importunately to ask; and we are not only unworthy of, but also unfit for, the
enjoyment of those special favors, which we neglect to seek to God for. It is
indeed an awful and mournful reflection, that even in the British armies,
whether land or sea forces, in which, perhaps, few would be found who have not
by baptism been inlisted under Christ; yet few of either officers of soldiers,
but what are more remarkable for cursing and swearing than praying. -- God
forbid that our American armies, who have at this day to be their opposers,
should, in this thing, be their imitators!

It would be impossible, in the time proper for this part of the discourse, to
produce all the instances, in which God in answer to prayer, has manifested his
presence in deciding battles. -- You, have two remarkable instances, recorded
in 1 Samuel vii. chap. and 2 Chronicles. xx. chap. -- In the first of these, you have
an account of a monumental pillar, raised in the field of battle and victory,
and inscribed to the honor of a prayer-hearing God, and for the encouragement
of future officers and soldiers.

In the second, you find that God was so interested, by a powerful prayer, that
he did not merely grant auxiliary aid, but was the sole efficient, leaving
nothing for Jehosaphat and his army to do, but to carry away the spoil. Allow
me to add, the instance of David, who trusting more to a prayer-hearing God,
than to Readiness coat of mail, went out with a sling and stone; but returned with
Goliah's head, and thereby obtained a general victory. In short, those are most
likely to be successful combatants in battle, who are the most importunate
wrestlers in prayer.

3. When an army maintains a reverence of a holy God, and are afraid to venture
on any of the ways of known sin. Those may expect the presence of God when
fighting against the enemies of their bodies, who are irreconcilable, in their
war, against the enemies of God and their own souls. And without this, the
foregoing will be nothing but solemn mockery of God; in words soliciting his
presence, and by our actions telling him to depart from us. It may, perhaps,
seem unsuitable to speak of a soldier being afraid of any thing; but I would
say, woe to the man, who is above the fear of sin, and does not tremble at the
word of God. -- Shocking to think that any should value themselves for their
fighting against God! Let the potsheards of the earth, strive with the
potsheards of the earth; but woe to him, that striveth with his Maker. You have
an example of this, in the abovementioned 7th of 1 Samuel from the 3d verse. And
Samuel spoke unto all the house of Israel, saying, if ye do return unto the
Lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange Gods, and Astaroth, from
among you, and prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only; and he
will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines. Then the children of
Israel did put away. Baalim and Astaroth, and served the Lord only. But it is
needless to multiply quotations on this head, since it is evident from reason,
and the whole tenor of revelation, that sin is the very cause, why God permits
enemies to invade a people; there is therefore no encouragement, to expect that
God will appear for us, unless we abandon our sins, which have provoked him to
send war upon our country. And however wicked soldiers may, indeed, be
instrumental of gaining a victory; yet unless repentance prevent, they shall at
last find, it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, when
their opposition, will only increase their misery.

4. When those who go out to battle manifest an humble temper, neither boasting
of their number and abilities; nor scornfully despising their enemies, but
committing the event to God. God declares that he resists the proud, but shows
favor to the humble. It has ordinarily been found, that those who went to the
field of battle, magnifying their own strength and warlike-accomplishments; and
contemning their enemies; thus as it were anticipating the victory, have either
fallen by these same despised enemies, or returned with a different tone, and
instead of their laurels, (...) only bring the news of a shameful defeat. Many
instances, from sacred and common history, might be adduced for the
illustration and confirmation of this, were it necessary and would time admit.
The fates ^^ a proud Pharaoh, an insolent Gollah, and a boasting Sennacherib
are familiar to all. Let none think, that humility is inconsistent with the
character of a soldier. Humility belongs to us as creatures, and is a dress
that becomes persons in every station and condition. There is a great
difference betwixt ostentatious bragging and courageous (...). Pride is a
concomitant of pusillanimity, and is opposed to true magnanimity. Those who
va^^ly and proudly vaunt, of their own skill and prow^^^ do thereby preclude
the divine presence and assistance; since they hereby manifest, that they look
upon (...) superfluous, for a God to interpose.

5. When those on whose behalf the army marches to the field of battle, are
also employed in earnest prayer to God, in confessing their sins and casting
away every abomination; not boasting of, nor confiding in, the number, prowess,
discipline and armor of their troops; but humbly committing the event to God,
who can save, by many or by few. -- Doubtless we may venture to say, however to
some it might appear a paradox, that those who remain at home, and never go out
to battle, have notwithstanding, a great hand in the victory or defeat. If we
fight against the Lord at home, how can we expect that he will fight for our
armies abroad? There may be Achans in the city and country, as well as in the
soldiery; by whom God may be so provoked, as to refuse to go forth with our
armies; on the other hand, persons may as truly be instrumental of an happy
campaign in their fields and closets, as those who charge upon the enemy in the
line of battle. When Israel fought with Amalek, as recorded in the 17th of
Exodus, neither Moses, Aaron, nor Hur, were either field-marshals or common
soldiers, but were at a distance upon the top of an hill; yet none who read
this part of sacred history, can exclude them from a share in obtaining the
victory. Those whose lives are a counter-part to their prayers, and are
employed in storming heaven with their importunate supplications, may be as
useful to their country, when a seat of war, as those who bombard castles and
scale walls!

In a lawful war, when any of these things is found, it is so far a good
symptom, when they are all found, there is full evidence of God's favorable
presence. -- But I am now to proceed to show how this inspires with true
courage.

III. True courage is a temper or disposition, by which a man, with firm
resolution and boldness encounters the dangers, which occur in the path of his
duty, repelling or resisting to his utmost, all intervening difficulties. -- As
this temper respects the character of a soldier, it is opposed to what is
commonly called cowardice; which either influences a man to shrink and flee
from, even those dangers, which lie in the way of his duty; or causes him to
make but a feeble and ineffectual resistance. -- And I might observe, that an
appresion of the favor and assistance of even false gods, had a tendency, in
heathenish armies, to produce something which had sundry of the ingredients and
much resembled true courage; and this however ill-founded, had after a great
influence in procuring victory. -- When the soldiers were animated, with what
they counted a lucky omen, or by a favorable answer from an oracle, they would
ordinarily exert themselves, with the utmost vigor. -- It has also been often
found, that a false apprehension, of the favorable presence of the true God,
has produced such effects, as in several respects were similar to true heroism.
-- With what irresistible violence and rapidity, did the followers of Mahomet
overrun many of the eastern countries, when possessed with the notion that
they were fighting the Lord's battles? -- With what enthusiastic fortitude, did
hundreds of thousands exert themselves in the crusades, or the wild project of
recovering the Holy Land from the Infidels? In which enterprise, they thought
that God was undoubtedly upon their side, and therefore were fearless of
danger. None can therefore doubt concerning the powerful operation of a
well-grounded apprehension, of the favorable presence of the true God. But I
am to show how this inspires with true courage.

1. There is contained in it, an evidence of the divine approbation in the
undertaking, which affords peace of mind, let the issue be as it will; without
this there can be no rational, manly courage; because a view of the
unlawfulness of the enterprise, whenever it occurs must make the man quake,
lest God himself should meet him as a bear robbed of her whelps.

2. It contains divine assistance and protection; and if God be for us, who can
prevail against us? What general or army shall be able to circumvent in
counsel, one who is omniscient and infinitely wise; or exceed in strength and
prowess, one who is Almighty? Who has an arm like God, or can thunder with a
voice like him? All the inhabitants of the earth are but as grasshoppers before
him; yea all the squadrons of hell quake before him; and shrink into the
burning pit, to hide from his majestic and terrible countenance.

3. A sense of the divine presence, in a war gives occasion to consider all the
deliverances God has wrought for his people, in former times; and to improve
these as an encouragement to expect his interposition at that time; for he is
the same yesterday, today and forever. -- Thus the people of Israel, when
environed with new difficulties, usually recount old deliverances, and
particularly the wonderful deliverance mentioned in our text, viz. bringing
them up out of the land of Egypt. In respect of that colony which is at present
the seat of war, it may be also said, that God did great things for their
ancestors, which I cannot but think affords encouragement to hope, that he will
not now forsake that people. -- They were brought from a land, then groaning
under oppression in regard of religious liberty, and stained with the blood of
persecution, not through the Red Sea, but across the Atlantic; and preserved
through all the difficulties and dangers attending a settlement among wild
beasts and savages. -- A^l who read the history of the planting and progress of
the colony of Massachusetts Bay, may find great instances of God's goodness, to
that people in former times, of which I cannot at present give even a general
account.

Lastly, If we have the presence of God when going to battle, and are
interested in his favor, then we may rest assured, that whether we survive the
engagement, or die in the field, all shall be well. If our souls are possessed
of the fear of the Lord, we need not fear them, who can only kill the body. A
soul prepared for Heaven, will as easily and joyfully (perhaps I may say more
so) find its way thither, from a field of battle, as from a bed of down; will
as cheerfully ascend from amidst roaring cannon, as weeping friends. As God is
with his people in danger, so also in death, which is to them an end of all
danger. Can then, any thing so effectually inspire a soldier with true courage,
as that which raises him above the fear of death; nay makes death itself appear
a desirable event? For blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, since they
rest from their labors, and their works follow them. I now proceed to make
some practical improvement.

1. As, agreeable to what was said in the introduction, we are at present in a
state of war, it will be very proper to enquire, whether, agreeable to the
doctrine, it be on our side a lawful and necessary war, i. e. whether it be,
indeed, defensive. As time will not admit of prolixity, I shall only attempt a
brief view of the matter, which I hope, notwithstanding, will contain evidence
sufficient to satisfy every competent enquirer, who is free from invincible
prejudice.

I therefore observe, that all the late acts of the British Parliament, which
by their united operation have at length brought on a civil war, have flowed
from a declaratory statute, made some years ago; or at least are built upon it,
as their true foundation. In which statute, there is this remarkable clause,
viz. That all his Majesty's Colonies and Plantations in America have been, are
and of right ought to be, subordinate to and dependent upon the Imperial Crown
and Parliament of Great Britain; who have full power and authority to make laws
and statutes of sufficient validity to bind the Colonies and people of America,
subjects of the Crown of Great Britain, in all cases whatsoever.

Now this is a basis, not only broad enough to support all the late acts
complained of and remonstrated against by the Colonies, but is a sufficient
foundation for a system of tyranny, both civil and ecclesiastic. Since the time
may come, when the whole of Great Britain, may bear no greater proportion to
the British Colonies, either with regard to circuit or number of inhabitants,
than one of our counties now do to a province; and yet this vast extent of
country shall have no other security against tyranny and oppression, but the
complexion of the British Parliament, the evils incident to which we can
neither prevent nor remedy. As we have no hand in choosing any of the Members of
Parliament, so we must according to said statute, be, not merely the subjects
of the Imperial Crown of Great Britain, but the slaves of the Parliament of
Great Britain. As they may drain away our property by heavy taxes, to be
absorbed in discharging the almost immense national debt, or consumed in court
luxury; so they may send pensioners and placemen to devour the ^ruits of our
industry among ourselves.

Now, in defense of this act, it is alleged, that, according to a theorem in
politics, there must, in ^very civil state, be a supreme power lodged
somewhere, that it essentially belongs to those, who have this supreme power,
to give laws, in all cases, to the whole body politic. -- That in the empire of
Great Britain, this power is lodged in the Parliament, and that it must be so
in order that these Colonies may be a part of the British empire.

To which it may be replied, that it is vain to urge any kind of hypothetical
maxims against plain matter of fact. Tacitus, who was in his day no mean
politician, allowed that a mixture of the three simple kinds of civil
government, had indeed a specious appearance in theory; but was not reducible
to practice, or at least alleged that no such government could be lasting. --
But in contradiction of this supposition, it is now a well known fact, that the
British constitution, which is such a mixture, has existed for hundreds of
years. It is as well known, that the Colonies and Great Britain have existed as
one state, for above 100 years, with mutual concord and prosperity, and with
the great augmentation of the wealth and glory of the British nation, without
the exercise of such unlimited power in the British Parliament. And it is too
likely, that if the Ministry of Great Britain persist in not only claiming but
attempting to exercise such a power, this will be the very thing that will
effect her ruin. Now if such an unlimited power has lain dormant for above a
century, and yet every thing as comfortable in the whole body politic as could
be wished, what avails it to allege a metaphysical axiom^ against evident
fact. The reducing this political principle to practice, in our nation, if
effected, is likely to be a growing rod of iron to the Colonies whereas it
might, for any thing that appeared respecting these Colonies, have been
consumed (...), without any detriment to the nation. How ever if British
politicians, have found such a gordian knot in politics, as admits of no
alternative, but subjecting the Colonies, in all respects, to the mercy of a
Parliament, about which they have no more agency, than they have about the
Court of Spain, it is evidently of their own tieing; and it is the interest and
duty of these Colonies, rather than be thus entangled, Alexander-like, to cut
it with the sword. The present war is therefore on our side manifestly in
defense of property and liberty, and I may add of life too. It is also
notorions, that neither before nor since the attempts upon our liberty, have we
thrown off allegiance to King George the Third, nor attempted to set up any
form of government, as an independent state; but on the contrary, in an humble
manner, been representing grievances, petitioning and remonstrating. Besides
the penalties annexed to the injurious laws, armies have been sent to enforce
obedience, who have already proceeded to shed the blood of our brethren. The
alternative, in short, now is either to wear the chain or the sword.

2. As different conduct comes to be duty at different times; so it is now the
duty of all, who are able, to be in readiness for going out to battle, and
therefore to be making every necessary preparation for that purpose. It is now
as proper to be diligent in learning the business of war, as at ordinary times
to learn the common businesses of life. And for persons to say, they are so
hurried with ordinary affairs, that they have no time to spare that way, is as
if a man should say, though his house was on fire, he had no time to put it
out. All capable of going to battle should endeavor to be furnished with the
weapons of war. If the exigency of the case required it, we should now, beat
our plow-shares into swords, and our pruning hooks into spears. This is by no
means repugnant to, nay it is necessarily contained in, trusting in the Lord
and expecting his favorable presence. To trust in means alone, and neglect
seeking to God, is pride and atheism; to pretend to trust in God, and at the
same time to neglect the use of proper means, is foolish presumption and wild
enthusiasm. Nor are any to look upon themselves above the business necessary to
prepare them for war; the most reputable citizens, and those who have
endeavored to maintain a character for piety, ought now to endeavor to
distinguish themselves as brave soldiers. How shameful, if the licentious and
profane, should manifest more forwardness and alacrity this way, than those who
formerly were of apparent pious deportment? Does it not give occasion to the
wicked, for saying, either these regular profess^^s, have not that religion
they pretend to; or with it all they are but dastardly cowards? Shall (says
Nehemiah) such a man as I flee?

3. Permit me to address those who design to go out to battle in defense of
themselves and country, whenever there may be a call for that purpose; and to
this end have associated themselves and taken up arms. You see the business is
not only lawful, but necessary, I may add honorable. -- Even if you die in the
conflict, it will be in a good cause. Since therefore, besides the obligation
which lay upon you in common with others, to stand forth in the face of danger
and death, in a good cause, you have added your own consent and engagement; to
draw back, if you were even before the cannon's mouth, would fix both awful
guilt and indelible disgrace upon you. Would brand you with perpetual infamy.
If then you would escape deep guilt before God, and lasting contempt among men,
forward you must go, ^^^^soever the drum shall beat, and the trumpet (...) for
battle. You have, in a word, no alternative, but either to venture your lives
bravely, or attempt to save them ignominiously; to run the hazard of dying like
heroes, or be certain of living like cowards. And here, let me exhort soldiers
to preserve the strictest regard to the authority of their officers, in all
their gradations. The more you duly honor and obey them, the more honorable
will you thereby be, yourselves; and the more fit for, and worthy of,
preferment. -- None more fit to be advanced to command others, than those who
have been eminent for their dutiful obedience. A family cannot exist without
government and discipline, much less an army. And surely if a house divided
against itself cannot stand, a rebellious and mutinous soldiery must go to
destruction. This way they will do the work of the enemy, themselves. It will
avail nothing to say your officers were formerly your equals, they are now by
your own consent your superiors. As little to the purpose, will it be to say,
you will not obey these, for though they were appointed by a majority, yet you
voted against them, and for others. Were they not chosen agreeable to the mode
agreed upon, and to which you consented, or at least, should have consented, as
being generally approved, by your countrymen? Your refusing submission, on this
supposition, proceeds from a principle, which might lead to as great evils, or
worse, than those which might give occasion to the distinction of soldiers and
officers at this day; for if it does not lead to tyranny, it will certainly end
in anarchy. You might as well say, you would not submit to the Sheriff of the
country, because at the general election you voted against him. Permit me also
in a few words, to exhort (...) of all ranks. -- As your country have (...) you
to distinguished places, endeavor to distinguish yourselves by a conduct in
all respects becoming your stations. Let them not have reason to say, that they
were mistaken in their choice. Exercise the authority committed to you with
mildness and equity; but at the same time with inflexible strictness. A due
mixture of these, produces the perfection of any kind of government.

And, as a matter of the utmost moment, let me exhort and beseech all, both
officers and soldiers, to conduct in such a manner as will afford encouragement
to expect the favorite presence of God with us, when we go out to battle. --
If we make the Almighty God our enemy, can we expect to stand before our
enemies? Oh! how monstrous to hear soldiers when about to face death, profaning
the name of God. -- This is, perhaps a more than infernal bravery; for the
devils believe there is a God and tremble. -- Shocking intrepidity -- to set
their mouths against the heavens, and challenge Omnipotence itself. -- And how
sordid and shameful for a soldiery to indulge themselves in drunkenness, and
debauchery? Are these like to be champions in battle, who are enervated,
emaciated and inslaved by their lusts? When Hannibal, the great Carthagenian
General, had led an army over the Alps, penetrated Italy itself, and after
sundry successful battles had given the Romans such a severe stroke at Cannae,
that there appeared scarce any thing to obstruct his making himself master of
their metropolis, Rome; yet he delayed at Capua, and indulged himself and
soldiers in luxury and drunkenness, after which, it is said, his army became
enervated and disobedient, and he never after was successful in Italy, nor
indeed any where else. This gave occasion to the proverbial saying, (...) Capua
was to the Carthagenians, what Can^^ ha^ been to the Romans; and to that
shameful distich, which in a play is ascribed to him, viz.

At Capua I in pleasures lay,
And for a woman gave the world away.
When Belshazzar and his nobles, with others in Babylon were feasting and
drinking, the city was surprised, taken, and the King slain.

Count it not only your safety but your honor to fear God. It is a (...) manly
fear to reverence Jehovah, and be afraid of guilt. -- Manly, did I say? It is
angelic, in proportion as the Angels rise in dignity, they descend in humble
reverence of God. Can you venture to go to the field of battle, in such a
manner, as will not only endanger your bodies, but your souls? Will any less
hardy, as by their open wickedness, to tell their fellow soldiers and others,
that they neither fear God nor man, death nor damnation? Will (...) be Achans,
In the camp, and thereby damn their own souls, and destroy their country, by
provoking God to deliver us into the hands of our enemies?

But however I thus warn and charge you in respect of fearing God, and being
afraid of guilt* yet in respect of your enemies, I would say, in the words of
our text, be not afraid of them. We fight not for conquest or fame, with a
design of cruelly and prodigally shedding human blood* but merely in defense of
those rights, which belong to us as men and Britons. Go forth then, and while
our invaders boast of their armor, artillery, discipline and naval force* let
us be encouraged from the justness of our cause, and humbly confide in the Lord
of hosts; saying "the sword of the Lord and of Liberty." Declare upon the one
hand, that if you may enjoy unmolested, those rights, which are derived from
God alone; you are ready to lay down the arms which you have been constrained,
as the last resort, to take up* on the other hand, with drawn sword, assert,
that rather than surrender that sacred depositum of liberty, which we received
from our ancestors, and are bound to transmit to our posterity, you will sign
the remonstrance with your own blood. I shall only add the words of a great
General: Be of good courage, and let us play the men, for our people and the
cities of our God; and the Lord do that which seems him good.

4. You, who are either unfit for bearing arms, or on any other account, may be
reasonably exempted from going out to battle; yet much (as you have heard) may
depend upon you, with respect to the success of those who appear in the field.
And O! how hopeful, if you are engaged in fighting against your own and others
sins which are the cause why God sends upon us the calamity of war. On the
other hand, how discouraging, if many of you, while others are abroad,
endeavoring to cut the bands of slavery, and open a way to liberty with the
sword, should, at home, be serving your lusts and ratifying a league with hell?
While others are opposing the wrath of our enemies; will any of you venture on
such conduct as will draw down the wrath of God! You may, (as has been said) be
Achans at home and troublers of your country, as well as in the camp. And
promise not yourselves security in sin, because you do not expect to face death
in battle. If God be your enemy, he will find you out and punish you, though you
were hid in the bottom of the sea. You may fall into hell, by the hand of a
sin-avenging God, at home, while your brethren may stand in battle and return
victorious. But O! how hopeful if the aged and females, who are not called to
march forth with sword and musket, should, while others are marching or
fighting, be much in praying. This way they may serve and help to save their
country, in their houses and closets, as truly as if they were able to appear
in the field of battle. Jacob singly, conquered an enraged enemy, with 400 at
his back, not by fighting with them, but wrestling with God.

Lastly, let me conclude with an address, which equally concerns you all,
whether you are to go to the field or abide by the stuff. We are at this day
treated as guilty of rebellion against man, blessed be God this is a false
charge: But let none of us venture to live under the just imputation of a
rebellion, far more atrocious in its nature and dreadful in its consequences. I
mean an obstinate rebellion against God, by violating his laws and despising
his Gospel. O sinners, permit me to use, with a little variation, language
which, according to its common acceptance, is justly hateful, but in this case
proper and emphatical: Let me in respect of God charge you to non-resistance,
and the most unlimited and cheerful obedience. -- Lay aside your armor,
confess your crimes, and submit yourselves wholly to the mercy of the offended
King of Heaven and earth. Insist upon no terms of capitulation, but those of
his own prescribing, which are indeed worthy of a God to propose; salutary and
honorable for you to accept. Plead guilty, accept of the righteousness of
Christ, and this merciful King will pass a sentence of oblivion upon your
iniquities, and of indemnity on your persons. Come inlist under Christ, and you
shall be more than conquerors over your enemies, whether terrestrial or
infernal. Do you ask what bounty he gives? It is beneath his dignity to
encourage you with worldly wealth and honor; these he throws out to slaves,
even to the devil's soldiers. What think you of pardon* of sin, of having the
honor to be conformed to himself by sufferings in this world, and afterward
through eternity reigning with him in glory? Give up (...) ^ame to be inserted
in his muster-roll; if you have been baptized, you are already under military
oath to be (...) to him* be so to the death, and thou shall be an illustrious
victor by the blood of the Lamb, and shall receive an eternal crown of life.
Become, this day, a voluntary soldier of Christ and this will, above any thing,
fit thee for defending thy country courageously for if in the conflict thou
losest thy country, nay thy life, he will give thee a better country and life,
even the heavenly. AMEN.

FINIS.

