LARGE ADDITIONS TO COMMON SENSE; Addressed to the Inhabitants of AMERICA, On
the Following interesting Subjects.

I. The American Patriot's Prayer. II. American Independancy defended, by
Candidus. III. The Propriety of Independancy, by Demophilus. The dread of
Tyrants, and the sole resource
Of those that under grim Oppression groan.
THOMPSON. IV. A Review of the American Contest, with some Strictures on the
King's Speech. Addressed to all Parents in the Thirteen United Colonies, by a
Friend to Posterity and Mankind. V. Letter to Lord Dartmouth, by an English
American. VI. Observations on Lord North's Conciliatory Plan, by Sincerus.
TO WHICH IS ADDED, An Appendix to Common Sense: Together with an Address to
the People called Quakers, on their Testimony concerning Kings and Government,
and the present Commotions in AMERICA.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold at the Printing-Office in Queen Street. 1776.

The AMERICAN PATRIOT'S Prayer.
PARENT of all, omnipotent
In heaven, and earth below,
Through all creation's bounds unspent,
Whose streams of goodness flow.
Teach me to know from whence I rose,
And unto what designed;
No private aims let me propose,
Since linked with human kind.
But chief to hear my country's voice,
May all my thoughts incline,
It Is reason's law, it is virtue's choice,
It Is nature's call and thine.
^e from fair freedom's sacred cause,
Let nothing ever divide;
Grandeur, nor gold, nor vain applause,
Nor friendship false misguide.
Let me not faction's partial hate
Pursue to this land's woe;
Nor grasp the thunder of the state,
To wound a private foe.
If, for the right, to wish the wrong
My country shall combine.
Single to serve the erron'ous throng,
Spite of themselves, be mine.
ADDITIONS To COMMON SENLE. AMERICAN INDEPENDANCY defended.
WHEN the little pamphlet entitled COMMON SENSE first made its appearance in
favor of that so often abjured idea of independance upon Great Britain, I was
informed that no less than three gentlemen of respectable abilities were
engaged to answer it. As yet I have seen nothing which directly pretends to
dispute a single position of the author. The oblique essay in Humphreys's
paper, and solemn Testimony of the Quakers, however intended, having offered
nothing to the purpose, I shall take leave to examine this important question,
with all candor and attention, and submit the result to my much interested
country.

Dependence of one man, or state, upon another, is either absolute, or limited
by some certain terms of agreement. The dependence of these colonies which
Great Britain calls constitutional, as declared by act of parliament, is
absolute. If the contrary of this be the bugbear so many have been declaiming
against, I could wish my countrymen would consider the consequence of so stupid
a profession. If a limited dependence is intended, I would be much obliged to
any one who will show me the Britanno American Magna Charta wherein the terms
of our limited dependence are precisely stated. If no such thing can be found,
and absolute dependence be accounted inadmissible the sound we are squabbling
about has certainly no determinate meaning. If any say we mean that kind of
dependence we acknowledge (...) and before the year 1763; I answer, vague and
uncertain laws, and more especially CONSTITUTIONS, are the very instruments of
slavery. The Magna Charta of England was very explicit, considering the time it
was formed, and yet much blood was spilt in disputes concerning its meaning.

Besides the danger of an indefinite dependence upon an undetermined power, it
might be worth while to consider what the characters are on whom we are so
ready to acknowledge ourselves dependant. The votaries for this idol tell us,
upon the good people of our Mother Country, whom they represent as the most
just, humane, and affectionate friends we can have in the world. Were this
true, it were some encouragement; but who can pretend ignorance that these just
and humane friends are as much under the tyranny of men of a reverse character
as we should be, could those miscreants gain their ends? I disclaim any more
than a mutual dependence on any man, or number of men upon earth; but ah
indefinite dependence upon a combination of men, who have, in the face of the
sun, broken through the most solemn covenants, debauched the hereditary, and
corrupted the elective guardians of the people's rights, who have, in fact,
established an absolute tyranny in Great Britain and Ireland, and openly
declared themselves competent to bind the Colonists in all cases whatsoever: I
say indefinite dependence on such a combination of usurping innovators is
evidently as dangerous to liberty, as fatal to civil and social happiness, as
any one step that could be proposed, even by the destroyer of men. The utmost
that the honest party in Great Britain can do, is to warn us to avoid this
dependence at all hazards? Does not even a Duke of Grafton declare the
ministerial measures illegal and dangerous? And shall America, no way connected
with this administration, press our submission to such measures, and
reconciliation to the authors of them? Would not such pigeon-hearted wretches
equally forward the recall of the Stuart family, and the establishment of Popery
throughout Christendom, did they conceive the party in favor of those loyal
measures the strongest? Shame on the men who can court exemption from present
trouble and expense, at the price of their own and posterity's liberty! The
honest party in England cannot wish for the reconciliation proposed. It is as
unsafe to them as to us, and they thoroughly apprehend it. What check have they
now upon the crown, and what shadow of control can they pretend, when the crown
can command fifteen or twenty millions a year, which they have nothing to say
to? A proper proportion of our commerce is all that can benefit any good man in
Britain or Ireland, and God forbid we should be so cruel as to furnish bad men
with power to enslave both Britain and America. Administration has now fairly
dissevered the dangerous tie: Execrated will he be by the latest posterity who
again joins the fatal co^d! But say the puling pusillanimous cowards, we shall
be subject to a long and bloody war, if we declare independance. On the
contrary, I affirm it the only step that can bring the contest to a speedy and
happy issue. By declairing independance we place ourselves on a footing for an
equal negotiation: Now we are called a pack of villainous rebels, who, like the
St. Vincent Indians, can expect nothing more than a pardon for our lives, and
the sovereign favor, respecting freedom and property, to be at the King's will.
Grant Almighty God that I may be numbered with the dead before that fable day
dawn on North America!

All Europe knows the illegal and inhuman treatment we have received from
Britons. All Europe Wishes the haughty empress of the main reduced to a more
humble deportment. After herself has thrust her Colonies from her, the maritime
powers cannot be such idiots as to suffer her to reduce them to a more absolute
obedience of her dictates than they were heretofore obliged to yield. Does not
the most superficial politician know that while we profess ourselves the
subjects of Great Britain, and yet hold arms against her, they have a right to
treat us as rebels, and that according to the laws of nature and nations no
other state has a right to interfere in the dispute? But on the other hand, on
our declaration of independance, the maratime states at least will find it
their interest, which always secures the question of inclination, to protect a
people who can be so advantageous to them. So that those short-sighted
politicians, who conclude that this step will involve us in slaughter and
devastation, may plainly perceive that no measure in our power will so
naturally and effectually work our deliverance. The motion of a singer of the
Grand Monarch would procure as gentle a temper in the Omnipotent British
Minister as appeared in the Manilla ransom and Falkland islands affairs. From
without certainly we have every thing to hope, nothing to fear; from within,
some tell us the Presbyterians, if freed from the restraining power of
Great Britain, would overrun the peceable Quakers in this government. For my
own part, I despise and detest the bickerings of sectaries, and am apprehensive
of no trouble from that quarter, especially while no peculiar honors nor
emoluments are annexed to either. I heartily wish too many of the Quakers did
not give cause of complaint, by endeavoring to counteract the measures of their
fellow citizens for the common safety. If they profess themselves only pilgrims
here, let them walk through the men of this world without interfering with
their actions on either side. If they would not pull down Kings, let them not
support tyrants; for whether they understand it or not, there is, and ever has
been, an essential difference in the characters.

Finally, with M. De Vatell, I account a state a moral person having an
interest and will of its own, and I think that state a monster, whose prime
mover has an interest and will, in direct opposition to its prosperity and
security. This position has been so clearly demonstrated in the pamphlet first
mentioned in this essay, that I shall only add, if there are any arguments in
favor of returning to a state of dependence on Great Britain, that is on the
present Administration of Great Britain, I could wish they were timely offered,
that they may be soberly considered, before the cunning proposals of the
cabinet set all the timid, lazy and irresolute members of the community into a
clamor for peace at any rate.

CANDIDUS.

ADDITIONS TO COMMON SENSE. The Propriety of INDEPENDANCY.
TO acknowledge that the Creator formed Man for society, and that society
cannot subsist without regulations, laws, and government; and at the same time
to assert, that in spite of all human care to prevent it, every government
will degenerate into a tyranny, is such a daring blasphemy of the divine
attribute, that had I not heard it asserted, and acquiesced in as a truth, I
could not have believed such a position could have obtained in a civilized
country! This monstrous hypothesis concludes that notwithstanding the Deity had
power enough to form such admirable creatures as men and women, and fit them
for enjoying of each other a thousand ways, and though by means of the most
exquisite of those enjoyments a race should arise from them over which every
power of rightful government must of necessity be exercised, yet just and
rightful government is in reality utopian, imaginary, and impracticable! Did
not God cloth the grass, direct the wild Goat and provide for the Sparrow, I
might more easily be persuaded to suspect his care of Man.

I readily grant that the delegates of governmental power are too apt to
consider themselves the possessors of it in their own right, and that they
therefore take every means in their power to become the masters in place of
servants to their constituents; and that the people in all civilized countries
have been too inattentive to the userpations of their rulers: But I conceive of
no cause in the nature of things which so absolutely counteracts the power of a
wise, learned, and free community as to render it impossible for them to
preserve their liberty. The arguments brought from the condition of other
states, are by no means conclusive with respect to the North-American colonies.
I am hold to assert, that such a favorable combination of circumstances as
they are blessed with at this important conjuncture, never did take place among
any people with whom history has made us acquainted. The most just and solid
foundation of social happiness was laid in the first settlement of the
Continent, the cultivation of the earth for the subsistence of its proprietor.
Here was no feudal tenure from some military Lord; every cultivator being the
lord of his own soil, and content with its produce, had no thoughts of
encroaching upon and subjecting his neighbor to his absolute dominion. Hence a
handsome competency has enabled the bulk of the people to give their children
such an education as enables them to read, and become acquainted with the
usurpations of the deepest plotters of their ruin. The spirit of the people for
obtaining this necessary information, is evident from the incredible number of
newspapers and other periodical publications which they encourage, and the
effect of such institutions never have been so great in any community, yet
known, as in these pantaplebean (altogether Commons) colonies. How quickly the
most important revolution of the fundamentals of our policy can pervade a
continent, may be guessed at by the progress of the idea of Colonial
Independancy in three weeks or a month at farthest! Surely thousands and tens
of thousands of common farmers and tradesmen must be better reasoners than some
of our trammelled juris consultors, who to this hour feel a reluctance to part
with the abominable chain, which remaining, in any shape whatever, though
modified by all the wisdom and caution of the greatest men now living, must in
a very little time drag the colonies into the most abject slavery. Many profess
themselves zealous for the liberties of America, yet declare an abhorrence of
the idea of independancy on Great Britain. If this be not a solecism, as absurd
and irreconcilable as ever wad obtruded on mankind, I know not the meaning of
the term! Civil Liberty never was defined in stricter terms than an EXEMPTION
from all control, WITHOUT THE COMMUNITY, in which every qualified member has
an equal voice. No American, as such, has the shadow of incorporation with the
government of Great Britain; and in consequence, if he receives the least
syllable of law from that quarter, he gives up his claim to the definitive
exemption. if the sticklers for dependence do not mean dependence for some
certain laws, in the forming of which the Colonists have no voice at all, I do
not yet understand them; and if they do mean that we should admit the claim of
any state, or any part of the power of any state, with which the democratic
power of this state is not incorporated, to give us law in any case whatever,
they admit a fiber, which I must make free to tell them, will speedily grown
into an iron sinew which neither themselves nor posterity will be able to
endure or burst asunder. And further, it is not only the admission of some
possible law from a foreign power, that hurries a people into slavery; a mere
negative power on acts for the repeal of grieveous laws will more slowly, but
as certainly subvert liberty.

Again Mr. Hume's observation, [ Perfect Commonwealth, p. 301.] that "the sword
being in the hands of a single person who will always neglect to discipline the
militia, in order to have the pretext to keep up a standing army;" and the
succeeding one, "that this is a mortal distemper in the British government of
which it must, at last inevitably perish," now so fatally confirmed, may be a
sufficient warning to the Colonies to beware of being again entangled with the
yoke of bondage.

Many object to a Republican Government as impracticable in a large state. "The
contrary of this (says Hume, [ Per. Com. 302.] seems evident. Though it is more
difficult to form a Republican Government in an extensive country than in a
city; there is more facility, when once it is formed, of preserving it steady
and uniform, without tumult or faction, in the former then the latter. ( Per.
Com. 303.) In a large government which is modelled with masterly skill, there
is compass and room enough to refine the democracy from the lower people, who
may be admitted into the first elections, or first concoction of the
commonwealth; to the higher magistrates who direct all the motions. At the same
time the parts are so distant and remote that it is very difficult either by
intrigue, prejudice, or passion, to hurry them into measures against the public
interest." Thus far Mr. Hume, whose plan for a perfect commonwealth, will
speedily be submitted to public consideration.

DEMOPHILUS.

A Review of the American Contest, with some Strictures on the King's Speech,
and its consequences. Addressed to all Parents, in the Thirteen United
Colonies. By a Friend to Posterity and Mankind.

NATURE instructs the brute creation to provide for, guard and protect their
offspring until they are able to do for themselves. The dam is never known to
forsake her young while her care is necessary for their safety, nor to do any
thing which would involve them in distress and difficulty. Man, who has this
principle in common with brutes, is endowed with others yet more valuable, but
which to him are absolutely necessary, whereby he is taught to provide for the
future welfare of his descendants and to guard them from the encroachments of
that power which civil society constitutes for its own safety; but which,
through the depravity of human nature is often turned against it. There are few
parents who do not make it their constant study and earnest endeavor to leave
some valuable inheritance to their children: few who have been so lost to the
feelings of nature and calls of parental affection, as to entail difficulty and
distress on their children, when it was in their power to leave them a fair and
easy inheritance. And yet it has so happened, that by an ill timed attachment
to the present, without paying proper attention to the future, they have
entailed misery upon them by the very means which were designed to preserve
them from it.

It is now in your power to bequeath to your children the one or the other, and
it becomes you to have an eye to them in all your proceedings. It is
sufficiently known to you, that riches in arbitrary states are often the ruin
of then possessors, and that security to property is absolutely necessary to
stamp their true value on wealth and possessions. He therefore, who wishes to
leave his children in flourishing circumstances ought to be a zealous friend to
those measures, and that plan of government which gives the greatest security
to property, and an active warm opposer of those which leave it to the
arbitrary disposal of men, who find a greater advantage in making free with
what does not belong to them, than in frugally using what is justly their own.
Whig and Tory should be out of the question. Private pique, party faction and
animosity ought to subside. He who thinks should think for posterity, and he
who acts should act for his children.

It is a great weakness to suffer our passions to take place of our reason and
blindly to follow their dictates, though to our manifest hurt, rather than
subject them to our better sense. A false pride, which will not acknowledge an
error though ever so evident, an obstinate perseverance in our own opinion
without deigning to hear advice or instruction, and an unreasonable attachment
to party, have done much mischief to mankind, and may yet do more if not
carefully avoided. I have directed this paper to you in preference to others,
because your parental affection should form more than a counterpoise to every
false principle, which can influence the human mind where the interest of your
offspring is at stake.

Our present contest is immensely great, and every man must see that it will
affect posterity. Its consequences cannot end with itself; but the latest
generations must feel its effects. The great Ruler of the universe has
permitted it for wise purposes and has called every one of us to act our part
in it. It becomes us, therefore, laying aside all former prejudices, partiality
and party attachments, to act upon principles which will justify us to him who
has assigned us our stations, and cause posterity to bless the memory of their
forefathers. We all agree in this, that Great Britain is unjust and arbitrary,
and we have hitherto principally differed in the mode of opposition, which
ought to have been pursued. I speak not to those who think one way and talk
another. They act upon such base principles, that it is in vain to attempt to
rouse in them any just or generous sentiments. We have no instances of the
conversion of avaricious or ambitious hypocrites, and it would be wasting time
to use arguments to convince them. I direct myself to you who have sincerity
sufficient to examine the principles on which you proceed, and honesty enough
to pursue that course of conduct which appears to be right, and so much
affection for your children as to prefer their interest and happiness to every
other consideration. For you I mean to throw together a few hints which may
assist you in finally fixing a right choice.

The British administration began its attacks on our liberties with a stamp
act, but meeting with strong opposition they thought fit to repeal it. This act
threw the colonies into strong convulsions, and we rejoiced exceedingly on its
repeal, and fondly hoped that we would enjoy future tranquillity. But we were
mistaken. They never intended to relinquish the design, but only to change
their ground, that which they first pitched upon not seeming tenable. An
American revenue granted by a British Parliament was the object, and they never
lost sight of it; for they soon renewed their attacks upon principles which
they thought more favorable to their intentions; but meeting with as little
success in that, as in the preceding attempt, they suspended their measures for
a time, in, hopes of lulling us into a careless security. They accordingly once
more returned to the charge, and endeavored to effect by cunning and artifice
what they had heretofore attempted in vain on every other peaceable plan. This
not succeeding, they were reduced to their last shift of bullying and force;
and this they resolved upon. They levied armies, appointed Generals of
reputation to command, and sent them amongst us, we may know their commission
by their conduct; for after abusing, brow-beating and insulting, after starving
and tarring and feathering, after offering every possible injury which a free
people could bear, without obtaining their ends, and every other measure
failing, they drew the sword, and at once reduced us to the dire alternative of
submitting to their illegal claims of jurisdiction, or entering into the bloody
contest. Like men determined to be free we chose the latter. It now rests on
the last argument, an argument which finally settles all controversies of a
like nature. The plan of operation is now opened, and they who stand to it with
the most steady perseverance must finally succeed. This is the decree of
providence in all cases, he that persevereth unto the end shall be saved. We
have, by the blessing of God, effectually baffled all their former attempts;
but if we fail in this, all our former victories will only serve to make our
fall the more conspicuous and terrible.

I will not enquire what would have been the efficacy of any heretofore
recommended, but untried means. The worst that can has happened, and it is with
it we have now to deal; to relinquish it on our part, would be to give up the
matter, for however any means might once have done, cowardice alone would now
desert the field, and slavery must be the inevitable consequence.

I do not wonder that war sits heavy on us, and that we are somewhat restless
and uneasy; but I shall be surprised, if we, who have so long and so
sucessfully opposed tyranny and oppression should all on a sudden lose every
desire of retaining our liberties. I am forced into this remark by the artful,
cunning and designing manner in which some men talk of a reconciliation with
Great Britain; and the bug-bears they conjure up to frighten the timid,
irresolute and ignorant, from a steady prosecution of those means, which alone
can help us in our present circumstances. Facts bear evidence from the
beginning of the contest that every scheme they ever recommended has, upon
trial, proved inadequate to the end for which it was intended; yet they
proceed. Beware of such men, they love neither their country, nor their
liberties, so much as something else.

There are many I doubt not who are denominated Tories by the more zealous
Whigs, who in their hearts wish success to our measures, though they maybe
chagrined because those they proposed did not go down with the people; these
are uniform, open, and not very dangerous; but there are others, who under the
cloak of friendship for the cause, harbor the bitterest rancour and malice in
their hearts. These talk favorably in general, though their discourses mostly
terminate with a doubt, suspicion, or but, which give those with whom they
converse, reason to dread some hidden design, or approaching evil, which most
men have not properly attended to. They artfully recall your attention to a
certain period, when all was peace and quietness, and by pathetically lamenting
the unhappy alteration, endeavor to impress your minds with an opinion that
all our troubles arose from ourselves. They carefully avoid mentioning the
iniquitous measures of the British government which produced them, and by
keeping those out of sight, they gradually lead the unwary into the belief,
that the men who have been most active on the present occasion in opposing the
tyrannical proceedings of Great Britain, and who have hazarded their all in
defense of their country, have been actuated by sinister motives in all they
have done. If every man who hears such insinuations were to ask those who cast
them out, what measures have not the men they condemn tried at one time or
another to avoid the present contest, and save our liberties? What advantages
they can reap by a successful end of it, which every other freeman on the
continent will not reap equally with them? And in an unsuccessful close of it,
all will allow they must be the greatest sufferers. Their lives must go, let
who will else escape. These questions might recall them to facts, and these
facts would enable men to judge aright.

Honesty could not stand the force of a few pertinent questions, but these men
have taken their leave of it, and like Manasseh of old, have sold themselves to
do wickedly. Were it not so, could it be possible for them in the face of the
sun, to charge all our troubles on the New England Presbyterians, troubles
which originally began and have all along been kept up by a wicked
administration and a venal parliament. To make them the hatchers of mischiefs
occasioned by unconstitutional acts of parliament, and the only fomenters of
our just opposition with a Pennsylvanian Quaker, a Maryland and a Virginian
Churchman did more to effect than all the other men on the continent put
together, is cruelty in the extreme. My heart bleeds when I think of such men;
who would fell the whole continent and all the blood on it for private
advantage, and with whom a few thousand, guineas with a title would be esteemed
an equivalent for the lives, liberty and property of the freemen of a colony.
May that God who sees how little they can gain, it successful, open their eyes
and turn their hearts, ever they be convinced by fatal experience, that he who
purchases the whole world at the price of his soul, is a very unwise dealer,
and makes but a poor bargain in the end. if the calls of virtue, the precepts
of religion, and dictates of patriotism cannot awaken them to a sense of their
duty, yet Norfolk might open their eyes. But let them do as they please, we
ought to act wisely. If we do not make such a settlement now as will secure the
privileges we contend for to posterity, we entail either slavery or a civil war
on our children. This is certain, let what will be doubtful. Look round you
then, view your offsprings and tell me, are you willing to leave them such a
legacy? Do not trifle on this occasion, all your other legacies must derive
their true value from the part you now take in this contest. Thintk not that
the God who charges him with worse than infidelity who provides not for his
own, and those of his household, will justify you in returning to the state you
were in when our troubles began, and thereby delivering over your offspring to
the mischievous machinations of at power that from the beginning has set right,
justice, and mercy at defiance, and in all her deliberations considered nothing
but her ability to execute.

Look to the year 1763, that happy period, as many so fondly call it, and see
what safety there is to America in such a situation. Lord North has said, If
that is all they want, we are agreed; and the saying pleases many of you. His
Lordship, like others, who have learned wisdom by experience, wishes to have
all to begin again, believing that he could more easily effect his purpose by
other means than those he is at present pursuing. Swallow the bait and you are
undone forever.

Can any man in his senses believe, that he who has so long, and so invariably
pursued his point against the sense of the best men in the nation, will finally
desert his master's most favorite scheme so easily? Has he uttered a single
syllable that can make the most credulous believe that he is convinced of the
injustice of his conduct? He confesses he was deceived; but wherein lay the
deception: In believing that fewer troops would effect a submission than he is
now convinced must be employed. Here lay the deception he complains of, and he
is therefore determined to send his terms with such an armed force; as he
expects will frighten you into a compliance. Does this look like the conduct of
one who designs to relinquish his claims? Were he or his master sensible of the
injustice of their proceedings and the wrongs they have done us, they would
both speak a very different language. Why does he call you rebels? Why call in
foreign troops to his aid? Why does his master lament so pathetically, that the
extensive operations of the war he means to carry on against you, will exhaust
his funds and increase the public debts, while he has not a single tear to
shed, not a groan, nor as much as a sigh for all the blood he has already
spilt, and yet means to spill, if he wishes to allow you security to your
privileges? Oh! George! The day thou utteredst that sentiment in the face of
the sun, thou gave up all title to humanity. Among the many unavoidable ill
consequences of this rebellion, none affects me more sensibly, says the King.
than the extraordinary burden it must create to my faithful subjects, "Most
humane Prince! most pious Sovereign! most affectionate father of thy people! an
addition to thy British subjects burdens to obtain a most unrighteous purpose
of thy own, affects thee in order to reconcile them to the bearing of it; but
to spill the blood of thy oppressed American subjects disturbs not thy
guiltless conscience! Let me tell thee, O King, that there is a God who sees
through the veil that covers thy deceit, and who hears the cry of the needy,
and regards the prayer of the distressed, who will recompense vengeance on the
wicked, though supported by the power of Great Britain. Our weakness is
sufficient in his hands for the purpose. If thine and thy ministers intentions
are not evil against us, why did thou not hearken to the repeated prayers of
thy distressed subjects in America? why do thou not recall thy troops, repeal
the acts, indemnify us for what we have suffered, and offer any further
security to our rights, which we may think necessary? Thou beganest the attack
and this is thy duty; besides, thou have an obedient parliament, which disputes
not thy will, and all this is in thy power, and in no one's else." Had the King
made a speech to the house recommending these things, he would have given
unequivocal proof of his honest intentions, and it might justly be termed
gracious. But who can trust a Prince, who while he speaks the language of peace
and humanity with his lips, has nothing but cruelty and war in his conduct. The
man who does, may have the innocence of the dove, but he cannot be possessed or
the wisdom of the serpent. I conclude by entreating you, that as you love your
children, and their happiness, you never desert your present opposition, until
you obtain such a plan of constitutional vigor, as shall put it at all times
in your power to secure yourselves, and your descendants from tyrannical
encroachments. This you never had, nor never can have on the plan of your
former dependence. Remember, I call the Deity to witness, that I have warned
you against destroying your offspring, and prayed you to be on your guard
against the snares of the insidious. May he who acts from a principle of
humanity and benevolence to mankind, finally meet with success, and may the
schemes of hypocrites be blasted.

A Friend to posterity and Mankind.

To the Right Honorable Lord DARTMOUTH Secretary of State for AMERICA.
Philadelphia, Jan. 1, 1776. My Lord,
YOU are the minister of the American department. You have the character of a
religious man, a rare virtue in a modern statesman. It has become my duty and
interest to address you, on the present circumstances of affairs in America. I
know the Americans well; their strongest and ruling passion was their affection
to their mother country; the honor, the glory of Great Britain they esteemed
as their greatest happiness; a large portion of the same affection remains;
nothing but repeated injuries and injustice could have lessened it. My Lord
from a wanton and avaricious exercise of power, the ministry of Great Britain
have heaped injuries on the heads of the Americans, that no one period of
history can parellel.

The practice of the Egyptians in smothering the children of the Israelites in
the birth, the swords of Cortez and Pizarro, who slew millions of innocent
Mixicans and Peruvians, the dreadful famine brought by the East India Company
upon the poor East-Indians must all be brought into one scale, to serve as any
sort of balance to the system of desolation, that you and your brother
ministers, are meditating and daily practicing against the unhappy people of
North America.

The elements, which the providence of God has given for all his creatures,
you have the presumption to deprive them of, Fire, sword, famine, and
desolation, show the vicinity of your fleets and armies; children and servants
are animated to rise and slaughter their benefactors. No species of cruelty,
which the wit or malice of man or devils could advise, but are practiced
against the Americans.

Do you believe in God, my Lord, and direct these things? Do you believe that
God made America as well as Great Britain? If you do, ponder, consider well,
what answer you will give if you escape punishment in this world, when you come
to be questioned before the Throne of God, for the destruction you have made of
his creatures, the work of his hands, to whom he granted life and liberty,
earth, air and water equally as to yourself; and yet presumptuous man, you have
dared to counteract his providence! Have you conscience my Lord? If you have, I
would not for the empire of a thousand worlds be Lord Dartmouth? But, my Lord,
it is not to awaken your conscience only that I write you this letter: the
flame of civil war, by your management, has extended far and wide in America;
battles have been fought, numbers have been slain, and prisoners taken on both
sides; the Americans have in their possession ten for one, and among them many
men of rank, Prescot, Preston, Stopford and others; they are all treated with
tenderness and regard, while the prisoners you have taken are treated with
severity, carried to England in irons, there, as it is said, to be tried, and
of course condemned and executed, or in other words, under form of law murdered!

My Lord, if there be any thing on earth or in heaven that you respect, avoid
that rock -- You have Col. Allen, Capt. Martindale and some other prisoners --
the hour that it is known here that any of those prisoners are executed, the
prisoners here will be sacrificed -- nay more, every English and Scots
adherent; -- dread shun, and for ever abandon such murderous intentions. -- The
cries and vengeance of all the relations of those whole blood shall be shed in
this manner will surround you, death and horror will be your constant
companions, and the torments of the damned, even on earth, will await you.

My Lord, this is but the beginning of sorrows. Take in good part what I write.
It is truth, and intended for the benefit of Britain and America.

AN ENGLISH AMERICAN.

Observations on LORD NORTH'S Conciliatory PLAN.
I CANNOT recall an idea to my mind more amazingly absurd and stupid than the
idea of Lord North's second attempt to gull the Colonists into a belief of his
inclination to hold out to them terms of a safe and amicable reconciliation
with Great Britain. No one is ignorant that the Americans have offered every
thing that can possibly be devised to bury the injurious and enslaving claim of
administration, in perpetual oblivion, and leave matters on the same footing
they were before the pretense was held up. Those generous proposals, however
often repeated, have as often been rejected with an insolent contempt, and yet
the profound politician tells his oponents in the British House of Commons,
that he is heartily inclined to a reconciliation with the Colonies, and willing
to put them in the situation they so passionately desire; that is, says he, to
a courtier demanding explanation, in a state of absolute dependence on the
British Parliament in all cases whatsoever; for, says his Lordship, they were
unquestionably thus dependant in 1763. Had his Lordship entirely forgot the
success of his former experiment, perhaps a trial of the same wretched trick
over again, might have appeared less rediculous. I may indeed say, less
insulting to the lowest understanding. I would ask the most credulous votary
for making up the dispute, what possible grounds they perceive to found their
expectation of a permanent reconciliation upon? Has any thing lately turned up,
which has indicated a change of disposition in the Prince or his favorites? Can
a majority, which have been secured from one seven years to another, by pure
force of corruption, be depended on to remain firm to a slaughtering,
plundering and desolating court, and share the detestation of present and
future ages, for mere nothing? Has the court resolved to cast Bernard,
Hutchinson and daughter, Richardson the Murderer, crazy John Malcom, and
Richardson the recent volunteer, out on the common? I tell you, nay! You have a
fresh instance of the firmness of the cabinet, in adding another three thousand
pound pensioner to the list, in conjuncture, when all mankind will confess
there is need of saving. These burdensome pensions must come from some part of
the dominions! If Great Britain and Ireland have conceived such a mortal hatred
to America, that they can hug her most inveterate enemies in their bosoms, and
vote them such munificent rewards for drawing her into so destructive a civil
war, we cannot be safe in the power of such enemies. If they abound in
resources as largely as Mr. Wedderburne and others boast they do, let them
cease complaining of their poverty, and contentedly discharge their own
national debt, rather than go on augmenting is by their efforts to saddle it,
with an unlimited pension list, on America. Does the nation bear the weight of
the present unnatural quarrel with America on other terms, than a firm
assurance of the Court, that millions of leading men's dependant's shall be
provided for in America, for whom places can by no means be found at home. Is
not the very genius of the people of Great Britain and Ireland corrupted,
insomuch, that the views of young fellows of education, or any connection with
men of note, are altogether set on public money? Can our peaceable men indulge
a gleam of hope, that this humor will alter, or that youths, bred in idleness
and dissipation, will become industrious and disinterested patriots? If not,
they must then be so weak as to conceit, that ministers will become less fond
of fingering the public money, and securing themselves in places of power and
profit by means of it; indeed, that they will become more honest and saving of
the national money than those the constitution has appointed as a check upon
them. It is no wonder they tell of sending a formidable fleet and army to bring
over their terms of reconciliation, when they are in no one article different
from the terms they first aimed to impose. Had the minister, or more properly
the obstinate author of all our troubles, had the remotest idea of favoring us
with a government of laws, which had any respect to the security of our lives
and properties, he had long since granted with a good grace, petitions, made
and repeated with the most dutiful and persevering affection, which asked for
nothing more! Sed aut Caesar aut nullus, seems the unalterable determination of
the man, who soothed our already elated expectations, by an inaugural
declaration, that he gloried in the name of Briton, at that time, a distinctive
characteristic of the patrons of universal liberty. If therefore the whole body
of the governing, and influential part of the governed in Great Britain, be
unalterably set upon extorting tribute from the Colonies; and the better to
secure the collection of it, claims right to impose the laws, and executors of
those laws, dependant only on themselves for appointment, continuance and
support; and all these to be extended at their sole pleasure, it may readily be
determined in what condition, the absolutely passive subjects of such an
unnatural usurpation would quickly be. It is evident they have concluded on two
things, viz. to make a bold push for our entire subjection, as their ends would
be thereby more readily answered; but that being found impracticable, we are to
be tried with negotiation, in which all the craft, duplicity and punic faith of
administration is to be expected. Pray God it may be wisely and firmly guarded
against! The worthy and honorable John Collins, Esquire; of New-Port, Rhode
Island, on the arrival of Lord North's last conciliatory plan, observed, that
notwithstanding the exposure of his large state, to whatever depredations the
enemy saw fit to make upon it, he was more concerned for the probable success
of their arts than arms. Had the Americans in general the wisdom and firmness
of that gentleman matters would not have come to the present melancholy lengths
we find them. However, in the great and general plan of him who puts down
and sets up states, this is doubtless an indispensible part, and therefore
not to be complained of; but it has amazed me to contemplate the numerous
instances of disappointment our enemies have met with, in every plot they have
laid for our destruction. How did Bernard and Hutchinson flatter themselves
with the number of friends they had in several towns of the Massachusetts, and
thought that a very trifling force, from the other side of the water, added to
their minions, dependants and expectants, would crush a little turbulent
faction, who disturbed their darling measures? Certainly men intoxicated with a
lust of absolute power found something in the appearance of things to tole them
on to an object so grateful to their fondest wishes; otherwise they would have
been contented to augment and confirm their power by such unperceived degrees
that the happy days, many tell us we have enjoyed under a continual invading
usurpation, would not yet have been so sensibly interrupted. No less has the so
often extolled Gov. Try on been disappointed in his benevolent intentions
respecting New York. His band on Long Island, and on the east side of Hudson's
river, with Sir John Johnson among his vassals, and the Indians, gave him great
hopes of having matters in a fine train before the invincible armada arrived in
the spring; instead of which, it is probable the active General Lee will so
fortify that place, that all the force they can send against it, will be
insufficient to reduce it. Dunmore, with all his wanton ravage, has done little
more than exasperate the Virginians, and convinced that brave colony, that they
can be formidable to savages on the east, as well as west side of their
dominion. Carleton's Canadians, make no such figure in the harrangues of the
pensioner, as they did last year; and in case foreigners are to be procured to
be poured in upon us, the greatest opposers of our total separation from
Britain acknowledge, they would then no longer defer a declaration of
independancy, and application to other powers for their protection. To this the
whole scene appears rapidly advancing, in my view, as hastily as infinite
wisdom thinks proper to conduct it; and if this be his most gracious design, he
will work, and none shall hinder. Amen, Beneficent Jehovah! Amen. Sic sperat.

SINCERUS.

COMMON SENSE. APPENDIX TO COMMON SENSE. The necessity of INDEPENDANCY.
SINCE the publication of the first edition of this pamphlet, or rather on the
same day on which it came out, the King's Speech made its appearance in this
city. Had the spirit of prophecy directed the birth of this production, it
could not have brought it forth, at a more seasonable juncture, or a more
necessary time. The bloody mindedness of the one show the necessity of pursuing
the doctrine of the other. Men read by way of revenge. And the Speech, instead
of terrifying, prepared a way for the manly principles of Independance.

Ceremony, and even silence, from whatever motive they may arise, have a
hurtful tendency, when they give the least degree of countenance to base and
wicked performances; wherefore, if this maxim be admitted, it naturally
follows, that the King's Speech, as being a piece of finished villainy,
deserved, and still deserves, a general execration, both by the Congress and
the people. Yet, as the domestic tranquillity of a nation, depends greatly on
the chastity of what may properly be called NATIONAL MANNERS, it is often
better, to pass some things over in silent disdain, than to make use of such
new methods of dislike, as might introduce the least inovation, on that
guardian of our peace and safety. And perhaps, it is chiefly owing to this
prudent delicacy, that the King's Speech has not, before now, suffered a
public execution. The speech if it may be called one, is nothing better than a
wilful audacious libel against the truth, the common good, and the existence of
mankind; and is a formal and pompous method of offering up human sacrifices, to
the pride of tyrants. But this general massacre of mankind, is one of the
privileges, and the certain consequence of king's; for as nature knows them
not, they know not her, and although they are beings of our (...) creating they
know not us, and are become the gods of their creators. The speech has one
good quality, which is, that it is not calculated to deceive, neither can we,
even if we would, be deceived by it. Brutality and tyranny appear on the face
of it. It leaves us at no loss: And every line convinces, even in the moment of
reading, that he, who hunts the woods for prey, the naked and untutored Indian,
is less a savage than the King of Britain.

Sir John Dalrymple, the putative father of a whining Jesuitical piece,
fallaciously called, "The address of the people of England, to the Inhabitants
of America," has, perhaps, from a vain supposition, that the people here went
to be frightened at the pomp and description of a king giving, (though very
unwisely on his part) the real character of the present one: "But," says the
writer, "if you are inclined to pay compliments to an administration which we
do not complain of, (meaning the Marquis of Rockingham's at the repeal of the
Stamp act, it is very unfair in you to withhold them from that prince by whose
NOD ALONE, they were (...) any thing." This is toryism with a witness! (...)
even without a mask: And he who (...) and digest such doctrine, has forfeit.
(...) to rationality -- an apostate from the (...), and ought to be considered
-- as one, (...) not only given up the proper dignity of (...) sunk himself
beneath the rank of animals, and contemptibly crawl through the world like a
worm.

However, it matters very little now, what the king of England either says or
does; he has wickedly broken though every moral and human obligation, trampled
nature and conscience beneath his feet; and by a steady and constitutional
spirit of insolence and cruelty, procured for himself an universal hatred. It
is now the interest of America to provide for herself. She has already a large
and young family, whom it is more her duty to take care of, than to be granting
away her property, to support a power, who is become a reproach to the names of
men and christians, YE, whose office it is to watch over the morals of a
nation, of whatsoever sect or denomination ye are of, as well as ye, who, are
more immediately the guardians of the public liberty, if ye wish to preserve
your native country uncontaminated by European corruption, ye must in secret
wish a separation -- But leaving the moral part to private reflection, I shall
chiefly confine my farther remarks to the following heads:

First, That it is the interest of America, to be separated from Britain.

Secondly; Which is the easiest and most practicable plan, reconciliation or
independance? with some occasional remarks.

In support of the first, I could, if I judged it proper, produce the opinion
of some of the ablest and most experienced men on this continent; and whose
sentiments, on that head, are not yet publicly known. It is in reality a self
evident position: For no nation, in a state of foreign dependence, limited in
its commerce, and cramped and settered in its legislative powers, can ever
arrive at at any material eminence. America does not yet know what opulence is;
and although the progress which she has made, stands unparalleled in the
history of other nations, it is but childhood, compared with what she would be
capable of arriving at, had she, as she ought to have, the legislative powers
in her own hands. England, is at this time, proudly coveting what would do her
no good, were she to accomplish it; and the continent hesitating on a matter,
which will be her final ruin if neglected. It is the commerce, and not the
conquest of America, by which England is to be benefited, and that would in a
great measure continue, were the countries as independent of each other as
France and Spain; because in many articles, neither can go to a better market
But it is the independance of this country on Britain or any other, which is
now the main and only object worthy of contention, and which, like all other
truths discovered by necessity, will appear clearer and stronger every day.

First. Because it will come to that one time or other.

Secondly. Because the longer it is delayed, the harder, it will be to
accomplish.

I have frequently amused myself both in public and private companies, with
silently remarking the specious errors of those who speak without reflecting.
And among the many which I have heard, the following seems the most general,
viz. that had this rupture happened forty or fifty years hence, instead of now,
the Continent would have been more able to have shaken off the dependence. To
which I reply, that our military ability at this time, arises from the
experience gained in the last war, and which in forty or fifty years time,
would have been totally extinct. The Continent would not, by that time, have
had a General, or even a military officer left; and we, or those who may
succeed us, would have been as ignorant of martial matters as the ancient
Indians: And this single position, closely attended to, will unanswerably
prove, that the present time is preferable to all others: The argument turns
thus: At the conclusion of the last war, we had experience, but wanted numbers;
and forty or fifty years hence, we should have numbers, without experience;
wherefore, the proper point of time, must be some particular point between the
two extremes, in which a sufficiency of the former remains, and a proper
increase of the latter is obtained: And that point of time is the present time.

The reader will pardon this digression, as it does not properly come under the
head I first set out with, and to which I again return by the following
position, viz.

Should affairs be patched up with Britain, and she to remain the governing and
sovereign power of America, (which as matters are now circumstanced, is giving
up the point entirely) we shall deprive ourselves of the very means of sinking
the debt we have, or may contract. The value of the back lands, which some of
the provinces are clandestinely deprived of, by the unjust extention of the
limits of Canada, valued only at five pounds sterling per hundred acres, amount
to upwards of twenty five millions, Pennsylvania currency; and the quit-rents
at one penny sterling per acre, to two millions yearly.

It is by the sale of those lands, that the debt may be sunk, without burden
to any, and the quit-rent reserved thereon, will always lessen, and in time
will wholly support the yearly expense of government. It matters not now long
the debt is in paying, so that the lands when sold, be applied to the discharge
of it, and for the execution of which, the Congress for the time being, will be
the continental trustees.

I proceed now to the second head, viz. Which is the easiest and most
practicable plan, Reconciliation or Independance; with some occasional remarks.

He who takes nature for his guide, is not easily beaten out of his argument,
and on that ground, I answer generally, That independance being a single simple
line, contained within ourselves; and reconciliation, a matter exceedingly,
perplexed and complicated, and in which, a treacherous capricious court is to
interfere, gives the answer without a doubt.

The present state of America is truly alarming to every man who is capable of
reflection. Without law, without government, without any other mode of power
than what is founded on, and granted by courtesy. Held together by an
unexampled concurrence of sentiment, which, is nevertheless subject to change,
and which, every secret enemy is endeavoring to dissolve. Our present
condition, is, Legislation without law; wisdom without a plan; a constitution
without a name; and, what is strangely astonishing, perfect Independance
contending for dependence. The instance is without a precedent; the case never
existed before; and who can tell what may be the event? The property of no man
is secure in the present unbraced system of things. The mind of the multitude
is left at random, and seeing no fixed object before them, they pursue such as
fancy or opinion starts. Nothing is criminal; there is no such thing as
treason; wherefore, every one thinks himself at liberty to act as he pleases.
The Tories would not have dared to assemble offensively had they known that
their lives, by that act, were forfeited to the laws of the state. A line of
distinction should be drawn, between English soldiers taken in battle, and
inhabitants of America taken in arms. The first are prisoners, but the latter
traitors. The one forfeits his liberty, the other his head.

Notwithstanding our wisdom, there is a visible feebleness in some of our
proceedings, which gives encouragement to diffentions. The Continental Belt is
too loosely buckled. And if something is not done in time, it will be too late
to do any thing, and we shall fall into a state, in which, neither
Reconciliation nor Independance will be practicable. The king and his worthless
adherents are got at the old game of dividing the Continent, and there are not
wanting among us, Printers, who will be busy in spreading specious falsehoods.
The artful and hypocritical letter, which appeared a few months ago, in two of
the New York papers, and likewise in two others, is an evidence, that there are
men who want either judgment or honesty.

It is easy getting into holes and corners, and talking of reconciliation: But
do such men seriously consider, how difficult the talk is, and how dangerous it
may prove, should the Continent divide thereon. Do they take within their view,
all the various orders of men, whose situation and circumstances, as well as
their own, are to be considered therein. Do they put themselves in the place of
the sufferer, (...) already gone, and of the soldier, who has (...) for the
defense of his country. If their (...) moderation be suited to their own
private (...) only, regardless of others, the event will convince them, that
"they are reckoning without their host."

Put us, say some, upon the footing we were on in sixty-three: To which I
answer, the request is not now in the power of Britain to comply with, neither
will she propose it; but it were, and even should be granted, I ask, as a
reasonable question. By what means is such a corrupt and faith so court to be
kept to its engagements? Another parliament, nay, even the present may
hereafter repeat the obligation, on the pretense of its being violently
obtained, or unwisely granted; and in that case, Where is our redress? -- No
going to law with nations; cannon are the barristers of crowns; and the sword,
not of justice, but of war, decides the suit. To be on the footing of
sixty-three, it is not sufficient, that the laws only be put on the same state,
but that our circumstances, likewise be put on the same state; our burnt and
destroyed towns repaired or built up, our private losses made good, our public
debts (contracted for defense) discharged, otherwise, we shall be millions
worse, than we were at that enviable period. Such a request, had it been
complied with a year ago, would have won the heart and soul of the Continent,
but now it is too late. "The Rubicon is passed."

Besides the taking up arms, merely to enforce the repeal of a pecuniary law,
seems as unwarrantable by the divine law, and as repugnant to human feelings,
as the taking up arms to enforce the obedience thereto. The object, on either
side, does not justify the means; for the lives of men are too valuable, to be
cast away on such trifles. It is the violence which is done and threatened to
our persons; the destruction of our property by an armed force; the invasion of
our country by fire and sword, which conscientiously qualifies the use of arms:
And the instant, in which such a mode of defense became necessary, all
subjection to Britain ought to have ceased; and the independancy of America,
should have been considered, as dating its era from, and published by, the
first musket that was fired against her. This line is a line of consistency;
neither drawn by caprice, nor extended by ambition; but produced by a chain of
events, of which the colonies were not the authors.

I shall conclude these remarks, with the following timely and well intended
hints. We ought to reflect, that there are three different ways, by which an
independancy may hereafter be affected; and that one of those three, will one
day or other, be the fate of America, viz. By the legal voice of the people in
Congress; by a military power; or by a mob: It may not always happen that our
soldiers are citizens, and the multitude a body of reasonable men; virtue, as I
have already remarked, is not hereditary, neither is it perpetual. Should an
independancy be brought about by the first of those means, we have every
opportunity and every encouragement before us, to form the noblest purest
constitution on the face of the earth. We have it in our power to begin the
world over again. A situation, similar to the present, has not happened since
the days of Noah until now. The birth day of a new world is at hand, and a race
of men, perhaps as numerous as all Europe contains, are to receive their
portion of freedom from the event of a few months. The reflection is awful and
in this point of view, how trifling, how ridiculous, do the little, paltry
cavillings, of a few weak or interested men appear, when weighed against the
business of a world.

Should we neglect the present favorable and inviting period, and an
independance be hereafter effected by other means, we must charge the
consequence to ourselves, or to those rather, whose narrow and prejudiced
souls, are habitually opposing the measure, without either inquiring or
reflecting. There are reasons to be given in support of independance, which men
should rather privately think of, than be publicly told of. We ought not now
to be debating whether we shall be independent or not, but, anxious to
accomplish it on a farm, secure, and honorable basis, and uncastly rather that
it is not yet began upon. Every day convinces us of its necessity. Even the
To^^^ (if such beings yet remain among us) should, of all men, be the most
solicitous to promote it; for as the appointment of committees at first,
protected them from popular rage, so, a wise and well established form of
government, will be the only certain means of continuing it securely to them.
Wherefore, if they have not virtue enough to be WHIGS, they ought to have
prudence enough to wish for Independance.

In short, Independance is the only BOND that can tie and keep us together. We
shall then see our object, and our ears will be legally shut against the
schemes of an intriguing, as well, as a cruel enemy. We shall then too, be on a
proper footing, to treat with Britain; for there is reason to conclude, that
the pride of that court, will be less hurt by treating with the American states
for terms of peace, than with those, whom she denominates, "rebellious
subjects," for terms of accommodation. It is our delaying it that encourages
her to hope for conquest, and our backwardness tends only to prolong the war.
As we have, without any good effect therefrom, withheld our trade to obtain a
redress of our grievances, let us now try the alternative, by independantly
redressing them ourselves, and then offering to open the trade. The mercantile
and reasonable part in England, will be still with us; because, peace with
trade, is preferable to war without it. And if this offer be not accepted,
other courts may be applied to.

On these grounds I rest the matter. And as no offer has yet been made to
refute the doctrine contained in the former editions of this pamphlet, it is a
negative proof, that either the doctrine cannot be refuted, or, that the party
in favor of it are too numerous to be opposed. Wherefore instead of gazing at
each other with suspicious or doubtful curiosity, let each of us hold out to
his neighbor the hearty hand of friendship, and unite in drawing a line,
which, like an act of oblivion shall bury in forgetfulness every former
dissension Let the names of Whig and Tory be extinct; and let none other be
heard among us, than those of a good citizen, an open and resolute friend, and
a virtuous supporter of the rights of mankind and of the free and independent
states of America.

To the Representatives of the Religious Society of the People called Quakers,
or to so many of them as were concerned in publishing a late piece, entitled
The ANCIENT TESTIMONY and PRINCIPLES of the People called QUAKERS renewed, with
Respect to the KING and GOVERNMENT, and touching the COMMOTIONS now prevailing
in these and other parts of AMERICA, addressed to the People in General.
THE Writer of this, is one of those few, who never dishonors religion either
by ridiculing, or cavilling at any denomination whatsoever. To God, and not to
man, are all men accountable on the score of religion. Wherefore, this epistle
is not so properly addressed to you as a religious, but as a political body,
dabbling in matters, which the professed Quietude of your Principles instruct
you not to meddle with.

As you have, without a proper authority for so doing, put yourselves in the
place of the whole body of the Quakers, so, the writer of this, in order to be
on an equal rank with yourselves, is under the necessity, of putting himself in
the place of all those, who, approve the very writings and principles, against
which, your testimony is directed: And he has chosen this singular situation,
in order, that you might discover in him that presumption of character which
you cannot see in yourselves. For neither he nor you can have any claim or
title to Political Representation.

When men have departed from the right way, it is no wonder that they stumble
and fall. And it is evident from the manner in which ye have managed your
testimony, that politics, (as a religious body of men) is not your proper Walk;
for however well adapted it might appear to you, it is, nevertheless, a a
jumble of good and bad put unwisely together, and the conclusion drawn
therefrom, both unnatural and unjust.

The two first pages, (and the whole does not make four) we give you credit
for, and expect the same civility from you, because the love and desire of
peace is not confined to Quakerism, it is the natural, as well as, the
religious wish of all denominations of men. And on this ground, as men laboring
to establish an Independent Constitution of our own, do we exceed all others in
our hope, end, and aim. Our plan is peace forever. We are tired of contention
with Britain, and can see no real end to it but in a final separation. We act
consistently, because for the sake of introducing an endless and uninterupted
peace, do we bear the evils and burdens of the present day. We are
endeavoring, and will steadily continue to endeavor, to separate and dissolve
a connection which has already filled our land with blood; and which, while
the name of it remains, will be the fatal cause of future mischiefs to both
countries.

We sight neither for revenge nor conquest; neither from pride nor passion; we
are not insulting the world with our fleets and armies, nor ravaging the globe
for plunder. Beneath the shade of our own vines are we attacked; in our own
houses, and on our own lands, is the violence committed against us. We view our
enemies in the character of Highwaymen and House-breakers, and having no
defense for ourselves in the civil law, are obliged to punish them by the
military one, and apply the sword, in the very case, where you have before now
applied the halter -- Perhaps we feel for the ruined and insulted sufferers in
all and every part of the Continent, with a degree of tenderness which has not
yet made its way into some of your bosoms. But be ye sure that ye mistake not
the cause and ground of your testimony. Call not coldness of soul, religion;
nor put the Bigot in the place of the Christian.

O ye partial ministers of your own acknowledged principles. If the bearing
arms be sinful, the first going to war must be more so, by all the difference
between wilful attack and unavoidable defense. Wherefore, if ye really preach
from conscience, and mean not to make a political hobbyhorse of your religion,
convince the world thereof by proclaiming your doctrine to our enemies, for
they likewise bear arm. Give us proof of your sincerity by publishing it at St.
James's, to the Commanders in chief at Boston, to the Admirals and Captains who
are piratically ravaging our coasts, and to all the murdering miscreants who
are acting in authority under Him whom ye profess to serve. Had ye the honest
soul of Thou have tasted of prosperity and adversity; thou know what it to
be banished thy native country, to be overruled as well as to rule, and set
upon the throne; and being oppressed thou have reason to know how hateful the
oppressor is both to God and man; If after all these warnings and
advertisements, thou do not turn unto the Lord with all thy heart, but forget
him who remembered thee in thy distress, and give up thyself to follow lust and
vanity, surely great will be thy condemnation. -- Against which snare, as well
as the temptation of those who may or do feed thee, and prompt thee to evil,
the most excellent and prevalent remedy will be, to apply thyself to that light
of Christ which shines in thy conscience, and which neither can, nor will
flatter thee, nor suffer thee to be as ease is thy sins. Barclay's Address to
Charles II.
BARCLAY, ye would preach repentance to your king; Ye would tell the Royal
Wretch his sins, and warn him of eternal ruin. Ye would not spend your partial
invectives against the injured and insulted only, but, like faithful ministers,
would cry aloud and spare none. Say not that ye are persecuted, neither
endeavor to make us the authors of that reproach, which, ye are bringing upon
yourselves; for we testify unto all men, that we do not complain against you
because ye are Quakers, but because ye pretend to be and are not Quakers.

Alas! it seems by the particular tendency of some part of your testimony, and
other parts of your conduct, as if, all sin was reduced to, and comprehended
in, the act of bearing arms, and that by the people only. Ye appear to us to
have mistaken party for conscience; because the general tenor of your actions
wants uniformity: And it is exceedingly difficult to us to give credit to many
of your pretended scruples; because, we see them made by the same men, who, in
the very instant that they are exclaiming against the mammon of this world, are
nevertheless hunting after it with a step as steady as Time, and an appetite as
keen as Death.

The quotation which ye have made from Proverbs, in the third page of your
testimony, that, when a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies
to be at peace with him; is very unwisely chosen on your part; because, it
amounts to a proof, that the king's ways (whom ye are so desirous of
supporting) do not please the Lord, otherwise, his reign would be in peace.

I now proceed to the latter part of your testimony and that, for which all the
foregoing seems only an introduction, viz.

"It has ever been our judgment and principle, since we were called to profess
the light of Christ Jesus, manifested in our consciences unto this day, that
the setting up and putting down kings and governments, is God's peculiar
prerogative; for causes best known to himself: And that it is not our business
to have any hand or contrivance therein; nor to be busy-bodies above our
station, much less to plot and contrive the ruin or overturn of any of them,
but to pray for the king, and safety of our nation, and good of all men: That
we may live a peaceable and quiet life, in all godliness and honesty; under the
government which God is pleased to set over us" -- If these are really your
principles why do you not abide by them? Why do you not leave that, which ye
call God's Work, to be managed by himself? These very principles instruct you
to wait with patience and humility, for the event of all public measures, and
to receive that event as the divine will toward you. Wherefore, what occasion
is there for your political testimony if you fully believe what it contains?
And the very publishing it proves, that either, ye do not believe what ye
profess, or have not virtue enough to practice what ye believe.

The principles of Quakerism have a direct tendency to make a man the quiet and
inoffensive subject of any, and every government which is set over him And if
the setting up and putting down of kings and governments is God's peculiar
prerogative, he most certainly will not be robbed thereof by us; wherefore, the
principle itself leads you to approve of every thing, which ever happened, or
may happen to kings as beings his work. Oliver Cromwell thanks you. Charles,
then, died not by the hands of man; and should the present proud Imitator of
him, come to the same untimely end, the writers and publishers of the
testimony, are bound by the doctrine it contains, to applaud the fact. Kings
are not taken away by miracles, neither are changes in governments brought
about by any other means than such as are common and human; and such as we are
now using. Even the dispersion of the Jews, though foretold by our Savior, was
effected by arms. Wherefore, as ye refuse to be the means on one side, ye ought
not to be meddlers on the other; but to wait the issue in silence? and unless
ye can produce divine authority, to prove, that the Almighty who has created
and placed this new world at the greatest distance it could possibly stand,
east and west, from every part of the old, does, nevertheless, disapprove of
its being independent of the corrupt and abandoned court of Britain, unless I
say, ye can show this, how can ye on the ground of your principles, justify the
exciting and stirring up the people firmly to unite in the abhorrence of all
such writings, and measures, as evidence a desire and design to break off the
happy connection we have hitherto enjoyed, with the kingdom of Great Britain,
and our just and necessary subordination to the king, and those who are
lawfully placed in authority under him. What a slap of the face is here! The
men, who in the very paragragh before, have quietly and passively resigned up
the ordering, altering, and disposal of kings and governments, into the hands
of God, are now recalling their principles, and putting in for a share of the
business. Is it possible, that the conclusion, which is here justly quoted, can
any ways follow from the doctrine laid down? The inconsistency is too glaring
not to be seen; the absurdity too great not to be laughed at; and such as could
only have been made by those, whole understandings were darkened by the narrow
and crabbed spirit of a despairing political party; for ye are not to be
considered as the whole body of the Quakers, but only as a factional and
fractional part thereof.

Here ends the examination of your testimony; (which, I call upon no man to
abhor, as ye have done, but only to read and judge of fairly;) to which I
subjoin the following remark; That the setting up and putting down of kings,
most certainly mean, the making him a king, who is yet not so, and the making
him no king who is already one. And pray what has this to do in the present
case? We neither mean to set up nor to pull down, neither to make nor to
unmake, but to have nothing to do with them. Wherefore, your testimony in
whatever light it is viewed serves only to dishonor your judgment, and for many
other reasons had better have been let alone than published.

First, Because it tends to the decrease and reproach of all religion whatever,
and is of the utmost danger to society, to make it a party in political
disputes.

Secondly, Because it exhibits a body of men, numbers of whom disavow the
publishing political testimonies, as being concerned therein and approvers
thereof.

Thirdly, Because it has a tendency to undo that Continental harmony and
friendship which yourselves by your late liberal and charatable donations has
lent a hand to establish; and the preservation of which, is of the utmost
consequence to us all.

And here without anger or resentment I bid you farewell. Sincerely wishing,
that as men and christians, ye may always fully and uninterruptedly enjoy every
civil and religious right; and be, in your turn, the means of securing it to
others; but that the example which ye have unwisely set, of mingling religion
with politics, may be disavowed and reprobated by every inhabitant of America.

FINIS

