PLAIN TRUTH; ADDRESSED TO THE INHABITANTS OF AMERICA, Containing, Remarks ON A
LATE PAMPHLET entitled COMMON SENSE.

Wherein are shown, that the Scheme of INDEPENDENCE is Ruinous, Delusive, and
Impracticable: That were the Author's Asseverations, Respecting the Power of
AMERICA, as Real as Nugatory; Reconciliation on liberal Principles with GREAT
BRITAIN, would be exalted Policy: And that circumstanced as we are, Permanent
Liberty, and True Happiness, can only be obtained by Reconciliation with that
Kingdom.

WRITTEN BY CANDIDUS.

Audi et alterem partem. HORACE. Will ye turn from flattery, and attend to this
Side.? There TRUTH, unlicenc'd, walks; and dares accost
Even Kings themselves, the Monarchs of the Free!
THOMSON on the Liberties of BRITAIN. PHILADELPHIA: Printed, and Sold, by R.
BELL, in Third-Street. MDCCLXXVI.

TO JOHN DICKINSON, ESQUIRE;
ALTHOUGH I have not the Honor to be known to YOU: I am not unacquainted with
YOUR native Candor and unbounded Benevolence. As happy as obscure, I am indeed
a stranger to the language of Adulation. Flattery I detest; Virtue, I Respect.

BE not offended SIR, if I remark, that YOUR Character, is contemplated with
profound Veneration, by the Friends of the Constitution. Those Abilities, which
YOU so illustriously displayed in defense of the Constitution; they now
supplicate YOU to exert, in saving it from impending ruin, under the Siren form
of delusive INDEPENDENCE.

STEP then forth; exert those Talents with which HEAVEN has endowed YOU; and
cause the Parent, and her Children to embrace, and be foes no more. Ardous as
this extraordinary task may seem, perhaps YOUR Virtue and Talents, may yet
effect (...). YOUR Endeavors to stop the Effusion of Blood, of Torrents of
Blood, is worthy of YOUR acknowledged Humanity* -- Even the honest attempt upon
recollection, will afford YOU ineffable satisfaction.

MY PRESUMING to inscribe to YOU, the following crude Remarks, is to remind
YOU, SIR, what YOUR distressed Country expects, nay, loudly demands from YOUR
extensive Capacity.

I BEG YOU will forgive this temerity; and that YOU may long enjoy the fruits
of YOUR Exalted Virtue, and remain an Honor to YOUR Country, and to Mankind: Is
the ardent wish of

Sir, Your most Obedient, and Respectful Servant, CANDIDUS.

INTRODUCTION.
IF indignant at the Doctrine contained in the Pamphlet, entitle I COMMON
SENSE: I have expressed myself, in the following Observations, with some ardor;
I entreat the Reader to impute my indignation, to honest zeal against the
Author's Insidious (...)* Animated and impelled by every inducement of the
Human Heart; I love, and (if I dare so express myself,) I adore my Country.
Passionately devoted to true Liberty; I glow with the purest flame of
Patriotism. Silvered with age as I am, if I know myself, my humble Sword shall
not be wanting to my Country; (if the most Honorable Terms are not tendered by
the British Nation) to whose Sacred Cause, I am most fervently devoted. The
judicious Reader, will not impute my honest, tho* bold Remarks, to unfriendly
designs against my Children -- against my Country; but to abhorrence of
Independency; which i^ effected, would inevitably (...) our once pre-eminently
envied Country into Ruin. Horror, and Desolation.

PLAIN TRUTH; CONTAINING, REMARKS ON A LATE PAMPHLET ENTITLED COMMON SENSE.
I HAVE now before me the Pamphlet, entitled COMMON SENSE; on which I shall
remark with freedom and candor. It may not be improper to remind my reader,
that the investigation of my subject, demands the utmost freedom of enquiry, I
therefore entreat his indulgence; and that he will carefully remember, that
intemperate zeal, is as injurious to liberty, as a manly discussion of facts is
friendly to it. "Liberty, says the great MONTESQUIEU, is a right of doing
whatever the laws permit; and if a citizen could do what they forbid, he would
no longer be possessed of liberty, because all his fellow citizens would have
the same power." In the beginning of his pamphlet, the Author asserts, that
society in every state is a blessing. This in the sincerity of my heart I d^ny;
for it is supreme misery to be associated with those, who to promote their
ambitious purposes, flagitiously pervert the ends of political society. I do
not say that (...) Author is indebted to BURGH'S POLITICAL DISQUISITIONS, or to
ROUSSEAU'S Social Compact for his definition of Government, and his large Tree;
although I wish he had favored his reader with the following extract from that
sublime reasoner. "To investigate those conditions of society which may best
answer the purpose of nations, would require the abilities of some superior
intelligence, who should be witness to all the passions of men, but be subject
itself to none, who should have no connections with human nature, but should
have a perfect knowledge of it: A Being, in short, whose happiness should be
independent of us, and who would nevertheless employ itself about us. It is the
province of Gods to make laws for Men." With the utmost deference to the
celebrated ROUSSEAU, I cannot indeed imagine, that laws even so constructed,
would materially benefit our imperfect race; unless omniscience deigned
previously to exalt our nature. The judicious reader will therefore perceive,
that malevolence only, is requisite to declaim against, and arraign the most
perfect Governments. Our Political Quack avails himself of this trite
expedient, to cajole the people into the most abject slavery, under the
delusive name of independence. His first indecent attack is against the English
constitution; which with all its imperfections, is, and ever will be the pride
and envy of mankind. To this panegyric involuntarily our author subscribes, by
granting individuals to be safer in England, than in any other part of Europe.
He indeed insidiously attributes this pre-eminent excellency, to the
constitution of the people, rather than to our excellent constitution. To such
contemptible subterfuge is our Author reduced. I would ask him, why did not the
constitution of the people afford them superior safety, in the reign of Richard
the Third, Henry the Eighth, and other tyrannic princes? Many pages might
indeed be filled with encomiums bestowed on our excellent constitution, by
illustrious authors of different nations.

This beautiful system (according to MONTESQUIEU) our constitution is a
compound of Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy. But it is often said, that
the Sovereign, by honors and appointments, influences the Commons. The
profound and elegant HUME agitating this question, thinks, to this
circumstance, we are in (...) indebted for our supreme felicity; since without
such controal in the Crown, our Constitution would immediately degenerate into
Democracy; a Government, which in the sequel, I hope to prove ineligible. Were
I asked marks of the best government, and the purpose of political society, I
would reply, the increase, preservation, and prosperity of its members, in no
quarter of the Globe, are those marks so certainly to be found, as in Great
Britain, and her dependencies. After our Author has employed several pages, to
break the mounds of society by debasing Monarchs: He says, "The plain truth is,
that the antiquity of English Monarchy will not bear looking into."

HUME treating of the original contract, has the following melancholy, but
sensible observation, "Yet reason tells us, that there is no property in
durable objects, such as lands, and houses, when carefully examined, in passing
from hand to hand, but must in some period, have been f^^^ded (...) fraud and
injustice. The necessities (...) human society, neither in private or public
life, will allow of such an accurate enquiry; and there is no virtue or moral
dut^, but what may, with facility, be refined away, if we indulge a (...)
philosophy, in sifting and ^^^rutin zing, by every captious ^ule of l^gic, in
every light or position in which i^ may be placed."

Say ye votaries of honor and truth, can we adduce a stronger proof of our
Author's turpitude, than his quoting the anti-philosophical story of the Jews,
to debase Monarchy, and the best of Monarchs. Briefly examining the story of
this contemptible race, more barbarous than our savages: We find their history
a continued succession of miracles, astonishing our imaginations, and
exercising our faith. After wandering forty years in horrid deserts, they are
chi^^ly condemned to perish for their perverseness, although under the
immediate dominion of the KING of HEAVEN. At length, they arrive in the sterile
country of Palestine; which they conquer, by exterminating the inhabitants, and
warring like (...) The inhabitants of the adjoining region^, justly therefore
held them in (...), and the Jews finding themselves constantly abhorred, have
ever since hated all mankind. This people, as destitute of arts and industry,
as humanity, had not even in their language a word expressive of (...) We might
indeed remind our (...), who so readily drags in the Old Testament to support
his (...) measures, that we could draw from that (...), many (...), favorable
to Monarchy, were we (...), that the Mosaic Law, gives way to the Gospel
Dispensation. The reader no doubt will be gratified by the following extract
from a most primitive Christian. "Christianity is a spiritual religion,
relative only to celestial objects. The Christian's inheritance is not of this
world. He performs his duty it is true, but this he does with a profound
indifference for the good or ill success of his endeavors: Provided he has
nothing to reproach himself, it is of little consequence to him whether m^tters
go well or ill here below. If the state be in a flourishing condition, he can
hardly venture to rejoice in the public felicity, least he should be puffed up,
with the inordinate pride of his country's glory. If the state decline, he
blesses the hand of GOD, that humbles his people to the dust."

Having desined the best government, I will humbly attempt to describe good
Kings by the following unerring rule. The best Princes are constantly
calumniated by the envenomed tongues and pens of the most worthless of their
subjects. For this melancholy truth, do I appeal to the testimony of impartial
historians, and long experience. The noble impartial historian Sully, speaking
of the almost divine Henry the Fourth of France says, "Thus was this god-like
prince represented (by the discontented of these days) almost throughout his
whole kingdom, as a furious, and implacable tyrant: They were never without one
set of arguments to engage his catholic nobility in a rebellion against him,
and another to sow sedition among his pr^testant officers and gentry." HUME
says, that the cruel unrelenting tyrant, Philip the Second of Spain, with his
infernal Inquisition, was not more detested by the people of the Netherlands,
than was the humane Charles, with his inoffensive Liturgy, by his mutinous
subjects. The many unmerited insults offered to our gracious Sovereign; by the
unprincipled Wilkes, and others down to this late Author; will forever disgrace
humanity. For he says, "that monarchy was the most prosperous invention the
Devil ever set on foot for the promotion of idolatry. It is the pride of Kings
which throws mankind into confusion: In short, continues this Author, monarchy
and succession, have laid not this or that kingdom only, but the world in blood
and ashes." How deplorably wretched the condition of mankind, could they
believe such execrable flagitious jargon. Unhappily indeed, mankind in every
age are susceptible of delusion; but surely our Author's poison carries its
antidote with it. Attentive to the spirit of his publication, we fancy
ourselves in the barbarous fifteenth century; in which period our Author would
have figured with his "Common Sense -- and blood will attend it."

After his terrible anathema against our venerable constitution, and monarchy;
let us briefly examine a democratical state; and see whether or not it is a
government less sanguinary. This government is extremely plausible, and indeed
flattering to the pride of mankind. The demagogues therefore, to seduce the
people into their criminal designs ever hold up democracy to them; although
conscious it never did, nor ever will answer in practice. If we believe a great
Author, "There never existed, nor ever will exist a real democracy in the
World." If we examine the republics of Greece and Rome, we ever find them in a
state of war domestic or foreign. Our Author therefore makes no mention of
these ancient States. "When Alexander ordered all the exiles, to be restored
throughout all the cities, it was found that the whole amounted to twenty
thousand, the remains probably of still greater slaughters and mass^cres. What
an astonishing number in so narrow a country as ancient Greece? and what
domestic confusion, jealousy, partiality, revenge, heart-burnings must tear
those cities, where factions were wrought up to such a degree of fury and
despair." Apian's history of the civil wars of Rome, contains the most
frightful picture of massacres, proscriptions, and forfeitures that ever were
presented to the world.

The excellent Montesquieu declares, "that a democracy supposes the concurrence
of a number of circumstances rarely united. In the first place, it is (...)
that the state itself should be of small extent; so that the people might be
easily assembled and personally known to each other. Secondly, the simplicity
of their manners, should be such as to prevent a multiplicity of affairs, and
perplexity in discussing them: And thirdly, there should subsist a great degree
of equality between them, in point of right and authority: Lastly, there should
be little or no luxury, for luxury must either be the effect of wealth, or it
must make it necessary. It corrupts at once, both rich and poor: The one, by
the possession, and the other, by the want of it." To this may be added
continues the same Author, "that no government is so subject to CIVIL WARS, and
INTESTINE COMMO^IONS, as that of the democratical or popular form; because, no
other tends so strongly and so constantly to alter, nor requires so much
vigilance, and fortitude to preserve it from alteration. It is indeed, in such
a constitution, particularly, that a Citizen should always be armed with
fortitude, and constancy; and should every day, in the sincerity of his heart,
guard against corruption, arising either from selfishness in himself, or in his
compatriots; for if it once enters into public transactions, to root it out
afterward would be miraculous.

Our Author asserts, that Holland and Swisserland are without wars domestic or
foreign. About a century ago, Holland was in a few weeks overrun by the arms
of France, and almost miraculously saved by the gallantry of her Prince of
Orange, so celebrated afterward by the name of William the Third. Almost from
that period, until the treaty of Utrecht, Holland was a principal in wars, the
most expensive and bloody, ever waged by human kind. The wounds she then
received were unhealed in 1744, when reluctantly roused from her pacific
lethargy, she was dragged into war; and losing her impregnable Bergenopzoom,
and Mae^^richt; was again on the brink of becoming a province to France, when
happily liberated by the British Nation. In the war of 1756. Holland
continually insulted in the capture of her ships, by our cruisers; preserved a
humiliating neutrality. If victory indeed had not crowned the British banners;
the Dutch indubitably would have assisted their natural Allies, in whatever
quarter of the globe attacked: For it is incontestibly true; that the existence
of Holland, as a State, depends, and invariably will depend, on the prosperity
of Great Britain. Since the murder of Barnevelt, and the immortal de Wits, by
the deluded furious people, Holland has too often been convulsed by anarchy,
and torn by party. Unfortunately alas! for the cause of humanity; the rugged
and incult deserts of Swisserland, preclude not ambition, sedition, and
anarchy. Her bleak and barren mountains do not so effectually secure precarious
liberty, as daily vending her sons to the adjoining nations, particularly to
France; by whom the thirteen Cantons, could be subjected in as many days, did
that court meditate so senseless and delusive an object. Nugatory indeed, if we
consider, that France derives more substantial advantage from the present state
of Swisserland, than if she exhausted herself, to maintain numerous Battalions,
to bridle the Cantons. A moment, let us suppose, that our author's
asseverations of Holland and Swisserland, are as real as delusive: His
inferences do not flow from his premises; for their superior advantages, do not
arise from their popular government, but from circumstances of peculiar local
felicity, obliging the princes of Europe, to defend them from the omnipotent
land force, if I may so speak of France. After impotently attacking our
Sovereign; and the constitution: He contradicts the voice of all mankind, by
declaring, that America "would have flourished as much, and probably much more,
had no European power taken any notice of her."

If he means, that had this Continent been unexplored, the original inhabitants
would have been happier: For once, I agree with him. Previous to the settlement
of these Provinces by our Ancestors, the kingdom of France was convulsed by
religious phrenzy. This, and Sebastian Cabot's (...) discovery, perhaps,
happily afforded the people of England, an opportunity of locating these
Provinces. At length, peace being restored to France, by her Hero, Henry the
Fourth: His nation in turn, were seized with the rage of colonizing. Finding
the English claimed the Provinces on the Atlantic; they appropriated the snow
banks of Canada, which we dare not suppose, they would have preferred to these
fertile provinces, had not the prior occupancy, and power of England
interfered. I hope it will not be denied, that the notice taken of us, at this
time by an European Power, was rather favorable for us. -- Certain it is, had
not England then taken notice of us, these delectable Provinces would now
appertain to France; and the people of New England, horrid to think, would now
be counting their b^ads. Some years after the Era in question, the civil wars
intervening in England, afforded to the Swedes and Dutch, a footing on this
Continent. Charles the Second being restored; England reviving her claim,
rendered abortive the Swedish pretensions; and by conquest, and granting
Surinam to the Dutch, procured the cession of their usurpation, now New York. I
do indeed confess, my incapacity to discern the injury sustained by this second
"notice taken of us, by an European Power;" in default of which intervention,
the Swedes, to this hour, would have retained their settlement, now the famed
Pennsylvania; and the Dutch, consequently, had retained theirs. Some time after
this period, the people of New England were employed, in framing and executting
laws, so intolerant and sanguinary, that to us, they seem adapted for devils,
not men.

Indeed it is worthy of note, that the inhabitants of Jamaica, Barbados, and
Virginia, at that very time, enacted laws, breathing the spirit of humanity,
and such as men could bear. Soon after the period in question, arrived the
great and good WILLIAM PENN, with his philosophic people called Quakers;
together with toleration, industry, and permanent credit. The people of
England, encouraged by the extension of their laws and commerce to those
colonies, powerfully assisted our merchants and planters, insomuch, that our
settlements increased rapidly, and throve apace. It may be affirmed, that from
this period, until the present unhappy hour; no part of human kind, ever
experienced more perfect felicity. Voltaire indeed says, that if ever the
Golden Age existed, it was in Pennsylvania. France disgusted with the unhappy
situation of her American Colonies, had long meditated the conquest of one of
our middle provinces. To accomplish this purpose, she extended a line of forts
on our frontiers, and actually fortified the place now called P^ttsburgh.
Justly alarmed by these encroachments in the hour of our distress, we called
aloud on Great Britain for assistance, nor was she deaf ^o our cries. The
English ministry, after in vain exhausting all the arts of negotiation,
declared war against France. After spilling torrents of blood, after expending
one hundred and ninety millions of their dollars, and four or five millions of
ours; they gloriously reduced the French settlements. Surely it will not be
said, that this last NOTICE taken of us by the people of England, was injurious
to us. Our enemies indeed allege, that this last intervention by bloating us
with pride, will eventually ruin us, and render the people of Britain objects
of derision, for lavishing their blood and treasure, in defense of provinces;
"a match not only for Europe, (according to our author,) but for the world." --
Our author next remarks, "that the commerce by which she has enriched herself,
are the necessaries of life, and will always have a market while eating is the
custom of Europe."

I reply, that our exporting grain, is as it were of yesterday, that the recent
demand was principally occasioned by the distractions in Poland, and other
parts of Europe, and probably will totally or partly fail, soon as the fertile
country of Poland, and more fertile Ukraine shall again become cultivated. I
believe the Europeans did eat before our merchants exported our grain, and
perhaps will eat, when they cease to export it. I deny, that this momentary
commerce has enriched us; and I could adduce numberless melancholy proofs of
the contrary. I shall only remark, that in the most fertile and delectable
wheat country in America, bounded by Chesopeak-bay, and almost adjoining that
of Delaware; a tract of the best wheat land ten years ago, would hardly have
exceeded a guinea and a half per acre, indeed, in 1773, such land covered with
wood, would scarcely have sold for four guineas an acre, an undoubted proof of
want of PEOPLE, industry, and wealth; particularly so, if we consider that one
crop of corn and wheat on such land judiciously cultivated, would actually
repay the supposed price. Our author asserts, "that our present numbers are
sufficient to repel the force of all the world. That the Continent has at this
time the largest disciplined army of ANY POWER UNDER HEAVEN. That the English
navy is only worth three millions and a half sterling," which in effect, would
reduce it to thirty-five ships of the line, twenty ships of forty guns, twenty
of thirty-six, and eight of twenty guns. "That if America had only a twentieth
part of this force, she would be by far an over-match for Britain, that
Independence is necessary, because France and Spain cannot assist us, until
such an event;" he also affirms "that Great Britain cannot govern us, and that
no good can arise from a reconciliation with her."

I shall humbly endeavor to show, that our author shamefully misrepresents
sacts, is ignorant of the true state of Great Britain and her Colonies, utterly
unqualified for the arduous task, he has presumptuously assumed; and ardently
intent on seducing us to that precipice on which himself stands trembling. To
elucidate my strictures, I must with fidelity expose the circumstances of Great
Britain and her colonies. If therefore, in the energy of description, I unfold
certain bold and honest truths with simplicity, the judicious reader will
remember, that true knowledge of our situation, is as essential to our safety,
as ignorance thereof may endanger it. In the English provinces, exclusive of
negroe and other slaves, we have one hundred and sixty thousand; or one hundred
and seventy thousand men capable of bearing arms. If we deduct the people
called Quakers, Anabaptists, and other religionists averse to arms; a
considerable part of the emigrants, and those having a grateful predilection
for the ancient constitution and parent state, we shall certainly reduce the
first number to sixty or seventy thousand men. Now admitting those equal to the
Roman legions, can we suppose them capable of defending against the power of
Britain, a country nearly twelve hundred miles extending on the ocean. Suppose
our troops assembled in New England, if the Britons see not fit to assail them,
they haste to and desolate our other provinces, which eventually would reduce
New England. If by dividing our forces, we pretend ^o defend our provinces, we
also are infallibly undone. Our most fertile provinces, filled with unnumbered
domestic enemies, slaves, intersected by navigable rivers, every where
accessible to the fleets and (...) Britain, can make no defense. (...) the
medium of passion and (...), we view our other provinces, (...), destitute of
money and a (...): We must confess, that no power ever (...) POTENT
ANTAGONISTS, (...) circumstances of infelicity. In the better days of Rome, she
permitted no regular troops to defend (...) Men destitute of property she
admitted not into her militia, (^er only army,) I have been extremely concerned
at the separation of the Connecticut men from ^ur army. It augur'd not an
ardent enthusiasm for liberty and glory. We still have an army before Boston,
and I should be extremely happy to (...) substantial process of their glory. I
am still hopeful of great things from our army before Boston, when joined by
the regiments n^w forming, which WANT OF BREAD will probably soon fill.
Notwithstanding the (...) I have for my countrymen, I remark with grief, that
hitherto our troops have ^ will animate to such glorious efforts of heroism, as
religious enthusiasm has often impelled its votaries to perform. If the ^ruel
unrelenting tyrant, Philip the second of Spain, had never attempted to
introduce into the Low Countries, the infernal tribunal of the Inquisition: It
is most probable, that the present States of Holland, would to this time have
remained provinces to Spain, and patiently paid the fiftieth penny, and other
grievous exactions. Certain it is, that the fanatics of Scotland, and people
of England, had never armed against the first Charles, if religious enthusiasm
had not more powerfully agitated their minds, than zeal for liberty, the
operations of which, on the human mind, has since the Era in question, ever
been more languid, than the former most powerful passion. These hardy
assertions, are supported as well by notorious facts, as by the learned HUME,
and other judicious historians. I cannot here omit remarking the inconsistency
of human nature. The Scotch, the most furious enthusiasts then in Europe, were
slaughtered like sheep, by Cromwell at Dunbar, where their formidable army
hardly made any resistance, if we except that made by a handful of loyalists,
destitute of that passion. Certain i^ is, that those enthusiasts, were often
(...) in pieces by their countryman, the gallant Marquis of Montrose, whose
troops (Highlanders and other loyalists,) held Presbyterianism in contempt.

With the utmost deference to the honorable Congress, I do not view the most
distant gleam of aid from foreign powers. The princes alone, capable of
succouring us, are the Sovereigns of France and Spain. If according to our
Author, we possess an eighth part of the habitable globe, and actually have a
check on the West India commerce of England; the French indigo and other
valuable West India commodities, and the Spanish galeons, are in great jeopardy
from our power. The French and Spaniards are therefore wretched politicians, if
they do not assist England, in reducing her colonies to obedience. --
Pleasantry ap^rt! Can we be so deluded, to expect aid from th^se princes, which
inspiring their subjects with a relish for liberty, might eventually shake
their arbitrary thrones. -- Natural avowed enemies to our sacred cause: Will
they cherish, will they support the (...) of liberty in America? Ardently
intent on extinguishing its latent dying spa^ks in their respective dominions.
Can we believe that those princes will offer an example so dangerous to their
subjects and colonies, by (...) provinces to independence? If independent,
aggrandized by infinite numbers from every part of Europe, this Continent would
rapidly attain power astonishing to imagination. Soon, very soon would we be
conditioned to conquer Mexico, and all their West India settlements, which to
annoy, or possess, we indeed are most happily situated. Simple and obvious as
these truths are, can they be unknown to the people and princes of Europe? Be
it however admitted, that those princes unmindful of the fatal policy of
RICHLIEU'S arming Charles's subjects against him, and the more fatal policy of
LEWIS the fourteenth permitting our glorious deliverer to effect the
revolution. I say, be it admitted, that those princes regardless of future
consequences, and the ineptitude of the times, are (...) disposed to (...).
Say, ye (...) of liberty and (...) no danger accrue from an army (...) and
Spaniards in the bosom of (...)? Would ye not dread their junction wi^h the
Canadians and Savag^^, and with the (...) Roman catholics, (...) throughout the
Colonies?

Let us n^w briefly view the pre-eminently envied state Great Britain. If we
regard the power of Britain, unembarressed with Continental connections, and
the political balance, we may justly pronounce her what our author does,
AMERICA; -- "A match for all Europe." Amazing were the efforts of England, in
the war of Queen Ann, when little benefited by colony (...), and ever she (...)
availed herself of the (...), good sense, and numbers of the people of Scotland
and Ireland.

That England then prescribed laws to Europe, will be long remembered. Last
war, her glory was, if possible, more eminently exalted; in every quarter of
the globe did victory hover round her armies and navies, and her same re-echoed
from pole to pole. At present Great Britain is the umpire of Europe. It is not
exaggeration to ^ffirm, that the Russians principally are indebted for their
laurels, to her power, which al^ne (...) France from preventing the ruin of her
ancient faithful ally, the Ottom^n (...). Superfluous i^ were to enumerate her
powerful alliances, or mention her (...) use resources* Her raising the
incredible sums of eighteen, nineteen, and twenty-two millions ^^^ling for the
service of the years 1759-60, and 61, was more astonishing to Europe, than the
victories of her fleets and armies. The annual rents of the kingdom of England
only, many years ago, amounted to thirty three millions sterling. Thirty five
millions bushels of wheat are annually produced in that kingdom; and perhaps as
many bushels of other grain: Twelve millions of fl^eces of wool are there
yearly shorn. In short, the Kingdom is a perfect Bee-hive, in numbers and
industry; and is said to contain more industry, consequently more wealth, than
all the rest of Europe. The famed HUME says, "I should as soon dread, that all
our rivers and springs, should be exhausted, as that money should abandon a
kingdom; where there are people and industry." The British navy, at the close
of last war, consisted of nearly two hundred ships of the line, one hundred
large frigates, and about one hundred smaller frigates, or other armed vessels.
Since the peace, I believe, the navy has been most vigilantly preserved by Lord
Sandwich, (said to be as equal to that arduous department, as any man in
Europe.) Since the war, several capital ships have annually been built; and it
is most certain, that on six months notice, Great Britain could equip fleets,
sufficiently formidable, to contend with all the naval force, that could, or
would act against her. The immense quantity of naval and other stores, in the
different arsenals, with the royal navy Seventeen capital ships were built from
1763 until 1771.
cannot at this time be worth less than twenty millions sterling. The island of
Great Britain, between six and seven hundred miles in length, and upwards of
two thousand miles circumference; and being every where indented with harbors,
forms (with other causes) such nurseries of seamen, as the world cannot produce.

Let us now examine our author's account of the navy of Great Britain. "It is
says he, worth no more than three millions and an half sterling." This in
effect will reduce it to ten second rate ships of war, ten third rate, fifteen
fourth rate, ten ships of forty guns, ten of thirty six, and eight of twenty.
"If America says he, had only a twentieth part of the naval force of Britain,
she would be by far an over-match for her, because as we neither have, nor
claim any foreign dominion, our whole force would be employed on our own coast;
where we should in the long run have two to one the advantage of those who had
three or four thousand miles to sail over, before they could attack us; and the
same distance to return, in order to refit and recruit. And although Britain by
her fleet, has a check over our trade to Europe, we have as large a one over
her trade to the West Indies, which, by laying in the neighborhood of the
Continent, lies entirely at its mercy."

Were it lawful to joke on so serious an occasion, I would remind the reader of
our Author's modesty, in saying, "that we claim no foreign dominion:" Since we
have the most numerous, and best disciplined army under Heaven; and a navy
sufficiently strong to combat that of Great Britain. For our present naval
armament compose a fleet more than equal to a twentieth part of the British
navy, (according to our author's estimation.) Notwithstanding our author's
delicacy, relying on the well known utility of melasses, to the New England
governments: I hope they will order Admiral Manly to seize Jamaica, and the
other West India Islands. The Admiral cannot be at a loss for men; since,
according to our author, "a few social sailors, will soon instruct a sufficient
number of active landmen, in the common work of a ship. I do indeed confess,
that the British ships of war, are constantly equipt altogether with very
social sailors; and as constantly drub the French ships, double manned, with
active landmen, though sufficiently instructed by a few social sailors. The
reader will perceive, that our author, has humbled the naval power of Britain,
with more facility than France and Spain could have done: And, has also
expelled her from our ports with happier success, than did Spain; who was
compelled to yield her Gibraltar and Portmahon, for the convenience of her
fleets and commerce.

We must indeed allow, that Spain, though possessed of Mexico and Peru, cannot
maintain the most numerous and best disciplined army under Heaven, nor equip a
navy fit to contend with the fleets of Britain. It must also be confessed, that
he makes Great Britain, very favorably dispose of her humbled navy, by
employing nineteen parts of it in the Mediterranean, Asia, Africa, and I know
not where: When he knows we have so great a check on her West India trade, a
commerce, of the last importance to her.

I would blush for poor human nature, did I imagine that any man, other than a
bigot could believe these ridiculous stories, these arrant gasconades,
respecting our numerous and best disciplined army under Heaven, about our navy,
and a few social sailors, and that France and Spain will not assist us, (who
by-the-bye, according to our author, are able to conquer them,) until playing
upon words, we declare ourselves INDEPENDENT. Can a reasonable being for a
moment believe that Great Britain, whose political existence depends on our
constitutional obedience, who but yesterday made such prodigious efforts to
save us from France, will not exert herself as powerfully to preserve us from
our frantic schemes of independency. Can we a moment doubt, that the Sovereign
of Great Britain and his ministers, whose glory as well as personal safety
depends on our obedience, will not exert every nerve of the British power, to
save themselves and us from ruin.

"Much says our author has been said of the strength of Britain and the
Colonies, that in conjuction they might bid defiance to the world; but this is
mere presumption, the fate of war is uncertain."

Excellent reasoning, and truly consistent with our author. We of ourselves are
a match for Europe, nay for the world; but in junction with the most formidable
power on earth; why then, the matter is mere presumption. The fate of war is
uncertain. It is indeed humiliating to consider, that this author should vamp
up a form of government, sor a considerable part of mankind; and in case of its
succeeding, that he probably would be one of our tyrants, until we prayed some
more illustrious tyrant of the army, to spurn him to his primeval obscurity;
from all his ill-got honors flung, turned to that dirt from whence he sprung.
"A government of our own, is our natural right," says our author.

" Had right decided, and not fate the cause,
" Rome had preserved her Cato and her laws."
Unfortunately for mankind, those are fine sounding words, which seldom or ever
influence human affairs. If they did, instead of appropriating the vacant lands
to schemes of ambition, we must instantly deputise envoys to the Indians,
praying them to re-enter their former possessions, and permit us quietly to
depart to the country of our ancestors, where we would be welcome guests. But
continues our author, "What have we to do with setting the world at defiance?
our plan is commerce, and that well attended to, will secure us the peace and
friendship of all Europe; because it is the interest of all Europe to have
America a free-port, her trade will always be her protection, and her
barrenness of gold and silver, will secure her from invaders."

I am perfectly satisfied, that we are in no condition to set the world at
defiance, that commerce and the protection of Great Britain will secure us
peace, and the friendship of all Europe; but I deny that it is the interest of
all Europe to have America a free-port, unless they are desirous of
depopulating their dominions. His assertions, that barrenness of gold and
silver will secure us from invaders, is indeed highly pleasant. Have we not a
much better security from invasions, viz. the most numerous and best
disciplined army under heaven; or has our author already disbanded it. Pray how
much gold and silver do the mines of Flanders produce? and what country so
often has seen its unhappy fields drenched with blood, and fertilised with
human gore. The princes of Europe have long dreaded the migration of their
subjects to America; and we are sensible, that the king of Prussia is said more
than once to have hanged Newlanders, or those who seduced his subjects to
emigrate. I also humbly apprehend, that Britain is a part of Europe. Now, old
gentleman, as you have clearly shown, that we have a check upon her West India
trade, is it her interest to give us a greater check upon it, by permitting
America (as you express it,) to become a free port. Can we suppose it to be her
interest to lose her valuable commerce to the Colonies, which effectually she
would do, by giving up America to become your free port. If therefore it is the
interest of all Europe, to have America a free port: The people of Britain are
extremely simple to expend so many millions sterling to prevent it. "It is
repugnant to the nature of things, to all examples from former ages, to suppose
that this Continent can long remain subject to any external power."

Antiquity affords us no eclarcisement respecting the future government of
America. Rome situated in a sterile corner of Italy, long, long, retained the
then world in chains, and probably had maintained her dominion longer, had not
the cross, removing the empire to Byzantium, weakened the eagles, and in turn,
justly been destroyed by the Barbarians. I see no reason to doubt, that Great
Britain, may not long retain us in constitutional obedience. Time, the
destroyer of human affairs, may indeed, end her political life by a gentle
decay. Like Rome, she may be constrained to defend herself from the Huns, and
Alaricks* of the North. Ingratefully should we endeavor to precipitate her
political demise, she will devise every expedient to retain our obedience; and
rather than fail, will participate those provinces amongst the potent states of
Europe. "The authority of Great Britain over this Continent, is a form of
government which sooner or later must have an end."

This I have granted, and I add, that a million of revolutions may happen on
this Continent, for every one of which, I am not indeed so over solicitous, as
our Phoenix of Whims, the Author of Common Sense. "The Colonies have manifested
such a spirit of good order and obedience to continental government, as is
sufficient to make every person happy on that head."

What is this union so highly vaunted off? whence the marching and counter
marching through almost every province to disarm those denominated tories? -- I
perfectly agree, that glorious is our union. -- I execrate those who say, it
has been cemented by every species of fraud and violence: Yet notwithstanding I
dread its fragility; were an army of Britons in the middle of our country. As
the Author of Common Sense is now in the grand monde; and cannot be acquainted
with the language of many people in the provinces: I will communicate the
general purport of their* discourse. -- "We, say they, do not see through the
wisdom of the present times. We remember with unfeigned gratitude, the many
benefits derived through our connections with Great Britain, by whom but
yesterday, we were emancipated from slavery and death. We are not indeed
unaware, that Great Britain is uniformly reproached with defending us from
interested motives. In like manner, however, may every ingrate, reproach his
benefactor; since all benefactions may be said to flow from no purer fountain.
With predilection, we view our parent state; and wishfully contemplate on our
late felicity, almost realizing that state of old, so beautifully feigned by
the poets. We venerate the constitution, which with all its imperfections, (too
often exaggerated) we apprehend almost approaches as near to perfection, as
human kind can bear. We shudder at the idea of arming with more virulence, more
unremitting ardour, against the parent state, than against France; by whom our
RIGHTS, CIVIL, as well as RELIGIOUS, certainly were more imminently endangered.
With horror we reflect on the former civil wars, when every crime, odious and
baneful to human nature, were alternately perpetrated by the soldiers,
particularly by the Independents."

"Every quiet method of peace has been ineffectual; our prayers have been
rejected with disdain." I do not indeed agree with the people of England in
saying, that those, who so successfully labored to widen the breach -- defired
nothing less than peace. That they who shortly were to command the most
numerous and best disciplined army under Heaven, and a navy fit to contend with
the fleets of England, imagining the time had found us, disdained to be just. I
highly venerate a majority of the Delegates. I have not indeed the honor of
knowing all the worthy members; however, I wish the Gentlemen of the Congress,
ever they entered on their important charge, had been better acquainted with
the strength of our friends in parliament. I sincerely lament, that the King
did not receive the last excellent petition from the Congress; and I as
^incerely wish, the Gentlemen of the Congress had not addressed themselves at
that juncture, to the people of Ireland. "As to government matters," (continues
our Author,) "it is not in the power of Britain to do this Continent justice:
The business of it will soon be too weighty and intricate to be managed with
any tolerable degree of convenience, by a power so very distant from us, and so
very ignorant of us; for if they cannot conquer us, they cannot govern us. The
difference between Pennsylvania, and Connecticut, respecting some unlocated
lands, shows the insignificance of a British government, and fully proves, that
nothing but Continental authority can regulate Continental matters."

Until the present unhappy period, Great Britain has afforded to all mankind,
the most perfect proof of her wise, lenient, and magnanimous government of the
Colonies -- The proofs to which we already have alluded, viz. our supreme
felicity, and amazing increase. Than the affair of the Connecticut invaders;
Omnipotence only could grant us stronger reasons for praying a continuance of
our former beneficent government. Most certainly, every dispassionate person,
as well as the plundered Pennsylvanians, must confess, that the Arm of Great
Britain alone detained those Free-booters aforesaid, from ^eifing the city of
Philadelphia, to which without all doubt, they have as just a claim, as to
those fertile regions in Pennsylvania, which they surreptitiously have
possessed themselves of. In wrath to mankind, should Heaven permit our Author's
new fangled government to exist; I, as a friend to Pennsylvanians, advise them
to explore new settlements, and avoid the cruel mortification of being expelled
by the Saints from their delicious abodes and pleasing fields. -- "But (says
the Author) the most powerful argument is, that nothing but independence, (that
is a Continental form of government) can keep the peace of the Continent, and
preserve it inviolate from civil wars. I dread the event of a reconciliation
now with Britain, as it is more than probable, that it will be followed by
revolt somewhere; the consequences of which may be far more fatal than all the
malice of Britain. Thousands are already ruined by British barbarity, thousands
more will probably share the same fate. These men have other feelings, than
those who have nothing suffered: All they now possess is liberty, what they
before enjoyed is sacrificed to its service, and having nothing more to lose,
they disdain all submission."

Here we cannot mistake our author's meaning, that if one or more of the middle
or southern Colonies reconcile with Great Britain, they will have war to
sustain with New England; "the consequences of which may be more detrimental,
than all the malice of Britain." This terrible denunciation, fortunately for
such Colonies, is as futile as its author. Should Great Britain re-establish
her authority in the said Colonies by negotiation, surely it is not temerity to
add, that the weight of Britain, in the scale of those provinces, would
preponderate against the power of New England. If Britain should reduce the
Colonies by arms, (which may Heaven avert!) The New England provinces will have
as little inclination, as ability, to disturb the peace of their neighbors. I
do indeed most sincerely compassionate those unhappy men, who are ruined by our
unfortunate distractions. I do fervently pray, that Britain, and the Colonies
may most effectually consider their peculiar infelicity. Such attention will do
infinite honor to the parent state; who cannot view them as enemies, but as
men unhappily irritated by the impolitic measures of Great Britain. "The
diminution of trade affords an army, and the necessities of an army, create a
new trade." (So says our Author) I am surprised the ministry, so often
reproached with ruining the commerce of Britain, never urged, (what was never
thought or said before.) Our Author's excellent axiom, "that the diminution,
etc." Certain it is, the minority had replied* since the commencement of this
century; the diminution of the commerce of France has afforded her nearly one
million of soldiers; but the necessities of this prodigious number of troops,
created her so bad a commerce, that she has twice proved bankrupt since, and
more than once experienced the miseries of famine.

"If premiums (says our Author) were to be given to Merchants to build and
employ in their service, ships mounted with 20, 30, 40, or 50 guns, the
premiums to be in proportion to the loss of bulk to the Merchants. Fifty or
sixty of those ships, with a few guard ships on constant duty, would keep up a
sufficient navy, and that without burdening ourselves with the evil so loudly
complained of in England* of suffering their fleets in time of peace to lie
rotting in their docks." Yield the palm of ingenuity to our Author, ye De Wits,
Colberts, Pelhams, and Pitts. He has outdone ye by constructing a beautiful
navy; alas! on paper only. -- First, no nation in Europe depends on such ships
for her defense: Secondly, such ships would be unfit to contend with capital
ships: Thirdly, in the hour of danger, these ships on their voyage, or return,
would alternately be taken by an active enemy: Lastly, six times as many such
ships would be unequally matched with that part of the naval power of Britain,
which she actually could spare to combat on our coasts* This cannot be thought
exaggeration, if we consider that the British navy, last war, carried about
seventeen thousand guns; and upwards of ninety-five thousand social seamen. "No
country (says our author) is so happily situated, or internally capable of
raising a fleet as America. Tar, timber, iron and cordage are her natural
produce." He speaks of forming a fleet, as if he could do it by his Fiat. A
third rate ship of the line fitted for sea, is allowed to cost seventy four
thousand pounds sterling, which at the present exchange, is about one hundred
and twenty nine thousand pounds. Now, as labor, sail cloth, cordage, and other
requisites, are dearer than in Europe, we may reasonably suppose the advanced
price, at twenty-five per cent. which makes the amount one hundred and fifty
four thousand pounds. We must next suppose our navy equal to that of France,
which consists of sixty four ships of the line (fifty gun ships inclusive)
twenty-five frigates, with ships of inferior force. In case of independence, we
cannot admit a smaller naval force. Indeed, when joined to the fleets of France
and Spain, the navies so united, and navigated principally with landsmen,
instructed by a few social sailors, will be vastly inferior to the squadrons of
Britain. The amount therefore of such our navy, will only require the trifling
sum of twelve million, six hundred and twenty five thousand pounds currency,
which I am very willing to believe we can spare, being scarcely one fourth the
value of our property, real and personal. With excellent management, our navy
would laft eight, nine, or ten years; we therefore would find it extremely
convenient to rebuild it constantly at the expiration of that term: Of this
there cannot be a doubt, when we remember with our Author, "that ship-building
is America's greatest pride. The vast empire of Russia is almost shut out from
the sea, wherefore her boundless forests, her tar, iron, and cordage, are only
articles of commerce." I reply, that Russia containing ten times our numbers,
is destitute of industry and commerce. She has ports sufficient to build and
contain a navy to subdue the world. Destitute as we have remarked of industry
and commerce, her navy is inconsiderable, and being equipt with landsmen,
cannot figure against ships navigated by social sailors. Who can doubt the
ability of Spain to build a navy? The cargo of two or three of her annual
galeons were sufficient to build a navy as formidable as that permitted to
Great Britain (by the author of Common Sense.) In her Island of Cuba, possessed
of an immensity of fine cedar; she might construct a navy as formidable as that
of Great Britain, but to what purpose, other than to adorn the triumph of her
enemies; unless she could arm her ships, otherwise than by active landsmen,
instructed by a few social sailors. Our Author says, "that the Terrible, Capt.
Death, stood the hottest engagement of any ship last war, yet had not twenty
sailors on board," (though her compliment of men was upwards of two hundred.)

We do indeed confess ourselves doubtful on this head, and therefore wish our
Author had produced his authority. We do apprehend, that naval actions, very
generally depend on seaman-ship, that is, on dexterously working the ship during
the combat. Now the judicious reader will remember, that ships of war in
engagement cannot be navigated by a few social sailors, nor even by a bare
competency, unless such sailors are more invulnerable than was the great
Achilles.

"Were the Continent (says our Author) crowded with inhabitants, her sufferings
under the present circumstances, would be intolerable, the more sea ports we
had, the more we should have both to defend, and to lose." This is rather
incomprehensible; I cannot imagine, that we would be less formidable with ten
times our present numbers, if at present we can defend one seaport; surely,
with ten times as many inhabitants, we could equally defend ten. If with our
present numbers, we are a match for the world, consequently with ten times as
many, we would be a match for ten worlds, which would indeed be prodigious! The
infant state of the Colonies as it is called, so far from being against, is an
argument in favor of Independence." This assertion is as absurd, as if he had
maintained, that twenty is inferior in number to two. "But the injuries and
disadvantages we sustain by that connection, are without number, and our duty
to mankind at large, as well as to ourselves, instruct us to renounce the
alliance; because any submission to, or dependence upon Great Britain, tends
directly to involve this Continent in European wars and quarrels. As Europe is
our market for trade, we ought to form no political connection with any part of
it." Innumerable are the advantages of our connection with Britain; and a just
dependence on her, is a sure way to avoid the horrors and calamities of war.
Wars in Europe, will probably than heretofore become less frequent; religious
rancour, which formerly animated princes to arms, is succeeded by a spirit of
philosophy extremely friendly to peace. The princes of Europe are or ought to
be convinced by sad experience, that the objects of conquest, are vastly
inadequate to the immense charge of their armaments. Prudential motives,
therefore, in future, will often dictate negotiation, instead of war. Be it
however admitted, that our speculations are nugatory, and that as usual, we are
involved in war. In this case we really do not participate a twentieth part of
the misery and hardships of war, experienced by the other subjects of the
empire. As future wars will probably be carried on by Britain in her proper
element, her success will hardly be doubtful, nor can this be thought audacity,
if we remember the great things effected by Britain in her naval wars, then
secondary objects to her Germanic connections, to which she now politically
seems indifferent. Our sailors navigating our vessels to the West Indies during
war, are exempted from impressment, and if our trade to any part of Europe is
then stagnated, it flows with uncommon rapidity in the West Indies, nor is the
object of captures inconsiderable.

Our author surely forgets, that when independent, we cannot trade with Europe,
without political connections, and that all treaties made by England or other
commercial states are, or ought to be, ultimately subservient to their
commerce. "But (says our author,) admitting that matters were now made up, what
would be the event? I answer the ruin of the Continent, and that for several
reasons." Reconciliation would conduct us to our former happy state. The
happiness of the governed is without doubt the true interest of the governors,
and if we aim not at independence, there cannot be a doubt, of receiving every
advantage relative to laws and commerce that we can desire. Montesquieu
speaking of the people of England, says, "They know better than any people on
earth, how to value at the same time these three great advantages, religion,
liberty, and commerce." "It is a matter worthy of observation, that the more a
country is peopled, the smaller their armies are." This indeed would be worthy
of observation, did not daily experience contravert it. The armies of Russia,
France, Austria, England, and Prussia, are certainly more numerous than' those
of Spain, Sweden, Denmark, Portugal, and Sardinia. Now, the first five states
contain nearly sixty millions, and the last kingdoms do not contain fourteen
millions of people. "In military numbers, the ancients far exceeded the
moderns, and the reason is evident, for trade being the consequences of
population, men become too much absorbed thereby, to attend to any thing else,
commerce diminishes the spirit both of patriotism, and military defense."

Every man of sense, now rejects the fabulous numbers of the army of X^rxes,
and other fabled armies of antiquity. The ancient armies, did not exceed in
numbers the armies of the moderns. If so, their states had been desolated by
the horrid carnage of their battles, arising from the military spirit of
defense, from the nature of their arms, and the arrangement of their armies,
which permitted the combatants to buckle together, who seldom gave quarter. The
Roman armies never exceeded twenty-five legions, which including auxiliaries,
did not exceed two hundred and fifty thousand, a number greatly inferior to the
armies of France, or perhaps Britain during war. Notwithstanding my ardour for
liberty, I do most fervently pray, that we may never exchange the spirit of
commerce, for that of military defense, even at the price of augmenting our
armies. Let us hear the testimony of Montesquieu in favor of commerce:
"Commerce, says he, is a cure for the most destructive prejudices, for it is
almost a general rule, that wherever we find agreeable manners, their commerce
flourishes. Let us not be astonished then, if our manners are now less savage
than formerly. Commerce has every where diffused a knowledge of all nations,
these are compared one with another, and from this comparison arise the
greatest advantages. Peace is the natural effect of trade, etc." The Athenian
people, perhaps the most respectable of antiquity, did not long posses a
commercial spirit, but were almost continually afflicted by this spirit of
military defense. The common people in effect distributed the public revenues
amongst themselves, while the rich, were in a state of oppression. According to
Lysius the orator and others, it was their custom, when in want of money, to
put to death some of the rich citizens, as well as strangers, for the sake of
the forfeiture. In short, could we enumerate the infinite train of misfortunes
inflicted on mankind, in every clime and age by this self-same spirit of
military defense; our readers will surely join us in opinion, that commerce has
most happily humanized mankind. I am not unaware, that there are many
declamations against commerce, these I have ever regarded as trials of wit,
rather than serious productions. Our author's antipathy, and extreme aversion
to commerce, is easily accounted for. If his independence takes place, I do
aver, that commerce will be as useless, as our searching for the philosopher's
stone. "And history (says he,) sufficiently informs us, that the bravest
achievements were always accomplished in the nonage of a nation." The Greeks
in their early state were pirates, and the Romans robbers, and both warred in
character. Their glorious actions were performed, (If I may so express myself)
in the manhood of their empire. Carthage, Greece, Asia, Spain, Gaul, and
Britain, were not indeed conquered during the nonage of the republic.
Agincourt, Cressey, Oudenard Ramillies, Blenheim, Dettingen, and Minden, surely
were not fought in the infancy of the English Empire. "With the increase of
commerce, England has lost her spirit." This is really a curious discovery; who
is unacquainted, that the English are the lords and factors of the universe,
and the Britain joins to the commerce of Tire, Carthage and Venice, the
discipline of Greece, and the fire of old Rome. "The city of London, submits to
continued insults, with the patience of a coward. The more men have to lose,
the less willing they are to venture, and submit to courtly power with the
trembling duplicity of a spaniel." That an inconsiderable part of the people in
London, submit to a person not very honorably distinguished in the world is
certain, but that the city of London submits to continued insults is certainly
a mistake. I suppose our author means, that by submitting to the best laws on
earth they submit to continued insults. The rich whom he so very honorably
distinguishes, can be at no loss for his meaning. An Agrarian law, would
perhaps be convenient for himself and his independents. It may not however be
amiss to remind him of that, which in the multiplicity of his projects, he may
have forgot, viz. that the richest part of the community will always be an
overmatch for the poorest part. "It might be difficult, (says our author,) if
not impossible, to form this Continent into a government half a century hence."

Here I humbly apprehend our author's meaning is truly conspicuous. This
Continent fifty years hence, infallibly will be richer, and much better peopled
than at present; consequently abler to effect a revolution. But alas! ever that
period, our author will forever be forgotten; impelled therefore by his
villainous ambition, he would rashly precipitate his country into every species
of horror, misery, and desolation, rather than forego his fancied
protectorship. "But if you have, (says our author) and still can shake hands
with the murderers, then are ye unworthy the name of husband, father, friend,
or lover, and whatever may be your rank or title in life, you have the heart of
a coward, and the spirit of a sycophant, etc. To talk of friendship with those
in whom our reason forbids us to have faith, and our affections wounded through
a thousand pores, instructs us to detest is madness and folly."

Ye that are not drunk with fanaticism answer me? Are these words dictated by
peace, or base foul revenge, the constant attendant on cowards and sycophants?
Does our author so perfectly versed in scripture, mean to conduct us to peace
or desolation? or is he fit to legislate for men or devils? Nations after
desolating each other, (happily for mankind,) forgive, forget, and reconcile;
like individuals who quarrel, reconcile, and become friends. Following the
laudable example of the CONGRESS; we lately have most readily shak^n hands with
our inveterate enemies the Canadians, who have scalped nearly as many of our
people as the British troops have done: Why therefore may we not forgive and
reconcile -- By no means, it blasts our author's ambitious purposes. The
English and Scotch, since the first Edward's time, have alternately slaughtered
each other, (in the field of Bannockburn, more men fell, than are now in the
New England provinces) to the amount of several hundred thousand: And now view
each other as subjects, despising the efforts of certain turbulent spirits,
tending to rekindle the ancient animosity. Many of the unhappy men criminally
engaged with the Pretender; reconciled by humane treatment to that family
against whom they rebelled; served in their armies a few years after. Indeed
the conduct of the Canadians to our troops, as effectually illustrates our
doctrine, as it reprobates the Antichristian, diabolical tenets of our author.
-- "The unwarrantable stretch likewise, which that house made in their last
sitting, to gain an undue authority over the Delegates of that province, ought
to warn the people at large, how they trust POWER OUT OF THEIR OWN HANDS. A set
of instructions for the Delegates were put together, which in point of sense,
and business would have dishonored a schoolboy, and after being approved by a
few, a very few, without doors, were carried into the house, and there passed
in behalf of the whole Colony. Whereas, did the whole Colony know, with what
ill will that house has entered on some necessary public measures, they would
not hesitate a moment to think them unworthy of such a trust." This very
insidious charge, we cannot read without indignation. If the Pennsylvanians,
had happily adhered to their virtuous resolves, it is more than probable, that
a constitutional reconciliation had ever now taken place. Unfortunately,
rescinding their opinion, they perhaps adopted the sentiments of certain
persons, by no means superior in virtue or knowledge. Those not inebriated with
independency, will certainly allow, that the instructions to their Delegates,
were dictated by the true spirit of peace, justice, and exalted policy. If
inspiration had dictated those resolves, obnoxious as they are to independency,
our author had reprobated them. How dare the author of Common Sense say, "that
they attempted to gain an undue authority over the Delegates of their province?
Who so proper to instruct them, as those chosen by the people, not in the hour
of passion, riot and confusion, but in the day of peace and tranquil
reflection. The gentleman, whom our author impotently attacks, in this and
other innuendos; will be long revered by his grateful countrymen, and the
friends of mankind; as well for his true patriotism and extensive abilities, as
his unbounded benevolence. Would we profit by the unhappy examples of our
ancestors, (which alas! mankind too seldom do,) let us remember the fate of
those illustrious patriots, of the first Charles's time: Allied at first with
the independents; they did not suspect those execrable hypocrites, of the
horrid design of destroying the King and constitution. When they saw through
their abominable views, it was too late to save the King and kingdom; for the
independents had seized the sovereignty. Soon as they were firmly possessed of
power; they persecuted those illustrious patriots, with more unrelenting
virulence, than the professed advocates of arbitrary power. Every virtuous
Pennsylvanian, must be fired with indignation at the insidious attack made by
this independent on the respectable assembly of his province. Indeed, the
Assembly of Pennsylvania in this unworthy treatment have a sure earnest of
their future expectations. -- "It is the custom of nations, (says our author)
when any two are at war, for some other powers not engaged in the quarrel, to
step in as mediators, and bring about the preliminaries of a peace. But while
America calls herself the subject of Britain, no power, however well disposed
she may be, can offer her mediation. Wherefore in our present state we may
quarrel on forever."

Nations, like individuals, in the hour of passion attend to no mediation. But
when heartily drubbed, and tired of war, are very readily reconciled, without
the intervention of mediators; by whom, belligerents were never reconciled,
until their interests or passions dictated the pacification. If we may use our
author's elegant language, mediation is "farsical." I grant however, that the
idea of our forcing England by arms to treat with us is brilliant. "It is
unreasonable continues (our author) to suppose that France and Spain will give
us any kind of assistance, if we mean only to make use of that assistance for
the purpose of repairing the breach, and strengthening the connection between
Britain and America; because those powers would be sufferers by the
consequences."

Considering "we have the most numerous, and best disciplined army under
Heaven; and a fleet fit to contend with the navy of Britain;" we must suppose
our Author's brain affected by dwelling constantly on his beloved independency,
else he would not have the imbecility to require the assistance of France and
Spain. The manner of his prevailing on France and Spain to assist us, is also a
strong proof of his insanity. Did those powers, hesitate to succor the Scotch
rebels in 1745, because they did not declare themselves independent. It then
was their interest to create a diversion, alas! too serious in the sequel for
the deluded rebels in that kingdom; and were they now interested in aiding us,
they undoubtedly would do it in spite of quibbles. In such case, ever this
time, their armies and navies had joined us without interruption: For we must
confess, that the efforts of Britain hitherto, would not have precluded the
republic of Genoa from aiding us. Suppose our author, had a son or an
apprentice eloped to his intimate acquaintance, and desired to enter into his
service: If this person replied to the youth; I know your apprenticeship is
unexpired, notwithstanding declare yourself a freeman, and I will hire and
protect you. I demand, would such odious, ridiculous duplicity, render our
supposed person, less criminal in the eyes of our Author, or render the example
less dangerous to his own apprentice. "Were a manifesto (says our author)
dispatched to foreign courts, etc." This also is a conclusive proof of our
author's maniacum delirium. Our author "challenges the warmest advocate for
reconciliation to show a single advantage this Continent can reap, by being
connected with Great Britain. I repeat the challenge, not a single advantage is
derived: Our corn will fetch its price in any market in Europe:" Were the
author's ass^rtions respecting our power, as real as delusive, a reconciliation
on liberal principles with Great Britain, would be most excellent policy. I
wave similarity of manners, laws, and customs, most friendly indeed to
perpetual alliance. The greatest part of our plank, staves, shingles, hoops,
corn, beef, pork, he^rings, and many other articles, could find no vent, but in
the English Islands. The demand for our flour would also be considerably
lessened. The Spaniards have no demand for these articles; and the French
little or none. Britain would be a principal mart for our lumber, part of our
grain, naval stores, tobacco, and many other articles, which perhaps are not
generally wanted in any kingdom in Europe. If it is suggested, that the English
Islands, impelled by necessity would trade with us. I reply, that it is not
uncommon to see English flour for sale in those Islands; as our merchants have
more than once found to their cost. Since 1750, flour has sold in the Islands,
at ten and twelve per cent. the price being reduced by flour from England.

Britain is also better calculated to supply us, with woollen goods and other
necessary articles, than any kingdom in Europe. Should a separation ensue;
Britain will open an extensive commerce to the Baltic, and Russia, for all, or
many of the commodities, she now receives from us. The Russians, since their
last glorious treaty with the Port; can now export the commodities of their
most fertile Ukraine, through the Mediterranean, until that period, they were
constrained to carry their hemp, eight or nine hundred miles to the Baltic,
whence by a long and dangerous navigation, it reached the different ports in
the Atlantic. I need not inform the reader that such immense land carriage,
precluded the subjects of Russia from raising wheat, which generally sold in
the Ukraine for ten-pence per bushel, as did rye at five-pence in that
extensive region, than which no country on earth is more happily adapted for
that grain. The British nation, pre-eminently distinguished for industry and
enterprise, will establish factories in the provinces of Russia, and animate
those people to emulate our productions, which they will transport by the
Mediterranean, to the ports of Europe, and the West Indies. -- By these means,
and the culture of Poland, our grain would probably be reduced to its pristine
price, two shillings and six pence. As our Author is so violently bent against
reconciliation; he must either suppose a constant war with the incensed power
of England; or admit that he is a proper inhabitant of the domains of Ariosto,
(the world in the moon.) Now, admitting "we have the most numerous, and best
disciplined army under Heaven; and a navy formidable for that of England;"
pray, what are ou^ resources to pay such considerable armaments? Although I do
not wish to mortify, my countrymen; I must acknowledge, that the neat proceeds
of all our produce is inadequate to that end. Our Author allows "that we have a
considerable check on the West In^^a commerce of Britain, and that Great
Britain has a considerable check upon our European trade."

In case Great Britain insults therefore our European bound ships, we have only
to order our admirals to seize their West Indiamen. Unfortunately, the
Algerines, and other piratical states of Africa, have no West India commerce;
and not having the clearest distinctions of thine and mine; will be apt to
seize our vessels. Our author affirms "that our trade will always be our
protection." I therefore crave his pardon, and shall believe, that the sight of
our grain, and smell of the New England Codfish, will effectually serve as a
Mediterranean pass, to the piratical rovers. I do humbly confess my suspicions,
least Portugal extremely dependent on Great Britain, may not insult us. When
independent, we no doubt will receive strong proofs of friendship from France
and Spain: Nevertheless, with the utmost humility I imagine, could we seize
Gibraltar or Portmahon, and there station a formidable squadron of capital
ships; we might as effectually protect our commerce, as our trade will protect
us. The author of Common Sense confidently affirms, "that our trade will always
be its protection." I cannot imagine that his purse or watch would effectual^y
protect him on Hounslow, or Blackhea^^ from footpads or highwaymen. Hitherto we
have treated of reconciliation on the principles of our being as potent as
Great Britain. Let us now consider our army, nearly as I have stated it, and
our navy as an object by no means sublunary. It now behooves us well to
consider, whether it were better to enter the harbor of peace with Great
Britain, or plunge the ship into all the horrors of war. -- Of civil war. As
peace and a happy extension of commerce, are objects infinitely better for
Great Britain; than war and a diminution of her commerce. It therefore is her
interest to grant us every species of indulgence, consistent with our
constitutional dependence, should war continue, there can be no doubt of the
annihilation of our ships, ports and commerce, by Great Britain. The King's
ships now in New England, unhappily are more than sufficient to ruin the ports
and commerce of these provinces. New York is already secured; and I should be
extremely grieved to hear, that a small armament, were destined against
Philadelphia. In the opinion of the best officers of the navy; Philadelphia is
accessible to a few forty and fifty gun ships, in despite of our temporary
expedients to fortify the river Delaware. If such opinion is groundless, the
ministry by their imbecility have befriended us; since by guarding the River
Delaware with a few frigates only; they had precluded us from arming our
vessels and strengthening the river Delaware. I would remind our author of the
constant language, and apparent purport of all ranks in opposition to Great
Britain: "We have (say they) been the happiest people on earth, and would
continue to be so should Great Britain renounce her claim of taxation. We have
no sinister views, we claim not independence; No! Perish the thought." Such I
believe also was the tenor of the petitions from the Congress to his Majesty.
Now I would ask every man of sentiment, what opinion our friends in Great
Britain, nay the whole world will entertain of us, if ingratefully, and madly
adopting our author's frantic schemes, we reject reasonable terms of
reconciliation? Will they not most assuredly believe, that our popular leaders,
have by infinite art, deluded the unwary people into their pre-concerted
schemes; on supposition, that the time had found us? Those acquainted with
Britain must confess, that the minority in parliament, hitherto have been our
main prop. Now independency for ever annihilates this our best resource. Let us
admit a part of the minority, republicans, or what is more probable, bent on
removing the present ministry from their power. Our author's schemes
annihilates all their consequence, all their opposition. In case of our
independence, should a BAR, or BURKE, patronise our government; such patrons,
would infallibly participate the fate of the great and good DEWITS; be torn in
pieces by the furious People. -- If my remarks are founded on truth, it
results, that the time has not found us; that independency is inexpedient,
ruinous, and impracticable, and that reconciliation with Great Britain on good
terms, is our sole resource. It Is this alone, will render us respectable; it is
this alone, will render us numerous; it is this only, will make us happy.

I shall no longer detain my reader, but conclude with a few remarks on our
Author's scheme. The people of those Colonies would do well to consider the
character, fortune, and designs of our Author, and his independents; and
compare them with those of the most amiable and venerable personages in, and
out of the Congress, who abominate such nefarious measures. I would humbly
observe, that the specious science of politics, is of all others, the most
delusive. Soon after the Revolution; the ablest statesmen in England, and
other parts of Europe; confidently predicted National ruin, infallible ruin,
^oon as the Public debt exceeded fifty millions sterling. The Nation now
indebted nearly thrice that sum; is not arrived at the zenith of her credit and
power. It is perhaps possible to form a specious system of government on paper
which may seem practicable, and to have the consent of the people; yet it will
not answer in practice, nor retain their approbation upon trial. "All plans of
government (says HUME) which suppose great reformation in the manners of
mankind, are merely imaginary."

The fabricators of Independency have too much influence; to be entrusted in
such ardous and important concerns. This reason alone, were sufficient at
present, to deter us from altering the Constitution. It would be as
inconsistent in our leaders in this hour of danger to form a government; as it
were for a Colonel forming his battalion in the face of an enemy, to stop to
write an essay on war.

This author's Quixotic system, is really an insult to our understanding; it is
infinitely inferior to HUME's idea of a perfect Common Wealth; which
notwithstanding his acknowleged greatness of genius, is still reprehensible. It
is not our business to examine, in what manner this author's associates,
acquired their knowledge in national affairs; but we may predict, that his
scheme of independency would soon, very soon give way to a government imposed
on us, by some Cromwell of our armies. Nor is this sentiment unnatural, if we
are attentive to constant experience, and human nature. The sublime
MONTESQUIEU, so aptly quoted by the Congress, unhappily corroborates our
doctrine, "from (says he) a manner of thinking that prevails amongst mankind.
They set a higher value upon courage than timorousness, on activity than
prudence, on strength than counsel. Hence, the army will ever despise a senate,
and respect their own officers. They will naturally slight the order sent them
by a body of men whom they look upon as cowards, and therefore unworthy to
command them, so that as soon as the army depends on the legislative body, it
becomes a military one;" and if the contrary has ever happened, it has been
owing to some extraordinary circumstances, such as Holland being able to drown
her garrisons, and the Venetians having it in their power to compel their
troops to obedience by the vicinity of the European armies. Resources to which
we forever must be strangers. If independence takes place, the New England men
by their consequence therein; will assume a superiority, impatiently to be born
by the other Colonies.

Notwithstanding our Author's fine words about toleration: Ye sons of peace and
true christianity; believe me, it were folly supreme, madness, to expect
angelic toleration from New England, where she has constantly been detested,
persecuted and execrated. Even in vain would our Author; or our CROMWELL
cherish toleration; for the people of New England, not yet arrived in the
seventeenth or eighteenth century, would reprobate her. -- It is more than
probable to suppose, that the New England governments would have no objection
to an Agrarian law; nor is it unreasonable to suppose, that such division of
property would be very agreeable to the soldiers. Indeed their General could
not perhaps with safety to his existence as a General, refuse them so
reasonable a gratification, particularly, as he will have more than one
occasion for their services. Let us however admit that our General and troops,
contradicting the experience of ages; do not assume the sovereignty. R^leased
from foreign war; we would probably be plunged into all the misery of anarchy
and intestine war. Can we suppose that the people of the south, would submit to
have the seat of Empire at Philadelphia, or in New England; or that the people
oppressed by a change of government, contrasting their misery with their former
happy state, would not invite Britain to reassume the sovereignty.

A failure of commerce precludes the numerous tribe of planters, farmers and
others, from paying their debts contracted on the faith of peace and commerce.
They cannot, nor perhaps ought not to pay their debts. A war will ensue between
the creditors and their debtors, which will eventually end in a general sponge
or abolition of debts, which has more than once happened in other States on
occasions similar.

Ye respectable descendants of the planters from Holland and Swisserland; who
acknowledge, that your fathers have instructed you to felicitate yourselves in
existing under the benign British government. And have taught you to execrate
the Government of Holland and other popular states, where the unhappy people
unacquainted with trial by jury and other peculiar felicities of British
Subjects are, (to use the significant language of your fathers) under the
harrow of oppressive Demagogues. Do ye possess the wisdom to continue your
happiness by a well regulated connection with Britain?

Volumes were insufficient to describe the horror, misery and desolation,
awaiting the people at large in the Siren form of American independence. In
short, I affirm that it would be most excellent policy in those who wish for
TRUE LIBERTY to submit by an advantageous reconciliation to the authority of
Great Britain; "to accomplish in the long run, what they cannot do by
hypocrisy, fraud and force in the short one." INDEPENDENCE AND SLAVERY ARE
SYNONYMOUS TERMS.

FINIS
The following Publication by RATIONALIS, is printed in this size, for the
convenience of those Gentlemen, who choose to bind it with other Pamphlets, in
an Octavo Volume.
The Republican Spirit is indeed at Bottom as ambitious as the Monarchical.
VOLTAIRE.
THE town has been lately amused with a new political pamphlet, entitled COMMON
SENSE.

This piece, though it has taken a popular name, and implies that the contents
are obvious, and adapted to the understandings of the bulk of the people is so
far from meriting the title it has assumed, that in my opinion it holds
principles equally inconsistent with learned and common Sense.

I know not the author, nor am I anxious to learn his name or character; ^or
the book, and not the writer of it, is to be the subject of my animadversions.

It Is the glory of a free country to enjoy a free press, and of this, that the
sentiments and opinions of the meanest, equally with those of the greatest, are
brought to view; for we know by frequent instances, that the rich and high born
are not the monopolizers of wisdom and virtue. -- On the contrary, these
qualities are oftener to be found among the middling class in every country,
who, being less dissipated and debauched than those who are usually called
their betters, apply themselves with more industry to the culture of their
understandings, and in reality become better acquainted with the true interests
of the society in which they live.

But to my great grief I have too often seen instances of persons in every
class of life, whose publications, at the same time they have reflected honor
on the parts and genius of the authors, have been so shamefully wanting in
candor as to attempt, by the cadence of words, and force of style, a total
perversion of the understanding.

The pamphlet in question seems to be plainly calculated to induce a belief of
three things.

1st. That the English form of government has no wisdom in it, and that it is
by no means so constructed as to produce the happiness of the people, which is
the end of all good government.

2d. That monarchy is a form of government inconsistent with the will of God.

3d. That now is the time to break of all connection with Great Britain, and to
declare an independence of the Colonies.

It must be obvious to every impartial eye, that the author reasons from the
abuses of, against the benefits derived from, the English constitution; and
after reciting these abuses concludes, very unfairly, that, "it is incapable to
produce what is seems to promise." -- For if an argument of this sort is to be
received, it will prove perhaps rather more than the author would choose -- it
would even prove that the Jewish theocracy was quite as improper, and as
incapable to produce what it aimed at, as the reprobated English government.
The records of sacred history inform us, that the law was given to the people
from God, and that the great Jehovah himself condescended to call them his
chosen people. He signally interposed in their behalf in bringing them out of
bondage, in preserving them from the rage of Pharoah's army, and seating them
in a land flowing with milk and honey, under his immediate government and laws,
"written with his own finger."

"And he will love thee and bless thee, and multiply thee: he will also bless
the fruit of thy womb and the fruit of thy land, thy corn and thy wine, and thy
oil; the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep, in the land which
he swear unto thy fathers to give thee." Deuteronomy. vii. 13.

"Thou shall be blessed above all people, there shall not be male or female
barren among you, or among your cattle." Deuteronomy. vii. 14.

But what effects did all these extraordinary favors and promises of the Deity
himself produce upon that wicked, perverse, stiff necked people? Moses tells
them,

"From the day that thou did depart out of the land of Egypt until ye came
unto this place, ye have been rebellious against the Lord." Deuteronomy. ix. 7.

"You have been rebellious against the Lord from the day that I knew you. Deuteronomy.
ix. 24.

Profane as well as sacred history informs us of the ineffectuality of the best
governments and the wisest laws among a corrupt, degenerate people. It does not
regularly follow, that if the people are not happy under an excellent form of
civil polity, that the fault is in the government, it may be owing to the
corruption of the people, and this I take to be the case in Great Britain at
this day. When the British parliament is properly balanced, and each branch of
the legislature faithfully executes its duty, I think I am safe in affirming
there was never yet a form of government in the world so well calculated for
the happiness of a free people as this, and yet we are told by the author of
the pamphlet, that the "prejudice of Englishmen in favor of King, Lords and
Commons, arises as much or more from national pride than reason." The world has
already seen numberless instances of fine spun political theories, which, like
the quackeries of mountebank doctors, are to cure all the political evils to
which human nature is liable. -- But when the experiment is made, they become
astonished at the ill success of their boasted schemes -- they find a thousand
little passions and interests continually interfering with their designs, and
at length retire again to their closets, chagrined they had not thought it
necessary to study the great volume of human nature, before they ventured to
say what was the best for mankind.

The author, after venting his spleen against the English form of government,
comes next to consider the subject of monarchy and heriditary succession; in
treating which he plainly discovers the utmost prepossion in favor of a
republic. I shall not follow him through his scripture quotations, which he has
so carefully garbled to answer his purpose, but beg leave to oppose some
authorities to it.

The celebrated Trenchard, in No. 60, of Cato's Letters, says, "There is no
government now upon earth, which owes its formation or beginning to the
immediate revelation of God, or can derive its existence from such revelation:
It is certain, on the contrary, that the rise and institution, or variation of
government, from time to time, is within the memory of men or of histories; and
that every government which we know at this day in the world, was established
by the wisdom and force of mere men, and by the concurrence of causes evidently
human."

"Nor has God by any revelation nominated magistrates, showed the nature or
extent of their powers, or given a plan of civil polity for mankind."
(Hutcheson's Moral Philosophy. p. 272.)

"There being no natural or divine law for any form of government, or that one
person rather than another should have the sovereign administration of affairs,
or have power over many thousand different families who are by nature all
equal, being of the same rank, promiscuously born to the same advantages of
nature, and to the use of the same common faculties, therefore mankind is at
liberty to choose what form of government they like."

"God's providence or permission suffered his own peculiar people the Jews to
be under diverse governments at diverse times; as first under patriarchs.
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. then under judges, Othniel, Ehud and Gideon;
then under highpriests, Eli and Samuel; then under kings, Saul, David and the
rest; then under captains and high priests again, "as Zerobabel, Judas
Maccabeus, and his brethren; and the government was lastly taken from them, and
they brought under the power of Rome. And that God permits such magistrate or
magistrates as the community thinks fit to approve, is plain by the testimony
of Holy Scriptures; when God said to Solomon, "By me kings rule, even all the
judges of the earth." Prove. viii. 16.

"When the sons of Samuel were judges over Israel, they took bribes and
perverted judgment, therefore the elders of Israel desired Samuel to make them
a king; and though the elders are only mentioned to have asked a king of
Samuel, they seem to have been deputed from the whole congregation; for God
said unto Samuel, "Hearken to the voice of the people in all that they say unto
thee." 1 Samuel viii. 4, 7.

"And Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote it in a book,
and laid it up before the Lord. 1 Samuel x. 25. It Is plain the manner of the
kingdom signifies the constitution of the government, by which was meant the
conditions on which Saul was to be king, and they his subjects; for though God
had given him the crown, it was to rule the people according to justice and
laws."

"After the battle between Saul and the Ammonites, Samuel said to the people,
Come, let us go to Gilgal; and there they made Saul king before the Lord. 1 Samuel xi, 1, 5, 6, 7, 14, 15. Now therefore behold the king, whom ye have
chosen, and behold the Lord has set a king over you." Sam. chap. 12. 13.

These latter quotations are taken from the great Lord Sommers's book called
the "Judgment of whole Kingdoms and Nations concerning the Rights of Kings and
the People." This nobleman was Lord high chancellor of England in King
William's reign, and was remarkable for his revolution-principles, great
learning and unshaken integrity, in public and private life.

It does therefore from the foregoing testimonies appear, that monarchy
(specially a limited one, such as that of England) is not inconsistent with the
Holy Scriptures, as is set forth in said pamphlet, but that it is as pleasing
to the Almighty, (...) agreeable to the people, as any other form of
government, even the author's beloved republic.

The writer next proceeds to inform his readers of the numerous wars and scenes
of blood acted in England under their kings, and asserts that "Monarchy and
succession have laid the world in blood and ashes. It Is a form of government
which the word of God bears testimony against, and blood will attend it." Here
are bold assertions indeed. To the latter part I have already endeavored to
make some reply, so far as he asserts it is contrary to the word of God; but
will the author's candor permit him to inform his reader of the infinite
distractions and mischiefs which have happened in the ancient and modern
republics -- Under this form there are always two parties, which divide the
whole body of the people, and an eternal warfare subsists between them for
power. The Contest is dreadful enough, but which soever party prevails, there
is no rod heavy enough, no sword sufficiently sharp, to punish those whom they
have subdued. -- It then becomes a many headed monster, a tyranny of many.

Let any man read with an unprejudiced eye the accounts which historians give
us of the famous Grecian Commonwealths, and I will venture to speak for him,
that he will not bestow great commendations on them. -- The Athenians, a wise
and polished people, very often banished their best citizens, from an
apprehension of their power -- a glorious reward for a virtuous citizen, who,
as was the case in more instances than one, had preserved (...) country from
destruction. In the latter times of the Carthaginian and Roman republics, what
constant scenes of blood and devastation does history present to us -- The
multitude in a perpetual ferment like the ocean in a storm -- In a storm did I
say, -- like the waters of the sea, agitated by a dreadful whirlwind, nothing
but the fury of one party encountering the rage of another. -- Every trace of
humanity being thus lost, men change their natures and become as fierce and
savage as wolves and tigers.

But let us descend nearer to modern times -- let us look for happiness and
security in the republic of Holland, so often mentioned, and so little known --
let us recollect the fate of the two brothers, Cornelius and John de Wit, Dutch
ministers, who were massacred by the people in the year 1672. Holland itself,
from being a republic, is become a downright aristocracy. Liberty did not
continue long in that country, notwithstanding the blood and treasure that were
expended to acquire it. The people, so far from being free, have had no voice
for many years past in the election of persons to represent them in the
States General, nor have they any thing to do in the forming of laws by which
they are to be governed. Whenever one of them dies, the vacancy is filled up
without any interference of the people, and this important change was made in
the state, because of the intolerable feuds and animosities which attended the
elections of representatives. Had they been to have cho^en a king, what
dangerous and destructive tumults must it have produced. Founded on the woeful
experience of ages, it is now become a general fixed opinion, that hereditary
is preferable to elective monarchy, on account of the terrible disorders,
outrages and confusion which usually attend the election of a king; a pregnant
instance of which, in our times, is the kingdom of Poland.

In our own history, we see what was the effect of the much wished for
Commonwealth after the death of the tyrant Charles -- it did not produce
liberty -- it presently ended in arbitrary power. The moment almost after the
reins of government fell from Charles's hands, Cromwell took them up, and
governed the nation with absolute sway.

I cannot agree with the author of the pamphlet in opinion, that this is the
time to declare an independence of the Colonies. This ought to be the dernier
resort of America. Let us not yet lose sight of the primary object of the
dispute, namely, a safe, honorable, and lasting reconciliation with Great
Britain, until we are under a necessity of doing it. If an advantageous
accommodation can be had, and a free constitution for this country be
established on mutual agreement and compact, 'twill be better and happier for
us. But if justice is still denied us, and we are to contend for liberty by
arms, we will meet them i^* the field, and try our manhood against them, even
to spilling the blood of every brave man we have. Should the ministry have
recourse to foreign aid, we may possibly follow their example; and, if it be
essential then to our safety to declare an Independence, I would willingly
embrace the necessity.

RATIONALIS.

FINIS.
CATO's LETTER (being his Second) to the People of PENNSYLAVANIA. On that
reception, which may be proper for BRITISH COMMISSIONERS, who are at present
(March 11th 1776) supposed on their Voyage, to treat with the Honorable, the
American CONTINENTAL CONGRESS. -- With some Observations against American
Independency.
AS I propose to take my subjects as they rise out of the times, I shall leave
to my next letter the further defense of our Assembly, to give room for a
matter of very great importance, agreeable to what was hinted in the conclusion
of my first letter.

The account which we have already received of Commissioners being appointed in
England, and ready to embark for America, in order to negociate a settlement of
the present unhappy differences, has engaged the attention, and exercised the
speculations of many among us. The powers with which they are to be invested,
the manner in which they are to be received, how they are to be treated with,
or whether they are to be treated with at all, have been canvassed agreeably to
the different views or judgments of individuals.

Among others, a writer under the signature of Cassandra, in the Pennsylvania
Evening Post of March fifth, has held forth sentiments which I conceive highly
disgraceful to America, and pernicious to society in general. He pr^tends to
have satisfied himself (but upon what grounds I known not) that the sole view
of administration in this commission, is to amuse and deceive, to bribe and
corrupt us. And because he supposes all of us so very corruptible, he proposes,
by way of prevention, to seize the Commissioners upon their first setting foot
on shore, and bring them immediately, under a strong guard, to the CONGRESS, I
have too good an opinion of the virtue and good sense of my countrymen, to
think they will pay any other regard to this advice, than to consider the
author as an enthusiast or madman.

The contest in which we are engaged is founded on the most noble and virtuous
principles which can animate the mind of man. We are contending, at the risk of
our lives and fortunes, against an arbitrary ministry, for the rights of
Englishmen. The eyes of all Europe are upon us, and every generous bosom, in
which the pulse of liberty yet beats, sympathizes with us, and is interested in
our success. Our cause, therefore, being the cause of virtue, it will be
expected that all our steps should be guided by it, and that where the stock is
so fair, the fruit will be proportionably perfect.

Let us not disappoint these sanguine expectations by the smallest deviation
from those liberal and enlarged sentiments, which should mark the conduct of
freemen; and when the faithful HISTORIC page shall record the events of this
GLORIOUS STRUGGLE, may not a single line in the bright annals be stained by the
recital of a disgraceful action, nor future Americans have cause to blush for
the failings of their ancestors.

I trust that there is not such another barbarian among us as Cassandra. I am
sure there are none such among our savage neighbors. To what is it that he
would persuade us? To receive with contempt, and treat with insult, men
commissioned to negociate with us about matters of the highest concern to
America, and at least professing peace -- Persons clothed with the character
of Ambassadors, which has been uniformly esteemed sacred by every nation and in
every age!

Can a precedent be produced in any country or at any period which could be
proposed for our imitation, or give countenance to such a proceeding? Let this
writer turn over the volumes which establish the principles of the Law of
Nations. Let him search the history of every state both ancient and modern,
civilized and uncivilized; he will find none so fierce and rude as not to
reverence the rights of Ambassadors, and consider any insult of their persons
as the grossest outrage that could be committed. Nay, let him enquire among the
numerous tribes of Indians that surround our frontiers, for some example to
countenance him in his proposal? These untutored savages would startle at the
question, and wonder that there could be a person so ignorant as not to know
that public messengers, with the CALUMET in their hands, are entitled to
audience, respect and hospitality. And shall Americans, glorying in their
attachment to the rights of humanity, be the first to violate obligations which
have been thus universally held sacred? No! Let us never give that advantage to
those who have been striving to excite the indignation of mankind against us as
faithless people, ferocious, barbarous, and uninfluenced by those humane
sentiments and finer feelings, which, in modern times, have, in some measure,
softened the horrors of war. We know that such a charge is as malicious as it
is groundless. Instances enough might be produced to refute it, since this
contest was carried on by arms; and I trust no future ones will be found which
might have a tendency to support it.

As we have long professed an ardent desire of peace, let us meet those who
bring the terms, with that virtuous confidence, which is inseparable from an
upright conduct. Let us hear their proposals with patience, and consider them
with candor; remembering how deeply the happiness of millions may be concerned
in the issue. If what they offer be such as freemen ought to accept, my voice
shall be for an immediate reconciliation; as I know of no object so worthy of a
patriot as the healing our wounds, and the restoring of peace, if it has for
its basis an effectual security for the liberties of America. If on the
contrary, the terms, which may be offered, should be such as we cannot accept,
we have only to say so, and the negotiation will be at an end.

But this writer is greatly concerned for our virtue, lest we should be
cajoled, deceived, and corrupted. I confess these fancies appear to me so
groundless, that I suspect their reality. Is it possible, in good earnest to
entertain so ill an opinion of those, who have staked their lives and fortunes
on this contest, as to believe that they will suffer themselves to be flattered
out of their liberties, or induced to sell their birthright for a mess of
pottage?

When I consider that this treaty is to be managed, on the part of America, by
men delegated for their integrity and abilities by the voice of their country,
I feel myself quite easy on that score. If the scheme of the ministry be to try
the arts of corruption, where their arms cannot prevail, there are other and
less suspicious ways of carrying it into execution, than by Commissioners, in
the face of America, where they will have the eyes of all fixed upon them, and
their conduct diligently watched and severely scrutinized.

Upon the whole, it appears that this writer is more an enemy to the business
on which the Commissioners are to be sent than really apprehensive ^or our
virtue. He seems to have drank deep of the cup of independency; to be inimical
to whatever carries the appearance of peace; and too ready to sacrifice the
happiness of a great Continent to his favorite plan. Among such writers I
pretend not to class myself; for I am bold to declare, and hope yet to make it
evident to every honest man, that the true interest of America lies in
reconciliation with Great Britain, upon constitutional principles, and I can
truly say, I wish it upon no other terms.

Why the many publications in favor of independency, with which our presses
have lately groaned, have passed hitherto unnoticed, I am not able to
determine. But there are certainly times when public affairs become so
interesting, that every man becomes a debtor to the community for his opinions,
either in speaking or writing. Perhaps it was thought best, where an appeal was
pretended to be made to the COMMON SENSE of this country, to leave the people
for a while to the free exercise of that good understanding which they are
known to possess. Those who made the appeal have little cause to triumph in its
success. Of this they seem sensible; and, like true quacks are constantly
pestering us with their additional doses, till the stomachs of their patients
begin wholly to revolt. If little notice has yet been taken of the publications
concerning, independence, it is neither owing to the popularity of the
doctrine, the unanswerable nature of the arguments, nor the fear of opposing
them, as the vanity of the authors would suggest. I am confident, that
nine-tenths of the people of Pennsylvania, yet abhor the doctrine.

If we look back to the origin of the present controversy, it will appear that
some among us at least, have been constantly enlarging their views, and
stretching them beyond their first bounds, till at length they have wholly
changed their ground. From the claim of Parliament to tax us, sprung the first
resistance on our part. Before that unjust claim was set on foot, not an
individual, not one of all the profound legislators with which this country
abounds, ever held out the idea of independence. We considered our connection
with Great Britain as our chief happiness -- we flourished, grew rich, and
populous, to a degree not to be paralleled in history. Let us then act the part
of skilful phisicians, and wisely adapt the remedy to the evil.

Possibly some men may have harbored the idea of independence from the
beginning of this controversy. Indeed it was strongly suspected there were
individuals whose views tended that way; but as the scheme was not sufficiently
ripened, it was reckoned slanderous, inimical to America, and what not, to
intimate the least suspicion of this kind.

Nor have many weeks yet elapsed since the first open proposition for
independence was published to the world. -- By what men of consequence this
scheme is supported, or whether by any, may possibly be the subject of future
enquiry. -- Certainly it has no countenance from the Congress, to whose
sentiments we look up with reverence. On the contrary, it is directly repugnant
to every declaration of that respectable body. It would be needless to quote
particular passages in proof of this, as they are to be met with in almost
every page of their proceedings. I will refer to a few only, viz. their
Resolves, March 5, 1775 -- their Declaration, July 6. -- their Address to the
King, July 8 -- their Letter to the Lord Mayor of London -- and more especially
their Declaration for a fast, June 12, in which with the deepest marks of
sincerity they call upon all America to join with them in addressing the great
Governor of the World -- humbly beseeching him to avert the desolating
judgments with which we are threatened, to bless our rightful Sovereign, etc.
-- that so America may soon behold a gracious interposition of Heaven for the
redress of her many grievances, the restoration of her invaded rights, and
reconciliation with the parent state, on terms constitutional and honorable to
both.

Will any one be so hardy as to say, that either the appointment or observation
of this solemn day was a mere mockery of Heaven and earth, or even that any
American joined in it, who was not sincere? -- I trust not. But if multiplying
authorities were of any use, I might add the sentiments of our own
representatives in assembly expressed in the instructions to their Delegates;
the sentiments of Maryland in similar instructions; the Resolves of New Jersey
and New Hampshire; nor shall the much injured province of Massachusetts Bay be
left out of the catalogue, whose Provincial Congress, while yet bleeding with
the wounds received at Lexington, thus addressed the inhabitants of Great
Britain -- These are marks of ministerial vengeance against this Colony, but
they have not yet detached us from our royal Sovereign, etc. trusting that in a
constitutional connection with the mother country, we shall soon be a free and
happy people. These were the sentiments of the Colony of the Massachusetts,
signed by that great Martyr to Liberty, Dr. WARREN, and soon after sealed with
his blood.

The sentiments of sundry other Colonies might be shown to have corresponded
with these. -- But this letter has already reached its full length. I shall
take some future opportunity to examine^ the arguments which have been offered
to induce a change of these sentiments; and upon the whole I doubt not to make
it appear that independence is not the cause in which America is now engaged,
and is only the idol of those who wish to subvert all order among us, and rise
on the ruins of their country!

CATO.
PHILADELPHIA, March 11th, 1776.
Just printed and published, at the desire of several Members of the Honorable
the Continental Congress, and some of the Military Officers of the Association,
and is now selling By ROBERT BELL, Printer in Third street, (Price Three
Dollars, two volumes, in neat bindings.)

THE MILITARY GUIDE FOR YOUNG OFFICERS, by THOMAS SIMES, Esquire. This work is a
large and valuable compilation from the most celebrated military writer^ --
Marshal Saxe -- General Bland -- King of Prussia -- Prince Ferdinand, etc. etc.
Containing the experience of many brave heroes in critical situations, for the
use of young warriors; including an excellent military, historical and
explanatory DICTIONARY. To which is now added, extracts from a military essay,
containing reflections on the raising, arming, clothing and discipline of the
British infantry and cavalry. By Campbell Dairymple, Esquire Lieutenant Colonel to
the King's own regiment of dragoons. The whole is illustrated with Eleven
Copper Plates.

Extract, from the Journal of the proceedings of the honorable the American
Continental Congress, held at Philadelphia, September fifth 1774.
Being that part of their Address to the Inhabitants of the Province of Quebec,
which enumerates, the glorious RIGHTS of Englishmen, and English subjects:
Among which are included, THE LIBERTY OF THE PRESS. The Committee, to whom the
Address to the Inhabitants of Quebec was recommitted; reported a draught, which
was read, and being debated by Paragraphs and amended, was approved, and is as
follows.

TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE PROVINCE OF QUEBEC.
Friends and Fellow Subjects,
"WE, the DELEGATES of the Colonies of New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay,
Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, the Counties of Newcastle Kent and Sussex on Delaware, Maryland,
Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina, deputed by the inhabitants of the
said Colonies to represent them in a general Congress at Philadelphia, in the
province of Pennsylvania, to consult together concerning the best methods to
obtain redress of our afflicting grievances, having accordingly assembled, and
taken into our most serious consideration the state of public affairs on this
continent, have thought proper to address your province, as a member therein
deeply interested."

"When the fortune of war, after a gallant and glorious resistance, had
incorporated you with the body of English subjects, we rejoiced in the truly
valuable addition, both on our own and your account; expecting, as courage and
generosity are naturally united, our brave enemies would become our hearty
friends, and that the Divine Being would bless to you the dispensations of his
overruling providence, by securing to you and your latest posterity the
inestimable advantages of a free English constitution of government, which it
is the privilege of all English subjects to enjoy."

"These hopes were confirmed by the King's proclamation, issued in the year
1763, plighting the public faith for your full enjoyment of those advantages."

"Little did we imagine that any succeeding ministers would so audaciously and
cruelly abuse the royal authority, as to withhold from you the fruition of the
irrevocable rights, to which you were thus justly entitled."

"But since we have lived to see the unexpected time, when ministers of this
flagitious temper have dared to violate the most sacred compacts and
obligations, and as you, educated under another form of government, have
artfully been kept from discovering the unspeakable worth of that form you are
now undoubtedly entitled to, we esteem it our duty, for the weighty reason
herein after mentioned, to explain to you some of its most important branches."

"In every human society," says the celebrated Marquis Beccaria, "there is an
effort, continually tending to confer on one part the height of power and
happiness, and to reduce the other to the extreme of weakness and misery. The
intent of good laws is to oppose this effort, and to diffuse their influence
universally and equally."

Rulers, stimulated by this pernicious effort, and subjects, animated by the
just "intent of opposing good laws against it," have occasioned that vast
variety of events, that fill the histories of so many nations. All these
histories demonstrate the truth of this simple position, that to live by the
will of one man, or set of men, is the production of misery to all men."

"On the solid foundation of this principle, Englishmen reared up the fabric
of their constitution with such a strength, as for ages to defy time, tyranny,
treachery, internal and foreign wars: And as an illustrious author
(Montesquieu) of your nation, hereafter mentioned, observes, -- "they gave the
people of their colonies the form of their own government, and this government
carrying prosperity along with it, they have grown great nations in the forests
they were sent to inhabit."

"In this form, the first grand right is that of the people having a share in
their own government by their representatives chosen by themselves, and, in
consequence, of being ruled by laws, which they themselves approve, not by
edicts of men over whom they have no control. This is a bulwark surrounding
and defending their property, which by their honest cares and labors they have
acquired, so that no portions of it can legally be taken from them, but with
their own full and free consent, when they in their judgment deem it just and
necessary to give them for public services, and precisely direct the easiest,
cheapest, and most equal methods, in which they shall be collected."

"The influence of this right extends still farther. If money is wanted by
rulers who have in any manner oppressed the people, they may retain it, until
their grievances are redressed, and thus peaceably procure relief, without
trusting to despised petitions, or disturbing the public tranquillity."

"The next great right is that of trial by jury. This provides, that neither
life, liberty nor property can be taken from the possessor, until twelve of his
unexceptionable countrymen and peers, of his vicinage, who from that
neighborhood may reasonably be supposed to be acquainted with his character,
and the characters of the witnesses, upon a fair trial, and full enquiry face
to face, in open court, before as many of the people as choose to attend, shall
pass their sentence upon oath against him; a sentence that cannot injure him,
without injuring their own reputation, and probably their interest also; as the
question may turn on points that, in some degree, concern the general welfare;
and if it does not, their verdict may form a precedent, that, on a similar
trial of their own, may militate against themselves."

"Another right relates merely to the liberty of the person. If a subject is
seized and imprisoned, though by order of government, he may, by virtue of this
right, immediately obtain a writ, termed a Habeas Corpus, from a judge, whose
sworn duty it is to grant it, and thereupon procure any illegal restraint to be
quickly enquired into and redressed."

"A fourth right is that of holding lands by the tenure of easy rents, and not
by rigorous and oppressive services, frequently forcing the possessors from
their families and their business, to perform what ought to be done, in all
well regulated states, by men hired for the purpose."

"The last right, we shall mention, regards the freedom of the press. The
importance of this consists, besides the advancement of truth, science,
morality, and arts in general, in its diffusion of liberal sentiments on the
administration of government, its ready communication of thoughts between
subjects, and its consequential promotion of union among them, whereby
oppressive officers are shamed or intimidated into more honorable and just
modes of conducting affairs."

"These are the invaluable rights, that form a considerable part of our mild
system of government; that, sending its equitable energy through all ranks and
classes of men, defends the poor from the rich, the weak from the powerful, the
industrious from the rapacious, the peaceable from the violent, the tenants
from the lords, and all from their superiors."

"These are the rights, without which a people cannot be free and happy, and
under the protecting and encouraging influence of which, these colonies have
hitherto so amazingly flourished and increased. These are the rights, a
profligate ministry are now striving, by force of arms, to ravish from us, and
which we are, with one mind, resolved never to resign but with our lives."

"THESE ARE THE RIGHTS, YOU ARE ENTITLED TO, AND OUGHT AT THIS MOMENT IN
PERFECTION TO EXERCISE."

ADDITIONS TO PLAIN TRUTH; ADDRESSED TO THE INHABITANTS OF AMERICA, Containing,
further Remarks ON A LATE PAMPHLET, entitled COMMON SENSE; WHEREIN, Are clearly
and fully shown, that American Independence, is as illusory, ruinous, and
impracticable, as a liberal reconciliation with Great Britain, is safe,
honorable, and expedient.

WRITTEN BY THE AUTHOR OF PLAIN TRUTH.

The enjoyment of Liberty, and even its support and preservation, consists, in
every man's being allowed to speak his thoughts, and lay open his sentiments.
Quotation of the American Congress, in their Address to the Inhabitants of
Quebec, from that friend to Mankind, MONTESQUIEU. PHILADELPHIA: Printed, and
Sold, by R. BELL, in Third-Street. MDCCLXXVI.

ADDITIONS TO PLAIN TRUTH: CONTAINING, Further Remarks on a late PAMPHLET,
entitled COMMON SENSE.
THE writer of PLAIN TRUTH, grieved at the insidious purpose of the Pamphlet,
entitled COMMON SENSE, ardently wished to see its Antichristian tenets exposed
to public detestation. After in vain, waiting several weeks in expectation of
its being answered, he at length hastily endeavored to refute its pernicious
doctrines; and therefore wishes the judicious reader to pe^^se the following
observations, intended as additional to his former remarks.

In our former observations, we intimated that many pages might be filled with
encomiums on our excellent constitution, by illustrious authors of different
nations. We hope the candid reader will be gratified with the following
extracts on that subject, by that universal genius Voltaire, and by the almost
inspired Montesquieu, so honorably distinguished by our respectable Congress.

"The English nation are the only people on earth, who, resisting prerogative,
happily restrained it: Who, by efforts to efforts, at length established that
wise government, where the Prince all powerful to do good, has his hands tied
from doing evil; where the nobility great without insolence, and vassals, and
where the people partake the government without confusion. The House of Peers
and House of Commons are the arbitrators of the nation; the King is the umpire.
This balance was wanting to the Romans; the Patricians and people were always
divided at Rome, without a mitigating power to reconcile them. The Senate of
Rome, who had the unjust and punishable pride to share no part of their power
with the Plebeians, knew no other secret to remove them from government, than
to employ them continually in foreign wars; they regarded the people, as a
beast of prey, whom it was necessary to let loose on their neighbors, least he
should tear his master. Thus, the greatest fault of the government of the
Romans made them conquerors; it was, because they were wretched at home, that
they conquered the world."

Montesquieu also affirms that "the British government is the wisest in Europe,
because, there is a body which examines it perpetually, and is perpetually
examining itself; and its errors are of such a nature, as never to be lasting,
and are frequently useful by rousing the attention of the nation." In short,
the man who in preference to these authorities, and the testimony of ages, can
believe our author's criminal assertions against the constitution, in our very
humble opinion, is incapable of being reasoned with.

The reader, often accustomed to hear our numbers exaggerated, will with
surprise be told, that the free people in the British Colonies do not exceed
1,500,000.

The writer of Common Sense, and his partisans, to promote their flagitious
purposes, endeavor to make the world believe, that the number of our free
people amount to three millions. These persons who have so excellent a knack of
creating armies, and navies, suppose 900,000 people in Virginia and Maryland,
although these provinces only contain 280,000 white people.

By examining, the list of taxables in Virginia and Maryland, and the
battalions now on foot in these provinces, such, as doubt our computations, may
satisfy themselves, that we are not widely mistaken. If I am told that 72
counties are included in Virginia and Maryland, I reply, that they do not
comprehend half the number of people contained in Yorkshire. The number of
white people therefore in the different provinces, may be truly stated in the
following manner; in the southern colonies, 450,000, in the middle colonies,
550,000, in the New England colonies, 500,000. Thus extensively disjoined,
these numbers form not so great a national strength, as would half that number
united in a compact territory. Now, a state, containing 1,500,000 people,
cannot prudently keep up more than 15,000 soldiers. A person possessed of L
1000 may indeed for some time display the expense of him seized of L 1000
yearly revenue, but he will affect such imprudent parade at the expense of his
ruin. On such, and no other principle, may a community of 1,500,000 arm more
than 15,000 men.

When by the lust of his ambition, Lewis the Fourteenth was constrained to
defend himself against his redoubtable adversaries, despotic as he was, he
never at once brought into the field one tenth part of his subjects capable of
bearing arms. If he had, his kingdom had been forever undone, seeing the loss
sustained by an army, even in an inactive campaign, is indeed almost
incredible. Least those more zealous than informed, doubt these simple truths,
we here subjoin the opinion of that friend of mankind, Montesquieu; who,
reflecting on the cause of the rise and fall of the Roman Empire; observes,
"that experience has perpetually shown, that an European Prince, who has a
million of subjects, cannot without destroying himself, keep up and maintain
above ten thousand soldiers, consequently, great nations only are possessed of
Armies. Let the reader judge how this corresponds with the writer of Common
Sense; who asserts, "that it is a matter worthy of observation, that the more a
country is peopled, the smaller their armies are."
"It is observed (continues the same author) that the immoderate labor which
soldiers are obliged to undergo, destroys our armies."

I would ask those who assert we are to be aided by France and Spain, on what
assurance do they ground their hopes of such assistance? Did Britain retain
Manilla, Havanna, Martinico, Guadaloupe, or Belleisle? Did Britain interfere in
the conquest of Corsica? Did she take part directly or indirectly with the
subjects of France, when late in revolt in the rich island of St. Domingo,
commonly called Hispaniola? Did not Great Britain with incorruptible integrity
adhering to the spirit of her treaties with France, r^^fuse to aid these
islanders, though more than once solicited and IMPORTUNED by them for that end?
Has France recovered the tone of her power, weakened by so many signal defeats?
Are not her finances in deep disorder, and likely so to continue for many
years? Did not these weighty considerations lately retain France from
succouring the Turks, though brought to the verge of perdition by the victories
of Russia? The Turks, her ancient natural allies, whose very beneficial
commerce she almost exclusively enjoyed; a commerce more valuable than that she
could carry on with us, were we raised to independence by her power.

Circumstanced as France and Spain are, would they not act extremely
impolitically to aid or create a civil war in the dominions of Britain? Such
procedure on the part of France would probably again rouse the martial ambition
of the proud islanders, so as to recall to her memory the age of Henry the 5th.
or the delivery of Dunkirk to Cromwell. Montesquieu very justly remarks, "that
no state threatens its neighbors with conquest so much as that which is
involved in the horrors of civil war: In such a season, the nobility, the
citizens, the artizans, the peasants, and in short the whole body of the people
become soldiers." Can we believe that the Sovereigns of France and Spain,
charmed with our author's encomiums on monarchs and monarchy, will in gratitude
raise him to his beloved, his passionately desired protectorship? Let us
however suppose that these monarchs jealous of the power of England, would
gladly depress her, even at the certain price of creating in the independent
states of America, a very dangerous power to their colonies. Let us next
examine the probable consequences. In such war, Holland, perhaps Denmark, and
Russia, would take part with their natural ally, Great Britain. It is indeed
incumbent on these powers to preserve, inviolate the British power in America
and the West Indies, which alone maintains the stability of the political
balance in Europe. It consequently will behoove France and Spain to arm with
the utmost vigor, which cannot be effected at less annual expense than fifteen
millions sterling to each of the said belligerents. Now should this war prove
unsuccessful on the part of Great Britain, we cannot imagine that it will
terminate, ever many bloody fields are lost and won; I say, it probably will
not end in less than 10 years. This war therefore would cost to France and
Spain at least 300 millions sterling, and consequently 3, 4, or 500,000
subjects. -- Methinks I hear the writer of Common Sense exclaim, Britain
divested of her American commerce, cannot so long maintain war. I would remind
him that Britain and Ireland contain nearly ten millions of people. If
therefore there is the least foundation in his assertion "that the diminution
of trade creates an army, and the necessities of an army create a trade," the
candid reader will surely allow that Great Britain may arm and maintain a most
redoubtable army, possessed of nearly a million of manufacturers (according to
our author, and his congenial frantic declamators) in danger of starving. Let
us suppose that in the course of this war, unhappily for mankind the glory of
Great Britain is stained by repeated disgraces and defeats, and that she is
forever stripped of her colonies, who become independent.

Ye that are not dead to humanity and every generous emotion of the human
heart, feel ye not compassion for human kind destroyed in these bloody scenes?
Do ye feel no remorse for the ruin of the British empire, the scourge of
tyrants, the protector of nations and our sacred religion? are ye not petrified
with horror, indignation and amazement, when informed, that a principal cause
of such bloody and ever deplorable scenes is the restless ambition of the
writer of Common Sense and his partisans: impelled I say by their turbulent
ambition to anticipate an event which the fullness of time would probably
produce without bloodshed

Here let us pause, and dispassionately examine the advantages accruing to
France and Spain from the expenditure of so much blood, so much treasure. These
advantage^ we must heartily resolve into humiliation to Great Britain, and
eventual and final rui^^ to their colonies.

"But our commerce (says the author o^ Common Sense) our commerce will repay
them." Famed as we are for gratitude, I sincerely believe that France and Spain
may securely rely on exclusively enjoying our commerce for ages, many ages.
After this sacrifice to truth, I must however acknowledge, that were we to
present those powers with the total of our produce for two centuries to come,
we should not nearly repay to those powers, the said expenditure of blood and
treasure. Let us now view the other side. If we consider the powerful efforts
Britain has heretofore made to support Austria, and the balance of power in
Europe, we may readily imagine the stupendous efforts she will perform to save
herself from impending destruction. Her navies covering the ocean would rapidly
destroy the fleets of her enemies. France and Spain overwhelmed with the
destruction of their commerce and colonies, like a tree stripped of of its
branches, would pine and languish. Soon would they again implore Britain for
peace. -- The French and Spanish colonies once more, and perhaps forever would
receive laws from Britain. The very fertile island of Hispaniola, of much more
value than all the British islands, only awaits a summons to surrender to Great
Britain. OPPRESSED BY EVERY SPECIES OF DESPOTISM, the planters of Hispaniola
lately flew to arms, but alas! were defeated by the regular troops of their
arbitrary Prince. Those rich planters being in the vicinity of Jamaica, are
charmed with the felicity of the British subjects, and languish to partake the
happiness of the British constitution. The surrender of this island (and its
reduction would be infallible) would afford to Great Britain as real a monopoly
of sugar and indigo, as the Dutch possess of the spice trade. Britain by moral
and physical causes habituated to glory, would rapidly prevail, and
triumphantly returning to our devoted shores. -- I draw a veil over the event.
Is it not a melancholy symptom that many, too many respectable persons in the
colonies have attended to our "visionary's tale of foreign aid? Is it not
humiliating to consider, that such persons have been misled by our would be
protector."

Can we be so credulous to believe what our author has asserted about our
creating a navy, etc.? We are not ignorant that Spain enjoys more commerce than
the colonies, consequently more seamen than America. We are not uninformed that
Spain possessed of Mexico and Peru (mines not indeed so easily worked as our
very valuable paper mines) would purchase seamen, if unhappily for the peace of
mankind, gold could purchase sailors; perhaps only to be obtained in Britain or
Holland. -- This our assertion is expressly confirmed by the friend of mankind
Montesquieu, who says, "in this age, the whole life of a prince is scarce
sufficient for the raising and equipping a navy capable to make head against a
power already possessed of the empire of the sea." This perhaps may be the only
thing which MONEY CANNOT EFFECT. I apprehend that this very excellent
authority, independent of our humble reasons, will assuredly evince, to every
candid reader, that in our days we cannot form a navy to contend with the pride
and mistress of the main. If the writer of Common Sense is still inflexibly
bent on building a navy, I advise him to construct it on his native plains of
the moon. -- There, indeed may it defy the power of Great Britain, which alas!
it cannot brave on the Blue mountains, or any other part of British America.
Seriously, the man's judgment must be strangely depraved who can give the least
faith to our visionry's navy, and his other rhodomontades!

I apprehend that our planters, farmers, and others, who cannot obtain a
shilling for wheat, who in barter for two bushels of that article, cannot
acquire one bushel of SALT; who cannot procure other articles almost
indispensibly necessary to life; I say, such persons, as well as every other
rank of inhabitants, will, I dread soon experimentally find, that the writer of
Common Sense has insulted their understanding, in bantering them about their
grain selling, "while eating is the custom in Europe," concerning a navy and
such like extravagancies.

We have already observed, that our author remarks, "that commerce diminishes
both the spirit of patriotism and military defense." The eloquent Ferguson
treating of the most respectaable nations of antiquity, has the following
observation.

They granted quarter only to enslave, or to bring the prisoner to a more
solemn execution; and an enemy when disarmed, was for the most part, either
sold in the market or killed, that he might never return to strengthen his
party. When this was the issue of war, it was no wonder that battles were
fought with desperation, and that every fort^ess was defended to the last
extremity. The game of human life went upon a high stake, and was played with a
proportional zeal. To the military spirit of defense were mankind indebted for
such detestable manners. Can any reasonable being therefore, wish for
independence at this time, which effectually destroying our commerce and our
agreeable manners, would without all doubt plunge us into br^tality and the
grossest barbarism.


The Hottentots, the people (if they may be so called) of Kamchatka, of
Greenland, and a considerable part of Siberia, know not commerce. They are as
remarkable no doubt for patriotism, as elegance of manners. The Algerin^^s* and
other pirates of Barbary, the numerous tribes of Arabs, the many hords of
Tartars, have no other commerce than robbery and murder. They indeed possess
the genuine spirit of military defense, and doubtless therefore are excellent
patriots. The natives of Florida, and New Zealand, who ravenously feed on human
flesh, have no idea of commerce. I cannot indeed of my own knowledge say much
of their patriotism, though they certainly possess the true spirit of military
defense in its native colors. I believe our honest Indian neighbors are
unskilled in commerce, though acquainted with the mode of broiling prisoners, and
well versed in the spirit of military defense. With the utmost submission, do I
propose to the real author of Common Sense, and his votaries of the true
military spirit of defense, and to him who lately so learnedly arraigned
luxury; I say, with entire deference do I propose to those worthies to pass the
remainder of their precious lives amidst these humane nations, and enjoy
patriotism, and the true spirit of military defense undefiled by commerce,
undebased by luxury.

I do not mean to expose the many absurdities with which the misled public has
too long been deluged by many of our deluded and deluding writers. I shall
however remark, that we are unacquainted with the West India Islands, if we
believe that they solely depend on us for provisions and lumber. In Jamaica,
flour is perhaps an article of luxury, and as bread, is rather inferior to
plantains, with which that island amply abounds. Jamaica also produces large
quantities of the best Indian corn on earth, and without injuring the sugar
canes, in the intervals or rows of which it is planted, and arrives at maturity
before the canes become so vigorous as to demand much nourishment from the
earth. Large quantities of yams and other ground provisions are there also
produced. An hundredth part of mountainous Jamaica is not cultivated in sugar
canes: that island consequently affords plenty of timber for hogshead staves:
Puncheon staves may be obtained from Hamburgh, from Canada, or Mississipi, from
which last colony, several of the French islands were plentifully supplied with
lumber.

Ever since the settlement of the French in Hispaniola, nine tenths of their
sugars have been shipped in hogsheads made of wood the growth of that island.
-- If it is said that the windward islands (particularly Barbados) are
destitute of the resources peculiar to Jamaica, I reply that it were perhaps
advantageous for the Barbadians to remove from their worn out island In 1772,
25000 hogsheads of sugar were shipped from Grenada; and in that year, 5000
hogsheads only from Barbad^^^.
a considerable number of their slaves to the newly ceded islands, or to
Jamaica, where their labor would probably turn to better account than in their
island demanding rest to recover its pristine fertility. As large quantities of
rum and other produce formerly wont to be consumed in America will now be sent
to Britain, it will effectually prevent the distilling of spirituous liquors
from grain which will answer many happy consequences to that kingdom and her
islands. In fine, were it possible for the present unhappy convulsions to
continue for two or three years, I do verily believe Great Britain would be
highly advantaged by forever prohibiting intercourse between those colonies and
her islands -- nor is it probable Britain would omit this politic measure. I
know it will be re-echoed that the West India islands cannot do without
America. The contrary is nevertheless true. Most assuredly Britain is as
capable to support her islands, as is France, whose islands as we have already
observed are much more considerable, consequently require larger supplies.

Since the publication of my first remarks on Common Sense, I have seen an
appendix to i^, which I am inclined to think the production of the PUTATIVE,
rather than the real author.

We know that the author of Common Sense for some time past has been anxiously
busied in negociating a match between Mademoisele Borgio, a descendant of Pope
Alexander the sixth, vulgarly called the Scarlet Who^e of Babylon, and a great
grandson of John Calvin. It is moreover over rumoured, that accompanied with a
PRIEST, he is gone to an estate late the grand monarch's, to celebrate the
nuptials. The true descendants of John Calvin and John Knox, even at this time
trembling for the consequences, dread this alliance: Nay, we ourselves are
sensible of her coquetry, to give it no harsher epithet, and really apprehend
the deceitful hussy will jilt him. The author of the Appendix, or rather
Summary of the pamphlet called Common Sense, says, "that America has a large
and young family, whom it is more her duty to take care of, than be granting
away her property, etc. I most ardently wish that her family were all well
employed, and that it did not comprehend this author, and too many of his cast,
who were better employed in mauling rails, than teizing their distressed parent
to take care of them.

"In support of independency adds this author, I could if I judged it proper,
produce some of the ablest and most experienced men on this continent, and
whose sentiments on that head are not yet publicly known. We lament he had not
judged it proper to favor the public with the names of his able and
experienced men who wish their country plunged into every species of misery.

In the Pamphlet, the author speaks of the trade by which America has enriched
herself. In the Appendix it is said, America does not yet know what opulence
is. This is surely contradictory. "Because, that it is the interest of America
to be separated from Britain, because it will come to that one time or other;
because the longer it is delayed, the harder it will be to accomplish." This is
devoid even of the semblance of truth, and no man in his senses can believe it.
Let us however for argument sake admit it. Are we to precipitate ourselves into
ruinous measures, because our remote descendants are to be involved in war? We
may honestly answer no; whatever political quacks allege to the contrary in
support of their criminal designs. If an assembly of 100 oppulent persons were
told that according to human affairs it were a million to one, that none of
their descendants one or two thousand years hence would possess one shilling of
their property, would they do well to afflict themselves? Surely not. In fine,
existing a moment between two eternities, our designs are frail as ourselves.

"The continent (says the author) by that time would not have had a general, or
even a military officer left; and we, or those who may succeed* us, would have
been as ignorant of martial affairs, as the ancient Indians: and this single
position closely attended to, will unanswerably prove, that the present time is
preferable to all others." Here I do the author justice to suppose, that he
really means to joke. If he is in earnest, his invention is rather fertile; for
I can safely say, that he has adduced a reason for arming, which no one else
would have thought of. I believe my countrymen, who last war carried arms, will
heartily own, that had we no better reason for taking up arms than that just
assigned, we very safely might postpone the war 50 or 100 years longer. If our
troops gathered laurels, the Britons also acquired glory. Certain I am, that
our experienced officers will most cheerfully allow, that the additional number
of 150 or 200,000 men, (which additional number, in that remote period, the
continent will at least possess) would be an EQUIVALENT for their military
skill. Why may not our descendants then expect foreign generals? Will not
soldiers of fortune then have stronger inducements to explore military fame and
fortune than at present? Why may not our youthful descendants courting glory in
the well fought fields of Europe, return with laurels, and instruct their
countrymen to acquire honor and fame in defending America. The author of the
Appendix next remarks, "that the value of the back lands which some of the
provinces are clandestinely deprived of, by the unjust extension of the limits
of Canada, valued only at five pounds sterling per hundred acres, amount to
upwards of twenty five millions, Pennsylvania currency, and the quit-rents at
one penny sterling per acre, to two millions sterling."

"It is by the sale of those lands that the debt may be sunk, without burden
to any, and the quit-rent reserved thereon, will always lessen, and in time,
will wholly support the yearly expense of government. It matters not ^ow long
the debt is in paying, so that the lands when sold be applied to the discharge
of it, and for the execution of which, the Congress for the time being, will be
the continental trustees." This is perhaps the most glaring insult ever offered
to mankind, and as he evidently means to betray the cause he pretends to serve,
I will therefore cheerfully detect his duplicity. First, I observe that his
back lands are only 480 millions of acres, or a territory BUT 82 times larger
than Pennsylvania, which comprehends all the space, even to the polar circle
(land or seas of ice matters not to him) three fourths of which will forever
remain a dreadful desert. I am not ignorant that our author will allege the
precession of the equinoxes, which in the course of a million of years, by
changing every climate on earth, may render his back lands habitable. Secondly,
this project of his back lands will exterminate every Indian in North America;
nor can this assertion be thought rash if we remember the RESPECT with which
our frontier settlers very generally treat their Indian neighbors. Now such
murderous ambition is rather too barefaced in our statesman so conversant in
scripture, in justice, and our NATURAL RIGHTS. Thirdly, the habitable part of
our author's provinces, will not be peopled (if ever) in less than 1000 or 1500
years. China, by every cause, is as favorable to population as any region or
empire on earth. Yet does it not contain one twentieth part of the inhabitants
our provinces ARE to comprehend in the short space of one or two centuries. In
fine, there is no example on earth of such population. War, famine, and
pestilence will ever prevent it. Mankind ever were and ever will be the same.
Nor does Providence seem solicitous to crowd the earth with inhabitants, else
such amazing numbers of human kind would not perish in infancy, and every stage
of life, as well by natural and acquired maladies, as by their passions rousing
them to war, and deluding them a prey to the accursed ambition of designing
leaders. Let us however admit those ridiculous tales about population are
realized. Can we believe that our numerous descendants will be happier than
their less numerous ancestors? I reply we dare not believe it. I have not the
least doubt that modern Rome with her priests and violins, is not happier than
ancient Rome with her triumphs, seditions, and proscriptions. Now will any
reasonable person pretend to deny that the APPENDIX STATESMAN does not mean to
stab our credit by telling the public creditors, that they are to have
unexplored, uninhabitable wilds, or seas of ice as a pledge for money? Will any
one affirm that the proffered security is in any degree preferable to the
planet Saturn?

Well does he know, that only naming such security to the monied men is an
effectual method of shutting their purses. "It matters not (continues the
appendix writer) how long the debt is in paying, etc." Our author's sincerity
on this head, I most sincerely believe.

The author more than once mentions, "the sufferers, whose all is already gone,
and the soldier who has quitted his all for the defense of his country." I say,
he attempts to terrify us with those who have no fortunes but their SWORDS. I
have already expressed my ardent wishes, that Britain, and those provinces may
effectually commiserate the unfortunate situation of the unhappy sufferers.
Surely those soldiers, who on principles of virtue and glory defend their
country; will, on the reestablishment of peace, cheerfully return to their
families and avocations. Most certainly, the reader will not be bullied by such
impotent menaces, but will readily perceive the true cause of our author's
aversion to conciliatory measures, viz. that in such case he would no longer be
able to fish in troubled waters; that peace would reduce him and his associates
to their native insignificance. Peace does not suit such men: Anarchy and war
-- civil war is their grand resource: They know, and perfectly agree with
Swift, "that in party as in had wine, the DREGS always mount highest."

"But if it were, says our author, and even should be granted (that is our
former happy situation) I ask as a reasonable question, by what means is a
corrupt and faithless court to be kept to its engagements?" Would not one
imagine he is speaking of the court of Lewis the 14th? If Britain, ever
renowned for good faith, should in any future period violate the compact, we
then indubitably, can defensively or offensively, war against her more
advantageously and effectually than at present. This axiom is as true as that
light flows from the sun. If we adopt reconciliatory measures, our numbers and
wealth will probably augment in a greater degree than the people and riches of
Britain circumscribed in territory. In fine, considering the present situation
of Europe, we must confess that a future period cannot present a juncture more
unfavourable to the designs of our author and his independents.

"The birth day of a new world is at hand" (says our author.) I sincerely wish
the old one a happy delivery from such mischievous persons so little acquainted
with the political obsteteric art, as the author of Common Sense, and his
colleagues.

"There are reasons to be given in support of independence, which men should
rather privately think of than be told of." Every man of sense engaged in our
present measures, will despise this inuendo as insidious as groundless.

"A line of distinction should be drawn between English soldiers, and an
inhabitant of America taken in arms, the first are prisoners, but the latter
traitors." Can we without horror, read this detestable charge; to murder our
deluded citizens? Britain, as famed for humanity, as arts and arms, has not
treated, and I trust never will treat as traitors, those, who are only
contending for their constitutional rights and liberties. "The artful and
hypocritical letter which appeared a few months ago in two of the New York
papers, is an evidence, that there are men, who either want judgment or
honesty." Every man of understanding will perceive, that this last daring
menace is thrown out, to deter Printers from virtuously asserting the liberty
of the Press. If an absolute freedom of the Press, if the liberty either of
speaking or writing on matters of state is permitted uncontrolably in the
government of Britain, which we are taught so strongly to reprobate: Shall any
reasonable being dare to assert, that these supreme felicities are not as
essentially necessary in America, the land of freedom, or in any republican
country. I am afflicted, by remarking that the committee of New York At Rome,
where the Inquisitor General constantly resided, the horrors of the inquisition
were unkown, when at the same time, it raged with detestable and unremitting
fury in the Ultra Mountain Provinces, where the deputies resided. The first,
were of exalted understandings, the last, only fitted to fill their eternally
memorable infamous places, by their determined ignorance.
as it is said, have a great aversion to PLAIN TRUTH, they have at present
interdicted and prohibited it from appearing among them, by seizing a number of
that pamphlet which were sent from Philadelphia, although published with the
printers name on the title page, and are daily selling here under the immediate
eye of the Congress. If such doings, are the first fruits of REPUBLICAN
LIBERTY? Grant me Heaven, our former mild and limited Government, where the
prerogative is ascertained by law, and where every man is at liberty to speak
and print his sentiments.

In PLAIN TRUTH, having too precipitately considered commerce, I shall here
reconsider that subject. And first, I observe the restrictions of Britain on
our commerce so often held up to us, as a grievance of the first magnitude, is,
I humbly apprehend rather ideally, than really so. Here, I ask those merchants
trading to Hamburgh, Holland, France, or other parts of Europe; to the Spanish,
French, Dutch, and West India settlements; do they hesitate to import into our
provinces, the commodities of these different kingdoms and colonies? I dare
say, they will not answer in the negative, but the risque exclaims the
superficial observer, I believe, the risque is a bugbear, not very terrific to
commercial adventurers.

A seizure I apprehend, is an event, that does not happen to one in a thousand
such speculists; if it does, it must arise from the transactors misconduct.
Great Britain, as already observed, is without doubt our best market for our
lumber, naval stores, ships, part of our grain, for our iron, train oil, flax
seed, furs; I may include indigo, tobacco, if not rice. No doubt, I shall be
told, that rice and tobacco would sell better in other parts of Europe than
Britain. I reply, that we legally transport rice to any country in Europe,
south of Cape Finisterre; and if the rice vessels bound to Holland and the
Baltic, call at England, they generally have indigo and other articles to land
in that kingdom.

France is well adapted to raise tobacco, where it soon will probably be
cultivated; such design some time since has been in agitation. "It is well
known, that the French might raise tobacco at home if they would, much cheaper
than they can import it. The fact is this: The farm of tobacco is one of the
great five farms, which make up the chief part of the Royal revenue; and
therefore, the farmers general, for bye ends of their own, have hitherto had
interest enough with the court, to prohibit the cultivation of it in old
France, under the severest penalties. But nevertheless the real French
patriots, and particularly the Marquess de Mirabeau, have fully demonstrated,
that it is the interest of the French government to encourage the cultivation
of it, and have pointed out a sure and easy method of collecting the duties;
which was the sole pretense of the farmers general for soliciting a
prohibition: So that it is apprehended, that the French government will at last
open their eyes in this respect, and allow the cultivation of it."

In case of separation says the Dean of Gloucester, "The ceasing of the payment
of bounties on certain colony productions will be another great saving, perhaps
not less than L200,000 a year: and it is very remarkable, that the goods
imported from the colonies in consequence of these bounties, could not have
been imported into any other part of Europe, were there a liberty to do it;
because the freight and first cost would have amounted to more than they could
be sold for; so that in fact, we give premiums to the colonies for selling
goods to us, which would not have been sold at all, any where else."

In short, evident beyond a dispute it is, that were we independent of Great
Britain, it were our interest to carry a very considerable part of our produce
to her without bounties, and receive from that kingdom 18 twentieths of the
articles we now take from her. It will be said, if this is admitted why does
Great Britain annually expend 3 or 400,000 sterling to keep armies and navies
in America, and at this time appear so willing to recover our allegiance. With
the utmost deference to the Dean of Gloucester, I humbly imagine, that our
independence would endanger the West Indies, according to the present system of
infinite consequence to Great Britain, and the other powers of Europe. I again
repeat, that were we independent, the Princes of Europe, by enacting
persecutive laws to restrain their subjects in Europe would only increase the
evil, since every one knows that persecution eternally defeats its own purpose.

I say, that this event would encourage many emigrants from Europe, incited as
well by the natural levity of mankind, as the hopes of one day visiting Mexico.
The event we now describe is doubtless a principal motive, which prevents
Britain from disolving the connection. Perhaps American independence if
effected at this juncture, might afford materials to light the torch of
republicanism so powerfully in Britain, as to destroy the monarchy. But some
may reply, are not such future prospects of grandeur sufficient inducements for
independence: I reply, that they are not, even could we effect it, without
wading through seas of blood. Every sensible person will acknowledge, that a
well regulated connection with Britain, will afford us more real happiness,
than independence, supported at an intolerable expense of money, and perhaps of
blood. Without doubt, a happy mediocrity is preferable to a dangerous, though
brilliant condition; as we have partly remarked in the instance of ancient and
modern Rome.

In Plain Truth, we observed, that independence, or a democratical government
would soon give way to a military system imposed on the colonies, by some
Cromwell of our armies. I am not ignorant that such usurpation would not take
place, while our virtuous citizen, General Washington commands. But let us
remember, that the person whose turbulent ambition, and extensive talents would
enable him to erect a tyranny, is perhaps at present a subaltern; whose talents
I say, for war, etc. gradually unfolding will prompt, and enable him to ruin
his country. To illustrate this simple truth, let us transiently view the late
civil wars. When the patriots of those days virtuously endeavored to restrain
prerogative, and ascertain liberty; they raised armies for that noble purpose
ONLY: The command of which, were given to the Earl of Essex, Lord Fairfax, and
other presbyterians as truly virtuous, as any men then on earth. It is
notorious that those leaders, as well as every virtuous patriot in the kingdom,
reprobated the thought of destroying that constitution, which they so often
bled to defend. At the commencement of those unhappy times, Cromwell possessed
of no fortune, scarcely ranked as a field officer. This execrable hypocrite,
possessing extensive military talents, and a most perfect knowledge of mankind,
saw with pleasure, that soldiers accustomed to a life of every species of
dissipation, would not willingly return to their ploughs, looms, etc. He also
knew, that nine tenths of his officers, being a sort of Demi-Gentry, (if I may
so express myself) had still a stronger aversion to resign their fastidious
profession (unhappily for mankind) more pleasing than their former peaceable
departments. Cromwell, and his congenial associates, by degrees acquainted the
soldiers with their real strength and interests. It must also be confessed,
that in such unhappy times, victorious soldiers are very readily tutored by a
Cromwell, Caesar, Pompey, or an Octavius. The Earl of Essex, Lord Fairfax and
others, as we have already remarked, of the most approved patriotism and
virtue, disdaining to enslave their country, and scorning to command those
military hypocrites, were succeeded by Cromwell, whose crimes and tyranny it
were superfluous to enumerate. In short, virtuous generals do not suit
soldiers, who are determined to enslave their country: The same causes ever
produce the same effects. Hawks were ever birds of prey; AND MEN WILL STILL BE
MEN.

The elegant Ferguson remarks, "that a specious government may be formed on
paper, which in execution may prove extremely arbitrary." Let us however
suppose fix of the first sages of antiquity, and join with them the most
respectable names of our times, and in this venerable Assembly, let Trajan, who
was the best qualified to do honor to human nature, and to represent the
divinity on earth: I say, let the almost divine Trajan preside in this august
Assembly, who, in the hours of calm retirement, are to form a democratical
government for us. In theory, perfect as such government would seem, let us not
delude ourselves, by supposing it would long remain unconvulsed by ambitious
men striving to lord it over their equals. Let us remember the dangerous
influence obtained by demagogues in every age, debauching the deluded people.
Suppose a dangerous war, domestic or foreign, victoriously terminated by an
able general. He is adored as well by the people, as the soldiery; if his
abilities equal his fortune, what may not he then effect? Innumerable are the
ways to accomplish his ambitious purposes. History affords him too many
examples to pervert the laws of his country. Our ambitious general impels his
emissaries in the senate, to promote unjust wars, laws, and taxes, to destroy,
their unhappy country. The wretched people, worn out, and tossed in seas of
anarchy and sedition, at length gladly repose in the shade of arbitrary sway,
where they are sure to find themselves no less wretched.

It is a melancholy truth that such as delude mankind constantly represent our
race infinitely more perfect than they really are. This hackneyed expedient
enables them speciously to inveigh against the best government on earth: Too
many of the human race give into the snare, forgetting that mankind, according
to SOLON, and the unerring experience of ages, can BEAR none other than
imperfect laws.

Let us remember that the Chinese, the most ancient respectable and polished
people on earth, have at LEAST for 4000 years been governed by Monarchs. Yet
surely the arbitrary government of China cannot be placed in competition with
our happy limited government. I finally ask the partisans of the pamphlet
called Common Sense if all the moments of ease peace and liberty could be
selected and united which democracies have enjoyed from the origin of
government until this hour, would they equal that portion of felicity enjoyed
by the Chinese during the reign only of one of their princes? Impelled by
exalted truth, we answer in the negative. Eternally true as this assertion will
remain, must not such partisans blush to remember they believed the absurd
paradoxes and continued falsehoods of that despicable production? Will they not
I say blush they believed that all the blood spilt on earth, that almost all
the miseries of mankind originated from kings? And will they not forever blush
to have said that such a miserable production as the pamphlet in question was
unanswerable?

In short, let us remember, that by our connection with Great Britain, we have
been the happiest people on earth, and by a just agreement with her we may long
continue so. Let us dispassionately consider, that in a connection with Great
Britain, we may possess all the ROSES of independence, without being cursed
with its innumerable THORNS.

We shall take little notice of the virulent abuse with which the Appendix
writer impotently bespatters the respectable people, called Quakers. His
scurrility on this occasion reminds us of the fable of the dog and the moon.
Well has Hume said "that there is no virtue or moral duty, but what with
facility may be refined away, if we indulge a false philosophy, sifting and
scrutinizing by every captious rule of logic, etc. In this sort of logic lies
our author's fort. Speaking of their virtuous testimony, he has the following
words, "it tends to the decrease and reproach of all religion whatever, etc."
Need I remark, that his assertion is the most impudent prostitution of language
that ever disgraced the Press, or ever polluted paper.

The conduct and morals of this most respectable society, is their defense, and
I hope will ever as effectually protect them, as they have benefitted their
province of Pennsylvania, and adorned mankind by their excellent example. We
must confess that the advancement of the adjoining middle colonies in industry
and morality, was principally owing to the very laudable and powerful example
of those real practicers of christianity. This honest truth is dictated in
gratitude for the signal blessings derived to the community at large in the
virtuous example of those industrious and peaceable moralists. Utterly
unconnected with any of the society is the writer, who is possessed of
property, and if he knows himself, of a natural independence of spirit. He
execrates flattery as ardently as he venerates truth. He therefore hopes the
reader will peruse Voltaire, and other celebrated authors on the subject of
this estimable society. This philosoher treating of that people, seems to
forget that he is writing the history of mankind, which according to him is
almost a continued succession of crimes. Were not the facts as modern as
notorious, we might imagine he is speaking of beings superior to men.

According to Voltaire, "they began by making a league with the Indians their
neighbors. It is the ONLY TREATY between those people and the christians which
was not confirmed by OATH, and which has not been BROKEN or INFRINGED. The
original inhabitants instead of flying into their forests, insensibly
accustomed themselves with the peaceable Quakers. As much as they detested the
other CHRISTIAN DESTROYERS and conquerors of America, as much did they LOVE
these new comers. In a little time, those pretended savages charmed with their
new neighbors, came in crowds to request WILLIAM PENN to receive them in the
number of his vassals. It was a spectacle entirely new -- A sovereign whom all
the world thee'd and thou would, and addressed with their heads covered, a
government without priests, a people without arms, citizens all equal, except
in magistracy, and neighbors without jealousy. WILLIAM PENN might have boasted
of bringing on earth the golden age of which so much has been said, and which
probably never existed but in PENNSYLVANIA." We cannot indeed view this
pleasing happy picture of morality, without receiving as much pleasure, as we
do grief, from his narration of the horrid civil wars in the first Charles's
time: Enumerating all the ever detestable acts of the fanatics, and military
hypocrites of that age, he says they perpetrated all their abominations while
they were SEEKING THE LORD.

I believe I have proved that we have not numbers nor wealth to support a
considerable army for a length of time, and that we have not the most distant
prospect of foreign aid. Evident it is beyond a dispute, that we cannot in our
days construct a navy to raise us to independence, or protect our trade -- I
therefore hope we shall not be so dazzled by false views of grandeur, as to
reject honorable terms, and rush to assured destruction.

I have remarked, that the event of which some persons seem so passionately
fond, may in the fullness of time be naturally accomplished, without costing one
drop of blood to Britain, or our descendants. If such event, by the misfortunes
or concurrence of Great Britain could be immediately effected, it would indeed
plunge us into inextricable difficulties. Many weighty considerations might be
offered in support of this allegation; suffice it at present to remark that we
are not arrived at sufficient maturity for this important event. Let us view
matters through a serene medium, and not through a glare of deceitful passions.
Let us not then put bridles into our mouths, nor permit ambitious men to ride
us to ruin.

On this occasion, perhaps it may not be amiss to remind the public, that great
patriots have more than once been caught napping. Let us hear what the Dean of
Gloucester says on this head.

"When the duty on stamps was first proposed, the Americans made as little
objection to it, as could be expected to be made to any new tax whatever. Nay,
several of their popular orators and leaders used considerable interest to be
employed as agents in the distribution of these stamps: and one among the rest,
whom I NEED NOT NAME, was more than ordinary assiduous in his application on
this head: so that had the act passed within the usual time, instead of being a
flaming American patriot, he would probably have acted the part of a
tax-gatherer and an American publican. But when the outs and the pouters on
this side the water, saw the advantage which the minister gave them by a whole
year's delay, they eagerly seized the opportunity; emissaries and agents were
dispatched into all quarters; the newspapers were filled with invectives
against the new intended tax. It was injudicious! it was ill-timed! oppressive!
tyrannical! and every thing that was bad! Letters upon letters were wrote to
America to excite the people to associate, to remonstrate, and even to revolt.
The most ample promises were made from hence of giving them all the assistance
which faction and clamor, and mock-patriotism, could muster up. And then it
was that this very man, this self intended publican, changed sides, and
commenced a zealous patriot. Then he appeared at the bar of the house of
commons to cry down that very measure which he himself had espoused; and then
as the avenging Angel of America.

He rode in the whirlwind to direct the Storm."
Even sincere Patriots are fallible, and at some periods, do not see the true
interests of their country, in the clearest light. Those who wish to understand
the true interest of America would reap useful knowledge, by perusing the
pamphlet from which the last paragraph is extracted, it is entitled, "The true
interest of Great Britain, set forth in regard to the Colonies; and the only
means of living in peace and harmony with them; in which are included FIVE
different PLANS for effecting this desirable purpose. By Josiah Tucker, D. D.
Dean of Gloucester.

I have been the more particular in mentioning this piece, because I am
persuaded (notwithstanding the ministerial attempts to ruin this Country) that
the interest of Britain and America are so nearly related, and their commercial
felicity so dependent upon reciprocality of kindnesses to each other, THAT
HONORABLE CONNECTIONS, AND POLITICAL HAPPINESS, ARE SYNONYMOUS TERMS.

In short, let us remember, that reconciliation on generous principles with
Great Britain, is our true and only road to permanent happiness. Above all, let
us seriously consider, that this (when the Commissioners arrive to treat with
the Congress) is the juncture, this the moment, when we may receive every thing
we can reasonably desire.

I conclude these remarks, by observing, that if they are founded in truth,
they will instruct you to keep a good look out, that ye may not be surprised
into AMERICAN INDEPENDENCY; without a thorough examination, both of it, and its
consequences.

THE END.
Philadelphia, April 10 th. 1776.
In a few days will be published by ROBERT BELL, in Third Street. OBSERVATIONS
ON THE RECONCILIATION OF GREAT BRITAIN AND THE COLONIES.

By a FRIEND of AMERICAN LIBERTY.

Let the GOOD of the PEOPLE be the Foundation of all LAW and CIVIL GOVERNMENT.


