A DISCOURSE ON the condemned State of SINNERS And their Recovery, Wherein is
confuted, some of the Errors of ARMINIANS and ANTINOMEANS, Togather with some
Warnings to HYPOCRITES or false PROFESSORS: As also some Exhortations to
CHRISTIANS to Practical Obedience.

BY B. CROSBY Of CHELMSFORD.

1. JOHN, iii. 7. "Little Children let no man deceive you, he that does
Righteousness is Righteous, even as he is Righteous"

CHELMSFORD: NEW ENGLAND PRINTED by Nathaniel Coverly, for the Author.
M,DCCLXXVI.

A Short PREFACE by another Hand.
THE following Tretis, Reader don't disdain,
Although it is style is low, the Matter's plain,
Although it is method be not curious plan'd,
Yet if it is Mattter should be closely scanned
You Will find that strength does often in weakness lie,
And things that is low does often excel the high,
These lines though simple, faithful warnings give,
Receive them truly and thy SOUL shall live.
I think false ways are set forth plain and clear,
Where many souls does walk, without much fear
Down to the gates of endless misery,
Where bound in chains they must forever lie,
These warnings I would recommend as clear,
Though they will not please a curious carping ear,
But if they may to some sinners be blessed,
Thy friend E. R. will have his soul's request.
JOHN iii. 18. "He that believes on him is not condemned, but he that
believes not is condemned already because he has not believed in the name of
the only begotten Son of GOD.


THESE are the words of our blessed LORD and SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST, which he
spoke to NICODEMUS, a ruler of the Jews. We have an account in the first part
of this chapter, of his coming to Christ by night, and he seemed to be
convinced by the miracles which Christ wrought of his being a teacher come from
God for he said unto him "Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come from God,
for no man can do these miracles that thou do, except God be with him"; Jesus
immediately goes to preaching to him the necessity of the NEW BIRTH, which
Nicodemus seemed to be altogather ignorant about? Jesus answered and said unto
him, verily, verily, I say unto you, except a man be born again, he cannot see
the kingdom of God. This was strange doctrine to Nicodemus, he did not
distinguish between a being born of the flesh, and of the spirit; and therefore
says, how can these things be etc. Jesus goes on to demonstrate the matter
till he comes to speak of the Son of man's being lifted up, as MOSES lifted up
the serpent in the wilderness. A clear type of Christ's being lifthd up: For as
those that were stung with the firery Serpents were healed by beholding the
brazon Serpent, so sinners by looking or believing in Christ the great
antitype, should receive spiritual healing. Therefore Christ says, as MOSES
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted
up; that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have etrnal life,
for God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Great love
indeed; great gift indeed, That when man had broke the law of God and turned
rebel, and took up arms against his Maker, that God should have such pity and
compassion on him as to send his Son into the world, to take our law place and
die in our stead, for God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world
but that the world through him might be saved? And then follows the words of
the (...): "He that believes on him is not condemned" That is by faith he
receives the righteousness of Jesus by which he is set free from the condemning
power of the divine law, and so shall be eternally saved, "But he that believes
not is condemned already" That is, sentance of death contained in the law is
already past upon him and the reason here for, is given in express terms,
because he has no believed on the name of the only begotton Son of God

In further treating on these words, I shall speak to these particulars, FIRST,
SHOW how man came into this State of Condemnation. SECOND, SPEAK of the Misery
of this State. THIRD, SHOW how they are freed from it. FOURTH, SPEAK of the
Happiness of those that are freed from this Condemnation, FIFTH, MAKE some
Improvement.


FIRST,
I Am to show how man came to be in this miserable condition, GOD at first made
man holy and upright, and gave him his holy and righteous law, and as long as
man kept the law, he remained a happy man. But man being seduced and tempted by
satan, and giving more credit to what the devil said, then to what GOD said, he
took up with the devil's counsel, and so broke the law of God. Man was
threatened with death in ease of disobedience, and so death took place. man
became spiritually dead, and under a state of condemnation. Here infidelity
first took place in man, by disbelieveing the severity of God, manifest in the
law, hence he is in a state of condemnation by the law; and as there could be
no way for his recovery, but by the gospel in which Christ is set forth to be
the only Savior of sinners, his condemnation is argmented by his disbelieving
the gospel which is plainly demonstrated in our Text, viz. "because he has not
believed on the name of the only begotten Son of GOD."

And so we come to the second Head, which is,

SESOND.
The misery of man in this condition, whilst in this state he is a stranger to
God: And being a stranger to him, he is a stranger to true happiness, he is a
stranger to peace? "There is no peace, says the Lord, unto the wicked" Isaiah.
vlviii. 22. He is under a broken law and is no ways able to keep it so, being
under a broken law, he is under all the curses of the law, he is at enmity with
God. We read the carnal mind, is enmity against God, not subject to his law,
neither indeed can be, he is under the displeasure of the great God, that God,
that in able to sink him to Hell in a moment, is angry with him, we read God is
angry with the wicked every day, a wicked man is spiritually a dead man, we
read of his being dead in trespasses and sins: He is distitude of true love to
God, which is that charity we read of, that a man is nothing without; he is a
slave and captive to satan, we read of his being led captive by him, at his
will, he stands at the devils beck, when he says go, he goes, and when he says
come, he comes, he is bent upon doing evil, he has no mind nor will to do any
thing that is good; he is spiritually blind and ignorant, he always puts evil
for good, and good for evil, light for darkness, and darkness for light.

He is always taking a wrong course, till enlightened by the blessed spirit of
God, he is always seeking after happiness, but in a wrong way, all the powers
of his mind are corrupted, his love is always set upon wrong objects, he loves
the creature more than the Creator. He always makes a God of something, besides
the liveing and true God, his will chooses the evil, and refuses the good.

Christ said, ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life. His memory
forgets what it should remember, and remember what it should not: he has a
very wicked heart, we read, that the heart is deceitful and desperately wicked,
above all things, whilst man remains out of Christ. He is always a sinning in
every thing he does, let men pretend to what duty they will, we read that
whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Men may please themselves with abundance of
fine Stories, about their good doings, and Ministers may encourage them on, but
every thing they do is sin, well says some we know that wicked men coimmit a
great deal of sin but don't they do a great deal of good too, and do a great
many duties. I tell you they sin in every thing they do, for we read in the
word of God, that whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and without faith. it is
impossible to please God.

The duties may be good of themselves; they may be good as to the matter of
them, but bad as to the manner of them, being done out of a wrong end; being
not done to the glory of God. Natural men. has always self at the bottom;
they have some self ends in all that they do, they hope to passify God, they
hope to please God, they hope to face the better in this world, or it may be
they hope to get to Heaven by their doings but this is all wrong. I don't mean
to discourage men from any duty, but what I am after is to drive men off from
self dependence, and not have them flatter themselves up with hopes of getting
to heaven, in the way that leads to Hell; not to take pains to build on a sandy
foundation, and think that they are keeping the commands of God when at the
same time they continue breaking them.

For God in his word says, "Wheather you eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do
all to the glory of God, but wicked men don't do all to his Glory, nor nothing
at all as they should do, and in this case suppose they could do duties without
commiting sin, what would they do with their sins that is past, if they could
live a hundred years without one Sin. Still they are under a broken law, and
having offended the justice of God, and being under a broken law and not able
to make any satisfaction, and altogather unable to keep the law.

Man I say being in this condition is exposed to all miseries in this life, to
death itself and to the pains of hell forever, if he dies in this condition.
And how many in this dreadful case are altogather unconcerned about
themselves, sleeping as it were upon the top of a mast, and hanging in a
manner by a twine thread over everlasting burnings; and if any come to be some
what awakened and concerned about themselves, (...) run right to the law for
life, (...) is never to be found: and this had bee^ (...) ^appy case of us all,
had not a good (...) infinite love and free grace and tender (...) ^ought of
mercy and provided a ransom in (...) his only begotten and divinly beloved Son
to (...) and save a number of the poor fallen race of Adam: And this brings us
to the third head, which is to show which way any are free from this estate of
condemnation.

THIRD,
The great God knew before he made man, what a dreadful condition man would
plunge himself into, by falling from him and out of infinite love, entered into
a covenant with his own dear Son, to give him a number of the poor fallen race
to come and redeem and save by taking their low place, and dying in their room
and stead. The Son foresaw the wretched case that man would be in, had a like
good will to the work he saw, that their was no other way that poor men could
be saved and all Gods attributes be glorified, so he undertook the great work
to come and take the low place of man, to satisfy divine justice, to fulfill the
law and make it honorable: to slept in as a surety, a bondsmen he undertook in
man's behalf, he became the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
beliveth, he satisfied the justice of God for all the elect, and wrought out a
perfect righteousness sufficient to cloth them with, and the only way any one
ever can be saved is by what Christ has done and suffered, for there is no
other name given under Heaven whereby we must be saved, their is no other way
nor name Christ says I am the way, and the truth, and the life: "No man comes
unto the Father but by me," John xiv. 6.

Christ righteousness imputed to sinners, is what justifies them before God,
Isaiah xl 21. "The Lord is well pleased for his righteousness sake, he will
magnify the law, and make it honorable." Isaiah liii. 4. Surely he has borne
our griefs, and carried (...) ^orrows: But he was wounded for our
transg^^^^^^ns, (...) for our iniquities the chastisement (...) was upon him,
and with his stripes we (...) Matt xviii. 11. "For the Son of man is com^ (...)
^^at which was lost". Matt x^. 28. "And (...) life a ransom for many". Matt. v.
17. Thi^ (...) not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets, I am not
come to destroy, but to fulfill". So that it appears plainly that what Christ
has done and suffered is the only cause of any ever being saved, which brings
me to the fourth head, which is to show something of the happiness of those
that are freed from this condition of condemnation.

FIRST,
They are happy being brought into the favor of God, again David said, "in thy
favor is life, and thy loving kindness is better than life," they enjoy the
love of God, they are passed from death to life, John iii. 36. "He that
beliveth on the Son, has everlasting life," they are in a safe state, they are
upon a sure foundation, safer then Adam was in the garden. Christ says that
none shall pluck them out of his hand, Christ ever loves them, and they love
Christ; read in Solomon Songs of their love to each other, they are safe living
and dying: God says that all things small work together for good to them that
love God. Mark the perfect man and behold the upright, for the end of that man
is peace, they will go to be even with the Lord, Christ says, "Father, I will
that those which thou have given me, be with me, that they may behold my
glory," John xvii. 24. though they may suffer many temptations in this life, and
be sometimes over come, yet blessed be God, Christ never was overcome, and
there is there safety, and they will get by and by, where there will be no
trouble, no sorrow, no temptation, nothing to disturb them in all that holy
mountain.

Now what remains is the improvement of the whole, and first, is it as we have
heard; "that he that beliveth not it condemned already:" then learn the folly
of several sorts of people, and first, learn the folly of open profane sinners
(...) go on in rebellion against the great God. (...) what do you think of
being condemned by (...) God, and no ways able to help yourselves (...)
condition? What do you think will become of you, if you live and die in this
dreadful condition, you great enmity against the great God, and under his wrath
and curse, and so liable to all misery, and seem to be altogether unconcerned,
seem to walk up and down as if nothing ailed you. You would think it strange to
see a poor murderer shut up in prison, and condemned to be hanged, and nothing
concerned about it, why sinner, this is nothing to your case; you are condemned
by the law of God, and hang as it were by a slender thread of life, over
everlasting misery, and don't know but every breath may be your last, and if
death finds you in this condition, you are gone to all eternity, and how do you
think you can meet your great Judge and have him against you. Then may you call
to the rocks and mountains, and all to no purpose, but come forth you must, and
there hear the sentence, (...) depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels," and away you must go into everlasting
fire there to be to all eternity; now sinner you seem to be airry and jolly as
if nothing ailed you, but when you come to die, then you will be of another
mind if you could see the dreadful condition you are in, it would strike a damp
upon all your merriment, but you seem to be altogether senseless about your
case, but it may be if ever you come to lie on a death bed, then you may be of
another mind, but if not before when death closes your bodily eyes, then it
will open your spiritual eyes, you will be of a different mind with a witness,
then you will be of another mind, and that to all eternity, and there will be
an end of all comfort, all pleasure, never no more case, no more peace forever,
nothing but weeping and waiting and gnashing of teeth forever and (...); think
how you can bear to lie under the scalding drop, of Gods wrath in everlasting
fire. The torments of hell are compaired (...) fire and brimstone, where the
worm dies not, (...) fire is not quinched, what is harder to beat (...) try
sinner to hold but one finger in the (...) ^andle but one quarter of an hour,
and see how you can bear the smart, look into an oven heated red hot, and think
if that you could bear to lie in that: could you bear think to lie in a fiery
furnace, and if the fire blown up by men be so dreadful, what do you think the
fire blown up by the great God will be, and lie in that forever, for we read,
"and these shall go away unto everlasting punishment," Matt. xxv. 46.
(Everlasting) O that word, never to be an end: when any one is in great pain,
such as the tooth ache or the like, O how uneasy be they when it is night, they
wish for morning, thinking the time long, but then they hope by and by it will
be over, and that is some comfort to them; but if a person was in small pain,
and knew that he never should be no better as long as he lived, this would seem
to add to his trouble.

"O who can dwell with devouring fire, who can inhabit everlasting burnings;"
it may be you think and flatter yourselves that you shall do as well as others,
but others will not be no comfort to you there in hell, your companions now in sin
will aggravate and increase your misery when you come to hell, and the devil
that now tempts and intices you to sin, then will be your tormentor, and it may
be, you flatter yourselves that it is not so bad as I set it forth; but if you
will not believe it, it is but only waiting a little while longer, if you go on in
the way you are now in, and you will find all true to your eternal sorrow, and
a great deal more, so that it is likely you may have to say as the Queen of
Sheabe did in another case, that the one half was not told you: it may be you
never intended to come to this place of torment, and I suppose you don't, I
suppose their don't one of you all intend to go to hell, well how do you
intend to escape, you are already condemned, and there is but one way of
escape, and if you miss that way, you are gone forever, and that is a strait
and narrow way: Strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leads unto
life, and few there is that find it: Because wide is the gate and broad is the
way that leads to destruction, and (...) there be that go in thereat. It may
be you intend to grow better, and betake yourselves to good duties, and so get
to Heaven that way; it may be you intend to repent, and lead a new life some
time hence, when you get over such or such a piece of business; but it may be
that you may not live to see that time that you have set, death may come
suddenly and snatch you away, and where be you then; you have none of you a
lease of your lives, and if you should live till that time, it may be you may
have something greater to hinder, at least you may be more hardened in sin, and
you cant turn off yourselves then neither, nor your good doings will not save you
that you lot upon. Well some may say if our good doings will not save us, we may
do as bad as we please, if that is the case, we may live as we list: But hold
man, if your good works will not save you, yet your bad works will damn you, they
will be the means of sinking you the deeper into hell. "How much she has
glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much sorrow and torment give her:"
Reve xviii. 7. Sinners it may be you think it strange to see ministers so
earnest, to hear them speak loud, but if you could see the dreadful condition
you are in, you would wonder they wan't more earnest; you may wonder to see
people cry and take on under conviction, but if you was to see hell, naked
before you, and destruction without a covering you would take on too: You may
wonder to see christians cry and weep, when they hear Christ's sufferings
preached; but if you could behold by an eye of faith, what Christ has done and
suffered for poor sinners, you would not wonder to see any cry as the hearing
of it. And

2. Is it as we have heard, that man in his natural state, is condemned
already, and that there is no other way of escape, but by the Lord Jesus
Christ, by his righteous life and bitter death: Then learn the folly of those
who are trying some other way to get to Heaven; is not there many think ye,
that are a putting something (...) in the room of Christ, are a trusting to
something of their own doings, are a building a righteousness of their own; any
that are upon that scheme, are a building on a sandy foundation, that will not
stand the trial. I don't say but that good works are good in their place but
what I say is, that good works are not the way to Heaven: Christ is the way.
Good works are signs of a good man, but they are not means nor conditions of
making a good man, and here it is that people make the grand mistake: We read
that a good man guides his affairs with discretion, and shows mercy and
lends; but that don't make them good, there being good makes them do the
good works: But what I say is, there good works don't make them good.

What are signs of a good man, they put for conditions to make good men, what
makes men good, is being engrafted into Christ, by a true and living faith,
that faith that works by love, and purifies the heart, and overcomes the world,
and is productive of good fruit, and where this faith is, it will bear good
fruit: This faith will produce good works, but the doings of good works, will not
beget this faith. A good tree brings forth good fruit but take a bad tree,
and put on eversomuch good fruit, and that will not make it a good tree; well but
some may say, we don't expect that our good works will save us alone but we
must do our part, and Christ will do his, if we do what we can, what we cannot
do, Christ will make up but that is all wrong. Christ will be a whole Savior
or else none at all; his coat was without seam, and his righteousness will not
bear pieceing. It men will but depend upon their doings the devil don't care
how much they do, he is not afraid of losing them that way: Let them build
never so stately a house, it will fall about their ears, when the storm comes,
being built upon a sandy foundation: If you fast twice a week, and pay ties of
all that you posess, and give all your goods to feed the poor, and your body to
be burnt, and depend upon that to justify you, you may go to hell when you have
done all, and lest any should say, that I have said more then I can prove: Let
us see what the word of God says upon this head. Christ says, "except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no ease enter into the kingdom of heaven:" Matt. v. 20. "Therefore by the
deeds of the law, there shall no flesh be justified in his sight: For by the
law is the knowledge of sin:" Romans iii. 20. "Being justified freely by his
grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ:" Romans iii. 24. For as by
one man's disobedience many were made sinners: So by the obedience of one shall
many be made righteous:" Romans v. 19. "Knowing that a man is not justified by
the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ: for by the works of the
law shall no flesh be justified." Gal. ii. 16. "For if righteousness come by
the law, then Christ is dead in vain." Gal. ii. 21. And many places of
scripture more, might be named to the same purpose; indeed the scriptures are
so plain, that it seems as if every one that reads, might see it But may be
some may say, what need is there of telling us about this: We don't think that
our works will save us, now under the second covenant: The first covenant was
of works; but now the conditions are, faith and repentance; but this is all
wrong: Faith and repentance will not save you, no more then good works will; no,
nor they are not conditions neither. Christ has suffered all the conditions,
for all that ever will be saved: It is true, there never will none be saved
without true faith, and it is likely where there is true faith, there will be
true repentance* but then what I say is, faith and repentance don't save none;
they be not conditions, their is nothing that we can do as causes means or
conditions of even our being saved.

As I said before, there will none be saved without faith, God will qualify
every one that he saves, with that qualification: For we read, "he that
beliveth shall be saved, and he that beliveth not, shall be damned:" For by
grace are ye saved, through faith; and that not of yourselves: It is the gift
of God. Ephesians. ii. 8. It is through faith, not for faith, it is altogether for
what Christ has done and suffered, that any are saved. "Christ is the author
and finisher of faith:" How can a person be chose for the having any thing,
when they are chose before they have it. We read of the elect, being chosen in
Christ before the foundation of the world: It will not do to put faith and
repentance in the room of Christ, no more then it will good works; if you make
a God of that, you had as good make a God of any thing else. It seems as if
people will always be a building upon something vvrong, 'till they understand
the doctrine of election, either upon works, or faith, or repentance, or it
may be upon their undependance, or something else vvrong. I am afraid that
people, a great many, encourages themselves on in sin, depending upon after
repentance, but that is a poor way: But I shall speak of another sort of
people, who seem to flatter themselves, that they depend upon Christ to save
them, and that they are a going in a right way to Heaven, and all the time as
great sinners as any: They seem to be convinced, that they cannot do any thing
to save themselves, they don't depend upon nothing but Christ they say, to save
them; and at the same time, are sound as bad as any body: This here is what
we call an Antinomean scheme, and when a person comes to be beat off from a
self-righteous Pharese scheme, or a norminon scheme, which is one and the
same. There is great danger I believe of running into this scheme, for the devil
always stands ready, when people come out of one vvrong way, to push them
into another. The devil is always going about like a roaring lion, (...) whom
he may devour, he will keep people (...) possible, in carnal security. But if
they begin to be somewhat concerned, and think that way (...), he sets them
then to depending upon some thing they can do themselves, and if they are
brought to see that they cannot do nothing to justify or help themselves, then
the devil tells them that they had no need do any thing, so if one suit will not
do any longer, he puts that off and claps on another: And so he comes in a
thousand shapes as it were to deceive poor man, but don't let us hear any
longer to the devils lies.

But let us hear what the word of God says, Christ says, "Even so every good
tree brings forth good fruit: But a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. A
good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit: Neither can a corrupt tree bring forth
good fruit:" Matt. vii. 17, 18. Now Christ says, every good tree brings
forth good fruit; and will any one, think to be a good tree, and not bring
forth good fruit, but bad. "But if while we seek to be justified by Christ, we
our selves also are found sinners, is therefore Christ the minister of sin? God
forbid:" Gal. ii. 17. "Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
kingdom of God? Be not deceived: Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the kingd in of God:" 1 Cor. vi. 9.10. "Follow place with all men, and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord." Heb. xii. 14. All that are
ever saved will be made holy; they want to be made happy for being made holy:
But justification and sanctification always go together, they are two links
which always go together in one chain, they never are separated. Christ saves
his people from their sins, and not in their sins; "and thou shall call his
name Jesus: For he shall save his people from their sins" Matt. i. 21. I don't
say, nor would not be understood that I think their is any one lives without
(...) for the best many a christian (...), has sin (...) it to damn him, if it
(...) way (...) But sin has not the dominion over them; they don't go on in
wilful known sins: Sin is their burden and sorrow, I don't say but that a good
man may be left to fall: Peter fell, but then he wept bitterly. And so I
believe if any true christian is left to fall, it will cost them sorrow. Sin is
their grief and hatred: It is folly for any to pretend to have faith, and at
the same time, go on in a course of wickedness. James says, "that faith
without words is dead:" James ii. 17. But,

2. A few words to all sorts of hypocrites and false professors: Woe to the
hypocrites; read how many woes their is to hypocrites in the 23 Chap. of St.
Matthews Gospel. What a dreadful disapointment it will be for people that look
for light, and flatter themselves with hopes of going to Heaven, and at last
find themselves mistaken, when their feet come to stumble upon the dark
mountains. Where will the hope of the hypocrite be, when God takes away his
soul. What a dreadful disappointment will it be to those who die in great hopes
of going to Heaven, and sink down to hell.

As one observes, "How great will be the sad surprise,
"Of those that die in sin asleep;
"When in hell they open their eyes,
"Alas! how will they weep."


If a man that calls himself owner of a great estate, should by and by find
out, that his little want good, and have it all taken away from him, we would
be ready to think the man was undone: But what a small matter would that be in
comparison of being deceived about going to Heaven: Then the man is undone with
a witness. O be exalted in time, to examine yourselves, the Apostle says,
examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith, prove your own selves, how
that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates, but it seems as if a
great many professors might know without much examination, that Jesus Christ is
not in them. Jesus Christ was of a meek, lowly, humble forgiving temper and
disposition: Christ says, "Father forgive them for they no not what they do."
But how many is there that profess to be christians that cannot overlook an
injury, they are as ready to revenge as any body, they are as proud, lofty, and
as worldly as other people, nay, is not there some that will steal and swear,
whore and get drunk: Is not there some that will lie, cheat, and take advantage
of their neighbors. But "woe unto him that builds his house by
unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong; that uses his neighbors service
without wages, and gives him not for his work:" Jer. xxii. 23. Is there not
many think ye, that will go the rounds of duty, they will be very constant to
meeting, come up to the ordinances, pray in their families, pass for moral
honest folks, they will pretend to a great deal of religion, and perhaps of
love to the brethren, but at the same time, are so covetous and selfish, that
they would not give five shillings to save a poor brother from suffering: But
true religion don't consist altogether in these duties that I mentioned, yet I
am not a pleading against any of these duties. See what the apostle James calls
pure religion: James i. 27. "Pure religion and undefiled before God and the
Father, is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to
keep himself unspotted from the world." "Is not this the fast that I have
chosen? To loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let
the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy
bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out, to thy
house? When thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not
thy self from thine own flesh?" Isa. lviii. 6, 7. Read the whole of that
chapter: But I would speak a few words to another sort of people, is not there
some that seem to be enquiring after the truth, they seem to be desirous to
know the right way, they seem to stand at the head of two ways, not knowing
which way to go. Dear souls their is but one right way, and that is Christ:
Ventur^ (...) upon him, there is safety no where else, the whole world is
divided into two kingdoms, Christ kingdom, and satan's, and you must either be
upon one side or the other. Christ says, he that is not against us, is on our
part, there is no standing nuter, and it is a dreadful thing to fight under the
devils banner: He is a hard master, and there is no way of escape from him, but
by being redeemed by Jesus Christ; but may be some may say, I am such a great
sinner, I dare not come to Christ before I grow better. Why, that is just as if
a man that is very sick should say, I am so sick that I dare not send for a
doctor, before I grow better? Why, as long as you are out of Christ, you never
grow no better, but are always growing worse, there is nothing you can do that
ever make you any better, if you are a sinner, you are just such a one as
Christ came to save. Christ said that he came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance: But don't understand that I think that you can come to
Christ in your own strength, or of yourself, for Christ says: "No man can come
to me, except the father which has sent me, draw him:" John vi. 44. It must be
by the Almighty power of God, if you are brought home savingly to Jesus Christ.
We read, that Gods people shall be willing in the day of thy power," Psa. cx.
3. "Christ is the author and finisher of our faith," Heb. xii. 2. "For it is
God which works in you, both to will and to do of his good pleasure," Phil.
ii. 13. Well but some may say one thing and some another, some say by works we
must be saved, and some say by faith and repentance, and some say by Christ
alone: Some say one denomination is right, and some say another; some ministers
hold one way, and some another; well, let the word of God deside all disputes
of this sort, leave it out to that, and what that says will stand good forever:
What God says is always right. Let God be true and every man a liar, and let
his word be your only rule; Christ said, "search the Scriptures, for in them ye
think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me," John v.
39. But in the next place, I shall speak a few words to another sort of people,
and it is to those who are redeemed out of this estate of condemnation; to
those who were made willing in the day of God's power; to those who have had a
true faith wrought in them, by the Almighty power of God, that have been
ingrafted into Christ, by a true and living faith: And what shall I say to you:
O that I knew what words to use, that might be any means of stiring any up to a
greater resolution in serving and glorifing God. And Oh! Christian be exhorted
to consider what a dreadful condition you are delivered out of, and what a
happy condition you are brought into; and consider how it was that you was
freed, and who it was that redeemed you out of that dreadful condition, and be
exhorted to be humble, be not high minded, don't be lifted up in your own
conceit; you know that it was no goodness of your own, none of your own doings,
but by the free grace of God that ever you was freed; the apostle Paul says,
"for who makes thee to differ from another? And what have thou that thou did't
not receive?" Cor. iv. 5. And it is by the grace of God, that I am what I am
(...) a consideration of what Christ has done and suffered, quicken you to
obedience of all God's commands, and let his glory be your chief aim, strive to
copy after your blessed Lord and Master, strive always to follow him, to keep
close to him: Come take up your cross daily and follow him; let religion be
your main business, it is to be lamented, that christians in our day, seem to
be so cold, so dull and stuped, and so much like the rest of the world, so
little concerned for the cause and interest of Christ. The world is divided
into two kingdoms, Christ's kingdom, and satan's; and how active and diligent
does the devils army seem to be: O! it seems as if christians in this day, had
need to be ashamed, to see those that have such a hard master, so busy and
lively, and themselves that have so good a master so idle and dull: Let all
that are on the Lord's side, be exhorted to rouse up and come forth, and fight
the Lords battles.

Contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints; don't be cowards
in so good a cause, though the flesh, the world and the devil are powerful
enemies, yet you have a Captain that can overcome them all, but then you must
mind and keep close to him, keep close to your Captain and you need not be
afraid of the devil and all his forces: Follow your Captain, obey all his
commands, rely on his strength, don't think to engage alone, for Christ said,
without me ye can do nothing, if you rely upon your own strength, as Peter did,
it is a wonder if you don't fall as he did, if the free grace of God don't
uphold you, you will not stand one minute. It is all of free grace: It was free
grace in God, to contrive the plan of man's redemption: And it was free grace
in Christ, to come and undertake in man's room and stead; and it is the free
grace of God, to enable any by his blessed spirit, to believe in Christ, with a
true and liveing faith: And it is the same free grace to enable any to
persevere in the way of well doing; and it is the same free grace, to receive
any home to glory. So that it is free grace from the foundation to the topstone.

Christian be persuaded to take Christ always for your Prophet, Priest and
King: Let him be your Prophet, to teach and instruct you by his word and
spirit; and what he teaches you by his word to do, that do and observe; let the
traditions and fashions, and customs of the world be what they will. Christ is
worthy to be Prophet Priest and King; to be Prophet to teach and instruct:
Priest to atone in, that he has offered up the great sacrifice to atone for
all the elect. And he is worthy to be King, to rule in, and rain over every
one, and when he teaches and enlightens any by his word and spirit, that such a
thing is their duty, and they don't comply with it: Then they rebel; and we
read, "to obey is better than sacrifice: For rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft," ^ Sam. xv. 22.23. And now, O Christian, that your bad practices
serve to harden sinners in their sins. When sinners see those that professes
religion, do that, that is not right, they are apt to conclude, that there is
nothing in religion, the world is always a watching for your halting, their
eyes are always upon you. Christ says, "Ye are the light of the world, a city
that is set on an hill, cannot be hid: Neither do men light a candle, and put
it under a bushel: But on a candlestick, and it gives light unto all that are
in the house. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven:" Matt. v. 14, 15, 16. Some
people say, they don't care what folks say about them; but that is wrong, for
we are commanded to cut off accasion from those that seek accasion, and to
abstain from all appearence of evil: Indeed if we don't give people no just
accasion to talk, let them talk, and indeed christians cannot expect no other,
but to be talked about, and persecuted, for we read, and all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution," 2 Timothy iii. 12. And Christ
said, marvel not if the world hate you. for you know it hated me, before it
hated you if ye were of the world, the world would love it is own, but because I
have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.

But what I say is, christians should be very careful how they give people any
cause to talk about them, they should take care how they become stumbling
blocks to others: A professor by his bad conduct, may become a stumbling block,
both to saints and sinners, a sinner is apt to say, see their is such a one
pretends to be a christian, but I don't see but he is as bad as any body, and
so they are apt to conclude, that religion is nothing but a name, and
christians I believe are many times kept off from their duty, by the bad
practices of some that professes such or such a way, they are apt to say I
cannot think that such a way is right, there is such a one that professes that
way, that will do so and so: But let me causion all, both saints and sinners,
not to judge no more after this sort, for this is a wrong way, the bad
practices of those that profess religion, never makes that religion, is wrong;
religion is the same, let who will profess it. It never makes no right way to
be wrong, by bad peoples professing of it: Nor it never made nor never will
make any wrong way to be right. By good people's professing of it, and calling
of it right, it did not make that Christ was wrong, (...) his followers when he
was upon earth, because that Judas followed him. It would not have done for the
rest of the disciples to have said, if this Judas follows Christ, we will not: If
they could have known just what a man Judas was, and just how bad he would do:
Nor it did not make that Christ was wrong. Peter's denying of him, though I don't
scruple, but what the rest of the disciples was twited many a time, by their
brother Judas, if not by their brother Peter too, though Peter was a good man,
and had repentance given him, though I don't assert it that they ever were twited
by them, because I don't know as we have any account of it in the scripture:
And since I have spoke of one stumbling block there seems to be some more come
in my mind, which people seem to stumble over in this day, partly much as the
Jews did, though it seems to be off of the business that I undertook, yet perhaps
it may not be altogether a miss, and one thing is, if any one that is despised
by people in general, and called a poor ignorant person: If any such one is
brought to understand any thing about religion, and to speak of the things of
God; people think it strange, they cannot suppose that such a one knows much,
they cannot think but that such a great man, or learnt man, or good minister
should know better then these poor ignorant ones: Strange say they, if such a
good man, and such a good minister don't know what way is right, just like the
old Jews, they said, "have any of the rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on
him? But this people who knows not the law are cursed:" John vii. 48.49.
"Christ thanked his Father, that he had hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes:" Matt. xi, 25. And we read, that
not many wise, not many mighty, not many noble are chosen, but the poor mean
and despised, and things that are not to bring to naught, things that are, it
seems as if the Rulers and the Pharisees, the great men of the nation had
believed on Christ, that the common people would not a scrupled it is being the
Christ, they might say if this is the Christ that was provified of by the
Prophets: Strange, that the Priest. Scribes and Pharisees that read so much,
have not found it out, we poor people have to work for our living, we have not
so much time to read and study the scriptures, but we must trust to their say,
that know better then we: And so it seems as if a great many people in this day
seem to trust too much to what others say and do, and not search for themselves
as they ought to do: They say, there is good Mr. such a one, and such a good
Minister, that says, such a way is right, and such a Minister is a learnt man,
and he knows better then we: But let whoever hears or reads these lines, be
persuaded to search the scriptures, and see for yourselves. Don't pin your
faith upon no man's sleave. The Scribes and the Pharisees were mistaken, and
why is not great and learnt men in our days, as liable to mistakes as they. It
seems if Christ had a come in great worldly grandour, and chosen the Scribes
and Pharisees, for his discipels and followers and conformed to the customs and
traditions of the people. Then the people would fall in with him fast enough;
but Christ chose poor fishermen* and unlearn't, men to be his disciples: So the
Jews said, this people who know not the law, are acursed; and so people in this
day, a great many seem to think, that no man has any right to preach without he
his college learnt, and will conform to all the traditions of the times; but
such people are very much mistaken, for Christ will send by whom he pleases,
and the word of God is a sufficient rule, for every one of his ministers to go
by, as well as for other men, let the fashions, and the traditions of men, be
what they will.

But I must return and speak a few words to true believers, and so conclude.
And O! Christian beliver, consider what a great price, Christ paid for your
redemption, to redeem you out of the dreadful estate of condemnation, which we
have been a speeking of, which all mankind were plunged into by their sins: And
let a consideration of this, quicken you to love, fear and obey, and honor him
as long as you live, and strive to keep all his commandments. The chief Captain
told Paul in another case, with great sum he obtained this freedom, but it was
with a great sum indeed, that Christ obtained freedom for all his; and let us
consider something of what he went through, he left his Father's bosom, came
down into this lower world, condescended to be born of a Virgin, and when he
was first born, his best lodging was a manger; and when he grew up, and came
upon his public ministry, behold what a treatment he met with from man, when
going about up and down in the world, taking many a wearrisome step, always a
doing some good to the soul or bodies of men. We never read of his doing any
hurt to any one: When his disciples spoke of calling for five from Heaven, he
rebuked them, and said, ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of, for says
he, the son of man did not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them: But
see what treatment he met with from a wicked world; he was received,
contridicted and falsely accused, he became poor, that we through his poverty
might be made rich. He said, "the Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air
have nests, but the Son of Man has not were to lay his head." He was despised
and rejected of men, a man of sorrow, and acquainted with grief. Isaiah. liii.
3. And now, let us follow him to the garden, and there, being in agony, he
sweats, as it were great drops of blood, falling down to the ground: And then
he was taken, led away to the high priest, and there he was mocked at, and spit
upon, blind folded and beaten: He was betrayed by one disciple, denied by
another, and forsaken by all? And now, behold him brought before PILATE, false
accused and then scourged, crowned with thorns and beaten* and after all nailed
to the CROSS, there to spill his precious blood.

And how hard hearted and cruel was his murderers, when he was thirsty, they
gave him vinegar, to drink, and besides all this that he underwent in his body;
Oh! who can think or tell what he under went in his soul; he being in the low
place of man, and bearing the punishment that was due to poor sinners to
satisfy the justice of GOD. He must bear punishment both in his soul and body.
He tells his disciples in the garden, that his soul was exceeding sorrowful,
even unto death; and on the CROSS he cried out, my God my God, why have thou
forsaken me, it seems as if what he underwent in his soul, hastened him to his
death, it seems by what we read, that he died before those that were crucified
with him: For when the soldiers came and broke the legs of those that were
crucified with him. When they came to him and saw that he was already dead,
they broke not his legs. And now, can you find in your heart to sin against
such a good and kind God, that has done so much for you. Be exhorted O
believer, to meditate much upon what Christ has done and suffered to redeem
and save you, and when tempted to any sin, say as Joseph did, "How can I do
this great wickedness and sin against God," and strive to do your duty in all
things, and have regard to all God's commands and not think that there is any
of them so small as to be overlook't. Some may say, you tell us about keeping
the commands, and doing our duty, but you don't tell us what our duty is, some
say one thing is duty, and some say another, so we are at a lose, to know what
duty is; we should be glad to keep the commands of God, if we knew what they
were; well, the best advice that I can give you is. to study the word of God,
and pray to him to teach you your duty, by his word and spirit, and enable you
to do it, and what God says in his word, that observe, let men say what they
will: Whenever their is a contridiction amongst people, about what is duty, let
your enquiry be what says the scripture, and let that decide all matters of
that sort, and let Christ be all in all unto you, and pray God to teach you his
will, and enable you to do it, for it is God that works in you, both to will
and to do, for of him and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be
glory forever, AMEN.

THE END.

