A SERMON PREACHED AT ST. PAUL'S, NEW YORK, September 22, 1776; BEING THE FIRST
SUNDAY AFTER THE ENGLISH CHURCHES WERE OPENED ON General HOWE's taking
Possession of the Town; AND The Day subsequent to the Attempt to destroy
New York by Fire.

By the REVEREND MR. O'BEIRNE, CHAPLAIN to the Right Honorable Lord Viscount
HOW.

PUBLISHED by particular Desire of the Congregation.

NEW YORK: Printed by HUGH GAIN, at the BIBLE and CROWN, in Hanover-Square,
M,DCC,LXXVI.

JEREMIAH XII.15. And it shall come to pass after that I have plucked them out,
I will return, and have Compassion on them, and will bring them again, every
Man to his Heritage, and every Man to his Land.


WAS it then reserved for a Stranger to your Persons, and your Altars, to
address you on this happy Restoration of your public Worship? This solemn Re
establishment of your Religious Assemblies? Was it to have been the good
Fortune of One, to whom you were unknown, but by your Sufferings, to be among
the first of the Ministers of God, to bring the Comfort and Consolation of his
Word to an afflicted and persecuted People? To tell them, that he has not
forgotten his loving Kindnessess of old, -- that however he seemed resolved to
chasten them in his Displeasure; to cast off his Altar and abhor his Sanctuary;
to cause the solemn Feasts and Sabbaths to be forgotten, and, in the
Indignation of his Wrath, to reject the King and the Priest -- that however he
suffers their City to be left desolate and broken down, and every House shut
up, so that no Man may come in: yet that he will return again in his Mercy, in
his appointed Time, to have Compassion upon his afflicted, to comfort his
oppressed, and to bring them again every Man to his Heritage, and every Man to
his Land; to say to the Prisoners, Go forth, and to them that are in Darkness,
Show yourselves; to restore their Princes as at the First, and their
Counselors as at the Beginning, and again to give them Priests according to
his Heart? Let it be my first Care to bless his holy Name for having permitted
me to join with your returning Clergy in the Discharge of this pleasing Office.
They also will add their Praises to mine. -- You, my Brethren, will not be
wanting in Gratitude and Thankfulness to the God of your Redemption, and the
united Voice of Priests and People will be -- It is good that a Man should both
hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord* His Ways are inscrutable,
but his Goodness certain and without Bounds.

WHO that was Witness of the cruel and disastrous Deed of the Night before
last, could promise himself, that you should be assembled this Day in the House
of God, to praise him for your wonderful Deliverance? Who could have hoped that
this Temple would remain a Monument of the returning Favor of Heaven, amidst
the Horror of the Ruins through which you must have passed to approach it?
Which of you could have said to himself, that he should see these Doors opened
once more for the Reception of the Faithful, though as yet but as the Shaking of
an Olive Tree, and the Gleaning Grapes when the Vintage is done? Or hear these
Walls, so long silent and unfrequented, filled again with the Praises of him,
to whose Name you had raised them? Is not this the Lord's Doing? Is not this
our God for whom we have waited? We have waited for him, he has saved us, and
we will be glad and rejoice in his Salvation.

SUFFER me, however, to check for a Moment, the Ferment which these different
Sensations of Joy and Grief, so rapidly succeeding each other within these few
Days past, must naturally have raised in your Breasts. When the Heart, long
oppressed, and closed in Affliction, is suddenly opened to the Impressions of
Joy, only to be overwhelmed as suddenly with an additional Weight of Sorrow and
Dismay, the Tumult within must be too violent to leave much Room for calm and
useful Reflections. It shall therefore be my Business to endeavor to suggest
such Thoughts as appear suitable to this extraordinory Occasion, and to
regulate your present Affections, in a Manner that best becomes the Disciples
of Christ. -- This has never been, and I am confident never will be, the Pulpit
of Contention or Strife. No Prophets, prophesying Lies in the Name of the Lord
who sent them not, shall ever turn it into a Stage for Sedition. The Words of
Truth and Life will never be perverted here in promoting Violence and
Bloodshed, under Pretense of consulting the Interests of the God of Peace; to
cause the Religion of the lowly, mild and meek Jesus to speak the Language of
Ambition, Slaughter and Revenge; or to consecrate and deliver out in his Name,
the Sword that is to be plunged by his Followers into each others Breasts.
Thanks be to the Lord, we have not so learned Christ. We will neither abuse his
Mercy, and long Forbearance ourselves, by thus daring to prostitute his awful
Name; nor shall we presume to deal out the Bolts of his Vengeance against
others, whom his Justice may arraign as guilty of such Profanation. -- I
therefore repeat it again, our only Business will be to suggest such
Reflections as should engage the Minds of Christians on this Occasion, to
exhort you to turn your Thoughts to yourselves; to consider the Redemption that
has been wrought in your Favor, and the Dispositions with which you should
receive these Instances of the Divine Mercies.

THE first Consideration that arises from the Subject, is the grateful Sense
you should entertain of the Goodness of God.

THE immediate Impressions of Gratitude for present Benefits are strong, lively
and affecting. We feel them with Warmth; we express them with Rapture -- But it
happens too frequently that we enjoy them with Indifference, and by Degrees
totally forget the gracious Hand that conferred them. While we are in Danger,
and Fear is upon us, we call upon the Name of the Lord: Our Sins and
Transgressions affect us in their Consequences; and our future Obedience,
Fidelity, and Gratitude, are fervently pledged in the Hopes of immediate
Protection and Relief. But when the first Sense of our Delivery is past, when
our Enemies are suppressed, and the Danger removed, we are too apt to forget
the Resolutions we formed in the Hour of Distress; our former Passions and evil
Habits too frequently return with our former Security. The God of our Salvation
is forgotten, and repayed with Ingratitude, Neglect and Disobedience.

THE Conduct of Individuals is, generally speaking, the Conduct of the
Community. Ingratitude for Favors, though a Disgrace to our Nature, is but too
common in the private Intercourses of Life; nor are Instances less frequent of
the ungrateful Returns which Nations have made for public Benefits confered
upon them. The odious Vice, in either Case, receives its Aggravation in
Proportion to the Mercies we have experienced, the Favors we have been blessed
with, and the Character of our Benefactor: But should it extend to that
Benificent Power, in whom we move, and have our being, and rob him of the
return he challenges from his Creatures for his boundless Mercy and Love, it
then assumes its most deformed Shape: It then receives its utmost Weight and
Accumulation of Guilt.

ALL that is sacred or dear upon Earth -- your Religion, your civil Rights and
Liberties, the Enjoyment of your Property, the Freedom of your Persons, the
Worship of your God, the Comfort of the Sacraments, the Presence and
Exhortation of your Ministers -- all that you possessed, and gloried in as
British Subjects and as Christians, wrested from you by Violence and
Oppression, while the Shepherds were smitten and the Sheep of the Flock
scattered abroad -- all these Blessings, valuable surely, if there be any so on
this Side the Grave, and the dearer to you now for having been so cruelly
deprived of them, has your God begun to restore to you in this your Day; and
with his stretched-out Arm, in a Manner visible to every Eye, brought you back
to a Prospect of happier Days, and placed you again under the protecting Care
of the ancient Guardians of your Religion and Liberty. And can it be possible
that you should ever suffer the Remembrance of the divine Mercies, thus
extended to you, to be blotted out from your Minds? It were doing wrong to
those who have suffered with the Fortitude and Perseverance, the Loyalty and
Attachment to their Sovereign, which have distinguished the Friends of
Government in this Colony, even to suppose it. And I should hope that they who
have endured so long and painful a Trial, rather than renounce their Loyalty,
or the religious Principles on which that Loyalty is chiefly founded, will
never hereafter be guilty of any Action, or pursue any Conduct, that can
disgrace them as good Subjects, or as virtuous Christians.

BUT while I thus exhort you to persevere in your grateful Acknowledgments to
the God of your Redemption, let me not neglect a Point of equal Importance to
you, equally acceptable to him. The Use, which in his gracious Providence he
designs we should make of the Misconduct of others, or of the Punishments which
our Sins may have brought on ourselves, is frequently pointed out in the
Scriptures. His Visitations he sets up as Marks to caution us against the Rocks
and Shelves on which Folly and Vice have already caused so many to be wrecked;
and wilfully to run upon them is to slight the divine Mercy -- is an
Aggravation of all our former Guilt, and justly exposes us to still more severe
Effects of the Wrath of Heaven. The Psalmist, enumerating the various
Calamities inflicted on the Israelites for their Incredulity and Disobedience,
mentions, as a Source of additional Miseries to this stiff-necked People, that
they neglected to profit by their own fatal Experience, or the dreadful
Examples they daily saw before their Eyes, of the Lord's Indignation. They
refused to humble themselves beneath the divine Chastisement, but continued to
provoke their Deliverer by fresh Proofs of Ingratitude. The Wrath of God came
upon them, and smote down the chosen Men of Israel; for all this they sinned
still -- therefore their Days did he consume in Vanity, and their Years in
Troubles. Entering into these Views, my Brethren, consider with me the Steps
that have led your Country into its present Calamities -- you will be the
better enabled to check them in future, at least to decline and avoid them
yourselves. -- The Excesses of others will teach you a Lesson of Prudence and
Moderation to regulate your own Conduct.

MY Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change -- was the excellent Rule laid down by the wisest of Men.
Against those who transgress it, he denounces a sudden and inevitable
Destruction. Whatever they may promise themselves, -- However they may seem to
prosper for a Time, Ruin, infallible Ruin, awaits them when least they expect
it; nor is it possible to foresee the Miseries they may entail on themselves
and their Descendants -- " their Calamity shall rise suddenly; and who knows
the Ruin of them both? The Words are remarkable, but they are dictated by
Wisdom, and supported by Experience. It has happened from your former
prosperous State, and the present Calamities of this Province, from which you
happily begin to respire, that no Nation upon Earth can form a better Judgment
upon this important Question than yourselves; and I have before me, in this
Assembly, a living Example to which alone I need refer.

CALL then to Mind the happy and prosperous Days this Colony enjoyed, when
Loyalty to your Sovereign, Affection for the Constitution of your parent State,
and Obedience to the Laws you enjoyed under its Protection, distinguished it
above all the other Provinces of America. Your Condition was then an Object of
Envy to Nations corrupted by the Refinements of Luxury. Peace was in your
Dwellings, Plenty in your Streets -- Industry diffused her Blessings through
your Fields with an increasing Profusion, giving Life to all the useful Arts,
and nurturing them daily into Maturity and Perfection. The Produce of your
Country flowed from your Port in a constant uninterrupted Stream, and you
received in Return the Conveniences and Comforts of Life, and all the
Elegancies which a free and extensive Commerce can bestow on a prudent and
contented People. A friendly, hospitable, and social Intercourse united you
together as the Members of one Family, to the Admiration and Delight of
Strangers who resided among you -- you were blessed beyond the usual Lot of Men
-- Happy, completely so, did you but know how to value your Happiness, and to
preserve it!

HOW different the Scene to which I must call off your Attention! what a Change
of Prospect will the Reverse exhibit! where shall we seek for that Treasure of
Happiness which you could boast, when every Man sat under his own Vine, and eat
his Bread with Cheerfulness? Alas! Is it not wasted all, and consumed in
visionary Schemes, empty and fanciful as the Dreams of the Morning! Is it not
squandered away in lawless and ungrateful Attempts, repugnant to every
Principle divine and human? In Pursuits which plain Sense and Reason condemn,
and at which even the Impulses of Nature must recoil? Peace, frightened from
the Seats where once she loved to dwell, long since took her Flight from among
you. Dissentions, party Rage, public Enmities, and private Animosities, usurped
her Place, and brought with them a horrid Train of mutual Fears, Distrusts, and
endless Jealousies. By these were the Confidence and Harmony of all social
Intercourse destroyed; by these were the Bands of Love and Friendship torn
asunder; by these were even the Ties of Consanguinity and Nature dissolved.
Self-interest, Self-preservation, the Welfare of Posterity, Principles
ingrafted in the human Mind by the benificent Creator, were all confounded and
lost in this dark and dismal Night of Confusion, Anarchy, and Licentiousness.
See Industry perverted from its useful Purposes, and employed in improving the
Arts of Destruction. Your Plough-Shears it turned into Swords, and your
Pruning-Hocks into Spears, the Reverse of the Blessing pronounced by Isaiah.
See your Fields once cultivated, the Gardens of America, laid waste and turned
into licentious Encampments and the desolating Scenes of War; -- see your
Commerce, your envied Commerce, destroyed, your Property seized and dissipated
in Support of the Cause you abhored -- your Liberties despised and trodden
under Foot* and an armed Multitude insulting over your Miseries, turned loose
upon your Possessions, and rioting in your Substance. In vain you looked up to
Justice for Support -- her Seats were overthrown, and trampled in the Dust; her
Rulers dispersed, and the People abandoned to every wild Impulse of Humor and
Passion, without Laws, without Magistrates, without Form of Government. In
short, too well might we apply to you the Words of Jeremiah -- If you went
forth into the Fields, behold the Slain with the Sword; if you entered into the
City, behold she that was full of Inhabitants, and Princess among the
Provinces, sitting solitary, and become as a disconsolate, childless Widow. --
Both the Prophet and the Priest went about in a Land they knew not -- your
Friends dealt treacherously with you, and became your Enemies, while you were
gone into Captivity, because of Affliction, and because of great Servitude.

To what Causes are we to attribute this deplorable Change? Whence is it that
you can say to yourselves, Such was the Happiness we once could boast; such the
melancholy Reverse we have experienced! I have heard some attribute it to the
Imperfection of human Nature, incapable of enjoying a durable State of
Prosperity, and oftentimes most discontented, when blessed with the greatest
Cause of Content. But I shall search for it among the Sources of the Decay and
Fall of Nations, which the Scriptures of God point out to me. Warranted by
these, I shall not hesitate to assert, that if this Province had continued to
fear the Lord, and the King, and had not meddled with those who are given to
change; the Tempest would have spent its Rage at a Distance from you, and
Peace, Industry, and Happiness would still have blessed your Dwellings, as they
did of old. You, indeed, my Friends, seem to have been well convinced of this
Truth. The Struggle you maintained was vigorous, and for some Time successful
-- But all were not animated with your Spirit. The Love of Novelty -- or
whatever other Causes the Powers of Darkness best can tell -- for it is
impossible to account for such Folly and Madness on any known Principles --
seduced too many from their Allegiance to their Sovereign, and their former
happy Attachment to the British Constitution; and these ancient Barriers being
once removed, all the Disorders that have well nigh overthrown your Country,
broke in upon you, and the Depression of your Religion, for the Time, followed
of Course. So true it is, that when Restlessness and Discontent once possess
the Mind, it is impossible to foresee to what Extremes a Rage for Innovation,
and a Passion for Change, will transport their Votaries. They are like the
unclean Spirit mentioned in the Gospel, always on the Wing, seeking a Place of
Rest, but never finding it. Excesses, at which Men would have shuddered at
their first setting out, swept clean, and placed in a delusive Point of View by
Faction and Party, lose their Deformity, and daily make Way for other Excesses
still more criminal, still more enormous. These dissatisfied Spirits take to
themselves other Spirits more wicked than themselves, and the last State of
these Men becomes worse than the first. I need not make the Application -- It
is but too manifest -- you have already done it for me.

I HAVE said that when too many of this Province suffered themselves to be
seduced from their Allegiance to their Sovereign, and their former happy
Attachment to the British Constitution, the Depression of your Religion
followed of Course -- Let me not be misunderstood -- I mean not to engage in an
invidious Point of Controversy, which has often been carried to such fatal
Lengths. Religious Disputes obtrude themselves too frequently into Subjects of
mere political Concern, and serve no other End than to widen Divisions, and
increase Animosities, which the Holy System, the Interests of which they would
seem to support, would wish to allay forever. Warmed with Zeal for their
particular Tenets, however unessentially differing from each other, the
Passions of the Disputants work themselves into the Controversy, and we are apt
to ascribe their rash and intemperate Dictates to that System, the Defense of
which they have embraced. There is also another Prejudice, which is apt to lead
us astray in this important Matter. As in the different Forms of Government, at
present established throughout the Christian World, Religion is fundamentally
connected with their civil and political Institutes; we generally consider them
as going Hand in Hand, and charge the Creed of each particular Sect with the
political Errors and Disorders of its Professors. A Church there is, indeed,
whose Principles have been proved by fatal Experience to be so essentially
inconsistent with every Notion of free and rational Government, so infallibly
introductive of a double Slavery, forging Chains both for the Body and Mind,
that it has been deservedly branded with this foul Imputation, and justly
abhorred by Nations jealous of their Liberties. But that among Protestant
Churches, such a Charge should be urged and retorted by each other, with so
much Virulence and Animosity, has long been a Cause of Grief to every
Well-wisher of the Reformed Religion, and a great Subject of Triumph to their
common Enemies, both at home and abroad. Let me not attempt to enlarge the
Breach, or be guilty of an Error, which I condemn in others. I shall only
observe, that in every Age, in every State, there are Men of depraved Hearts,
who put on Religion as a Cloak to cover their sinister Views; or use it as a
political Tool to work upon the Minds of the Weak, and uninstructed, and all,
whose Zeal without Knowledge renders them an easy Prey to the Arts of Seducers.
These, like the Lame and Impotent at the Pool of Bethesda, watch the Troubling
of the Waters, that they may be the first to take Advantage of the public
Commotions, and on the Ruins of the Peace and Happiness of their Country, pave
the Way to their own Advancement: Men, who declaim against every Power, but
that which they have themselves usurped; to whom the Pretense of the public
Good, and the Interests of their Country, is as easy as that of Religion; and
who assume both in common with every restless Malecontent, who in every Age,
under every Government, has destroyed the Peace of the Christian World.

FROM what Causes your Sufferings may have originated, this is not the Time,
nor the Place to consider. Too certain it is, that they have now risen to such
a Height of Aggravation, as needs no Words to represent to you -- You feel it
beyond the Energy of Words. The smart of recent Wrongs, and former Injuries,
speaks a Language which those who sympathize with you in your Sufferings, can
never adopt. Whatever the Principles of your Persecutors may be, their
unrelenting Malice is but too notorious; and they have added to all their
former Excesses, a Deed of Atrociousness which must open the Eyes of the most
infatuated -- must totally alienate even the small Numbers, who may have
hitherto been deluded into some favorable Opinion of their Cause. To what a
Scene were you Witnesses the Night before last! When just escaped from the
Storm, and imagining yourselves arrived at a Port of Rest; laboring to collect
together the small Remains of your Fortune that had escaped the general Wreck;
meeting once more and embracing, after so long and painful a Separation, the
Objects of your tenderest Affection, or solacing yourselves with the Hopes of
being speedily reunited to those who were yet detained in Bondage from you;
congratulating your Friends on your mutual Deliverance, and the Prospect that
was opening to you of returning Peace, Quiet and Security -- In this Dawn of
your Hopes and Expectations, to awake at the Midnight Hour and find your City
in Flames; to see your All perishing before your Eyes, and to know that your
Destroyers were secretly among you, spreading the Ruin, and exulting in the
Success of their infernal Scheme!

THIS was not the sudden Act of a vanquished and flying Enemy, perpetrated in
the peevish Moment of Disappointment and Defeat, or contrived to favor their
Escape. No, -- several Days had elapsed since their Flight, and Quiet seemed to
have revisited you under the Banner of your Deliverers. Even the base
Incendiaries returned among you, wearing the Mask of Peace. We hoped that they
had repented of their Excesses -- had been convinced of their Folly and
Madness, and meant to embrace the proffered Clemency of their Sovereign, who was
willing to forget the ungrateful Revolt against his Authority, their Contempt
of his Crown and Government, and the Insults offered to his Person. But they
cried, Peace, Peace, when there was no Peace. The Blow they were meditating was
the more dangerous from its being thus concealed -- they gloried in striking it
home, and nothing, under Heaven, but the Activity of your English Friends,
could have prevented the whole City's falling a Victim to their determined
Malice. Yes, my Friends, ye were Witnesses of it. -- Ye saw the treacherous
Adherents of these pretended Guardians of your Rights and Possessions, who came
to rescue you from Tyranny and Oppression, armed with Firebrands, and under
Cover of the Darkness wrapping your City in Flames -- Ye saw the brave and
generous Servants of your King, -- that King, whom you have so often heard
represented as a Tyrant, who sends forth his Fleets and Armies to enslave,
ravage, destroy, -- flying to the Assistance of their fellow Subjects, in the
Midst of the Flames, at the Hazard of their Lives, exerting every Nerve to
preserve your Dwellings and Possessions, and tearing from the Hands of the dark
Incendiaries the Instruments they had prepared for your Destruction. Had it
pleased Heaven, that the Success could have answered their Zeal, so many
Families once blessed with Comfort and Affluence, would not have been turned
out on the World, naked, helpless, and stripped of their All. -- The Seminary
of indigent Merit, where Poverty found a Resource against Ignorance, and where
Charity reclaimed Thousands from Idleness and Dissipation to Virtue and
Industry, would yet have stood. In the Fire of Saturday, Sept. 21, a Thousand
Houses, nearly One Fourth of the City, were laid in Ashes. Trinity Church, the
public Charity School, the Rector's House, and a Lutheran Chapel, were among
the Buildings that were consumed. -- The Loss sustained in Houses, etc. by the
Corporation of Trinity Church, amounts, at a moderate Computation, to THIRTY
THOUSAND POUNDS, New York Currency.
The Mansion of your worthy and reverend Minister, whose Absence you still
regret, and the Possessions appropriated for the Support of your Clergy, would
not have perished, and added to the Distresses they have already suffered on
your Account and their own. -- But ye smitten and afflicted, who beheld your
Destruction coming on you like a Whirlwind, and saw the Work of Ages, the
Fruits of your own Industry, and the Labor of your Ancestors, swept off in the
Space of a Moment, whither could ye have fled from the Rage of your Enemies?
Not even the Temples of the Lord were sacred from their Fury -- his Altars
could afford you no Sanctuary. The Mother of your Churches, the Ornament of
your Worship, the first Edifice which the Piety of your Ancestors had raised to
the God of their Fathers, in Gratitude for his Mercies in a strange Land, was
marked out for certain Destruction. Some Child of Perdition claimed to himself
the Merit of this daring Sacrilege, and involved the ancient and venerable Pile
in the same Ruin with which they designed to extirpate all the Monuments of
your Religion, every Vestige of your ancient Splendour and Glory.

IN this Scene of universal Danger and Distress, to what can the Ministers of
God exhort you? Ill should we know what Manner of Spirit we were of, if we
suffered any Expressions, that may have fallen from us, to be interpreted into
a Breach of Charity, the Crown of Christian Virtues; or into a Design of
sharpening the Virulence of Party, or increasing Animosities that have already
too fatally destroyed the Peace of your Jerusalem. To minister some Consolation
in your Sufferings, as becomes the Teachers of the Gospel, who must be
unworthy indeed of the Character they bear, not to feel for the Afflictions of
their Brethren, who look to them for Comfort and Instruction; to set before you
the loving Kindnesses of the Lord, and the Redemption he has wrought in your
Favor, and to exhort you to make every becoming Return for his Mercies and
Love; to point out to you, and warn you against the Abuses that have brought
Ruin upon your Country -- this has been our only Aim. -- If we have succeeded,
all our Wishes are satisfied, and we shall have the Consolation to think that
you will sanctify this Day, as becomes Christians -- by Prayer and
Thanksgiving; by Repentance for past Sins, and Resolutions of an Amendment of
Life; by practicing the Duties of that Religion, for the Interests of which you
have manifested such Zeal and Attachment; by laying aside all Malice, Hatred,
and Desire of Revenge; by committing your Cause to the Justice of God, and
waiting with Resignation for the further Accomplishment of his gracious
Designs. He who can still the raging of the Seas, knows best how to restore
Peace and Tranquillity to your distracted Country. May he correct the Hearts,
and enlighten the Understandings of your infatuated Brethren, who still refuse
to contribute their Endeavors toward healing these unhappy Disputes. And
while their Example proves a Warning to you, -- while, in their Conduct, you
consider the Excesses to which those may be transported, who once pass the
ancient Bounds of lawful and settled Government, may God give you Grace to
attach yourselves the more firmly to our happy Constitution both in Church and
State.

HUMBLY, and with all due prostration of Heart, I shall venture to affirm that
your Cause is his own. It is the Cause of Peace, Loyalty, and sound Reason,
exposed to the Attempts of misguided Men, whom he seems to have given over to a
Blindness of Heart that hurries them into all the Violence and Artifice of
Sedition, Frenzy and Rebellion. Fear not then, my Friends, but in his own Time
his Wisdom will order all Things sweetly. In the mean Time, learn to resign
yourselves to whatever Means he may be pleased to employ for that End, and
humble yourselves beneath his chastising, but fatherly Hand. Would to God I
could say that the Danger were past! But Treachery perhaps, still lurketh
amongst you. Let every Man, therefore, be careful and vigilant. Nature
requires, and Religion approves, that we should make Use of the Means, which
Providence has put into our Power for our Protection and Safety. But let this
be your chief Dependence, that he who is with you, is greater than they who are
against you. -- He from whom alone your Safety can come, neither slumbers nor
sleeps. Though your Enemies may hope that the Darkness shall cover them, the
Darkness is no darkness with Him. He will not let them have their Desire, nor
their mischievous Imagination prosper. Let the Sense of the common Danger to
which you are exposed, and the Fellowship of your past Sufferings, strengthen
the Ties of Charity between you, and bind you together as Friends and Brethren.
Let a Reciprocration of Kindness and Humanity distinguish you in this Season of
Distress, to soften the Rigor of each others Sufferings and lighten the
universal Burden of Affliction. Be of one Heart, and one Mind, cleave
together, -- commend yourselves to the Protection of God, and doubt not but he
will complete the Work he has already so graciously begun. And when he shall
have plucked out all Strife and Enmity from among you, fear not but he will
return, and have Compassion upon you, and bring you again every Man to his
Heritage, and every Man to his Land.

I MUST not finish as if I meant to disappoint your Expectations, and not adopt
a Conclusion which I am convinced you have already anticipated. The Allegiance
they had sworn to their lawful Sovereign, and an affectionate Attachment to his
virtuous Character, compelled your Clergy to shut these Doors, rather than omit
the dutiful Addresses, which the Church enjoins them daily to offer to Heaven
for his Safety. Let us therefore conclude the Service of this Day, when the
Freedom of your Worship is restored to you, by uniting together with one Heart,
and one Voice; to implore the divine Favor and Protection for our Sovereign
Lord, King George; -- that God would be pleased to give him length of Days, and
increase of Happiness -- to prosper all his Undertakings for the good of his
People, and to bless him with what his Actions prove, and his Words assert to
be the Sea his Majesty's Speech at the Conclusion of the Session of Parliament.
FAVORITE WISH OF HIS HEART; THE RESTORATION OF HARMONY, AND THE
RE-ESTABLISHMENT OF ORDER AND HAPPINESS IN EVERY PART OF HIS DOMINIONS.

The END.

