FRUITS OF A FATHER'S LOVE: BEING THE ADVICE OF WILLIAM PENN To his CHILDREN,
Relating to their Civil and Religious CONDUCT.

THE SIXTH EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and sold by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Market-street between
Second and Third-Streets.

MDCCLXXVI.

FRUITS OF A FATHER'S LOVE: Being the ADVICE of WILLIAM PENN to his CHILDREN.
CHAP. I.
My DEAR CHILDREN,
. 1. NOT knowing how long it may please God to continue me amongst you, I am
willing to embrace this Opportunity of leaving you my Advice and Counsel, with
respect to your Christian and civil Capacity and Duty in this World: And I both
beseech you and charge you, by the Relation you have to me, and the Affection I
have always shown to you, and indeed received from you, that you lay up the
same in your Hearts, as well as your Heads, with a wise and religious Care.

. 2. I will begin with that which is the Beginning of all true Wisdom and
Happiness, the holy Fear of God.

Children, Fear God; that is to say, Have an holy Awe upon your Minds to avoid
that which is evil, and a strict Care to embrace and do that which is good. The
Measure and Standard of which Knowledge and Duty, is the Light of Christ in
your Consciences, by which, as in John iii. 20, 21. you may clearly see if your
Deeds, ay, and your Words and Thoughts too, are wrought in God or not; for they
are the Deeds of the Mind, and for which you must be judged; I say, with this
divine Light of Christ in our Consciences, you may bring your Thoughts, Words,
and Works to Judgment in yourselves, and have a right true, sound and unerring
Sense of your Duty toward God and Man. And as you come to obey this blessed
Light in its holy Convictions, it will lead you out of the World's dark and
degenerate Ways and Works, and bring you unto Christ's Way and Life, and to be
of the Number of his true self-denying Followers, to take up your Cross for his
Sake, that bore his for yours; and to become the Children of the Light, putting
it on, as your holy Armor; by which you may see and resist the fiery Darts of
Satan's Temptations, and overcome him in all his Assaults.

. 3. I would a little explain this Principle to you. It is called Light, John
i. 9. iii. 19, 20, 21. and viii. 12. Ephesians. v. 8. 13, 14 1 Thessalonians. v. 5. 1
Epistle of John i. 5, 6, 7. Rev. xxi. 23. because it gives Man a Sight of his
Sin. And it is also called the quickening Spirit; for so he is called; and the
Lord from Heaven, as 1 Cor. xv. 45, 57. who is called and calls himself the
Light of the World, John viii. 12. And why is he called the Spirit? Because he
give Man spiritual Life. And, John xvi. 8. Christ promised to send his Spirit
to convince the World of their Sins: Wherefore, that which convinces you and
all People of their Sins, is the Spirit of Christ: This is highly prized, Romans
viii. as you may read in that great and sweet Chapter, for the Children of God
are led by it. This reveals the Things of God, that appertain to Man's
Salvation and Happiness, as 1 Cor. ii. 10, 11, 12. It is the Earnest God gives
his People, 2 Cor. v. 5. It is the great End and Benefit, and Blessing, of the
Coming of Christ, viz. The shining forth of this Light, and pouring forth of
this Spirit. Yea, Christ is not received by them that resist his Light, and
Spirit in their Hearts* nor can they have the Benefit of his Birth, Life,
Death, Resurrection, Intercession, etc. who rebel against the Light. God sent
his Son to bless us, in turning of us from the Evil of our Ways: Therefore have
a care of Evil, for that turns you away from God; and wherein you have done
Evil, do so no more: But be ye turned, my dear Children, from that Evil in
Thought, as well as in Word or Deed, or that will turn you from God your
Creator, and Christ whom he has given you for your Redeemer; who redeems and
saves his People from their Sins, Tit. ii. 14. not in their Sins; read Acts ii.
and Heb. viii. And the Christian Dispensation will appear to be that of the
Spirit, which Sin quenches, hardens the Heart against, and bolts the Door
upon. This holy divine Principle is called Grace too, Tit, ii. 11, 12. there
you will see the Nature and Office of it, and its blessed effects upon those
that were taught of it in the primitive Days. And why Grace? Because it is
God's Love, and not our Desert, his Good Will, his Kindness. He so loved the
World, that he gave his only begotten Son into the World, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life, John iii. 6. And
it is this holy Son, that in John i. 14. 16. is declared to be full of Grace
and Truth, and that of his Grace we receive Grace for Grace; that is we receive
of him, the Fullness, what Measure of Grace we need. And the Lord told Paul in
his great Trials, when ready to stagger about the Sufficiency of the Grace he
had received to deliver him, My Grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. xii. 9. O
Children! love the Grace, hearken to th^^ Grace, it will teach you, it will
sanctify you, it will lead you to the Rest and Kingdom o^ God; as it taught the
Saints of old, first, who to deny, viz. To deny Ungodliness and worldy Lusts;
and then what to do, viz. To live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present World, Tit. ii. 11. 12. And he that is full of Grace, is full of Light,
and he that is full of Light is the quickening Spirit, that gives a
Manifestation of his Spirit to every one to profit with, 1 Cor. xii. 7. And he
that is the quickening Spirit is the Truth. I am the Way, the Truth and the
Life, said he to his poor Followers, John xiv. 6. And if the Truth make you
free, said he to the Jews, then are you free indeed, John viii. 32. 30. And
this Truth sheds abroad itself in Man, and begets Truth in the inward Parts,
and makes false, rebellious, hypocritical Man, a true Man to God again. Truth
in the inward Parts is of great Price with the Lord. And why called TRUTH?
Because it tells Man the Truth of his spiritual State; it shows him his State,
deals plainly with him, and sets his Sins in Order before him. So that, my dear
Children, the Light, Spirit, Grace, and Truth, are not diverse Principles, but
diverse Words or Denominations given to one eternal Power and heavenly Principle
in you, though not of you, but of God, according to the Manifestation or
Operation thereof in the Servants of God of old Time: Light, to discover and
give Discerning; Spirit, to quicken and enliven: Grace, to wit, the Love of
God: Truth, because it tells Man the Truth of his Condition, and redeems him
from the Errors of his Ways; that as Darkness, Death, Sin, and Error, are the
same, so Light, Spirit, Grace and Truth, are the same.

. 4. This is that which is come by Christ; and a Measure of this Light, Spirit,
Grace, and Truth, is given to every Man and Woman to see their Way to go by.
This is that which distinguishes FRIENDS from all other Societies, as they are
found walking in the same, which leads out of vain Honors, Compliments, Lusts
and Pleasures of the World.

O my dear Children! this is the Pearl of Price; part with all for it, but
never part with it for all the World. This is the Gospel Leaven to leaven you*
that is, sanctify and season you in Body, Soul and Spirit, to God your heavenly
Father's Use and Service, and your own lasting Comfort. Yea, this is the divine
and incorruptible Seed of the Kingdom, of which, all truly regenerate Men and
Women, Christians of Christ's making, are born. Receive it into your Hearts,
give it Room there, let it take deep Root in you, and you will be fruitful unto
God, in every good Word and Work. As you take heed to it, and the holy
Enlightenings and Motions of it, you will have a perfect Discerning of the
Spirit of this World; in all its Appearances in yourselves and others; the
Motions, Temptations and Workings of it, as to Pride, Vanity, Covetousness,
Revenge, Uncleanness, Hypocrisy, and every evil Way; you will see the World in
all its Shapes and Features, and you will be able to judge the World by it, and
the Spirit of the World in all its Appearances: You will see, as I have done,
that there is much to deny, much to suffer, and much to do: And you will see,
that there is no Power or Virtue but in the Light, Spirit, Grace and Truth of
Christ, to carry you through the World to God's Glory and your everlasting
Peace. Yea, you will see what Religion is from above, and what is from below;
what is of God's working, and of Man's making and forcing; also, what Ministry
is of his Spirit and giving, and what of Man's studying, framing, and imposing.
You will, I say, discern the Rise, Nature, Tokens, and Fruits of the true from
the false Ministry, and what Worship is spiritual, and what ca^nal; and what
Honor is of God, and what that Honor is, which is from below of Men, yea,
fallen Men, that the Jews and the World so generally love and which is spoken
against in John v. 44. you will see the vain and evil Communication, that
corrupts good Manners; the Snares of much Company and Business, and especially
the Danger of the Friendship of this present evil World. And you will also see,
that the Testimony the eternal God has brought our poor Friends unto, as to
Religion, Worship, Truth-speaking, Ministry, Plainness, Simplicity, and
Moderation in Apparel, Furniture, Food, Salutation: as you may read in their
Writings, from the very Beginning, is a true and heavenly Testimony of his
Mind, Will, Work and Dispensation in this last Age of the World to Mankind,
being the Revival of true primitive Christianity: Where, your most tender
Father prays, that you may be kept, and charges you to watch, that you may be
preserved in the Faith and Practice of that blessed Testimony; and count it no
small Mercy from God, nor Honor to you, that you come of Parents that counted
nothing too dear or near to part with, nor too great to do or suffer, that they
might approve themselves to God, and testify their Love to his most precious
Truth in the inward Parts, in their Generation. And I do also charge you, my
dear Children, to retain in your Remembrance those worthy Ancients in the Work
of Christ, who remained alive to your Day and Memory, and yet remain to your
Knowledge; more especially that Man of God and Prince in Israel, the firstborn
and begotten of our Day and Age of Truth, and the first and the great early
Instrument of God amongst us, GEORGE FOX. And what you have heard, seen and
observed, of those heavenly Worthies, their holy Wisdom, Zeal, Love, Labors
and Sufferings, and particular Tenderness to you, treasure up for your Children
after you, and tell them what you have heard, seen and known, of the Servants
and Work of God, and Progress, thereof, as an holy, exemplary, and edifying
Tradition unto them. And be sure, that you forsake not the Assembling
yourselves with God's People, as the Manner of some was, Heb. x. 25. and is at
this Day, especially among young People, the Children of some Friends, whom the
Love of this present evil World has hurt and cooled in their Love to God and
his Truth. But do you keep close to Meetings, both of Worship, and Business of
the Church, when of and Age and Capacity proper for it; and that not out of
Novelty, Formality, or to be seen of Men, but in pure Fear, Love and Conscience
to God you Creator, as the public, just and avowed Testimony of your Duty and
Homage to Him: In which be exemplary, both by timely coming, and a reverent and
serious Deportment during the Assembly; in which be not weary, or think the
Time long till it be over, as some did of the Sabbaths of old Time; but let
your Eye be to him you come to wait upon and serve, and do what you do as to
him, and he will be your Refreshment and Reward; for you shall return with the
Seals and Pledges of his Love, Mercy and Blessings.

. 5. Above all things, my dear Children, as to your communion and Fellowship
with Friends, be careful to keep the Unity of the Faith in the Bond of Peace.
Have a Care of Reflectors, Detractors, Backbiters, that undervalue and
undermine Brethren behind their Backs, or slight the good and wholesome Order of
Truth, for the preserving Things quiet, sweet and honorable in the Church.
Have a Care of Novelties, and airy changeable People, the conceited, censorious
and puffed up; who at last have always shown themselves to be Clouds without
Rain, and Wells without Water, that will rather disturb and break the Peace and
Fellowship of the Church, where they dwell, than not have their Wills and Ways
take place. I charge you, in the Fear of the living God, that you carefully
beware of all such; mark them, as the Apostle says, Romans xvi. 17. and have no
Fellowship with them; but to advise, exhort, entreat, and finally reprove them,
Ephesians. v. 11. For God is and will be with his People, in this holy Dispensation
we are now under, and which is now amongst us, unto the End of Days: It shall
grow and increase in Gifts, Graces, Power and Luster, for it is the last and
unchangeable One: And blessed are your Eyes, if they see it, and your Ears, if
they hear it, and your Hearts, if they understand it; which I pray that you
may, to God's Glory and your eternal Comfort.

. 6. Having thus expressed myself to you, my dear Children, as to the Things of
God, his Truth and Kingdom, I refer you to his Light* Grace, Spirit and Truth
within you, and the holy Scriptures of Truth without you, which from my Youth I
loved to read, and were ever blessed to me; and which I charge you to read
daily; the Old Testament for History chiefly, the Psalms for Meditation and
Devotion, the Prophets for Comfort and Hope, but especially the New Testament
for Doctrine, Faith and Worship: For they were given forth by holy Men of God
in diverse Ages, as they were moved of the holy Spirit; and are the declared and
revealed Mind and Will of the holy God to Mankind under diverse Dispensations,
and they are certainly able to make the Man of God perfect, through Faith, unto
Salvation; being such a true and clear Testimony to the Salvation that is of
God, through Christ the second Adam, the Light of the World, the quickening
Spirit, who is full of Grace and Truth, whose Light, Grace, Spirit and Truth,
bear Witness to them in every sensible Soul, as they frequently, plainly and
solemnly bear Testimony to the Light, Spirit, Grace and Truth, both in himself
and in and to his People, to their Sanctification, Justification, Redemption
and Consolation, and in all Men to their (...) Reproof and Conviction in their
(...) Ways, I say, having thus expressed myself in general, I refer you, my
dear Children, to the Light and Spirit, of JESUS, that is with^^ you, and to
the Scriptures of Truth without you, and such other Testimonies to (...) same
eternal Truth, as have (...) in our Day; and shall now descend to Particulars,
that you may more directly apply what I have said in general, both as to your
religious and civil Direction in your Pilgrimage upon Earth.

CHAP. II.
. 1. I WILL begin here also with the Beginning of Time, the Morning. So soon as
you wake, retire your Mind into a pure Silence from all Thoughts and Ideas of
worldly Things, and in that Frame wait upon God, to feel his good Presence to
lift up your Hearts to him, and commit your whole Self into his blessed Care
and Protection. Then rise, if well, immediately; being dressed, read a Chapter or
more in the Scriptures, and afterward dispose yourselves for the Business of
the Day; ever remembering that God is present, the Overseer of all your
Thoughts, Words and Actions; and demean yourselves, my dear Children,
accordingly; and do not you dare to do that in his holy all-seeing Presence,
which (...) a Man, yea, a Child, (...) do. And as you have Intervals from your
lawful Occasions, delight to st^p home, within yourselves I mean, and commune
with your own Hearts, and be still; and, as Nebuchadnezzar said on another
Occasion, One like the Son of God you shall find and enjoy with you and in you;
a Treasure the World knows not of, but is the Aim, End and Diadem of the
Children of God. This will bear you up against all Temptations, and carry you
sweetly and evenly through your Day's Business, supporting you under
Disappointments, and moderating your Satisfaction in Success and Prosperity.
The Evening come, read again the holy Scripture, and have your Times of
Retirement, before you close your Eyes, as in the Morning; that so the Lord may
be the Alpha and Omega of every Day of your Lives. And if God bless you with
Families, remember good Joshua's Resolution, Josh. xxiv. 15. But as for me and
my House, we will serve the Lord.

. 2. Fear God; show it in Desire, Refraining and Doing: Keep the inward Watch,
keep a clear Soul and a light Heart. Mind an inward Sense upon doing any Thing;
when you read the Scripture, remark the notablest Places, as your Spirits are
most touched and affected, in a commonplace Book, with that Sense or Opening
which you receive; for they come not by Study or in the Will of Man, no more
than the Scripture did; and they may be lost by Carelessness, and over-growing
Thoughts and Businesses of this Life; so in pursuing any other good or
Profitable Book; yet rather meditate than read much. For the Spirit of a Man
knows the Things of a Man, and with that Spirit, by Observation of the Tempers
and Actions of Men you see in the World, and looking into your own Spirits, and
meditating thereupon, you will have a deep and strong Judgment of Men and
Things. For from what may be, what should be, and what is most probable or
likely to be, you can hardly miss in your Judgment of human Affairs; and you
have a better Spirit than your own, in reserve for a Time of Need, to pass the
final Judgment in important Matters.

. 3. In Conversation, mark well what others say or do, and hide your own Mind,
at least till last; and then open it as sparingly as the Matter will let you. A
just Observance and Reflection upon Men and Things, give Wisdom; those are the
great Books of Learning seldom read. The laborious Be draws Honey from every
Flower. Be always on your Watch, but chiefly in Company; then be sure to have
your Wits about you, and your Armor on; speak last and little, but to the
Point. Interrupt none, anticipate none, read Prove. x. 8. 13. Be quick to hear
slow to speak, Prove. xvii. 27. It gives Time to understand, and ripens an
Answer. Affect not Words, but Matter, and chiefly to be pertinent and plain:
Truest Eloquence is plainest, and brief Speaking, I mean Brevity and Clearness
to make yourselves easily understood by every Body, and in as few Words as the
Matter will admit of, is the best.

. 4. Prefer the Aged, the Virtuous, and the Knowing; and choose those that
excel, for your Company and Friendship, but despise not others.

. 5. Return no Answer to Anger, unless with much Meekness, which often turns it
away: But rarely make Replies, less Rejoinders; for that adds Fuel to the Fire.
It is a wrong Time to vindicate yourselves, the true Ear being then never open
to hear it. Men are not themselves, and know not well what Spirits they are of:
Silence to Passion, Prejudice and Mockery, is the best Answer and often
conquers what Resistance inflames.

. 6. Learn and teach your Children fair Writing, and the most useful Parts of
Mathematics, and some Business when Young, what ever else they are taught.

. 7. Cast up your Incomes and live on half; if you can, one-third; reserving
the rest for Casualties, Charities, Portions.

. 8. Be plain in Clothes, Furniture and Food, but clean, and then the Coarser
the better; the rest is Folly and a Snare. Therefore next to Sin, avoid
Daintiness and Choiceness about your Person and Houses. For if it be not an
Evil in itself, it is a Temptation to it; and may be accounted a Nest for Sin
to brood in.

. 9. Avoid Differences; what are not avoidable refer, and keep Awards strictly,
and without Grudgings, read Prove. xviii. 17, 18. xxv. 8. Mat. v 38, to 41. 1
Cor. i. 10, to 13. it is good Counsel.

. 10. Besure draw your Affairs into as narrow a Compass as you can, and in
Method and Proportion, Time and other Requisites proper for them.

. 11. Have very few Acquaintance, and fewer Intimates, but of the best in their
Kind.

. 12. Keep your own Secrets, and do not covet others; but if trusted, never
reveal them, unless mischievous to somebody; nor then, before Warning to the
Party to desist and repent. Prove. xi. 13. xxv. 9, 10.

. 13. Trust no man with the main Chance, and avoid to be trusted.

. 14. Make few Resolutions, but keep them strictly.

. 15. Prefer Elders and Strangers on all Occasions; be rather last than first
in Convenience and Respect; but first in all Virtues.

. 16. Have a Care of trusting to after Games, for then there is but one Throw
for all; and Precipices are ill Places to build upon. Wisdom gains Time, is
before hand, and teaches to choose seasonably and pertinently; therefore ever
strike while the Iron is hot. But if you lose an Opportunity, it differs, in
this from a Relapse: Less Caution and more Resolution and Industry must recover
it.

. 17. Above all, remember your Creator: Remember yourselves and your Families,
when you have them, in the youthful Time and fore Part of your Life; for good
Methods and Habits obtained then, will make you easy and happy the rest of your
Days. Every Estate has its Snare: Youth and Middle Age, Pleasure and Ambition;
Old Age, Avarice: Remember I tell you, that Man is a Slave where either
prevails. Beware of the pernicious Lusts of the Eye, and the Flesh, and the
Pride of Life, 1 John ii 15, 16, 17. which are not of the Father, but of the
World. Get higher and nobler Objects for your immortal Part, O my dear
Children! and be not tied to Things without you; for then you can never have
the true and free Enjoyment of yourselves to better Things; no more than a
Slave in Algiers has of his House or Family in London. Be free, live at home,
in yourselves I mean, where lie greater Treasures hid than in the Indies. The
Pomp, Honor, and Luxury of the World are the Cheats, and the Unthinking and
Inconsiderate are taken by them. But the retired Man is upon higher Ground, he
sees and is aware of the Trick, comtemns the Folly, and bemoans the Deluded.
This very Consideration. doubtless, produced those two Passions in the two
greatest Gentiles of their Time, Democritus and Heraclitus, the one laughing,
the other weeping, for the Madness of the World, to see so excellent reasonable
a Creature as Man, so meanly trifling, and slavishly employed.

. 18. Choose God's Trades before Men's; Adam was a Gardener, Cain a Ploughman,
and Abel a Grasier or Shepherd: These began with the World, and have least of
Snare, and most of Use. When Cain became Murderer, as a Cowley, in his Works on
Agriculture.
witty Man said, he turned a Builder of Cities, and quitted his Husbandry:
Mechanics, as Handicrafts, are also commendable, but they are but a second
Brood, and younger Brothers. If Grace employ you not, let Nature and useful
Arts, but avoid Curiosity there also, for it devours much Time to no Profit. I
have seen a Cieling of a Room, that cost half as much as the House; a Folly and
a Sin too.

. 19. Have but few Books, but let them be well chosen and well read, whether of
religious or civil Subjects. Shun fantastic Opinions: Measure both Religion
and Learning by Practice; reduce all to that, for that brings a real Benefit to
you, the rest is a Thief and a Snare. And indeed, reading many Books is but a
taking off the Mind too much from Meditation. Reading yourselves and Nature, in
the Dealings and Conduct of Men, is the truest human Wisdom. The Spirit of a
Man knows the Things of Man, and more true Knowledge comes by Meditation and
just Reflection than by reading; for much ^^ading is an Oppression of the Mind,
and extinguishes the natural Candle; which is the Reason of so many senseless
Scholars in the World.

. 20. Do not that which you blame (...) another. Do not that to another, which
you would not another should do to you. But above all, do not that in God's
Sight, you would not Man should see you do.

. 21. And that you may order all Things profitably, divide your Day; such a
Share of Time for your Retirement and Worship of God: Such a Proportion for
your Business; in which, remember to ply that first which is first to be done;
so much Time for yourselves, be it for Study, Walking, Visit, etc. In this be
first, and let your Friends know it, and you will cut off many Impertinences
and Interruptions and save a Treasure of Time to yourselves, which People most
unaccountably lavish away. And to be more exact, for much lies in this, keep a
short Journal of your Time, though a Day require but a Line; many Advantages
flow from it.

. 22. Keep close to the Meetings of God's People, wait diligently at them, to
feel the heavenly Life in your Hearts. Look for that more than Words in
Ministry, and you will profit most. Above all, look to the Lord, but despise
not Instruments, Man or Woman, young or old, rich or poor, learned or unlearned.

. 23. Avoid discontented Persons, unless to inform or reprove them. Abhor
Detraction, the Sin of fallen Angels and the worst of fallen Men.

. 24. Excuse Faults in others, own them in yourselves, and forgive them against
yourselves, as you would have your heavenly Father and Judge forgive you. Read
Prove. xvii. 9* and Mat. vi. 14, 15. Christ returns and dwells upon that*
Passage of his Prayer, above all the rest, Forgiveness, the hardest Lesson to
Man, that of all other Creatures most needs it.

. 25. Be natural; love one another; and remember, that to be void of natural
Affection, is a Mark of Apostasy set by the Apostle, 2 Timothy iii. 3. Let not
Time, I charge you, wear out Nature; it may Kindred, according to Custom, but
it is an ill one, therefore follow it not. It is a great Fault in Families at
this Day: Have a Care of it, and shun that unnatural Carelessness. Live as near
as you can, visit often, correspond oftener, and communicate with kind Hearts
to one another, in proportion to what the Lord gives you; and don't be close,
nor hoard up from one another, as if you had no Right or Claim in one another,
and did not descend of one most tender Father and Mother.

. 26. What I write is to yours, as well as you; if God gives you Children, and
in case a Prodigal should ever appear among them, make not his Folly an Excuse
to be strange or close, and so to expose such an one to more Evil; but show
Bowels, as Eusebius. Ecc. Hist. Lib. 3. Cap. xxiii.
John did to the young Man that fell into ill Company, whom with Love he
reclaimed, after his Example that sends his Sun and Rain upon all.

. 27. Love Silence, even in the Mind; for Thoughts are to that, as Words to the
Body, troublesome, much Speaking, as much Thinking, spends, and in many
Thoughts, as well as Words, there is Sin. True Silence is the Rest of the Mind,
and is to the Spirit, what Sleep is to the Body, Nourishment and Refreshment.
It is a great Virtue; it covers Folly, keeps Secrets, avoids Disputes, and
prevents Sin. See Job. xiii. 5. Prove. x. 19* xii. 13. xiii. 3. xvii. 28. xviii.
6. 7.

. 28. The Wisdom of Nations lies in their Proverbs, which are brief and pithy;
collect and learn them, they are notable Measures and Directions for human
Life; you have much in little; they save Time in speaking; and upon Occasion,
may be the fullest and safest Answers.

. 29. Never meddle with other Folks Business, and less with the Public, unless
called to the one by the Parties concerned, in which move cautiously and
uprightly, and required to the other by the Lord in a Testimony for his Name
and Truth; remembering that old, but most true and excellent Proverb, Been
quilatuit, been vixit, He lives happily that lives hiddenly or privately, for
he lives quietly. It is a Treasure to them that have it: Study it, get it, keep
it; too many miss it that might have it: The World knows not the Value of it.
It doubles Man's Life, by giving him twice the Time to himself, that a large
Acquaintance or or much Business will allow him.

. 30. Have a Care of Resentment, or taking Things amiss, a natural, ready and
most dangerous Passion; but be apter to remit than resent, it is more Christian
and wise. For as Softness often conquers, where rough Opposition fortifies, so
Resentment; seldom knowing any Bounds, makes many times greater Faults than it
finds; for some People have out-resented their Wrong so far, that they made
themselves faultier by it, by which they cancel the Debt through a boundless
Passion, overthrow their Interest and Advantage, and become Debtor to the
Offender.

. 31. Rejoice not at the Calamity of any, though they be your Enemies, Prove.
xvii. 5. xxiv. 17.

. 32. Envy none; it is God that makes rich and poor, great and small, high and
low, Psalm. xxxvii. 1. Pro. iii. 31. xxiii. 17. xxiv. 1. 1 Chronicles. xxii. 11. 12.
Psalm. cvii. 40. 41.

. 33. Be intreatable. Never aggravate. Never revile or give ill Names: It is
unmannerly as well as unchristian. Remember Mat. v, 22. who it was said, He
that calls his Brother Fool, is in Danger of Hell Fire.

. 34. Be not morose or conceited; one is rude, the other troublesome and
nauseous.

. 35. Avoid Questions and Strife; it shows a busy and contentious Disposition.

. 36. Add no Credit to a Report upon Conjecture, nor report to the Hurt of any.
See Exodus xxiii. 1. Psalm. xv. 3.

. 37. Beware of Jealousy, except it be godly, for it devours Love and
Friendship; it breaks Fellowship, and destroys the Peace of the Mind. It is a
groundless and evil Surmise.

. 38. Be not too credulous; read Pro. xiv. 15. Caution is a Medium, I recommend
it.

. 39. Speak not of Religion, neither use the Name of God in a familiar manner.

. 40. Meddle not with Government; never speak of it; let others say or do as
they please. But read such Books of Law as relate to the Office of a Justice, a
Coroner, Sheriff and Constable; also the Doctor and Student; some Book of
Clerkship, and a Treatise of Wills, to enable you about your own private
Business only, or a poor Neighbor's. For it is a Charge I leave with you and
yours, Meddle not with the Public, neither Business nor Money; but understand
how to avoid it, and defend yourselves, upon Occasion against it. For much
Knowledge brings Sorrow, and much Doings more. Therefore know God, know
yourselves; love Home, know your own Business and mind it, and you have more
Time and Peace than your Neighbors.

. 41. If you incline to marry, then marry your Inclination rather than your
Interest: I mean what you love, rather than what is rich. But love for Virtue,
Temper, Education and Person, before Wealth or Quality, and be sure you are
beloved again. In all which be not hasty, but serious; lay it before the Lord,
proceed in his Fear, and be you well advised. And when married, according to
the Way of God's People, used amongst Friends, out of whom only choose, strictly
keep Covenant; avoid Occasion of Misunderstanding, allow for Weaknesses, and
Variety of Constitution and Disposition, and take Care of showing the least
Disgust or Misunderstanding to others, especially your Children. Never lie down
with any Displeasure in your Minds, but avoid Occasion of Dispute and Offense;
overlook and cover Failings. Seek the Lord for one another; wait upon him
together, Morning and Evening, in his holy Fear, which will renew and confirm
your Love and Covenant: Give way to nothing that would in the least violate it*
Use all means of true Endearment, that you may recommend and please one
another; remembering your Relation and Union is the Figure of Christ's to his
Church; therefore, let the Authority of Love only bear Sway your whole Life.

. 42. If God give you Children, love them with Wisdom, correct them with
Affection: Never strike in Passion, and suit the Correction to their Age as
well as Fault. Convince them of their Error before you chastise them, and try
them; if they show Remorse before Severity, never use that but in case of
Obstinacy or Impenitency. Punish them more by their Understandings than the
Rod, and show them the Folly, Shame and Undutifulness of their Faults, rather
with a grieved than an angry Countenance, and you will sooner affect their
Natures, and with a nobler Sense, than a servile and rude Chastisement can
produce. I know the Methods of some are severe Corrections for Faults and
artificial Praises when they do well, and sometimes Rewards: But this Course
awakens Passions worse than their Faults; for one begets base Fear, if not
Hatred; the other Pride and vain Glory, both which should be avoided in a
religious Education of Youth; for they equally vary from it, and deprave
Nature. There should be the greatest Care imaginable, what Impressions are
given to Children: That Method which earliest awakens their Understandings to
Love, Duty, Sobriety, just and honorable Things, is to be preferred. Education
is the Stamp Parents give their Children; they pass for that they breed them,
or less Value perhaps, all their Days. The World is in nothing more wanting and
reprovable, both in Precept and Example; they do with their Children as with
their Souls, put them out at Livery for so much a Year. They will trust their
Estates or Shops with none but themselves, but for their Souls and Posterity
they have less Solicitude* But do you bre^d your Children yourselves; I mean as
to their Morals, and be their Bishops and Teachers in the Principles of
Conversation: As they are instructed so they are likely to be qualified, and
your Posterity by their Precepts and Examples which they receive from yours.
And were Mankind herein more cautious, they would better discharge their Duty
to God and Posterity; and their Children would owe them more for their
Education than for their Inheritances. Be not unequal in your Love to your
Children, at least in the Appearances of it: It is both unjust and indiscreet:
It lessens Love to Parents, and provokes Envy among Children. Let them wear the
same Clothes, eat of the same Dish, have the same Allowance as to Time and
Expense. Breed them to some Employment, and give all equal but the Eldest: And
to the Eldest a double Portion is very well. Teach them also Frugality, and
they will not want Substance for their Posterity. A little Beginning, with
Industry and Thrift, will make an Estate; but there is great Difference between
saving and sordid. Be not scanty any more than superfluous; but rather make
bold with yourselves, than be straight to others; therefore let your Charity
temper your Frugality and theirs.

What I have writ to you, I have writ to your Children, and theirs.

. 43. Servants you will have, but remember, the fewer the better, and those
rather aged than young; you must make them such, or dispose of them often.
Change is not good, therefore choose well, and the rather because of your
Children; for Children, thinking they can take more Liberty with Servants than
with their Parents, often choose the Servants Company, and if they are idle,
wanton, ill Examples, Children are in great Danger of being perverted. Let them
therefore be Friends, and such as are well recommended: Let them know their
Business as well as their Wages; and as they do the one, pay them honestly the
other. Though Servants, yet remember they are Brethren in Christ, and that you
also are but Stewards, and must account to God. Wherefore let your Moderation
appear unto them, and that will provoke them to Diligence for Love rather than
Fear, which is the truest and best Motive to Service. In short, as you find
them, so keep, use and reward them, or dismiss them.

. 44. Distrust is of the Nature of Jealousy, and must be warily entertained
upon good Grounds, or it is injurious to others, and instead of safe,
troublesome to you. If you trust little, you will have but little Cause to
distrust. Yet I have often been whispered in myself of Persons and Things at
first Sight and Motion, that hardly ever failed to be true; though by
neglecting the Sense, or suffering myself to be argued or importuned from it, I
have more than once failed of my Expectation. Have therefore a most tender and
nice Regard to those first sudden and unpremeditated Sensations.

. 45. For your Conduct in your Business, and in the whole Course of your Life,
though what I have said to you, and recommended you to, might be sufficient;
yet I will be more particular as to those good and gracious Qualifications, I
pray God Almighty to season and accomplish you with, to his Glory and your
temporal and eternal Felicity.

CHAP. III.
. 1. BE humble: It becomes a Creature, a depending and borrowed Being, that
lives not of itself, but breaths in another's Air, with another's Breath, and
is accountable for every Moment of Time, and can call nothing its own, but is
absolutely a Tenant at Will of the great Lord of Heaven and Earth. And of this
excellent Quality you cannot be wanting, if you dwell in the holy Fear of the
Omnipresent and All-seeing God; for that will show you your Vileness and his
Excellency, your Meanness and his Majesty, and withal, the Sense of his Love to
such poor Worms, in the Testimonies he gives of his daily Care, Mercy and
Goodness; that you cannot but be abased, laid low and humble: I say, the Fear
and Love of God begets Humility, and Humility fits you for God and Men. You
cannot step well amiss, if this Virtue dwell but richly in you; for then God
will teach you. The Humble he teaches his Ways, and they are all pleasant and
peaceable to his Children: Yea, he gives Grace to the Humble, but resists
the Proud, James iv. 6. 1 Pet. v. 5. He regards the Proud afar off. Psalm.
cxxxviii. 6. They shall not come near him, nor will he hear them in the Day of
their Distress, read Prove. xi. 2. xv. 33. xvi. 18. 19. Humility seeks not the
last Word, nor first Place; she offends none, but prefers others, and thinks
lowly of herself; is not rough or self-conceited, high, loud, or domineering;
blessed are they that enjoy her. Learn of me, said Christ, for I am meek and
lowly in Heart. He washed his Disciples Feet, John xiii. Indeed himself was the
greatest Pattern of it. Humility goes before Honor, Prove. xviii. 12. There is
nothing shines more clearly through Christianity than Humility; of this the
holy Author of it is the greatest Instance. He was humble in his Incarnation;
for he that thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, humbled himself to
become a Man; and many Ways made himself of no Reputation. As first, in his
Birth or Descent, it was not of the Princes of Judah, but a Virgin of low
Degree, the espoused of a Carpenter; and so she acknowledges in her heavenly
Anthem, or Ejaculation, Luke i. 47, 48. 52. speaking of the great Honor God
had done her: And my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior, for he has
regarded the low Estate of his Handmaiden; he has put down the Mighty from
their Seats, and exalted them of low Degree. Secondly, he was humble in his
Life: He kept no Court but in Deserts and Mountains, and in solitary Places;
neither was he served in State, his Attendants being of the mechanic Size. By
the Miracles he wrought, we may understand the Food he eat, viz. Barley-bread
and Fish; and it is not to be thought there was any Curiosity in dressing them.
And we have Reason to believe his Apparel was as moderate as his Table.
Thirdly, he was humble in his Sufferings and Death: He took all Affronts
patiently, and in our Nature triumphed over Revenge: He was despised, spit
upon, buffetted, whipped, and finally crucified between Thieves, as the greatest
Malefactor; yet he never reviled them, but answered all in Silence and
Submission, pitying, loving, and dying for those by whom he was ignominiously
put to Death. O Mirror of Humility! Let your Eyes be continually upon it, that
you may see yourselves by it. Indeed his whole Life was one continued great Act
of Self-denial: And because he needed it not for himself, he must needs do it
for us; thereby leaving us an Example that we should follow his Steps, 1 Pet.
ii. 21. And as he was, we should be, in this World, according to the beloved
Disciple, 1 John ii. 6. So what he did for us, was not to excuse but excite our
Humility. For as he is like God, we must be like him; and that the Froward, the
Contentious, the Revengeful, the Striker, the Dueller, etc. cannot be said to
be of that Number, is very evident. And the more to illustrate this Virtue, I
would have you consider the Folly and Danger of Pride its Opposite: For this it
was that threw the Angels out of Heaven, Man out of Paradise, destroyed Cities
and Nations, was one of the Sins of Sodom, Ezekiel. xvi. 49. the Destruction of
Assyria and Israel, Isa. iii. 16. and the reason given by God for his great
Vengeance upon Moab and Ammon, Zeph. ii. 9. 10. Besides Pride is the vainest
Passion that can rule in Man, because he has nothing of his own to be proud of,
and to be proud of another's shows want of Wit and Honesty too. He did not only
not make himself, but is born the nakedest and most helpless of almost all
Creatures. Nor can he add to his Days; or Stature, or so much as make one Hair
of his Head white or black. He is so absolutely in the Power of another, that,
as I have often said, he is at best but a Tenant at Will of the great Lord of
all, holding Life, Health, Substance, and every Thing it his sovereign
Disposal; and the more Man enjoys, the less Reason he has to be proud, because
he is the more indebted and engaged to Thankfulness and Humility.

Wherefore avoid Pride as you would avoid the Devil; remembering you must die,
and consequently those Things must die with you that could be any Temptation to
Pride; and that there is a Judgment follows, at which you must give an Account,
both for what you have enjoyed and done.

. 2. From Humility springs Meekness. of all the rare Qualities of Wisdom,
Learning, Valor, etc. with which Moses was endued, he was denominated by his
Meekness: This gave the rest a Luster they must otherwise have wanted. The
Difference is not great between these excellent Graces; yet the Scripture
observes some. God will teach the Humble his Way, and guide and Meek in
Judgment. It seems to be Humility perfectly digested, and from a Virtue become
a Nature. A meek Man is one that is not easily provoked, yet easily grieved;
not peevish or testy, but soft, gentle, and inoffensive. O blessed will you be,
my dear Children, if this Grace adorn you! There are diverse great and precious
Promises to the Meek in Scripture. That God will clothe the Meek with
Salvation; and blessed are they, for they shall inherit the Earth, Psalm.
xxxvii. 11. Mat. v. 5. Christ presses it in his own Example, Learn of me for I
am meek, etc. Mat. xi. 29. And requires his to become as little Children, in
order to Salvation, Mat. xviii. 3. and a meek and quiet Spirit is of great
Price with the Lord, 1 Pet. iii. 4. It is a Fruit of the Spirit, Gal. v. 22,
23, exhorted to, Ephesians. iv. 2. Col. iii. 12. Tit. iii. 2. and many Places more to
the same Effect.

. 3. Patience is an Effect of a meek Spirit, and flows from it: It is a bearing
and suffering Disposition; not choleric or soon moved to Wrath, or vindictive;
but ready to hear and endure too, rather than be swift and hasty in Judgment or
Action. Job is as much famed for this, as was Moses for the other Virtue:
Without it there is no running the Christian Race, or obtaining the heavenly
Crown; without it there can be no Experience of the Work of God, Romans v. 3, 4,
5. for Patience works, says the Apostle, Experience; nor Hope of an eternal
Recompense, for Experience works that Hope. Therefore, says James, Let
Patience have its perfect Work, James i. 4. It is made the Saints Excellency;
here is the Patience of the Saints, Rev. xiii. 10. It is joined with the
Kingdom of Christ, Rev. i. 9. read Luke xxi. 19. In Patience possess your
Souls, Romans xii. 12. (...) 4. 2 Cor. vi. 4. 1 These. v. 14. Be patient toward
all Men, Tit. ii. 2. Heb. vi. 12. x. 36. which shows the Excellency and
Necessity of Patience, as that does the true Dignity of a Man. It is wise, and
will give you great Advantage over those you converse with on all Accounts. For
Passion blinds Men's Eyes, and betrays Men's Weakness; Patience sees the
Advantage and improves it. Patience enquires, deliberates, and brings to a
mature Judgment; through your Civil as well as Christian Course, you cannot act
wisely and safely without it; therefore I recommend this blessed Virtue to you.

. 4. Show Mercy, whenever it is in your Power; that is, forgive, pity and help,
for so it signifies. Mercy is one of the Attributes of God, Genesis xix. 19. Exodus
xx. 6. Psalm. lxxxvi. 15. Jer. iii. 12. It is exalted in Scripture above all his
Works, and is a noble Part of his Image in Man. God has recommended it, Hos.
xii. 6. Keep Mercy and Judgment, and wait on the Lord. God has shown it to
Man, and made it his Duty, Mic. vi. 8. He has showed thee, O Man, what is
good: And what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly and to love
Mercy, and to walk humbly, or, to humble thyself to walk with thy God: A short
but ample Expression of God's Love, and Man's Duty; happy are you if you mind
it. In which you see Mercy is one of the noblest Virtues. Christ has a Blessing
for them that have it, Blessed are the Merciful, Mat. v. for they shall find
Mercy; a strong Motive indeed. in Luke vi. 35, 36. he commands it. Be you
merciful, as your Father is merciful. He bid the Jews, that were so
over-righteous, but so very unmerciful, learn what this means: I will have
Mercy and not Sacrifice, Mat. ix. 13: He hit them in the Eye. And in his
Parable of the Lord and his Servants, he shows what will be the End of the
unmerciful Steward, Mat. xviii. 34, 35, that having been forgiven much by his
Master, would not forgive a little to his Fellow Servants. Mercy is a great Part
of God's Law, Exodus xxiii. 4, 5. It is a material Part of God's true East, Isa.
lviii. 6, 7. It is a main Part of God's Covenant, Jer. xxxi. 34. Heb. viii. 12.
And the Reason and Rule of the last Judgment, Mat. xxv. 31, to the End: Pray
read it. It is a Part of the undefiled Religion, James i. 27. iii. 17. Read
Prove. xiv. 21, 22. But the merciful Man's Mercy reaches farther, even to his
Beast; then surely to Man, his Fellow Creature, he shall not want it. Wherefore
I charge you, oppress nobody, Man nor Beast. Take no Advantage upon the
Unhappy, pity the Afflicted, make the Case your own, and that of their Wives
and poor innocent Children the Condition of yours, and you cannot want
Sympathy, Bowels, Forgiveness, nor a Disposition to help and succor them to
your Ability. Remember, it is the Way for you to be forgiven and helped in Time
of Trial. Read the Lord's Prayer, Luke xi. Remember the Nature and Goodness of
Joseph to his Brethren; follow the Example of the good Samaritan, and let
Edom's Unkindness to Jacob's Stock, Obad. x. 16. And the Heathen's to Israel,
Zach. i. 21. ii. 8, 9. be a Warning to you. Read also, Prove. xxv. 21, 22. Romans
xii. 19, 20.

. 5. Charity is a near Neighbor to Mercy; It is generally taken to consist in
this, Not to be censorious, and to relieve the Poor. For the first, remember
you must be judged, Mat. vii. 1. And for the last, remember you are but
Stewards. Judge not, therefore, lest you be judged. Be clear yourselves before
you fling the Stone. Get the Beam out of your own Eye; it is humbling Doctrine,
but safe. Judge, therefore, at your own Peril: See it be righteous Judgment, as
you will answer it to the great Judge. This Part of Charity also excludes
Whisperings, Backbiting, Tale-bearing, Evil-surmising, most pernicious Follies
and Evils, of which beware. Read 1 Cor. xiii. For the other Part of Charity,
relieving the Poor, it is a Debt you owe to God: You have all you have or may
enjoy, with the Rent, charge upon it. The Saying is, that he who gives to the
Poor, lends to the Lord: But it may be said, not improperly, the Lord lends to
us to give to the Poor: They are at least Parents by Providence with you, and
have a Right you must not defraud them of. You have this Privilege indeed,
when, what, and to whom; and yet, if you heed your Guide, and observe the
Object, you will have a Rule for that too.

I recommend little Children, Widows, infirm and aged Persons, chiefly to you;
spare something out of your own Belly, rather than let theirs go pinched. Avoid
that great Sin of needless Expense on your Persons and on your Houses, while
the Poor are hungry and naked. My Bowels have often been moved, to see very
aged and infirm People, but especially, poor helpless Children, lie all Night,
in bitter Weather, at the Thresholds of Doors in the open Streets, for want of
better Lodging. I have made this Reflection, If you were so exposed, how hard
would it be to endure? The Difference, between our Condition and theirs has
drawn from me humble Thanks to God, and great Compassion and some Supply to
those poor Creatures. Once more, be good to the Poor: What do I say? Be just to
them, and you will be good to yourselves: Think it your Duty, and do it
religiously. Let the moving Passage, Mat. xxv. 35. to the End, live in your
Minds: I was an hungry, and thirsty, and naked, sick, and in Prison, and you
administered unto me; and the Blessing that followed: Also what he said to
another Sort, I was an hungry, and thirsty, and naked, and sick, and in Prison,
and you administered not unto me; for a dreadful Sentence follows to the
Hard-hearted World. Woe be to them that take the Poor's Pledge, Ezekiel. xviii.
12, 13. or eat up the Poor's Right. O devour not their Part! less, lay it out
in Vanity, or lay it up in Bags, for it will curse the rest. Hear what the
Psalmist says, Psalm. xli. Blessed is he that considers the Poor, the Lord
will deliver him in Time of Trouble: The Lord will preserve and keep him alive,
and he shall be blessed upon the Earth: And thou will not deliver him into the
Will of his Enemies: The Lord will strengthen him upon the Bed of Languishing:
Thou will make all his Bed in his Sickness. This is the Reward of being
faithful Stewards and Treasurers for the Poor of the Earth. Have a Care of
Excuses, they are, I know, ready at hand: But read Prove. iii. 27, 28. Withold
not Good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the Power of thine Hand to
do it. Say not unto thy Neighbor, go and come again, and Tomorrow I will
give, when thou have it by thee, Also bear in Mind Christ's Doctrine. Mat. v.
42. Give to him that asks thee, and from him that would borrow of thee, turn
not thou away. But above all, remember the poor Woman that gave her Mite; which
Christ preferred above all, because she gave all, but it was to God's Treasury,
Mark, xii. 42, 43, 44.

. 6. Liberality or Bounty is a noble Quality in Man, entertained of few, yet
praised of all, but the Covetous dislike it, because it reproaches their
Sordidness. In this she differs from Charity, that she has sometimes other
Objects, and exceeds in proportion. For she will cast her Eye on those that do
not absolutely want, as well as those that do; and always outdoes Necessities
and Services. She finds out Virtue in a low Degree, and exalts it. She eases
their Burden that labor hard to live: Many kind and generous Spells such find
at her Hand, that don't quite want, whom she thinks worthy. The Decayed are
sure to hear of her. She takes one Child, and puts out another, to lighten the
Loads of overcharged Parents; more to the Fatherless. She shows the Value of
Services in her Rewards, and is never Debtor to Kindnesses; but will be
Creditor on all Accounts. Where another gives Sixpence, the liberal Man gives
his Shilling; and returns double the Tokens he receives. But Liberality keeps
Temper too; she is not extravagant any more than she is sordid; for she hates
Niggard's Feasts as much as Niggard's Fasts; and as she is free, and not
starch't, so she is plentiful, but not superfluous and extravagant. You will
hear of her in all Histories, especially in Scripture, the wisest as well as
the best of Books: Her Excellency and her Reward are there. She is commanded
and commended, Deuteronomy. xv. 3. 4. 7, 8. and Psalm. xxxvii. 21. 26. The Righteous
shows Mercy and gives, and the good Man is ever merciful and lends. He
shows Favor and lends, and disperseth abroad, Psalm. cxii. 5. 9. There is
that scatters, and yet increases; and there is that withholds more than
is meet, but it tends to Poverty; the liberal Soul shall be fat. Prove. xi.
24. 25. The bountiful Eye shall be blessed, Prove. xxii. 9. The Churl and
liberal Man are described, and a Promise to the latter, that his Liberality
shall uphold him, Isa. xxxii. 78. Christ makes it a Part of his Religion, and
the Way to be the Children of the Highest, read Luke. vi. 34, 35. to lend and
not receive again, and this to Enemies as well as Friends; yea, to the
unthankful and to the Evil; no Exception made, no Excuse admitted. The Apostle
Paul, 2 Cor. ix. 5. 10. enjoins it, threatens the Strait-handed, and promises
the Open-hearted a liberal Reward.

Wheresoever therefore, my dear Children, Liberality is required of you, God
enabling of you, sow not sparingly nor grudgingly, but with a cheerful mind,
and you shall not go without your Reward; though that ought not to be your
Motive But avoid Ostentation, for that is using Virtue to Vanity, which will
run you to Profuseness, and that to Want; which begets Greediness, and that
Avarice, the contrary Extreme. As Men may go Westward till they come East, and
travel till they and those they left behind them, stand Antipodes, up and down.

. 7. Justice or Righteousness, is another Attribute of God, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 4.
Psalm. ix. 7, 8. v. 8. Dan. ix. 7. of large Extent in the Life and Duty of Man.
Be just therefore, in all Things, to all; to God as your Creator; render to him
that which is his, your Hearts; for that Acknowledgment he has reserved to
himself, by which only you are entitled to the Comforts of this and a better
Life. And if he has your Hearts, you have him for your Treasure, and with him
all Things requisite to your Felicity. Render also to Caesar that which is his,
lawful Subjection; not for Fear only, but Conscience Sake. To Parents, a filial
Love and Obedience. To one another, natural Affection. To all People, in doing
as you would be done by. Hurt no Man's Name or Person. Covet no Man's Property
in any sort. Consider well of David's Tenderness to Saul, when he sought his
Life, to excite your Duty; and Ahab's unjust Covetousness and Murder of Naboth,
to provoke your Abhorrence of Injustice. David, though anointed King, took no
Advantages; he believed, and therefore did not make haste, but left it to God
to conclude Readiness Reign, for he would not hasten it. A right Method and a good
End, my dear Children, God has shown it you, and requires it of you.

Remember the Tenth Commandment, 'twas God that gave it, and will judge you by
it. It comprehends Restitution as well as Acquisition, and especially the poor
Man's Wages, Lev. xix. 13. Deuteronomy. xxiv. 14, 15. Jer. xxii. 13. Amos v. 11. Mal.
iii. 5. Samuel is a great and good Example of Righteousness, 1 Samuel xii. 3. He
challenged the whole House of Israel: Whom had he oppressed or defrauded? The
like did the Apostle to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. vii. 2. He exhorted the
Christians, to be careful that they did not defraud, 1 These. iv. 6. for this
Reason, that God was the Avenger of the Injured. But as bad as it was, there
must be no going to Law amongst Christians, 1 Cor. vi. 7. To your utmost Power,
therefore, owe no one any Thing but Love, and that in Prudence as well as
Righteousness; for Justice gives you Reputation, and adds a Blessing to your
Substance; it is the best Security you can have for it.

I will close this Head, with a few Scriptures to each Branch. To your
Superiors; Submit to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's Sake, 1 Pet. ii.
13. Obey those that have Rule over you, Heb. xiii. 17. Speak not evil of
Dignities, Jude viii. 2 Pet. ii. 10. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King,
and meddle not with them that are given to change, Prove. xxiv. 21.

To your Parents; Honor your Father and your Mother, that the Days may be long
in the Land, which the Lord your God shall give you, Exodus xx. 12. Children,
obey your Parents, it is the first Command with Promise, Ephesians. vi. 1, 2. Great
Judgments follow those that disobey this Law, and defraud their Parents of
their Due: Whosoever robs his Father or his Mother, and says it is no
Transgression, the same is the Companion of a Destroyer, Prove. xxviii. 24. Or
such would destroy their Parents if they could. It is charged by the Prophet
Ezekiel upon Jerusalem, as a Mark of her wicked State: In thee have thy Princes
set lightly by Father and Mother, oppressed Strangers, and vexed Fatherless and
Widows, Ezekiel. xxii. 6, 7.

To thy Neighbor; hear what God's Servants taught: To do Justice and Judgment,
is more acceptable to the Lord than Sacrifice, Prove. xxi. 3. Diverse Weights and
Measures are alike Abomination unto the Lord, Levit. xix. 36. Deuteronomy. xxv. 13 to
16 inclusive. Prove. xi. 1. xx. 10. 23. Read Prove. xxii. 16. 22, 23. xxiii. 10,
11. Peruse the sixth of Micah; also Zech. viii, 16, 17. And especially the
fifteenth Psalm, as a short but full Measure of Life, to give Acceptance with
God.

I have said but little to you of distributing Justice, or being just in Power
or Government; for I should desire you may never be concerned therein, unless
it were upon your own Principles, and then the less the better, unless God
require it from you. But if it ever be your Lot, know no Man after the Flesh;
know neither Rich nor Poor, Great nor Small, nor Kindred, nor Stranger, but the
Cause, according to your Understanding and Conscience, and that upon deliberate
Enquiry and Information. Read Exodus xxiii. from 1 to 10. Deuteronomy. i. 16, 17. xvi.
19, 20. xxiv. 17. 2 Samuel xxiii. 3. Jer. xxii. 3, 4. Prove. xxiv. 23. Lam. iii.
35, 36. Hos. xii. 6. Amos viii. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Zeph. ii. 3. iii. 1, 3. Zech.
vii. 9, 10. Jer. v. 4, 5, 6. viii. 6, 7. Which show both God's Commands and
Complaints, and Man's Duty in Authority; which as I said before, wave
industriously at all Times, for Privacy is freed from the Clamor, Danger,
Imcumbrance and Temptation, that attends Stations in Government: Never meddle
with it, but for God's Sake.

. 8. Integrity is a great and commendable Virtue. A Man of Integrity, is a true
Man, a bold Man, and a steady Man; he is to be trusted and relied upon. No
Bribes can corrupt him, no Fear daunt him; his Word is slow in coming, but
sure. He shines brightest in the Fire, and his Friend hears of him most when he
most needs him. His Courage grows with Danger, and conquers Opposition by
Constancy. As he cannot be flattered or frighted into that he dislikes, so he
hates Flattery and Temporizing in others. He runs with Truth, and not with the
Times; with Right, and not with Might. His Rule is strait; soon seen but seldom
followed: It has done great Things. It was Integrity preferred Abel's Offering,
translated Enoch, saved Noah, raised Abraham to be God's Friend, and Father of
a great Nation, rescued Lot out of Sodom, blessed and increased Jacob, kept and
exalted Joseph, upheld and restored Job, honored Samuel before Israel, crowned
David over all Difficulties, and gave Solomon Peace and Glory, while he kept
it; it was this preserved Mordecai and his People, and signally defended Daniel
among the Lions, and the Children in the Flames, that it drew from the greatest
King upon Earth, and an Heathen too, a most pathetical Confession to the Power
and Wisdom of the God that saved them, and which they served. Thus is the
Scripture fulfilled, The Integrity of the Upright shall Guide them, Prove. xi.
3. O my dear Children, fear, love and obey this great holy, and unchangeable
God, and you shall be happily guided, and preserved through your Pilgrimage to
eternal Glory.

. 9. Gratitude or Thankfulness, is another Virtue of great Luster, and so
esteemed with God and all good Men: It is an owning of Benefits received to
their Honor and Service that confer them. It is indeed a noble sort of
Justice, and might, in a Sense, be referred as a Branch to that Head; with this
Difference, though, that since Benefits exceed Justice, the Tie is greater to
be grateful, than to be just; and consequently there is someting baser and more
reproachful in Ingratitude than Injustice. So that, though you are not obliged
by legal Bonds or Judgments, to Restitution with due Interest, your Virtue,
Honor and Humanity, are naturally Pledges for your Thankfulness; and by how
much the less you are under external Ties, esteem your inward Ties so much the
stronger. Those that can break them, would know no Bounds: For, make it a Rule
to you, the Ungrateful would be unjust too, but for fear of the Law. Always own
therefore the Benefits you receive, and then to choose, when they may most
honor or serve those that conferred them. Some have lived to need the Favors
they have done; and should they be put to ask, where they ought to be invited?
No matter if they have nothing to show for it, they show enough when they show
themselves to those they have obliged: And such see enough to induce their
Gratitude, when they see their Benefactors in Adversity; the less Law, the more
Grace and the stronger Tie. It is an Evangelical Virtue, and works, as Faith
does, only by Love: In this it exactly resembles a Christian State; we are not
under the Law, but under Grace, and it is by Grace, and not by Merit, that we
are saved. But are our Obligations the less to God, that he heaps his Favors
so undeservedly upon us! Surely no. It is the like here; that which we receive
is not owed or compelled, but freely given; so no Tie, but Choice, a voluntary
Goodness without Bargain or Condition; but, has this therefore no Security? Yes
certainly, the greatest; a Judgment-Writ, and acknowledged in the Mind; he is
his to the Altar with a good Conscience: But how long? As long as he lives. The
Characters of Gratitude, like those of Friendship, are only defaced by Death,
else indelible. A Friend that loves at all Times, says Solomon, Prove. xvii.
17. xxvii. 10. And thine own Friend, and thy Father's Friend, forsake not. It
is Injustice which makes Gratitude a Precept. There are three Sorts of Men that
can hardly be grateful; the fearful Man, for in Danger he loses his Heart, with
which he should help his Friend: The proud Man, for he takes that Virtue for a
Reproach: He that unwillingly remembers he owes any Thing to God, will not
readily remember he is beholden to Man. History lays it to the Charge of some,
of this Sort of great Men, that uneasy to see the Authors of their Greatness,
have not been quiet till they have accomplished the Ruin of those that raised
them. Lastly, the covetous Man is as ill at it as the other two; his Gold has
spoiled his Memory, and will not let him dare be grateful, though perhaps he owes
the best Part, at least the Beginning of it, to another's Favor. As there is
nothing more unworthy in a Man, so nothing in Man so frequently reproached in
Scripture. How often does God put the Jews in Mind for their Forgetfulness and
Unthankfulness for the Mercies and Favors they received from him, read Deuteronomy.
xxxii. 15. Jesur^^ waxed fat, and kicked against God, grew unmindful, forgot
and forsook his Rock, that had done mighty Things for him. Thus Moses, Deuteronomy.
xxxi. 16. 17. Also Judges x. 11, 12, 13. And 1 Samuel viii. 8. David likewise in
his lxxviii. cv. cvi. Psalms, gives an History of God's Love to Israel, and
their Ingratitude. So Isa. xvii. 1 to 11. Likewise Jer. ii. 31, 32. v. 7 to 20.
xv. 6. xvi. 10, 11, 12. 20. 21. xviii. 15. Hos. viii. 9. It is a Mark of
Apostasy from Christianity, by the Apostle, 2 Timothy iii. 2.

. 10. Diligence is another Virtue useful and laudable among Men: It is a
discreet and understanding Application of one's Self to Business; and avoids
the Extremes of Idleness and Drudgery. It gives great Advantages to Men: It
loses no Time, it conquers Difficulties, recovers Disappointments, gives
Dispatch, supplies Want of Parts; and is that to them, which a Pond is to a
Spring; though it has no Water of itself, it will keep what it gets, and is
never dry. Though that has the Heels, this has the Wind; and often wins the
Prize. Nor does it only concern Handicrafts and bodily Affairs; the Mind is
also engaged, and grows foul, rusty and distempered without it. It belongs to
you, throughout your whole Man; be no more santering in your Minds than in your
Bodies. And if you would have the full Benefit of this Virtue, don't baulk it
by a confused Mind. Shun Diversions; think only of the present Business, till
that be done. Be busy to purpose; for a busy Man, and a Man of Business, are
two different Things. Lay your Matters right, and Diligence succeeds them, else
Pains is lost. How laborious are some to no Purpose? Consider your End well,
suit your Means to it, and then diligently employ them, and you arrive where
you would be, with God's Blessing. Solomon praises Diligence very highly:
First, it is the Way to Wealth: The diligent Hand makes rich, Prove. x. 4. The
Soul of the Diligent shall be made fat, Chap. xiii. 4. There is a Promise to
it, and one of another Sort to the Sluggard, Chap. xxii. 21. Secondly, it
prefers Men, Verse 29. See thou a Man diligent in his Business, he shall
stand before Kings. Thirdly, it preserves an Estate: Be thou diligent to know
the State of thy Flocks, and look well to thy Herd; for Riches are not for
ever, Chap. xxvii. 23, 24. There is no living upon the Principal, you must be
diligent to preserve what you have, whether it be Acquisition or Inheritance;
else it will consume. In short, the wise Man advises, Whatsoever thy Hand finds
to do, do it with thy Might, Eccl. ix. 10. As is mends a temporal State, no
spiritual one can be got or kept without it. Moses earnestly presses it upon
the Israelites, Deuteronomy. iv. 9, and vi. 7. The Apostle Paul commends it in the
Corinthians, and Titus to them for that Reason, 2 Cor. viii. 7. 22. So he does
Timothy to the Philippians on the same Account, and urges them to work out
their Salvation, Phil. ii. 12, 20, 21. Peter also exhorts the Churches to that
purpose: Wherefore the rather, Brethren, says he, give Diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure; for if you do these Things, you shall never fail, 2
Pet. 4. 10. and in Chap. iii. 13, 14. Wherefore, Beloved, seeing you look for
such Things; the End of the World and last Judgment, be diligent that you may
be found of him in Peace, without Spot and blameless. Thus Diligence is an
approved Virtue: But remember, that is a reasonable Pursuit or Execution of
honest Purposes, and not an over-charging or oppressive Prosecution to Mind or
Body, of most lawful Enterprises. Abuse it not therefore to Ambition or
Avarice. Let Necessity, Charity, and Convenience govern it, and it will be well
employed, and you may expect prosperous Returns.

. 11. Frugality is a Virtue too, and not of little Use in Life, the better Way
to be rich, for it has less Toil and Temptation. It is proverbial, a Penny
saved is a Penny got: It has a significant Moral; for this Way of getting is
more in your own Power, and less subject to Hazard, as well as Snares, free of
Envy, void of Suits, and is beforehand with Calamities. For many get that
cannot keep, and for want of Frugality spend what they get, and so come to want
what they have spent. But have a Care of the Extreme: Want not with Abundance,
for that is Avarice, even to Sordidness; it is fit you consider Children, Age
and Casualties, but never pretend those Things to palliate and gratify
Covetousness. As I would have you liberal but not prodigal; and diligent but
not drudging; so I would have you frugal but not sordid. If you can, lay up one
Half of your Income for those Uses, in which let Charity have at least the
second Consideration; but not Judas's, for that was in the wrong Place.

. 12. Temperance I must earnestly recommend to you, throughout the whole Course
of your Life: It is numbered amongst the Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. xxii. 23.
and is a great and requisite Virtue. Properly and strictly speaking, it refers
to Diet; but, in general, may be considered as having Relation to all the
Affections and Practices of Men. I will therefore begin with it in regard to
Food, the Sense in which it is customarily taken. Eat to live, and not live to
eat, for that is below a Beast. Avoid Curiosities and Provocations; let your
chiefest Sauce be a good Stomach, which Temperance will help to get you. You
cannot be too plain in your Diet, so you are clean; nor too sparing so you have
enough for Nature. For that which keeps the Body low, makes the Spirit clear,
as Silence makes it strong. It conduces to good Digestion, that to good Rest,
and that to a firm Constitution. Much less feast any, except the Poor; as
Christ taught, Luke xiv. 12, 13. For Entertainments are rarely without Sin; but
receive Strangers readily. As in Diet so in Apparel, observe, I charge you, an
exemplary Plainness. Choose your Clothes for their Usefulness, not the Fashion,
and for Covering and not Finery, or to please a vain Mind in yourselves or
others: They are fallen Souls that think Clothes can give Beauty to Man. The
Life is more than Raiment, Mat. vi. 25. Man cannot mend God's Work, who can
give neither Life nor Parts. They show little Esteem for the Wisdom and Power
of their Creator, that under-rate his Workmanship (I was going to say, his
Image) to a Taylor's Invention: Gross Folly and Profanity! But do you, my dear
Children, call to Mind who they were of old, that Jesus said, took so much Care
about what they should eat, drink, and put on: Were they not Gentiles,
Heathens, a People without God in the World? Read Mat. vi. and when you have
done that, peruse those excellent Passages of the Apostles Paul and Peter, 1 Timothy ii. 9, 10. and 1 Pet. iii. 3. 5. where, if you find the Exhortation to
Women only, conclude it was effeminate, and a Shame then for Men to use such
Arts and Cost upon their Persons. Follow you the Example of those primitive
Christians, and not voluptuous Gentiles, that perverted the very Order of
Things: For they set Lust above Nature, and the Means above the End, and
preferred Vanity to Convenience; a wanton Excess that has no Sense of God's
Mercies, and therefore cannot make a right Use of them, and less yield the
Returns they deserve. In short, these Intemperances are great Enemies to Health
and to Posterity; for they disease the Body, rob Children, and disappoint
Charity, and are of evil Example; very catching, as well as pernicious Evils.
Nor do they end there: They are succeeded by other Vices, which made the
Apostle put them together in his Epistle to the Galatians, Chap. v. 20, 21. The
evil Fruits of this Part of Intemperance, are so many and great, that upon a
serious Reflection, I believe there is not a Country, Town, or Family, almost,
that does not labor under the Mischief of it. I recommend to your Perusal the
first Part of No Cross no Crown, and of the Address to Protestants, in which I
am more Particular in my Censure of it: As are the Authorities I bring in
Favor of Moderation. But the Virtue of Temperance does not only regard eating,
drinking, and Apparel, but Furniture, Attendance, Expense, Gain, Parsimony,
Business, Diversion, Company, Speech, Sleeping, Watchings; and every Passion of
the Mind, Love, Anger, Pleasure, Joy, Sorrow, Resentment, are all concerned it
it: Therefore bound your Desires, learn your Wills Subjection, take Christ for
your Example, as well as Guide. It was he that led and taught a Life and Faith
in Providence, and told his Disciples the Danger of the Cares and Pleasures of
this World; they choked the Seed of the Kingdom, stifled and extinguished
Virtue in the Soul, and rendered Man barren of good Fruit. His Sermon upon the
Mount is one continued divine Authority in Favor of an universal Temperance.
The Apostle, well aware of the Necessity of this Virtue, gave the Corinthians a
seasonable Caution. Know ye not, says he, that they which run in a Race, run
all, but one receives the Prize? So run, that ye may obtain. And every Man
that striveth for Mastery, (or seeks Victory) is Temperate in all Things: (he
acts discreetly, and with a right Judgment.) Now, they do it to obtain a
corruptible Crown, but we an incorruptible. I therefore so run as not
uncertainly; so fight I, not as one that beats the Air: But I keep under my
Body, and bring it into Subjection; lest that by any Means, when I have
preached to others, I myself should become a Castaway, 1 Cor. ix. 24 to 27. In
another Chapter he presses the Temperance almost to Indifferency: But this I
say, Brethren, the Time is short: It remains then, that both they that have
Wives, be as though they had none; and those that weep, as though they weep
not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that use this
World, as not abusing it. And all this is not without Reason: He gives a very
good one for it: For, says he, the Fashion of the World passes away: But I
would have you without Carefulness, 1 Cor. vii. 29. 32. It was for this Cause
he pressed it so hard upon Titus to warn the Elders of that Time to be sober,
grave, temperate, Tit. ii. 2. not eager, violent, obstinate, tenacious, or
inordinate in any sort. He makes it an indispensible Duty in Pastors of
Churches, that they be not Self-willed, soon angry, given to Wins or filthy
Lucre, but Lovers of Hospitality, of good Men, sober, just, holy temperate,
Tit. i. 7, 8. And why so? Because against these excellent Virtues there is no
law, Gal. v. 23.

I will shut up this Head, being touched upon in diverse Places of this ADVICE,
with 'this one most comprehensive Passage of the Apostle, Philip. iv. 5. Let
your Moderation be known unto all Men, for the Lord is at hand. As if he had
said, Take heed; look to your Ways; have a care what ye do; for the Lord is
near you, even at the Door: He sees you, he marks your Steps, tells your
Wanderings, and he will judge you. Let this excellent, this home and close
Sentence live in your Minds: Let it ever dwell upon your Spirits, my beloved
Children, and influence all your Actions, ay, your Affections and Thoughts. It
is a noble Measure, sufficient to regulate the whole; they that have it are
easy as well as safe. No Extreme prevails; the World is kept at Arm's End; and
such have Power over their own Spirits, which gives them the truest Enjoyment
of themselves and what they have: A Dominion greater than that of Empires. O
may this Virtue be yours! You have Grace from God for that End, and it is
sufficient: Employ it, and you cannot miss of Temperance, nor therein of the
truest Happiness in all your Conduct.

. 13. I have chosen to speak in the Language of the Scripture; which is that of
the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth and Wisdom, that wanted no Art or Direction
of Man to speak by, and express itself fitly to Man's Understanding. But yet
that blessed Principle, the eternal Word I begun with to you, and which is that
Light, Spirit, Grace and Truth, I have exhorted you to in all its holy
Appearances or Manifestations in yourselves, by which all Things were at first
made, and Men enlightened to Salvation, is Pythagoras's great Light and Salt of
Ages; Anaxagoras's divine Mind; Socrates's good Spirit; Timaeus's unbegotten
Principle, and Author of all Light; Hieron's God in Man: Plato's eternal,
ineffable and perfect Principle of Truth; Zeno's Maker and Father of all; and
Plotin's Root of the Soul: Who, as they thus styled the Eternal Word, so the
Appearance of it in Man, wanted not very significant Words. A domestic God, or
God within, says Hieron, Pythagoras, Epictetus and Seneca; Genius, Angel or
Guide, say Socrates and Timaeus; the Light and Spirit of God, says Plato; the
divine Principle in Man, says Plotin; the divine Power and Reason, the
infallible immortal Law in the Minds of Mer^^ says Philo; and the Law and
living Rule of the Mind, the interior Guide of the Soul, and everlasting
Foundation of Virtue, says Plutarch. Of which you may read more in the first
Part of the Christian Quaker, and in the Confutation of Atheism, by Dr.
Cudworth. These were some of those virtuous Gentiles, commended by the Apostle,
Romans ii. 13, 14, 15. that though they had not the Law given to them, as the
Jews had, with those instrumental Helps (...) Advantages, yet, doing by Nature
the Things contained in the Law, they became a Law unto themselves.

WILLIAM PENN.

FINIS.

