THE AMERICAN CRISIS. NUMBER I. BY THE AUTHOR OF COMMON SENSE.
THESE are the times that try men's souls: The summer soldier and the sunshine
patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of his country; but he
that stands it now, deserves the love and thanks of man and woman. Tyranny,
like hell, is not easily conquered; yet we have this consolation with us, that
the harder the conflict, the more glorious the triumph. What we obtain too
cheap, we esteem too lightly: -- It is dearness only that gives every thing its
value. Heaven knows how to set a proper price upon its goods; and it would be
strange indeed, if so celestial an article as FREEDOM should not be highly
rated. Britain, with an army to enforce her tyranny, has declared, that she has
a right ( not only to TAX) but to BIND us in ALL CASES WHATSOEVER, and if being
bound in that manner is not slavery, then there is not such a thing as slavery
upon earth. Even the expression is impious, for so unlimited a power can belong
only to GOD.

Whether the Independence of the Continent was declared too soon, or delayed
too long, I will not now enter into as an argument; my own simple opinion is,
that had it been eight months earlier, it would have been much better. We did
not make a proper use of last winter, neither could we, while we were in a
dependent state. However, the fault, if it were one, was all our own; we have
none to blame but ourselves "The present winter" (meaning the last) is worth
(...) rightly employed, but if lost, or neglected, the (...) Continent will
partake of the evil; and there is no punishment that man does not deserve, be
he who, or (...) where he will, that may be the means of (...) season so
precious and useful. COMMON SENSE.
. But no great deal is lost yet; all that How has been doing for this month
past is rather a ravage than a conquest, which the spirit of the Jersies a year
ago would have quickly repulsed, and which time and a little resolution will
soon recover.

I have as little superstition in me as any man living, but my secret opinion
has ever been, and still is, that GOD almighty will not give up a people to
military destruction, or leave them unsupportedly to perish, who had so
earnestly and so repeatedly sought to avoid the calamities of war, by every
decent method which wisdom could invent. Neither have I so much of the infidel
in me, as to suppose, that HE has relinquished the government of the world, and
given us up to the care of devils; and as I do not, I cannot see on what
grounds the king of Britain can look up to heaven for help against us; A common
murderer, a highwayman, or a housebreaker, has as good a pretense as he.

It is surprising to see how rapidly a panic will sometimes run through a
country. All nations and ages have been subject to them: Britain has trembled
like an ague at the report of a French fleet of flat bottomed boats; and in the
fourteenth century the whole English army, after ravaging the kingdom of
France, was driven back like men petrified with fear; and this brave exploit
was performed by a few broken forces collected and headed by a woman, Joan of
Arc. Would, that Heaven might inspire some Jersey maid to spirit up her
countrymen, and save her fair fellow sufferers from ravage and ravishment! Yet
panics, in some cases, have their uses; they produce as much good as hurt.
Their duration is always short; the mind soon grows through them, and acquires
a firmer habit than before. But their peculiar advantage is, that they are the
touchstones of sincerity and hypocrisy, and bring things and men to light,
which might otherwise have lain for ever undiscovered. In fact (...) they have
the same effect on secret traitors, which an imaginary apparition would upon a
private murderer. They sift out the hidden thoughts of man, and hold them up in
public to the world. Many a disguised Tory has lately shown his head, that
shall penitentially solemnize with curses the day on which How arrived upon
the Delaware.

As I was with the troops at fort Lee, and marched with them to the edge of
Pennsylvania, I am well acquainted with many circumstances, which those, who
lived at a distance, know but little or nothing of. Our situation there was
exceedingly cramped, the place being on a narrow neck of land between the North
river and the Hackensack. Our force was inconsiderable, being not one fourth so
great as How could bring against us. We had no army at hand to have relieved
the garrison, had we shut ourselves up and stood on the defense. Our
ammunition, light artillery, and the best part of our stores, had been removed
upon the apprehension that How would endeavor to penetrate the Jersies, in
which case fort Lee could be of no use to us; for it must occur to every
thinking man, whether in the army or not, that these kind of field forts are
only for temporary purposes, and last in use no longer than the enemy directs
his force against the particular object, which such forts are raised to defend.
Such was our situation and condition at fort Lee on the morning of the 20th of
November, when an officer arrived with information, that the enemy with 200
boats had landed about seven or eight miles above: Major Genesis Green, who
commanded the garrison, immediately ordered them under arms, and sent express
to his Excellency General Washington at the town of Hackensack, distant by the
way of the ferry six miles. Our first object was to secure the bridge over the
Hackensack, which laid up the river between the enemy and us, about six miles
from us and three from them. General Washington arrived in about three quarters
of an hour, and marched at the head of the troops toward the bridge, which
place I expected we should have a brush for; however they did not choose to
dispute it with us, and the greatest part of our troops went over the bridge,
the rest over the ferry, except some which passed at a mill on a small creek,
between the bridge and the ferry, and made their way through some marshy
grounds up to the town of Hockensack, and there passed the river. We brought
off as much baggage as the wagons could contain, the rest was lost. The simple
object was to bring off the garrison, and to march them on till they could be
strengthened by the Jersey or Pennsylvania militia, so as to be enabled to make
a stand. We staid four days at Newark, collected in our out posts with some of
the Jersey militia, and marched out twice to meet the enemy on information of
their being advancing, though our numbers were greatly inferior to theirs.
How, in my little opinion, committed a great error in generalship, in not
throwing a body of forces off from Staten Island through Amboy, by which means
he might have seized all our stores at Brunswick, and intercepted our march
into Pennsylvania: But, if we believe the power of hell to be limited, we must
likewise believe that their agents are under some providential control.

I shall not now attempt to give all the particular, of our retreat to the
Delaware; suffice it for the present to say, that both officers and men, though
greatly harassed and fatigued, frequently without rest, covering, or provision,
the inevitable consequences of a long retreat bore it with a manly and a
martial spirit. All their wishes were one, which was, that the country would
turn out and help them to drive the enemy back. Voltaire has remarked, that
King William never appeared to full advantage but in difficulties and in
action; the same remark may be made on General Washington, for the character
fits him. There is a natural firmness in some minds which cannot be unlocked by
trifles, but which, when unlocked, discovers a cabinet of fortitude; and I
reckon it among those kind of public blessings, which we do not immediately
see, that GOD has blessed him with uninterrupted health, and given him a mind
that can even flourish upon care.

I shall conclude this paper with some miscellaneous remarks on the state of
our affairs; and shall begin with asking the following question, Why is it that
the enemy has left the New England provinces, and made these middle ones the
seat of war? The answer is easy: New England is not infested with Tories, and
we are. I have been tender in raising the cry against these men, and used
numberless arguments to show them their danger, but it will not do to sacrifice
a world to either their folly or their baseness. The period is now arrived, in
which either they or we must change our sentiments, or one or both must fall.
And what is a Tory? GOOD GOD! what is he? I should not be afraid to go with an
hundred Whigs against a thousand Tories, were they to attempt to get into arms.
Every Tory is a coward, for a servile, slavish, self-interested fear is the
foundation of Toryism; and a man under such influence, though he may be cruel,
never can be brave.

But before the line of irrecoverable separation be drawn between us, let us
reason the matter together: Your conduct is an invitation to the enemy, yet not
one in a thousand of you has heart enough to join him. How is as much deceived
by you as the American cause is injured by you. He expects you will all take up
arms, and flock to his standard with muskets on your shoulders. Your opinions
are of no use to him, unless you support him personally; for it is soldiers, and
not Tories, that he wants.

I once felt all that kind of anger, which a man ought to feel, against the
mean principles that are held by the Tories: A noted one, who kept a tavern at
Amboy, was standing at his door, with as pretty a child in his hand, about
eight or nine years old, as most I ever saw, and after speaking his mind as
freely as he thought was prudent, finished with this unfatherly expression,
Well! give me peace in my day. Not a man lives on the Continent but fully
believes that a separation must some time or other finally take place, and a
generous parent would have said, "If there must be trouble, let it be in my
day, that my child may have pence;" and this single reflection, well applied,
is sufficient to awaken every man to duty. Not a place upon earth might be so
happy as America. Her situation is remote from all the wrangling world, and she
has nothing to do but to trade with them. A man may easily distinguish in
himself between temper and principle, and I am as confident, as I am that GOD
governs the world, that America will never be happy till she gets clear of
foreign dominion. Wars, without ceasing, will break out till that period
arrives, and the Continent must in the end be conqueror; for, though the flame
of liberty may sometimes cease to shine, the coal never can expire.

America did not, nor does not, want force; but she wanted a proper application
of that force. Wisdom is not the purchase of a day, and it is no wonder that we
should err at first fitting off. From an excess of tenderness, we were
unwilling to raise an army, and trusted our cause to the temporary defense of a
well meaning militia. A summer's experience has now taught us better; yet with
those troops, while they were collected, we were able to set bounds to the
progress of the enemy, and, thank GOD! they are again assembling. I always
considered a militia as the best troops in the world for a sudden exertion, but
they will not do for a long campaign. How, it is probable, will make an
attempt on this city; should he fail on this side the Delaware, he is ruined;
if he succeeds, our cause is not ruined. He stakes all on his side against a
part on ours; admitting he succeeds, the consequence will be, that armies from
both ends of the Continent will march to assist their suffering friends in the
middle States: for he cannot go every where, it is impossible. I consider How
as the greatest enemy the Tories have; he is bringing a war into their country,
which, had it not been for him and partly for themselves, they had been clear
of. Should he now be expelled, I wish, with all the devotion of a Christian,
that the names of Whig and Tory may never more be mentioned; but should the
Tories give him encouragement to come, or assistance if he come, I as sincerely
wish that our next year's arms may expel them from the Continent, and the
Congress appropriate their possessions to the relief of those who have suffered
in well doing. A single successful battle next year will settle the whole.
America could carry on a two years war by the confiscation of the property of
disaffected persons, and be made happy by their expulsion. Say not that this is
revenge call it rather the soft resentment of a suffering people, who, having
no object in view but the GOOD of ALL, have staked their OWN ALL upon a
seemingly doubtful event. Yet it is folly to argue against determined hardness;
eloquence may strike the ear, and the language of sorrow draw forth the tear of
compassion, but nothing can reach the heart that is steeled with prejudice.

Quitting this class of men, I turn with the warm ardour of a friend to those
who have nobly stood, and are yet determined to stand the matter out: I call
not upon a few, but upon all; not on THIS State or THAT State, but on EVERY
State; up and help us; lay your shoulders to the wheel; better have too much
force than too little, when so great an object is at stake. Let it be told to
the future world, that in the depth of winter, when nothing but hope and virtue
could survive, that the city and the country, alarmed at one common danger,
came forth to meet and to repulse it. Say not, that thousands are gone, turn
out your tens of thousands; throw not the burden of the day upon Providence,
but "show your faith by your works," that GOD may bless you. It matters not
where you live or what rank of life you hold, the evil or the blessing will
reach you all. The far and the near, the home counties and the back, the rich
and the poor, shall suffer or rejoice alike. The heart that feels not now, is
dead? The blood of his children shall curse his cowardice, who shrinks back at
a time when a little might have saved the whole, and made them happy. I love
the man that can smile in trouble, that can gather strength from distress, and
grow brave by reflection. It Is the business of little minds to shrink; but he
whose heart is firm, and whose conscience approves his conduct, will pursue his
principles unto death. My own line of reasoning is to myself as strait and
clear as a ray of light. Not all the treasures of the world, so far as I
believe, could have induced me to support an offensive war, for I think it
murder; but if a thief break into my house, burn and destroy my property, and
kill or threaten to kill me, or those that are in it, and to "bind me in all
cases whatsoever," to his absolute will, am I to suffer it? What signifies it
to me, whether he who does it, is a King of a common man; my countryman or not
my countryman? whether it is done by an individual villain, or an army of them?
If we reason to the root of things we shall find no difference; neither can any
just cause be assigned why we should punish in the one case, and pardon in the
other. Let them call me rebel, and welcome, I feel no concern from it; but I
should suffer the misery of devils, were I to make a whore of my soul by
swearing allegiance to one, whose character is that of a sottish, stupid,
stubborn, worthless, brutish man. I conceive likewise a horrid idea in
receiving mercy from a being, who at the last day shall be shrieking to the
rocks and mountains to cover him, and fleeing with terror from the orphan, the
widow and the slain of America.

There are Cases which cannot be overdone by language, and this is one. There
are persons too who see not the full extent of the evil that threatens them:
they solace themselves with hopes that the enemy, if they succeed, will be
merciful. It is the madness of folly to expect mercy from those who have
refused to do justice; and even mercy, where conquest is the object, is only a
trick of war: The cunning of the fox is as murderous as the violence of the
wolf; and we ought to guard equally against both. Howe's first object is partly
by threats and partly by promises, to terrify or seduce the people to deliver
up their arms, and receive mercy. The ministry recommended the same plan to
Gage, and this is what the Tories call making their peace; "a peace which
passes all understanding", indeed! A peace which would be the immediate fore
runner of a worse ruin than any we have yet thought of. Ye men of Pennsylvania,
do reason upon these things! Were the back counties to give up their arms, they
would fall an easy prey to the Indians, who are all armed: This perhaps is what
some Tories would not be sorry for. Were the home counties to deliver up their
arms, they would be exposed to the resentment of the back counties, who would
then have it in their power to chastise their defection at pleasure. And were
any one state to give up its arms, THAT State must be garrisoned by all Howe's
army of Britons and Hossians to preserve it from the anger of the rest. Mutual
fear is a principal link in the chain of mutual love, and woe be to that State
that breaks the compact. How is mercifully inviting you to barbarous
destruction, and men must be either rogues or fools that will not see it. I
dwell not upon the vapors of imagination; I bring reason to your ears; and in
language, as plain as A, B, C, hold up truth to your eyes.

I thank GOD that I fear not, I see no real cause for fear. I know our
situation well, and can see the way out of it. While our army was collected.
How dare not risk a battle, and it is no credit to him that he decamped from
the White Plains, and waited a mean opportunity to ravage the defenseless
Jersies; but it is great credit to us, that, with an handful of men, we
sustained an orderly retreat for near an hundred miles, brought off our
ammunition, all our field pieces, the greatest part of our stores, and had four
rivers to pass. None can say that our retreat was precipitate, for we were near
three weeks in performing it, that the country might have time to come in.
Twice we marched back to meet the enemy and remained out till dark. The sign of
fear was not seen in our camp, and had not some of the cowardly and disaffected
inhabitants spread false alarms through the country, the Jersies had never been
ravaged. Once more we are again collected and collecting, our new army at both
ends of the Continent is recruiting fast, and we shall be able to open the next
campaign with sixty thousand men, well armed and clothed. This is our
situation, and who will may know it. By perseverance and fortitude we have the
prospect of a glorious issue; by cowardice and submismission, the sad choice of
a variety of evils -- a ravaged country -- a depopulated city -- habitations
without safety, and slavery without hope -- our homes turned into barracks and
baudy-houses for Hessians, and a future race to provide for whose fathers we
shall doubt of. Look on this picture and weep over it! -- and if there yet
remains one thoughtless wretch who believes it not, let him suffer it
unlamented.

NORWICH: Printed by JOHN TRUMBULL.


