THE VOICE of the PROPHETS CONSIDERED IN A DISCOURSE or SERMON, SHOWING what is
WISDOM for men in a FALLEN ESTATE; AND also, what is WISDOM for a People in a
CIVIL STATE. With an Observation on THIS TIME.

But where shall Wisdom be found, and where is the Place of Understanding.

JOB. Should ye not hear the Words which the Lord has cried by the former
Prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited and in Prosperity?

ZECHARIAH. Printed in the Year M,DCC,LXXVI.

PROVE. 9.12. If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self; but if thou
scornest, thou alone shall bear it.


LET us consider that we are in the Presence of an Holy GOD, who made us, and
gives us every good thing we enjoy; who will bring every Work into Judgment
with every secret Thing. -- It becomes us therefore with the utmost awe and
reverence, to behave ourselves so as not to Break his holy Law, or merit his
Divine displeasure: You may remember, that within these few years past there
has been several Judgments threatened against this Land and Nation. The first
that I shall mention, was in what is commonly called the Chebucto fleet, a
large fleet sent from France against the Colonies; big enough according to
humane understanding, to have Destroyed our shiping, and at least to have laid
our Seaports in the utmost Ruin and Desolation. The English fleet at that time
by contrary winds, a mere act of providence, hindered from coming to our
Relief. But mark, the French fleet taken with a Dreadful Distemper on their
passage; they put into Chebucto, where they Died by Thousands, and were not
suffered to do the Colonies the least Damage.

A case something similar to what we have told us, Judge. 7.2. And the Lord said
unto Gideon, the People that are with thee are too many for me to give the
Midianites into their Hands; lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying,
mine own Hand has saved me.

Another instance of Judgment threatened against us, was in the beginning of the
last War; Genesis Braddick was defeated by the French and Indians, who came in
like a Flood on some of the Southern Colonies, burning Houses, killing and
taking Captive many of our People; it seemed as though they would devour the
whole land: But mark -- in the conclusion of the war, the French, quite from
St. Lawrence river to the Missisippi, were brought into subjection. Which
brings to my mind the prophecy of Amos, who, after he had reproved Israel for
diverse sins, says, chap. 7.1. Thus has the Lord showed unto me, and behold he
formed grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth,
and lo, it was the latter growth, after the king's mowings. And it came to
pass, that when they had made an end of eating the grass of the land, then I
said, O Lord God, forgive, I beseech thee; by whom shall Jacob arise? for he is
small. The Lord repented for this: It shall not be, says the Lord. Thus has
the Lord God showed unto me, and behold, the Lord God called to contend by
fire, and it devoured the great deep, and did eat up a part. Then said I, O
Lord God, cease, I beseech thee; by whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small.
The Lord repented for this: This also shall not be, says the Lord God. -- Then
said the Lord, Behold, I will set a plum-line in the midst of my people Israel.
-- Have we not reason to believe, from these signs, that there is something
among us that is very offensive in the eyes of an holy God, that must be
reformed, ere we can expect to prosper. O that there were now a number of
praying Amoses, who would say, O that the Lord would spare his people! it may
be that they will repent. -- Are we now engaged in a more dreadful war, blood a
running, killing one another? as in Rev. 6.4.

I do not determine wherefore it is that the hand of the Lord is gone out
against us: I shall here only observe, that God sometimes brings his judgments
by instruments, to whom his people have done no wrong; see Judges 10.6, and
onward, And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord, and
served Baalim and Ashtaroth. -- And the anger of the Lord was hot against
Israel, and he sold them into the hands of the Philistines, and into the hands
of the children of Ammon. And what harm had the children of Judah done to the
Babylonians? yet how they destroyed and captivated them! -- But what was the
matter? see Jer. 7.5, -- 7. If ye thoroughly amend your ways, and your doings;
if ye thoroughly execute judgment between a man and his neighbor; if ye
oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, and shed not innocent
blood in this place, neither walk after other gods, to your hurt: then will I
cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, for
ever and ever.

But it is possible some of you may say, at least in your hearts, 'We are wise
men, and understand our interest exceeding well; who can teach us?' -- But I
desire you to remember, that even the wisest of men have sometimes need of
being put in mind of things they well knew. I will therefore consider the words
in the following order,

First, Endeavor to show from the scripture, what is true wisdom for men in a
fallen condition:

And in the next place, endeavor to show what is true wisdom for a people in a
civil state.

Thirdly, That whosoever shall scorn the word of God, that they alone shall
bear it.

And Lastly, Show, in some measure, what it is they shall bear.

First, What is wisdom for men in a fallen state? But let us first observe,
that there is what has been called wisdom, see Daniel, 5.15. And now the wise
men, the Astrologers; who were probably such men, as by the help of the devil,
pretended to foretell future events* but this is so far from the true wisdom
intended in the text, that it is the most dreadful folly*

Another sort of wisdom is mentioned in 1. Cor. 2.13. Which things also we
speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the holy Ghost
teaches: There is such a thing then as what is called man's wisdom; of this
sort of wisdom, I suppose the apostle Paul had a large share before his
conversion, being brought up to learning, who had the witness of miracles, and
zealous in what he called religion; yet persecuted the christians until he
received a light from heaven.

We have an account, John 3. of Nichodemus likewise a ruler of the Jews, who
probably had a great share of human understanding or man's wisdom, although he
was so far convinced by the miracles, that he said to our Savior, Rabbi, we
know that thou art a teacher come from God, for no man can do these miracles
that thou do, except God be with him: Yet when our Savior told him, Except a
man be born again, he connot see the kingdom of God, he understands nothing of
this by his human wisdom, but says, How can a man be born when he is old? And
further says, How can these things be? -- How ignorant was he of the
new birth, or the new heart which delights in hallelujahs and adoration to
God! And we are told in plain words, 1 Cor. 2.14. But the natural man receives
not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. And our Savior
himself says, John 6.45. It is written in the Prophets, And they shall be all
taught of God -- Every man therefore that has heard and learned of the Father,
comes unto me.

My answer then to the first question (which is, What is wisdom for men in a
fallen estate) shall be, That it is their wisdom to go to God by solemn prayer,
for his mercy in teaching them, and to bring them into true religion by his
mighty power, and that with an honest intention to be conformed to the will of
God; for God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit
and in truth, John 4.24. For if the heart does not believe that God is
righteous to reject its request, the prayer is like a demand: and it is
therefore the wisdom of sinners to beg of God to show them how vile they are,
and know that God is sovereign of his gifts, or they would cease to be free
grace. And I hope there are none of you so wise in your own eyes, as to think
you have no need that God should teach you. Have you more wit than Nichodemus,
or St. Paul, who were both taught of God? -- And indeed, could men go to heaven
by their own wit and invention, to whom would they sing praise? Would it be to
themselves, while they neglect or despise to glorify God? What, self-saved, and
self-glorified! No; if any are saved, it must be by the gift of God.

Which brings me in the second place, to say, that whosoever shall scorn to beg
of God, to renew his heart, and to be taught, he alone shall bear it; for it is
written, 'As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every
tongue shall confess to God: So then every one of us shall give an account of
himself to God,' Romans 14.11, 12. 'Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for
whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap; for he that sows to his
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to the spirit,
shall of the spirit reap life everlasting,' Gal. 6.7, 8. And the text is a full
confirmation of this. 'If thou scornest, thou alone shall bear it.' But what
shall he bear; the answer is, 'The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven
with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not
God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power,' 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. 'Then shall he say also unto them
on the left hand, depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for
the devil and his angels,' Mat. 25.41. The son of man shall send forth his
angels, and they shall geather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and
them that do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there shall
be wailing and gnashing of teeth,' Mat. 13.41, 42. 'And I say unto you my
friends, be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more
that they can do. But I will fore-warn you, whom you shall fear* fear him which
after he has killed the body, has power to cast into hell: Yea, I say unto
you, fear him,' Luke, 12.4. Can any person get any thing by scorning or
slighting the counsels of their maker; to be cast into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his engels, where the soul dies not, and the fire is
not quenched. I conclude this point, with this word, fly from the wrath to come.

In the next place, or secondly, I shall endeavor to show what is wisdom for
men in a civil state: -- To this I answer, It is wisdom for a people to do
righteously, or what is the same, to keep the ten commands, for we have the
words of the most high and holy God, the former of all things, see Deuteronomy. 16.20.
'That which is altogether just shall thou follow, that thou may live and
inherit the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.' Levit. 18.5. 'Ye shall
therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments, which if a man do, he shall live
in them: I am the LORD.'

For instance; Suppose a people should have no law to punish the breaking any
one of the first four of these commands, and of consequence have no regard to
God; how dreadful must be their doom: see what was said to the children of
Israel; Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen, let them deliver you in
the time of your tribulation, Judges, 10.14.

Let us consider the fifth command, which is, Honor thy father and mother, that
thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God gives thee. Now if
there were no obedience or respect paid to parents, or rulers, how would every
villain invade the property of others, spending their time in it so that there
could be no sustenance for the people; and if there were no law against murder,
how would people be in danger of losing their lives, it would doubtless take so
much time in preserving them, as that they would not be able to raise any
support for life.

And see what is said against breaking the seventh command. Job, 31.11. 'For
this is an heinous crime, yea, it is an iniquity to be punished by the judges,
for it is a fire that consumes to destruction, and would root out all mine
increase. And with respect to the eighth command, were there no law to punish
stealing, how would many think it easier to steal for a living, than to labor,
which of natural consequence, will ruin any people, and witness is the eyes of
the law; how could the breaking of any one of these commands be punished, if
there were nothing but false witness; and the tenth command, which includes the
whole, or all honesty to our neighbor, to be neglected will be equally ruinous.

But you will doubtless ask in a more particular manner, when a nation, or a
people, may be truly said to break any one of these commands? To this I answer,
That a people, or nation, may be guilty of one villain's stealing a horse, for
when the judges willingly and knowingly, clear the thief, when they know he is
guilty, they are partakers with the thief; and indeed, for want of a proper
enquiry into truth, they may become guilty: So when a people shall see that
their judges do unrighteousness, and willingly clear the thief; if they do not
endeavor to know and displace such judges, they all become guilty; for the
people are commanded to see that righteousness takes place: see Deuteronomy. 16.18.
Judges and officers shall thou make thee in all thy gates, which the Lord thy
God gives thee, throughout thy tribes; and they shall judge the people with
just judgment.

This command was given to the people, they ought therefore to have put in
officers by election, and to be sure to be left out when they did not do
righteously. What greater encouragement to wickedness, than to have no judges;
and what greater encouragement to the wicked, than hinder their being found out
and punished; how severely were the children of Israel punished when they made
no judges, but left every man to do as he pleased, or that which was right in
his own eyes; see the end of judges: should they not have made righteous judges
a terror to evil doers, how guilty then of the blood of the Levites wife, and
how dangerous was it to put in officers for life, if the people were justly
charged for what they knew, and suffered their representavives to do.

Again, kings or rulers may be greatly to blame another way. For instance,
suppose a king, or rulers, should take from the people ninety-nine parts of an
hundren of the produce from the people, or the value, and lay it up for
themselves, or give it to pentioners, or charity men, and enable them to carry
on rioting, and drunkenness, while the people are greatly distressed to
maintain it; it may be as great a burden, as to be slaves: and how wicked is it
to rate the people to maintain rioting, and drunkenness, right in the face of
Gods commands, for even kings are not to make themselves rich beyond bounds
with the peoples money, see Deuteronomy. 17.17. Neither shall he greatly multiply to
himself silver and gold. Nevertheless, there is no doubt but that kings and
rulers ought to have a reasonable and honorable recompense for their labor, See
Romans 13.6. For this cause pay you tribute also for they are God's ministers,
attending continually upon this very thing.

I should think it proper, under this enquiry, for us to consider the conduct
of the children of Israel, and see wherein they were blamed, and when they were
not: For God is the same, yesterday, to day, and forever? Therefore those
things that were displeasing to him then, are displeasing to him now if they
are acted. And I do not remember any threatening against the children of Israel
for injustice, until after Solomon's time* the question will then be, How did
they conduct in that time? see Deuteronomy. 24.10. When thou do lend thy brother any
thing, thou shall not go unto his house to fetch his pledge. Did they indeed
when they sold, or lent one another any thing, take a pledge as a witness to
the debt? I answer, Doubtless they did; or what is the meaning of a pledge.
Wherefore it is evident they took care beforehand to know how to do justice.
But see Deuteronomy. 24.12, 13. And if the man be poor, thou shall not sleep with his
pledge: In any case thou shall deliver him the pledge again when the sun goes
down.

Why truly did they not trust one another longer than from morning to night;
for what profit could a pledge be that must be given up before the debt was
paid. I answer, That the creditor could show the pledge to a number of the
neighbors, and thereby git witnesses that the debtor owes for goods delivered?
In that case a creditor might recover his cause, or else it was lost, for what
advantage was it to have a pledge or witnesses; if a person could recover upon
his own say so, or by making a false book, and swear it was truly and justly
charged, nor could they make a book against any person for four times so much
as the debtor would have given a pledge for; nor for things for which
satisfaction had been made. Should they not have been as realy punished had
they had no law to prevent making false accounts, as they were for not having
law, or judges, to prevent the wickedness done to the Levites wife; werefore
they did well to take care beforehand, that one should not defraud or wrong
another. If we can find in their practice, what was the mind and will of God,
let us hear it. But to return; It is probable, when persons thought themselves
wronged, and could git no pledge; they went immediately to trial. I shall here
produce the account of an action that was brought and tried in one of their
courts, present, king Solomon judge, 1. Kings, 3.16, to the end. Then came
there two women that were harlots, unto the king, and stood before him: and the
one woman said, O my lord, I, and this womam dwell in one house; and I was
delivered of a child with her in the house: and it came to pass, the third day
after that I was delivered, that this woman was delivered also, and we were
together: there was no stranger with us in the house; save we two in the house.
And this woman's child died in the night, because she overlaid it. And she
arose at midnight and took my son from beside me, while thine handmaid slept,
and laid it in her bosom, and laid her dead child in my bosom; and when I rose
in the morning to give my child suck, behold it was dead; but when I had
considered it in the morning, behold it was not my son which I did bear: and
the other woman said nay; but the living is my son, and the dead is thy son:
and this said no, but the dead is thy son, and the living is my son. Thus they
spoke before the king. Then said the king, the one says this is my son that
lives, and thy son is the dead: and the other says nay; but thy son is the
dead, and my son is the living. And the king said bring me a sword, and they
brought a sword before the king; and the king said divide the living child in
two, and give half to the one, and half to the other. Then spoke the woman
whose the living child was, unto the king (for her bowels yearned upon her son)
and she said, O my lord, give her the living child, and in no wise slay it: But
the other said, let it be neither mine, nor thine, but divide it. Then the king
answered and said, give her the living child, and in no wise slay it; she is
the mother thereof. And all Israel heard of the judgment which the ksng had
judged, and they feared the king; for they saw that the wisdom of God was in
him to do judgment.

Here observe, we have no account of any writ, or any officer to bring the
defendant before the king, for it likely was looked upon as a token of guilt,
to be unwilling to attend the court: we have no account of any attorney to
abate the writ, or plead demuror, or special plea; nor even to say, that the
plantiff had produced no witness to prove her cause; neither could they go from
court, to court, until they had spent in the trial, three times so much as the
cause was worth: But the judge hears the story from the parties, and by policy
finds out from them which was the true mother, and orders, that she should have
her own child.

But where lay the great wisdom think you; was it in judging that a woman
should have her own child, or in serching the matter.

See what is spoken by Job, who seems to have been a judge: chap. 29.16. I was
a father to the poor, and the cause which I knew not, I searched out. I break
the jaws of the wicked, and pluck the spoil out of his teeth.

But from Solomon's time, to their going into captivity, there are repeated
threatenings for injustice, and violence, see Micah. 2.1. Woe to them that
devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds: when the morning is light, they
practice it because it is in the power of their hands -- And they covet fields,
and take them by violence, and houses, and take them away: so they oppress a
man and his house, even a man and his heritage: -- Therefore, thus says the
Lord; Behold against this family do I devise an evil, from which ye shall not
remove your necks: see also Jer. 22.3. Thus says the Lord; Execute ye
judgmdnt, and righteousness; and deliver the spoiled out of the hands of the
oppressor; and do no wrong; do no violence to the stranger, the fatherless, nor
the widow; neither shed innocent blood in this place; for if you do this thing,
indeed then shall there enter in by the gates of this house, kings setting upon
the throne of David rideing in chariots, and on horses, he, and his servants,
and his people. But if ye will not hear these words, I swear by my self, says
the Lord; That this house shall become a desolation.

But did they do all this injustice, and violence, without any pretense of law?
No, they did not; for we read, Micah, 6.16. For the statutes of Omry are kept,
and all the works of the house of Ahab; and Hab. 1.4. Therefore the law is
slacked, and judgment does never go forth, for the wicked does compass about
the righteous; therefore wrong judgment proceeds.

But what was their law do you think; was it like a fish-net, that would catch
all the little fish, and let all the great fish go through? I answer yes; it
probibly was: but you will ask, how can that be? I answer, That under a
plausable pretense of doing justice; that when either partiy thought themselves
wronged, they might revew or appeal, from court, to court; until they had
spent three times so much in the trial, as the cause was worth. The great men,
by having very large fees for manageing the causes, probably run off with the
most of the money, while they left the poor to suffer for want. Who having
recovered hardly enough to pay the cost, they lost all that was taken from them
by injustice, or violence: How did this deliver the spoiled. And when any one
person did injustice, or violence to another, he was obliged to go to law, or
loose his right; and who knows but what that was next to his life; was not the
nation guilty of this. And what were they better to to have a law which cost
more than could be recovered by it; could it relieve a distressed person who
had been wronged by injustice or violence. But if the righteous lost all, what
become of the mistaken party, who likely lost more than three times all: Was
not such a law, like an iron brier, that tore the flesh off every one that came
near it: wherefore every mite of cost that was made in trials more than was
absolutely necessary, was unjust; no better than other injustice. Let us
conclude this point, with these words, 2. Chro. 19.6. To the judges, Take heed
what ye do, for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the
judgment. And whosoever shall break any one of the laws of God, they alone
shall bear it: for if a people shall have no law to punish the breaking any of
these commandments, this is the natural tendency to bring them to ruin, as has
been observed before; if a people shall carefully punish the breakers of these
commands, it is strange if any one escapes without punishment, shame, and
disgrace; however, they will certainly be under the curse, see Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed be he that confermeth not all the words of this law, to do them; and all
the people shall say amen. Observe the word conferm; for all are required to
confirm this law. Therefore, here is a curse pronounced against every one who
has a right to choose rulers who does not endeavor to choose such as will be
most likely to keep this law.

Here is a curse pronounced against every one who does not endeavor to know
what rulers do not do well in keeping this law; who shall throw away his power,
or does not endeavor to displace, or leave out such rulers as do not do well in
keeping this law. Here is a curse pronounced against every one who although he
has not a right to choose rulers eye or ear who shall do any thing which he
knows is likely to hinder the keeping this law. Here is a curse pronounced
against every judge or other who shall not endeavor the keeping this law. In
fine, here is a curse pronounced against all the breakers of this law: and who
has ever hardened himself against his creator, and has prospered; therefore,
every one that scorneth he alone shall bear it. But what shall he bear? I
answer, That whosoever shall scorn to obey the law of God, shall bear his wrath
and displeasure. See what (if it be practiced) will be an instance of this,
Exodus 22.22. Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child; if thou
afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their
cry; and my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword; and your
wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless. And I have have heard
there is a distemper among the nations, which is the most dreadful and mortal
to the well people, for when a number of men shall make unjust rules, they will
not only enjoy the displeasure of God, but they, and their's must be tried by
the same law, see Prove. 28.10. Whosoever causes the righteous to go astray in evil
way, he shall fall himself into his own pit; but the upright shall hvae good
things in possession: and Job, 18.8. For he is cast into a net by his own feet,
and he walks upon a snare. I remember an old observation that has been maid;
That when the children of Israel had good rulers, to whom they heard so much as
that they could execute the laws, they always prospered; on the other hand,
when they had bad rulers, to whom they heared, then they suffered greatly: and
those rulers fared the worst, witness Jereboam, Jehoiachim Baasha, and Ahab. I
conclude this point with that in Job, 27.8. For what is the hope of a
hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away his soul.

And now let us conclude this part, with a word of exhortation to the hearers.
As we are probationers here, for eternity: Let us set apart some time in every
day, wherein to consider solemnly what will become of us in another world; and
if we are in any distress, and see that the rod of God is upon us; let us
mistrust whether there be not something in our practice that we have
overlook't, that is offensive to an holy God. Let us seek to God by fasting and
prayer, to teach us what is amiss: see the example of David, when there was
three years famine year after year; and David enquired of the Lord, 2. Samuel,
21.1. Let us examine carefully how our actions agree with the rules of the word
of God, see Zach. 7.7. Should ye not hear the words which the Lord has cried
by the former prophets: and whatever is amiss let us reform, and restore
righteousness; then by fasting and prayer seek to God for forgiveness, and
mercy; who can tell if God will direct, and prosper our enterprises, or find a
way of redemption, that we perish not. I conclude the whole, with that in Isa.
50.10. Who is among you that fears the Lord; that walks in darkness, and
has no light: Let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.

AMEN.

