A WARNING TO AMERICA.

By ELAM POTTER, M. A. MINISTER of the GOSPEL.

Superb^s Deus humiliat, et
Humiles exaltat.
HARTFORD: Printed by EBEN. WATSON, MDCCLXXVII.

A WARNING to America.
ZECHARIAH, Chap. xiith, Verse 12th. And the land shall mourn, every family
apart.
My COUNTRYMEN and BRETHERN,
MUST America be the unhappy people, as it were, the Jews raised from the dead
to perpetrate the same wickedness over again, but under greater light, that our
ruin in the end may be still more complete, and our condemnation, like that of
Capernaum at the day of judgment, be seven fold enhanced!

WE see that while the calls of GOD to repentance wax louder, the cry of our
sabbath-breaking, swearing, uncleaness, and many other sins, waxes louder and
louder, and like the cry of Sodom comes up before GOD: And HE is now come down
in his righteous judgment among us, and pleads against us, for the abuses we
offer to his bleeding Son, who is crucified in every unbelieving heart.

WHAT shall we do? We cannot stand before his anger! Shall dust magnify itself
against him that treads thereon? Or the chaff against the wind? Or the dry
stubble against the raging flames?

LET us then, every family and every person, mourn apart for our sins. Let each
one, with himself, cry Alas! Alas for my sins! -- How much have I done to pull
down the judgments of GOD upon the land! -- O how did I sin! -- How was my sin
aggravated! -- How did I sin wilfully! -- Against my own conscience, against
examples, against many warnings and admonitions, against mercies and against
judgments, and after vows made in sickness and in danger; how have I restrained
prayer, abused sabbaths, neglected GOD's word, despised his people, pierced his
Son and grieved his Holy Spirlt! Oh! How have I observed lying vanities and
forsaken mine own mercies!

LET conscience, she is one of thy best friends, let conscience now have full
scope, and range with freedom through all thy life, and bring up every sin, and
place it before thee in its blackest colors, as it would appear to thee if
thou were now upon thy death bed.

Nay, let conscience dive into the heart and search every corner of it; and
pray GOD to search you and to show you more and more the blackness, the
filthiness and turpitude of your own heart. There see your contrariety to GOD,
your unreconciledness to his ways, your disaffection to his holiness. View your
heart in the glass of GOD's perfect word; -- view it as discribed in Matthew
xv. 19.

VIEW it as the seat of pride, malice, hypocrisy, unbelief, covetousness and
sensuality; view it as the fountain, as the sea of Sodom, from whence all the
streams of wickedness flow. -- View the sins of your life, view them over again
and again; let them be continually before you; but the heart like an ocean
swallows them all; -- view the evil of them especially as they are against a
GOD of infinite purity and excellence. Let us view them as the thorns, the
nails and the spear that pierced the LORD of life.

VIEW the just damand's of GOD's all-perfect law, -- The soul that sineth it
shall die, Ezekiel xviii. 4. View the rottenness of your own righteousness, the
sins of your best services, and be humbled under your moral inability to help
yourselves.

AND when you have wandered up and down in self, and in the world, seeking help
of creatures, and have found none, come to JESUS CHRIST, he can help when all
others fail. He is able to save to the uttermost. Come to him; thousands reject
him and are damned; but come ye to this infinitely glorious SAVIOR, and prove
his excellence.

THE Greeks came to him at the feast; Nichodemas came to him; the Cyrophenician
woman came to him, thousands have come to him miserable as you are, and not one
that comes will be cast out.

Do you say if he were upon earth as he was once, you would come to him? -- I
tell you JESUS CHRIST is even now upon earth by his word and spirit; he is here
in his humble form by his witnesses and people, and blessed are they who are
not offended in him: Verily you may now come to him in a manner that is as
pleasing to him, and as saving to you, as if you had beheld him and come to him
in the days of his flesh upon earth.

O COME to him; come now; come as you are; come beggars; come with all your
sins, blindness, poverty and disgrace, cast yourselves at his feet. He, the
glorious LAMB of GOD, invites you, saying come unto me all ye that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

IF you think you are even as black as the blackest in hell, come and be
married to the PRINCE of LIFE. Come, experience the efficacy of his all
purifying blood, which never failed to cleanse the blackest; no not Mary
Magdalen, a persecuting Saul, or a thief on the cross. But it may be, one
says, I am worse than any of these, I have sinned beyond them! Well, dear
heart, what then? What if you are legion, possessed of a legion of devils?
Don't let us distrust CHRIST's sufficiency or his willingness; he is stronger
than the strong man armed; he conquers hell and death, and shouts his
victories. Despair not; thank GOD that he has begun to open your eyes, while
others are going blindfold to hell.

BE not weary of your sadness, while the laughter, the scoffing and mirth of
fools is like the crackling of thorns under a pot -- You now sorrow and they
rejoice; but it is possible, if you grieve not the holy spirit, that you may
yet rejoice when they may sorrow without hope. Think how intolerable hell
would be, were it only to dwell forever with thine own unsanctified self, under
the reigning power of thine unrestraining passions, having an accusing
conscience, that worm which dies not, forever praying like a vulture upon
thine heartstrings. Every man is born and brought up with the seeds of hell in
him 'till grace subdues them.

As you would not endure this; as you would not endure the wrath of Almighty
GOD, with devils in the flaming regions of endless despair; and as you would
obtain pardon, peace, joy, bliss and glory above, come to JESUS CHRIST for all
that you need.

COME to him for teaching; he is a glorious teacher come from GOD; lie at his
feet; confess your sins; make restitution to those you have injured; forgive
your enemy from the heart; and as you forgive, pray GOD, for CHRIST's sake, to
forgive you.

THUS come to JESUS CHRIST to have sins pardoned, guilt removed, lusts and
corruptions subdued, grace and strength communicated.

RENOUNCE the world, the flesh and the devil, give up yourself, your all, to
GOD, in JESUS CHRIST, to be his entirely, to do or to suffer whatever he calls
you to in life, trusting in his merits alone for the acceptance of your persons
and services.

THESE are the terms of divine favor to every person; O how glorious! How
infinitely reasonable our compliance! GOD does not require us to investigate
the number of fixed stars, or to track the blazing comet, but that we believe
on him whom he has sent. Here is peace, if all the world are at odds, and
safety, if the heavens and earth be dissolved.

BUT for us to continue stupid and secure in this day, is more awful than the
judgments we feel, being a surer foreboder of ruin. In this sense, quos deus
vult perdere prius dementat. O madness without parallel, and ruin without
remedy!

Wherefore, my countrymen and brethren,

LET us no longer, like the Jews, mock the great Jehovah with our hypocritical
shows, as we have often done, for he looks at the inward part: Therefore let us
repent and turn unto him with all our heart, if peradventure the LORD may yet
turn from his fierce anger, that is kindled against us, and be a present help
in time of need. Let us not be deceived; GOD is not mocked. But let us, O land,
repent indeed of our sins, of our profaneness, of our drunkenness, of our
uncleanness, of our sabbath-breaking, of our injustice, of our covetousness and
oppression, of our neglect of family and other devotions; let us repent and
mourn for our horrid abuse of the glorious gospel and the greatest privileges
that ever a nation enjoyed. And, in the matter of oppression, do not the thing
that thou condemnest in another, knowing that with what measure ye mete, it
shall be measured to you again, Matthew, vii, 2. For these sins our fields have
more than once smoaked with the blood of our young men; many wives are now
become widows, and many children are become fatherless, and thousands of our
brethren are slain, or wounded, or carried into captivity.

WHEREAS we all, ministers, rulers and people, have by our sins procured this,
let us all as one man unite in repenting and turning unto the LORD. Let every
family and every person mourn apart, and no longer, by provoking GOD, go on to
plunge the fatal steel into the bosoms of our dear ones. What I say to one, I
say to all. Let every parent and every child, every town and every society, cry
to GOD for his help, sending up every prayer in the name of the LORD JESUS
CHRIST. Pray in public, pray in your families, in your closets, or in the
fields; pray with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, pray and faint
not. Let incessent fervent prayers be ascending up to GOD from all parts of the
land, that he, in his infinite love and mercy, will appear for us, and cause
his blessed spirit to be poured out that we may be awakened to a thorough
reformation; and that GOD would save us when we have no might to save ourselves.

But to those who in this day frolic and carouse.

MY FRIENDS, though you forget your sins, yet remember your sins will not
forget you: If you fly from them they will follow you, as the shadow does its
substance; and no distance or time, nor change of place, can alter or efface
them. While you murder time at your revels, conscience behind the door minutes
even your thoughts, and her black bill is now reposited in store against you,
which death will soon read; -- he, the end of all your mirth, is now at the
door, and hell follows with him. O what a change is at hand! Now you dance to
the violin; then you must dance to death's pipe. Now the sparks of lust kindle,
then the fire of hell burns. Now you sin in jest; then GOD damns in earnest.
Now you bark at the word; then you howl at yourselves.

O be wise; for what is a sand to the globe; a drop to the ocean; a sunbeam to
its fountain, and a short life of mirth to eternal pain.

FINIS

