The Last Words and dying Speech of THOMAS GOSS, In a private Conference,
previous to his Execution.
I WAS born at Brookfield, in the commonwealth of Massachusetts. My parents
sustained respectable characters, and were blessed with easy fortune, superior
to want, though not affluent. -- My father was a farmer, who dying when I was
about 10 years old, I consequently become subject to the governance of my
mother; but as she did not long survive the death of my father, I was sent, at
the age of 14, to live with Capt. Jonathan Buttalf, a pretty wealthy farmer,
resident in a society in Symsbury, near the boundary line of Massachusetts,
with whom, and my brother, then living at Grenville, in the commonwealth
aforesaid, (about 7 miles from Capt. Buttalf's) I resided, alternately, till I
arrived at the age of 22. -- At which period, recruits being wanted to act
against the French in Cannda, in the war between them and the English, in the
year 1755, I enlisted as a soldier in the provincial service, for a short term,
in defense of English liberty; and, with other recruits, took my departure from
Springfield, under the command of Lieut. Jonathan Ball, (afterward Major.) --
On our arrival at Fort Edward, I was detached, under Major Rogers, commanding a
corpse of Rangers in that department, to scour the woods in search of war
parties of the enemy; and being distinguished as qualified for such excur^^ons,
discovering an acquaintance with the woods, as well as a fondness for
enterprise; I was immediately ordered to act in capacity of a sergeant; though I
never obtained a warrant of that office, nor received, though promised, more
wages than a private soldier; being, as is but too frequently the case,
defrauded of them by my officers. In piloting scouting parties of our men,
through the woods was, therefore, my principal employment: nor did I ever betray
the confidence reposed in me; but acted as a faithful guide, and dutiful
soldier; not having been guilty of any misdemeanors, for which I now feel the
least remorse of conscience." -- Being reminded that a letter had been written
to the States Attorney ( John Canfield, Esquire.) previous to his arraignment
before the Hon. Superior Court, signed by Ephraim Pelion, of London, in the
State of Massachusetts, relative to the murder of Elias Hopkins, Extract of a
letter from a gentleman in London, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, to the States
Attorney of Litchfield County, before the arraignment and conviction of Thomas
Goss, for the murder of his wife.
"SIR,
"I have been very uneasy in my mind for more than twenty years past, being
well persuaded, that Thomas Goss, was guilty of the murder of Elias Hopkins,
late of Hartford: he was slain in the year 1758; Goss and Hopkins were
companions in hunting, at or near Wood-Creek, in the fall of the year; Goss
came in and reported, that the Indians fired on him and Hopkins, killed
Hopkins, took the furr, traps, etc. On which a scouting party was dispatched in
quest of the body of Hopkins, -- who reported on their return, that Hopkins was
shot, hutt burned, furr and traps missing; which report I believed; nor had I
any suspicion that Goss was mischievous in the affair, till I returned from the
service, the same year; to my surprise, I found that Goss had conveyed home the
traps, furr, Hopkins's gun and shoe-buckles, which I well knew to be his, while
living: -- but by taking advice, I supposed I should expose myself, if I said
much about it, being able to prove no more than what I have above related; I
have therefore concealed my suspicion till this time, but am ready to disclose
my knowledge more fully, if enquired of.

Test, EPHRAIM PELTON."



of New-Hartford, a companion with him in the year 1758, of which he was
supposed to be guilty; -- he replied, "It is a groundless misrepresentation,
and must have been dictated by a malevolent disposition, as Mr. Pelton is
supposed still to retain prejudices against me, on account of some animosities
created between us while in service together, which amounted to blows, and was
never amicably adjusted;" -- giving the following advice respecting that
unfortunate affair, viz. "As soon as the term of my enlistment had expired,
wishing to pursue a more lucrative business than that of a soldier, I left the
encampment, in company with a Mr. Flag and said Hopkins, determining to erect a
hut to shelter us from the inclemency of the weather, and when that was
accomplished, to employ ourselves in hunting and trapping: consequently, a hut
was immediately constructed, situated in the most unfrequented retirement of a
swamp, about seven miles from Fort Edward, and in the neighborhood of the
enemy (exposing ourselves thus to danger in order to watch their movements, and
give intelligence of the same; in which we rendered very essential services,
and for which we received the same pay and rations as though enlisted) where we
lived together in the greatest harmony; making frequent and successful, as well
as very profitable hunting excursions -- and were equal sharers in the game --
Hopkins generally remaining (not being so well skilled in hunting as ourselves)
in charge of the company's property: But having once, however, during our
absence, and without our concurrence, retired to Fort Edward with what skins we
had collected, and to considerable amount, in order for disposal; and having
made an injudicious traffic, by taking in exchange for them articles that we
did not want* such as pistols, etc it was proposed by Flag that Hopkins,
instead of myself, should go with him -- to which I reluctantly assented, and
returned into camp. -- When they had proceeded about a mile from our
habitation, Flag discovered, from a small eminence, a party of Indians, going,
as he imagined, to surprise the garrison at Fort Edward; who were marching in a
hollow, about 4 or 5 feet from the surface of the rising ground on their right
and left. -- Flag being a faithful and vigilant man, acquainted Hopkins, that
he would endeavor to count their numbers, and then retire to apprize the army;
requesting him to remain still, and not on any account to follow him; which he
agreed to: -- Hopkins, however, crept along undiscovered by the enemy, and
imprudently raised his gun over Flag's shoulder to fire upon them: -- which was
prevented by being thrown back; -- unhappily, however, in making a second
attempt, they observed a motion in the bushes, immediately skulked behind
trees, and put themselves in a posture of defense: -- They fired, and mortally
wounded Hopkins in the breast; -- Flag was taken prisoner, and as they knew him
to be a trapper, obtained a promise of good treatment on a discovery of
property; which terms he readily accepted, and conducted them to the hut --
which they plundered, leaving only two traps behind, information of which was
not given them. -- Flag remained a prisoner in Canada during the war, at the
close of which he returned, and from him I learnt the fate of Hopkins, etc. --
That the hut was burnt, (as represented) no person, unless a fool or madman,
can suppose to be true; as such an event would certainly have alarmed the army,
and frustrated the design of the enemy." -- Was you not suspected, and
examined, as an offender in that affair? No; nor did I ever convey home any
property belonging to Hopkins." -- With respect to the authenticity of this
account, the reader must draw his own conclusions* Mr. Pelton is said to be ^
gentleman (...) ^eracity, and his character free from aspersions.

"The commission of the several murders of which I have been accused, viz. that
of a French prisoner last war and an Indian, as likewise a child of my own, I
positively declare to be false; such reports must have originated with
prejudiced and evil minds: but, that I killed my wife, is indisputable. -- Have
you a knowledge of that event? Yes. Did she say any thing before the fatal blow
was given? Yes, she asked if I designed to kill her; and uttered these words,
-- O Beelzebub, my master, have mercy on me. -- Do you remember any other
occurrences of that unhappy night? Yes; the holy angels have convinced me that
I got up and lay down in bed five or six times previous to the murder, dressing
and undressing myself a often. -- Had you any intention of secreting the body
of your wife? -- Yes. Sometime previous to that transaction, my wife and her
associates concerted a plan to deprive me of life. -- After they had effected
their purpose, I was to have been thrown into an ash-hole, which communicated
from a fire place in my house, into the cellar. In this place, I had it in
contemplation to conceal her, after cutting her in pieces; -- and while this
was in agitation, I thought of a breach made in my cellar wall -- in which the
witches and wizards kept their treasure. -- This place I examined, plunging a
crow-bar twice into it; -- and concluding to bury her here, I returned, in a
few moments, to where she lay, and took the body in my arms to dispose of
accordingly; -- but immediately laid it back. -- Had you any thought of
murdering the infant in bed with her? -- The devil and I were at strife about
it. -- He endeavored to urge me to it; but the angels commanded the contrary,
and I laid it carefully away. -- Were you not jealous with respect to the
chastity of your wife? -- Yes, and confirmed in that opinion by an acquaintance
with her illicit correspondents; -- several of whom were evidences against me
on my trial. -- Had you any private bickerings with your wife the day previous
to the murder? -- Not that I recollect; though we were strangers to domestic
happiness some months before that event took place. -- Did you complain to
authority, and divulge your suspicions? -- Yes, but some of them being intimate
with her, and free-masons, acted partially, and put a master over me only. --
Was it justifiable, taking into consideration every circumstance, to kill your
wife? -- To kill in self-defence is justifiable -- she had frequently
threatened my life -- and often when sitting at table. -- Was it not just in
Moses to kill the Egyptian, and bury him in the sand? -- He acted under the
immediate influence of his divine Master -- you, from a spirit of malevolence,
created by jealousy. -- You are indeed mistaken, -- I was surrounded with holy
angels when I laid violent hands on my wife. -- Would it not tend to your
future happiness, and be more satisfactory to your children and friends, were
you to conduct with steadiness and composure of mind, by devoting the few
remaining hours of life, in serious meditation, and advice of the clergy? --
Reply, don't you imagine that men of liberal education are more intriguing, and
do more frequently deceive the world than illiterate farmers. -- And will you
not allow that there are as many bad clergymen, in proportion to their number,
as of any other sect? -- As this is my opinion, why should I request their
advice or prayers, in preference to others.

Much might be said with respect to the conduct of this unhappy man. His
behavior while in prison has been strikingly singular. Previous to his trial
he appeared very irrational. After his condemnation was very composed for a
considerable time -- Requested advice and prayers, and regularly attended
divine service -- But for about three weeks has behaved like a poor deluded
wretch -- Abuses the clergy, and defies the powers of earth and hell to hang
him -- Calling himself brother to JESUS CHRIST, etc. etc.


