The Rev. Mr. Maccarthy's Account of the Behavior of Mrs. Spooner after her
Commitment and Condemnation for being Accessory in the Murder of her Husband at
Brookfield, March 1. 1778.
MRS. Spooner professed that her match with her Husband was not agreeable to
her* -- Domestic dissentions soon took place, and went on from step to step,
till she conceived an utter aversion to him; at length she meditated his
destruction; laid several plans, and never gave over till the fatal act was
committed. Her guilt in this manner appeared in most flagrant colors upon her
trial as well as since, from the solemn declaration of the poor men whom she
employed in the bloody deed, and to whom she promised a large reward, which
reward they immediately received.

I soon visited her after her commitment. She was not very free to converse
upon the subject. And indeed it was difficult to converse freely upon it till
after her trial. After this, opportunity was given in the fullest manner. She
did not blame judges or jurors or the Attorney General, but often declared that
the witnesses wronged her. She declared, that though she had planned the
matter, yet that she never thought it would be executed; that she relented when
she found they were in earnest. She doubtless could have given her husband
notice of what was designed, and so have prevented it, but she did not; nor did
she make discovery of it as soon as possible but sent the next morning to a
neighbor's to enquire after him, when at the same time she knew he was in the
well. She could not be brought to acknowledge her guilt or the justness of her
sentence till very late in the day, as shall be mentioned. It seems she went
upon this mistaken principle that she was not an immediate actor. She was a
person of uncommon fortitude of mind, did not for the most part appear to be
affected with many circumstances in her case which were wont deeply to affect
others. She would indeed sometimes say, that she felt more than she did or
could express. Seldom a day passed but I visited her, for which she expressed
great gratitude. I was wont to converse with her upon the main point, and to
endeavor to impress her mind with a sense of her guilt, hoping to observe upon
her the symptoms of true penitence. Appearances of this were from time to time
discouraging.

Her behavior to all was very polite and complaisant. From the frequent
opportunities I had with her, I was led to conceive of her, as a person
naturally of a kind, obliging, generous disposition. But she was unhappy, as
above mentioned, in her first setting out in the world, and so left to a fatal
capital crime.

It appeared to many that carefully observ^d her for many weeks before her
execution, that ^^e was in a state of pregnancy. She accordingly petitioned
authority for a respite. A jury of matrons was appointed to examine her. They
did not bring in in her favor; she petitioned again but it was not granted;
accordingly execution was ordered; she received the tidings with great
calmness. At her own desire, that the public might be satisfied, she was opened
the evening after the execution, and a perfect male foetus of the growth of
five months, or near it, in the judgment of the operators, was taken from her.
Having undergone a second examination a few days before her execution, and
being thereby greatly disordered, she was not able to attend the sermon that
day.

Soon after it, I went to the goal with a number of my brethren; she appeared
very calm, humble and penitent, professed her faith in the great savior and
dependence upon him; upon its being proposed to her, she readily consented to
be baptized; she was so immediately, as but a few moments remained before she
must go forth. The scene was very solemn and affecting; she was not at all
daunted when the sheriff presented her with and put on the fatal cord; she told
him she esteemed it as much as though he had put on a necklace of gold or
diamonds. She presently went forth, I accompanied her in a carriage to the
place of execution; she appeared undismayed and unaffrighted at the various
striking scenes that opened from one stage to another. At length we came in
sight of the gallows, I asked her if the sight of it did not strike her? She
answered not at all any more than any other object. Her constitutional
politeness still remained, and she discovered it to numbers that were near her.
She presently mounted the scaffold, and while the sheriff was fixing her, she
told him, with a serene countenance, that it was the happiest day she ever saw,
for she doubted not it would be well with her. She acknowledged that she justly
died; that she hoped to see her christian friends she left behind her, in
Heaven, but that none of them might go there in the ignominious manner that she
did. It was a fixed principle with her, that confession of her faults was
proper only to be made to her maker, not to men; she often declared, that she
was not neglectful of this and found satisfaction in so doing; but at the last
cast, she did this at least implicitly to the sheriff, as just related.

I would be far from presuming to decide upon her future state or that of the
rest of them. -- I shall only add a short extract from the sermon I delivered
to my people the Lord's Day following.

"We know what are the infinite compassions of God, and that the blood of Jesus
is of infinite value, cleansing from all unrighteousness, We may by no means
limit the holy one of Israel. We read of the servant that came in at the
eleventh hour, who received the same wages as those who had borne the burden
and heat of the day. We know what was done by our Savior to the penitent thief
upon the cross, just before he expired. This shows us what divine power and
grace can do and may do. But secret things belong to God, and we ought to leave
them with him."

FINIS.

