A SINCERE REGARD TO RIGHTEOUSNESS AND PIETY, THE SOLE MEASURE OF A TRUE
PRINCIPLE OF HONOR AND PATRIOTISM.

ILLUSTRATED IN A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR, THE
HONORABLE COUNCIL, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, IN THE STATE OF VERMONT,
OCTOBER 8 th, A.D. 1778.

By EDEN BUROUGHS, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Hanover.

DRESDEN, State of VERMONT: Printed by J. P. and A. SPOONER, Printers to the
GENERAL ASSEMBLY of said State.

State of VERMONT, In General Assembly at Windsor, Oct. 9th, 1778.
VOTED and Resolved, That Jonathan Freeman, Esquire; and Capt. David Woodward, be
desired to wait on the Reverend Eden Buroughs, and return him our Thanks for
the Sermon delivered by him before this Assembly Yesterday, and that they
desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

A true Extract from the Journals of the Assembly, Attest. BEZA WOODWARD, Clerk.

AN Election Sermon.
PROVE. 13th. 34th. RIGHTEOUSNESS EXALTS A NATION.
THERE is no principle of human nature that is, in a general way, more powerful
than a principle of honor. When a man apprehends his honor at stake, he will
readily risque every thing that is dear to himself to defend it; and will even
sacrifice his life in the cause. This is, most commonly, at the bottom of all
the wars, commotions, and bloodshed, that are at any time in the world. In the
support and defense of this, thousands have bled and are still bleeding. To
assert and maintain, to support and defend the pretended honor and dignity of
the crown of Great Britain, they have already expended millions, and have
hazarded the lives of thousands; yea, thousands and thousands have already
fallen in the field of battle; and they have spread desolation, ruin and
distress amongst numbers of the innocent inhabitants of America. If we enquire,
how it can be possible that a nation can be so void of natural affection, and
can conduct as though they were destitute of all feelings toward their fellow
creatures and their brethren according to the flesh, besides those of malice
and rancour; we shall find that it is a principle of honor that continually
impels then, that it is a principle of honor that overpowers every other
affection of the mind, and hurries them (...) such acts of outrage, cruelty and
vengeance. Surely we might be ready to think that if a principle of honor will
produce such bitter fruits as these, -- it is will overpower the principles of
compassion and benevolence in mankind toward their fellow creatures, and event
those of their own kindred; that if a principle of honor will operate in this
manner, it is an evil and pernicious principle.

BUT mankind are most evidently actuated by a false principle of honor, in
pursuing such a line of conduct. What they aim at as their honor, is indeed
their greatest reprouch, and terminates in their burning shame. A principle of
true honor is a most excellent principle -- It is truly laudable and well
pleasing in the sight of God. When a person or a people are ambitious of that
wherein their true honor consists, they are then engaged in a most laudable and
excellent pursuit. So it is pointed out by the observation of the wise man in
our text, Righteousness exalts a nation. He meant, most surely, to mention
this as a powerful motive to exite a people to follow after righteousness. It
is as though he had said, What nation or people are ambitious of true honor? let
them seek after righteousness, and this will be a dignity and an honor unto
them.

AND now to trace the design of these words, and to improve them in a manner
suitable to the occasion before us, I would here endeavor by the divine
assistance,

I. To show what the wise man means by that righteousness which exalts a
nation.

II. POINT out the reasons why this righteousness will exalt a nation.

III. CONCLUDE with those addresses that will naturally arise out of my subject.

I. I AM to show what the wise man means by that righteousness which exalts a
nation.

WHEN the wise man speaks of righteousness exalting a nation, he has a most
evident reference to the general character of that people of which the nation
consists. That righteousness may exalt a nation, the generality of the people
of which the nation consists must be visibly possessed of it; so that it may be
said of such a nation, that it is a righteous nation, a nation that loves
righteousness and seeks after it. This is of absolute necessary, in order
that righteousness may exalt a nation. Righteousness must form their general
character. It will be of no avail to any such a purpose for many individuals
among a nation or people to pursue after righteousness, whilst the nation in
general, and the people at large do visibly give a loose to sin, and iniquity
reigns triumphant amongst them. In such a case, although as to individuals there
may be seven thousand amongst that people that have not bowed the know to the
image of Baal, yet as a people they are destitute of that righteousness which
exalts (...) and are a sinful people, a people ladem with iniquity. And now
that righteousness which exalts a nation, taken in this view of it, implies

1. THAT the people, as such, do pay a sacred regard to the worship and
ordinances of God.

THIS is one essential token and test of a people's being God's visible people.
It is such an essential test and token of it, that without it a people cannot
be said to be God's visible people. When it once comes to this among a people
that they openly forsake the worship and ordinances of God, they do then openly
cast off the badge of their being his visible people; they openly renouce their
visible relation to him as their God, and declare, as in open language that
they will not have him to reign over them. When God instituted his woship to be
observed by his people, he instituted it as a sign and token that his people
were visibly his, that he was their king and lord, and that they were his
subjects and servants. So it is expressed in Exodus 31.16, 17. Wherefore the
children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath through out
their generation for a perpetual covenant. It is a sign between me and the
children of Israel forever. This was the design of the institution of the
sabbath. It was to be a sign between God and his people; a token and pledge
that they were his visible people; that he was their supreme King and Lord, and
that no other lords besides him had the dominion over them. And now if this is
what is enjoined upon a people by the ordinance and appointment of God as an
essential taken and pledge of their being his visible people; then surely it is
essential that a people do sacredly observe the worship and ordinances of God,
in order that they may be visibly possessed of that righteoussness which
exalts a nation.

IT is evident from the very light of nature, that the worship of God is a duty
of sacred importance. Hence the Apostle observes concerning the very heathens,
that because they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, and neither
would worship and glorify him as God; but turned the glory of the incorruptable
God into an image made like unto corruptable man, and served the creature more
than the Creator, who is God over all blessed forever; -- that for this cause
God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not
convenient. Which evidently implies that the very light of nature laid the
heathens under sacred obligations, to observe the worship of God. They were
visited with the most awful judgments, because they did not worship and glorify
God as God. But surely they were never punished by a righteous God for
violating those obligations they were not under. Forasmuch then as they were
punished in such an awful manner as to be given up of God to a reprobate mind,
because they did not worship and glorify him as God, it is a full demonstration
that they were under most sacred obligations to observe the worship of God, and
to glorify him as God. And now surely if those that had no other than the light
of nature were under such sacred and inviolable obligations to worship and
glorify God, as that their wilful neglect of this did provoke God to give them
over to a reprobate mind; much more is that people under the most sacred
obligations to this, to whom God has made known has will by showing them his
judgments, and giving them his statutes. God has enjoined upon his people in
his word, by all that is solemn and sacred, as a duty of the highest
importance, that they should have no other God before him. This is the first
law of his kingdom. And this command does, by clear implication, carry in it, a
most sacred injunction to observe the worship of God, and to pay our homage
unto him according to his institution and appointment. When the will of God is
so clearly made known unto us in reference to this matter, that people do
surely bring the most awful guilt upon themselves who neglect the worship of
God, and who do openly refuse to glorify him as God. The worship of God is an
open practical acknowledgement that he is our only supreme lord and King; and
of consequence for a people to refuse to worship and glorify him as their only
supreme lord and king, is an open renunciation of their allegiance unto him; it
is an open declaration that they will not be in subjection to him, and will not
have him to reign over them. Under this view of the matter, we need not wonder
that God should declare himself so awfully displeased with his people of old,
whenever they forsook his ordinances, and turned their backs upon his worship.
This is ever mentioned by God as an iniquity of the deepest dye; and for this
he ever manifested his and anger against his people in a series of the most
awful judgments. And hence, whenever a pious king came upon the throne of
Israel, and set himself to bring on a reformation among the people, his first
care was always exercised in rectifying the abuses of God's worship. Never was
there a reformation bro't about amongst that people where this one thing was
neglected. 'And in proportion as a reformation ever takes place among any
people in any age of the world; and to the same degree as true religion does
visibly prevail among them, it will be seen in that people's paying a sacred
regard to the worship of God.

WE are under the same obligations to the worship of God as the children of
Israel were. For the grand reason why they were under such obligations was
because God was their God and redeemer. And if he is our God and redeemer, we
are under the same obligations to worship and glorify him as God; and our
forsaking his worship will be equally odious in his sight. If we do, in this
manner, disown and renounce our visible relation to God; he will disown and
renounce his visible relation to us as his people; and as he has done to his
people of old, to the seven churches of Asia, and to all that eastern world
where christianity once flourished in its glory; so will he do unto us, by
visiting us with one judgment upon the back of another, until he has cast us
off from being his people.

I proceed to add,

2. THAT that righteoussness which exalts a nation implies that a people do
set themselves to discountenance and bear down all fraud and oppression. --
Every degree of fraud and oppression among men is an abomination unto the Lord;
because it is a most flagrant violation of those obligations mankind are ever
under to each other. Mankind are under the most sacred obligations to conduct
toward one another under the influence of a temper of universal love and
benevolence, by doing to others as they would that others should do unto them.
This is the law and the prophets. It is what the law enjoins, and the prophets
have constantly taught. And there is no way in which mankind can be guilty of
more flagrant and daring violations of this command and injunction than by acts
of fraud and oppression. And hence, when fraud and oppression become general
among a people, It is most evident that that people are destitute of that
righteousness which exalts a nation. The character that evidently belongs to
such a people, is that of a sinful people, a people laden with iniquity. And
hence, if a people would be characterised a righteous people; it is of absolute
necessity that they set themselves to discountenance and b^ar down all fraud
and oppression among them.

Now this implies,

1. THAT such a people are always regulated and governed by a system of laws
that are founded in righteousness.

IT implies that the legislative rulers among them are themselves careful to
frame such a system of laws as are in their nature calculated to discountenance
and prevent all unrighteousness, fraud and oppression among a people. For this
purpose it is always a matter of the most sacred importance that the rulers of
a people be just men, that fear God and hate covetousness. For if they that
rule a people be men that love the pleasures of sin or the wages of
unrighteousness, it will be in vain to expect that they will make it their aim
to establish a system of laws to discountenance iniquity, and bear down vice
and oppression. The state of that people will immediately represent that spoken
of by the wise man, Eccl. 3.16. Moreover I saw under the (...) the place of
judgment, that wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that
iniquity was there. For (...) they that are appointed to rule among a people
are such men as have no fear of God before their eyes; they will be so far from
discountenancing iniquity and oppression among a people, that they themselves
will practice oppression, and openly countenance it by their conducted as the
wise man round upon his own observation, as it is ex^r^ssed in Eccl. 4.1. So I
returned and considered all the oppressions that are under the sun; behold the
tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter: and on the side of
the oppressors there was power, but they had no comforter. If the rulers of a
people do themselves love iniquity, and are determined to live in the open
practice of any vice or abomination, it will be their desire and endeavor to
have such practices become fashionable and customary. And if they frame a
system of laws that have any aspect upon promoting virtue and religion, and
bearing down vice and immorality, they will be careful to frame them in such a
manner that the force of them may be easily evaded, that they may not be as
shackles upon their own fuel to hamper them in their pursuit after the objects
of their lusts. And hence if righteousness ever reigns among a nation do as to
form the general character of a people; we may be sure that such a people are
always under the government and regulation of a system of laws that are founded
in righteousness; that the rulers of such a people are men that fear God and
hate covetousness.

And moreover,

2. It implies that every one is faithful in his proper station and capacity,
to put such laws into execution.

OF what avail can it be at any time for the rulers of a people to frame the
most wholesome laws for the health of a stare, and to bear down all
unrighteoussness and oppression, if at the same time, these laws are not put
into execution? To frame a system of laws for this purpose, and not put them
into execution, is the most direct way to bring a people to a state of anarchy
and confusion. For when rulers have in this manner, taught a people to cast
contempt upon a certain set of laws, they will soon learn to cast contempt upon
all laws and government. Some times it is notoriously the case that rulers will
live in the open violation of those laws which they themselves have framed to
bear down all open iniquity and unrighteousness. They themselves lead the way
in casting contempt upon law and government; and no wonder that in such a case
the people soon learn to pattern after the example of their leaders, and
trample under foot all law and authority amongst them. It is in reference to
such conduct of rulers as this that the wise man says, Woe unto thee, O land,
when they king is a child, and thy princes eat in the morning. That is, when
thy rulers are given to gluttony, and a round of carnal pleasures. For when
this is their aim, and what they are resolved upon, the reigns of government
will be let loose, and will be thrown upon the necks of a people, and a state
of anarchy, disorder and confusion will soon take place, and every one will
learn to do what is right in his own eyes. -- Some times it is owing to a state
of inveterate and abandoned wickedness amongst a people that the most wholesome
laws cannot be put into execution, notwithstanding the rulers of a people may
be over so faithful. If a people are generally agreed, at all hazards, to have
open wickedness reign triumphant amongst them, it will be to no purpose to have
the most righteous system of laws established amongst them. Let the laws be
ever so well constructed to bear down all open wickedness, yet in vain may the
rulers endeavor to put them into execution against such universal opposition.
When this becomes the state of a people, and they are thus abondoned in
wickedness, their disease is inveterate, and their wound is incurable. Anarchy
and confusion will reign among them till they are reduced to utter destruction.
That righteousness therefore / may reign among a people, it is of absolute
necessity, not only that a system of laws be established among them that are
calculated to bear down all open wickedness; but also that every one is
faithful, in his proper station and capacity, to put such laws into execution,
to the terror of evil doors, and to the praise of those that do well.

I ADD once more,

3. THAT the righteousness spoken of in the text implies that a people do set
themselves to discountenance all open wickedness in the tenor of their conduct.

If sin is a reproach to any people, then certainly that people among whom
righteousness reigns, will account a reproach, and endeavor to discountenance
it in the tenor of their conduct. They will treat those as scandalous persons,
who live in the open practice of any kind of wickedness. They will avoid their
company, and withdraw from their society and fellowship. So they treat a
notorious thief. The generality of a people do ever hold him as a scandalous
person, and are ashamed to keep company with him. And if righteousness did
reign triumphant amongst a people, they would be as much ashamed to countenance
or keep company with vain swearers, with sabbath breakers. with defamers and
backbiters, with such is made it their practice to overreach and defraud, to
grind and oppress their fellow creatures in their dealings with them; I say,
they would be as much ashamed to countenance or keep company with any of such a
character, as they would with an open and notorious thief. For these iniquities
are, in their nature, as really scandalous as theft. They are as truly an
abomination in the sight of God, and as diametrically contrary to that
righteousness which exalts a nation. When therefore a person can live in the
open practice of any of these iniquities, and yet not become a scandalous
person among the people where he dwells; when he can live in the open practice
of these iniquities, and yet preserve his reputation, and his company is not
avoided; can it be imagined that such a people do look upon thse iniquities as
being any wise scandalous? Nay verily. Instead of pursuing after that
righteousness which exalts a nation, they are hastening to that state of
abandoned wickedness described by the Prophet in that solemn interrogation,
Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? Nay, they were not at
all ashamed, neither could they blush! -- Enough has been said to lay open to
view what is implied in that righteousness which exalts a nation.

I COME now,

II. TO point out the reasons why this righteousness will exalt a nation.

AND in illustrating this head, I would here say,

1. THAT this righteousness is that wherein the real dignity and honor of a
people consists.

SOME are ready to esteem a nation or people honorable in proportion as they
are wealthy and powerful. But this of itself is so far from rendering a people
honorable, that on the contrary, if they make use of their power and wealth in
an unrighteous manner, their being possessed of wealth and power does but serve
to render them the objects of the most solemn contempt and abhorrence. Let a
nation be possessed of ever so much wealth and power, and let them make use of
these to spread devastation and ruin amongst mankind, and to reduce their
brethren to a state of slavery to their lawless tyranny and dominion; in such a
case as this, will any one be wild enough to imagine that such a nation or
people are possessed of true honor, merely because they are wealthy and
powerful? Nay verily. -- True honor and real dignity is ever founded in that
righteousness which consists in a conformity to the laws and commands of the
great Lord of all.

WHEN a people do evidently appear to reverencce the rights of conscience, --
to pay a sacred regard to the worship of God, -- to be actuated by a pious zeal
in bearing down all fraud and oppression, and discountenancing all vice and
immorality of every kind; when it is thus with a people, there is nothing that
can be a greater honor and dignity to them. The most unbounded wealth and power
is as nothing when compared with this, to render a people honorable. Each one
will account it his honor and dignity to be in due subjection to the higher
powers, and with alacrity of mind will be careful to render unto all their
dues; tribute to whom tribute; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honor
to whom honor. The wheels of government will perpetually move on in the utmost
harmony, and without any jar or discord. And of such a people it may be justly
said, in relation to their civil state, How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and
thy dwellings, O Israel! -- This righteousness then is that wherein the real
dignity and honor of a people consists. -- But,

2. THIS righteousness exalts a nation, as it brings a series of the smiles
and blessings of heaven upon them.

GOD always deals with his visible people according to their visible conduct.
Never was it known, from the beginning of the world, either under the law, or
under the gospel, that God suffered his visible people to be ruined, until they
had openly departed from him, and had turned aside from the way of his
statutes. No instance can be produced where God suffered the enemies of his
people to triumph over them whilst they continued to put their trust in his
name, and to walk in his ways. When our forefathers first came over into
New England, they had such difficulties to encounter, and such formidable
dangers were impending over them on every side, that it might seem at first
view that nothing but perfect phrenzy and madness could induce them to believe
it possible for them to surmount the difficulties and escape the dangers that
lay in their way. But they found that the name of the Lord was a strong tower,
that the righteous run into it and were safe. Righteousness was their glory; it
was a crown and a diadem upon their head. They made God their refuge, and his
own right hand, and his holy arm was their safeguard and their defense in all
scenes of danger, and under every trial. Had they cast off the fear of God, and
openly departed from him, we may with confidence, affirm that they would soon
have become a reproach among the (...), and their names would have perished.
But they (...) honor God, be will honor. He will be nigh unto (...) that put
their trust in his name. He will (...) their general in a time of war, and
their constant protection in all scenes of danger. The Lord is my light and my
salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my heart, of whom
shall I be afraid? (...) host should (...) against me, in this will (...)
confident. And if it be so, if God will be their high unto that people that put
their trust in his name; then surely we may join with the Psalmist and say,
Happy is that people that is in such a case; yea. happy is that people whose
God is the Lord. -- In this view of the matter then, we most evidently see that
righteousness exalts a nation, and renders a people honorable. -- But,

3. RIGHTEOUSNESS exalts a nation, as it is the only thing that can be a firm
bond of union among them, and will inspire universal confidence in them.

WHEN a nation or a people as such are evidently void of principle, and
abandoned in wickedness, there can be no confidence had in the public faith.
Their lust of power, their unbounded avarice will readily induce them, upon
almost every occasion to violate the most solemn compacts and covenants, in the
most flagrant and daring manner. But if a people are united together upon the
principles of righteousness, this bond of union is like the threefold cord that
is not easily broken. It is a bond of union that will render a people faithful
to each other in all scenes of danger, and under every trial. And when they are
visibly actuated by such principles as these in the tenor of their conduct, the
utmost confidence will ever be had in the public faith; and every nation will
be ready to say of such a people, Surely they are children that will not lie.
And under this view such a people will ever be most honorable in the esteem of
all to whom their character is known, and to their enemies they will be
terrible as an army with banners. -- Upon these accounts then it most evidently
appears that righteousness exalts a nation, and is like a crown of diadem and
glory to any people. The time being far spent requires that I hasten to the
last thing proposed from the text which is,

III. To conclude with those addresses that naturally arise out of my subject,
and are suitable to the occasion before us.

AND here I am reminded to turn myself in the first place, by way of address to
hi Excellency the Governor, and the honorable Council of this State.

Much honored Sirs,

I AM under no apprehensions that the great plainness of speech I have indulged
in laying open to view the duty of rulers, and the sacred Importance of their
being men that fear God and (...) coveteousness, will in any degree disgust
your minds, or prove offensive to you. Had I departed from the line of my duty,
and acted so much out of the character of an Ambassador of Christ, as to have
consumed the proceeding hour in treating the rulers of this people with an
empty round of fulsome complements; I had justly rendered myself an object of
your compassion and resentment. I would ever regard it as a duty of sacred
importance in relation to myself, and urge it upon others, as occasion may
offer, to render that honor to the higher powers which God in his word
requires. It is essential to the health and well being of a state, that such be
had in honor and reverence by the people whom they govern. And I would to God
that this honor and reverence to the rulers of this people, may ever be founded
on that sacred regard to righteousness and true piety that shall be visible and
evident in the constant tenor of their conduct. This will command that respect
and reverence, that honor and esteem, which is real and solid; and which will
have an extensive influence in forming the manners, and regulation the conduct
of a people. You will consider yourselves as the leaders of this people; that
your example in your public department will ever carry much weight and energy
in it; that it will have an almost irresistible power to leaven the manners and
form the character of this people. A people will follow the example of their
leaders; and under this view a set of vicious rulers are in a great degree,
accountable for that flood of wickedness that does at any time overspread a
country. We unto thee, O land, when thy king is a child, and thy princes eat in
the morning. You will then consider yourselves as being accountable to God, and
to this people another day, for the execution of the important trust committed
unto you; and with a view to this, will gird up the lions of your mind to
execute justice and judgment; to bear down all vice and immorality; to promote
the interest of religion, and the prosperity of Christ's kingdom among the
people whom you govern. This will lay the most effectual foundation for your
ruling this people with comfort and in peace, till you and they are gathered
together into that kingdom of righteousness above, where each one shall reign
in life by Jesus Christ!

THE occasion before us requires that I now turn myself to the honorable House
of Representatives.

Honored Gentlemen,

WHAT has now been delivered is what you have a most particular and intimate
concern in. If righteousness exalts a nation; if it be that wherein the real
dignity and honor of any nation or people consists; then surely it is of the
most sacred importance that the legislative authority do ever turn their
attention to the framing such a system of laws as will bear down all fraud and
oppression, and all vice and immorarality of every kind; and that the mosst
sacred (...) be had to the appointment of such executive officers as are men of
principle, and will be animated with a becoming zeal to put such laws into a
most vigorous execution, to the terror of evil doers. I have heard it has been
observed, (though not by any belonging to this state) that it is no matter what a
man's religious character is, provided he be a good member of civil society;
and that civil society, as such, are not to concern themselves about the
interest of religion. But I may, with confidence, affirm, that never was civil
authority more honored and revered, than when they have had the interest of
religion at heart, and made it their aim to promote it in their public
department; and that never was it rendered more contemptable than when they
suffered vice and immorality to reign triumphant. Thus it has been in every
age, and thus it will ever be. -- Those that honor God, be will honor; and they
that despise him shall be lightly esteemed. -- We have now an opportunity to be
the happiest people on the continent. If we begin with God; if we are careful
to walk in his judgments, and seek the interest of his kingdom; he will delight
in us, and delight to dwell in the midst of us. You will ever regard this; then
as an object most worthy of your attention while you are engaged in consulting
those things that pertain to the prosperity of this state. Your zeal for God
will animate you to a becoming care that his worship is duly observed, that his
(...) is visibly glorified, and that (...) of (...) of iniquity that is an open
insult upon the name of God, or a violation of the obligations we are under to
each other, may be scourged from among us. The interest of learning, being
nearly connected with this, and for essentially necessary to promote religion
and good order, will find a place in your care; and the College in this state
will claim your protection as nursing farther to so useful and serminary. And
may your pious care to promote the prosperity of this state, and the interest
of religion among this people, be attended with the smiles of heaven, and
crowned with such glorious success, that our peace may be as the river, and our
righteousness like the waves of the sea!

THE subject before us so obviously suggests many thing that do claim the
solemn attention of the ministers of the gospel, that I cannot dismiss it
without turning myself to them in particular, by way of address.

My Reverend Fathers and Brethren,

As we are set for the defense of the gospel, and to promote their interests of
religion amongst mankind; so it will ever become us in our station and capacity
of life to labor incessantly to strengthen the hands of their civil authority
in bearing down all open vice, immorality, and profaneness* Are the civil
powers (...) of God for good unto his people, to be a terror to evil doers, and
a praise to them that do well? Even so are we appointed to labor incessantly
to reclaim the wicked from the evil or (...) ways; and most wretched will be
(...) doom, if we are found unfaithful in this works -- The blood of souls will
be required at our hands.

LET us then, ever set our faces like a flint, in bearing the most solemn
testimony against the iniquities of such (...) themselves, and leading others
in the paths of the destroyer; and this, whether they will bear, or whether
they will forbear. Let us labor most servently to promote that kingdom of God
amongst men which is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy
in the holy ghost. This will diffuse peace and harmony, concord and love
throughout church and state; and will lay the most happy foundation to hope that
the God of love and peace will be with us, and that his blessing will descend,
and rest upon us in all our interests, and in all our concerns.

AND now in a word, and by way of address to this Assembly at large, Let us be
ever-careful, each one for himself, in his propet station of life, to
discountenance and bear down all open wickedness of every kind, and to promote
the interests of that righteousness which exalts a nation.

LET us ever be careful to treat all kinds of open wickedness as being shameful
and scandalous. Let us withdraw from the fellowship of such as are visible
enemies to the laws of Christ's kingdom. Let us avoid their company as persons
that are truly scandalous and without reputation. In this way iniquity would
soon be bro't to stop her mouth, and justice and judgment would run down our
streets as a river, and righteousness as an overflowing stream.

WHICH may God, of his infinite mercy, grant.

AMEN.

