THE DIFFERENCE between those called STANDING CHURCHES, and those called STRICT
CONGREGATIONALISTS

ILLUSTRATED, IN SOME REMARKS, UPON A CHARGE, AND RIGHT HAND OF FELLOWSHIP.

DELIVERED AT THE ORDINATION OF Mr. EMERSON FOSTER, IN THE FIRST SOCIETY IN
KILLINGLY, JANUARY 22, 1778.

Together, with a short account of the SENTIMENTS of STRICT CONGREGATIONAL
CHURCHES, so far as it respects gathering (...) GOVERNMENT.

BY ELIPHALET WRIGHT, PASTOR of a CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, in the FOURTH SOCIETY
in said KILLINGLY.

Her Prophets are light and treacherous Persons; her Priests have polluted the
Sanctuary, they have done violence to the Law.. ZEPH. III.4. NORWICH: PRINTED
by JOHN TRUMBULL. M,DCC,LXXV.

TO THE READER.
IF any should say of me, as Dr. Mayhew said of Mr. John Cleveland, viz. "An
obscure person, of little note," I have only to say, that thereby I have
greatly the advantage. The low trees in the valleys, are not so exposed to
winds, and hurricanes, as the tall trees on the mountains.

If any should say, that the following performance, is an incorrect, inelegant,
homely piece, I shall only say, that a wise man never despises wholesome food,
because it is served up in an homely dish. Such as it is, I venture to send it
forth for thy careful perusal: And desire nothing more of thee, than that thou
should impartially, and heartily, compare what Mr. Foster delivered, and
what I have said against it, with the word of God; and as truth turns the scale
in thy mind, so let thy practice be conformable thereto.

Mistakes in the effentials of religion while in this life, may prove fatal to
us in the world to come. Therefore, it is of the highest concern, that we dig
deep, and lay our foundation upon a rock; even the rock Christ Jesus: And not
trust to our doing much toward our own salvation; that if ever we are aved, we
must work it out. And it will be but a cold comfort, to graceless
church members, when they shall cry, Lord, Lord, we have eat, and drank, in thy
presence, etc. And he shall say unto them, Depart from me, I never knew you, ye
workers of iniquity.

THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THOSE CALLED STANDING CHURCHES, AND THOSE CALLED STRICT
CONGREGATIONALISTS, etc.
IT has been thought by many, that disputes in matters of religion, have been
hurtful thereto; and from thence have rejected all disputes in religious
affairs. Although, I believe, that many controversies in religious affairs,
where mastery has been sought, ^a^ tended much to destroy vital piety, and
godliness; yet, I believe, that many controversies that have been in the
christian church, have tended greatly to clear some truths, that have been in
the christian church, and has made them appear more bright and glorious, than
ever they would as yet, if they had never been disputed. As for instance,
Atheism, and Deism, that have been advanced in the world, have produced
arguments against them, that have made the being of God, and the truth of
divine revelation, appear in a very glorious light. And so it has been,
respecting how much sinners can do toward their salvation by works of their
own: And also who have right to church membership, and the special ordinances
of the gospel.

Having had opportunity to read a senmon, and a charge, delivered by Mr. Isaac
Foster, and the right hand of fellowship, delivered by Mr. Ruffel, at the
ordination of Mr. Emerson Foster, in Killingly, (...) society, 22d day of
January, A. D. 1778; I thought there was a fit opportunity presented, to answer
a question that has been asked by many, in these late years, viz. What is the
difference, between those called Standing Churches, and those called Separates,
(or a the law of this State has termed them, Strict Congregationalists?) And
this I shall attempt, by making some remarks upon said se^mon, charge, and
right hand of fellowship; and then give the reader a short account, of the
sentiments of the separate churches, so far as it respects gathering churches,
and church government; by which the difference may be seen, and so people will
need to ask the question no more. And,

First. With respect to said sermon, I shall only remark the deficiency in it.
The text laid a proper foundation, to have shown, how ministers of Christ, come
by the word of the Lord that they a^e to preach, or speak to the people; but
this is entirely neglected, and only a few hints given, how the faithful
preacher, will preach faithfully: And so people are left in the dark, as to
what makes a gospel minister; whether it is Christ, or human learning, or both,
or whether it is Pope, Bishop, Presbytery, or Association. But,

Secondly, I shall take notice and consider some things handed out by Mr. F. in
his charge to his son. Always oppose in your preaching, (faith he) that wicked,
abominable opinion, that prevails in the country at this day, viz. That the
unregenerate can do nothing but sin; -- nothing that will, in the least,
forward their eternal salvation: That all their endeavors can only aggravate
guilt. This then is what he calls wicked and abominable. But let us examine
what he calls wicked and abominable, and see if they are not some of the great
truths of God, revealed in his word to lost sinners. Christ has told us, that,
a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit; neither can a corrupt tree bring
forth good fruit. The apostle faith, The carnal mind, is enmity against God, is
not subject to his law, neither indeed can be. Further, God has said of man,
that, Every imagination of the thoughts of his heart, was only evil
continually. I know of no medium, between a state of nature, and a state of
grace; -- between a state of entire enmity against God, and a state of
reconciliation with God. An unregenerate person, is in a state of depraved
nature, at enmity with God, every part, power, and faculty of his soul, fixed
against God, and in opposition to his law. And i^ (...) impossible that he can
perform one act of obedience out of love to God; and love to God is what he
requires, of all rational beings, in order to their services being acceptable
to him. And is it possible that a child of the devil, and enemy of God, can do
any thing but sin against God? We are told in God's word, that their plowing is
sin, and their sacrifices an abomination. But Mr. F. has implicitly charged
his son, to tell sinner, that they can do some hing besides sin; that is, that
they can perform some holy actions: For there is no medium between sin, and
holiness. Christ has determined the point, that a corrupt tree cannot bring
forth good fruit. And therefore, he has charged his son, to preach directly
against the word of God. I do not mean to be understood, that there is no
actions done by sinners, that are considered abstractly in themselves, but what
is sin; far from it: But then considered, as the sinners acts, they are all
wrapped up in sin. This was the case with Jehu, he did right in executing God's
wrath, upon the house of Ahab: And yet God declared by the prophet, that the
days should come, when he would avenge the blood of Jezreel, upon the house of
Jehu. And why? Because, Jehu did not act from a principle of love to God; but
with a murderous mind; and therefore it was all sin in him. Hear what that
great divine, Mr. Boston, has said to this point; his words are these, Object.
But God is a merciful God, and he knows we are not able to answer these
demands; we hope therefore to be saved if do as well as we can, and keep the
commands as well as we are able. Ans. Though thou art able to do many things,
thou art not able to do one thing aright; thou can do nothing acceptable to
God: John xv 5. Without me you can do nothing. An unrenewed man, as thou art,
can do nothing but sin, as we have already evinced. Thy best actions are sin,
and so they increase thy debt to justice. Dr. Gill, in his sermon upon the
present state of the church, faith, There is no good thing in unregenerate men,
and therefore no good thing can come out of them; they have no true knowledge
of that which is good, and much less to do it; they have no inclination or
desire, nay, an aversion to it; they have no free will thereunto, nor power to
perform; it may as reasonably be expected to gather grapes of thorns, or figs
of thstles, as good works to be done by an evil man; a wicked man is to every
good work reprobate and unfit. A man must first be a good man before he can do
good works; men begin at the wrong end, when they propose to do good works, in
order to make themselves good men; the first concern should be to have a good
work of grace upon the heart, which is the Lord's work; the tree must first be
made good, ere the fruit will be good.

Now if what has been said, will stand for truth, as it most certainly will,
then it will determine the two next particulars. That sinners can do nothing,
that will forward their eternal salvation: That all their endeavors can only
aggravate guilt. For how is it possible, if the unregenerate can do nothing but
sin, that it should be otherwise? It is only increasing their debt to justice.

Further, Mr. F. charges his son to tell sinners, They can do much toward
their own salvation: -- That if ever they are saved, they must work it out.
Now, I conceive that the salvation of sinners, consists in these two things,
the payment of their debt to justice, and a real change of heart, from sin to
holiness. Without these two things being done, for, and in, sinners, they can
never be saved. Now, where is the son or daughter of Adam, that can do much
toward paying his debt to justice; or changing his heart, from sin to
holiness? If they can do much, I pray how much? Can they do half, or two
thirds? If so, why not all, as well as much? And so consequently, Christ is
dead in vain. The word of God has taught us, that the salvation of sinners,
must be all by works; or all by grace; there is no mixing them together. See
Romans iv. 4, 5. and chap. xi. 6. Now to him that works, is the reward not
reckoned of grace, but of debt. But to him that works not, but believes on
him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. And if
by grace, then it is no more of works; otherwise grace is no more grace. But if
it be of works, then it is no more of grace; otherwise work is no more work.

But Mr. F. says, According to God's gracious constitution, they can do much
toward their own salvation, etc. But let us inquire into this affair, and see
how much a sinner can do, even under the gracious constitution of the gospel.
The apostle sums up the whole of his preaching, in those few, but comprehensive
expressions, viz. Repentance toward God; and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ. Now, it is absolutely necessary for the salvation of sinners, even
under the gracious constitution of the gospel, that sinners repent, and believe
the gospel; and that repentance, and faith, that are of a saving nature, are
both the work of God's spirit upon the souls of men: And they are as unable to
repent, and believe the gospel, as they are to satisfy the law by works of
their own; for if they could do much toward repentance, and faith, of
themselves, then salvation would not be all by free grace, from the foundation
to the top stone. I wonder, how much Mr. F. thinks the Ephesian believers did
toward their own salvation, that the apostle faith, were dead in trespasses
and sins; and that it was God that quickened them; and that it was by grace
they were saved, through faith, and that not of themselves, but it was the gift
of God. The bible has (...) told sinners, that they can do much toward their
own salvation; but the reverse, that it is not of him that wills, nor of him
that runeth, but of God, that shows mercy. And that it is God, that must work
in us both to will, and to do, or we never shall be saved. See the opinion of
the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, upon this point. Consiss. chap. IX.
fect. III. Man by his fall, into a state of sin, has wholly lost all ability
of will, to any spiritual good, accompanying salvation; so as a natural man,
being altogether averse from that good, and dead in sin, is not able by his own
strength, to convert himself, or to prepare himself thereunto. Thus, I think
Mr. F's. opinion, is not scriptural, nor calvinistical; but a motley mixture of
works and grace, and contrary to the opinion of the most found orthodox
Divines, that have wrote upon the subject.

Mr F. seems to insinuate, as if the opinion he opposes, is some new opinion,
that is prevailing in the country at this day. But he is mistaken: It is the
good old opinion, that has been held ever since there was a church on earth.
Nor will I say, that his opinion is a new opinion, though I am sorry to see it
prevailing in the country, at this day. It is as old as Caln's day, he
attempted to do much toward his own salvation, by bringing the product of his
own labor, an offering, to appease an offended Deity; and it was as good an
offering, as any unregenerate person ever brought to God since.

Mr. F. charges his son, to stop the mouths of these unruly and vain talkers
and deceivers. But pray, who are these vain, and unruly talkers, who must have
their mouths stopped? Why, horrid to think! they are Christ, and his apostles,
and prophets; and not only so, but that venerable Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, with a cloud of calvinist writers. But he has set his son an hard
tosk, that he never will accomplish in this world, and I am sure he will be of
a different opinion from his father, when he arrives at the world to come.

There is one thing more, that Mr. F. calls a wicked opinion, viz. That the
unregenerate can do nothing that has any more tendency to holiness, than the
exercise of lust. Which is an opinion I never heard of before, in them terms,
and therefore I shall leave it as I found it.

Furthermore, Mr. F. has told his son, that, Baptism is the only badge of
church membership, appointed by Christ. And from thence has directed him, to
baptize all those children that are born of baptized parents, or whose
ancestors were in covenant with God. Upon which I would say, that although I am
fully persuaded in the doctrine of household baptism, yet I am very different in
my opinion from Mr. F. in what he has said.

First, In what he has said respecting baptism's being the only badge of church
membership. -- As the word baage signifies a cognizance, or coat of arms, and
as cognizance signifies knowledge, or a privilege which a corporation has to
hold a plea, etc. It will follow, from Mr. F's. principle, that all baptized
persons, have a right to claim full privilege of membership in the church of
Christ: Or in other words, that they are members of the visible church. Baptism
I allow to be necessary to membership in the visible church; but not the only
badge of church membership. Is a person baptized in the church of Rome, known
to be a member of the church of Christ? Are children baptized in the halfway
covenant, known to be members of the church of Christ? Surely, they are not
more in the church, than their parents were which got them baptized; which were
but halfway in. Suppose a Jewish priest had wandered from home, and got among
the Moabites, and Amorites, and had fallen to circumcising their children:
Would they thereby be known to be members of the visible church? Are all those
persons baptized by the Separate and Baptist ministers, cognized members of the
visible church? Surely Mr. F. will not allow it. Neither do I think that he
believes his own assertion. It would be difficult to prove from the bible, that
the primary design of the institution of circumcision, or baptism, was to be
the only badge of church membership; or even to be a badge of church membership
to all upon whom them ordinances were administered. Dr. Owen says, that in
order to our being known to be members of Christ's visible church, it is
necessary, That every man's own voluntary consent, and submission to the
ordinances of Christ in that church whereunto he is joined, is required for his
union therewith, and fellowship therein. If baptism is the only badge, by which
the church of Christ, and its members, are known; then the Protestant church of
Scotland long ago, were mistaken in their notes, by which the church of Christ
is known; which they avow, and affirm to be, First, The true preaching of the
word of God -- Secondly, The right administration of the sacraments of Christ
Jesus -- Thirdly, Ecclesiastical discipline, uprightly ministered, as God's word
prescribes; whereby vice is repressed, and virtue nourished. But,

Secondly, If what Mr. F. has said, That all those children that are born of
baptized parents, or whose ancesters were in covenant with God, are to be
baptized, then it will follow, that there is not a person on earth, of the
human race, but what are proper subjects of baptism. If we may go back four
generations, I see not why we may not go back a thousand generations; and as
all men descended from pious Noah, that was in covenant with God, so all men
have an equal right to baptism. I suppose, that it was upon this principle,
that the Spanish missionaries drove the Mexico Indians, sword in hand, into the
water, by thousands in a drove, and baptized them; or declared them to be
baptized -- And it seems by the manner of Mr. F.'s delivering himself to his
son, in this affair, as if he intended he should baptize all he could lay hands
upon, willing or unwilling, asked or unasked. But as his opinion in his affair
has no foundation in the word of God, and as it has been so sully refuted, by
the learned Mr. Boston, it will be needless for me to add.

I proceed, in the next place, to take notice, and consider, those words in the
charge. Ever reject that church-destroying opinion, that makes grace a term of
communion in the visible church; which opinion has no footsteps in the word of
God, nor was ever known in the church, till that man of sin arose, whose coming
was after the working of satan, with all signs and lying wonders.

When I first read these words, I was astonished that any man in this day of
great light, should be so bold as to tread under foot, not only the word of
God, but the opinion of great, learned, and pious divines, that have wrote upon
the subject, and have demonstrated from the word of God, and from the nature of
the ordinance of the Lord's supper, the necessity of grace in order to a due
attendance thereupon, whose littlefingers were thicker in divinity, than Mr.
F.'s loins. But when I came to consider the affair, I was satisfied that God,
in his providence, so ordered it, that upon so public an occasion, the real
sentiments of our standing churches, (as they are called) should be brought out
to public view. I take it for granted, that as Mr. F. was appointed by the
venerable council, that assisted in the ordination, to be their mouth in giving
the charge, that he spoke their minds, especially as none of them objected to
what he said; and therefore, it may justly be said, that all those ministers,
and churches, that assisted in said ordination, hold to, and profess, the same
principles that Mr. F. advanced, (though I hope, and charitably believe, that
not all who are called standing churches, and ministers, hold such unscriptural
opinions; yet I have reason to fear, they are very scarce.) Thus, I think, that
venerable council, have ingenuously published their sentiments to the world, so
that from this time forward, we need not ask them what their sentiments are in
the above particulars.

I proceed therefore, to give some evidence of what I have said -- That Mr. F.
in asserting, that grace is not a necessary term of communion in the visible
church, has trodden under foot, not only the word of God, but the writings of
some of the greatest divines. And

First, The scriptures, in giving the characters of the members of Christ's
visible church, every where speak the reverse of his opinion. I shall name a
few of them. Psalm xv. 1, 2. Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? Who shall
dwell in thy holy hill? He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness,
and speaks the truth in his heart. -- Psalm xxiv. 3, 4. Who shall ascend into
the hill of the Lord? And who shall stand in his holy place? He that has clean
hand and a pure heart." -- From which it may be seen, that truth in the heart,
or heart purity, was necessary even in the old testament times, for those that
would dwell (...) holy hill. And it always was, and always will be, a truth,
that without faith itis impossible to please God. So Romans i. 7. To all that be
in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints. I Cor. i. 2. Unte the church of
God, which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called
to be saints. Ephesians. i. 1. To the saints which are at Ephesus, and to the
faithful in Christ Jesus. Heb. iii. 1. Wherefore holy brethren, partakers of
the heavenly calling. I Peter, ii. 5. Ye also as lively stones, are built up a
spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, etc. All
which scriptures hold forth, not only the necessity of grace, but the
profession of grace, by such as were members of Christ's visible church. --
Now, with what propriety graceless persons, by their own profession children of
the devil, can be called faints, holy brethren, and lively stones, is beyond me
to explain. But,

Secondly, The scriptures that speak of the union, between Christ and his
church, all suppose grace as necessary to that union. Read the whole book of
Canticles; and many expressions in the prophets, as, I am married unto you,
faith the Lord -- Thy Maker is thy husband, the Lord of Host is his name. All
which suppose, that there was not only an inward union, subsisting between the
Lord, and his church; but a visible covenant relation, wherein the church had
professed to be a chaste virgin, espoused to one husband, even Christ.

So the near union between the members of Christ's visible body, supposes grace
as necessary to that union, The apostle compares the church of Christ to the
human body; and tells us it was knit together in love. Now, if the saving grace
of love, or true charity, is not necessary to be in the church in this world,
in order for its union, and communion; or if Christ can be pleased with a
graceless bride, in this world; I see not, why he may not have a church in
hell, where hatred reigns, and be well pleased with it; especially when
(according to Mr. F.) he sees them have the only badge of church membership.
But the apostle has fully settled the point, in telling us, That our
fellowship is with the Father, and his son Jesus Christ; and one with another.
That is, that fellowship, or union with God, in Christ, is that, that lays a
foundation, for our (...) fellowship one with another, in his church in this
world. Again,

Thirdly, The express command of God forbids graceless membership, and
communion, in his visible church. See Ezekiel. xliv. 7, 8, 9. In that ye have
brought into my sanctuary, strangers, uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised
in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to pollute it. And ye have not kept the charge
of my holy things. Thus says the LORD, no stranger, uncircumcised in HEART,
nor uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary.

I shall, in the next place, cite some passages, out of some of the most
approved divines, that speak very different from Mr. F. in the point now under
consideration. Ursin, upon the question, Who ought to come to the supper? tells
us, The sacraments are appointed, for the faithful and converted only, to seal
the promises of the gospel to them, and to confirm their faith. And further he
says, That God commands to all the use of the sacraments, yet the lawful use,
which is not without faith and repentance. Mr. Boston, in his sermon upon the
union of the body of Christ, faith, It is not in your power to know certainly,
and infallibly, who are real members of this body; but the visible body of
Christ, is made up of saints by profession; and as such, they admitted to the
Lord's table, upon their desire. The pious Mr. Willison, in his sacramental
catechism, has this question, Ought all who come to the Lord's table, to have
saving grace, as necessary to qualify them for it? Aos. Yes; for without saving
grace in the heart, we are incapable (...) hold communion with God, or of
putting forth those act^ (...) faith, love, and repentance, which are necessary
in partaking of this ordinance. The late Mr. Edwards, has demonstrated the
necessity of grace, in order for church communion, in such a light, that all
his opponents, have not been able to gainsay his arguments, from scripture or
reason. The Protestant church of Scotland, in their confession of faith, say,
The supper of the Lord, we confess to appertain to such only, as be of the
household of faith.

I will transcribe a few articles, from the confession of faith, of the Vaudois
churches, in the valleys of Piedmont; which churches are generally allowed to
have kept nearest to the primitive standard, in the dark days of popery, of any
churches in the world. Art. 24. That God has gathered together a church in the
world, for the salvation of mankind. Art. 25. That this church is the company
of the faithful, who being elected of God, before the foundation of the world,
and called by an holy vocation, are united together for to follow the word of
God, believing that which he teaches, and living in his fear. Art. 30. That he
has instituted his holy supper, for the nourishment of our souls, to the end,
that by a true and lively faith, by the incomprehensible virtue of the Holy
Ghost, eating effectively his flesh, and drinking his blood, and uniting us
most inseparably to Christ, in him, and by him, we may have eternal life. --
Dr. Hugh Knox, in his essay upon a preparation for the Lord's supper, faith, It
is evident, from the very nature and design of this ordinance, that it belongs
only to true disciples, and real christians. It is a nourishing ordinance; but
such only can be nourished who have life: Besides, the grace of faith, love,
hope, etc. which are properly exercised in this ordinance, can only be
exercised by real, living christians. It is a solemn renewal of our covenant
with God; but how can they renew a covenant which they never entered into at
all? How can such as are in league with the devil and their lusts, be said to
enter into covenant with God? What sincerity can there be in such a transaction
as this! Does it not imply the most insolent, barefaced mockery. -- Thus,
reader, you have a fair opportunity of judging for yourself, whether Mr. F. is
not criminally guilty, in asserting, that grace, as a term of communion in the
visible church, has no footsteps in the word of God; but took its rise from the
man of sin.

I remember, not many years since, in conversation with an eminent minister, in
one of the standing churches, to have asked him, how far he extended his
communion? His answer was, to all that make the christian profession. I asked
him if he held communion with those churches, that held, that grace was not
necessary for membership in the visible church? His answer was, no, no more
than he would with infidels. I asked him why? His answer was, because they did
not make the christian profession. And for my part, I never could find a church
in all the bible, that was built upon a graceless profession, that ever God
owned for his visible church. Therefore, with a little variation from Mr. F's.
words, I would say, that his opinion of graceless communion, has no footsteps
in the word of God: Nor was ever known in the church, till error arose, and
taught that works were meritorious.

Those that hold to graceless communion, make use of the tares, and wheat,
growing together, to prove their opinion: But stop, reader, a minute, and pause
upon the parable, and ask, who sowed them tares among the wheat? Did God sow
them; or even order them to be sowed? No, it was the devil that sowed them,
while men slept. And may we not justly say, that all who plead for graceless
communion, are advocates for the devil, and laboring to assist him in his work?

I always thought, when we give a minister a charge, we ought to take the same
from the word of God; but that part of Mr. F's. charge, that respects graceless
communion, was never taken from the word of God; and I am humbly of the
opinion, was the first that ever was delivered in them terms, since there was a
church on earth.

I only add, that as there is no difference, between the church militant, and
the church triumphant, as to the nature of their union, and communion, only in
the degree of it, I see not, why graceless sinners may not be as capable of
holding communion with the church triumphant, as with the church militant. The
church militant is said to be one body, and one bread -- one body and one
spirit; and if sinners are capable of being one body, and one bread -- one
body, and one spirit, with the saints in this life, why not in the life to
come? Every argument that might be brought, to bar sinners out of heaven, might
be used with equal force, to bar them out of the church on earth. I do not mean
to be understood, that I think there ever will be a pure church on earth: But I
mean, as Mr. Boston has well said, that unregenerate persons, are no more of
the body of Christ in reality, than a wooden leg is part of the human body. I
proceed,

Lastly, To consider those words in the right hand of fellowship, viz. It is
with real pleasure, that we once more behold a candle lighted in this golden
candle-stick. The first thing that came into my mind, when I read these words,
was, that it was calling things by wrong names. I suppose that the young
gentleman, was of the same opinion with his honored father, that gave him his
charge; and the church over which he was ordained, was agreed with them in
their principle of graceless communion. Now, it is beyond me to comprehend, how
such a church can, with propriety, be called a golden candle-stick. They are
not so by profession, but the reverse; they profess, that gold is not
necessary, in building the church of Christ: Or in other words, that grace,
(...) a term of communion, or membership among them, is a church-destroying
opinion, that took its rise from the man of sin. Were I to give the right hand
of fellowship to a minister, and church, that held grace as a term of
communion, a church-destroying opinion, it should be conceived in the following
terms, viz. That it is with real sorrow of heart, that we once more behold a
graceless minister, sit in this graceless church, (so by their own profession)
a blind leader of the blind, that are in danger of falling into the ditch
together.

It may be thought by some, that I reject all that was said in the sermon,
charge, and right hand of fellowship. Far from it; many things were excellently
well said. But those things that I have remarked upon, especially in the
charge, I take to be very poisonous. Neither would I be thought to insinuate,
that there is no real saints in such churches, as hold to graceless communion.
But then they are not visible saints, nor do they have communion with the
churches that they belong to, as the body of Christ; but live a lonely life, as
to the communion of saints, except it be in a private manner.

Thus, reader, I have made those remarks that I purposed, upon the proceedings
of the foresaid ordination. And that you may have a clear view of the
difference, between those ministers, and churches, that assisted in said
ordination, and those churches called strict congregationalists, I will
represent them to you, in the following manner, by sitting the one over against
the other.

Standing Churches hold, Strict Congregational Churches hold, That unregenerate
sinners, can do something besides sin, i.e. that a corrupt tree, can bring
forth good fruit. That unregenerate sinners, can do nothing but sin, i.e. that
a corrupt tree, cannot bring forth good fruit. That sinners can do something,
that will forward their eternal salvation. That the doing of sinners, will not
forward their eternal salvation. That the endeavors of the unregenerate, do
not aggravate their guilt. That the endeavors of the unregenerate, aggravate
their guilt. Inasmuch as they never originate from a right principle, nor are
aimed at a right mark. That unregenerate sinners, can do much toward their own
salvation. That the more sinners try to save themselves, by their own work, or
fit themselves to be saved by Christ, the deeper they involve themselves in
debt to justice. That if ever sinners are saved, they must work it out. That if
ever sinners are saved, it must be all by free, rich, and sovereign grace. That
baptism is the only badge of church membership. That in order to our being
cognized members of the visible church, it is necessary, that we be not only
baptized, but that we personally profess our faith in Christ, and voluntarily
give up ourselves to him, and to his church, according to his will. That all
are proper subjects of baptism, whose parents were baptized, or whose ancestors
were in covenant with God. That no children are proper subjects of baptism on
their parents account, unless one or both of their immediate parents, be
visible professing saints. That grace, as a term of communion in the visible
church, is a church-destroying opinion, that has no foot steps in the word of
God, but took its rise from the man of sin. That grace, as a term of communion
in the visible church, is so necessary, that without it there can be no real
church of Christ, and without the profession of it there can be no visible
church of Christ.

I shall, in the next place, give a short account of the sentiments, or
principles, of the Separates, (so called) so far as it respects gathering
churches, and church government.

I. As to a confession of faith, and platform of church government, we are
generally agreed, in Westminster confession of faith, and Cambridge platform of
church discipline (with some few exceptions.) But then, we look upon no human
composures of divine authority, no further than they agree exactly with the
word of God. And therefore we believe, that the word of God, contained in the
scriptures, of the old, and new testament, to be the only uncring rule of faith
and practice.

II. We believe, that where there is a competent number of visible professing
saints, so situated in the providence of God, as that they can conveniently
meet together; and other circumstances of providence concurring, to make duty
plain, have a good right to embody together, in a church state, without any
respect to town, or parish lines.

III. That the manner of their embodying together, ought to be, by a
declaration of each other, of a work of God's grace upon their souls -- And a
special respect, ought also to be had, to the fruits of grace, that will
certainly discover themselves, in the life and conversation of true believers.
And they ought also, to enter into a voluntary covenant to walk together, in
all the laws, ordinances, and institutions of the gospel; and to be subject to
the discipline of his kingdom. And these rules ought to be observed in all
after admissions into their society.

IV. We believe, that a competent number of visible professing saints, thus
embodying, and covenanting together, are a visible church of Christ; and have
good right, full power, and lawful authority, delegated to them, by Christ
their lawful head, to act, and transact; every thing within themselves, that is
necessary to their well-being, as a church of Christ, viz. To admit their own
members; and reject them in case of sin unrepented of -- To try, prove, and
examine their own candidates for the ministry -- To choose them into office; and
to put them into office by ordination; and to depose them from officeship, in
case of sin, by which their officeship is forfeited.

V. We believe, that as a church is a free voluntary society, and ought to be
in bondage to no man, in matters of religion; that as they have right to choose
their own ministers, so it is their duty to support them, without ever making
use of civil law for that purpose.

VI. We believe, that brethren in church covenant together, ought never, in any
ordinary cases, to go to law with one another, while they remain in that
relation together.

VII. We believe, that all those gifts of prayer, exhortation, or preaching,
that are in the church; and are approved by the church; ought to be improved in
the church, in their proper place, for the edification of the church, which is
the body of Christ in a mystery.

Thus, reader, I have gone throngh with what I proposed, in showing the
difference between those called Standing Churches, and those called Strict
Congregationalists, by which I think the difference may be seen; and so the
question may be determined in peoples minds.

Therefore, I shall conclude this small piece, by answering some objections;
and making some reflections upon the foregoing remarks; and some addresses to
several sorts of persons, or professors.

From what has been said respecting sinners being unable to do any thing but
sin, I foresee that some objections will arise. As first. If sinners be under
an utter inability to do any good, how can God require it of them? etc. I find
this objection stated by Mr. Boston, and therefore I will answer it in his
words, viz. God made man upright, gave him a power to do every thing he should
require of him: This power man lost by his own fault. We were bound to serve
God, and to do whatsoever he commanded us, as being his creatures; and also, we
were under the superadded tie of a covenant, for that effect. Now, we having,
by our own fault, disabled ourselves, shall God lose his right of requiring our
task, because we have thrown away the strength he gave us, where-withal to
perform it? Has the creditor no right to require payment of his money, because
the debtor has squandered it away, and is not able to pay him? Truly, if God
can require no more of us than w are able to do, we need no more to save us
from wrath, but to make ourselves unable for every duty: And so the deeper one
is immersed in sin, he will be the more secure from wrath. Now, if God can
require of men the duty they are not able to do, he can in justice punish them
for not doing it, notwithstanding their inability. If he has power to exact the
debt of obedience, he has power also to cast the insolvent debtor into prison,
for not paying of it.

I find another objection stated, and answered, by the same author, that I
suppose will naturally arise, in some people's minds, against what I have said,
viz. Why then do you preach Christ to us; call us to come to him, to believe,
repent, and use the means of salvation? Ans. Because it is your duty so to do.
It is your duty to accept of Christ, as he is offered in the gospel, to repent
of your sins, and to be holy in all manner of conversation: These things are
commanded you of God, and his command, not your ability, is the measure of your
duty. Moreover, the calls, and exhortations, are the means, that God is pleased
to make use of, for converting his elect, and working grace in their hearts: --
Upon very good ground may we, at the command of God, who raileth the dead, go
to their graves and cry in his name, Awake, thou that sleep, and arise from
the dead, and Christ shall give thee light.

But, methinks it would be well for sinners to consider, that their inability
is a voluntary, wilful inability. It is not a natural inability, that hinders
sinners from doing their duty to God, and their neighbor: But it is a moral
inability, that hinders them from doing what God requires of them. Their wills
are opposed to the will of God: Their understandings are dark, and they choose
to have them so. Their affectio^^ are turned away from God, and set upon the
creature more than upon the creator; and sinners are well pleased that it
should be so. God requires that we give him our hearts, in all that we do; but
an unregenerate sinner, never did give his heart to God, in any thing that ever
he did; he never gave his heart to God, in one religious duty that ever he
attempted to do: And the reason is, because he does not love to give his heart
to God; if he chose to give his heart to God, it would not be in the power of
men, or devils, to hinder him from it; and therefore, the whole of the blame
lies at the sinner's door. Therefore, sinners should know, that unless their
hearts are changed by renewing grace, they never will, they never can perform
one act of obedience acceptable to God. And therefore, are far from doing much
toward their own salvation. They must be born again -- born from above, or
they cannot see the kingdom of God.

Perhaps some unregenerate sinner will say, If I thought I should do nothing
toward my salvation, by all my prayers, reading the word of God, attending
upon public worship, maintaining the gospel, and giving alms to the needy, etc.
I would leave off all those duties, and try no more. -- Truly thou have brought
out the affair just as it is; and at once has discovered the spring, and motive
of all thy good doings. Not a love to God, nor to his law; but a seeking
justification by thy own doings. And this is the highest motive, of all the
doings of the unregenerate. But let me tell thee, if ever thou art converted,
thou will be brought to closer work than this; thou will be brought to as great
extremity, as Israel was in Egypt; that keep the law you must; and keep the law
you cannot, till you are driven out of all self-dependance, and brought to fall
into the hand of God just as you be, a poor, wretched, helpless, miserable,
blind and naked creature; and will have no plea before God, but sovereign
mercy, and that only, through the merits of a crucified Redeemer.

Again, from what has been said, it may be seen, what was the grounds, and
reasons of our separation from the established churches -- The three capital
articles in our separation from the standing churches, were these, viz. First,
Their holding to, and practicing upon, the principle of graceless communion. --
Secondly, The ministers, or ministry, engrossing into their hands, the power of
church government, and the power of minister-making, or the sole right of
ordination. -- Thirdly, The churches submitting under the government of a
certain body of ecclesiastical laws, made in this State. To which may be added,
many things of lesser note, as may be seen in the preceding pages.

Moreover, from the preceding remarks, and observations, it may be seen, that
the people called Separates, are, as to their profession of faith, and
practice, truly scriptural, apostolical, calvinistical, and congregational.

Once more, from the foregoing remarks, it may be seen, that the sentiments
advanced by Mr. F. and his brethren, are the soul, life, nerves, and sinews of
arminianism, and border very closely upon the popish doctrine of merit. It
seems that their notion about the salvation of sinners, is, that by the death
of Christ, sinners are set again upon their own legs, to work out their own
salvation; or at least that they can do much toward it. That sinners can be
better today, than they were yesterday, and tomorrow, than they were to day,
and so by little and little, they can grow into true christians -- They do not
tell sinners, th^^ they are totally depraved, and can never bear any fruit to
God until they be born again. And that the new birth, is entirely effected by
the agency of the spirit of God, ordinarily working by the word of truth.

What remains shall be by way of address. And, First, To those of my brethren
of the strict congregational profession.

Beloved brethren, It appears that the days we live in, are perilous days;
perilous on various accounts; but in none more than in the overspreading of
errors, and false opinions, in matters of religion -- The doctrine of
justification by works, seems strangely to insinuate itself into men's minds --
The doctrine of graceless communion in the church, is again openly avowed by
some -- The doctrine of universal redemption, is making a strange, and
unaccountable progress, in our land, of late -- To which may be added, an ove^
flowing of sin, and wickedness of every sort; cursing, swearing, lying,
cheating, stealing, oppression, blasph my. sabbath breaking, and contempt of
the gospel, etc. And to make the scene yet more dreadful, christians, that
should b^ the ^alt of the earth, have lost their savor; wise and foolish
virgins, slumbering and sleeping together; and to close up the horrors of our
day, God himself, has in a great measure, withdrawn the kind influences of his
good spirit from this people, and is leaving us to blindness of mind, and
hardness of heart; and is become almost as a stranger in our land, except it be
by the judgments of his hand. Therefore, my brethren, let me entreat you to
live up to the profession you have made; it is high time to awake out of sleep,
to stand upon your watch, to witness a good confession, by your lives and
conversation in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation. Especially have
your minds rooted and grounded in the truth, that so you may not be easily
carried about with every wind of doctrine; study the word of God; make it the
man of your council; conform to its rules and precepts, in your whole conduct
in the world; hold fast the things you have been taught, knowing of whom you
have learned them; labor according to your ability, and opportunity, to
instill into the minds of those you are conversant with, the pure doctrines of
the gospel; such as the total depravity of man by the fall; the necessity of
regeneration, in order to seeing the kingdom of God; justification by faith
without the deeds of the law; the absolute unfitness for church communion,
without saving grace; the eternity of hell torments, unless we be washed from
our sins, in the blood of Christ, etc. Labor especially to instill these
truths, and all other truths of the gospel, into the young and tender minds of
your children, and those under your immediate care; that so they may be a
generation of God's praise, and not of his wrath. Let your light so shine
before men, that others beholding good work, may glorify your father which is
in heaven, and ye become the epistle of Christ, read and known of all men.

Secondly, To those ministers, and churches, that hold to, and profess the
principles advanced by Mr. F. in his charge to his son, Suffer me to propose
the following queries: First, Whether it can be proved from the word of God,
that a person believing in his heart, that an unregenerate person can do
something besides sin; that is, can bear good fruit; that they can do much
toward their own salvation; that if ever they are saved, they must work it out
-- can be a true believer in Jesus Christ? Secondly, Whether a person
professing the above sentiments, can be a visible saint? Thirdly, Whether it
can be proved from the bible, that a minister, believing in his heart, and
professing with his mouth, the above sentiments, can be a true minister of
Jesus Christ? Or that a church, professing the above opinions, and also that
grace, as a term of communion in the visible church, is a church-destroying
opinion, that took its rise from the man of sin -- can be a visible church of
Christ?

Now, if the affirmative of the above queries, cannot be proved from the word
of God, then I affirm these two things: First, That no rational being of the
human race, is bound in duty, to hear such ministers preach; or to hold
communion with such churches. Secondly, That it is the indispensable duty of
all people, to come out from, or be separate from such ministers, or churches,
and touch not the unclean thing.

Thirdly, As there is some ministers, and churches, in this land, that are
called standing ministers, and churches, that differ as widely from the
opinions advanced by Mr. F. as any of the Separates do; some at least, that I
have some knowledge of; and I trust, are laboring to promote the same interest
of the Redeemer, that I hope the people called Separates are engaged in. To all
such, suffer me to propose the following queries: First, Whether it is not the
duty of christians, that are agreed in the essentials of religion, to labor to
walk together as far as possibly they can; especially in such a day as we live
in, when the united strength of all true christians is called for, to oppose
that flood of corruption, both in doctrine and practice, that is so prevailing
in our land at this day? Thirdly, Whether the difference between such churches,
and those of us that are called strict congregationalists, is so great, that it
ought to bar us from a fellowship together, or a free communion one with
another? Thirdly, Whether it is not the duty of such churches, to break off
their connection with such churches as hold to, and practice upon, the
principles, and opinions, advanced by Mr. F. at the aforesaid ordination?

Lastly, To people in general, into whose hands these papers may come,
especially in the State of Connecticut, I shall only say, that matters of a
religious nature, are things of the highest concern; and therefore ought not to
be taken up upon trust. The doctrine of an implicit faith, held to in the
church of Rome, has long since been exploded by the Protestant churches. We
ought not, therefore, to condemn others, in the thing that we allow. It is the
duty of all men to search the scriptures for themselves; and form their
opinions, and practice, in matters of religion, according to the best
understanding they can obtain, of the will of God, in his holy word. This is a
duty, and a privilege, that all men have a right to enjoy, (provided they do
not abuse it to acts of licentiousness, or disturbance of the commonwealth) and
cannot be deprived of, without an infringement upon the liberties of
conference; a liberty which no man ought to give up, or can give up, without
parting with his birthright; and ought to be contended for, even to the loss of
all earthly things. -- The principal design of my writing these papers, is to
put people upon searching the scriptures for themselves; especially in those
things that I have opposed Mr. F. in. And to let people know what the
difference is, between those called standing churches, and those called (by an
act of assembly passed in May sessions, 1777) strict congregationalists; who by
said act are freed from taxes to support the established ministry, or
meeting houses in this State, under certain limitations, and restrictions; It
could have been wished, that said act had extended to all such churches as are
described in it, in their infant state; and whe^^ they are deprived of ordained
ministers among them, by death or otherwise, which I think is but reasonable.
And I hope our General Assembly will find it their duty, as well as their
glory, spontaneously to make that addition to said act.
that so people, that are like minded with us, may take the benefit of said act
of assembly, and not be obliged to pay their money for that which is not bread,
nor their labor for that which satisfies not. -- It is likely, that many
people, when they hear the words strict congregationalist used, form some
barbarous ideas about the principle, and the professors of it; but if I may use
the term without offense, I would say, that it is true christian whigism, and
raises the noble mind of man above the low, servile, priest-ridden condition,
that christendom has been often sunk into, as whigism in a civil state does the
minds of men above tyranny* and therefore, I have given a short account of our
principles, so far as it relates to gathering churches, and church government;
and hope, all my readers will carefully examine the same by the word of God,
and form their practice according to the best light they can obtain therefrom.

P. S. It may be thought by some, that in what I have said, respecting those
that plead for graceless communion, are advocate, for the devil that I have
reproached that good man, Mr. Stoddard. To which I would say, that we look upon
it no unjust reproach to say that Solomon of old was an idolater, or at least
introduced idolatry into Israel; and as his great grandson Josiah, beat down
his high places; (...) Mr. Stoddard's grandson Jonathan, has fairly beat down
what his grandfather labored to build up! So that none since, have been able,
to exculpate Mr. Stoddard, from being an advocate for the devil, in his
pleading for graceless communion in the church. Although he was, perhaps, as
good a man, as King Solomon of old.

THE END

