A VERY REMARKABLE NARRATIVE OF LUKE SWETLAND, Who was taken captive four Times
in the space of fifteen Months, in the time of the late Contest between Great
Britain and America; sh^w^ng how and when taken, whether carried and how
treated until his return to his Family; with a concise Account of the exercise
of his Mind during his trials; A short Account of the Manners of the Indians;
and a short Sketch of the Rarities of the Indian country.

WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.

HARTFORD: PRINTED for the AUTHOR.

A NARRATIVE, etc.
I LIVED at Wyoming on the Susquehannah river at the time when it was cut off
by the Indians, and with my family was captivated with many others, on
condition of being subject to the king and had liberty to live on our farms,
the articles of capitulation were made and signed July 5, 1778, and none of our
effects to be destroyed; but they soon broke the agreement by burning
buildings, killing and driving off our cattle, sheep, horses and hogs, and
plundering every thing they could find, but as I had hid some of our household
stuff so that they could not find it, and out of ten head of cattle when we
went from the fort to our house (as it was not burnt) we found some of our
cattle, viz. one ox, one milch cow, and four young cattle, so concluded we
would try to live there and not leave the country, and so picked up the small
matter the Indians had left us, and went to keeping house although very near
naked, yet naked as we were we took courage and went to work at harvesting and
ha^ing, but about ten days after as we were about our business, two or three
Indians came and told us that the Indians were returning with some wild Indians
that had not been with them in the battle nor plundering, and if we were not
all gone in the space of two hours we should all be scalped. We having no horse
left us, I and my wife and four sons, the oldest of them about fourteen years
old, set out on foot, took as much victuals as we could well carry and a few
trifl^s out of the house, and went to Delaware river to Colonel Strouds, where
we were supported some days on the public continental stores, until a party of
continental soldiers, together with a number of the S^sq^ehan^^^ inhabitants,
were going back to retake the place and also to harvest the grain, I went with
them to harvest my English grain, and having harvested and thrashed some, went
to mill with it with one Joseph B^^^chard, went down the Susquehannah river in
a canoe about eight miles below Walksb^ry fort, and pushed our canoe up the
Mill-Creek, within about half a mi^e of the mill, and having carried our wheat
to the mill and got it floured, I borrowed the mille^s horse to carry my flour
to the canoe, Blanchard had his fl^u^ on his back and when we had got within a
few rods of the ca^^^ six Indians were hid under the weeds and bush^s cl^se by
the path and when we came against them they sta^ted up within about two or
three steps of us and said bow de, we being near together they took hold ^f us
in an instant we not having opportunit^ to run or sca^ce time to think,
surrendered without making any resistance, they took horse, fl^ur and a^^,
(...) asked us if there was any house near; we told them no one ^^t at the
mill, and asked us many other q^^st^^ns concerning the number of the men at the
(...), and in that country, and where our gu^s were, etc Now there was in that
place in a boat chests (...) and much other household goods belonging to the
(...) mill, which things the (...) dest^oyed and pl^^dered. While they were
examining us (...) ma^y signs like scal^ing, when I (...) be put into
execution, which the reader may (...) was shocking to any one in his senses. It
was now d^sk they began to pinion us and when they had us fa^^ in ropes, two of
them went to the house by the m^ll, came to us again, had a mighty jabber
sometime, a^ last spoke to us in English roughly for telling lies in saying
there were but two men at the mill, and told us there were many and horses too;
we told them we sopposed the ^^ght guard was come from the fort to guard the
mill; which they seemed to accept as truth and with precipitation lead us off
with ropes as we were tied together. We went about ten miles that night and
made a halt, struck up a ^i^e, and they laid us on our backs* pinioned our arms
behind us, tied round the neck and middle with rope and tied together, one of
the Indians lay on the rope between us. This as I remember was on Monday,
August 24, 1778.

N^xt morning we set ^ut before sunrise, one or two Indians went forward as
pilots, the Indian that first took hold of me said he was my master, and drove
me before him after the pilots, and would often strike me with his tomahawk on
my hips and sides, sometimes on one side and say, tullaway, then on the other
side and say, G^d damn tullaway, and then would laugh and so he did till my
sides and hips were sore by reason of being so bruised, my feet were also
bruised and sore, for they made me throw away my shoes and gave me dee^skin
m^ckisons, and being forced to run where the ground was sto^y made stone
bruises on the bottoms of my feet, my Indian master paid no regard (...) my
lameness but kept on his cruelty. Some time afternoon they made a stop and eat
some roasted hogs flesh, and gave some to me and my fellow prisoner, it was now
about thirty hours since we had eat any thing except whirtleberries; then we
went on till night, when we were pinioned and secured as we were the night
before, rose early next morning and w^nt on as before, my master still
continuing h^s cruelty to me, when we were set down to rest he would often call
^o me an^ ^ay come in my dog, as much as to say come here my dog, and when I
was come to him would cock his firelock and put it to my breast and grin and
put his finger to the trigger with an air of much fury, at first* I thought it
was the last moment of my life, but I ^a^^ and did nothing, he seeing I paid no
regard to that, took it from my breast, opened the pan and threw out the
priming and primed it anew, and then put it to my forehead with the same
fu^ious motions as before, and so went on all that day doing every thing he
could invent to ^ffl^ct me; sometime in the evening we came to Mosh^pping,
where the tories had an encampment, I was well acquainted with so^e of them,
they said they were glad we were taken, but sorry we were not killed, however
they gave us victuals. This night we were tied to a spar of their hu^, and two
of the tories stood sentry over us all night, and the tories both men and women
danced round us the most part of the night, next morning my old neighbors the
tories appea^ed friendly gave me a razor and soap to shave myself with, and
gave more victuals to m^, and told the Indians that I was an honest man, so the
Indian Captain took me to himself and was very tender of me, ^e found I was
very lame, he opened the stone bruises on my feet and showed all the favor he
could to me, we went on slowly that day up the river, found several tory
families where we had good usuage, the next day we came to Teoga where was
another camp of my neighbor tories and some Indians, the tories spoke roughly
to me, but gave us buttermilk to drink, when we set off from there my Indian
master went along a little before me and I being lame went very slowly till all
of a sudden I felt a blow on my head which sallied me out of the path, I
recovered a little and he struck me on the other side of my head, which nearly
brought me to the ground, I looked and saw it was an Indian that followed me
from the tory camp, I did my best to get out of his way, but he followed me
sometime with kicks and blows till at last he went back to his camp, and my
master stopped till I came up and then made me go before him, so went on, came
to Shemongo quite late in the evening and very dark, my master gave the
prisoner hoop which rallied the whole town, numbers of them met us yelling and
screaming, jumping and running, the Indian Captain took hold of my hand run
with me some distance into a house, so they did not hurt me, but they took
Blanchard and very much abused him, but after sometime he came where I was,
being wounded on the head and face, was very bloody, the Captain appeared
pitiful, gave him water to wash his bloody face and head, here we lay that
night not bound at all, next day my companion took his leave of me, he said I
shall never see you again, pray for me, it is all we can do for each other, so
I went on; two Indians went with me to conduct me, we had not gone far before
we came to some Indians, one exceeding fierce in warlike appearance, came up to
me and with great fury began to strip off my clothes even my shirt, and I went
on naked about twenty rods; another Indian came briskly to me said yankee,
yankee, he having a drawn sword in his hand fetched it up as ^f he was going to
cut me in two, but struck with it flat on my back, went a little further came
to a town of them, t^^ came out and placed themselves in two ranks one each
side of the path, as near as I can guess about fifteen in each rank, each
having a stick in his hand, my conductors went on before me between the two
ranks, I followed after slowly, they all made some attempts to strike me, but
they did not hurt me much, we went on and came to the French Catherines, a
squaw so called, this old squaw could speak good English and told what they was
going to do with me, and the next day sent two Indians to carry me on horseback
toward Appletown, in Indian called Condawhaw, and left me at a house called
the Longhouse, where I stayed three days, then came an old Indian and carried
me home with him to Appletown, to the old squaw to whom I was given as a
grandson, she made great lamentation over me showing many signs of respect to
me, and so did three little squaws the same. A few days after came an Indian
scout to this town, with two captives that they took on the Susquehannah river,
I went to speak with the captives, but they would not let them speak much with
me, the next morning the Captain of the scout came to me, asked me if I knew
his prisoners, I told him no; he told me how I was disposed of and how they
called their relations in their way, told me this old squaw is your
grandmother, and pointing the ^igest of the little ones said that is your
sister, and them two little ones are your cousins, and so went on through the
town telling me who were my relations, and said I should soon be an Indian and
then I should know all about it, I was glad of this opportunity for I had (...)
heard any English words for many days before. H^^^ I lived twelve months and
two days, except some intervals, when I went a visiting my relations and (...)
prisoners. The Indians were remarkably kind to (...)* made me many fine
presents, I had from one and another three hats, five blankets, near twenty
pipes, six razors, six knives, several spoons, gun and ammunition, fireworks,
several Indian pockets, one Indian razor, awls, needles, goose-quills, paper
and many other things of small value, and many other ways showed their respects
to me, about the tenth of September I was taken sick with the fever and ague,
which held me some time, in which time the whole town was attentive to me, gave
me butter and some milk and butter milk, and my sister went daily more than
(...) a mile to get spring water for me, though other water was but a few rods
off, I thought these favors were worthy of my grateful notice. In the time of
my sickness the French Catherine came to see me, spoke to me in English and
said how do you do my child, I could hardly forbear weeping it was so agreeable
to hear English words again having heard none for some weeks, she wept and so
did my other grandmother and sister, she told them to be kind to me, she went
to Niagary, and when she came back she gave me sweet ^^ag root to steep in
water to drink and it helped me of my illness, I had my liberty to do what I
had a mind for*

Sometime in November I begged one quart of wheat which I sowed thinking to
raise wheat it I continued with them many years; cold weather now began to come
on, I had made me a bed of hay and lay well, but not being used to were brich
clouts, suffered with the cold by going with my thighs naked, yet I got through
the winter better than I expected, toward spring, our corn being almost gone,
we began to dig ground-nuts and I began to eat basswood buds, and had some
sugar and when the spring came on wood^ bitterny early sprung up, which I eat
with sugar and some other weeds and roots was our main support till some time
in July, when we had some dead horses which I thought was the best meat in the
world. Some time in June, 1779, I became a^quainted with an Indian that could
speak good English* I went with him to a salt spring to make salt, and I had a
brass kettle that held about one pa^l full, I fill^d it with the water of the
spring and boiled it down to salt, as near as I could judge it made one quart;
while we were on this voyage we eat one bull and helped eat several horses, yet
I remained very weak, having been so long without proper food it was very hard
for me to travail four miles in a day, for when I had done making salt I made
an attempt to run away, but found myself not able, as I had tried it once
before and found myself unable. Soon after I got back from making salt I heard
of the army a coming, I made it all my study to get to them, finally I took
this method, the Indians gathered all the force they could to withstand our
army, but being defeated and driven before our army come where I was, told us
we must all go to Niagara and I set out with the Indians and went one day's
journey with them, at night we encamped in the woods, I judge there was ^60
Indians and ^12 tories and British soldiers, I waited until about the middle of
the night, all were still and I thought asleep, so I took what I had prepared
to carry and set out and crept off till I had got beyond all their guards, and
then travailed as fast as I could all the rest of the night, much of the way
the weeds and brush were as high as my head and very thick so went but slow,
about break of day I lay down and slept till near sunrise and got up and about
three in the afternoon came near Appletown, where I went from the day before,
hearing bells in the town laid down my pack in a swamp and resolved to see who
was in the town, thinking it might be our army and so crawled along till I was
very near, I rose up to look and to my great surprise a few rods one side of me
an Indian spoke to me in the Seneka language, said come here, I answered him in
Indian; and to no, and made off, but he followed me and insisted that I would
come to him; I asked him who was in the town; he said Indians, I went directly
to him and went with him into the town, where I was surrounded and taken by
about 100 of them, shook hands with them, they said you have run away, I asked
them how that could be, pointed and told them that was my grandmother's house,
they said why you walk bushes then, and where is your grandmother? I said she
is gone to Niagara, and has left a great deal of corn, I am going to get some
of it to carry to eat by the way; they let me go, and told me to go and get
corn, so they should know if I were an honest man* I told them to stay till I
brought the corn and so went off and left them, and when I had got out of their
sight I ran as fast as I could near one mile toward the army, and hid myself
in a thicket of bushes, and there lay till sundown, and then got up and went to
see if they were gone, when I came near I heard talking and laughing in the
town, left it and went to look for my pack, but it being now dark I could not
find it, so I went away into a field, lay down to sleep, got up in the morning,
resolved to go to a house about three quarters of a mile from the town, and
stayed there till near noon and went and found my pack, and found an iron pot
in which with some mending I could boil corn which made me feel very rich,
being hungry having eat nothing but three pieces of dried horse beef, each
about the bigness of a chestnut and some wild mandrakes and raw corn from
Thursday night till then, being Saturday late in the day, here I lay this night
and slept well, got up in the morning being Lord's day I concluded the army
would be up this day, and was contriving how to introduce myself to them
unhurt, sometime afternoon began to look for them, about this time all of a
sudden I came to the house, I saw them through the cracks of the house, went to
the door to see who they were, a sergeant of the riflemen was at the door, he
called to the other two and said here is a prisoner, and asked me how I came
there, I told him it was my home my grand mother's house, he took hold of me
and began to strip me, and said will you go with me, I told him yes, he first
took my silver broach out of my s^i^ and stripped me naked all but an old pair of
stockings, and struck me with his rifle rod, and said with an oath you
plundered this shirt; I told him no the (...) made it for me, as he repeated
striking me, I told (...) I had two petitions to make to him, which were (...)
would not kill me, nor give me to the Indians; (...) said I will spare your
life with a devil to it, and struck me again and said you stay here to kill
white folks do you; I told him no by no means; he took up a club and struck me,
bid me go along; I said I am naked and ashamed to go and said you are Christian
bred (...) and I think it a shame to drive me naked, and begged for something
to put before me; he struck me again and again said go along quick time; I
insisted to have something to put on to cover my nakedness; they still hurried
me to go; I asked them if the rebels were near, God damn you, said he, do you
call us rebels; I said no I mean the army that is coming; he struck me again,
at last gave me a piece of sacking bag, and I tied it on; they gave me also an
old rag of a shirt that was in my pack, and a coat of mine, I put them on, and
they struck me again and bid me go along into the town, and so driving me
before them, running and whipping me all the way; and when we came into the
town, near twenty of their party came running to us damning and swearing,
saying why don't you kill the tory, and with many oaths swore I should not live
to go another step; but they would not let them strike me, but drove me as fast
as I could run till met by a number of my acquaintance, who took hold of me and
took me from them, to my exceeding great joy, for throughout this scene I
thought they were mine and the country's common enemies; but the scene being so
suddenly and so agreeably changed, together with the wor^y and fatigue, it so
overcome me that for some time I scarcely knew my friends nor was able to speak
to them; but soon recovered, went to the sergeant and gave him thanks for
sparing my life, he said God damn you, none of your jaw; a few days after he
was kill^d by the Indians. But to return, I was talking with old acquaintance,
General Poor sent for me to come into his marker, where I eat wheat bread, and
pork, and beef, such victuals I had not eat nor tasted above twelve months;
General S^llivan sent for me, and examined me who I was, and where from, and
how I came there, I told him the whole of the affair. There was many gentlemen
officers that could testify to my faithfulness, yet I was ordered under
provost, and so used as a prisoner; I went with them to assist as a guide where
I was acquainted, and went with the army as far as they went and returned with
them to Wyoming, from whence I was first taken; many of my old acquaintance
came to me to congratulate my return, and made me several presents; I stayed
here some days; a horse being presented to me to ride to find my family, I set
out, found them at Kent in Connecticut, where we had formerly lived before we
went to the Susquehannah, on or about the 25th day of October, 1779, to my
great joy, having not seen them in the space of about ^ourteen months and a
half -- my old neighbors and acquaintance gave many tokens of their respect
and rejoiced with us.

Perhaps it would not be amiss to speak word or two as to the exercise of my
mind whilst in this scene of trial.

August 25, 1779. O memorable day! when (...) savages naked and dismally
painted with red and black, rose up within reach of me, my first thought was to
run, but thinking if I did run they would certainly kill me, and if I stood
they could but kill (...) and death appeared near then; with ejaculations
earnestly desired that I might have wisdom to direct me in this moment of
trial, and grant to me all the needed graces of his spirit, and grant me
deliverance from the fear of men and particularly from these Indians which
could only kill the body; and (...) they behaved as though they would kill me
every moment, yet I think I retained my best judgment and did as well and as
fight for my own safety as I have ever thought of since; I had some sense that
I was in the hand of the same God that made me (...) them, and he could dispose
them to show me favor, and daily and almost hourly sent up ejaculatory pr^^ers
to to almighty God, that I may constantly feel my dependence upon him and put
my trust in him. When the Indian my master made daily and hourly attempts to
fire me through, sometimes his gun at my head and sometimes at my breast; I
often said in myself you cannot kill me without a commission from the God in
whose hand my breath is, and if this is the way God had appointed for me to
die, it was my duty to submit to his will, and blessed be God that I had any
degree of submission as I thought sometimes I really had. When we came to
Shemongo, the Indians were so wild and fierce, I thought that I and my fellow
prisoners should certainly be slain; now death was a terror to me, but I think
I did in some measure take sanctuary in God; sometimes it troubled me to think
of being killed or dying in a heathen land, but one time I remember in
particular, it seemed to me I were as willing to die now and in this place as I
ever should be at any future time or any other place; it was my earnest desire
to know my duty in all respects, and to be rightly disposed to all beings. When
I come to the log-house where I lived three days, my first business was to find
a place of convenient retirement, and by the side of the lake under a high
clift of rocks, spent much of the three days; so when I come to Appletown,
spent much of my time along the woods, I had no book of any kind, endeavoring
to spend the first Wednesday in every month in private fasting, prayer and
meditation when my health and the weather would admit. Some time in November,
one Michael Showers gave me a bible, which was a great comfort to me, I hope I
had a disposition of thankfulness, for that as I thought then, as it really is
the most blessed book in this world, I took great sati^faction in reading
David's psalms; when wintry days and snow and cold came on, as I was in Indian
dress, a cold fashioned dress to me, I feared I should have no convenient place
to retire on account of the weather, but as I was looking one day, found a cave
in the side of a hill where I could be hid from mortal eyes, and also from the
inc^^^^ncy of the (...) where I retired twice at least every day, and spent the
most part of the sabbaths there, meditating and reading the bible; it was with
much hard suffering thus I lived through the winter; the next summer Partial
Terry sent me a book called Mr. Edwards's life. When I thought of running away
from the Indians, as I made several trials, I was very solicitous as know my
duty, that I might not through self love throw away my life foolishly; on the
whole concluded it was my duty, if I could with safety and when I had clean
escaped the guards, to fall on my knees and return thanks, and to ask for
future preservation ^ And when the riflemen came to me and so barbarously
treated me, I almost gave over all hopes of life, had but little hope if any ^t
all left; and notwithstanding for many times expected, now is my last mo^ent of
life, yet I never asked any creature to (...) before then, but while in their
cruel hands I had not much time for contemplation; and when I came to the army
it was a matter of joy to me, and reason demanded a thankful heart, but seems
to me my mind was all confused, yet I think I longed to be alone out of the
noise of the army, and found my confinement was a great trial to me.

Now to give a brief account of the manners of the Indians. Those which I lived
with did not appear (...) have any principles of religion at all, though they
(...) to have some idea of an invisible Being, I could (...) find wh^ ^d of
Being they thought it was, (...) would (...) together often, and have one to
(...) to the auditory; some minutes one time after a ^ong ^ech to the auditory,
they hung a dog on a high pole, and burnt another under it, one Indian told me
that was to have good luck against the Yankees; they had many frolli^^^ singing
and dancing, wonde^fully different from white people; I cannot discribe it
without swelling my piece too large; they seem (...) have some legislative
order, I cannot fully tell in what method, I see a goal in one of their towns,
they are good humoured, the squaws patiently do all the work in the field
whilst the Indians play and hunt, they live in some respect^ as one family,
live on corn, beans squashes and potatoes so long as that lasts* some meat,
sugar, milk and butter, but in the summer chiefly on ground (...) and some
other weeds and roots, till green corn and beans come, then they will have many
fea^^ days; the squaws do all the court^^g and also all the ^ooking.

RARITIES.
And first, the country is rare for its (...) and (...) also (...) from stone,
well wa^ered, well (...) quantity of inter^ (...) miles in length and breadth
without (...) abundance of m^^berry trees in some parts of it, (...) apple
(...) before General Sullivan's army (...) down, and greatly abounded with
peach (...) and (...), hazle-nuts and black wa^^^^^ ma^y (...) afording a
plenty of fish, salt (...) where I ^^de some salt, a sort of root with (...)
made bread, they call it ^okt^haw, a (...) plenty of wild mandrakes.


