SENTENCE of Death for High Treason.
AT a special Court of Oyer and Terminer and Goal Delivery, held at Frederick
Town, in the Month of July, 1781.

Peter Sueman, Nicolaus Andrews, Jost Blecher, John George Grafes, Adam Graves,
Henry Schell, and Caspar Fritchie; some of them Residents of Washington, the
others of Frederick County, were indicted for High Treason, and convicted.

The Judge of the said Court, the Honorable Alexander Contee Hanson, Esquire
pronounced the Judgment following against them severally, on the 25th of July,
1781.

That they be carried to the Jail, of Frederick County, that they be drawn from
thence, to the Gallows of Frederick Town, and be hanged thereon, that they be
cut down on the Earth alive, that their Entrails be taken out, and burnt, while
they are yet alive, that their heads be cut off, that their bodies be divided
into four Parts, and that their Quarters be placed where his Excellency the
Governor shall direct and appoint.

Das Todes-Urtheil derjenigen die des Hoch Verraths schuldig befunden.

In einem Blut Gericht, und Erledigung des Gefangnisses, welches in
Frederichs-Taun, in Maryland, im Julius 1781 gehalten werden,

Wurden die folgenden Manner, namlich Peter Schumann, Nicolaus Andreas, Jost
Blecher, Johann Georg Graff, Adam Graff, Henrich Schell, und Caspar Fritscht,
des Hoch-Verraths beschuldiget, und nach einem Verhor dessen gultig befunden.
Einige davon waren wohnhaft in Waschington, und die andern in Friederich Caunty.

Worauf der Richter von them besagten Gerichte, der Achtbare Alexander Contee
Hanson, Esquire, das folgende Todes Urtheil uber einen jeden ins besondere, den
25sten Julius 1781 ertheilte, namlich

Dass sie in das Gefangniss von Friderich Caunty gefuhrt werden sollen, und von
dannen in them Galgen von Friederich Caunty ges^^^^t, daran gehenckt, und
alsbald ^^^^er herunter geschnitten werden sollen, ehe sie noch todt sind, sie
sollen geofnet, und ihre Eingeweide heraus genommen, und verbrant werden, weil
sie noch lebendig sind, der Kopf soll ihnen abgeschlagen, und ihr Korper
geviertheilt werden, und ein jedes Viert el davon soll an them Plaz aufgesteckt
werden, welchen seine Excellenz, der Gouverner, dazu bestimmen wird.


