THE SPEECH of his Excellency JOHN RUTLEDGE, ESQUIRE, Governor and Commander in
Chief of the State of SOUTH CAROLINA, to the GENERAL ASSEMBLY, met at
Jacksonburgh, on Friday the 16th Day of January, 1782.
Honorable Gentlemen of the Senate, Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the House of
Representatives,
SINCE the last meeting of a General Assembly, the good People of this State
have not only felt the common Calamities of War, but, from the wanton and
savage Manner in which it has been prosecuted, they have experienced such
Severities as are unpractised, and will scarcely be credited by civilized
Nations.

THE Enemy, unable to make any impression on the Northern States, the Number of
whose Inhabitants, and the strength of whose Country, had baffled their
repeated Efforts, turned their Views toward the Southern, which, a difference
of Circumstances afforded some Expectation of conquering, or at least of
greatly distressing. -- After a long Resistance, the Reduction of Charles Town
was effected, by the vast superiority of Force with which it had been besieged.
-- The loss of that Garrison, as it consisted of the Continental Troops of
Virginia and the Carolinas, and of a number of Militia, facilitated the Enemy's
march into the Country, and their Establishment of strong Posts, in the upper
and interior Parts of it; And, the unfavourable Issue of the Action near
Camden, induced them vainly to imagine, that no other Army could be collected,
which they might not easily defeat. -- The Militia, commanded by the Brigadiers
Sumpter and Masion, whose enterprising Spirit and unremitted Perseverance under
many difficulties, are deserving of great Applause, harrassed and often
defeated large Parties, but, the Numbers of those Militia were too few to
contend effectually with the collected Strength of the Enemy -- Regardless
therefore of the sacred (...) of Honor, destitute of the Feelings of Humanity,
and determined to extinguish, if possible, every Spark of Freedom in this
Country, They, with the insolent Pride of Conquerors, gave unbounded scope to
the Exercise of their Tyrannical disposition, infringed their public
Engagements, and violated the most solemn Capitulations -- many of our
worthiest Citizens, were, without cause, long, and closely confined -- some on
Board of Prison Ships, and others in the Town and Castle of St. Augustine --
their Properties disposed of, at the Will and Caprice of the Enemy, and their
Families sent to a different and distant Part of the Continent, without the
Means of Support -- many who had surrendered as Prisoners of War were killed in
cold Blood, several suffered Death in the most ignominious Manner, and others
were delivered up to Savages, and put to Tortures, under which they expired --
Thus, the Lives, Liberties and Properties of the People were dependent, solely,
on the pleasure of British Officers, who deprived them of Either or all, on the
most frivolous Pretenses -- Indians, Slaves and a desperate Banditti of the
most profligate Characters, were caressed and employed by the Enemy to execute
their infamous Purposes -- Devastation and Ruin marked their Progress, and that
of their Adherents, nor were their Violences restrained by the Charms or
Influence of Beauty and Innocence -- Even the fair Sex, whom it is the duty of
all, and the pleasure and pride of the Brave, to protect, -- they, and their
tender Offspring, were Victims to the inveterate Malice of an unrelenting Foe
-- neither the Tears of Mothers, nor the Cries of Infants, could excite, in
their Breasts, Pity or Compassion -- not only the peaceful Habitations of the
Widow, the aged, and the infirm, but, the holy Temples of the most High were
consumed, in Flames, kindled by their sacrilegious Hands -- They have tarnished
the Glory of the British Arms, disgraced the Profession of a British Soldier,
and fixed indelible Stigmas of Rapine, Cruelty, Perfidy, and Pro^^^^ness, on
the British Name. -- But I can now congratulate you, and I do so most
cordially, on the pleasing Change of Affairs, which, under the Blessing of GOD,
the Wisdom Prudence Address and Bravery of the great and gallant General
GREEN, and the Intrepidity of the Officers and Men under his Command, have
happily effected -- a General who is justly entitled, from his many signal
Services, to honorable and singular Marks of your Approbation and Gratitude --
His Successes have been more rapid and complete, than the most sanguine could
have expected -- The Enemy, compelled to surrender or evacuate every Post which
they held in the Country, frequently defeated, and driven from Place to Place,
are obliged to seek Refuge under the Walls of Charles Town, and on Islands in
its Vicinity -- We have now the full and absolute Possession of every other
part of the State, and the Legislative, Executive and Judicial Powers are in
the free Exercise of their respective Authorities.

I also most heartily congratulate you, on the glorious Victory obtained by the
combined Forces of America and France, over their common Enemy -- when the very
General, who was second in Command at the Reduction of Charles Town, and to
whose boasted Prowess, and highly extolled Abilities, the Conquest of no less
than three States had been arrogantly committed, was speedily compelled, to
accept of the same mortifying Terms, which had been imposed on that brave but
unfortunate Garrison; to surrender an Army of many thousand Regulars, and to
abandon his wretched followers, whom he had artfully seduced from their
Allegiance, by specious Promises of Protection, which he could never have hoped
to (...) to the Justice or Mercy of their Country -- on the naval Superiority
established by the illustrious Ally of the United States -- a Superiority in
itself so decided, and in its Consequences so extensive, as must inevitably
soon oblige the Enemy to yield, to Us, the only Post which they occupy in this
State -- on the reiterated Proofs of the sincerest Friendship, and on the great
Support, which America has received from that powerful Monarch -- a Monarch
whose Magnanimity is universally acknowledged and admired, and, on whose Royal
Word, We may confidently rely, for every necessary Assistance -- on the perfect
Harmony which subsists between France and America -- on the Stability which her
Independence has acquired, and, on the Certainty that it is too deeply rooted,
ever to be shaken -- for, animated as they are, by National Honor, and united
by one common Interest, it must and will be maintained.

WHAT may be the immediate Effects, on the British Nation, of the Events which
I have mentioned, of their Loss of Territory in other parts of the World, and,
of their well sounded Apprehensions from the powers of France, Spain and
Holland, it is impossible to foretell -- If Experience can teach Wisdom, to a
haughty and infatuated People, and, if they will now be governed by Reason,
they will have learnt, that they can have no solid Ground of Hope, to conquer
any State in the Union, for, though their Armies have obtained temporary
Advantages over our Troops, yet the Citizens of these States, firmly resolved,
as they (...) return to a Domination which, near six Years ago, they (...) and
justly renounced, cannot be subdued -- and, They must now be convinced, that it
is the Height of Folly and Madness to persist in so ruinous a War -- If,
however, We judge, as We ought, of their future by their past Conduct, We may
presume, that they will, not only endeavor to keep possession of our Capital,
but make another Attempt, howsoever improbable the Success of it may appear, to
subjugate this Country -- It is therefore highly incumbent on Us, to use our
most strenuous Efforts, to frustrate so fatal a Design, And, I earnestly
conjure you, by the Duty which you owe, and the sacred Love which you bear, to
your Country, by the constant Remembrance of her bitter Sufferings, and by the
just Detestation of British Government, which you and your Posterity, must for
Ever, possess, to exert your utmost Faculties, for that purpose, by raising and
equipping, with all possible Expedition, a respectable permanent Force, and by
making ample Provision for their comfortable Subsistence -- I am sensible the
Expense will be great, but, a Measure so indispensable to the preservation of
our Freedom, is above every pecuniary Consideration.

THE Organization of our Militia is likewise a Subject of infinite Importance
-- a clear and concise Law, by which the Burdens of Service will be equally
sustained, and a competent Number of Men brought forth, and kept in the Field,
when their Assistance may be required, is essential to our Security, and
therefore, justly claims your immediate and serious Attention -- Certain it is,
that some of our Militia have, upon several Occasions, exhibited Instances of
Valor which would have reflected Honor on veteran Troops -- The Courage and
Conduct of the Generals whom I have mentioned, the cool and determined Bravery
repeatedly displayed by Brigadier Pickens, and, indeed, the Behavior of many
Officers and Men in every Brigade, are unquestionable Testimonies of the Truth
of this Assertion -- But, such Behavior cannot be expected from Militia in
General, without good order and strict discipline, nor can that order and
discipline be established, but by a salutary Law, steadily executed.

ANOTHER important Matter for your Deliberation, is the Conduct of such of our
Citizens as voluntarily avowing their Allegiance, and even glorying in their
prosessions of Loyalty and Attachment to his Britannick Majesty, have offered
their Congratulations on the Success of his Arms, prayed to be embodied as
Royal Militia, accepted Commissions in his Service, or, endeavored to subvert
our Constitution, and establish his power, in its stead, of those who have
returned to this State, in Defiance of a Law by which such return was declared
to be a Capital Offense, and have abetted the British Interest; and of such,
whose Behavior has been so reprehensible, that Justice and Policy forbid their
free Readmission to the Rights and Privileges of Citizens.

THE extraordinary Lenity of this State, has been remarkably conspicuous --
other States have thought it just and expedient to appropriate the Property of
British Subjects to the public Use, But, We have forborne to take even the
Profits of the Estates of our most implacable Enemies -- It is with you to
determine, whether the Forfeiture and Appropriation of their Property should
now take Place -- If such shall be your Determination, though, many of our
firmest Friends have been reduced, for their inflexible Attachment to the Cause
of their Country, from Opulence to inconceivable Distress, and, if the Enemy's
Will and Power had prevailed, would have been doomed to Indigence and Beggary,
yet it will redound to the Reputation of this State, to provide a becoming
Support, for the Families of those whom you may deprive of their Property.

THE Value of Paper Currency became, of late, so much depreciated, that it was
requisite, under the Powers vested in the Executive during the Recess of the
General Assembly, to suspend the Laws by which it was made a Tender -- You will
now consider whether it may not be proper to repeal those Laws, and fix some
equitable Mode, for the discharge of Debts, contracted whilst Paper Money was
in Circulation.

IN the present Scarcity of Specie, it would be difficult, if not
impracticable, to levy a Tax, to any considerable Amount, toward sinking the
public Debt, nor will the Creditors of the State expect that such a Tax should,
at this Time, be imposed; But, it is just and reasonable, that all unsettled
Demands should be liquidated, and satisfactory Assurances of Payment given, to
the public Creditors.

THE Interest and Honor, the Safety and Happiness of our Country depend, so
much, on the Result of your Deliberations, that I flatter myself you will
proceed, in the weighty Business before you, with Firmness and Temper, with
Vigor, Unanimity and Dispatch.

JOHN RUTLEDGE.

THE ADDRESS of the Honorable the SENATE, in Answer to the Governor's SPEECH.
May it please your Excellency,
WE beg leave to return your Excellency the thanks of this House, for your
Speech.

ANY words that we might adopt, would convey but a very faint Idea of the
Satisfaction we feel, on the perfect Re-establishment of the Legislative,
Executive and Judicial Powers in this State.

IT is with particular Pleasure, that we take the earliest Opportunity to
present to your Excellency our unfeigned Thanks, for your unwearied zeal and
attention to the real Interest of this Country, and to testify our entire
approbation of the good Conduct of the Executive, since the last meeting of the
General Assembly.

WE see and revere the goodness of Divine Providence, in frustrating and
disappointing the attempts of our Enemies, to conquer the Southern States, and
we trust, that by the blessing of the same Providence, on the Valor and
Intrepidity of the Free Citizens of America, their attacks and enterprises will
continue to be repelled and defeated.

WE reflect with pleasure on the steady Resolution with which Charles Town was
defended, by a small body of brave Men, against such a vast superiority of
Force, and we gratefully acknowledge the meritorious Conduct, and important
Services of the Officers and Privates of the Militia, who stood sorth in the
hour of Danger, and whose coolness, perseverance and ardour under a
complication of Difficulties, most justly entitle them to the applause of their
Country.

WE flatter ourselves, that the Blood which the Enemy has inhumanly spilt, the
wanton Devastation which has marked their progress, and the tyrannical System
that they have invariably pursued, and which your Excellency has so justly and
pathetically described to us, will rouse the good People of this State, and
will animate them with a Spirit to protect their Country, to save their Rights
and Liberties, and to maintain, at all hazards, their Independency.

IT is with inexpressible Pleasure, that we receive your Excellency's
Congratulations upon the great and glorious Events of the Campaign, on the
happy change of Affairs, and on the pleasing Prospect before us; And, We assure
your Excellency, that we concur most sincerely with you, in acknowledging and
applauding the meritorious Zeal, and the very important Services which have
been rendered to this State, by the great and galiant General GREEN, and the
brave and intrepid Officers and Men under his Command, and to whom we shall be
happy to give the most honorable and singular Testimonies of our approbation
and applause.

WE are truly sensible of the immense Advantage, which the United States derive
from the magnanimous Prince their Ally: We have the most perfect Confidence on
his Royal Word, and on the sincerity of his Friendship, and, We think ourselves
much indebted to that illustrious Monarch, for the great and effectual
Assistance, which he has been pleased to give the Confederated States, and by
whose means they have been enabled to humble the Pride of Britain, and to
establish their Independency upon the most permanent Basis.

THE Importance of the several Matters which your Excellency has recommended
to our Consideration, is so evident, that we shall proceed to deliberate upon
them, with all possible Dispatch, and we flatter ourselves, that our Business
will be carried on with Temper, Firmness and Unanimity.

J. L. GERVAIS, President.

TO which his Excellency returned the following ANSWER.
Honorable Gentlemen,
I sincerely thank you for this Address -- The Approbation which you are
pleased to declare of my Conduct affords me much Satisfaction -- Bound by the
strongest Ties, and the deepest Gratitude, to promote the Happiness of this
Country, I have only to regret that my Endeavors for that purpose have not, as
yet, produced all the good Effects which I anxiously strove to obtain -- Your
Sentiments of public Affairs are so perfectly just, that I foresee the happiest
Consequences must result from the disposition which you profess.

JOHN RUTLEDGE.

THE ADDRESS of the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES in Answer to the Governor's SPEECH.
WE the House of Representatives of the State of South Carolina, in General
Assembly met, return your Excellency our most cordial Thanks, for your very
interesting Speech to both Houses, at the opening of this Session, the Language
of which, evidently bespeaks a Heart glowing with ardent Zeal for the Interest
and Welfare of our common Country.

WE want Words to express our heartfelt Exuitation, on the pleasing reverse in
our Affairs: On this Spot, but a few Months past, a military Despotism
prevailed, and Tyranny, with lawless Violence, was desolating our fair
Possessions; But, We now, with extacy, behold, a free Government
re-established, Liberty, that greatest of temporal Blessings, restored, and
every Citizen secured in the possession of his Property by the firm barrier of
the Law of his Country -- This auspicious Change, is in a great degree owing to
the Prudence, Firmness and good Conduct of your Excellency.

IF any thing can add to the sublime and refined Enjoyment, which must arise
from your Excellency's own reflections on your persevering, unabated and
successful Exertions toward rescuing your Country from the Iron Hand of
Oppression, be pleased, Sir, to accept the most sincere and unfeigned Thanks of
your grateful fellow-Citizens.

THE black Catalogue which your Excellency has given of British Barbarities,
forms but a small part of the Whole -- When ever the historic Page shall be
stained with their Story, it will exhibit a Nation devoid of Faith, with whom
Oaths, Treaties and the most solemn Compacts were considered as trifles, who,
without Scruple or Remorse, had abandoned all regard to Humanity, Honor,
Justice and every ennobling Sentiment of the human Breast. It is hardly
possible to conceive any circumstance that could aggravate the atrocious
Wickedness of their Conduct. There is not left a Step in the degradation of
National Character, to which they can (...) descend. The Name of a Briton must
henceforward, be a term of Reproach among all Nations.

WE should betray a great degree of Insensibility, and be wanting in Justice to
his Merit, should we omit this occasion of acknowledging, with the warmest
Gratitude, our Obligations to the great and gallant General GREEN: His
Achievements in this State, while they rank him with the greatest Commanders
of ancient or modern Date, will engrave his Name in indelible Characters on the
Heart of every Friend to this Country. Our Acknowledgments are also due to all
the brave Officers and Men, under his command, who have so often Fought, Bled
and Conquered for us. The Generals Sumpter, Marion and Pickens, with the brave
Militia, under their commands, those virtuous Citizens who did not despair of
the Commonwealth in her greatest Extremity, are deserving of the highest
Commendation. The friendly, seasonable and effectual Aid, recently afforded us,
by our great and illustrious Ally, by means of which, the General, on whom the
British nation seemed most to have placed their dependence, has been compelled
to surrender the Flower of the British Army, to our immortal Commander in
Chief, must greatly increase the flame of Gratitude, which had been before
kindled in the Breast of every American, and which it will not be in the power
of Time or Accident to extinguish. We perfectly concur in Sentiment with your
Excellency, that from our Connection with this powerful and wise Monarch, we
may expect, with well grounded Confidence, that our Independence will be
shortly established upon an immovable Basis, nor need we harbor a (...) Fear
of its dissolution.

AN Union which originated from such liberal and generous Motives, and which is
founded on mutual Interest, that best cement of Nations, must and will continue
-- Whether the series of Losses, Disasters and Defeats of the Year past, will
at length recover Britain from her Delirium, time only can disclose: But as
Misfortune hitherto, instead of producing Reflection and Prudence, has operated
to increase her insanity, we agree in opinion with your Excellency, that it is
probable she will not only endeavor to keep possession of our Capital, but
make another attempt to subjugate the Country; We shall therefore immediately
enter upon the prosecution of the Measures recommended by your Excellency, as
necessary for its Safety. And being fully sensible how much depends upon the
result of our Deliberations we will endeavor to proceed in the weighty
Business with Firmness and Temper, with Vigor, Unanimity and Dispatch.

By Order of the House, HUGH RUTLEDGE, Speaker.

TO which his Excellency returned the following ANSWER.
Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen,
I heartily thank you for this very affectionate Address.

THOUGH I am truly sensible, that your Partiality, has far over-rated my
Services, yet, I cannot but regard the Approbation of my Country as an
invaluable, and the most acceptable Reward.

YOUR proceeding on public Business, in the Manner which you have expressed,
cannot fail to give the greatest Satisfaction, And* I am persuaded, that the
State will derive many real Advantages, and substantial Benefits from the
Wisdom of your Councils.

JOHN RUTLEDGE.


