THE PROFESSION AND PRACTICE OF CHRISTIANS HELD UP TO VIEW BY WAY OF CONTRAST
TO EACH OTHER;

Appearing in the Neglect of executing the Laws of Christ in his House: AND
That this Neglect is pregnant with every Evil that threatens Ruin to the
Churches.

BY EDEN BUROUGHS, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Hanover.

WINDSOR: PRINTED BY HOUGH AND SPOONER, M.DCC.LXXXIV.

PREFACE.
THE design of the ensuing Sections is not to amuse the fancy, or gratify the
curiosity, of any; nor are they sent out into the world with any expectation
that the performance will procure to the author the applause of mankind. If
they may prove subservient to awaken the consciences of those who have any love
to the bleeding cause of Zion, and in this way, become effectual to revive the
true spirit of discipline and brotherly watchfulness in the churches, the
author will esteem himself rewarded a thousand fold; and all the contempt that
may be cast upon him, to be infinitely overbalanced.

I had fully intended to have reduced the arguments and illustrations under the
several heads to a form much more concise than that in which they now appear:
but considering the piece as being intended for all capacities, and that it is
of importance that the force and weight of every sentiment be fully understood,
I had rather suffer the impeachment from the learned and judicious of being
somewhat too repetitious, than to have any sentiment pass without being fully
understood by those of more vulgar capacities.

If any should be convinced, that what is aimed at and enforced in the ensuing
Sections is indeed according to that order which the great King and head of the
church ever meant should take place amongst the people called by his name, this
conviction must surely bind him to use his utmost endeavors to reduce things
to such order in the house of God, at every hazard, and at the risque of every
consequence; and to refrain pursuing such an object under the influence of any
motive whatever, must surely expose him to be condemned out of his own mouth,
that some beloved object lies nearer his heart than the honor of that Redeemer
whom he has professed to love more than father or mother, wife or children,
houses or lands, or his own life.

Our ruin is certainly near, even at the door, if the Lord do not interpose to
recover us. To his blessing, therefore, the ensuing Sections are devoutly
recommended.

Hanover, January 20, 1784.
LUKE vi. 46. And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?
SECTION I. The words explained.
THERE is no doubtful interpretation to these words: and should they be applied
to the relation that subsists between a temporal prince and his subjects, they
would be readily understood, and the meaning of them would be obvious to the
meanest capacity. Should the prince expostulate with his subjects by such an
interrogation, and address them in this manner, they would immediately
understand him as meaning to upbraid them with paying no regard to the laws of
his kingdom, whilst they professed to own him for their king; and that he
esteemed it no honor at all, but rather an insult upon his dignity, for them
to profess to own him for their king, and at the same time pay no regard to the
laws of his kingdom. Should a people have recourse to a round of fulsome
compliment and empty flattery with a view to please their prince, and expect
that he would look upon himself as being honored by them, whilst at the same
time they trampled his laws under foot in his presence, they must be fully
confident, that their prince was void of the understanding of a child, and knew
not his right hand from his left. For any to attempt to treat a temporal prince
in this manner, we readily know would be at the peril of their lives; and that
if the prince meant to maintain the dignity of his kingdom, he would very
quickly teach them, by the severest tokens of his displeasure, the horrid
insult and daring presumption of such conduct.

This would be the light in which a temporal prince would be understood by one
and all, upon his expostulating with his subjects in this manner, And why call
ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? And the meaning of these
words is as plain in reference to that subjection we owe to him whom we profess
to own for our Lord and master. Every one is sensible of the absurdity of a
people's professing to own a temporal prince for their king, and at the same
time pay no regard to the laws of his kingdom: and they fully see, at first
view, the horrid insult this people would be guilty of, should they profess a
high veneration for their king, and at the same time trample on the laws of his
kingdom in his presence. And they would, on the same principle, see things in
this point of light in reference to the relation between Christ and the
professed subjects of his kingdom, were it not so that they love darkness
rather than light.

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION II.
The words further explained.
THE interrogation contained in these words is to be understood as being
addressed to the subjects of Christ's kingdom at large, in every age of the
world. And when applied to those bodies who are incorporated together by solemn
covenant, we may have a clear understanding of their meaning by having recourse
to the light in which they would be understood when made use of by a temporal
prince in addressing his people at large. If an earthly prince should call upon
his subjects at large to do the things which he had said, they would readily
understand him to mean that every one, in his proper station, should take heed,
not only to govern his own personal conduct by a regard to what was enjoined in
the laws of his kingdom; but also that they see to it that his authority was
reverenced, and his laws regarded by one and all incorporated together under
his protection and dominion. Nothing is more essential to the honor of a
prince, than the faithful execution of the laws of his kingdom; and nothing
will bring contempt on the dignity of his government so speedily and
effectually, as to dispense with the execution of his laws, by suffering them
to be treated with defiance and neglect. If the laws of a prince are not put
into execution, they are not treated as laws, but only as empty declarations
that have no force. The penalty annexed to a law, is the whole of that which
gives force and energy to the law, and renders it of the nature of a law. Take
away this, and it ceases to be a law, and nothing remains but a mere empty
declaration, by which a people are under no bonds to govern and regulate their
conduct. And if the penalties annexed to the laws of a prince are not exacted,
and the laws of his kingdom are not put into execution by those appointed for
this purpose, the force and authority of his laws are as effectually made void
as if no penalties were annexed to them. Nay more, for a temporal prince to
suffer things to go on at such a rate among the subjects of his kingdom, would
be a more effectual way to teach them to treat him with contempt, than if he
had never made any law for the regulation of their conduct, but had thrown the
reins upon the necks of one and all, and gave unlimited indulgence to do as
they please. The honor of a temporal prince is too sacred to be trifled with
in this manner. If those whom he has appointed to put his laws into execution
should be convicted before him of having been inattentive to the duties of
their office, and of suffering his laws to be trampled under foot by others, it
would be in vain for them to plead that they had ever took heed to govern their
own personal conduct by a regard to the laws of their prince. There is no one
but would be ashamed to offer such a trifling plea to a governor; for they
would know he would not accept it. Nothing is more plain to the understanding
of every person, than these things, when applied to that relation which
subsists between a temporal prince and his subjects. And why these things are
not as plain, on the same principles, and as easy to be understood, in
reference to that relation that subsists between Christ and the professed
subjects of his visible kingdom, can be accounted for in no other way than
this, that mankind do hate the light, neither will they come unto it, lest
their deeds should be made manifest and reproved.

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION III.
The words explained in another point of view.
WE readily understand, that if a temporal prince should require it of his
subjects to do the things which he has said, his meaning would be, that the
laws of his kingdom were to be the only rule of their civil conduct. They would
never dream that their prince would indulge them in substituting any other
system of laws for the regulation of their civil conduct, in the room of those
which he had enacted for this purpose. For any of his subjects, when arraigned
before their prince for the violation of any of the laws of his kingdom, to
plead that their conduct was agreeable to what was allowed by the laws of some
other kingdom, would be the highest affront they could offer to their prince;
and would amount to an open declaration that they meant to cast off their
allegiance to their prince, and be subject to the authority of some other king.
Mankind dare not offer such pleas to their earthly governors; for they fully
understand, that a temporal prince does ever expect that the laws of his
kingdom, and no other laws, are regarded by his subjects as the only rule of
their civil conduct And if mankind had not their understandings darkened by a
deep-rooted, inveterate, perverse relish for wicked things, they would as
readily view these things in the same point of light in reference to the
relation that subsists between Christ and the professed subjects of his visible
kingdom. What he has said, and the laws of his kingdom, would be regarded by
them as the only rule of their conduct: and they would no more think of having
recourse to any other standard to measure their conduct by, than the subjects
of a temporal prince would think of pleading in arrest of judgment, that their
conduct was agreeable to what was allowed by the laws of some other kingdom.

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION IV.
That professing christians in general have no claim to the character which they
have assumed.
THERE is no corporation of christians but what do profess to own Christ for
their Lord; and there is nothing which they do value themselves by more highly,
than the character of their being the subjects of Christ. Their fondness for
this is so eager and strong, that it is impossible to fire the indignation of a
man to a higher degree, than by charging it upon him that he is destitute of
religion. But if it shall appear, that professing christians in general are not
governed in the tenor of their visible conduct by a regard to what Christ has
said and enjoined in his word, there will need nothing more to prove that they
are not his visible subjects. For surely it is impossible to conceive, that any
can be the visible subjects of Christ, unless they are in a visible subjection
to him. So far as any do appear to be in subjection to Christ, so far do they
appear to be his subjects; and neither scripture nor common sense will admit of
any other rule to judge by in this matter. And what is it that we mean by a
visible subjection to Christ? The answer is plain; and it is obvious to the
understanding of a child. So far as a person appears to be governed in the
prevailing tenor of his conduct by a sacred regard to what Christ has said and
enjoined in his word, so far is he in a visible subjection to Christ, and no
farther. And this being the sole criterion whereby to measure the visible
subjection of professing christians to Christ as their Lord, and King, the very
mentioning of it is surely sufficient to flash conviction in every breast, that
there is no visible subjection to Christ amongst those in general who profess
to own him for their Lord. If any are disposed to think that this is too bold
and uncharitable an assertion concerning professing christians, I would only
remind them, that whilst they tax the author with the charge of
uncharitableness in asserting such a thing concerning professing christians in
general, they are asserting the same thing concerning one another, and
concerning professing christians in general, every day of their lives. If a
person should openly declare that he could put no confidence in his christian
brethren, it would be the very same thing as if he should declare that he does
not look upon it that they mean to be in subjection to Christ. And if
professing christians conduct toward one another in such a manner as to
demonstrate that they can put no confidence in each other, it is surely equal
to their openly declaring in the plainest manner, and in the loudest accents of
language, that they have this persuasion concerning each other, that they do
not mean or intend to be governed by a regard to what Christ has said and
enjoined in his word. For it is impossible to withhold their confidence toward
one another on any other principle than such an apprehension and persuasion
concerning each other. And by christians putting confidence in each other, I
would be understood to mean that confidence only which is agreeable to their
profession. We put confidence in gentlemen as gentlemen; in men of honor as men
of honor. That is, there are certain rules which gentlemen mean ever to observe
in the manner of their treating others; and when we have found out what their
rules are, we are confident what treatment we shall receive from a man who
wears the character of a gentleman. There are certain principles which men of
honor profess ever to act from in their dealings with others; and when we have
found what these principles are, we are confident how they will deal with us
upon every occasion. But if we put confidence in a professing christian under
an apprehension or on the warrant of his being a gentleman or a man of honor,
we don't put confidence in him as a christian; and the exercise of such
confidence is no mark at all of any charity toward him. If the confidence of
professing christians one toward another is not founded upon a mutual
apprehension that each other is governed by a sacred regard to what Christ has
said and enjoined in his word, there is no christian confidence, and
consequently no christian charity amongst them. And surely there is no need of
any labor to prove that there is nothing of this mutual confidence to be seen
in the conduct of professing christans in general one toward another. We know
it by intuition, in the same manner as we know we see the light of the sun at
noon day, whilst we are surrounded and covered with its rays. And we
furthermore know, that it is absolutely impossible for professing christians to
have this mutual confidence toward each other, whilst they evidently see that
they are so commonly disposed to bite and devour one another, by seeking to get
the advantage of each other in their commerce and dealings; or to slander,
backbite, and reproach one another; or to be unfaithful in fulfilling their
promises and mutual engagements to each other; or to be insensible of the wants
and distresses of each other. Where these things are to be seen, as being
manifestly allowed and indulged, in the open conduct of professing christians,
it is as abhorrent to every dictate of common sense to believe concerning them
that they mean or intend to do as the word of God enjoins, as it would be to
think that they are employed, every day of their lives, in working miracles
after the example of Christ and his apostles. And whilst it is impossible, on
such a principle as this, for professing christians to put mutual confidence in
each other, nothing more is needful to prove out this point, that there is no
visibility of subjection to Christ amongst those in general who profess to own
him for their Lord. They are swift witnesses against themselves and against one
another, that their practice does, every day, give their profession the lie;
and that it is the whole business of their lives to mock and insult the
Redeemer, whilst they call him Lord, Lord, and do not the things which he has
said.

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION V. A
further illustration of the same point.
THAT professing christians in general have no claim to the character which
they have assumed, is so evident as to be generally, if not universally,
acknowledged and assented to. They are so generally and universally sensible,
when they make a solemn profession, that they have no meaning at all to their
covenant vows, that they dare not put confidence in one another on the warrant
of those bonds which these vows do lay them under. In exercising confidence in
each other, they dare not venture any further than they are under bonds, and
are holden to each other by the laws, usages, and customs of the state where
they dwell. And when these laws, usages, and customs are the sole foundation of
that mutual confidence which professing christians do exercise in each other,
what do they more than others? They might as well exercise this confidence in
one another, if they had never made any profession of the christian religion at
all: for it is the same kind of mutual confidence, and founded upon the same
warrant, as the civilized heathens, yea, and the very barbarians throughout the
world, do universally exercise one toward another. Nothing is more evident
than that this kind of mutual confidence has not the least degree of christian
charity in it; and let it be exercised to ever so high a degree, it gives not
the least evidence that professing christians do believe that each other have
any meaning at all to their solemn covenant vows. Nay, whilst they exercise a
mutual confidence in each other on the warrant of those bonds they are under by
the laws, usages, and customs of the state where they live; whilst these laws,
usages and customs are the sole foundation of their mutual confidence in each
other, and the sole rule and measure of that confidence which they exercise in
each other, and they dare not trust one another but only in such a way as these
bonds will hold them; it is certainly a demonstration that they have no idea or
expectations that professing christians do mean to be held by any other kind of
bonds than what they are under by the laws, usages and customs of the state
where they live; and consequently that they have no meaning at all to their
covenant vows. For surely so far forth as there is any meaning to those solemn
covenant vows that christians are under, these would hold them most sacredly to
the faithful discharge of every duty and engagement that they owe to each
other, without the intervention of any other kind of bonds whatever. And if it
is any other bonds that hold them to be faithful to each other in any instance;
and if they will not be faithful to each other, without being holden by other
bonds; it is not the authority of Christ that governs them; neither do they do
any thing at all in his name; but they are governed in the whole of their
conduct by a regard to the authority of the laws, usages and customs of the
world; and this authority is supreme in their views, and they exalt it into the
throne of God, whilst it is not only the highest, but the only authority which,
in their practice, they bow down before, and to which they yield subjection. It
is impossible that professing christians can be in subjection to Christ, whilst
this is the tenor of their conduct; for to whomsoever you yield yourselves
servants to obey, his servants you are to whom you obey; and he is your Lord to
whose authority you are in subjection.

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION VI.
That the neglect of executing the laws of Christ's kingdom is the source of
that visible hypocrisy which is so evident in the conduct of professing
christians.
ENOUGH has been said to prove out this point, that professing christians in
general do not mean or intend to have their visible conduct governed by a
regard to what Christ has said and enjoined in his word. They are swift
witnesses against themselves, and against one another, that they have no
meaning at all to their covenant vows, whilst they dare not put confidence in
one another but only as they are holden by bonds of an entirely different
nature and kind from those which their covenant vows do lay them under. There
is no state or kingdom on earth, either among the civilized heathens, or the
rudest barbarians, the authority of which is treated with such insolence and
contempt as the authority of Christ is treated by those who are incorporated
together as members of his visible kingdom. When those who dwell together in
any certain state or kingdom come under obligations to each other according to
the laws of the state or kingdom they are under, the authority of these laws is
too sacred to suffer such obligations to be trifled with or violated. And if
you can find out what are the laws, usages and customs of the most ignorant and
unpolished barbarians, you are at once convinced how far you may put confidence
in them. Only take heed that the confidence you put in them is founded upon the
laws, usages and customs by which they are governed, and you are entirely safe:
for the authority of these laws, usages and customs, will bind them to a
faithful discharge of those obligations they come under to you. On this
principle it is always safe for mankind, in every age of the world, and amongst
all nations, to put confidence in one another, only provided their confidence
is founded upon the authority of those laws by which they are governed. So
sacred is the authority of the kingdoms of this world, that mankind dare not
trifle in matters where this authority binds them. But is it so, in any degree
of comparison, where men are under bonds to each other by the authority of
Christ? When a man has sworn allegiance to Christ, and has solemnly professed
himself a member of his visible kingdom; have we, in a general way, any more
warrant to expect that he means to govern his conduct by a regard to the true
spirit and plain meaning of his covenant vows, than we have to expect that we
shall find his conduct according to the precepts of Mahomet's alcoran? And
surely there is some powerful reason why things should be so infinitely
different in Christ's kingdom from what they are in any other kingdom upon
earth; why the authority of Christ in his visible kingdom should be contemned
and despised, whilst the authority of earthly kingdoms is revered.

What can be the reason that we can readily put confidence in a man on the
warrant of those bonds he is under by the laws of the land, and can put no
confidence in him on the warrant of those bonds he is under by the laws of
Christ? Why are the laws of an earthly kingdom, and the authority of these
laws, so much more powerful to bind men to the faithful discharge of those
bonds which these laws lay them under, than the laws of Christ's kingdom, and
the authority of his laws, are to bind men to the faithful discharge of those
duties which his laws do enjoin? It is because the laws of one kingdom are
faithfully executed, and the laws of the other are suffered to be treated with
contempt and defiance. If the laws of any earthly kingdom should not be
executed, but one and all should be suffered to trample upon them as they
please, such a system of laws would soon lose all their energy, and that people
would be in a state of more absolute anarchy and confusion, than if they had no
law amongst them. The faithful execution of the laws of any kingdom, is the
whole of that which gives force and energy to the laws of that kingdom; and in
proportion as the laws of any kingdom are faithfully executed, will these laws
be revered and obeyed by the subjects of that kingdom; and there is nothing
else, there is no other expedient, whereby it is possible to bring a people
into a visible subjection to the laws of any kingdom whatever, and to form
their conduct and manners according to the true spirit and plain meaning of the
laws of that kingdom. The visible temper, conduct, and manners of a people,
will be according to the true spirit and plain meaning of what is pointed out
and enjoined in the laws of the kingdom to which they are subject, in
proportion to the faithfulness with which the laws of that kingdom are
executed. It is impossible it should be otherwise; for this being the order and
practice of a kingdom, those who should remain openly and visibly disobedient
to what the laws of the kingdom did enjoin, the operation of the laws would of
course spue them out of the limits of the kingdom.

This one observation does certainly demonstrate, and nothing more is needed to
prove, that the laws of Christ's kingdom are not executed in his house; and
that this is the capital and highest reason why the visible conduct of
professing christians is not according to what is pointed out and enjoined in
the laws of this kingdom: for surely, were it so that the laws of Christ's
kingdom were faithfully executed, there would ever be as much of a foundation
for christians to put confidence in one another on the warrant of those bonds
they are under by the authority of Christ, as there now is amongst the members
of any civil kingdom to put confidence in each other on the warrant of those
bonds which the laws of the kingdom do lay them under. The execution of the
laws of Christ's kingdom would surely render these laws as powerful to govern
the visible conduct of professing christians, as the execution of the laws of
any earthly kingdom does ever render the laws of that kingdom powerful to
govern the civil conduct of its subjects.

The only reason why one man can have confidence in another on the warrant of
his being under bonds by the laws of the land, is founded in this, that if he
refuses to answer his engagements, that law will be executed upon him which
will oblige him to a punctual fulfillment of his covenant. And had we the like
warrant for our confidence, that the laws of Christ's kingdom would be put into
execution against every one that should turn his back upon the path of his
duty, there would ever be the same foundation for confidence that the members
of his visible kingdom would walk according to their high and holy calling: and
the capital reason why it is not so, and professing christians in general are
so entirely conformed to the world in their visible conduct, that we can
discern no difference between them and the rest of the world, is, because the
laws of Christ's kingdom are not put into execution amongst them. And surely,
whilst they suffer the laws of Christ's kingdom to be openly trampled under
foot by those who are called by his name, their very profession is an
additional insult upon him, and they are continually provoking him to his face
in the most daring manner, whilst they call him Lord, Lord, and do not the
things which he has said.

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION VII.
That churches do not put the laws of Christ into execution, however confident
they may be that it is their meaning to do so.
THERE is no corporation amongst mankind but what are ready to persuade
themselves, and would have it though it by others, that it is their meaning to be
governed by the laws of their corporation, and to put these laws into
execution. To profess otherwise, and openly declare that they did not mean to
be governed by the laws of their corporation, and that they did not mean to put
these laws into execution, would be the same thing as to declare that they did
not belong to the corporation, and had no interest or concern in it. On this
principle those who are incorporated together by solemn covenant, as members of
Christ's visible kingdom, would fain persuade themselves, and have others
think, that it is their meaning to be governed in the whole of their conduct,
by a regard to the laws of Christ's kingdom, and to put these laws into
execution. To acknowledge that this is not their meaning, and that they have no
such intent or design; -- that after they have made a solemn profession, and
have bound their souls by all the ties that are solemn and sacred, to be wholly
devoted to the fear of God, and to walk together in a universal obedience to
what he has enjoined in his word, they meant to live as much at loose ends, and
to suffer one another to live as much at loose ends, as if they were under none
of these bonds; -- for them to acknowledge that these are the principles they
act upon in the solemn profession they make, would be such barefaced impudence
as to surpass the hypocrisy of devils incarnate.

And hence we may be sure, that notwithstanding all that has been said to prove
that the laws of Christ's kingdom are not executed in his house, professing
christians in general will labor most eagerly to persuade themselves, and have
others believe, that it is their meaning to govern themselves by a regard to
the laws of Christ's kingdom, and to do what in them lies to put these laws
into execution. And on this principle many will feel a surprise that any one
should assert that the laws of Christ's kingdom are not executed in the
churches that profess to own him for their Lord; and will be confident that
such an assertion does favor of uncharitable arrogance, and unwarrantable
boldness; and that the churches in general are unsufferably abused by such an
assertion. Surely if the author had taken pains to acquaint himself with the
practice of churches in general, he might have known that they do not mean to
allow of any gross transgressions in the conduct of their members, such as open
profaneness, stealing, lying, etc. It is not the design of the author to
dispute or call in question the truth of such an assertion. Let it be granted
that churches do keep up a careful watch over the conduct of their members to
keep them from such gross transgressions; if they mean to go no further in
exercising the discipline of God's house than to suppress the out-breakings of
such kinds of open wickedness in the conduct of their members; this is so far
from being an evidence that they have it in view to put the laws of Christ into
execution, that it is a full demonstration to the contrary. For whilst they
will discipline their members for such gross transgressions, and yet at the
same time, indulge and pass over that conduct in them which the word of God
does as absolutely abhor, and as solemnly condemn, as it does any of those
gross transgressions, the laws of Christ's kingdom are not the rule of their
conduct, and they have no reference at all, either to the will or the authority
of Christ in dealing with and disciplining their members. Upon what principle
can it be that churches will deal with their members for stealing, and yet at
the same time will indulge and pass over that conduct in them which is as
direct and daring a violation of that rule of equity, Whatsoever ye would that
men should do unto you, do ye the same unto them, as stealing it of the eighth
command? For it is evident to the understanding of a child, and to the common
sense of every person, that professors are indulged in such conduct whilst it
is a common thing among them to bite and devour, to grind and oppress, to
backbite and defame one another. And now is it that churches apprehend that the
eighth command is more sacred in the eye of the Redeemer than the great rule of
equity, that they will deal with their members for the open violation of the
one, and pass over that conduct in them which is as daring a violation of the
other? They dare not pretend this. And hence there is no other reason can be
assigned for this conduct in churches in condemning the gross violations of the
eighth command, and passing over the open violations of the great rule of
equity, but this, That the world condemns the one and not the other. The gross
violations of the eighth command are universally condemned by the laws, usages
and customs of the world; and if churches should not condemn such conduct in
their members, the world would condemn them. And whilst the churches have their
eye upon such a standard as this for their rule, and mean to condemn that only
in the conduct of their members which is contrary to what is reputable and
honorable in the eyes of the world, it is evident that the laws of Christ's
kingdom are entirely out of their sight; and in the whole of their proceedings
they are conformed to the world. If the laws of Christ's kingdom were the rule
of their conduct in their proceedings, they would surely be ready to condemn
every thing in the open conduct of their members, which the laws of this
kingdom do condemn. And whilst they continue to indulge and pass over those
things in the visible conduct of their members which they know are glaringly
opposite to the true spirit and plain meaning of what is sacredly enjoined in
the laws of this kingdom, it is arrant hypocrisy in them to pretend that they
have it in view to be governed by a regard to what Christ has said in his word.
Whilst a person may retain the character of a visible christian, and his
standing in church fellowship, in the open practice of those things which the
word of God does as solemnly abhor, and as sacredly forbid, as it does the most
atrocious transgressions; it is an insult upon the common understanding of
mankind to pretend that such a church is governed by a regard to the laws of
Christ's kingdom. Let them be ever so careful in watching over their members,
and dealing with them for such gross transgressions which the world condemns;
it is entirely another system of laws than those of Christ's kingdom that they
are governed by; and they can have no other account, in the end, to give to
their Lord, but this, that although they have not been governed by a regard to
the laws of his kingdom, yet they have been governed by a regard to the laws of
some other kingdom. If they have not put the laws of his kingdom into
execution, yet they have put the laws of some other kingdom into execution If
they have not condemned what his word condemned, yet they have condemned what
the world condemned. That is, they have cast us word behind them, and have
substituted another rule in its stead; and have reverenced the authority of the
world, and have treated the authority of Christ and his word with defiance. And
surely if this be the reigning character of professing christians, it will
strike them into confusion, and shock them into convulsions, to have this
solemn interrogation addressed unto them from the mouth of their judge, And why
call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION
VIII. That there is no visible conformity, in the conduct of professors, to
what the word of God enjoins.
NOTHING can be more absurd and ridiculous than for a church to pretend that
they have it in view to do the things which Christ has said, unless their eyes
are upon the laws of his kingdom as the only rule of their conduct; and the
laws of this kingdom are executed in such a manner as to make it manifest that
they do not mean knowingly to allow or tolerate any visible conduct in their
members which the laws of this kingdom do abhor and condemn. The execution of
the laws of any kingdom whatever is designed to promote that particular kind of
conduct in the subjects of the kingdom which is agreeable to the true spirit
and plain meaning of the laws of that kingdom. And if those who are appointed
to put the laws of any kingdom into execution, stead of having their eye upon
this as their governing object, should only aim at forming the conduct of the
members of this kingdom according to what is pointed out and enjoined by the
laws of some other kingdom; there is no way in which they could cast contempt
upon the dignity and authority of that kingdom as by such a line of conduct.
And the matter is most plain in reference to the point under consideration. The
laws of Christ's kingdom do require a certain and particular kind of conduct in
all the visible subjects of this kingdom: and if a church do mean to put the
laws of this kingdom into execution, they are surely to require the same
particular kind of conduct in its members which the laws of this kingdom do
require. And there is no way in which they can possibly treat the authority of
Christ with contempt as by indulging such visible conduct in their members
which they know the word of God does absolutely condemn, and to pass it over on
such a principle as this, That such conduct is allowed of in general, and is
agreeable to what is customary and reputable in the world. What is this but a
setting up the customs of the world above the authority of Christ, and a
substituting these in the room of what he has enjoined in his word?

The world is our God, if its customs are the rule of our conduct. If our eye
is upon these customs as the rule we mean to walk by, we are guilty of open
idolatry as evidently as Jereboam ever was in setting up his golden calves in
Bethel and Dan: and all the difference between our conduct and that of
Jereboam, is this, that we don't worship the same idol as he worshipped --
instead of worshipping his golden calves, we have set up the world in their
stead: and nothing can be more evident, than that the customs of the world are
the highest and ultimate rule that professing christians do mean to regulate
their conduct by, whilst they will indulge and pass over that visible conduct
in one another, which the word of God does absolutely condemn, merely or mainly
because such conduct is agreeable to what is customary and reputable in the
world. And there is no need of any labor to prove, that there is that visible
conduct in professing christians in general, which the word of God does
absolutely condemn; and consequently, that such conduct is openly allowed of
and tolerated in the churches that profess to be in subjection to Christ, as
their Lord: for if there is such open and visible conduct amongst professing
christians, it is certainly tolerated and allowed of: for if it were not
tolerated and allowed of, it could not take place. And for any one to ask,
whether the visible conduct of those in general who make a profession of
religion, is agreeable to the true spirit and plain meaning of what the word of
God enjoins, would be an inquiry most palpably ridiculous, even in the mouth of
a child. The contrary is so evident, and so universally known, that professors
themselves dare not put confidence in one another on the warrant of those bonds
they are under to each other by virtue of the oath of their allegiance to
Christ. The utmost that we can expect concerning the visible conduct of
professing christians in general, is, that we may hope to find it agreeable to
what is reputable in the eyes of the world. And they are so attached to this as
the highest and ultimate rule to which they mean to conform, that they would be
ashamed, even to have it thought that they meant to regulate their conduct by
any other rule, or that the authority of Christ, after they had sworn
allegiance to him, was to have any binding influence upon them, or was to
operate against them in condemning any line of visible conduct which the word
of God condemns, unless the customs of the world do also condemn the same line
of conduct.

In what light will the visible conduct of professing christians appear to
their own consciences, when they come to see things as they really are? In what
light will the churches of Christ appear, when their King shall call upon them
to give an account of their stewardship; and shall solemnly reckon with them
for treating the laws of his kingdom with such awful contempt? -- They will
certainly be confounded; and will have no power to return any answer to that
solemn interrogation, And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things
which I say?

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION IX.
That professors are not conformed to what the word of God enjoins, any further
than they are governed by the great law of love.
IF these corporations who call themselves churches of Christ, do mean to have
the visible conduct of their members according to what Christ has enjoined in
his word; if they mean to require that in each other which the word of God
requires, and to condemn that in each other which the word of God condemns; it
is evident, at first view, that they are ever to require that particular line
of conduct in one another which is pointed out and enjoined by the great law of
love. Christ declares that this law is his commandment: evidently intimating
that there is no other particular law of his kingdom that he accounts so sacred
and dear, and which he meant to lay so much weight upon, as this. And this must
evidently appear to be his meaning, when we consider the view which the
inspired apostle gives of the same matter, where he observes, that love is the
fulfilling of the law. And on the same principle, our Savior lays down, that a
conformity to the true spirit and plain meaning of what is enjoined by the
great law of love in the visible conduct of the professors of his religion, is
not only the highest, but the only, evidence that they are his followers, when
he observes, Hereby shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one
another. Now if it is by this that professors are to be known as belonging to
Christ; then surely there is no scripture warrant to look upon any one as
belonging to Christ, any further than his visible conduct is agreeable to the
true spirit and plain meaning of the great law of love. For if we might have a
scripture warrant to look upon any one as belonging to Christ, where there is
no visibility of such a temper, acted out in his open conduct; then certainly
it would not be hereby, but by something else, that professors were to be known
as belonging to Christ. But if a man were possessed of all other endowments
that can be conceived of, and should he arrive to such seize as to speak
with the tongue of men, and of angels; or should he be possessed of so much
natural sympathy, and human compassion, as to give all his goods to feed the
poor; and should he make such a show of zeal for God and his cause as to give
his body to be burned; and yet not be governed by, or act out this temper, in
these transactions, he would be nothing in the sight of God. In this view of
the matter we need be at no loss at all to know, what is that particular line
of conduct which is pointed out and enjoined by the laws of Christ's kingdom,
and which is absolutely essential for those who mean to be in a visible
subjection to him as their Lord and King. It is such a line of conduct as is
agreeable to the true spirit and plain meaning of the great law of love. If
those who are incorporated together by the sacred bonds of God's covenant, do
not mean to regulate their visible conduct according to the true spirit and
plain meaning of what is pointed out and enjoined by this law of love, and to
require this of one another; there is nothing in that corporation, or amongst
them, that is any evidence, or that gives us any scripture warrant to look upon
them as belonging to Christ, any more than that they belong to Baal-peor. If
such a corporation do mean to tolerate any conduct in its members which they
know the great law of love does abhor; and if they do not mean to condemn every
thing in the open conduct of their members, which they know the great law of
love condemns (and this, whether the laws of men, and the customs of the world
condemn it or not) it is as manifest an evidence as can be conceived of, that
they care no more about the authority of Christ, and the honor of his name,
than they do for the dirt under their feet.

Churches in general appear to have some apprehension that they are under
sacred bonds to deal with their members for open profaneness, if any amongst
them appear to be notoriously guilty of such a transgression. And it is
generally conceived and granted that a church would incur very great guilt upon
themselves, if they should tolerate their members in such kind of
transgressions. Any one that had any tenderness of conscience, and who desired
spiritual edification, would esteem it no privilege at all to join in
fellowship with such a church: but in proportion as his conscience was
awakened, he would feel himself overpowered with amazement to see how they
suffered the authority of Christ to be treated with contempt, and the laws of
his kingdom to be trampled under foot; and under the energy of this
astonishment, he would be ready to say, O my soul, come not thou into their
secret, and to their assembly, mine honor be not thou united. But why are we
shocked at beholding open profaneness tolerated in a church, any more than we
are at beholding that visible conduct passed over and indulged which we know is
as glaringly contrary to the true spirit and plain meaning of the great law of
love, as open profaneness is to the third command? Wherein does the wickedness
of open profaneness consist? Most surely in nothing but this, that it is a
treating the third command with defiance and contempt; and the evil of this
transgression is heinous in proportion as the third command is sacred. But
surely if the great law of love is as sacred in the eye of the Redeemer, as the
third command, can any mortal point out a reason why that visible conduct which
is manifestly contrary to what the great law of love enjoins, should not be as
odious in his sight as open profaneness? Every transgression is heinous in
proportion to the sacredness of the law which is violated. And surely, in this
view of the matter, there is no line of conduct that God does more solemnly
abhor than that which is openly abreast of what is enjoined by the great law of
love. And if that corporation, who call themselves a church of Christ, do not
mean to have this law in force among them, (and it cannot be in force without
it is put into execution) there is not the least degree of any visible
subjection to Christ in that corporation; and they have no more of any claim to
the character of a christian church, than if they should tolerate open
profaneness, and every kind of evil amongst them.

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION X. A
further illustration of the same point.
IF there is not that particular kind of visible conduct amongst professing
christians which is agreeable to the true spirit and plain meaning of what is
pointed out and enjoined by the great law of love; if this is not the sole rule
in distinction from every other rule in the universe, according to which they
mean to treat one another in every branch of their conduct; and if they do not
mean to insist upon such a line of visible conduct one toward another in every
member that pertains to their body -- it is evident that they have no intention
at all, to do the things which Christ has said. They may, it is true, be very
careful to insist upon such a line of conduct in one another, as is agreeable
to what is reputable in the eyes of the world; and may be very ready, and much
engaged, to frown upon and condemn every line of conduct in their members which
may render them obnoxious to the civil part of the world. But if this is the
object which they have in view, and in reference to which they are governed in
dealing with their members, the laws of Christ's kingdom are absolutely out of
their sight, and they are continually trampling the authority of these laws
under foot, and treating them with contempt and defiance. If they can but keep
their members to such a line of conduct as is agreeable to the civilized part
of the world, it is generally apprehended and taken for granted, that such a
church is in a very good state, and in excellent order. And if those rules
which the civilized part of the world have adopted, will admit of such a line
of conduct as the great law of love does abhor, it alters not the case in the
least: professing christians are impregnable in their confidence that a visible
conformity to these rules is the whole of what ought, in reason, to be expected
of them, and the whole of what is to be regarded by them, and by others, as an
evidence that they belong to Christ. It is needful to repeat it again, for it
cannot be too solemnly remembered, that whilst professing christians have their
eye upon this as their rule, and mean to insist upon that visible conduct only
in their members, which is agreeable to this rule, they have exalted the world
into the midst of God's throne; and it is the idol which they worship, and the
god which they adore: for know ye not that to whomsoever you yield yourselves
servants to obey, his servants you are to whom you obey?

On this evident principle there can be no warrant for a church to look upon
themselves as being the subjects of Christ, any further than they mean to be
governed; and that every member that pertains to them, shall be governed in the
whole of their visible conduct, according to the true spirit and plain meaning
of the great law of love. Let them aim at a conformity to any other law in the
universe, or to ever so many laws, modes, and customs, if this law is not
regarded by them as the highest and ultimate rule of their conduct, it is not
the authority of Christ that governs them. And how great soever their
reputation may be, in the view of the world, and how much soever their order
may be admired, whilst they have thus carefully kept one another to such a line
of conduct as was reputable in the eyes of the world, they will be just as
unable as the most careless and profane to return any answer to that solemn
inquiry, And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION XI.
That it is absurd to look upon an incorporation as being a church of Christ,
unless the laws of his kingdom are executed by them.
UPON the principle, that what has been already held up to view is agreeable to
God's word, there is no corporation that means to be called a church of Christ,
but will readily acknowledge themselves sacredly bound to be governed, in the
whole of their visible conduct, by a regard to the great law of love; and that
they are under the most sacred bonds to see to it that each and every member
that pertains to their body, is governed, in the whole of his conduct,
according to the plain meaning of what is pointed out by the same law. Every
one will readily give in to it, that unless their eye is upon this as the sole
rule and measure of their visible conduct, they have no claim at all to the
character of christians; and that they do not mean or intend to do the things
which Christ has said. And yet, after all, when they are called upon to put
these plain and evident principles into practice, there is nothing they will
urge more vehemently, and they will be as loath to give it up as to part with
the breath of life, that we must pass over many things in the visible conduct
of professing christians, which, we know, are evidently contrary to the great
law of love. They will readily grant, that the conduct of every professor ought
to be according to what is pointed out and enjoined by the great law of love;
but then, upon the whole, it will do, if they don't conduct according to this
rule, and if the church don't insist that their conduct be according to it.
Which is the same thing as to say, it is true indeed that a church ought to be
in a visible subjection to Christ; but then, upon the whole, it will do, if
they are not so. When it is urged that we must hold those in charity whose
visible conduct is manifestly contrary to the great law of love; it is the same
thing as to urge, that we must have charity for those that walk not charitably.
To urge that we must hold them as christians in whose conduct there is no
visible conformity to the great law of love, is the same thing as to urge that
we must hold them as christians in whose conduct there is nothing that gives us
any scripture warrant to look upon them as christians. There is no
contradiction more glaring, than to call such a corporation a church of Christ
who knowingly tolerate their members in that line of visible conduct which the
great law of love condemns. Surely a church is not founded upon the word of
God, unless it is governed by the word of God: and it is absurd to pretend that
it is governed by the word of God, if they allow that conduct in their members
which they know the word of God condemns. Every one must grant that we can have
no scripture warrant to look upon a particular person as belonging to Christ,
in whose visible conduct there is no conformity to the great law of love; and
only pursue the same way of reasoning, and it will be equally evident, on the
same principle, that we can have no scripture warrant to look upon a
corporation as being a church of Christ who knowingly tolerate that open
conduct among them which the great law of love condemns. If it is necessary for
a particular person to obey the laws of Christ, in order to have any claim to
the character of a christian; it is equally necessary, on the same principle,
for a corporation to execute the laws of Christ in order to have any claim to
the character of a church of Christ. Obedience to the laws of Christ is the
only thing that gives a person a claim to the character of a christian; and the
execution of the laws of Christ is, on the same principle the only thing that
gives a corporation a claim to the character of a church of Christ. Obedience
to the laws of Christ, is the only way that a person can manifest a visible
subjection to Christ; and the execution of the laws of Christ is, on the same
principle, the only way in which a church can manifest their visible subjection
to Christ. There is surely no other way in which incorporate bodies, as such,
can manifest their subjection to their prince, but by putting the laws of his
kingdom into execution. If they should suffer the laws of his kingdom to be
treated with contempt by one and another, although many individuals in that
corporation should take heed to govern their own personal conduct according to
the laws of their prince; yet that corporation would be looked upon and treated
by their prince as being in a state of rebellion. And for the like realon, on
the other hand, if the laws of his kingdom were faithfully executed, the
corporation would be looked upon and treated by their prince as being in a
loyal subjection to him, though many individuals in that corporation should
prove at last, to have been violently attached to some other lord. In this
point of view it evidently appears that those corporations who call themselves
churches of Christ, if they continue to indulge and pass over that visible
conduct in their members which is manifestly contrary to the great law of love,
they are only struggling to cheat their own consciences; and they will be found
by their Redeemer at last, to have been in a state of rebellion, so sure as
there is any meaning to those awful words, And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and
do not the things which I say?

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION XII.
That it may be easily discerned whether the conduct of professors is agreeable
to the great law of love.
THERE is nothing more certain than this, that professing christians will yet
continue to flatter themselves that it is their meaning to do the things which
Christ has said, so far as it is in the power of their hands. And if they fail
in keeping one another to that line of visible conduct which is according to
the plain meaning of the great law of love, and do pass over many things in the
open conduct of one another, which the great law of love abhors; it is not
because they have no reverence for this royal law, which is the sum of every
thing that Christ has said; but it is owing to this, that they cannot know when
one another walks according to this rule, and when they depart from it. They
are very incompetent judges whether one another mean to walk according to the
great law of love, because they cannot look into the hearts of each other: and
therefore it is the safest way, upon the whole, to indulge every one to do as
they please, and put on that charity that will induce them to hope that one and
all do mean to walk according to the great law of love, though nothing appears
in the tenor of their conduct that would give a person any reason to think,
that they had ever read or heard of a precept, enjoining upon them, to do unto
others as they would that others should do unto them. Were it not so that
mankind had learnt the art of trifling with matters of a sacred nature, and
were they not determined, at all hazards, to have recourse to every evasion in
their power to cheat their own consciences, they never could argue in this
manner, or act upon such principles as these. These principles are pregnant
with the highest and most barefaced folly, hypocrisy, and impudence, when
applied to temporal matters. No one ever argues, that we have reason to hope
that there is any real love between parents and children, husbands and wives,
where there is no love acted out and manifested in their conduct one toward
another. This kind of love is so plainly seen, as to be obvious to the
understandings of all, and children themselves are competent judges of it. And
whilst we have that confidence which is founded upon the clearest evidence,
that there is, in a general way, the most tender, fervent, and endearing love
between parents and children, husbands and wives, our charity is wholly
grounded on what is visible in their conduct one toward another: and nothing
would be more ridiculous, than for any one to pretend that he had any warrant
to think, that there was any real love between a man and his wife, whose
treatment of each other was manifestly contrary to the spirit and operation of
that love, which they professed to bear to each other. And we may be very sure,
if that love, which christians profess to exercise one toward another, were
acted out to as high a degree as parental or conjugal love is acted out; it
would be as plainly seen, and as clearly discerned; and we should be no more at
a loss to distinguish christians from the rest of the world by this mark, that
they love one another, than we now are to distinguish who are parents and
children, and who are husbands and wives, by the visible appearance of parental
and conjugal love. It is certain, when our Savior enjoined it upon his
followers to love one another, he meant that they should act out this love one
toward another in such a manner that it might be seen by one and all that
should be acquainted with them; else he never would have laid down this mark to
distinguish his followers from the rest of the world, Hereby shall all men know
that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another. It is utterly impossible that
we should know that professing christians do love one another by any other
evidence than their open conduct. So far as this love is acted out in their
open conduct, so far we can see it, and no further. And if our eye was single,
we should be no more at a loss to form a judgment of any line of conduct that
is inconsistent with christian love, than we now are to form a judgment of that
line of conduct between parents and children, husbands and wives, that is
inconsistent with parental or conjugal love. And the only reason why professing
christians will pretend that it is not in the power of their hands to prevent
that visible conduct in one another, which the great law of love abhors; and
that they are not competent judges of that conduct which is inconsistent with
the plain meaning of this law, is, because they love darkness rather than
light; and mean, after all, to be treated by the Redeemer, as his servants and
friends, whilst they have treated him with a continual round of fulsome
compliments and empty flattery, whilst they have called him Lord, Lord, and not
done the things which he has said.

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION
XIII. Pointing out that line of conduct which the great law of love requires.
IF the things which Christ has said are all (...) in the great law of love, so
that this is the only rule of conduct to his followers, in contradistinction to
every other rule in the universe; then our inquiry will naturally center in
this, What is that line of conduct which the great law of love does require?
And in answer to this, it is manifest, that the mutual welfare of the souls of
each other is the primary object of that love which christians are to exercise
one toward another. In the same degree as a person loves his own soul, he will
ever be concerned for its welfare; and, on the same principle, in proportion as
he loves the souls of others, he will be concerned for their welfare. There is
no way in which a person can manifest a real love for his own soul, but by a
concern for its welfare; and there is no other way in which he can manifest a
real love for the souls of others, but by a concern for their welfare and
happiness. And if a person does truly mean to manifest any concern for the
welfare and happiness of his own soul, he will surely manifest it by a
continual sacred care to stand at the remotest distance from evil, and the
appearance of evil: and there is no way for christians to manifest and act out
a mutual love and concern for the welfare of the souls of each other, as by
setting their faces against evil, and the appearance of evil, in each other. If
a parent should suffer his child to walk upon the edge of a dangerous
precipice, without a most watchful care to prevent him, and without interposing
all his authority to reclaim him from that dangerous situation, we should most
readily judge that such a parent was an unnatural monster, void of natural
affection, and that the life of his child was of no great account with him. And
if professing christians can suffer evil, or the appearance of evil, in each
other, it is equally evident, that they are utterly destitute of any genuine
love or concern for the welfare of the souls of each other. In this view of the
matter, it manifestly appears, that for christians to suffer evil, and the
appearance of evil, upon each other, is directly contrary to that line of
conduct which the great law of love requires and enjoins. No one can call it in
question, that he who can suffer evil, or the appearance of evil, upon himself,
does evidently conduct as if he hated his own soul, and was entirely
unconcerned about its welfare and safety: and, on the same principle, it is
equally evident, that if professing christians can knowingly suffer evil, and
the appearance of evil, in each other, they conduct as if they had no concern
at all for the welfare and safety of the souls of each other. When any one
beholds that conduct in another, which, in his view, the word of God condemns,
however agreeable it may be to the modes and customs of the world, he is bound
most sacredly, by the great law of love, and the whole weight of his covenant
vows lies upon him, to reclaim him to a sense of his evil, and to recover him
to the path of his duty. And where one sees only the appearance of evil in
another, the vows of God, and the great law of love, do unite to bind him most
sacredly to admonish and warn him of his danger: and if he neglects, his guilt
becomes infinitely greater than the guilt of him upon whom he saw the
appearance of evil; for this neglect is an open scandal, it being a deliberate
violation of his covenant vows.

Nothing is more manifest, than that this mutual concern for the welfare of the
souls of each other amongst professing christians, is according to the genuine
operation of the great law of love. And herein, that kind of love, which is
enjoined upon christians, stands distinguished from every other kind of love
amongst mankind. We oftentimes see that, which we are ready to call love,
amongst those who are disposed to run to the same excess of riot, whilst they
will rejoice together, and show a ready disposition to gratify one another. But
that which we call love in these, is, in reality, the most virulent hatred they
can possibly act out toward one another; and the devil is full of this
affection toward those whom he means to destroy.

There is nothing that deserves the name of love, or that does, in any measure,
partake of the nature of it, but that disposition which aims at the mutual
welfare and safety of the souls of each other, by a constant endeavor to guard
one another from evil, and from the appearance of evil. In this way our Savior
manifested the tenderest love to mankind in the days of his abode upon earth.
He was an irreconcilable enemy to evil, and the appearance of evil, and set his
face like a flint, and bore the most solemn testimony against it, how much
soever it might expose him to the rage and envy of those who were disposed to
cavil at the truth. In this way it was manifest that the law of kindness was on
his tongue, and this was the constant operation of the great law of love
through the whole tenor of his conduct. And this, surely, is that line of
conduct, which the great law of love does enjoin upon his followers: and if
those who call themselves his followers, can suffer evil, and the appearance of
evil, in one another, they may flatter themselves, that they are induced to
pass over such conduct in one another, out of mutual tenderness, and lest they
should disturb the peace of each other, and bring on tumults and divisions in
the church; and their meaning is, to put on charity for each other, though they
frequently behold evil, and the appearance of evil, in one another: and they
may be as confident, that this is the way, in which, upon the whole, it is best
for them to walk, as king Saul was, that he was in the right when he spared the
best of the sheep and of the oxen, amongst the Amelekites, to sacrifice unto
the Lord. But their confidence will assuredly be confounded, as his was, when
their Lord shall demand of them, And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the
things which I say?

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION XIV.
A further illustration of the same point.
IF it be the real meaning of professing christians to do the things which
Christ has said, by walking together in love, and to manifest a tender concern
for the welfare and state of the souls of each other, by letting their faces
against evil, and the appearance of evil, in each other; if this be the spirit
of those bonds by which they are united together, it is evident, at first view,
that they will countenance one another in every instance wherein any one sets
himself to the discharge of such a solemn covenant duty. If they mean to walk
together in the spirit of this temper, it will be impossible for them to
reproach any one for being grieved with the conduct of another under a notion
that such conduct is a little thing, and ought not to be noticed, or treated as
a matter of grievance. For let it be as it will in the view of others, if it be
what the word of God abhors and condemns, in the view of the person who is
grieved with it, he is sacredly bound to treat it as a matter of grievance. If
every one who has named the name of Christ, is under covenant bonds to set his
face against evil, and the appearance of evil, in each other; it is manifest
that every one must judge for himself, what is evil, and what wears the
appearance of evil, in the visible conduct of those he is in covenant with.
Without the exercise of this judgment, it is utterly impossible for
individuals, as such, to quit themselves of the oath of God by discharging
those solemn covenant duties they owe to each other. If any one comes under
blame for attempting to discharge that which he looks upon, and professes to be
a solemn covenant duty; if he is reproached for so doing by those with whom he
is in covenant; and it is represented by one another, that such a little thing
ought not to be noticed; they are doing what in them lies to cast a stumbling
block and an occasion to fall in their brother's way. Such a body of professing
christians are trying to their utmost to discourage and dishearten one another
from discharging their solemn covenant duty. For if this be once established
that no one must treat a matter as a matter of grievance until he is certain
that it will appear to others in the same light it does to him; if he must
refrain from bearing testimony against that which he looks upon to be evil, or
to wear the appearance of evil, until he is confident that others will not look
upon it to be a little thing; that moment that things are come to such a pass
in a church, there is no rule for individuals to go by in the discharge of
those solemn covenant duties they owe to each other. When a professing
christian sees that conduct in another which he looks upon to be evil, and he
must wait till he knows how those in general with whom he is in covenant, will
view it, or by what name they will call it, before he will venture to recover
his brother to the path of his duty; this motive will be a bar in his way, and
if he is governed by it, will incapacitate him from discharging those solemn
covenant duties which the vows of God do bind him to. If professing christians
do mean to walk together under the governing influence of that temper which the
great law of love does enjoin; nothing is more manifest than that they will
have a sacred care to avoid, not only what they themselves look upon to be
evil, or to wear the appearance of evil; but also what they know is viewed and
esteemed so by any brother in the covenant with them. And if the eyes of
professing christians are not upon this as an essential object which they mean
ever to have in view, it is manifest that the great law of love has become
contemptible among them: for if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now
walk thou not charitably. If you mean to plead up for, and allow of, that
which, you know, is a grief to your brother, and he views as being sinful; the
great law of love abhors your conduct. When therefore professing christians
will reproach one another, on their attempting to discharge a solemn covenant
duty, and will urge that we must bear with one another in things indifferent,
and not take offense at such trifles; there is no way more effectual to throw
down the hedge and the wall around the church, and to turn the house of God
into a den of thieves. How confident soever such may be, who conduct on such
principles, that they are seeking the peace of the church; and how much soever
they may now flatter their hearts that they are doing God service; they will
certainly find, in the end, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, that it
were better for them that a millstone were hanged about their necks, and they
cast into the sea, than to have offended those little ones that believed on
Christ, and who would have readily discharged their solemn covenant vows, had
it not been that these stumbling blocks, and occasions to fall, had been thrown
in their way.

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION XV.
The subject continued.
IF there is any meaning at all to those solemn vows by which professing
christians have covenanted with God, and one another, -- if they mean to walk
together in the spirit of that love to the souls of each other, which is
according to the tenor of their solemn covenant; they will most surely be
ready, not only to set their faces against evil, and the appearance of evil, in
each other; but there will also be a readiness to receive the admonitions of
one another, without resentment or envy. If the law of love does but govern
amongst them, they will be ready to join issue with David, Let the righteous
smite me when I go astray: and this will be esteemed, as indeed it is, one of
the greatest external privileges on this side heaven. There is no one point of
more sacred importance, in reference to the order of God's house, than for a
church to keep their members to that visible conduct, which is according to
such a temper. If professing christians are indulged in despising reproof -- if
they may raise a clamor against a person, for attempting to discharge a solemn
covenant duty -- if any one may be allowed to suggest and insinuate, that such
a person is actuated by prejudice against him, though at the same time his
visible conduct is according to what the word of God warrants -- if these
things are indulged, and openly tolerated in a church; it is very certain, that
there can be nothing amongst them but confusion, and every evil work. For a
church to indulge such a line of conduct in their members, is to tolerate them
in the most direct violation of their covenant vows; for if there is any
meaning at all to those solemn vows by which professing christians are bound to
one another, they do certainly hold them under sacred bonds to hearken to the
reproofs, and to receive the admonitions of each other, on every occasion, with
all thankfulness and readiness of mind. For one to reject an admonition given
him by another, under a pretense that the thing for which he is admonished, is
so little and trifling as not to be worthy of reproof, is a despising his
brother, and setting at naught his brother for attempting to quit himself of
the oath of God that is upon him. For one to reject the admonition of a
brother, or to resent an attempt to recover him to the path of his duty, under
a pretense that his conduct is over-rated, and that he is dealt with too
severely, is the same thing as setting himself up for a judge in his own case;
and is as much as if he should say, When I go astray, let the righteous smite
me, but only let him take heed to smite just so hard as I order him, and no
harder: which would be the highest kind of trifling that can be conceived of.
When a brother is set at naught and despised for attempting to quit himself of
the oath of God that is upon him; -- when a church will suffer a clamor to be
raised against him on this account; they are openly countenancing a spirit of
persecution for righteousness sake, and whenever this leaven gits into a
church, there will be nothing more dangerous than for one to attempt the
discharge of his covenant duty; and he that, in this way, departs from evil,
will make himself a prey. Every professor is as sacredly bound to receive as
his brother is to give an admonition or reproof. He is as sacredly bound to be
willing to be dealt with, as his brother is to deal with him. The same bonds
that bind a professor to deal with another, do bind that other to be willing to
be dealt with. These bonds are always mutual, and are as sacred on the one hand
as they are on the other. As therefore we should very justly look upon the
person as having no meaning at all to his covenant vows, who suffers sin upon
his neighbor, and never sets his face against evil, or the appearance of evil
in others; so we may be sure that there is no way in which a person can treat
his covenant vows with a more direct and daring defiance than by despising his
brother, and setting at naught his brother, by casting contempt upon him for
attempting to deal with him for that which he viewed to be evil. And where such
a spirit is allowed to operate, and professors are tolerated in treating one
another in this manner; there is no other law of love that governs amongst them
but that which is according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit
that works in the children of disobedience.

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION XVI.
That where the law of love reigns, those things will be condemned which the
world justifies.
IF professing christians do mean to do the things which Christ has said, by
manifesting a tender love to the welfare and safety of the souls of each other,
there will surely be a vigilant care amongst them, to set their faces against
every thing, in the open conduct of one another, which the word of God abhors
and condemns. There is no other way, in which they can aim at the welfare of
the souls of each other, but by keeping their eye upon this as the only rule of
their conduct, in the manner of their treating one another: and if they should
once learn to keep their eye upon this, as the sole rule and measure, whereby
they meant to form an estimate of that which is evil, or wears the appearance
of evil, in the open conduct of one another; they never could presume to call
any matter a little thing, unless the word of God also called the same matter a
little thing. They would immediately learn to call every thing by the same name
that the word of God called it; and to view every thing in the same point of
light as the word of God viewed it. And in this point of view, it is manifest,
that when one christian brother should admonish another, for what the world
calls so little a thing as vain jesting, another would not dare to call it a
little thing, unless he could prove that the apostle was in jest, when he
solemnly warned his christian brethren against this practice.

There are many things which the civilized part of the world call little,
because they have become common, and are generally tolerated and allowed of;
which, at the same time, the word of God, in the plain sense of it, does as
absolutely abhor, and as solemnly condemn, and which are as inconsistent with
the character of a christian, as those gross transgressions which the world
condemns. And for christians to indulge one another in these things, and to
treat them as little things, because the world calls them so, is as
inconsistent with the leading design of their being covenanted together, as if
they should turn the whole of their brotherly watchfulness into this channel,
to help one another to get as much of the world as they could. Whatever is
agreeable to the spirit and relish of the world, will become common among them,
and will be tolerated and allowed of: and how evident soever it be, that it is
contrary to what the word of God enjoins and requires; yet when it has once
become common and customary, it will be viewed by the world as being a little
thing, unworthy of notice; and that for any one to be grieved with it, or bear
testimony against it, is a mark of superstition and silly weakness. It is
agreeable to the spirit of the world, to practice openly many things which the
great law of love does as absolutely condemn, as the third command condemns
cursing and swearing. And on this principle it has become fashionable and
customary, even amongst those who call themselves christians, to bite and
devour one another; and they are generally as fond as the rest of the world
are, to make what is commonly called good bargains, in their dealings with one
another; and they will hear a christian brother speak evil of another, without
bearing their testimony against such conduct. They have learnt to violate their
engagements to each other, and to pay no regard to the mutual promises whereby
they have bound themselves to each other, but only so far forth as the
authority of the civil law will bind them to a fulfillment of their bonds: and
if they can avail themselves of any slip in the law, to get rid of their
engagements, it is not much out of character for them to do it. And whilst
professing christians have learnt to practice after this manner, I am sure they
have learnt it not from the precepts of Christ, but from the example of the
world. These things are agreeable to the relish and spirit of the world, and
have therefore become common and customary among them; and they are little
things, not worthy of notice; and it would be a pity for professing christians
to be so superstitious as to condemn such conduct in one another, or to be
grieved when there is nothing more to be seen than such little things as these.
But if the great law of love did operate in churches, and were this the rule
that churches meant to be governed by, these things would no sooner be allowed
of, or tolerated among them, than murder and robbery would be allowed of or
tolerated by the civil community: for the toleration of murder and robbery is
not a whit more inconsistent with the whole design of the civil law, than the
indulgence of such practices is inconsistent with the plain meaning of the
great law of love. And hence, if churches did only mean to pursue such a line
of conduct as the great law of love does enjoin, and to hold each of their
members to such a line of conduct; they would set their faces against, and
frown upon, every kind and degree of the out-breakings of rash anger, of evil
speaking, of clamouring and reproaching, of overreaching and defrauding, and
of every instance of that treatment that should give a brother just occasion to
think hard of another. This is manifestly that conduct which the great law of
love does enjoin; and if churches do mean to tolerate that treatment of each
other which the great law of love does abhor, and will treat such conduct in
their members as being but little things, because they are agreeable to the
spirit of the world, and have become common and customary; it is manifest that
they mean to be conformed to the world; they are of the world, they speak of
the world, and the world hears them. Let these little things be ever so
fashionable and customary amongst the civil or the religious world, if they are
only such things as the great law of love does abhor, they are as inconsistent
with the real character of christians, as open profaneness. And if they mean to
give indulgence to such things, it is absurd for them to pretend, that they
intend to be governed by a regard to the laws of Christ's kingdom, or to put
them into execution.

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION
XVII. That the profession of christians in general, is nothing more than an
open insult upon Christ.
I come now to ask, what it can signify for professing christians to call
Christ Lord, Lord, and do not the things which he has said? What it can signify
for churches to call themselves the subjects of Christ, when they are not in
subjection to him? What it can signify to call him their King, when they are
not governed by a regard to the laws of his kingdom, but will tolerate and
indulge those things in the conduct of their members which they know the laws
of this kingdom do absolutely condemn? They are surely insulting the Lord that
bought them, in the most high-handed and daring manner, by treating him with
such a round of empty compliment and flattery. If one man should abuse another,
and under pretense of being sorry for his conduct, should ask his forgiveness,
and immediately upon it should repeat the abuse, he must expect the person to
be more than a fool to give any heed to his profession of sorrow, or to think
he had any design but to add insult to cruelty. Like to this is that conduct
which is evidently to be seen in professing christians toward Christ, whilst
they profess to own him for their Lord, and at the same time turn their backs
upon the authority of his word, and suffer the laws of his kingdom to be
trampled under foot. Such conduct as this, continued and persisted in, does
certainly incapacitate a church so much as to ask for the returns of God's
presence, or to make any other prayer but what is pregnant with the most daring
hypocrisy. For whilst they profess to lament that abuse with which they have
treated their king, and to acknowledge, with shame, that they have justly
provoked him to anger by treating the laws of his kingdom with contempt; and at
the same time mean to repeat over the same abuse, and to persist in treating
the laws of his kingdom with the same contempt; is there any thing in such
prayers but the most daring insult, and open hypocrisy? Whilst they can treat
the Almighty in such a manner as this, and have any hope or expectation that he
will be pleased with them, or look upon it that there is any sincerity in their
most solemn addresses to him; they must surely conceive of him, not only as
being altogether such a one as themselves, but that it is a much easier matter
to impose upon him, and to make a fool of him, than it is to impose upon one of
their fellow mortals. Let such a people be ever so devout in attending to the
external duties of religion, and let them go up together to the house of God
ever so frequently, and there bow down the head like a bullrush, and spread
sackcloth and ashes under them; if these incessant devotions are accompanied
with a visible disregard to the laws of Christ's kingdom in their practice, and
they suffer one another to turn their backs upon the authority of his word; it
is manifest that there is nothing but hypocrisy in every prayer they address to
the Almighty; and it cannot be otherwise than that God should reject such
prayers as these with the most solemn abhorrence; as he forewarned his people
of old, whose conduct was, in like manner, in direct opposition to the many
prayers they made, and for which reason God expressly told them, And when ye
spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when you make
many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood. No language can
express or paint out that degree of insult and contempt with which a professing
people are daily treating the Lord that bought them, whilst they attempt to
pray for his presence, and yet at the same time turn their backs upon him, by
suffering the laws of his kingdom to be trampled under foot: and no heart can
conceive the consternation into which they will be thrown when they come to see
things as they really are, and hear their Lord say unto them, And why call ye
me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?

And why call ye me Lord Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION
XVIII. That professors walking contrary to the truth counteracts and prevents
the operation of the truth on the minds of others.
AND without putting into practice those things which Christ has said, to what
purpose can it be for the ministers of Christ to hold up the truth, and to urge
the importance of it by all the arguments that are weighty and solemn, with any
view or expectation that it will produce any effectual conviction in the minds
of perishing sinners? It casts off the prospect of this, not only as it
provokes God to withhold his spirit; but also as the direct tendency of it is
to prevent any light from entering into their minds from the most plain,
pungent, and powerful preaching. Let the truth be held up in the clearest light
and let the importance of it be urged by every consideration that is weighty
and solemn; yet if the truth is contradicted by the open and visible practice
of those who profess to be of the truth, and they suffer one another to go
right abreast of the whole spirit and evident meaning of their covenant vows;
this will effectually put out and prevent all the light that would otherwise
arise in the minds of sinners from the dispensation of the truth. Mankind will
always form their apprehensions of the nature and importance of religion by
what they see in the lives of its professors. If they see that those who make a
profession, do treat the things of religion in their daily practice, and the
solemn truths which they hear from sabbath to sabbath, as being of the most
sacred importance, and are governed in their daily walk, by a sacred regard to
them; this sight will force upon them a conviction which they can hardly
resist, that the truth which they have heard, is as important as it was
pretended to be. And if on the other hand, they see those who make a
profession, trifling with the most solemn truths in their daily practice, and
conducting as though they believed not the things which they have heard, but in
their practice they are conformed to the spirit and manners of the world, and
they suffer one another to go directly abreast of the whole tenor of their
covenant vows; there is nothing in the universe that can be more fatal to put
out all the light that the truth would otherwise convey to their minds; and
there is nothing that can, with more certainty, make fast the bonds of death
upon them. It is the most effectual way to shut up the kingdom of heaven
against men. For whilst the laws of Christ's kingdom are suffered to be
trampled under foot by those who are called by his name, when sinners are
warned of their danger, a view of their danger is effectually hid from their
sight. They are called upon to believe that which they know that those who
profess to be of the truth, do not believe; and on this account they can hardly
be persuaded to think that they are called upon in earnest, to attend to the
things which belong to their peace; but whilst they see that professors are
suffered to trifle with the truth in their daily practice, it must, and it
cannot but appear to them that they are trifled with when they are called upon
to attend to the truth. Let the truth be proved out by arguments that are ever
so clear and weighty, yet whilst it is trifled with, and treated at this rate
by those who profess to be of the truth, the clearness of argument will have no
tendency to produce conviction, but the contrary. For the more clearly the
truth is held up to view, if at the same time, it is trifled with by those who
profess to be of the truth, the more will it be despised and disgusted by those
who are called upon to attend to it: and there is nothing that can have such a
tendency to prejudice the minds and harden the hearts of mankind against the
truth, as on the one hand, to hold it up to view as being of the most sacred
and weighty importance, and on the other hand, to trifle with it in our daily
practice. This one observation is sufficient to account for that flood of deism
and infidelity that so awfully threatens to deluge the land. It is in vain for
professing christians to call upon mankind to believe that which it is evident,
by their daily practice, they themselves do not believe. The clearest
arguments, under such circumstances, will have no effect, but to disgust and
harden them against the truth. It will ever be in vain to hold up the truth,
and to urge the importance of it by the most weighty arguments, with any
expectation that it will have any tendency to produce an effectual conviction,
unless, at the same time, those who profess to be of the truth, will carry the
truth into execution. And under this view of the matter, it is evident that
those corporations who call themselves churches of Christ, whilst they refuse
to put the laws of Christ's kingdom into execution, and will suffer them to be
trampled under foot, are more awfully guilty of the blood of souls than every
other set of men under heaven; and there is no where to be found such insult,
prevarication and hypocrisy, as has run through the whole of their conduct,
whilst they have called Christ Lord, Lord, and not done the things which he has
said.

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION XIX.
That unless the laws of Christ are executed in a church, to join in fellowship
with it, must prove a dangerous temptation.
IF those corporations who call themselves churches of Christ, do not mean or
intend to put the laws of Christ's kingdom into execution, it is evident that
they are combined together for no other purpose but to make fast the bonds of
death upon one another; and nothing can be more dangerous to the soul of any
person than to join in fellowship with such a church. Whoever joins himself in
fellowship with any church, must have it in view to be under some better
advantages to be prepared for heaven, than he should otherwise be. But no one
can be under better advantages for this but in proportion as he is under
advantages to walk in the light, to be guarded from every false way, and
directed and led in that way, and that only which the word of God directs;
whatever gives him any advantage for this, is of the nature of the highest
privilege on this side heaven; and whatever is of the nature of a temptation to
lead him astray from the path of his duty, is most awfully dangerous, and there
is nothing which can behove him more sacredly to avoid. And whatever has a
tendency, in its operation, to hide the path of duty, is surely the most
effectual temptation to lead him astray from this path. And surely it is hard
to conceive how a person can be in a situation where he is more likely to have
the path of his duty entirely hid from his eyes, than to be in fellowship with
a church who do not mean or intend to put the laws of Christ's kingdom into
execution. When they will suffer one another to go directly contrary to the
true spirit and plain meaning of their covenant vows, and will plead up for and
countenance those things in the conduct of one another which the word of God
does absolutely abhor, and solemnly condemn; they not only put out all the
light that would otherwise be for the conviction of sinners, but it is their
whole business to hide the path of duty from the sight of each other. If any
one is under better advantages to be prepared for heaven in consequence of his
joining in fellowship with a church, than he should otherwise be, it must be
because he is under some better advantages to learn where the path of his duty
is; but he cannot be under better advantages to know this any further than he is
taught it; and he cannot be taught it in a church with whom he is in fellowship
but only in that sense in which they understand it; and it is manifest, that
after all their profession, they understand and teach the truth to others in
that sense, and that only in which they practice it. And hence if their
practice be in oppositon to the true sense and plain meaning of the truth, it
is the very same thing as if they should openly tell those who are in
fellowship with them, that this is the path which the word of God marks out for
them to walk in; and so far as any one gives heed to them as being of the
truth, so far must he be in the most awful danger of being perverted from the
right ways of the Lord, and of being turned aside by a deceived heart. Nothing
can be more dangerous to any soul, than to come into the secret, and be united
to the assembly of such a corporation; for if the salt has, in this way, lost
its savor, it is not only altogether useless, but it has become much worse
than nothing. It is neither fit for the land, nor yet for the dunghill; but men
cast it out into some sink, that it may not poison the land, and render it
barren.

And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? SECTION XX.
That the continued neglect of executing the laws of Christ, will inevitably
issue in the ruin of churches.
IF we believe the declarations of God's word, we must give in to it, that
unless the tokens of God's presence do accompany the administration of his word
and ordinances, our attending upon the external duties of religion, will serve
to no other purpose but to prepare us for more aggravated ruin than if we had
never heard the gospel, or known our Master's will. If the excellency of the
power, in the conversion of sinners by the gospel, is of God, then certainly so
far forth as this power is withheld, the gospel will be a savor of death unto
death unto those who hear it. The ancient rule of God's dealings with his
people was this, Them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me,
shall be lightly esteemed. And if these words are now as true as they were at
the time they were spoken; and if they were left upon record for our learning,
and have the same reference to the visible people of God as they had to the
house of Eli; or, in other words, if God does equally abhor the same thing at
one time as he does at another time, and in one people as he does in another
people; and if we may expect that he will testify his displeasure against his
people at one time, for any particular treatment of him, in the same way that
he has testified his displeasure against them at another time for the same
treatment of him; that is, if God be the same yesterday, to day, and forever --
these words do certainly point out the reason why the tokens of God's presence
are so awfully withheld from the administration of his word and ordinances.
Whilst God withholds the tokens of his presence from his visible people, he
treats them as if he did but lightly esteem them. When he continues to withhold
the tokens of his presence from the people that are called by his name, and
there is no apparent effect from the administration of his word and ordinances;
but on the contrary, in reference to the fruits of that temper which the gospel
enjoins, they are as barren as the heath in the desert, and evidently appear to
be left to the infatuation and folly of their own hearts, producing a spirit of
opposition, mutual jealousies, and evil surmisings and perverse disputings; or
a fatal union and peace on worldly principles; these things are the highest
evidence that can be conceived of that such a people are treated by God as
being lightly esteemed by him. And the reason why he treats them so is, because
they have despised him. And if they ask, Wherein have we despised him? It is
manifest, that there is no way in which they can despise him in such an awful
manner, as by casting contempt upon his authority; and that they always cast
contempt upon his authority in proportion as they despise the laws of his
kingdom; and that there is no way in which it can be conceived that they can
openly despise the laws of his kingdom, but by refusing to put them into
execution. If they don't mean to put these laws into execution, it is certain
they don't mean that the authority of these laws should govern them; for it is
impossible that any laws should govern the conduct of a people, or have any
binding authority in them for such a purpose, unless they are put into
execution. And hence it most evidently follows, that for a people to refuse
putting the laws of Christ into execution, and to suffer one another to go
directly abreast of the plain meaning of their covenant vows; it is fully and
clearly as much as if they should say, in open language, We will not have this
man to reign over us. And under this view of the matter, we need not wonder
that churches are so awfully forsaken of God, and left to the infatuation and
folly of their own hearts: and we may be sure, that they are in the high road
to final ruin, by being spewed out of the mouth of the Redeemer, and given over
to their own hearts lusts, and left to walk in their own counsels.

But, O merciful Redeemer, since thou have loved thy church, and given thyself
for it -- and since thou art yet waiting upon the people that are called by thy
name; do thou lighten their eyes, left they sleep the sleep of death. Bring thy
church up out of the wilderness, and have mercy on the vine which thou have
planted. Reconcile the hearts of thy people to the laws of thy kingdom, that
they may no longer resemble that salt which has lost its savor; but may be
like lights in the world. Vain is the help of man -- let thy power therefore be
displayed for this blessed purpose, and triumph over all the efforts and
struggles of the strong man armed -- and our glory shall yet be great in thy
salvation, and in thy salvation will we rejoice.


