BAXTER's DIRECTIONS TO SLAVE-HOLDERS, REVIVED; First Printed in London, in the
Year 1673.

TO WHICH IS SUBJOINED, A Letter from the Worthy ANTHONY BENEZET, late of this
City, deceased, to the Celebrated ABBE RAYNAL, with his Answer, which were
first Published in the Brussels Gazette, March 7, 1782.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by FRANCIS BAILEY, at Yorick's Head, in Market-Street.
MDCCLXXXV.

THE following expostulation with slave holders, is abstracted from the works
of Richard Baxter, an eminent author, and dissenting preacher of the last
century, and is now republished as an evidence that the same Divine principle
which has enlightened the minds of many in the present age, which a sense of
liberty, and influenced the^ (...) ^^pose the inhumanity and injustice of the
barbarous trade to Africa, for the purpose of enslaving the poor untutored
Negroes, and continuing them and their offspring in bondage, was clearly seen
to be unchristian and unjust, at so early a period as that in which the author
wrote, viz. in 1673. And it is not because the iniquitous practice has been
since unreproved, by judicious and conscientious men, that it is not yet
abolished, but rather that avarice, pride, and ignorance has so unhappily
prevailed over justice and mercy, as to continue great numbers of professing
Christians in partaking of the unrighteous gain of oppression.

And in order to preserve from oblivion, and for general information, it is
thought expedient to subjoin a letter from the truly pious Anthony Benezet,
lately deceased, who was well known to be an uniform prudent advocate for
relief of the oppressed, to the famous Abbe Raynal, with his answer, which
first appeared in the Brussels gazette, of March, 1782, and from thence
published in one of the news papers of this city.

Abstract from Baxter's Christian Directory, etc. Page 557.
"Directions to those Masters, in Foreign Plantations, who have Negroes and
other Slaves, being a Solution of several Cases about them.

"UNDERSTAND well how far your power over your slaves extends, and what
limits God has set thereto; such as is a sufficient difference between men and
brutes, that they are of as good a kind as you, that is, they are reasonable
creatures as well as you, and born to as much natural liberty; that they have
immortal souls, and are equally capable of salvation with yourselves; Remember
that God is their absolute owner, and that you have none but a derived and
limited property in them; that they and you are equally under the government
and laws of God; -- Remember that God is their tender Father, and if they be as
good, does love them as well as you, and that the greater your power is over
them, the greater your charge is of them, and your duty for them; the fourth
Commandment requires masters to see that all within their gates observe the
Sabbath day, so must you exercise both your power and love to bring them to the
knowledge and faith of Christ, and to the just obedience of God's commands.

Those therefore, that keep their Negroes and slaves from hearing God's word,
and from becoming Christians, do openly profess contempt of Christ the
Redeemer, and contempt of the souls of men, and indeed they declare that, their
worldly profit is their treasure, and their God."

"If this comes to the hands of any of our natives in Barbados, or other
islands and plantations, who are said to be guilty of this most heinous sin,
yea, and to live upon it, entreat them further to consider, how cursed a crime
it is to equal men to beasts? Is not this your practice? Do you not buy them
and use them merely to the same end as you do your horses; to labor for your
commodity, as if they were baser than you and made to serve you? Do you not see
how you reproach and condemn yourselves, while you vilify them as savages and
barbarous wretches? Did they ever do any thing more savage, than to use not
only men's bodies as beasts, but their souls, as if they were made for nothing
but to actuate their bodies in your worldly drudgery?

"Does not the very example of such cruelty, besides your keeping them from
Christianity, directly tend to teach them to hate Christianity, as if it taught
men to be so much worse than dogs, or tigers?

"Do you not mark how God has followed you with plagues? and may not
conscience tell you, that it is for your inhumanity to the souls and bodies of
so many? Remember the late fire at the bridge, in Barbados; Remember the
drowning of your governor, loss of ships at sea, and the many judgments that
have overtaken you, and at the present, the terrible mortality that is among
you.

"Will not the example and warning of neighboring countries rise up in
judgment against you, and condemn you? You cannot but hear how odious the
Spanish name is made (and thereby, alas! the Christian name also, among the
West Indians) for their most inhuman cruelties in Hispaniola, Jamaica, Cuba,
Peru, Mexico, and other places, which are described by Joseph Acosta, a jesuit
of their own; And what comfort are you like to have, at last, in that money
which is purchased at such a price? Will not your money and you perish
together? Will not you have a worse than Gehazi's leprosy, with it? Yea, worse
than Achan's death by stoning; and as bad as Judas his hanging himself, unless
repentance shall prevent it? Do you not remember the terrible words in Jude, "
Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the
error of Balaam; and ii. Peter, 2, 3, 14, 15, through covetousness they make
merchandise of you. An heart they have exercised with covetous practices;
cursed children (or children of a curse) which have forsaken the right way, and
are gone astray, following the way of Balaam, the son of Bezor, who loved the
wages of unrighteousness; but was rebuked for his iniquity; the dumb ass
speaking with man's voice, forbad the madness of the prophet. When you shall
every one hear, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee, and
then whose shall all these things be, which thou have provided. Luke xii. 19,
20, 21."

"What men in the world does James speak to, if not to you -- James v. 1 to 4.
Go to now, ye rich men, weep and bowl for your miseries that shall come upon
you: Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are moth-eaten: your gold and
silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your flesh as it were fire: Ye have heaped treasure, together for the
last days: Behold the hire of the laborers which have reaped down your fields,
which is of you kept back by fraud, cries, and the cries of them which have
reaped, have entered the ears of the Lord of Sabbath;" How much more then the
cry of betrayed souls?

After these animadversions on the iniquity of holding and treating men as
slaves, for the private emolument of the possessors, he proceeds to consider
diverse cases under which men are held in bondage, from whence he adduces the
following conclusions.

"A nominal Christian, who by wickedness forfeiteth his life or freedom, may
penally be made a slave as well as an Infidel; and a poor and needy Christian
may sell himself into a harder state of servitude than he would choose, or we
could otherwise put him into; but to go aspirates, and catch up poor Negroes,
or people of another land, that never forfeited life or liberty, and to make
them slaves and sell them, is one of the worst kinds of thefts in the world,
and such persons are to be taken for the common enemies of mankind; and they
that buy them, and use them as beasts for their mere commodity, and betray, or
destroy, or neglect their souls, are fitter to be called incarnate Devils, than
Christians.

He then queries; "But what if men buy Negroes, or other slaves, of such as we
have just cause to believe did steal them by piracy, or buy them of those who
have no power to sell them, and not hire, or buy them by their own consent, or
by the consent of those who had power to sell them, nor take them captives.

And answers, "It is their heinous fin to buy them, unless it be in charity to
deliver them from slavery; having done it, undoubtedly they are presently bound
to deliver them, because, by right, the man is his own, and therefore, no man
else can have a just title to him.

Question, "But may I not sell him again, and make my money of him, seeing I
leave him as I found him --?

Answer, "No; Because when you have taken possession of him, and he becomes a
pretended property, then the injury that is done him is by you, which, before,
was only by another; and though the wrong be no greater than the other did him,
yet, being done by you, it is your sin.

Question, "But may I not return him to him that I bought him of?

Answer, "No; for that is but injuring him, by delivering him to another to
continue the injury: To say as Pilate (I am innocent of the blood of this just
man) will be no proof of your innocence: Yea, God's law binds you to love,
and works of love, and therefore you should do your best to free him. He that
is bound to help to save a man that is fallen into the hands of thieves, by the
high way, if he should buy that man, as a slave, of the thieves, may not after,
give him up to thieves again.

"If they be Infidels, use them so as tends to win them to Christ, and the
love of religion, by showing them that Christians are less worldly, less cruel
and less passionate, and more wise, charitable, holy and meek than any other
persons are. Woe to them, who by their cruelty, and covetousness, do scandalize
even slaves, and hinder their conversion and salvation. Remember that even a
slave may be one of those neighbors that you are bound to love as yourselves,
and to do unto as you would be done by, if your case was his, which, if you do,
you will need no more direction for his relief."

Extract from the Independent Gazetteer, dated Philadelphia* June 15, 1782,
viz. "The Liberality of Sentiment displayed in the following Letter, not only
evinces that the Author's Heart must be exceedingly Humanized, but that it
abounds with a Philanthropy, which reflects Honor to Human Nature.
Brussels, March 7.
"The Abbe Raynal, whom we have the happiness to possess, together with other
strangers, in this city, has just now received from a Quaker, in Philadelphia,
the following letter in French, the tendency of which, entitles it to
publication. It is presumed it will be read with pleasure.

My friend Abbe Raynal,
From the idea which I conceived of the justice and generosity of thy
sentiments, I took the liberty of writing to thee, about 7 or 8 months past,
under cover of my friend B. F. and likewise by J. B. who, we are afraid, was
lost on his passage. Having received no answer, by several vessels, nor knowing
whether my letters reached thee, or whether thine miscarried; and a good
opportunity offering, by my friend Dr. G. I now seize it to send thee two
copies of a small extract of the origin and principles of my brethren, the
Quakers, whom, I observe in such of thy writings which have come to our hands,
thou did not think unworthy of thy attention.

I have nothing to add to what I already wrote thee, but shall repeat my wish
of saluting thee affectionately, on the principles of reason and humanity,
which constitute that grand circle of love and charity, unconfined by our
parentage or country; but which, with affectionate cordiality, embraces the
whole creation, earnestly desiring, to the utmost of my abilities, to promote
the happiness of all men, even my enemies themselves, could I have any.

I beseech God to give thee strength, that thou may continue to hold up to
mankind, thy brethren, principles tending to replenish their hearts with
goodness, friendship and charity toward each other; that thus thou may do
the utmost of thy power, to render men reasonable, useful, and consequently
happy; and more especially, that thou may strenuously combat that false
principle of honor, or rather intolerable pride and folly, which so strongly
prevails in our nation, where the most indolent and the least useful fancy
themselves, and are reputed the most noble. Let us endeavor to make them
sensible, that men are noble but in an exact proportion to their being
rational. The happiness which is to be found in virtue alone, is sought for by
men, through the titles acquired by their fathers, for their activity in those
wars which have desolated the world, or in the wealth accumulated by their
ancestors; two means, generally unjust and oppressive, and consequently rather
the sources of shame and humiliation. For, as the Chinese Philosopher well
observed, "There is scarcely one rich man out of one hundred, who was not
himself an oppressor, or the son of an oppressor."

Let us display to princes and the rulers of nations the example of
Numa-Pompilius, who, by a Conduct opposite to that of Romulus, his predecessor,
and most of his successors, rendered the Romans, during his long reign, so
respectable and happy. Above all, my dear friend, let us represent to our
compatriots the abominable iniquity of the Guinea trade. Let us put to the
blush the pretended disciples of the benign Savior of the world, for the
encouragement given to the unhappy Africans, in invading the liberty of their
own brethren. Let us rise, and rise with energy, against the corruption,
introduced into the principles and manners of the masters and owners of slaves,
by a conduct so contrary to humanity, reason and religion. Let us be still more
vehement, in representing its baneful influence on the principles and manners
of their wretched offspring, necessarily educated in idleness, pride, and all
the vices to which human nature is liable.

How desirable it is that Lewis XVI, whose virtues and good dispositions have
been so nobly praised, would set an example to the other potentates of Europe,
by forbidding his subjects to be concerned in a traffic so evil in itself, and
so corrupt in its consequences, and that he would also issue out ordinances, in
favor of such of the Negroes who now are slaves in his dominions.

Alas! should Christianity, that law of love and charity, work its proper
effect on the hearts of its pretended disciples, we would see numbers of
Christians traverse Africa, and both the Indies, not to pollute themselves with
slavery and slaughter, nor to accumulate wealth, the supreme wish of the
present nominal Christians; but that Divine love would impel them to visit
remote regions, in order to make the inhabitants acquainted with the corruption
of the human heart, and invite them to seek for the influence of that grace,
proposed by the gospel, by which they may obtain salvation.

I am under the necessity of concluding hastily, requesting thou would excuse
faults which time does not allow me to correct, and to write to me by various
opportunities, the vessels bound to these parts, often missing their
destination.

I am, affectionately, thy friend, A. B.


To which the Abbot returned the following Answer,
Brussels, December 26, 1781.
Your letters, sir, have miscarried, except that of July 16, 1781, which
happily I received, together with the pamphlet, full of light and sensibility,
which accompanied it. Never was a present more agreeable to me. My satisfaction
was equal to the respect I have always had for the society of Quakers. May it
please Heaven to cause all nations to adopt their principles! Men would then be
happy; and the globe not stained with blood. Let us join in our supplications
to the Supreme Being, that he may unite us in the bonds of a tender and
unalterable charity.

I am, etc. RAYNAL.

THE CASE OF THE OPPRESSED AFRICANS.
WE are engaged, under a sense of duty, to bear a public testimony against a
species of oppression which, under the sanction of national authority, has long
been exercised upon the natives of Africa, is grown up into a system of
tyranny, and is unhappily become a considerable branch of the commerce of this
kingdom: An oppression which, in the injustice of its origin, and the
inhumanity of its progress, has not, we apprehend, been exceeded, or even
equalled, in the most barbarous ages.

We are taught, both by the holy scriptures, and by the experience of ages, to
believe that the Righteous Judge of the whole earth chastises nations for
their sins, as well as individuals; and can it be expected that he will suffer
this great iniquity to go unpunished? As the design of the institution of
government is for a terror to evil doers, and the praise of them that do well,
we wish it may be seriously considered, whether this has been made the rule of
its administration in this land. Will it not rather be found, on inquiry, that,
with respect to the enslaved Negroes, its benevolent purposes have been
perverted; that its terrors have fallen on the innocent, while evil doers, and
oppressors, have been openly encouraged?

But notwithstanding, government, in former times, have been induced by, what
we conceive to be a mistaken, as well as an unjust, policy, to promote this
evil, we are persuaded that many of the present members of the legislature, as
true friends of civil and religious liberty, hold this unrighteous traffic in
the utmost abhorrence. This persuasion, joined to the favorable reception of
the petition of our last Yearly Meeting, to the House of Commons, encourages us
to address you, thus freely, on this important subject; and we apprehend that
the abolition of this iniquitous practice is not only required by the calls of
justice and humanity, but is also consistent with sound policy. For avarice in
this, as in other instances, has defeated its own purpose. Africa, so populous,
and so rich in vegetable and mineral productions, instead of affording all the
advantages of a well regulated commerce, is scarcely known but as a mart for
slaves, and as the scene of violence and barbarities, perpetrated, in order to
procure them, by men professing the Christian religion.

The arguments which have been advanced by the few writers, who have attempted
to justify this inhuman business, can have no weight with generous minds.
Those, in particular, which are drawn from the permission to hold slaves among
the Jews, can in no wise be applied to the practice amongst us: For, blessed be
the God and Father of all our mercies, Acts xvii. 26.
who has made of one blood all nations of men, we now live under a
dispensation essentially different from that of the law; in which many things
were permitted to the Jews, because of the the hardness of their hearts. All
distinctions of name and country, so far as they relate to the social duties,
are now abolished. -- We are taught by our blessed Redeemer, to look upon all
men, even our enemies, as neighbors and brethren, and to do unto them as we
would they should do unto us.

Under a dispensation so admirably adapted to promote the temporal as well as
the eternal happiness of mankind, that any should deviate so far from its
principles, as to encourage a practice so replete with iniquity, and in
particular that this nation, generally characterized by its attachment to civil
and religious liberty, should have contributed, perhaps, more than any other,
to the establishment and continuance of slavery, is a most painful reflection.
It would surely have been more consistent with the avowed principles of
Englishmen, both as men and as Christians, if their settlement in heathen
countries had been succeeded by mild and benevolent attempts to civilize their
inhabitants, and to incline them to receive the glad tidings of the gospel. But
how different a conduct, toward them, has been pursued! it has not only been
repugnant, in a political view, to those commercial advantages which a fair and
honorable treatment might have procured, but has evidently tended to increase
the barbarity of their manners, and to excite in their minds an aversion to
that religion, the professors whereof so cruelly treat them.

This traffic is the principal source of the destructive wars which prevail
among these unhappy people, and it is attended with consequences, the mere
recital of which is shocking to humanity. The violent separation of the dearest
relatives, the tears of conjugal and parental affection, the reluctance of the
slaves to a voyage from which they can have no prospect of returning, must
present scenes of distress which would pierce the heart of any, in whom the
principles of humanity are not wholly effaced. This, however, is but the
beginning of sorrows with the poor captives. Under their cruel treatment on
shipboard, where, without regard to health or decency, hundreds are confined
within the narrow limits of the hold, numbers perish; and, by what is called
the seasoning in the islands, many are relieved by a premature death, from that
series of accumulated sufferings which awaits their less happy survivors. The
measure of their afflictions yet remains to be filled; being sold to the
highest bidder, and branded with a hot iron, they have yet to linger on,
unpitied, the whole term of their miserable existence, in excessive labor, and
too often under the merciless control of unprincipled and unfeeling men,
without proper food or clothing, or any encouragement to sweeten their toil;
whilst every fault, real, or imaginary, is punished with a rigor which is but
weakly restrained by the colony laws; instances of the greatest enormity, even
the most wanton or deliberate murder of the slaves, being only punished, if
punished at all, by trifling pecuniary fines.

But a bare enumeration of the calamities of this wretched people, would exceed
the limits proposed to this short address: We think it not improper, however,
to give the following extract from a late author, who was an eye witness of the
miseries of this persecuted race.

If we bring this matter home, and, as Job proposed to his friends, "Put our
soul in their souls stead;" if we consider ourselves, and our children, as
exposed to the hardships which these people lie under, in supporting an
imaginary greatness;

Did we, in such case, behold an increase of luxury and superfluity among our
oppressors, and therewith feel an increase of the weight of our burdens, and
expect our posterity to groan under oppression after us;

Under all this misery, had we none to plead our cause, nor any hope of relief
from man, how would our cries ascend to the God of the spirits of all flesh,
who judges the world in righteousness, and, in his own time, is a refuge for
the oppressed!

When we were hunger-bitten, and could not have sufficient nourishment, but saw
them in fullness, pleasing their taste with things fetched from far;

When we were wearied with labor, denied the liberty to rest, and saw them
spending their time at ease; when garments, answerable to our necessities, were
denied us, while we saw them clothed in that which was costly and delicate?

Under such affliction, how would these painful feelings rise up as witnesses
against their pretended devotion! And if the name of their religion were
mentioned in our hearing, how would it sound in our ears, like a word which
signified self-exaltation and hardness of heart!

When a trade is carried on productive of so much misery, and they who suffer
by it are some thousands of miles off, the danger is the greater of not laying
their sufferings to heart.

In procuring slaves from the coast of Africa, many children are stolen
privately; wars also are encouraged among the Negroes; but all is at a great
distance. -- Many groans arise from dying men, which we hear not. Many cries
are uttered by widows and fatherless children, which reach not our ears. Many
cheeks are wet with tears, and faces sad with unutterable grief, which we see
not. Cruel tyranny is encouraged. The hands of robbers are strengthened; and
thousands reduced to the most abject slavery, who never injured us.

Were we, for the term of one year only, to be eye witnesses to what passes in
getting these slaves; was the blood which is there shed, to be sprinkled on our
garments; were the poor captives, bound with thongs, heavy laden with elephants
teeth, to pass before our eyes, in their way to the sea;

Were their bitter lamentations, day after day, to ring in our ears, and their
mournsul cries in the night, to hinder us from sleeping!

Were we to hear the sound of the tumult, when the slaves on board the ships
attempt to kill the English, and behold the issue of those bloody conflicts;
what pious man could be a witness to these things, and see a trade carried on
in this manner, without being deeply affected with sorrow?

Our religious society in these kingdoms, and in North America, have for many
years tenderly sympathized with this unhappy people, under their complicated
sufferings, and have endeavored to procure them relief: Nor has their case
been without other advocates; whose numbers we have with much satisfaction
observed to increase. The expectation of many, who are anxiously concerned for
the suppression of this national evil, is now, under Providence, fixed upon the
wise and humane interposition of the legislature to whom, with dutiful
submission, we earnestly recommend the serious consideration of this important
subject; with a pleasing hope, that the result will be, a prohibition of this
traffic in future and an extension of such relief to those who already groan in
bondage, as justice and mercy may dictate, and their particular situations may
admit. That so the blessings of those who are ready to perish may rest upon
you, and this nation may no longer, on their account, remain obnoxious to the
righteous judgments of the Lord, who, in the most awful manner, declared by his
prophet, That the land should tremble Amos iv and viii. chap.
, and every one mourn that dwells therein, for the iniquity of those who
oppress the poor, and crush the needy; and who likewise pronounced a Woe
Jeremiah xxii. chap.
unto him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by
wrong; that uses his neighbor's service without wages, and gives him not for
his work.

Signed by order of the Meeting for Sufferings This meeting is composed of
about one hundred members residing in London, who are chosen by, and correspond
with, the meetings in the country. It was instituted, and thus named, during
the times of persecution (anno 1675) in order to receive accounts of the
sufferings of our members, and to solicit relief from those in power. It still
continues to superintend the general concerns of the society during the
intervals of the Yearly Meeting.
, London the 28th Day of the Eleventh Month, 1783, by JOHN ADY, CLERK of the
MEETING.

FINIS.
NOTES ON THE SLAVE TRADE.
IT may not be necessary to repeat what has been so fully declared in several
modern publications, of the inconsistence of slavery with every right of
mankind, with every feeling of humanity, and every precept of Christianity; nor
to point out its inconsistency with the welfare, peace and prosperity of every
country, in proportion as it prevails; what grievous sufferings it brings on
the poor NEGROES; but more especially what a train of fatal vices it produces
in their lordly oppressors and their unhappy offspring. Nevertheless for the
sake of some who have not met with, or fully considered those former
publications, and in hopes that some who are still active in support of slavery
may be induced to consider their ways, and become more wise, the following
substance of an address or expostulation made by a sensible Author, to the
several ranks of persons most immediately concerned in the trade, is now
republished.

"And first, to the Captains employed in this trade. Most of you know the
country of Guinea, perhaps now by your means, part of it is become a dreary
uncultivated wilderness; the inhabitants being murdered or carried away, so
that there are few left to till the ground; but you know, or have heard, how
populous, how fruitful, how pleasant it was a few years ago. You know the
people were not stupid, not wanting in sense, considering the few means of
improvement they enjoyed. Neither did you find them savage, treacherous, or
unkind to strangers. On the contrary they were in most parts a sensible and
ingenious people; kind and friendly, and generally just in their dealings. Such
are the men whom you hire their own countrymen to tear away from this lovely
country; part by stealth, part by force, part made captives in those wars which
you raise or foment on purpose. You have seen them torn away, children from
their parents, parents from their children: Husbands from their wives, wives
from their beloved husbands; brethren and sisters from each other. You have
dragged them who had never done you any wrong, perhaps in chains, from their
native shore. You have forced them into your ships, like an herd of swine, The
following relation is inserted at the request of the author.

That I may contribute all in my power toward the good of mankind, by
inspiring any of its individuals with a suitable abhorrence for that detestable
practice of trading in our fellow creatures, and in some measure atone for my
neglect of duty as a christian, in engaging in a wicked traffic, I offer to
their serious consideration, some few occurrences of which I was an eye
witness. That being struck with the wretched and affecting scene they may
foster that humane principle, which is the noble and distinguished
characteristic of man.

About the year 1749; I sailed from Liverpool to the coast of Gainea, some time
after our arrival, I was ordered to go up the country a considerable distance,
upon having notice from one of the Negroe Kings, that he had a parcel of slaves
to dispose of, I received my instructions and went, carrying with me an account
of such goods we had on board, to exchange for the slaves we intended to
purchase; upon being introduced, I presented him with a small case of spirits,
a gun and some trifles, which having accepted. and understood by an interpreter
what goods we had, the next day was appointed for viewing the Slaves; we found
about two hundred confined in one place. But here how shall I relate the
affecting fight I there beheld, the silent sorrow which appeared in the
countenance of the afflicted father, and the painful anguish of the tender
mother, expecting to be forever separated from their tender offspring; the
distressed maid wringing her hands in presage of her future wretchedness, and
the general cry of the innocent, from a fearful apprehension of the perpetual
Slavery to which they were doomed. I purchased eleven, who I conducted, tied
two and two, to our ship. Being but a small vessel (ninety ton) we soon
purchased our cargo, consisting of one hundred and seventy Slaves, whom thou
may reader range in thy view, as they were shackled two and two together,
pent up within the narrow confines of the main deck, with the complicated
distress of sickness, chains and contempt; deprived of every fond and social
tie and in a great measure reduced to a slave of desperation. We had not been a
fortnight at sea, before the fatal consequence of this despair appeared, they
formed a design of recovering their natural right, Liberty, by raising and
murdering every man on board; but the goodness of the Almighty rendered their
scheme abortive, and his mercy spared us to have time to repent: The plot was
discovered; the ring leader tied by the two thumbs over the barricado door, at
sun rise received a number of lashes; in this situation be remained till
sunset, exposed to the insults and barbarity of the brutal crew of sailers,
with full leave to exercise their cruelty at pleasure: The consequence was, the
next morning the miserable sufferer was found dead, fleed from the shoulders to
the waist. The next victim was a youth, who from too strong a sense of his
misery refused nourishment and died disregarded and unnoticed till the hogs had
fed on part of his flesh.


them who had souls immortal as your own. You have stowed them together as
close as ever they could lie, without any regard to decency or convenience --
And when many of them had been poisoned by soul air, or had sunk under various
hardships, you have seen their remains delivered to the deep, till the sea
should give up his dead. You have carried the survivors into the vilest
slavery, never to end but with life: Such slavery as is not found among the
Turks at Algiers, no, nor among the heathens in America.

May I speak plainly to you? I must. Love constrains me: Love to you, as well,
as those you are concerned with. Is there a God? You know there is. Is he a
just God? Then there must be a state of retribution: A state wherein the just
God will reward every man according to his work. Then what reward will he
render to you. O think betimes! before you drop into eternity: Think how, He
shall have judgment without mercy, that showed no mercy. Are you a man? Then
you should have a human heart. But have you indeed? What is your heart made of?
Is there no such principle as compassion there? Do you never feel another's
pain? Have you no sympathy? No sense of human woe? No pity for the miserable?
When you saw the flowing eyes, the heaving breast, or the bleeding sides and
tortured limbs of your fellow creatures. Was you a stone or a brute? Did you
look upon them with the eyes of a tiger? When you squeezed the agonizing
creatures down in the ship, or when you threw their poor mangled remains into
the sea, had you no relentings? Did not one tear drop from your eye, one sigh
escape from your breast? Do you feel no relenting now? If you do not, you must
go on till the measure of your iniquities is full. Then will the great God deal
with you, as you have dealt with them, and require all their blood at your
hands. And at that day it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah than
for you: But if your heart does relent; though in a small degree, know it: is a
call from the God of Love. And today, if you hear his voice, harden not your
heart -- To day resolve, God being your helper to escape for your life --
Regard not money: All that a man has will he give for his life. Whatever you
lose, lose not your soul; nothing can countervail that lose. Immediately quit
the horrid trade: At all events be an honest man.

This equally concerns every merchant who is engaged in the slave trade. It is
you that induce the African villain to sell his countrymen; and in order
thereto, to steal, rob, murder men, women and children without number: by
enabling the English villain to pay him for so doing; whom you over pay for his
execrable labor. It is your money, that is the spring of all, that improwers
him to go on, so that whatever he or the African does in this matter, is all
your act and deed. And is your conscience quite reconciled to this? Does it
never reproach you at all? Has gold entirely blinded your eyes and stupefied
your heart? Can you see, can you feel no harm therein? Is it doing as you would
be done to? Make the case your own. Master (said a slave at Liverpool to the
merchant that owned him) what if some of my countrymen were to come here, and
take away my mistress, and master Tommy and master Billy, and carry them into
our country and make them slaves, how would you like it? His answer was worthy
of a man: I will never buy a slave more while I live. O let his resolution be
yours! Have no more any part in this detestable business. Instantly leave it to
those unfeeling wretches, who laugh at humanity and compassion.

And this equally concerns every person who has an estate in our American
plantations: Yea all slave-holders of whatever rank and degree; seeing
men-buyers are exactly on a level with men-stealers. Indeed you say, I pay
honestly for my goods; and I am not concerned to know how they are come by. Nay
but you are: You are deeply concerned, to know that they are not stolen:
Otherwise you are partaker with a thief, and are not a jot honester than him.
But you know they are not honestly come by: You know they are procured by means
nothing near so innocent as picking of pockets, house breaking, or robbery upon
the highway. You know they are procured by a deliberate series of more
complicated villainy (of fraud, robbery and murder) than was ever practiced
either by Mahometans or Pagans; in particular by murders of all kinds; by the
blood of the innocent poured upon the ground like water. Now it is your money
that pays the merchant, and through him the captain and African butchers. You
therefore are guilty: Yea principally guilty, of all these frauds, robberies,
and murders. You are the spring that puts all the rest in motion; they would
not stir a flep without you -- Therefore the blood of all these wretches, who
die before their time, whether in their country or elsewhere, lies upon your
head. The blood of thy brother, (for whether thou will believe it or no, such
he is in the sight of him that made him) cries against thee from the earth,
from the ship and from the waters. O! whatever it cost, put a stop to its cry,
before it be too late. Instantly, at any price, were it the half of thy goods,
deliver thy self from blood guiltiness! Thy hands, thy bed, thy furniture, thy
house, thy land, are at present stained with blood. Surely it is enough;
accumulate no more guilt: Spill no more the blood of the innocent! Do not hire
another to shed blood! Do not pay him for doing it! Whether thou art a
Christian or no, show thy self a man; be not more savage than a lion or a bear.

Perhaps thou will say, I do not buy any NEGROES: I only use those left me by
my father. But is it enough to satisfy your own conscience! Had your father,
have you, has any man living, a right to use another as a Slave? It cannot be,
even setting REVELATION aside. It cannot be, that either war, or contract, can
give any man such a property in another as he has in his sheep and oxen: Much
less is it possible, that any child of man, should ever be born a Slave.
Liberty is the right of every human creature, as soon as he breathes the vital
air. And no human law can deprive him of that right, which he derives from the
law of nature. If therefore you have any regard to justice, (to say nothing of
mercy, nor of the revealed law of GOD) render unto all their due. Give Liberty
to whom Liberty is due, that is to every child of man, to every partaker of
human nature. Let none serve you but by his own act and deed, by his own
voluntary choice, away with whips, chains, and all compulsion. Be gentle
toward all men. And see that you invariably do unto every one, as you would he
should do unto you.


