OBSERVATIONS ON THE SLAVERY OF THE NEGROES, IN THE SOUTHERN STATES,
PARTICULARLY INTENDED FOR THE CITIZENS OF VIRGINIA, BY JUVENIS.

NEW YORK: Printed by W. Ross, at his Printing Office, No. 33, Broad-Street,
near the Exchange, M,DCC,LXXXV.

PREFACE.
THE Author of the following Sheets is fully sensible of the Defects which may
be discovered in them by the Eye of Criticism; but as it was not to establish
himself as a Writer, that he undertook at present to address the Public, be
flatters himself that they will look with Kindness on his Peformance; and hopes
that they will regard rather the Propriety of his Arguments, than the Language
in which they may be conveyed. -- That Zeal which he wishes to posses for the
Interest of his Country, so long as he shall continue to be a Citizen thereof,
induced him, at a very early Age, to offer his 'Sentiments to his fellow
Countrymen, on a Subject, which in his Opinion, involves in it not only the
Interest, but also the Honor and Dignity of the United States.

JUVENIS.

OBSERVATIONS,etc.
MANKIND in every age, and at every period of the world, have been unanimous in
their sentiments concerning Liberty, which they have universally esteemed as
one of the most sacred and invaluable blessings, -- as a right naturally
belonging to all, -- and of which no human authority could possibly divest
them. The human mind seems to have implanted in it by nature, a certain desire
after Freedom, which rendering the smallest degree of confinement or restraint,
irksome and intolerable, appears to have been given for the very purpose of
securing us in that state of Liberty and Independence, wherein we were all
born, and to which we have all indiscriminately a claim. But custom, whose laws
are arbitrary and tyrannical, has gained to great an ascendency over our
reason, that we are not surprised when we behold the most civilized and
enlightened nations, deviating from those simple and invariable rules of nature
which must be perceptible even to the most ignorant and unlearned people.
Blinded by it, the most virtuous and respectable people, have rendered
themselves contemptible, and degenerated into viciousness; and under its
influence, we may at present behold the virtuous citizens of America, giving
their sanction to a practice, which, in the criminality and injustice of its
nature, has not been exceeded by the people of the most barbarous ages.

THE Slavery of the unfortunate Africans, is the practice to which I advert. It
is a practice of the most shameful and inhuman nature, and demands the
attention of every citizen who would wish to be esteemed either virtuous or
honest; for honestly does not always consist in a strict adherence to the laws,
which are frequently defective in their nature, and in many instances give
sanction to the most fraudulent dealings. In order to avoid error, and the
commission of injustice, we need only to consult our own bosoms; where the
virtuous and honest man will meet with an approbation of his conduct; and the
vicious and dishonest man, although patronized and protected by the laws, will
meet with reprehension, for his dishonesty and baseness. It is to this
tribunal, and not to that of the laws, that I wish to submit the propriety of
the practice at present in debate. For although by the laws of our country we
may be licensed in the enslaving of the Negroes, and in treating them in what
manner we please, nevertheless, as those laws are of our own creation, and may
consequently be replete with error and injustice, it becomes those who are the
authors thereof, to inspect into the nature of them, and to abrogate whatever
part of them may be improper, or inconsistent with those superior laws of
nature; on which all laws, if either rightful or just, must indubitably be
founded.

THAT all men have naturally a right to Liberty, and that to deprive them of
it, is the most arbitrary and unauthorized extension of power (even if there
were no other laws in existence which respected it, and if our own reason did
not very evidently point it out to us) must most manifestly appear from the
repeated declarations of our Congress, and the Constitutions of the different
States; all of which, in the most positive manner assert, that all men are
possessed of certain natural, inherent rights, of which they cannot be
divested, but by the most arbitrary and unjustifiable measures.

IT is an invariable and an undoubted maxim, that wherever there is a right
existing on the one part, there must necessarily be an obligation on the other;
that is, if the Negroes are rightfully entitled to their liberty, there is a
consequent obligation on us, not to injure or molest them in the peaceable
enjoyment of it, since it would be the height of absurdity to suppose that they
could possess a just and unalienable title to their freedom* and that we could
at the same time be possessed of an equal right of depriving them of it.

THE only question therefore which can arise on a mature consideration of the
subject, is in my opinion this, Are the Negroes men? For if they be men, and if
all men have a right to liberty, as is universally acknowledged, and as you
also most particularly assert, they must indubitably, as men, be entitled to a
participation of that right; and you, consequently, nor no other nation in the
world, can rightfully deprive them of it.

UNDER what pretext then do we retain them; or rather, with what justice did we
at first reduce them from a state of liberty, to that of the most abject
servitude? For since we cannot possibly discover in the laws of nature, which
are the basis of all rightful laws, any rightful power which we can have, to
exercise the smallest degree of authority over the Africans, more than over any
other nation in the world, those persons who can persuade themselves that the
enslaving them is not one of the most unwarrantable and inhuman practices that
ever characterized the people of any country, or time, must either be entirely
divested of every sentiment of humanity, -- or must be so extremely ignorant as
to suppose that the Creator of the universe made a discrimination between the
White People and the Negroes, with respect to their privileges, and that he
gave the preeminence to the White People; to whom it became the Negroes, either
on account of their unbecoming color, or as M. Montescue very ironically
observes, of their short and curly hair, to be obedient and submissive; -- a
supposition which however ridiculous it may be, is nevertheless not more so
than many others which are used by the proprietors of Negroes, in vindication
of their conduct.

THE introduction of the Negroes into this country, was one of the greatest
proofs which the British crown could give, of their tyranny and baseness. In
order to increase the population of the country, they did not think it
sufficient to send over a number of criminals, who being detrimental to society
were unworthy of living longer in their own country, but also by the
establishment of the Guinea trade, sent over thousands of miserable wretches,
over whom we were privileged to exercise the most unlimited authority, for the
purpose of promoting the wealth and richness of the then colonies, and the
consequent advantages to the mother country. This traffic obtained immediately
the countenance of the laws, by means of the British governors on the
continent, who studious only of the interest of the crown, were ready to adopt
any measures which might have a tendency to increase it. But however flagrant
the injustice, or however glaring the insolence of the measure, I am sorry to
observe that they have passed away entirely unnoticed; and that although free, we
still pursue a practice which would have rendered us contemptible, even as the
subjects of a different power. Many of our citizens are irrational enough or at
least are so blinded by their interest, as to imagine t hat the purchase of the
Negroes from the British, or those acting under their authority, was sufficient
of itself to afford a rightful and complete title, not only to them but also to
their posterity forever. But those persons might, with as much propriety,
contend that the purchase of any article from a thief, who had wrongfully
gotten it into his possession, would have an effect to deprive the original
possessor of his right, and to vest it in the purchaser; which would be
entirely to overthrow that just, though simple maxim, which informs us that no
man can give that which is not his own; and would open a field to the
commission of every species of dishonesty and fraud.

IT must unavoidably inspire with horror, a mind possessed of the most trifling
portion of sensibility, to reflect on the many and enormous cruelties which
have been practiced toward those ignorant and inoffensive people, by the
consent of our government, and under the sanction of our laws. The wars which
have been carried on among them for a series of years, have taken their rise,
in a great measure, from the lucrative dispositions of those nations which may
have promised to themselves a considerable profit from the sale of those whom
they might have captured from another nation, less numerous and less powerful
than themselves.

THE barbarous and uncivilized people make war, and the civilized and
enlightened people share with the victorious in the cruel and deplorable
consequences of it. It is true that we have not been spectators, but we may
very easily form a judgment of the horrors and distress which have been the
necessary and inevitable consequences of those savage wars. Our ears have not
been saluted by the groans of wounded and of dying wretches, nor have our eyes
beheld the outrages and devastations which have been committed by the
conquerors, on the country of the vanquished. We hear not the sighs of parents
for their unfortunate children, nor the cries of children for their absent
parents; of whose protection and assistance, death or an extensive ocean, must
forever deprive them. We hear not the reiterated lamentations of the husband
for his wife, or of the wife for her husband; but we behold those very persons
when they arrive in our country, where, with all these agonizing and torturing
reflections, -- after having been dragged away from their friends, relations,
and every thing that could be dear to them, -- after having been cast into a
nauseous dungeon, and brought through tempestuous seas, instead of meeting with
a little consolation, or receiving something which might in some degree,
compensate for their liberty, they are compelled to labor continually in the
fields, and to undergo all the additional miseries and distress of which the
human mind is susceptible; and to suffer the most excruciating tortures the
body can possibly endure, or the unrelenting hand of cruelty can inflict. But
not content with the barbarity and injustice which we exercise upon the
fathers, we have extended our inhumanity still farther, toward their guiltless
and unoffending offsprings. From whom do we derive an authority over them? Is
the unborn infant, involved also in the fate of its unhappy parent? Is it
because distant from its country and its friends, cut off from every right and
every privilege of Men? Or do we rather constitute ourselves beings of a
superior order, and determine to visit upon it, and its posterity forever, the
calamities of its father?

IF we cannot justify ourselves in the commission of such acts as these, upon
principles of right: If in the place of law or justice, we substitute violence
and superior force, then are we again returned to that state of anarchy and
disorder, wherein one man may seize upon another's property, injure his person,
or even take away his life, without the dread of punishment, or the
apprehension of being compelled to make the smallest degree of restitution for
the injury which he may have done. If force be our law, then do we subject
ourselves to the government of the Negroes, whenever by their numbers they may
be rendered capable of exercising it. The law by which we hold them, being in
their favor, we cannot reckon it unjust that they should wrest the rod of
despotism from our hand, and inflict it with as little humanity on us as we
have been accustomed to inflict it upon them.

IF we would but consider for a moment, the origin of the contest between
Great Britain and ourselves, and would but condescend to compare their
situation with respect to us, to our then situation with respect to what was at
that time called the Mother Country, we shall be able to discover the injustice
of our conduct toward the Africans, in a plainer and more conspicuous light.
What, in the first place, was the cause which induced us into that war? -- a
war, which although justifiable, was as cruel and unnatural as, that between a
parent and a child. Was it not the apprehension which we entertained, of a
disposition in the Mother Country to incroach upon our natural Liberties, and
to divest us of those privileges to which all mankind are entitled, and which
we considered as our birthright? We were not in a situation similar to that of
the Negroes, nor could we apprehend that the British crown ever had it in
contemplation to reduce us to such an one; yet notwithstanding, possessed of a
just and lively sense of our rights, we contemned the idea of being subject to
the insolence and caprice of a Parliament; and were led on to break every tie
of relationship, of friendship and affection, rather than to suffer tamely,
what we considered as an unwarrantable exercise of power. But how much more
deplorable than ours could have been, must be the situation of the Negroes in
our country. They do not enjoy any of those privileges which we esteemed so
essential to our existence, as to hazard our lives in order to obtain them. In
point of liberty, they are by no means to be considered as superior to the
Brutes in our fields, and are inferior to those who range the forests, and
partake of nature's gifts. The world has at all times afforded us examples of
licentiousness and vice; but if we can reflect on all these, circumstances
which respect our fellow creatures, without commiserating their fate, or making
a single effort, in order to relieve them of it, we may assure ourselves that
the history of our time will equal that of our most barbarous predecessors, in
the number of examples which it will furnish both of licentiousness and
depravity.

THE United States of America, have, by one of the most vigorous exertions that
ever adorned the page of ancient or of modern history, established to
themselves that Liberty and Independence which they so ardently desired; and to
which, as men, they conceived they had a claim. -- Their Legislators are the
guardians of that Liberty; but how inconsistently with the sacred nature of
their trust, and the dignity of their station, do they conduct themselves!
Whilst with one hand they are vigorously supporting the standard of Liberty,
they are exercising with the other, the rod of Slavery and Despotism; -- whilst
engaged in preserving their constitutions from violation or infraction, they
violate one of its most essential articles, and subvert the very basis on which
it is constructed. By their constitutions it is declared, that Liberty is
inherently the property of all; and nevertheless, in open violation of that
principle, (to which one would suppose they are not only bound by every tie of
justice, but also of honor, to comply) they deprive more than two-thirds of
their inhabitants of their freedom, without being able to assign a single
reason for which they do it, or offering a single argument in vindication of
the measure.

IF we properly consider the principles by which the human mind is most
generally actuated, we shall be induced also to believe the injustice of this
practice is not more flagrant, than its consequences may in time be
detrimental. The most ignorant and unenlightened nations may, like those who
have already become civilized and enlightened, emerge from their state of
ignorance and incogitancy, and be possessed of the same sentiments of their
dignity and right, with those who exist in a state of liberty and refinement;
-- and should the Negroes, while living in subjection to us, acquire those
sentiments, and be divested of those servile notions by which they are at
present influenced, what should we not have to apprehend from their indignation
and resentment. When created by a sense of injuries sustained, how dreadful,
and how greatly to be apprehended, are the insurrections of the injured; --
imbecility, or a want of numbers, can alone be sufficient to prevent them from
gratifying their revenge, by retaliating fully on their oppressors. It would be
prudent then to consider well these consequences, before the time come when we
may probably experience them. If we have no regard to the justice, let us at
least pay some attention to the policy of our practices, which in the present
instance would, I am convinced, be sufficient to induce us to divest ourselves
of our property in Negroes, as speedily as possible; for the profits which are
derived from them, are in my opinion, too trifling to render it our interesst
to retain them.

PROPORTIONABLE to the number of slaves, must be the quantity of one's land;
and by how much the greater may be the number of them, by so much the greater
must be the quantity of provision, and the additional expenses which attend a
family; so that, as the profit is increased on the one hand, it is
counterbalanced by the expenses which inevitably attend it on the other. The
number of the Negroes in the southern States, and particularly in that of
Virgina, daily continues to increase; while that of the White People, by reason
of the emigrations to other parts of the country, continues as rapidly to
decrease. -- The poor man, whose land is already almost worn out by
cultivation, induced to dispose of it to his more wealthy neighbor, (whose
necessities for territory annually increasing, is obliged to purchase that
which may be most convenient to him) appropriates the money which he obtains by
the sale of his land, to the purchase of other in a more fertile country, where
he may obtain a sufficiency for himself, upon more moderate terms. This has
occasioned the very great emigrations which have been made, for several years
past, from the adjacent States, to the settlement of Kentucke; where the
fertility of the country, and the smallness of their taxable possessions,
render their subsistence more easy, and consequently their life more agreeable
to them.

THE Negroes will always in time of war, prove injurious to the country wherein
they live; for being naturally inimical to those who are their oppressors, they
will avail themselves of every opportunity which may offer, of liberating
themselves from their oppression: And as an enemy will never fail to seize
every occasion of the kind, we may with safety conclude, that the Country or
State which possesses a considerable number of slaves, is incapable of
defending itself against invasions from abroad; and whenever attacked, will
unavoidably become an easy conquest to its invaders.

CONSIDERING every circumstance therefore which relates both to policy and
right, we are bound by the duty which we owe to humanity and ourselves, to
adopt the most immediate and effectual mode of abolishing a practice, in its
nature so tyrannical, and so unworthy of mankind. -- Let Liberty, of whom we
have so rapturously spoken, and in whose cause we have so obstinately fought,
preside universally over our country, and be the directress of our steps. --
Let that patriotic spirit, of which we so greatly boast, display itself in our
conduct in the present instance; and then, and not till then, shall we be a
virtuous and an honest people. -- Let our conduct be always uniformly just as
well toward our own citizens, as toward those of other nations. -- Let this
rising country be forever an example of virtuous patriotism and unblemished
faith. -- Expel from its shores the advocates of despotism and cruelty; and as
we have obtained our Liberty, so let us watch over and protect it.

WHEN nations or individuals, act inconsistently with those principles by which
they have professed themselves to be led and actuated, they render themselves
contemptible in the eyes of all who are spectators of their conduct; and
destroy all the confidence and faith which might have been previously reposed
in them.

AFTER the effusion of so much blood in the defense of our rights, (which we
did not consider as peculiarly belonging to ourselves, but as the unalienable
property of all mankind) let us evince to the world that our sentiments are
equally noble with our declarations; that we are in reality guided by that love
of Liberty which induced us into the field of battle, and that hatred of
usurpation with which our minds have apparently been fraught.

THE memory of those who have fallen in our cause, who have bled in the support
of our honor and our rights, requires that we should be vigilant of what we
have obtained, so that they may not have bled for us in vain; that a
remembrance of the ransom which they have given for our Liberty, may not be
effaced from our minds; but that its benefits may be equally imparted to all
our countrymen, and impartially diffused throughout all the States.

THE subject is plain, and I should conceive that it would be to doubt both
your understanding and humanity, to expatiate longer on it, or to offer more
arguments, in order to prove what in its nature is self-evident and simple.
What I have laid down for your perusal, has been dictated by the highest zeal
for your prosperity and welfare. -- It has been dictated by those principles of
humanity which I shall always esteem it as the greatest Happiness to possess;
and although it should be of no effect, and should pass away entirely
disregarded, I shall console myself with this agreeable reflection, -- "That my
motives were commendable and good." On the contrary, should it contribute in
the least to call up your consideration on the subject, which is all that I
conceive to be necessary to the acquiring so desirable an end, I shall deem
myself inimitably happy and sufficiently rewarded, in the abolition of a
practice, which involves in it consequences of so important a nature to the
inhabitants of this Continent.

JUVENIS.


