THE GOLDEN AGE: OR, FUTURE GLORY OF NORTH AMERICA DISCOVERED BY AN ANGEL TO
CELADON, IN SEVERAL ENTERTAINING VISIONS. VISION I.

-- Ferrea
Desinet, ac toto surget gens aurea Mundo.
Virgil Eclog IV. Thus Englished, The iron past, a golden Age shall rise,
And make the whole World happy, free, and wise.


BY CELADON.

PRINTED in the Year M,DCC,LXXXV.

TO THE READER.
IT is thought proper for certain reasons, to publish these VISIONS of the
pious CELADON in separate pieces. -- Should this first one meet with suitable
encouragement, the others may appear in due time. -- If not, they must lie in
darkness, and be buried in oblivion.

Your humble servant, THE EDITOR.

THE GOLDEN AGE, etc.
IN one of our American States, lives the retired and devout Celadon. A man
strictly honest, and a real lover of his country. That such is his true
character, appears by the whole tenor of his conduct for several years past.

During our late noble contest with British fury, he signalized himself above
many of his equals in age and fortune. Not contented to plead the glorious
cause of liberty in private only, he bravely entered the bloody field, and
actually served several campaigns, in vindication of our common rights. Nor did
he once discover the least timidity in the day of battle.

Since the restoration of peace, and establishment of our independency, he,
like another Daniel, has been anxious to know the future condition of his
people -- and what may be the consequences of a revolution so extraordinary in
itself -- which is the wonder of the present, and will probably be the joy of
many succeeding generations.

Often musing on this delightful subject, he was at last indulged with an
agreeable vision, which gave him the greatest satisfaction. This, as related by
himself, is faithfully recorded in the following pages.

Having walked out on a summer's evening, and grown weary, I sat down on the
verdant bank of a neighboring stream, leaning against a tree, whose spreading
branches sheltered me from the solar blaze. In this easy posture, I was awhile
delighted with the music of the groves. The murmuring waters below, and
chirping birds, -- together with the sighing gales above, soothed my
imagination, and by degrees, lulled every ungrateful care to rest; 'till, in
short, I fell into a kind of drowsy trance.

Whilst thus dissolved in slumberous indolence, lo, to my apprehension, a
wondrous form darting from the sky swift as the lightning's flash, stood before
me. -- His countenance sparkled like the morning star: And his robes outshone
the glowing brilliancy of the rainbow. All nature seemed to smile at his
approach. -- The hills and vales rejoiced together; and the trees of the wood
clapped their hands. -- I indeed, was at first smitten with a trembling awe, as
in the presence of so superior a being. But perceiving an ineffable sweetness
in his looks, and nothing vindictive in his aspect; this at length recovered my
dejected spirit -- so that I ventured to accost him with words to this effect;
and was kindly answered as in the sequel.

Celadon. Good Angel! For such I am convinced you are, may I know your errand?
What strange cause could induce you to leave the mansions of light, and
condescend to visit this wretched, fallen, and offending world?


Angel. My present business is, to resolve certain doubts with which you have
been lately puzzled, and to give you intelligence respecting several as yet
unknown events, whereby, you and others may be comforted, and encouraged to
stand fast in a resolute attachment to the glorious cause of truth, and the
inviolable interest of American freedom and independency.


Celadon. Dare a poor mortal ask, by what name to honor your dignity? And what
rank you bear among the Empyreal Hierachies?


Angel. Inquire not after my name, for it is secret -- but, as to my present
station, I belong to a bright squadron of Seraphic warriors, who are appointed
as guardians of these confederated States. -- We inspired your statesmen with
wisdom, and your heroes with courage, in all their late gallant struggles for
freedom. -- We baffled the counsels of your enemies, and struck terror into
their hearts; insomuch, that they often fled without any visible pursuer -- Yet
were we but generous instruments at most. God himself was the supreme agent. --
He it was, that succeeded your enterprises: and at last, crowned your combined
forces with victory. -- Without his blessing, neither men nor angels could have
saved America, from the rapacious jaws of tyranny and oppression. To him
therefore, let all the glory be ascribed for ever.


Celadon. What you have now said, might be sufficient was it disputable before,
to convince the whole world, that America was very right in casting off the
British yoke.


Angel. Her so doing was in every view, a most equitable transaction. -- That
once flourishing kingdom, having reached the zenith of temporal grandeur, has
been several years on the decline. -- Britain was once indeed, a land of
patriots and heroes. But now alas! The majority of her sons are lamentably
degenerated. In days of old, what zealous advocates for freedom were they! --
The very name of bondage made the whole nation start, as at the sight of an
infernal ghost! -- But of late they seem determined as by some strange
fatality, to introduce an arbitrary and despotic government -- a submission to
which, is the reproach of reason, and a scandal to humanity. It was therefore,
the indispensable duty of these States to resolve on an entire separation; as
from a family deeply infected with the plague. Even the law of
self-preservation required it.


Celadon. And may not our legislators also, follow their example? Allured by
the splendid baits of lucre and ambition, will they not hereafter aspire to
absolute sovereignty themselves? Should that be the case, we have no great
reason to triumph. It would only be changing one imperious lord for another. A
doleful recompense that, for the rivers of blood we have spilt, and the
millions of gold we have spent.

Tyranny will always prove the same insatiable, sanguinary, cruel monster, in
whatever shape she appears; and in whatever part of the globe she reigns*


Angel. All sublunary things are subject to mutation. The greatest empires have
had their birth, their growth, their maturity, and their fall. Nor can America,
should the world stand long enough, expect an exemption from the usual
vicissitudes of fortune. -- Yet, such a change is not likely to happen very
soon. -- A republic being composed of many parts, is not so liable to enslaving
measures, as monarchies in general are. -- The States will doubtless watch over
one another with the strictest vigilance. So that no gross innovation can long
lie concealed, but must soon be discovered and detected, by that matchless
sagacity with which this country is distinguished -- and is indeed, one of your
peculiar characteristics as a nation. May you never forfeit it, by wilfully
shutting your eyes against the truth, as too many others have done!


Celadon. Yet should some foreign power, cast an avaricious eye on our fertile
fields, and blooming forests, how could we repel the encroachment? Should they
invade our territories in their infancy, and before our constitution is well
settled, might we not be reduced to the basest vassalage after all? -- A burnt
child dreads even the most distant thought of fire!


Angel. If you live in amity and concord, there can be no danger of that
calamity; especially if you join to suppress vice, and encourage virtue. --
Whilst you labor to worship God in sincerity, and promote the interest of
religion and morality, you need fear no external enemy; nor dread any hostile
invasion. -- Your country is so situated, that it would prove very difficult,
if not morally speaking, impossible, to subdue it by outward force. -- It needs
no artificial bulwark, or sumptuous fortification. -- Nature itself, has made
it impregnable. -- And which is much more: As long as you retain your
integrity, the Lord of Hosts will be with you; the God of Jacob will be your
refuge. -- Nothing can ruin America, but the degeneracy of her own offspring.
-- Beware of that, and you may be easy on all other accounts.


Celadon. Good news! But, may not the now United States differ among
themselves! Should they hereafter quarrel with one another, it would certainly
be to their mutual injury. Yea, perhaps, prove destructive to the whole empire.
-- Divide, and overthrow them, is Satan's maxim -- the ancient logic of that
malignant spirit.


Angel. Should they do so, they must blame themselves for their own perdition.
And like self-murderers, die contemned; and be buried in the horrid vaults of
infamy. -- But, this is not likely to happen, without some great, and general
depravity of manners. -- Seeing each State is of itself independent, as to its
own internal jurisdiction; and enjoys all the immunities it can desire as a
distinct substantive commonwealth; what ground can there be for jealousy or
emulation, for envy or bickerment between them? -- These atrocious fiends will,
it is hoped, never prevail in this new and flourishing continent. On the
contrary, the inhabitants daily tasting the delicious sweets of equal freedom,
will, you may trust my word, be more and more united, and join as one mighty
champion to maintain the tranquillity of the whole community.


Celadon. Should this be our propitious lot, we shall probably increase in
number very fast. Which will by consequence, augment our warlike force* and be
a continual addition to our national strength. So that by a long course of
prosperity, we may become as the sand on the sea shore for multitude.


Angel. Multiply you doubtless will; and that to a prodigy. To this, not only
your own fruitfulness, but continual emigration from several parts of the world
will annually contribute. -- The poor, the oppressed, and the persecuted will
fly to America as doves to their windows. -- This Western-World will be the
dernier resort, the last refuge, and asylum for afflicted merit. -- Nor will
room be wanting. This continent is the largest, and will be the most populous
empire upon earth: Provided, the pride and luxury of the inhabitants, do not
prove an obstacle to its growth. -- Of all such enormities therefore, they will
do well timely to beware: which, as history informs you, have in past ages,
sapped the foundations of, and laid the most opulent and powerful states in
ruins.


Celadon. Heaven grant they ever may! But alas! The relentless Indians are
still ravaging our helpless frontiers. Their perpetual depredations will, it is
feared, greatly retard the population of our as yet woodland regions. The
related horrors of their scalping massacres, have hitherto prevented not a few
in their designs of removing thither.


Angel. That impediment is not likely to last very long. Their ammunition will
soon be spent. Nor can their game last many years. -- The deer, buffalo, etc.
will gradually grow scarce; and at last fail of course. -- So that in
conclusion, they will find themselves under a necessity of working, or
starving. -- Hunger will compel them to sue for peace. They will apply to
Congress for an assured settlement of their own, which being granted, they will
betake themselves to honest labor; and by industry in due time become a
polite, wealthy, and pious nation.


Celadon. Pious! And will such savages ever be converted to Christianity! When
at present, they seem to be implacable enemies to the name of Christ!


Angel. You may be assured of it. -- Why this paroxism of admiration? Your
progenitors, the now refined Britons, were formerly as wild Pagans, as rank
Idolaters, and as averse to embracing the gospel as the Indians now are. --
Remember, it is God's work to convert men. Divine power can do every thing. --
And time may produce yet greater wonders. Every operation is alike easy to
omnipotence.


Celadon. And what is to be done with the poor Negroes? Nothing! There are vast
crowds of them in some States. -- And is not their rigorous servitude an odious
blot in our scutcheon of honor? -- Wretched creatures! Must they alone remain
in irrevocable bondage? I hope not.


Angel. No, they too, shall in the proper season be set at liberty. -- A tract
of land will be allowed them. -- They shall be furnished with implements of
husbandry, and every thing necessary to begin the world with. -- They will by
degrees form a State of their own. -- And at length also, prove a rich, a
religious, and useful people. But there must be time for their manumission. It
cannot be done at once.


Thus saying the Angel as I thought, took me up in his arms, and in an instant
set me down again on the top of an exceeding high mountain. -- This mountain
stands in the center of North America; and for altitude surmounts all others.
-- It is in figure like a broken globe. And for circumference about thirteen
geographical miles. -- This stately ridge seems to claim the monarchy of the
atlantic hills: Being crowned with an ever glowing verdure. -- The trees which
adorn its towering summit, are clad with unfading green. -- Cedar, pine,
laurel, etc. are the principal product of the irriguous soil. It put me in mind
of the famous Helicon, so often celebrated by the poets, as the native
residence of the muses. -- Especially, as I perceived several limpid springs
bursting from its sides, and flowing in fertilizing meanders through the
circumjacent plains, and refreshing the vales below. -- I stood on a large
rock, placed about the middle of the mountain; and somewhat higher than any
other part of it. This stone too is of a circular form, and makes a beautiful
appearance; for it looks like polished marble.

Then the Angel washed my eyes with a crystaline elixir, which he carried in a
pearly phial. Whereupon I found my visive faculty amazingly strengthened: So
that I could distinctly view the whole continent from shore to shore.

This done, he bid me turn to the east. I did so. And looking from north to
south, what a grand and majestic prospect was presented to my sight!

Several spacious cities, and a great many thriving towns already founded. --
What a thick conjunction of farms, plantations, gardens, orchards, vineyards,
etc. laden with every kind of fruit! -- How charmingly diversified with lofty
hills, and flowery dales! Extensive forests, and shady groves! How plentifully
watered with living fountains, purling rills, and navigable rivers throughout
the whole; for fifteen hundred miles in length, and near a thousand in breadth!
-- And what elegant buildings adapted to all the purposes of life, both civil
and religious! -- I stood, and gazed with pleasing astonishment, till the Angel
ordered me to turn my face westward. I obeyed, and was equally surprised at the
wide extended landscape.

This western part of America, is as yet but an uncultivated desert; the haunt
of savages; and range of wild beasts. -- But the soil in general is much richer
than that of the eastern division. The rivers too, are larger, and flow in
greater numbers. The mountains indeed are numerous, and very high: Yet between
them lie exceeding wide and level valleys; and to appearance fertile as the
plains of Shinar, which they say, used to yield an hundred fold. I also
perceived, that the settled part of our continent, is really but a little spot
in comparison of the vast regions to whitemen as yet unknown.

Upon the whole, lost in wonder I could not avoid falling into this agreeable
reflection, whilst surveying a beauteous world rising out of a dreary
wilderness.

It is as yet, scarce three hundred years since this quarter of the globe was
first discovered by the European nations. Nor is above one hundred years
elapsed, since any considerable improvements have been made in this northern
continent. Yet at this day it contains by computation, at least three millions
of Christain inhabitants; beside the heathenish tribes. Of whom there is
perhaps, a much greater number than are yet registered in our accounts of those
formidable warriors. -- How rapid must have been the growth of my native
country! When in that short space of time, it has arisen to such a degree of
wealth and grandeur, as to be able not only to cope with, but to bid defiance
to Great Britain itself. A power, which for ages past, was renowned for
military prowess; and famous for victory and triumph. -- Blessed art thou O
America! Thou shall both do great things, and shall still prevail!

How long I might have remained in this contemplative rapture I cannot tell,
had not the Angel recalled my attention by a gentle touch on my side, and
pointing his finger a little to the south-west, Celadon, says he, do you see
yonder long valley. -- How full of the choicest timber! What fine springs it
contains! And how many perennial rivers glide through it, at suitable
distances! -- That whole region you may call Savagenia: It being designed for
the future habitation of your now troublesome Indians. -- And that other
valley; it is you may notice, as well wooded, and watered, and every way
furnished with all the preparative accommodations for human life, as the first
I showed you. It lies toward the north-west; and enjoys of the two, the
clearest air; and by consequence, will prove the healthiest climate. -- This
you may call Nigrania: It being allotted for the Negroes to dwell there, when
the term of their vassalage is come to a period. -- And in all those vast
spaces westward to the great ocean, there may be seats hereafter for sundry
foreign nations. -- There may be a French, a Spanish, a Dutch, an Irish, an
English, etc. yea, a Jewish State here in process of time. -- And all of them
united in brotherly affection, will at last form the most potent empire on the
face of the earth.

Celadon. And is it possible! Pray what can ever urge that deluded people to
come hither also?


Angel. Since their total expulsion from Palestine, they have been scattered as
with a whirlwind, and dispersed into all lands. -- They are every where hated
and despised. -- They are, as was foretold by their prophets, become a proverb,
a taunt, an astonishment, an hissing, and execration in every part of the
habitable world. -- But, at last, hearing the unbounded benevolence of the
generous Americans toward all nations; and the unlimited toleration by them
granted to every sect, and form of religion; they will hereafter, gather in
crowds, and fly to this continent as swarming bees to their chosen resting
place; and they will be received without opposition. -- A settlement will be
granted them in that pleasant spot, which you see reaching from a long chain of
mountains westward to the sea. -- There they will join in civil society,
according to their own notions of policy. Their state will be called
New-Canaan. And on the banks of that copious, and gently flowing river, they
will in time build a magnificent city, which may be fitly named the
New-Jerusalem.


Celadon. And will this now rejected people ever embrace the gospel, and
profess the Christian religion?


Angel. Yes. When the full era of their derelicton is accomplished, they shall
do so. -- Grown weary of waiting for their Messiah, and convinced at length
that he is already come, they will humbly acknowledge their once crucified King,
heartily bow to his scepter; and serve him with a fervency, that will excite
even Pagans to emulation; and be a shame to you Christains: Who though in
general you are very zealous for the several forms, are many of you, utter
strangers, and some of you open enemies to the power of Godliness. -- In one
word, they will transcend you in all the beauties of holiness, far as the star
of evening outshines the languid constellations of the milky-way. Insomuch,
that the real children of God in those days, will be surprised at their own
former lukewarmness in the awful concerns of another world.


Celadon. Thrice happy event! The Lord hasten it. That occurrence will probably
have a blessed influence toward the resuscitation of primitive piety, which was
the splendid ornament of christianity in the apostolic age. But seems at
present, like a plant in the drought of summer; which by long fading has lost
much both of its original verdure and fragrancy.


Angel. You are not mistaken. The conversion of the Jews, will be as life from
the dead to the Gentile church. -- It will greatly animate and revive true
believers themselves. -- It will awaken many formal professors to
righteousness. -- And will also, startle and alarm multitudes of stupid
wretches, who had long slumbered in carnal security, even under the sound of
the gospel. -- In short; it will be nothing less than the commencement of that
stupendous work, which your divines justly denominate, the glory of the latter
days. -- This is that most illustrious operation of sovereign mercy, for which
you have heard several pious ministers so often pray: And of which they speak
in such high and lofty strains. -- In America God has determined to begin his
last and greatest wonders among mankind. -- And in the west shall that
propitious cloud arise, whose salutary shower will in the end refresh, and in
an evangelical sense fructify the whole continent. -- It will water the Jewish
state first; and in progression, borne as on the wings of the wind, visit all
the rest, until the whole wilderness is gladdened by the nectareous drops, and
the desert is made to rejoice, and blossom as the rose. -- It shall blossom
abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing.


Celadon. And is this gracious visitation to be limited only to our American
shores; and must it reach no farther than our western coasts?


Angel. No indeed! It shall by degrees, extend to the extremities of the Globe.
The report will soon be borne by fame over the great ocean, and like a clap of
sevenfold thunder, rouse every nation where it comes, and force them to a
serious consideration of their latter end. -- None of them shall be excepted
from this common privilege. For, the whole earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. Then will be
fulfilled, that emblematical prediction recorded in the revelation. -- The
seventh Angel sounded, and all Heaven rang with reverberating, solemn,
triumphant acclamations: And as with one voice proclaimed his coronation, who
is the adored proprietor of the universe. -- The kingdoms of this world, are
become the kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ: And he shall reign for ever
and ever. -- Then will the illustrious morning dawn, the true golden age
commence. -- That era of light and love, foretold by so many inspired Prophets,
and long expected by your progenitors of different nations, for several
generations past. -- America, I say, will be irradiated with the first, and
brightest rays of that resplendant day, whose dazzling effulgence shall by
degrees illuminate the darkest regions of the earth, and at length, replenish
the whole world of mankind with spiritual glory.


Celadon. Thrice happy epoch!

And when will it begin? May a man of my age hope to see it? -- How glad would
I be to known the precise juncture! Or at least, in what year it may be
expected! -- The desire defered makes the heart sick. -- Oh, that I did but
know the blessed time!


Angel. Indulge no vain curiosity! You have been already cautioned against that
error, when you inquired after my name. -- Neither am I able to resolve you in
that instance. -- That hour is hitherto concealed in impenetrable darkness. --
It is not yet revealed even to the highest order of Angels. -- Let it suffice
for you to know, that it will assuredly take place at the exact crisis
ordained, and appointed by infinite wisdom.


Celadon. Forgive the temerity of a wretched mortal! We are prone to search
into future contingencies: and apt to seek forbidden knowledge. -- But may I
not* Divine Prophet! May I not be permitted to ask, by what method this
wonderful change shall be introduced among us, and by what means it will be
effected? -- Who is meant by the Angel you spoke of? And what is signified by
the sounding of his trumpet? In what sense the kingdoms of this world must
become the property of Christ more than they at present are; or have ever yet
been? And how long that delectable season shall continue after it is once
begun? -- What unutterable satisfaction would it afford all the sincere
votaries of religion, to hear you describe the nature, the manner, the
latitude, the extent and the duration of that charming vicissitude of Divine
Providence? We would listen to the pleasing narrative with exultation! With
transport! With ravishment! -- If permitted, pray indulge an unworthy inquirer
with a more particular delineation of that very grand and momentous
dispensation. -- Long have I waited for instruction relating to these weighty
points; but am at last, out of hope of receiving information from any
uninspired man, even the predictions recorded in the scriptures, with reference
to such extraordinary events, are covered with much darkness. And our best
expositors greatly differ in opinion concerning them. For which reason, it is
impossible to draw any certain and determinate conclusion from their
disquisitions. All, all seems to be but probable conjecture at most. Whereas,
the document of an angelic teacher, might be relied on with the firmest belief,
and trusted in with indubitable dependence.


Angel. You have I find a great many questions to ask. And a degree of
knowledge in regard to several particulars you mention, might perhaps, prove to
your future advantage; and I could willingly gratify your inquisitive humor
for as it innocent; but at present am not allowed to proceed. Provided you make
a proper improvement of what has been already revealed, you may be favored with
another interview hereafter, When farther discoveries may be granted according
to your desire. -- In the mean while, be careful to practice what you know. --
Be faithful. -- Be watchful. -- Be deligent. -- Be courageous. -- Be thankful.
-- And finally, you may rest assured, that however the wheel of fate may turn
and whatever changes may happen in the world, it shall always go well with the
righteous. They shall stand in their lot, and a happy lot it is, and shall be
through all the revolutions of time, and beyond it to eternal ages.

Here my celestial visitant paused for a little while, and seemed like one lost
in deep meditation. Then bounding from the earth, in the twinkling of an eye
mingled with the blue either. And I saw him at that time no more.

Startled at the suddeness of his departure, I awoke; and found myself in the
place, and posture aforesaid. -- The sun was by this time gone down, and night
had drawn her starry curtain over the prostrate world. I arose, and greatly
delighted with what I had seen and heard, walked softly home to my dwelling.


FINIS.

