A LETTER FROM WILLIAM PENN, TO HIS WIFE AND CHILDREN, WRITTEN A SHORT TIME
BEFORE HIS FIRST VOYAGE TO AMERICA.

LANCASTER: PRINTED BY A. BUSHER. M,DCC,LXXXV.

FROM THE UNIVERSAL EVENING POST.
To the PRINTER.
SIR,
THERE is a pathetic, elegant, and sententious simplicity in the writings of
great and good men, singularly expressive of that sweetness, harmony, and
uniformity of conduct which accompanied them through life, and which I take to
be the natural result of conscious goodness and exalted virtue. The perusal of
such writings affords more pleasure than the pompous display of rhetorical
flourishes and refined elaborate periods: I was therefore highly delighted with
a letter which a neighbor of mine, a quaker, has communicated to me, wrote by
Mr. Penn, to his wife and children a little before his first voyage to America,
and found after his death among some old manuscripts never published. I have
gained permission to copy it, and here send it you. The sentiments are not
studied, novel, or sublime, but simple, sincere and natural, adapted to the
occasion, flowing from the heart, and consonant with the rules of true
epistolary writing. Mr. Penn (as observed of Shakespeare) appears not so
properly to speak from nature, as that she speaks through him. Whether we view
this great man in the light of a legislator, historian, or chronologist, we
must allow he had great extent of knowledge, accuracy of judgment, and
quickness of invention; and I think it is but justice to his memory to observe,
that in all his writings the gentleman, scholar and christian are eminently
conspicuous. He appears to have had a much deeper and truer sense of religion
than was common to the genius of the times in which he lived.

Yours, PHILALETHES.
Oxfordshire, Nov. 7th, 1760.
My dear wife and children:
MY love, that sea, nor land, nor death itself can extinguish or lessen toward
you, most endearedly visits you with eternal embraces, and will abide with you
for ever: And may the God of my life watch over you, and bless you, and do you
good in this world and for ever. Some things are upon my spirit to leave with
you in your respective capacities, as I am to one a husband, and to the rest a
father, if I should never see you more in this world.

My dear wife, remember thou wast the love of my youth, and much the joy of my
life, the most beloved as well as most worthy of all my earthly comforts, and
the reason of that love was more thy inward than thy outward excellencies
(which yet were many.) God knows, and thou know it, I can say it was a match
of providence's making, and God's image in us both was the first thing, and the
most amiable and engaging ornament in our eyes. Now I am to leave thee, and
that without knowing whether I shall ever see thee more in this world; take my
counsel into thy bosom, and let it dwell with thee in my stead while thou
live.

First. Let the fear of the Lord, and a zeal and love to his glory dwell richly
in thy heart, and thou will watch for good over thyself and thy dear children
and family, that no rude light or bad thing be committed; else God will be
offended, and he will repent himself of the good he intends thee and thine.

Secondly. Be diligent in meetings for worship and business; stir up thyself
and others herein, it is thy day and place: And let meetings be kept once a day
in the family, to wait upon the Lord, who has given us much time for ourselves.
And, my dearest, to make thy family matters easy to thee, divide thy time and
be regular, it is easy and sweet; thy retirement will afford thee to do it, as
in the morning to view the business of the house, and fix it as thou desire,
seeing all be in order, that by thy counsel all may move, and to thee render an
account every evening. The time for work, for walking, for meals, may be
certain, at least let them be made so as near as may be; and grieve not thyself
with careless servants, they will disorder thee; rather pay them and let them
go, if they will not be better by admonitions: This is best, to avoid many
words, which I know wound the soul, and offend the Lord.

Thirdly. Cast up thy income, and see what it daily amounts to, by which thou
may be sure to have it in thy sight and power to keep within compass; and I
beseech thee to live low and sparingly till my debts are paid, and then enlarge
as thou see it convenient: Remember thy mother's example when thy father's
public spiritedness had worsted his estate (which is my case.) I know thou
love plain things, and art averse to the pomps of the world, a nobility
natural to thee. I write not as doubtful, but to quicken thee for my sake to be
more vigilant herein, knowing that God will bless thy case, and thy poor
children and thee for it: My mind is wrapped up in a saying of thy father's, I
desire not riches, but to owe nothing; and truly that is wealth, and more than
enough to live is a snare attended with many sorrows. I need not bid thee be
humble, for thou art so, nor meek and patient, for it is much of thy natural
disposition; but I pray thee be often in retirement with the Lord, and guard
against encroaching friendships; keep them at arm's end, for it is giving away
our power, ay, and self too, into the possession of another, and that which
might seem engaging in the beginning may prove a yoke and burden too hard and
heavy in the end. Wherefore keep dominion over thyself, and let thy children,
good meetings, and friends be the pleasure of thy life.

Fourthly. And now, my dearest, let me recommend to thy care my dear children,
abundantly beloved of me as the Lord's blessings, and the sweet pledges of our
mutual and endeared affection. Above all things endeavor to breed them up in
the love of virtue, and that holy plain way of it which we have lived in, that
the world in no part of it get into my family. I had rather they were homely
than finely bred, as to outward behavior; yet I love sweetness mixed with
gravity, and cheerfulness tempered with sobriety: Religion in the heart leads
into this true civlity, teaching men and women to be mild and courteous in
their behavior, an accomplishment worthy indeed of praise.

Fifthly. Next breed them up in the love one of another; tell them it is the
charge I left behind me, and that it is the way to have the love and blessing
of God upon them, also what his portion is who hates or calls his brother fool.
Sometimes separate them, but not long, and allow them to send and give each
other small things to endear one another with; once more, I say, tell them it
was my counsel they should be tender and affectionate one to another. For their
learning be liberal; spare no cost, for by such parsimony all is lost that is
saved; but let it be useful knowledge, such as is consistent with truth and
godliness, not cherishing a vain conversation or idle mind; but ingenuity mixed
with industry is good for the body and mind too: I recommend the useful parts
of mathematics, as building houses or ships, measuring, surveying, dialing,
navigation, etc. but agriculture is especially in my eye; let my children be
husbandmen and housewives, it is industrious, healthy, honest, and of good
example; like Abraham and the holy ancients, who pleased God, and obtained a
good report, this leads to consider the works of God and nature of things that
are good, and diverts the mind from being taken up with the vain arts and
inventions of a luxurious world. It is commendable in the princes of Germany,
and the nobles of that empire, that they have all their children instructed in
some useful occupation. Rather keep an ingenious person in the house to teach
them than send them to schools, too many evil impressions being commonly
received there: Besure to observe their genius, and do not cross it as to
learning: Let them not dwell too long on one thing; but let their change be
agreeable and all their diversions have some bodily labor in them. When grown
big have most care for them, for then there are more snares both within and
without. When marriageable see that they have worthy persons in their eye, of
good life and good fame for piety and understanding: I need no wealth but
sufficiency; and besure their love be dear, fervent, and mutual, that it may be
happy for them: I choose not they should be married to earthly covetous kindred,
and of cities and towns of concourse beware: The world is apt to stick close to
those who have lived and got wealth there: A country life and estate I like
best for my children: I prefer a decent mansion of an hundred pounds per annum
before ten thousand pounds in London or such like place in a way of trade. In
fine, my dear, endeavor to breed them dutiful to the Lord, and his blessed
light, truth and grace in their hearts, who is their Creator, and his fear will
grow up with them. "Teach a child (says the wise man) the way thou will have
him to walk, and when he is old he will not forget it." Next, obedience to
thee, their dear mother, and that not for wrath but for conscience sake:
Liberal to the poor, pitiful to the miserable, humble and kind to all: And may
my God make thee a blessing, and give thee comfort in our dear children, and in
age gather thee to the joy and blessedness of the just (where no death shall
separate us) for ever.

And now, my dear children, that are the gifts and mercies of the God of your
tender father, hear my counsel, and lay it up in your hearts; love it more than
treasure, and follow it, and you shall be blessed here and happy hereafter. In
the first place, remember your Creator in the days of your youth; it was the
glory of Israel in the second of Jeremiah, and how did God bless Josiah because
he feared him in his youth! And so he did Jacob, Joseph and Moses. O! my dear
children, remember, and fear, and serve him who made you, and gave you to me
and your dear mother, that you may live to him and glorify him in your
generation. To do this, in your youthful days seek after the Lord, that you may
find him, remembering his great love in creating you, that you are not beasts,
plants or stones; but that he has kept you, and given you his grace within, and
substance without, and provided plentifully for you. This remember in your
youth, that you may be kept from the evil of the world, for in age it will be
harder to overcome the temptations of it. Wherefore, my dear children, eschew
the appearance of evil, and love and cleave to that in your hearts that shows
you evil from good, and tells you when you do amiss, and reproves you for it.
It is the light of Christ, that he has given you for your salvation. If you do
this, and follow my counsel, God will bless you in this world, and give you an
inheritance in that which shall never have an end; for the light of Jesus is of
a purifying nature, it seasons those who love it and take heed to it, and never
leaves such till it has brought them to the city of God that has foundations.
O! that ye may be seasoned with the gracious nature of it: Hide it in your
hearts, and flee, my dear children, from all youthful lusts, the vain sports,
pastimes and pleasures of the world; redeeming the time, because the days are
evil. You are now beginning to live. What would some give for your time? Oh! I
could have lived better were I as you in the flower of youth. Therefore love
and fear the Lord, keep close to meetings, and delight to wait on the Lord God
of your father and mother among his despised people, as we have done; and count
it your honor to be members of that society, and heirs of that living
fellowship which is enjoyed among them, for the experience of which your
father's soul blesses the Lord for ever.

Next, be obedient to your dear mother, a woman whose virtue and good name is
an honor to you, for she has been exceeded by none in her time for her
plainness, integrity, industry, humanity, virtue and good understanding,
qualities not usual among women of her worldly condition and quality: Therefore
honor and obey her, my dear children, as your mother and your father's love
and delight; nay, love her too, for she loved your father with a deep and
upright love, choosing him before all her many suitors; and though she be of a
delicate constitution and noble spirit, yet she descended to the utmost
tenderness and care for you, performing the painfullest acts of service to you
in your infancy as a mother and a nurse too. I charge you before the Lord,
honor and obey, love and cherish your dear mother.

Next, betake yourselves to some honest industrious course of life, and that
not of sordid covetousness, but for example, and to avoid idleness. And if you
change your condition and marry, choose with the knowledge and consent of your
mother if living, guardians or those that have the charge of you: Mind neither
beauty nor riches, but the fear of the Lord, and a sweet and amiable
disposition, such as you can love above all this world, and that may make your
habitations pleasant and desirable to you; and being married, be tender,
affectionate, patient and meek: Live in the fear of the Lord, and he will bless
you and your offspring. Be sure to live within compass; borrow not, neither be
beholden to any: Ruin not yourselves by kindness to others, for that exceeds
the due bounds of friendship, neither will a true friend expect it: Small
matters I heed not: Let your industry and parsimony go no further than for a
sufficiency for life, and to make a provision for your children (and that in
moderation) if the Lord gives you any. I charge you, help the poor and needy.
Let the Lord have a voluntary share of your income for the good of the poor
both in our society and others; for we are all his creatures; remembering, that
he that gives to the poor lends to the Lord. Know well your incomings, and
your outgoings may be better regulated. Love not money nor the world; use them
only, and they will serve you; but if you love them you serve them; which will
debase your spirits, as well as offend the Lord. Pity the distressed, and hold
out a hand of help to them; it may be your case; and as you mete to others God
will mete to you again. Be humble and gentle in your conversation, of few words
I charge you, but always pertinent when you speak; hearing out before you
attempt to answer, and then speaking as if you would persuade not impose.
Affront none, neither revenge the affronts that are done to you, but forgive
and you shall be forgiven of your heavenly Father. In making friends consider
well first; and when you are fixed be true, not wavering by reports nor
deserting in afflictions, for that becomes not the good and virtuous. Watch
against anger, neither speak nor act in it, for like drunkenness it makes a man
a beast, and throws people into desperate inconveniences. Avoid flatterers, for
they are thieves in disguise, their praise is costly, designing to get by those
they bespeak; they are the worst of creatures, they lie to flatter, and flatter
to cheat; and which is worse, if you believe them, you cheat yourselves most
dangerously; but the virtuous, though poor, love, cherish and prefer. Remember
David, who asking the Lord, Who shall abide in thy tabernacle? Who shall dwell
in thy holy hill? answers, He that walks uprightly, works righteousness,
and speaks the truth in his heart, in whose eyes the vile person is
contemned, but he honors them that fear the Lord.

Next, my dear children, be temperate in all things; in your diet, for that is
physic by prevention, it keeps, nay it makes people healthy and their
generation sound: This is exclusive of the spiritual advantage it brings. Be
also plain in your apparel; keep out that lust which reigns too much over some;
let your virtues be your ornaments, remembering, life is more than meat, and
the body than raiment. Let your furniture be simple and cheap; avoid pride,
avarice and luxury. Read my No CROSS NO CROWN: There is instruction. Make your
conversation with the most eminent for wisdom and piety, and shun all wicked
men, as you hope for the blessing of God, and the comfort of your father's
living and dying prayers. Be sure you speak no evil of any, no not of the
meanest, much less of your superiors, as magistrates, guardians, tutors,
teachers, and elders in Christ. Be no busy bodies, meddle not with other folk's
matters but when in conscience and duty pressed, for it procures trouble, and is
ill manners, and very unseemly to wise men. In your families remember Abraham,
Moses, and Joshua, their integrity to the Lord, and do as you have them for
your examples. Let the fear and service of the living God be encouraged in your
houses, and that plainness, sobriety and moderation in all things, as becomes
God's chosen people. And as I advise you, my beloved children, do you counsel
yours, if God should give you any; Yea I counsel and command them, as my
posterity, that they love and serve the Lord God with an upright heart, that he
may bless you and yours from generation to generation. And as for you who are
likely to be concerned in the government of Pennsylvania and my parts of East
Jersey, (especially the first) I do charge you before the Lord God and his holy
angels, that you be lowly, dillgent, and tender, fearing God, loving the
people, and hating covetousness. Let justice have its impartial course, and the
law free passage; though to your loss protect no man against it, for you are
not above the law, but the law above you. Live therefore the lives yourselves
you would have the people live, and then you have right and boldness to punish
the transgressor. Keep upon the square, for God sees you. Therefore do your
duty; and be sure you see with your own eyes, and hear with your own ears.
Entertain no lurchers, cherish no informers for gain or revenge. Use no tricks,
fly to no devices to support or cover injustice; but let your hearts be upright
before the Lord, trusting in him above the contrivances of men, and none shall
be able to hurt or supplant. Oh! the Lord is a strong God, and he can do
whatsoever he pleases; and though men consider it not, it is the Lord that
rules and overrules in the kingdoms of men, and he builds up and pulls down. I
your father am the man that can say, He that trusts in the Lord shall not be
confounded, but God in due time will make his enemies be at peace with him. If
you thus behave yourselves, and so become a terror to evil doers and a praise
to them that do well, God, my God will be with you in wisdom and a sound mind,
and make you blessed instruments in his hand for the settlement of some of
those desolate parts of the world, which my soul desires above all worldly
honors and riches, both for you that go and you that stay, you that govern and
you that are governed, that in the end you may be gathered with me to the rest
of God.

Finally, my dear children, love one another with a true endeared love, and
your dear relations on both sides; and take care to preserve a tender affection
in your children to each other, often marrying within themselves, so as it be
without the bounds forbidden in God's law; that so they may not (like the
forgetting and unnatural world) grow out of kindred and as cold as strangers,
but, as becomes a truly natural and christian stock, you and yours after you
may live in the pure and fervent love of God toward one another, as becomes
brethren in the spiritual and natural relation: So, my God, that has blessed me
with his abundant mercies both of this and the other and better life, be with
you all, guide you by his counsel, bless you, and bring you to his eternal
glory; that you may shine, my dear children, in the firmament of God's power,
with the blessed spirits of the just, that celestial family, praising and
admiring him the God and Father of it for ever and ever. For there is no God
like unto him, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of the
prophets, the apostles, and martyrs of Jesus, in whom I live for ever. So,
farewell to my thrice dearly beloved wife and children. Yours, as God pleases,
in that which no waters can quench, no time forget, nor distance wear away, but
remains for ever.

WILLIAM PENN.
Worminghurst, 4th of 6th Month, 1682.

