A wonderful Discovery of a HERMIT, Who lived upwards of 200 YEARS.



Printed at SPRINGFIELD, 1786.

A Wonderful Discovery OF A HERMIT, who lived upwards of 200 Years
A KNOWLEDGE of (...) under every appearance, is not only pleasing, but in many
respects useful and necessary. The following account, as it is a discovery made
within the limits of our own country, and confirmed by them who were
eyewitnesses may with great propriety deserve our notice. -- Two gentlemen of
undoubted veracity, viz. Capt. JAMES BUCKLAND, and Mr. JOHN FIELDING, living in
some part of Virginia, agreed to travel into the western parts of this vast
country, to explore the regions which belong to these United States, which are
yet unknown to us. On the 19th of June, 1785, they took their departure. Each
of them were armed with two pistols and a long sharp dagger. They were attended
by two strong and hearty slaves, armed with muskets. -- Both the gentlemen very
well understood the rules of Trigonometry, on which are founded the principles
of sailing and surveying. And carrying with them a compass, they were able to
keep their course directly, and pretty well able to determine the distance they
traveled. The slaves carried as much provision as they could conveniently,
with a considerable quantity of salt, for the sake of cooking venison and other
food which they might kill on their way. They passed with much difficuly, the
lofty Allegany Mountains. On these mountains they made several important
discoveries of Gold and Silver mines, an account of which will be published
soon. After leaving these grand and lofty mountains, they traveled 73 days
without seeing the least appearance, or even tract of any human being. The
country was diversified with hills, mountains, valleys and beautiful rivers.
Trees of all kinds and sizes. The large trees grew very tall, and the ground
was often covered with amazing thickets of small pine, hemlocks and ivies. This
diversity rendered the country agreeaable beyond description. They saw wild
animals of almost every kind, many of which they killed, some for food and some
for curiosity, being such as they never saw nor heard of before. At length,
having traveled several miles on rising ground, they came to the summit of an
high mountain. Here they stopped, and it was the most beautiful prospect
imaginable: on every side as far as they could possibly see, they beheld the
green groves waving by the gentle gales of wind. Here they spent several hours
in refreshing themselves, and viewing the extensive country on every side. They
took notice that the ground appeared to be trodden, and frequente^ as they
supposed, by wild beasts. As they were setting out to go forward, they
discovered a small foot path to lead down the mountain between two high ridges
of rocks. They were surprised at this, and doubted whether it could be made by
wild animals; but as there were no marks of feet, they were at a loss about it.
They were fearful about entering, although it was directly in their way, lest
they should fall among some dens of wild beasts, which might be too strong for
them. After some deliberation, they considered that a ^^irit of cowardice did
not become adven^^rers. They reviewed their arms and ammunition, and resumed so
much courage as they thought sufficient to encounter the most terrible beasts
of the wilderness, and then proceeded down the mountain in the following
manner, viz. One slave first, then the two gentlemen, and the other slave
behind. After they had proceeded about half a mile the path grew brighter; but
as the ground was hard and dry, no appearance of feet could be discovered. This
descent was truly venerable and august. On each side were the two ridges of
rocks at the distance of four or five rods: -- Each of them were covered with
high trees, likewise small pines and ivies hung bending over the narrow valley
in which the path was: -- each side was covered incredibly thick with small
shrubs: -- the taller trees, covered with leaves and thick branches, bent over
the valley so that they shut out the rays of the sun. In this situation the
travelers not only admired the grandeur in which they were enclosed; but they
were filled with anxieties concerning the path which still increased: -- in
this condition they proceeded in a gradual descent about two miles and an half
in a western direction, though in several places the grandeur of the valley was
increased by small turnings and circular windings. Then they were surprised
with an opening; the ridge of rocks on the right hand continued, but that on
the left did not.

A large extended level country now opened to their view, and the sun being in
the western hemisphere, a new day seemed to usher in upon them, which struck
them with an agreeable surprise. -- In this condition they stood gazing for a
moment, then recollected the path which had by this time become much beaten.
About four rods from them they saw the path turn to the right hand toward the
ridge o^ rocks which was almost perpendicular. They then discovered a hole in
the rock several feet square: they stood still for some time viewing it, as
they supposed it was a den for wild beasts, when they were supprised with a
shape coming out from the rock: -- it appeared like a grave old man: -- his
head was bald, his beard was long and white which covered his breast: -- his
body was covered with furr and skins of beasts. -- He seemed surprised to see
them, as they were also to see him. -- At length, with a grave and solemn voice
he spoke. Friends! Human Forms! From whence, or who are you? Are you Angels or
Men? One answered we are men, -- he then waved his hand in token of friendship,
and pleasure seemed to sit on his countenance:

With joy, said he, I once more behold human shapes. -- The travelers stood
almost speechless for some time, and when he moved toward them, they turned
for fear, and made off from him: -- at which the old man called with tears in
his eyes; -- whether do you flee -- leave me not -- I am an innocent Hermit, I
cannot hurt you -- I live in this Cave whose mouth you see: they then stood
'till he came and shook hands with them, and expressed such emotions of joy as
are difficult to describe. -- The Hermit then conducted them to his Cave; they
were somewhat reluctant at first about entering it -- but they were however
prevailed upon so that they followed him into the Cave, the mouth of which was
ornamented on the outside with trees and thick ivies, which shaded it; --
before it was the wide level country beforementioned, covered with beautiful
trees, the inside contained several nice apartments, all which seemed to be dug
out of a solid marble rock; the walls on the inside were adorned with many
curious figures of sculpture; -- the upper part of the Cave was an arch which
gave a small light like a sort of wood we call light-wood or fox fire, which
added luster to the Cave. The Hermit seemed overjoyed with his new guests, and
their curiosity was much satisfied with him. -- He seated them on several
smooth stones at the side of the Cave; -- he then presented them with some
bark, roots, acorns, and several kinds of fruit unknown to them. -- They
partook of his bounty, and were pleased with his simplicity both of manners and
diet. They also produced a piece of venison which they had; and desired the
Hermit to partake; but he told them very mildly, that he chose not to eat any
flesh, that his diet consisted only of such simple food as he had set before
them. -- After they had eaten, the Hermit said it is night, you will not leave
me, -- they answered that they were travelers and must depart early in the
morning. -- Having now became some acquainted, they asked him his place of
nativity and how he came there; -- the Hermit very freely began and related as
follows. My story says he is mournful; but it may be worth your hearing. I was
born in London (as I have been very exact to keep my age) 227 years ago. -- My
father was a mechanic, who placed his affections greatly on me; he put me
under the care of a private gentleman to be educated, where he kept me 'till
about 19 years of age, about which time I formed a close connection with a
Nobleman's daughter. We made the most solemn protestations to each other of
mutual friendship: -- When her parents became (...) and refu^ed our seeing each
other (...) long after, the lady was taken sick and died, at whose remembrance
I cannot refrain from tears.

I, like a disconsolate person as I was, roved through different parts of the
kingdom: At length I went on board a vessel bound to Italy. Soon after our
departure, the mas^ and all the crew except two, were lost in a violent storm.
We being unable to manage the vessel, let her drive. After several days we came
to land, but whither we know not. The country was uninhabited, which pleased me
the more, as solitude was what I sought. I left my companions and betook myself
to the wilderness. I took from on board the vessel a gun and all the ammunition
I could find, which I found to be of great importance to me, as I had the good
fortune to procure skins of animals which served to cloth me tolerably well.
At last Heaven brought me to this place where you found me. -- Here I have
lived alone in contemplation of the works of nature, and adoring him who
preserves me. The reason of my long life and good constitution I cannot account
for, only by the blessing of Heaven, and living on such simple food as I set
before you. Often I ascend this winding vale, through which I thought you came,
to the (...) of the mountain. The beasts of the forest all play before me.
Nothing offers violence to me, all the animals are friendly to me, and none
durst enter my Cave. Thus the Hermit ended, after which Capt. Buckland informed
him of the present state of the nation, how some of them had left their native
country, and come to this, which is now called America. At which account the
Hermit was not a little surprised. -- The evening being spent, the Hermit could
not go to rest without paying divine service to his Creator and Preserver, he
gave thanks that he once more had an interview with human beings, asked for
protection and blessings.

The next day they did not depart as they had proposed, but being so much
pleased, they tarried several days. At their departure they used their utmost
endeavors to persuade the Hermit to come off with them; but he refused, and
said he had been ex^^eding happy in their company, and could ^^ve entertained
them longer; as for leav^^g his Cave he could not, he thought Hea^^n had
provided that place for his dwel^^g, in which he ever expected to reside ^^ile
he lived in this world. Notwithstand^^^ his reluctance to leave his Cave, he
was ^^^eedingly affected with their leaving him, he wept like a child, and
taking Capt Buckland by the hand, he embraced him, wishing him prosperity,
after which they departed.

Capt. Buckland gives particular directions for any one to go and find the
Hermit, and satisfy his own curiosity.

FINIS.

