CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN JOHN HOLKER, Esquire, Inspector General of Trade and
Manufactures, and late Consul General, of France, AND ROBERT MORRIS, Esquire,
Late Superintendant of the Finances of the United States.

TO WHICH IS ANNEXED A MEMORIAL, Relative to the Transactions between them, and
to the Principles on which Mr. MORRIS offered a Final Settlement thereof, by
his Letter of the 26th of February, 1784.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by CHARLES CIST, in ARCH-STREET. M,DCC,LXXXVI.

A SERIES OF LETTERS, Interchanged by John Holker, Esquire and Robert Morris, Esquire
Copy of Mr. HOLKER's Letter to the Honorable ROBERT MORRIS, Esquire Dated January
4, 1783.
SIR,
THE object of the present is merely to request as the most particular favor
you can confer on me, the most speedy settlement of your accounts with the
Royal Marine. Mr. Swanwick has repeatedly informed me that they are drawn out
ready for your examination, and that nothing is wanting but your inspection of
the same and your signature: pray, oblige me so far as to despatch them.

Permit me also to reiterate to you, Sir, my request, respecting my accounts as
Agent of the Royal Marine with the United States, and which it is my earnest
desire as duty to get settled; my endeavors to attain this point have hitherto
been fruitless, and in the mean while, I am daily held up as a public
defaulter, a character too odious to be supported by any man of principle or
feeling. Let me entreat you to renew your instructions to the public officers,
so as every possible despatch may be given.

I remain with every sentiment of respectful attachment, SIR, your most
obedient and humble servant, (Signed) HOLKER.

Philadelphia, January 14, 1784. SIR,
I AM informed that, in all probability, his Excellency the Chevalier de la
Luzerne will soon return to France: I have therefore to claim your immediate
and constant attention to the accounts of the Royal Marine. I must have them,
so as the vouchers may be submitted to his Excellency, without delay: the
necessity of the case, my reputation, my interest and fortune are too deeply
concerned, not to claim every exertion on your part. I request you will honor
me with an answer, and inform me when I shall positively receive said accounts
and vouchers. You must excuse the earnestness of my application, and I trust
you will raze every possible obstacle in the way. One thing more I must add, that
without your accounts, I cannot proceed a single step further: my clerks are at
full stop, and we are waiting till such time we are enabled to proceed.

I remain with unfeigned respect and attachment, SIR, Your most obedient and
very humble servant, (Signed) HOLKER.

The Hon. ROBERT MORRIS, Esquire
Philadelphia, January 15, 1784. SIR,
IN consequence of your letter of yesterday, I have this day gone into an
examination of the accounts as you desire, but on looking into the papers which
you returned, as those you had received from Mr. Swanwick, I find very
incorrect copies of my general accounts, instead of the originals which were
sent to you; I must therefore request those original accounts may be sent
immediately, that I may be enabled to proceed and show the folly and absurdity
of those observations which occasion this unnecessary trouble.

I am, SIR, your most obedient and very humble servant, (Signed) ROBERT MORRIS.

The Hon. JOHN HOLKER, Esquire
Philadelphia, January 16, 1784. SIR,
I AM peculiarly happy to find that by your letter of the 15th which I only
received yesterday at 10 o'clock in the evening, you have at last found leisure
to attend to the settlement of my ^^^ounts. I now send you the original papers
you claim.

I cannot let slip this opportunity of expressing to you, that I not only want
the accounts to be examined, but that it will be necessary that you make them
out in a new form, expressing solely the payments, negociations and receipts of
money made by yourself. My transactions being blended with yours, I have found
it utterly impracticable to know with any precision our reciprocal situation,
or rather your situation, with respect to the Royal Marine* The copies of the
originals which I request you will be so kind as to return me, will enable me
to make out separately the accounts of my own transactions so soon as I obtain
the vouchers which are to support them, and which you were so obliging as to
take charge of, in order that they might be recorded for my safety in the first
draughts of my public accounts.

I am sorry, you should deem this an unnecessary trouble; I mean not to give
you any, but these accounts are of too high importance to both of us, not to
deserve the utmost care and attention in the redaction thereof.

I am, SIR, your most obedient and humble servant, (Signed) HOLKER.

The Hon. ROBERT MORRIS, Esquire
Philadelphia, January 23, 1784. SIR,
AFTER what has passed in writing and conversation betwixt us, it is with very
great reluctance I sit down, to write you on the subject of my private and
public accounts; but as you told me repeatedly yesterday, that you wished I
should indicate, in the first place, a mode of rendering the said accounts,
and, in the second place, that I should write you on the subject of
depreciation, I shall now endeavor to express my ideas on these two points,
and, I hope, to your satisfaction and conviction.

I want not that you should, in any instance, depart from the usual, exact,
mercantile mode or manner in rendering my public or private accounts. In
abiding by the rules laid down for the same, you will state precisely the day
on which you have received or paid any money for me, either on behalf of the
Royal Marine, or for my personal account with you. I doubt not that you will
admit this to be necessary in all accounts whatever, both in specie and in
continental money; but much more so for the latter, and for the following
reasons:

In the first place, without the precise date of the time when each transaction
took place is specified in the account, it would not be a true statement or
account thereof. Secondly, Without the precise date, no value can be fixed on
the apparent sum paid or received.

This being premised, if you will please to proceed to the examination of such
of your accounts, as have come to my knowledge, you will clearly remark the
necessity of altering and correcting them.

I have already wrote you, and repeatedly told you of the absolute necessity of
separating both the public and private transactions, which are personal to me,
from those which regard yourself. This is indispensable, in order that each of
us may be responsible for his own operations.

In the public accounts, was I to settle finally with you on them, in the form
they were first proposed, I should ultimately become responsible for your
operations, and you for mine -- this cannot be.

In the private accounts, your transactions being blended with mine, the
concerns of various other individuals being also blended with mine and yours,
it is impossible to know from the dates that appear on them, what is the right
of each individual, or to judge what is just to allow them, to you, or to me.
One of the private accounts as proposed, I suppose not rendered, much less
settled betwixt us, bears no signature, no date for the balance that is
apparent; though it is for a sum not less than 551,514 pounds. The credit is
composed of twenty-two articles, the debit of thirty-one, and notwithstanding,
there are only five dates on the debit, not one on the credit; though all the
sums are in continental specie. This certainly cannot be an account on which a
settlement can have been intended by you. However that may be, it would be
folly indeed on my part, to admit it as it now stands, without the vouchers and
accounts, on which it is grounded, will justify the present statement of the
transactions it relates to.

Respecting the subject of depreciation, I know not why you desired I should
write you on it; much less why you should first have offered to me, to certify
in writing, that you could not and would not grant any depreciation on your
public accounts; nor, why you should have argued yesterday, that because the
King had made great savings, by the operations of the Royal Marine under my
directions, you are not to account (...) me on his behalf, and make good
depreciation, if any loss has ensued: The proposition you made to me, verbally,
in answer to my letter of the 16th, and the argument you repeatedly urged to me
yesterday.

This proposition, you well know, is of such a nature, as cannot be accepted of
by me; nor can you, on serious reflection, indulge the thought one moment.

As to the great savings made to the King by my operations in Boston, surely
they are not those you seriously alluded to, in order to give them as reasons,
for not adjusting your accounts on a proper footing, and making good all
depreciation, in every case where it may be justly due. Those operations are
personal to me alone, and the King, through his secretaries of state, was duly
informed thereof. If the savings made thereon are now to be given up, by the
mode of adjusting and intermixing accounts, I shall personally lose the merit
of my own transactions, and the King be deprived of that share of those
advantages to which my attention and industry has given him the fairest title.
These reasons, I am confident, are sufficient to ground my earnest request,
that my transactions in Boston, be not any ways, or any longer, blended or
connected in account with yours. I have too much reason to fear that the
statements thereof, intermixed with your accounts, might occasion some
erroneous inductions; which, I am certain, you never meant should take place.

The savings made for the King, by your operations, will best appear from the
accounts, when they will stand alone, unconnected with any others; when they
will be stated at the precise dates of receipt and payments, and not at the
dates when the entries were made in your books. Let the advantages, gained
thereon, be placed against the losses, suffered by depreciation; this is fair
and just; this is all you certainly can mean or pretend to; and this needs no
previous determination.

I shall not now add much on my private affairs, and the statements that have
been proposed thereon; but, I must say, that I will not admit them, even for
examination, without the transactions, personal to you, are clearly distinct
from mine. Let them be joined to the vouchers belonging to them, and also with
the accounts on which they are grounded, for my inspection, and then I shall
see and know what I may have further to say on them.

Whatever may be the result of your accounts with me, when your transactions
for others, and mine with and for others, are separated from your accounts with
me, is immaterial at present. But it is of the utmost importance, to your honor
and mine, that the settlement of accounts, which has been totally laid aside
for much too long a period, should at least now be finally adjusted and settled
betwixt us, without any further delay, for any possible reason. Without this,
neither you nor I can receive or render that justice due to each of us, nor to
those, whose concerns have been entrusted to our good faith, care and
management.

As the vouchers, in support of my personal transactions in Boston, can be no
longer of any use to you, as they are of the utmost consequence, and necessary
to the progress of my public accounts, I request you will be so kind as to send
'em to me, by a safe hand, so soon as you can conveniently collect them: and at
the same time the original accounts of Thomas Russell, Jon. Williams, and John
Row, of Boston, with me, and all others which may relate to my private or
personal accounts and transactions; so as I may proceed to settle them by
myself. I will return a regular discharge or receipt for the whole, if you deem
it proper or necessary.

You showed me yesterday in your hand a statement, which you said you had just
then been making, in order to value the savings made on my Boston transactions;
which you found to amount to a very high sum, indeed. But permit me to ask you,
Why all this unnecessary trouble? Is it on my account? Surely you do not mean
to claim for yourself those savings? In order to establish your right thereto,
I have this morning, for the very first time, examined how your accounts, with
me, did stand at that period. I arrived here, from Boston, on the 24th day of
December, 1778; I have, therefore, stated your private and public accounts with
me, separately, on the 31st day of December of that year. Their inspection will
elucidate whether or not the individuals, whose money and property I had at my
disposal in Boston, and the King, have or have not a just and indisputable
right to the savings I there made. I shall renounce all claims to these great
savings, on their behalf, if you will please to show the smallest shadow or
appearance of right to them.

I earnestly entreat you to weigh the above observations in your mind, and that
you will permit me to conclude by renewing to you the assurance of the sincere
attachment, with which I shall not cease to remain,

SIR, Your devoted friend and very humble servant, (Signed) HOLKER.

The Hon. ROBERT MORRIS, Esquire
Philadelphia, January 24, 1784. SIR,
I RECEIVED your letter of the 23d instant late last evening: I will answer it
fully, as soon as may be. B^^ previously I must have your explicit answer to
this plain question: Did you not desire me, when I first agreed to assist you,
to comprehend all the accounts of the Royal Marine under your direction in my
accounts, without regarding whether the business had been performed by you or
by me, or by your or my orders? I shall expect your answer to this question
immediately.

I am, SIR, your most obedient and humble servant, (Signed) ROBERT MORRIS.

JOHN HOLKER, Esquire present.
Philadelphia, January 24, 1784. SIR,
BY your letter of this day, you ask me this plain question: Did you not desire
me, when I first agreed to assist you, to comprehend all the accounts of the
Royal Marine, under your direction, in my accounts; without regarding whether
the business had been performed by you or by me, or by your or my orders? I
shall make you immediately as plain an answer.

When you first agreed to assist me, I could not possibly have desired you, to
comprehend all accounts of the Royal Marine, under my direction, in your
accounts; without regarding, whether the business had been performed by you or
me, or by your or my orders. I say, it could not possibly be; because, when you
first agreed to act as my agent, no one operation had taken place, no one
operation or business had been performed, either by you or me.

I might make some further observations on this question; but I will not enter
into useless dissertations or discussions.

You must certainly mean to render me substantial justice; you must mean to
render it to the King, and to all who have entrusted you with their concerns.
My intentions are perfectly similar to yours, and I do not mean any thing else,
than to obtain it speedily from you; as well as to render it also to you, in
all possible cases. On this ground let your accounts personal be stated
separately from those personal to me, in the usual, regular, mercantile mode or
manner; so as they may be clearly understood, and our respective interests and
concerns as easily established: and we shall undoubtedly part hereafter on the
same footing we have hitherto lived.

But, Sir, I must repeat to you, that my Boston transactions shall not be
blended with yours. I affirm that I never intended, much less agreed to or
consented, that they should be rendered by you at any one period. I never
permitted they should be anyways blended with your accounts; but in that very
incomplete statement of the then situation of the affairs, committed to my
care, during Monsieur Gerard's residence here, which it was proper to let him
have, for his information, before his departure for France.

When I carried you the papers and notes I had made and drawn up in Boston, on
my return from thence, in December 1778, I prayed you to oblige me so far, as
to draw up an account of my transactions there, separate and distinct from all
others; to state them in a separate book or paper, and to keep the vouchers
till I should want or call for them: telling you, I should think them safer in
your hands than in mine, and that your statement of my transactions, in a
regular form, would, on a future day, assist my memory in redacting and
rendering my accounts. This, Sir, you complied with; and, in consequence
thereof, you drew 'em up in one set of sheets, which you gave me, some time
afterward, to keep for my direction.

I have since then observed, that this account is thus entitled: Debtor, JOHN
HOLKER, Esquire in Boston, acct currt. with ROBERT MORRIS, Creditor. By this
superscription it would almost appear, that I was accomptable to you, and not
you to me; but I am convinced you do not think me quite so great a fool, as to
have ever established you Agent General over myself: however, I overlooked the
superscription and thought it was merely a method or form adopted, in order to
establish a regular account, that might serve for my future instruction at a
later day.

You Will please to observe, that the transactions therein related are either
personal to me, or to the Chev. De Borda, Major of that fleet which the Count
D'Estaing commanded. This observation, you must recollect, I made you, and gave
it as a special reason for stating them distinctly from your other accounts,
and for giving me up the papers, on which they were to be stated and redacted;
you still retaining the vouchers and my notes, for their and mine ultimate and
additional safety.

At the period, when M. Gerard mentioned his resolution of returning to France,
I then told you of the propriety of showing him an account of the expenditures
of the Royal Marine. You observed, in reply, that the business was only in
train, and that it was utterly impossible that anything, like an exact account,
could be produced: that, among other agents, M. Smith of Baltimore, in
particular, had rendered none; though very heavy advances had been made him by
you. I agreed, therefore, to the proposition you then made, that a statement
should be redacted of such transactions only, as could then be supported by
vouchers in your possession. You observed, you would also make out a separate
account of my Boston transactions, and that you would include the same therein.
This last foregoing part of this story, is as near truth as I can remember.
This said account was afterward inserted in your public account; and, by one
particular line or article, in conformity to the real and true spirit of my
intentions, when you undertook to draw up for me the little book I have before
mentioned. When this separate account was drawn up, or about being drawn up,
you told me that you had a great deal of trouble in redacting these accounts
for me; that you had paid or received my bills drawn from Boston on you, or in
your favor; and, that a commission, of two and a half per cent. would not be
more than adequate for your time and trouble. You added, that I ought to
pretend to as much, in order to defray my traveling expenses, etc. etc. I did
agree to allow a commission of two and a half per cent. and, in consequence of
this imprudent consent, it was so past and introduced in that form (though it is
a very incomplete statement of my Boston transactions) among your other
accounts. But, Sir, rather than this commission should any longer retard the
redaction and settlement of my accounts, I agree that you shall pass in your
accounts a sum equivalent to 5 per cent. on the amount of that particular
account, which you so properly blended with your own, though I have repeatedly
declared to you, and most seriously, that I will not partake of any copper
thereof, nor of any other commission whatever; and though I shall certainly
credit the Chev. De Borda for two and a half per cent. on the said amount, in
favor of the King, because I am sensible of the impropriety of my consent to
your proposition; and, because it is just, I should not only refund the King,
but also, if necessary and you should insist on it, suffer for the indelicacy
of the transaction, so far as it regards me.

All the above circumstances must be present to your mind; you will likewise
recollect that immediately after you had agreed to be my agent in Philadelphia
and also to assist me with your good advice, I entreated you three different
times, to open a new set of books for all the transactions of the Royal Marine,
in order to keep the accounts separate and distinct from all others, and in
order that I might have a daily recourse to them, or produce them, to whom it
might concern. If ever I thought it proper or necessary. This fact I stated
fully to you the last time I saw you, and you told me you remembered it well;
and, likewise the answer you made me at the time; which was, that it would be
somewhat inconvenient and unnecessary; because you would hold yourself
constantly ready to give me the accounts, when I should want them, or any
information I should choose thereon.

When I last saw you at your office, you showed me a number of papers relative,
said you, to the accounts of the Royal Marine, which would undoubtedly remove
all my groundless and injurious suspicions and prove that you had employed
every dollar, or nearly every dollar, (I don't recollect positively the exact
expression) which you had received for the King's account. You must remember
how forcibly I was struck, on remarking the great number of transactions
therein apparently stated; I told you that I had never seen them or heard of
them, till you mentioned some such an account in your last visit to me; but,
also, that I had forbid Mr. Turnbull repeatedly from blending his accounts with
yours. You answered, that Mr. Turnbull, by whose actions I was naturally bound,
being my agent, had received them, or copies of them, some time after you had
declined my public business; that Mr. Swanwick had delivered them to him,
himself, by your order, after your perusal and examination of these said
accounts, and that I should still find them in Mr. Turnbull's possession, in
whose hands they had certainly remained ever since that time: all this you must
well recollect, since it happened betwixt us the day before last. Now, Sir, on
enquiry I find, that Mr. Turnbull did receive some such papers; they were
delivered to him by Mr. Swanwick, and retaken by him from Mr. Turnbull, one or
two days afterward. It may be essential, in order to remove all difficulties
betwixt us, that I should immediately see those papers; I therefore request
you will either entrust me with the original draft, or with the copy presented by
Mr. Swanwick, who will be best able to give full information respecting them
and this part of the business, since he was the redacter thereof. However this
may be, why did not you communicate these accounts to me at that time, and why,
after Mr. Swanwick retook them, have not all my accounts been settled for these
three years past? Why have you not sent me your accounts with Mr. Smith, in
order to assist my operations and the examination of his accounts, when you
knew that I had a person employed in Baltimore to settle them with him, etc.
etc.? You must see that I can make questions also; but it is unnecessary to
answer them, wihout you choose it; for all I want is my public and personal
accounts, and such other papers which are so necessary to me, and which I
claimed from you in my letter of yesterday.

It is not my desire to elude any further preparatory questions from you; but,
I must observe to you, that a long correspondence will only occasion delays in
rendering and settling finally accounts betwixt us, which it is so incumbent on
you and me to have done with.

I am, SIR, your most obedient humble servant, (Signed) HOLKER.

The Hon. ROBERT MORRIS Esquire
Philadelphia, February 26, 1784. SIR,
YOU will receive with this letter, a state of my accounts with you, both in
your public and private capacity; together with such observations as may serve
to explain them fully, and if farther explanations should be necessary, I will
readily go into them. After a due examination of all these accounts, you will
be able to judge, whether you was authorized to suppose that a desire to
withold a balance from you has influenced me to delay the settlement. In your
letter of the 24th of last month you ask why have not all my accounts been
settled for these three years past? To this question I am now about to reply,
without noticing what is said on the same subject in your previous letter of
the 23d, or your subsequent letters of the 27th of last month, and of the 8th
and 13th inst. You will remember, Sir, that you introduced yourself to my
acquaintance in the beginning of July, 1778, and pressed me to undertake the
transaction of your affairs. The consideration held out to me was, that very
great sums of money would naturally come to my hands, and might be occasionally
employed in useful speculations on our joint account, and that the commission
(also to be divided between us) would be very considerable. You will remember
that I declined your proposals (though urged upon me for several days) telling
you that my private affairs called for my whole attention, that my public
occupations for some time had prevented the settlement of old and important
accounts, and that I should not, without injury to myself and others, engage in
new pursuits. You may remember, also, that you urged it as a kind of
obligation, to take care of the interests of a King, who was in the act of
affording such generous assistance to my country, and called on me, if I would
not act myself, to point out some person for whom I would be responsible. At
length you drew from me my reluctant consent; and whatever else may happen, I
have at least the pleasure to reflect that the trust reposed in me, was
faithfully executed, until it was delivered over in the spring of the year
1780, to the house of W. Turnbull and Comp.

As you was not only agent for your sovereign, but also for many individuals
trading to this country, or speculating in our public funds, the concerns which
I engaged in for you, were both numerous and important. On some a commission
was charged, and on others it was not; but in every commission you was by
agreement to share one half. For the proof of this I will, out of many other
materials, select only for the present, what is said in your letter of the
twenty-fourth of last month, and your letter of the nineteenth instant,
explaining away the groundless assertion it contains as a mistake. I must,
however, observe, that the only objection you made to the half commission, when
Mr. Swanwick delivered you the account thereof, was, as to its value; and to me
you never declared against taking it, until a conversation we had in the office
of Finance in November or December last. You repeated the refusal at your own
house the 22d of last month, and the next day at my house: and then reminded
me, in your letter of the 24th of last month, how frequently you had declared
against taking this commission. To me it is immateria whether you take it or
not. I agreed to divide all commissions charged on the affairs transacted for
you, both on account of the Royal Marine and on account of individuals; and
have therefore rendered that account with the others, and credited you for the
half which belongs to you. By the list of accounts annexed to this letter it
will appear, that before the month of June, 1780, forty-one different accounts
were delivered by me to you, and our transactions closed as far as the actual
situation of things could well admit of. In the autumn of that year a
settlement of your accounts was attempted, but it could not be effected;
because neither you nor I could obtain several of the necessary materials. I
have many of your notes and other documents on this subject, but what you say
in yours of the 25th of January, 1781, is sufficient: I cannot obtain,
notwithstanding the most earnest and repeated applications to the treasury, the
valuation of the provisions furnished to the Royal Marine, by the Continental
Commissaries, in the run of 1779. I entreat you to put on the same the present
current value thereof, so as to close and transmit your accounts with all
possible convenient speed. I shall hereafter settle the just valuation myself
with the commissaries, and will understand with you thereon personally, if any
difference should arise. I must observe (in this place) that I do not like to
render such accounts, and still less to come to a settlement in appearance,
when the real settlement remains behind. It was not before the middle of May,
1781, that I obtained the account of Ephraim Blaine, one of the Continental
Commissaries, and therefore I could not before that period have settled with
you. But why did I not then make the settlement? I had then accepted the office
I now hold, and was (in consequence) obliged to refer all my former affairs to
the direction of others. But if you had urged a settlement, even when I was
most engaged, with half that solicitude and impetuosity which you now have put
en, I would have taken hours from my sleep rather than have exposed myself to
the charges and suspicions (which I have only discovered of late were in your
mind) although in the event they will appear to be totally unfounded. As to
what you say of the Chevalier de la Luzerne's application on the subject of
your public accounts in his letter of the 4th October last, I will leave your
own heart to make the comment. It is sufficient for me to observe, that if you
asked this application with the view of urging me (personally) to* settlement,
you ought to have asked it, when that gentleman first pressed you on the part
of his court. But you knew full well my willingness to settle with you at any
moment, if it were possible to spare the time from my public avocations. Mr.
Swanwick whom I had empowered to settle these as well as other of my accounts,
labored with you from time to time in the business, my books and papers were
always open to you, and at your request, on the sixth of March last, he
delivered to Mr. Betheder a number of rough statements of accounts, some
formerly made by me, others by himself, together with all the vouchers and also
the account settled the 31st August 1779, in presence of Monsr. Gerard. These
were detained until some time in November or December last, when you sent a
bundle or two of papers containing a part of them to my house.

About that time you mentioned to me in my office, that I was indebted 169,000
Livres to the Royal Marine, and gave me to understand that you collected your
information from Mr. Turnbull; you know my surprise on that occasion. I told
you, it was impossible; but that as soon as Mr. Governeur Morris returned from
New York, and some immediate business of the office was dispatched, I would
attend to the settlement of those accounts. On the 14th of January I received
your letter, pressing for a settlement; on the fifteenth I set about it, and
(for the first time) opened the bundles of papers you had sent to my house. To
my very great surprise, I found that the rough drafts of my accounts were
detained, and imperfect copies sent, and that very improper remarks were made
on those accounts. In my letter of the 15th I asked the original accounts, and,
in answer to it, you mention a desire that they should now be rendered in a new
form; which, by the remarks made by the person you had employed on my accounts,
was done, I find, at his instigation. This request I shall presently have
occasion to take notice of; however on receiving those originals, I was
astonished to find various scratches, notes and obliterations had been made in
them (even in that which was signed by Monsr. Gerard and yourself). On the 22d
day of January ('till which time you could not see me) I called on you and
complained of this extraordinary conduct, which you could not defend. You then
let me know (for the first time) your claim of depreciation; which you at the
same time acknowledged you had never thought of 'till lately. I told you, I
would never allow it. And in reply to your question, "what will the King's
minister say" I told you, I did not care, and offered to give a certificate
under my hand, that I would not pay it. I requested you to come to my house the
next day, that you might be convinced from my books how much you had injured me
by supposing, I was in debt to the Royal Marine, and entertaining (as I had
lately perceived you did) suspicions unworthy both of you and me. You came and
I opened my books to you, and begun an examination of those articles of my
accounts against which objections had been made by the person you had employed
to make observations on them; the first article we took up was Col. Mitchell's
account, and finding all the objections to that account were unfounded, you
grew tired of this mode of refutation, and seemed desirous to get rid of it. I
told you that I could with the same ease show the folly and absurdity of all
the other objections; I then showed you the rough draft of an account current
with Wm. Turnbull and Co. which brought my accounts with the Royal Marine to a
close, by transferring the balances to my accounts with that house, which had
been done by your order. This seemed to alarm you, and you declated you had
never seen that account. We had a good deal of conversation which closed with
my desire that you would send the form in which you chose to have your accounts
rendered, and assign in writing the reasons on which you asked for
depreciation. The objects of this request were that (if possible) I might
reduce the accounts to the required form, and that if you should (on
reflection) risque the demand of depreciation, I might have an opportunity once
for all to contest it. Before I quit the above mentioned conversation, it is
proper to add, that in consequence of what you then said, and of what is
contained in your letter of thy twenty fourth of January, I have enquired more
particularly into the state of facts, and I find that Mr. Swanwick delivered
the account in question to your said agents Wm. Turnbull and Co. that it
remained with them some months, that he received it back to correct the
omission of one or two trifling charges which were on their books against me,
that he did not return it because Mssrs. Turnbull and Co. had entered it on
their books, that they have delivered to Mr. Swanwick two statements of
accounts conformable to it, that Mr. Swanwick informed you he had delivered
this account to Mr. Turnbull, that you applied for it to him, and (Mr. Turnbull
tells me) that you certainly was furnished with a copy of it. This state of
facts which can be supported by the evidence of Mr. Swanwick and Mr. Turnbull
-- you may (if you please) contrast with the declarations you have made in
writing, and in conversation. On the twenty seventh of January Mr. Cottringer
called on my part for some of those vouchers delivered by Mr. Swanwick to Mr.
Betbeder, but you not being at home he called again next day, and the vouchers
confidentially entrusted were refused. The foregoing true history contains the
reasons why your accounts have not yet been finally settled, and prepares the
way for another point which of late you have much labored.

In your letter of the 23d of January last you tell me I will not admit the
private accounts even for examination without the transactions personal to you
are clearly distinct from mine. How does this agree with the assertion
contained in your same letter? It is of the utmost importance to your honor and
mine, that the settlement of accounts which has been totally laid aside for
much too long a period should at least now be finally adjusted and settled
betwixt us without any further delay for any possible reason. I must leave you,
Sir, to reconcile these and other things which do not consist too well
together, but I seriously assure you that I will not render my accounts in any
other form than that in which they are now sent. My reasons are these: First,
these accounts agree with my books which can be supported by proper evidence;
2ly, if I rendered them in any other form, they might be invalidated by
contrasting them with those already in your possession; 3ly, although I was
very desirous of indulging your wish on this occasion, yet I cannot now do it,
for the confidence I reposed in you is gone; 4ly, the accounts, as rendered,
contain that substantial justice you speak of, and therefore it is not
necessary to change the form on that account. You may from the accounts in
their present form make just such statements as you shall think proper, and if
on comparing them, I find no essential difference, I will give a proper
certificate thereof; but more I will not do.

In your letter of the 23d January you observe, that the King, through his
Secretaries of State, was duly informed of your operations in Boston; that, by
the mode of adjusting and intermingling accounts, you shall personally lose the
merit of your own transactions, and that the savings made for the King, by my
operations, will best appear from the accounts when they will stand alone.
Whether the informations you gave to the King were well or ill founded, it is
not my business to enquire; whether the state of facts will or will not do you
honor, I am no longer solicitous; but I hope they may. As to myself, I claim
from the King neither thanks, nor honors, nor rewards. I shall never give
myself a moment's concern, whether he gained or lost in those transactions,
which I performed by your order; I owed him no duty, he had confided to me no
trust, nor conferred on me any authority; if he had, I would have executed his
trust with fidelity; you are responsible to him and may render such accounts as
you think proper; mine with you, I send with this letter. In your same letter
of the twenty-third of January, you dwell on the same arguments, and say: I am
convinced you do not think me quite so great a fool, as to have established you
Agent General over myself. To all this my answer is very simple: you are, I
suppose, answerable to the King; but whether you are or not, is none of my
affair. As to the business I performed for you, I must answer it to you, and I
do this by showing a compliance to your orders. Robert Morris accounts to the
Agent of the Royal Marine; John Holker, Daniel Bell, John Row and others,
transact business on account of the Royal Marine in Boston; the Agent General
makes those Gentlemen accountable to Robert Morris, by placing the accounts of
those transactions in his hands, for the express purpose of introducing their
accounts into his, so that the Agent General may have the whole in one view in
the accounts of Robert Morris, and for the purpose of justifying the charge of
a commission thereon, one half of which is to be drawn by the Agent General, by
agreement, and the other half by Robert Morris. If the accounts of those
Gentlemen do not please you, I care not; for I did not employ them, and
inserted their accounts in mine by your order. In my letter of the
twenty-fourth of January I asked this question: "Whether you did not desire me
to comprehend all the accounts of the Royal Marine in my accounts?" It would
have saved time at least if you had answered plainly in the affirmative. The
fact was, that the account of your Boston transactions, as well as all other of
these accounts, was inserted in mine by your order, that the whole might appear
in one point of view, and a commission be charged on the whole. You have stated
this matter somewhat differently, in your letter of the sixteenth of January,
speaking of the vouchers to that Boston account, you say, which you were so
obliging as to take charge of, in order that they might be recorded for my
safety, in the first draught of my public accounts. In your letter of the
twenty-third of January, you say, My Boston transactions shall never be blended
with yours; I affirm, that I never intended, much less agreed or consented,
that they should be rendered by you. And in your letter of the twenty-fourth of
January, you say, When I carried you the papers and notes I had made and drawn
up in Boston, I prayed you to draw up an account of my transactions there,
separate and distinct from all others, to state them in a separate book or
paper, and to keep the vouchers till I should want or call for them; telling
you, I should think them safer in your hands than in mine. In that same letter
you mention other things, relative to a commission on those transactions, in
which your memory served you so badly, that your letter of the nineteenth
instant has been written to correct one error. Your relation of this matter
would seem to turn on this point: That you conceived your papers to be safer in
my custody than in your own. But how is this possible? You admit, that it was
agreed, a commission should be charged by me on this transaction. How could
that be, without bringing the whole into my accounts? You say that these
transactions were to be recorded in your first public accounts. In the first
accounts settled you admit the amount of them was carried out in one line,
agreeably to the original intention. Now, Sir, I have in my possession a state
of those transactions, as rendered by me for settlement, and joined thereto, is
written, not only Mr. Gerard's certificate that he had compared it, etc. etc.
but the following words signed by you, " vu, verify and approuve par nous a
Philadelphie, 9 Sept. 1779." After doing this how can you at this hour pretend,
that you never intended much less agreed to or consented that these accounts
should be rendered by me? But this is not all: several of your transactions in
Boston were included in and produced in support of an account entitled John
Holker, Esqr; Agent of the Royal Marine of France in account current with
Robert Morris of Philadelphia on account of said Marine To make out this
account you yourself furnished me with your own minutes with John Rowe's
accounts, Daniel Bell's, the Continental Navy Board's, Miller and Tracey's,
Nathaniel Rugles's, Jon. Williams's, Thomas Russell's and the Board of War's at
Boston: And you yourself was present, not only at the adjustment of this
account before Monsr. Gerard, but also when the entries were made by me in my
books, and you have signed the account. I do acknowledge that you proposed my
opening a set of books for the business of the Royal Marine, but upon my
objecting that a multiplicity of books were apt to create confusion and
subjected accountants to a greater chance of error, you acquiesced in the
introduction of those as well as the private affairs entrusted to your
management, into my books, and after that acquiescence, objections made now to
answer your own purposes, can have no weight, especially as the accounts, I
render, are just, fair and honorable. To these convincing evidences of your
agreement and consent, I can add also your directions. I have in my possession
a list of bills drawn by you at Boston for the use of the Royal marine, to
which is added by you the following note, " Mr. Holker begs the proper entries
may be made". In a letter from you of the 7th of January 1779, you ask, When
will Mr. Robert Morris be at liberty to work with Mr. Holker on account of the
expenditures of the fleet, his negociations, and at Boston. You wrote to me on
the first of August 1779, as follows, Mr. Holker presents his compliments to
Mr. Morris, reflecting on Mr. Chaumont's protesting the bills, he makes the
following requests: That his account may be finally drawn out and sent to him,
that a proper list of loan-office certificates, proceeding from the bills drawn
on Mr. Le Ray de Chaumont, payable at the house of Mr. Peltier, may be finally
drawn up and transmitted, after having been certified by me par quadruplicates,
so as he may dispose of part or the whole thereof. That an account of the money
paid into Mr. Bell's hands, by Mr. Jonathan Williams, for the account of Mr.
Chaumont, may be made out, and the price of exchange, then current, mentioned;
so as to authorize me to send notes of the payment to the Minister, to pay the
value thereof to Mr. Chaumont on account of the affairs of the Royal Marine, to
determine the Minister to honor my bills, to facilitate Chaumont's affairs, to
give some satisfaction, to ensure my own credit and consequence, etc. etc. I
should want seven half joes, which I shall reimplace here on the first
opportunity. I am yours for life and death, HOLKER, In your letter of the
sixteenth of August, 1779, you say, I beg you will write in a pressing manner to
Mr. Smith for his accounts, so as I may have, as soon as possible, an estimate
of our situation with respect to the King. On the twenty-fifth of the same
month you say, Mr. Holker hopes Mr. Smith has sent his accounts, they are very
necessary, as Mr. Holker can only ground his remittance to Mr. Chaumont on the
general account. On the third of September you say, The above note is a general
account of what was furnished by the Continental commissaries in Boston,
deducting the article mentioned in Miller and Tracey's account. Remainder, is
that part, which, being sent from hence, arrived in Boston, and must be
estimated at the price then current in Boston, according to Messrs. Miller and
Tracey's account, so as to avoid all difficulties. And on the eighth of
September, 1779, you say, As soon as you can send me a copy of the general
account, I shall be glad to receive it, so as to ground my letter to the
Minister, by Mr. Gerard, and my correspondence with Mr. de Chaumont. All this
was previous to the settlement of those accounts on the 9th of September, 1779.

But, Sir, it will not be difficult to show, not only what you ordered and
agreed to, but even what you intended at that time; although your intentions may
now have changed. Be pleased to recollect, that your operations at Boston were
twofold, part for the King, and part for private account; that the business of
both kinds passed in some instances through the same hands, and that the money
was applied partly by funds, which you received there, and partly by bills
drawn on me. John Rowe's accounts amount, in the whole, to the sum (in
Pennsylvania currency) of L. 61040 - 15 - 5 of this there was for account of
the King L. 51503 - 17 - 8 and for your and my joint account 9536 - 17 - 9 is
61040 - 15 - 5 He drew bills on me to the amount of L. 55275 - 15 - 0 and you
paid him in Boston 8250 - 0 - 0 L. 63525 - 15 - 0 which placed a balance in his
hands of 2484 - 19 - 6 and this balance being charged to him in a new account,
run L. 61040 - 15 - 5 into other transactions: the L.8250 which you paid him,
arose from a sale of bills you drew on Messrs. Lecouteulx, on the credit of
200,000 Livres, remitted to them in part of 400,000 Livres the King had given
to the owners of certain privateers, which transaction I shall, by and bye,
have occasion to mention again. Now, Sir, I ask how this part of your Boston
transactions is to be separated from my account. But, further, you will
recollect, also, that I have at your request introduced into my accounts all
your transactions for others (except some of your remittances to Mr. Chaumont,
which you did not impart to me) and I have certified, by you, accounts of sales
of bills of exchange you sold in Boston, for those who had directed you to
procure for them loan-office certificates, which accounts were delivered to
enable me to frame mine. (Penns. currency.) For bills drawn on Mr. Chaumont,
payable at the house of Mr. Peltier, you received L. 38615 - 0 - 0 For bills
drawn on Messrs. Buffault and Co. payable do. 38467 - 5 - 6 L. 77082 - 5 - 6

These were part of the funds applied to the King's service, also about L.2000,
of what you received for goods of Mr. Chaumont, and a very considerable sum
belonging to the same gentleman, which was received by Jonathan Williams in
Boston. This last, paid to the use of the Royal marine L.187,525 - 5 - 10, and
he received the money from sales of bills on Mr. Chaumont, Mr. Grand, Messrs.
Lecouteulx and Co. and from sales of goods, the property of Mr. Chaumont,
Chaumont Cavillon freres and Co. Sabatier fills and Despres, and Marquis de St.
Aignan. The accounts of all these things are, at your desire, in my books and
in my name. How are they to be separated? Where are your instructions for the
purpose at the time? Could you have had any such thing then in idea? But you
have endeavored to obviate these clear conclusions, by holding up the idea,
that the settlement before Mr. Gerard was a very incomplete statement, which it
was necessary for him to have before his departure for France. Is there any
thing in your notes or letters, written at the time, which will countenance
such construction? You know that there is not; you know that they prove the
direct contrary. And, I Will go one step farther, which is to show, that very
long after Mr. Gerard's departure you viewed that settlement in a very
different point of light. For, I have a note, in which you say, Mr. Holker
wants a copy of Mr. Robert Morris's old account current of the Royal Marine
signed by Mr. Gerard, which he will return immediately, and then will demand a
meeting with Mr. Morris, for his kind advice, how to proceed in a settlement
with Roger Sherman. It is clear, therefore, that before your Boston operations,
at the time of (...), when the account of them was rendered, and long after,
you agreed, consented, ordered, and intended that they should be involved in my
accounts. The effort now made to separate them is with a view to establish your
demand of depreciation. But, although it is in that respect immaterial to me, I
will not consent to it.

I have already mentioned that I desired you to write on this subject, that I
might have an opportunity, once for all, to contest it. I will add, that I did
not imagine you would seriously advance such a claim. Remember, Sir, that my
transactious with you, were merely of the nature of a trust; you put moneys
into my hands for your own purposes; I held them at your disposition; if I
performed that trust, and the moneys perished in my hands, how am I answerable?
Did I ever ask you to place moneys in my hands (except when you indicated
purchases to be made or services to be performed that required it? You know
that I did not. Did I ever refuse to honor your drafts, or obey your orders on
me for money? You know that I did not. To what purpose, then, is it, that you
speak to me of the depreciation of moneys which I did you the favor to keep for
you? I say favor, because the loss in receiving and paying such large nominal
sums in paper money, by errors in counting* etc. amount to more than you can
have any idea of, and the trouble and time consumed therein, none can know, but
those who went through the painful experience. Suppose you had entrusted to me
any other perishable article, should I, or could I be made answerable for the
waste and loss while it lay in my store, especially if I received no
consideration for the care and custody? Although, to oblige you, these accounts
were rendered in a variegated form, they might all be comprised under one
general account, between you and me, of moneys received and paid by me.
Whether, during the whole of this time, there was, or was not, a balance in my
hands, is totally immaterial to me; it was always ready at your order to draw
it out when you pleased. I repeatedly, at your desire, made estimates for your
government in this respect, and my books and papers were always open to you.
Thus much, Sir, I have thought it might be proper to say on the general
principle.

For what you say, in your letter of the 23d of January, on the subject of
dates to the articles of my accounts, I can only refer you to the subordinate
accounts, which contain dates as precisely as I can render them (except that
the articles of my cash account being only entered from the cash-book into the
waste-book weekly, probably the dates may sometimes bear the date of the day of
entry, instead of the precise day on which the money was paid or received; but
this, I conceive, is not of any importance.) But, in your same letter, you say
further, In the private accounts your transactions being blended with mine, the
accounts of various other individuals being also blended with mine and yours,
it is impossible to know, from the dates that appear on them, what is the right
of each individual. Believe me, Sir, I have no desire to preclude you from any
calculations you may think proper, on this occasion; but, I will neither ask of
others, nor allow myself any depreciation in the moneys which were held for
your use and at your disposition. For instance, when, by your desire, I
remitted upwards of thirty thousand pounds to Mr. Slough, to purchase flour for
the Royal Marine and money of the recalled emissions for your private friends,
can you believe I would expose my reputation, by asking him for the
depreciation of that money, or waste my fortune, by allowing it to you? But,
you ask me, in your letter of the twenty-third of January, Why offer a
certificate that you would not allow depreciation? Recollect, I pray you, that
this was in answer to your question, what you should say to the King's Minister
for not allowing it to him. You say further, Let the advantages gained by your
operations, be placed against the losses suffered by depreciation; this is fair
and just; this is all you certainly can mean or pretend to. But, I neither mean
nor pretend to any such a thing, I have already said, and again repeat, I ask
no credit of the King for any savings, I am not accountable to him for any
loosings, nor will I compensate to him or to you for any depreciation during my
agency in your affairs. At the same time it is not clear to me that you would
not have to pay, rather than receive on the King's account; for, at the time
when the settlement was made before Mr. Gerard I was actually in advance,
although, from the face of the account, the balance is considerably against me.
The notes made on that very account show this, and, although those notes were
then made upon estimates only, yet the facts support them; except, that the sum
in the hands of Mr. Smith was not quite so large as we expected, a considerable
part thereof being applied to purchase and fitting a ship for your and my
account, came from our own funds, and of course lessened the sum Mr. Smith had
for the service of the Royal Marine. In like manner, the remittance of L.10,000
had not been effectually made to Mr. Langdon, but he had, by your desire,
received my orders long before to purchase the masts which were estimated at
that sum, and I was liable to pay his drafts whenever they should appear. But,
in your letter of the twenty-third of January, you ask me, Why argue, that
because the King had made great savings by the operations of the Royal Marine
under my direction, you are not to account to me on his behalf and make good
depreciation if any loss ensued. Indeed, Sir, I made use of no such argument,
but told you the King had not suffered by depreciation, and therefore had no
right to ask it. You certainly can not have forgotten the arguments which you
have used for paying the United States for provisions furnished at the nominal
value, viz. that the King's money lay in the hands of your agents, at your
order, ready to pay into the treasury, and as you could not ask them to make
good depreciation, so it ought not to be asked of you. I have said that I did
not ask you to place money in my hands; I now go further, if I had been in your
place, I would not have drawn for the King's money until it was wanted for the
King's service. Doubtless you had good reasons for writing to me on the
twenty-sixth of February 1779, Mr. Holker presents his compliments to Mr.
Robert Morris, and begs he will do his utmost to push on his accounts as fast
as possible, as also the negotiation of bills, so as to make money. And shall
Mr. Holker now ask this same Mr. Morris for depreciation, for money thus
brought into his hands? Nay, money that lay ready for his disposal, and which
Mr. Morris could not have parted with without immiment hazard? On the
twenty-eighth day of April, 1779, you say, I shall want, for the use of the
Royal Navy of France, from fourteen to fifteen thousand barrels of flour. I
beg, also, that you will lay in here, five hundred barrels of the best beef, and
as much pork. On the twentieth of August, 1779, you say, What money can you
command in Boston, shall I offer it to the treasury, or shall I have it
employed in the purchase of beef, pork, codfish, etc. etc. On the third of
September, 1779, Mr. Gerard wants 10,000 dollars for a few days. Mr. Holker has
taken the liberty of drawing this day on Mr. Morris for that sum. On the
eighteenth of the same month, I request you will be so kind as to write to Mr.
Mumford in Connecticut, to secure the salt provisions, flour, bread, etc. but
especially the oil, and butter, and salt-fish, that might come in any prize
vessels, to be sold at Providence or New London. Can you seriously imagine,
that the depositary of moneys, held liable to sudden calls, of any and every
kind, and who was always ready to answer those calls, would be so weak as to
allow for the perishing of it in his hands? Can you suppose any tribunal, or
any impartial person, would hold him bound to make it good? But let us return
for a moment to your Boston transactions, on which so great a stress is laid.
Your most favorable statement of them can only be, a profit made by the King on
the depreciation of money belonging to individuals, applied to his use. But
this is not all: you, as I have already observed, derived the means of making
those expenditures, principally from funds credited to individuals in accounts
kept by you, in my name, at your request; comprise the whole together, and you
must see, that it forms neither addition to, nor deduction from, what I
possessed. But, according to the mode in which you seem to desire a statement,
I should first account to those individuals for depreciation on moneys you
received and applied to the King's use; secondly, to the King, for moneys which
you put into my hands; and, thirdly, you would ask the United States to accept
of the money at the original value, because it had been in my hands; this
attempt requires no comment. Such, then, is your claim for depreciation on
general principles, and on the particular nature of our accounts. Before I quit
the subject I will select two or three instances from those accounts, which
will bring the reasoning more home to your perceptions. The King paid 400,000
Livres for two prizes, taken by the privateers Hancock and Boston, you agreed
with the owners for L.70,000 lawful money; you paid in part your bills for
45,000 Livres, (L.7875) and drew on me for the remainder L.62,125, which sums
together, make L.70,000 lawful. These drafts on me, equal to L.77,656 - 5
Pennsylvania currency, were paid by me, when your public bills were selling at
900 per cent. on sterling, reckoning livres 10 d. sterling. Consequently, those
bills were paid with somewhat less than 200,000 Livres, the difference on the
whole transaction was a gain of 155,000 Livres Tournois.

The account sales of bills of exchange, dated the eleventh of March, 1779,
contains a sale to Peter Whiteside of 91,428 Livres 5 sols, of which one bill
for 4571 Livres 7 sols, was on his account. The remainder (equal to L.3800
sterling) was, on your and my joint account, taken at the current rate, toward
reducing the advances which had been made for the Royal Marine, and afterward
I agreed to give you the sum of L.5700 advance on your half, for which you are
credited the 12th of May in your account current, being a profit you gained
thereon. The fifteenth of February, 1780, I received by your orders, bills to
the amount of 54,722 Livres 18 sols, which were, according to that order,
received of Messrs. Wm. Turnbull and Co. whom I have credited for the same, at
the then current price of six dollars per livre; afterward 36752 Livres 6 sols
of these bills were paid for a brigantine, in which you and I were concerned,
and 5500 Livres were sold at one dollar advance, is Dollrs. 5500 and 12651
Livres at three dollars advance, is 37953 Dollrs. 43453

For one half of this gain you are credited by me in account current on the
seventh of April, 1780, and yet you can ask me for depreciation on these
accounts. You have asked me for Livres -- which you suppose to be due, and by
examining the last of these transactions, being one of those on which this
demand is made, you will find I should in that case pay L. 4104 - 3 - 7 for
what sold at the time for L. 2600 -- and in a transaction where you had already
derived the benefit of the actual depreciation.

You wish to know what measures I allude to which may prove disadvantageous or
even ruinous to you, and what are the false conclusions drawn by you. I
believe, Sir, you will be convinced that the conclusions you had formed of me
and my conduct are not just; if you still think otherwise, go on in the
measures necessary to compel me to render such accounts as you like. Whether
some of the facts contained in this letter would be to your advantage or
disadvantage and whether they would promote your grandeur or effect your ruin,
you best can determine. Having thus discussed the points so much labored and
insisted upon in your late letters, I come now to speak of the accounts sent
you herewith.

In your letter of the 24th January you say "I told you that Mr. Swanwick had
delivered to Mr. Turnbull the accounts of the Royal Marine after my perusal and
examination of said accounts: in this you are mistaken; I might have looked at
them cursorily, but as to examining them I never did until since the twenty
third day of January, the day on which you and I had our last interview. I am
sorry to say that, upon my examination of those accounts, I find Mr. Swanwick
had made considerable errors and omissions, all which I have now corrected: and
as you did forbid Mr. Turnbull to admit the balances of my accounts to be
introduced into his, (although I could prove your contrary orders at the time
if I thought it necessary) I have continued the account of the Royal Marine in
your name as agent until the end thereof. By this account you will find there
was a balance of upwards of L. 340,000 continental currency in my favor when I
ceased to be your agent: this consists with estimates which you and I made at
that time and with the letters you told me you then wrote, excepting as to L.
100,000 which I shall presently mention. This balance was nearly discharged by
bills of exchange which by your order I received of Mssrs. William Turnbull and
Co. in March, April and June 1780, and which I sold or paid at the same price I
was charged for them, to John Donaldson, Isaac Moses and others, to all which
you was privy at the time. It is true that I had charged Wm. Turnbull and Co.
with the effects from which their capital was to be drawn, and that I had
omitted in due time to give them credit for the sum of L.200,000 continental
currency, being the amount of that capital, which you and I agreed to advance
to Mr. Turnbull, when we took him into partnership, in order to transfer your
agency into his hands, neither had I charged your account for L.100,000
continental, being the half of that capital, so that these omissions not being
attended to in our estimates, generally occasioned an error in them of L.
100,000 continental currency, as is above mentioned. Notwithstanding this I
find, that on stating properly the accounts between Mssrs. Wm. Turnbull and Co.
and me, they were paid for all the bills of exchange which I purchased of them,
so that you will find your claim of 169,000 Livres Tournois falls to the
ground. From the time I ceased to be your agent our accounts are no longer to
be considered as of the nature of a trust, neither are the accounts between Wm.
Turnbull and Co. and me of that nature. I am willing therefore to settle my
accounts with them and those with you for subsequent transactions upon
principles of depreciation. I find, that at the time when the Royal Marine owed
me upwards of three hundred and forty thousand pounds continental currency, I
had in my hands, of your private funds, and those of your friends, nearly to
the amount of three hundred thousand pounds continental, and as I continued to
receive more after that period, I readily agree to set aside Mr. Swanwick's
proposition, of valuing the balance of continental money on your private
account current at one hundred for one; he meant to do justice between us, but
it did not occur to him that I received on account of the balance in my favor,
on your account, as agent of the Royal Marine, the sum of L. 342,775 - 2 - 6
continental money, when it was worth sixty-one and a half for one; and, that
having at the same time near L. 300,000 of yours and your friends in my hands,
you ought to have the like value for at least the latter amount. And therefore
to save all trouble of investigation, as to the exact sum which was in my
hands, I agree to compute the same sum which I received L. 342,775 - 2 - 6
continental, at sixty-one and a half, and bring the amount thereof to your
credit in the hard money account; this I think is just, and therefore, Sir, I
offer it. There will then remain a balance of L. 114,561 - 18 - 0 continental
money arising from receipts of later date, the value of which must be settled
by you and me. You will observe, I suppose, several articles in the accounts
now rendered, which Mr. Swanwick had omitted some for, and some against you. In
the course of examining my books and papers I have discovered also, that I lent
you a cargo of tobacco, which was shipped for your account in May, 1780, per
the brig Hawke, Captain Tailor, from Baltimore, consisting of 79 hogsheads.
This tobacco I borrowed and paid in November last, without recollecting its
being lent to you; therefore, you must either return me seventy-nine hogsheads
of tobacco, or pay me as much money as will purchase it. I am ready to meet you
at any time and place, in order to fix the value of the continental balance
above mentioned, as also the price of the tobacco; unless you choose to save
that trouble, by delivering the like quantity of tobacco equally good in
quality, which will be most agreeable to me; when these two points are
adjusted, there can be no difficulty in completing the settlement of our
accounts. I will then render you an account of those articles depending between
us, which consists of hard money debits and credits. I have formerly rendered
you a number of those subordinate accounts, whose amount or balance form
articles in the accounts currt. now sent, I did intend to have had the whole
copied again and sent with these, but as this would detain you much longer from
the investigation of your real situation with me, I have omitted it for the
present; but I will cheerfully have copied and sent to you any of them that you
may desire. I am also not only ready but desirous to explain any thing in these
accounts that you do not comprehend; for, although I will not comply with unjust
and unreasonable demands, yet I am, and ever shall be, ready to show all those
with whom I have any dealings, that the accounts, which I render, are just,
fair and honorable.

You will probably think it necessary that I should have sent my vouchers in
support of these accounts; but, since you have detained from me some of those
which were confidentially entrusted to you, I will not part with those which
now remain, until we shall have made a settlement. It is possible, situated as
I am, subject to perpetual interruptions, that there may still be errors or
omissions in these accounts, although I have examined them with all the care and
attention that I could; if any such, they cannot be important nor long
undiscovered, as I shall still bestow time on the subordinate accounts more
than I have yet done. If either errors or omissions are discovered, whether
they make for or against me, I shall announce them to you, in order that right
may be done.

I am, SIR, Your humble servant, (Signed) ROBERT MORRIS.

JOHN HOLKER, Esquire
Observations on ROBERT MORRIS's letter of the 26th of February, 1784, to JOHN
HOLKER, and extracts from the same.
ROBERT MORRIS, being accused with delaying the settlement of his accounts with
JOHN HOLKER, appears determined to acquit himself of that charge. With this
view, he sends, with the letter above mentioned (of February 26, 1784,) his
accounts, for a final settlement, which, according to his statement, nearly
balance by credit and debit. He then, in his turn, accuses the agent general,
J. H. of having unjustly charged him with such delays, and of attributing them
to a wish of withholding a balance due to J. H. This point is to be cleared up
by the accounts of the auditors, which, however, cannot materially differ, at
least in nominal sums of continental money, from those established by J. H.
against R. M. upon the vouchers produced by the latter.

Speaking of the nature of the trust reposed in him, during his agency, R. M.
says, You may remember also, that you urged it as a kind of obligation, to take
care of the interests of a King, who was in the act of affording such generous
assistance to my country, and called on me, if I would not act myself, to point
out some other person. And In this said letter R. M. first says, You will
remember, Sir, that you introduced yourself to my acquaintance in the beginning
of July, 1778, and pressed me to undertake the transaction of your affairs. The
consideration, held out to me, was, that very great sums of money would
naturally come to my hands, and might be occasionally employed in useful
speculations on our joint account. J. H. says he never pressed R. M. to
undertake his affairs; he offered to R. M. the preference of his affairs; he
stipulated a fixed commission; but denies that ever he held out as a
consideration, that they were jointly to speculate with the funds of any one;
much less to speculate and attempt the ruin of the service and of his absent
friends, by working depreciation against them. No one at least will believe
that the consideration held out to R. M. was, that R. M. should speculate with
J. H's money for his own account, and afterward that J. H. should gladly put
up with a nominal account, when it pleased R. M. to render any, or to offer a
settlement of them. But every one will see why and wherefore he accepted of the
preference given him to manage J. H's affairs; and others will best judge,
whether it is true that R. M's consent was reluctantly drawn from him, on this
occasion, by a man who had introduced himself to his acquaintance.
further says, At length you drew from me my reluctant consent. And whatever
else may happen, I have, at least, the pleasure to reflect, that the trust
reposed in me was faithfully executed.

By this paragraph, he says, he reflects with pleasure, that he has faithfully
executed the trust reposed in him, though he did undertake the King's business
with reluctance; he was solicited thereto by the King's agent, who urged him to
act for the interest of a good and generous King, and stipulated with him, as a
previous obligation, that he should take care of his interest; because he was
in the act of giving and affording assistance to his country in the hour of
it is distress; he engaged in the King's concerns, and to act in those of
Holker's friends on this footing. But, RES MIRABILIS? he afterward maintains
he was not agent, not bailiff in law, -- but merely a banker, all the time of
his agency.

And further, As you was not only agent for your sovereign, but also for many
individuals trading to this country, or speculating in our public funds, the
concerns, which I engaged in for you, were both numerous and important.

In another part of this letter he says, page 9, Remember, Sir, that my
transactions with you were merely of the nature of a trust, you put R. M. is
pleased to call bills of exchange by the denomination of moneys, in order
thereby to draw a consequence, favorable to his purposes.
moneys into my hands for your own purposes, I held them at your disposition;
if I performed that trust, and the moneys perished in my hands, how am I
answerable. Did I ever ask you to place moneys into my hands, except when you
indicated purchases, or services to be performed? Did I ever refuse to honor
your drafts, or obey your orders on me for money? To what purpose then is it
that you speak to me of depreciation of moneys which I did you the favor to
keep for you? I say favor, because the loss in receiving and paying such large
nominal sums of paper money, by errors Is the mistake in counting money always
on one side?
in counting, amount to more than you have an idea of, and the trouble and time
consumed therein, none can know, but those who went through the painful
experience.

John Holker entrusted to Robert Morris almost the whole of the business of the
Royal Marine, deeming him alone competent thereto; J. H. being a foreigner,
unacquainted with accounts and with the characters to be chosen and employed --
with the prices of articles, -- with the countries where these articles or
provisions were to be procured, -- with the nature of the money then current,
-- and the valuations of specie through the continent: he had no clerk, no
accountant with him, no credit established to transact or give satisfaction in
transacting business, to secure engagements, etc. etc. For all these purposes
R. M. was chosen and employed, and at the time J. H. had not another choice to
make.

For these purposes, he gave bills of exchange, he put bills on France into the
hands of R. M. and also some moneys arising from the sales of prize goods and
others, salt, etc. etc. However, all this, R. M. says, was reduced to a mere
trust of moneys deposited with him, which he did J. H. the favor to keep; this
favor, however, was to cost an immense sum to the King; for, laying aside all
considerations respecting the heavy loss sustained on such of the bills, as it
was necessary to sell for the real purpose of services actually performed for
the Royal Marine, it appears by the account, that a sum exceeding L.39,000 of
real specie value, of which L.30,000 at least were paid in bills on France, are
said to have been employed by R. M. in order to make purchases of articles or
payments, which together amount to no more than L.11,950 - 8 - 11 specie value,
thus sinking L.39,000 real, in order to pay about L.12,000. A pretty favor
indeed!

"Suppose," continues the author of this extraordinary letter, you had
entrusted me with any other perishable R. M. has attempted to account for near
one million of livres, drawn in public bills upon France, whereof the greatest
part he sold, or pretended to sell: were they of a perishable nature? 1,000,000
of livres is equal to L.71,428 - 11 - 5, P^^ns. currency.
article, should I, could I, be made answerable for the waste and loss; while
it lay in my store; especially if I received no consideration for the care and
custody?

This passage of the letter admits of the depreciation of the paper, it being
also a perishable article; moreover it implies, that if this perishable article
did not remain in his store, or in his chest, he is answerable for the waste
and loss; and the more so, because he was actually not only a depositary, but a
true agent, a bailiff in law, receiving the full consideration he had
previously stipulated for (which is also expressed in this same letter) three
times the consideration or commissions usually allowed for recovering A mere
banker charges no commission whatever.
and paying money: if answerable for the waste and loss of the money when not
in chest, he is also answerable for the total loss of the bills, either by the
untimely sale thereof, or of their proceeds by depreciation, because if he did
not keep those public moneys in chest, till wanted for the public service, he
must have employed them in the interim for his own purposes, to his own
emolument, to throw the waste in his hands; and if answerable for the waste, by
his own avowal when the money was out of his chest, shall he not produce his
books, the only certain evidence in his favor, to prove, that he did keep them
in his chest, that he did not employ the proceeds of the bills for his own
purposes, that he did not sell the bills in order to get at the proceeds, that
he did not take the bills to himself, under the idea of fictitious sales;
especially when fictitious sales can be proved against him by this same letter?
Is he not also bound; by this avowal, to give full, undoubted and lawful
reasons for his conduct, in order to convince us that he had sufficient cause
for the sale of all the bills given to Him?

Further says R. M. (page 4) As to myself I claim from the King neither thanks,
nor honors, nor rewards. But he claimed from the King's agent five per cent.
for his commissions on all purchases on the King's account, two and a half per
cent. on the sales of all bills, etc. etc. It is true, he was, per agreement,
to allow one half of these commissions to the King's agent, and this half has
been prudently saved for the King; therefore, the auditors can only credit R.
M. in account, for two and a half per cent. on all purchases, and one and a
quarter on the sales of bills, since R. M. on account of the extensive business
he had to manage, agreed originally, to be satisfied with one half of the
commissions usually charged in America, which are more than double of what is
usually charged by European merchants on commission business.
I shall never give myself a moment's concern, whether he gained or lost, on
those transactions which I performed by your order: I owed him no duty, he had
confided to me no trust, nor conferred on me any authority, if he had, I should
have executed his trust with fidelity: you are responsible to him, and may
render such accounts as you think proper, mine with you, I send with this
letter.

If the King had conferred on R. M. authority, he then would have acted with
fidelity; but when the King's agent confers on him all his authority, then he
is not bound to any duty; he may act without integrity in this case, and even
charge therewith his employer, and traduce the agent general, because he
reposed confidence in his good faith, honesty, reputation and fidelity; he was
not then responsible for the trust reposed in him, because no commission in his
name had issued under the King's authority, except merely for the accounts of
the nominal value of these perishable articles, which he had purchased with
unperishable bills; and these he had procured from the King's agent, under the
pretense of fallacious accounts, of real expenditures, actual advances of
money, and further wants for further expenditures. Suppose he had received from
the agent general 100 hogsheads full of molasses, that he was to keep them in
his store, and attend carefully to the waste; he accounts for the hogsheads but
not for the contents; and when called upon to open the store, and to prove by
his cooper, and servants, and books, that the hogsheads were attended to, that
they have been constantly in store, and that he has neither sold nor bartered
the contents; he then maintains, that the King had conferred on him no
authority; therefore that he would neither open his store, thereby to prove the
natural leakage and waste of the hogsheads; nor would produce his books, not
being bound to act with fidelity or integrity, because he was only employed by
the King's agent, and not by the King -- because he was not agent for the
latter, but only a store keeper, a banker for J. H.

R. M. however adds -- As to the business Was he a depositary of business? Does
a mere banker incur the obligation of answering for business? Does a mere
banker perform any business for others?
I performed for you, I must answer it to you, and I do this by showing a
compliance with your orders.

The following passage will show that he received more, or pretended to receive
more, than the full consideration for his services as bailiff and agent; and
therefore much more than he could have claimed, had he been, as he says, a mere
depositary, a mere banker.

Page 11, -- The fact This is in reply to J. H's letters of the 23d and 24th of
January, 1784 who said, that the accounts relative to Boston transactions,
respecting the fleet of Count D'Estaing, ought not and should not be blended
with R M's accounts of his agency; because improper consequences would and did
appear from their introduction into R. M's accounts. For J. H. had then
discovered, that it was by their means that R. M. contrived to conceal the real
situation of his accounts and operations from him, and to make a claim of bills
on France to an immense amount, on account of balances erroncously brought by
R. M. to his own credit, and which he says, were due to me say, to R. M.
was that the account of your Boston transactions, as well as all others of
these accounts, was inserted in mine by your order, that the whole might appear
in one point of view, and a commission be charged on the whole.

In this business, J. H. did not even benefit of the advice of R. M. during all
the time of his residence in Boston: in October, November and December 1778.
But as he prayed R. M. to redact those accounts on his return to Philadelphia,
he at the time consented to allow a commission of 2 per cent. on the whole, on
a sum of more than L.305,000, when it ought only to have extended to the sum of
L.51,503, paid by him for J. Rowe's drafts from Boston, and J. H's bills on him
for L.54,981 - 11- 3, continental currency: one half of this commission was,
however, to have been credited to the Royal Marine, and this reduces the claim
of R. M. on the whole to one and one quarter per cent. or one half of the above
commission, if the claim is admissible on the improper consent of the agent
general given at the time, to the proposal of R. M. for his trouble in
redacting the accounts.

R. M. has said above, (page 10) that if the King had conferred on him any
authority, he would have executed his trust with fidelity: afterward, he adds,
(page 15) to his immortal honor I did not ask His words are (page 14) Did I
ever ask you to place moneys in my hands, except when you indicated purchases
or services to be performed? This is very different, -- and he must reconcile
the interrogation and the assertion to each other.
you to put moneys into my hands; now go further; if I had been in your place,
I would not have drawn for the King's money, until it was wanted for the King's
service.

Does not this accusation made against J. H. -- does not this charge preferred
by R. M. against his employer -- indicate, and amount to an acknowledgement,
that R. M. knew at the time, that the bills were improperly sold? -- This sale
he well knew, the accounts when properly stated would disclose: therefore to
prevent the charge against himself, and to avoid the consequences, he becomes
accuser of the agent general, and lays the blame at his door, though no such
charge had yet been made against R. M. -- J. H. could not have even suspected
that R. M. had ever concealed from his knowledge the management and
appropriation of such a large sum as appears by the accounts, nor would he ever
have believed it, but from the conviction, that the accounts carry with them,
to all who can read and understand them.

However, the following questions arise on this astonishing passage of his
letter: If it was, in his eyes, a want of fidelity; if it was not honest in the
King's agent general, to have (as he here asserts) prematurely drawn the bills;
why does his confidential subordinate agent prematurely sell these bills? Was
it, because J. H. had entrusted to him the management of the whole of his
business, the transaction of all his affairs, the negotiation of those bills,
the choice of agents and correspondents for all purchases on account of the
royal service, the settlement of the accounts? Was it necessary for R. M. to
sell those same bills, before the expenditures in many cases could have been
foreseen, much less have taken place? Were the perishable proceeds of the
bills, so prematurely sold, to be considered as vested in J. H. or in R. M. to
whom the management of this business was wholly confided? -- Why were those
unperishable bills, sold for a perishable article: or rather why pretend a sale
to P. Whiteside, of L.3,800 sterling of bills, as he acknowledges to have done,
by this very letter, and then keep the whole bills for his own purposes, in
order to account for the perishable value of their proceeds? -- Was this the
execution of that trust reposed in him, which he says "It gives me so much
pleasure, to have faithfully Vide the second page of the letter.
executed!" And is it thus he was to act for the interest of a King, whose
service he had been urged by his agent to undertake, because he was in the act
of affording such generous assistance to his country, and of aiding to save him
from the wrath of an incensed nation, and a relentless enemy?

In another part of this letter, R. M. describes the nature of the trust
reposed in him in concise terms. -- Page 15. Can you seriously imagine, (says
he) that the depositary In the beginning of this letter he says, The concerns I
engaged in for you, were both numerous and important. He engaged for J. H. in
the concerns of the King, and of J. H's friends -- Was he depositary of their
concerns as well as of their moneys, or agent for their concerns and depositary
for their moneys, arising from, or necessary for their concerns?
of moneys, held liable to sudden calls of any and every kind, and who was
always ready to answer those calls, would be so weak, as to allow for the
perishing Page 14. R. M. says, But I will neither ask of others, nor allow
myself any depreciation on the moneys which were held for your use, and at your
disposition. If held for J. H's use in his hands he will not allow
depreciation; consequently, if he did not hold it for his use, he must pay
depreciation, according to his own principle.
of it in his hands?

To this it is replied, that among those articles best calculated to raise
money on sudden emergencies, and for sudden calls of the service, bills held
the first rank among merchants, for the purpose of an unfailing remittance to
Europe: these would have answered the purpose completely at all times, and were
not a perishable article. -- But it is also to be added, that there never was
one sudden call made on him for a large sum of money during his agency: that
all the calls made upon him were the consequence of his own measures in almost
every instance, of the purchases he had directed to be made, of the
expenditures he had authorized, as subordinate agent, and not as depositary or
banker.

Indeed it would be rather hard if the moneys had come into the hands of R. M.
and were to lay with him, till employed, if he sold the bills for real
purchases ordered, then actually making, or really practicable, it would be
rather hard I say, to make him account for the untimely sale of bills, and the
consequent loss by depreciation, provided he always had, as he asserts, the
money ready in his chest, to answer sudden calls; and that such money was
actually and bona fide perishing in his hands; -- in such a case, it might be
dealing too hard with a banker, or even an agent, to throw on him the whole
burden of the loss. But if the loss should have proved unreasonably great in
proportion to the service he had rendered, if there should be reasons to doubt
of the purchases having been ordered by the agent general to him, when he took
the bills, or when he sold them to his correspondents or brokers; then and in
this case, will it not be incumbent on him to clear up the matter, to show his
books, in order to prove, that, as he says, the money was actually perishing in
his hands? Shall we take his word, or the declaration of his friends or
partners, or clerks, in his justification, when a positive written evidence,
kept on purpose to establish it, and to ground the opinion of the world on or
respecting his conduct, can be produced by him in his defense? -- Shall not
this evidence be produced, since he acknowledges by this paragraph, "That it
would be weak in him to allow for the perishing of the money in his hands."
Which implies a very different consequence, if he employed the money to his own
purposes on the above supposition, and reaped not only the waste of the money,
but also the profits of the speculations he made with the proceeds of the
public bills; especially when it is evident that he took some to himself, under
the appearance of fictitious sales; nay, are we not to suppose that he probably
sold others so as to employ the proceeds thereof when in his chest, with and
without any distinction from his own moneys, as fast as opportunities offered?
This he confessed in as many words (on the arbitration) to have done, as
constantly as J. H's moneys came to his hands, and as any calls whatever were
made on him for his own concerns.

Can such conduct and such arguments be applauded? Was it thus that R. M.
intended to act for the interest of a generous King in his concerns? Had he
forgot that the paper of Congress was but a nominal perishable thing (to make
use of his own words)? Had he forgot that he alone kept the books; that he had
refused to open a separate set of books; that he had insisted upon blending the
accounts of the concerns of J. H. as agent and as a private individual in his
own books, with those of his own affairs and concerns? He alone was able to
know whether the surplus moneys were employed for the service, or perishing in
his chest; it was, therefore, incumbent on him, either to vest the money, or to
have proposed to his employer to vest it in some thing not perishable, not
subject to depreciation, rather than to let it perish, as he says, in his
hands, if really it was in his hands. Can any one believe, that such immense
sums, 2, 3, or L.400,000, should have lain for long periods of time, for 6, 8,
or 10 months, perishing in his hands? Was he not to have apprized the King's
agent of so very unfortunate a circumstance, so as to have provided against
future waste or depreciation, if these had been the unavoidable consequences of
the times and circumstances? Had he (R. M.) not foreseen, and previously
intended to apply those moneys to his own purposes, and was not this the
consideration he had in view when he reluctantly consented to transact J. H's
affairs?

R. M. being challenged by the letter of the 23d of January, 1784, of the agent
general, with having refused to keep separate books for the public concerns, he
answers:

I do acknowledge that you proposed my opening a set of books for the business
of the Royal Marine; but, upon my objecting that a multiplicity of books
According to this writer, to open a set of books for all public concerns,
separate from all others, would have created confusion, and given rise to
errors; to separate, according to him, is to confound matters, to subject an
accountant to a greater chance of error; and this was his motive for refusing
to open one more separate set of books distinct from his own.
were apt to create confusion and subjected accountants to a greater chance of
error, you acquiesced to the introduction of those, as well as the private
affairs entrusted to your management, The management of his friends affairs and
concerns was entrusted by J. H. to R. M. and by this means R. M. became their
agent, and has accounted for his agency to them.
into my books, and after that acquiescence, objections made now, to answer
your own purposes, can have no weight, especially as the accounts I render are
just, fair, and honorable.

By refusing to enter the accounts of the public transactions in separate
books, in opposition to J. H's repeated request, R. M. thus put it out of the
power of the King's agent to look into, or to know the situation of the public
affairs, as to the matter of moneys on hand: he could not have made out on the
books of R. M. the cash account of the Royal Marine, his own, and that of his
friends, without knowing also the situation of R. M. as to money in chest; and
without being more or less acquainted with his speculations and affairs, and
those of his agents and intimates. But this could not have been permitted, and
thus the agent general was to be kept in the dark. By these means did R. M.
alone become responsible for the consequences of his refusal to accede, at the
time, to J. H's proposal; which was a proper and necessary one, and such as
being afterward made to Messrs. Turnbull Their evidence on the trial is to be
taken, and to be contrasted with the conduct of R. M. and a pretty contrast it
will be indeed; for every eulogium, as to truth and candor, is deserved by
them, and their accounts give something of a profit to the King, instead of the
enormous loss we have to complain of; they were employed for the same business,
public and private, of J. H. they were requested to keep separate books and a
separate chest, and it was done; they never sold a bill but for an expenditure
actually made or making; they were confidentially employed, and every trust was
reposed in them, and they know that they were responsible for that trust,
though the King had conferred on them no authority.
and Co. was most cheerfully complied with. R. M. would not grant this request;
yet, as J. H. placed the utmost confidence in his honor and justice, as he
conceived that his services would be highly useful to the King, and as the
choice of him, for rendering such services, had been made by his Excellency Mr.
Gerard, as well as by J. H. he (J. H.) would not change his agent for this sole
reason; especially as he knew, that this agent's refusal of opening separate
books, would render him still more and more responsible for all the
consequences thereof -- a refusal grounded on so weak and frivolous a pretense,
so void of truth and reason. In fact, J. H. objected at the time to the
entering of the public accounts on R. M's private books; he objects now to the
impropriety of the measure, and always thought the refusal, to keep them
separate and distinct, very improper. J. H. never did freely acquiesce in, but
submitted to the refusal, because R. M. would not do otherwise; and therefore
R. M. is now charged with the consequences thereof, by his employer.

Shall not R. M. be responsible, when he alone did know, or could know the
amount of the expenditures making, or to be made, and the amount of the bills
on France necessary for defraying those expenditures? He alone did and could
know the amount of the public moneys, or private moneys on hand; the management
whereof, to save them from perishing, to save the King from loss, himself and
his friends from ruin, J. H. had entrusted to R. M. to his good faith and
attention, to his agency, upon the most confidential reliance on his fidelity
and abilities, on the same footing and principles, as the public business.

How much more strong will this reasoning appear; how weak and flimsy the
excuse offered by R. M. and how glaring his criminal intentions, at the time to
keep J. H. his employer, and all others in the dark; when it shall be rendered
evident that the estimates made, the accounts given to J. H. as settled
accounts, (though only settled by R. M. in his own behalf) are not exact; that
the balances are untrue and fallacious, and all in his favor, all contrived to
establish the grounds of obtaining further sums of money, and bills on France,
in order to secure the whole to himself, to work the plan of depreciation in
his defense, and to maintain at a future day, that an immense property was
wasted thereby in his hands, and had vanished like snow before the sun: all
this will appear by the accounts to which we refer the reader, and to the
observations thereon. Nay, when large nominal sums of the public paper, then
said to be perishing in his hands, were still to be accounted for, when heavy
sums of the same money, belonging to J. H. or his friends, were supposed to be
in his chest, and were also to be accounted for; if it should appear that he
was still claiming A sum of 169,000 Livres Tournois, was claimed by R. M. on
account of his advances for the Royal Marine, and were delivered to him in
bills on France in 1780, for that very purpose by Messis. Wm. Turnbull and Co.
balances in his favor, claiming bills for advances, which he said, he had made
on the public account; will it not be as clear as day light, that even as
banker, or depositary, R. M. was untrue, was inaccurate and unjust? Will it not
therefore be believed, that when he refused to keep separate books, he meant to
keep the agent general in the dark, to abuse his trust, and to profit by the
confidence reposed in him? Was not this refusal necessary, to conceal the
consequences of the premature and untimely sale of the bills, and of
depreciation of money, which, he says, did perish in his hands; lest a redress
of grievances might have been sued for at a more early period, or rather, that
he might have time to accomplish a settlement, and obtain a full We must here
refer the reader to some observations made on R. M's attempt of grafting the
accounts of Messrs. Win. Turnbull and Co. his successors in the public agency,
on those of his own operations and transactions.
discharge, before the consequences of his conduct could be perceived and fully
ascertained?

Was it not on account of these terrible consequences, that R. M. would not
send on the 26th of February, 1784, (vide page 18) the vouchers in support of
those accounts, he then forwarded to J. H. with his famous letter of that date?
Was it not for fear of these consequences, that he writes on the 2d and 3d of
March, that he will not even give communication of these vouchers, without all
claim of depreciation is formally and for ever given up, previous to all
communication thereof? Was it not through the fear of these consequences, that
he intimates (page 14) that he conceived it was of no importance to ascertain
the precise dates of receipt and payment of paper money. Was it not through
fear of these consequences that he writes a letter in 16 long and full pages,
to prove that J. H. had no claim whatever for depreciation on him, during the
whole of his agency; forgetting that he himself urged and got passed a law,
declaring that every one shall receive and allow depreciation on all unsettled
accounts.

Besides the accounts and the balances of the estimates, which R. M. says he
made at the time, we shall find other proofs of the claims he made for his
advances on behalf of the Royal Marine, as early as the 11th of March, 1779.
Vide his letter, page 16.

The account sales of bills of exchange, dated the 11th of March, 1779,
contains a sale to Peter Whiteside of 91,428 Livres 5 sols, of which one bill
for 4571 Livres 7 sols was on his account; the remainder (equal to L.3800
sterling) was on your and my joint account taken at the current rate, toward
reducing the advances which had been made for the Royal Marine: and afterward
I agreed to give you the sum of L.5700 (continental Money) advance on your
half, for which you are credited the 12th of May, in your account current,
being a profit you gained thereon. -- A little further he says, "And yet you
ask me for depreciation on those Referring to another sum of 54,722 Livres, 18
sols, paid to him by J. H's then agents, Wm. Turnbull and Co. on the 15th of
February, 1780, -- and of which we shall hereafter speak more fully.
accounts." -- Further, "And in a transaction where you have already derived
the benefit of the actual depreciation."

The first object that strikes, in this passage of the letter, is the sale made
to Peter Whiteside (Peter Whiteside and Co. was the house of R. M. in which he
held 3 shares in 4) of bills which belonged to him, as he says, on account of
his actual advances for the Royal Marine, and were taken afterward for his and
J. H's joint account. It will be necessary that the books of P. Whiteside be
examined, to see whether any mention is made of this sale, and whether he did
not gratuitously endorse these bills to the order of R. M. which must have been
done to cover the sale, and give room for a charge of a commission, etc. This
is the more necessary, in order to ground further minute investigations of R.
M's books, in this and other respects; and to establish, whethe he was or was
not, under the date of the 11th of March, 1779, in advance for the public
account, as he now says, and as he told J. H. at the time. If he was not in
advance for the Royal Marine at that period, -- if, on the contrary, he then
owed the Royal Marine, or had on hand, more than L.100,000 continental,
belonging to the King, did he not deceive J. H. then, and in his letter of the
26th of February, 1784? What shall we believe from him? Does he not owe these
bills, which he confesses having taken, under the cover of a fictitious sale?
Has he not taken any more, and how could he say, that J. H. was in advance for
half the sum? Was not this also imposing on his understanding? Was it not
further for the purpose of loading J. H. with depreciation afterward, on that
part of the bills (says R. M.) taken on his account, that R. M. pressed J. H.
to let him have those bills in order to offer the L.5700 continental of
advance, as expressed in the accounts under the date of the 12th of May, 1770;
and afterward offered them to J. H. by Swanwick, at the exchange of 100 for 1,
at a later period -- say in 1781 -- that advance being worth, and to be valued
in May, 1779, at 24 for 1? This is what R. M. calls a clear profit, gained by
J. H. on the sum of L.1900 sterling. in bills of exchange, the whole of which he
took to himself; and afterward adds -- How can you ask for me depreciation
Page 13, his words run thus I have already mentioned, that I desired you to
write me on this subject of depreciation, that I might have an opportunity,
once for all, to contest it; I will add, that I did not imagine, you would
seriously advance such a claim.

He certainly has wonderfully availed himself of the opportunity; but it will
not be, I suppose, once for all, as he says. He adds in the very same page,
Remember, Sir, that my transactions with you were merely of the nature of a
trust.


on this business, on a transaction wherein you have actually received the
benefit of the actual depreciation? Is not this an astonishing question, made
in a letter wrote to that very man to whom R. M. refuses all depreciation
during his agency, and wherein, also, he reprobates J. H's claiming
depreciation on a transaction where it has been granted by himself as early as
the month of May, 1779? When sitting as his own judge, betwixt J. H. and
himself, R. M. grants the principle of depreciation in May, 1779, by an impulse
of his own conscience, of his own knowledge of right and wrong, -- depreciation
for two months, from the 11th of March, 1779, to the 12th of May following, --
and refuses it in 1784 on this very sum, and others received by him during the
following months and years! He reproaches the agent general for claiming it in
his own affairs, but much more in the public account; forgetting, we suppose,
that he had got unjustly and without any cause, the whole sum of L.3800
sterling, as now appears evident from the vouchers. A great part of these
vouchers were obtained from R. M. when sitting on an arbitration, in the month
of June, 1784, and not before.

Can we not here say, and with some ground, Quem Deus vult perdere, prius
dementat? If it is proved, as it will be, that, he was not in advance on the
11th of March, 1779, is it not clear that R. M. misapplied those bills (for
L.3800 sterling) induced thereto by the agent general's confidence in him? --
If at other various periods, under the pretenses of his advances, By the
estimate of R. M. said by him, to have been settled by J. H. in presence of his
Excellency Mr. Gerard, under the date of August, 1779, he brings the Royal
Marine in debt for L.192,692-11-6 continental, by his mode of stating the
account, and therein says, as well as in his letter of February, 1784, "That he
was then actually in advance for the Royal Marine, although by the face
thereof, a balance of L.163,355-8-6, appear against him. In December, 1779, he
gives an account to J. H. of his situation in money, with R. M. and brings J.
H. in debt to him L.91,073-18-8, at the very time that he owed J. H. near
L.500,000. These are the nominal accounts, furnished by him as banker and
depositor.

In 1781, he furnishes the account of the Royal Marine, and brings the King in
debt for L.450,000, -- when he actually did owe a very heavy sum of more than
L.100,000, nominal, besides 169,000 Livres, taken in bills on France, on
account of the above balance, in the year, 1780.


of balances in his favor, etc. R. M. did claim more bills at the very time he
owed nominal sums to the Royal Marine, and immense sums, nominal and real, to
J. H. and his friends, on their private account ( -- which sums he was also in
duty bound to appropriate for the public service, before he could, without
injustice to them and J. H. have sold any one bill --) and if, under those
circumstances, he did actually take up more bills from the Royal Marine -- does
he not owe them to the King, being taken without cause, or to Holker's absent
friends? Especially if he had then in hand their money to purchase the bills
therewith; and this must have been the case, since he exclaims -- Can I be so
weak as to make good depreciation, since J. H's money was perishing in my
hands, was wasting in chest? -- Perhaps, however, it was employed for his own
purposes.

Whatever may be the result of the reflections and opinions of the readers
hereof on the foregoing observations, it is now proper to transcribe another
passage of R. M's letter, which fixes the time during which his first
principles of accounting are to take effect; for we must observe, that these
are only of short duration, not general, not permanent. -- From the time I
ceased (says R. M. page 17) to be your agent, our accounts are no longer to be
considered as of the nature of a trust, neither are the accounts between Wm.
Turnbull and Co. and me of that nature; I am, therefore, willing to settle my
accounts with them, and those with you for subsequent transactions upon
principles of depreciation.

From this we are to conclude, that while any confidence, dependence, or trust
is reposed in him, for so long all moneys entrusted to him are to be permitted
to perish in his hands; all concerns confided to his integrity, judgment, and
knowledge, are to be forgot or unnoticed as unworthy of attention; no
depreciation whatever is to be allowed: but when no dependence, as he says, is
placed on his talents and fidelity, he will, of his own motion and accord,
allow that the principle of depreciation shall take place between him and J. H.
in all cases, where he was no longer to act as agent for the King's interest,
the interest of J. H. and that of his friends! Is it R. M. who reasons thus?
What are then his ideas of fidelity, trust, etc. etc.

Let it however be admitted, for a while, that these principles are grounded on
the solid basis of honesty, and that they will lead to substantial justice,
from the accountant R. M. to his employer J. H. -- Then put the question -- Do
the accounts of his agency, those sent with his letter of the 26th of February,
1784, agree with these principles? The answer may be collected from what
follows:

William Turnbull and Co. his successors in the agency, began their operations
in the first days of January, 1780; they credit in The deed of copartnership
between R. M. and Wm. Turnbull under the ratio of Wm. Turnbull and Co. is dated
and was signed by them, on the 27th day of December, 1779.
account R. M. under the date of the 1st of January of that year, for 120,000
dollars, paid by him to Blair M'Clenachan, for the lease of the house they have
occupied since that date; and, R. M. says, he credited them in account for
These form a part of the 169,000 Livres, given to R. M. on account of the
advances he pretended to have made on the public account.
54,722 Livres 18 sols Tournois, in bills he received from them, order of J. H.
as their employer; they delivered these bills as agents for J. H. therefore he
acknowledges, by his said letter, that they were actually his agents under the
date of the 15th of February, 1780. A circumstance which happened to Mr. Wm.
Turnbull, about that period, deserves to be noticed here: He waited upon the
widow lady, owner of the house which he afterward occupied, to inform her in
his own name and that of R. M. that he had purchased the remaining lease
thereof, from the gentleman who had lately occupied it, and for which R. M. had
paid by agreement, a sum of L.45,000, which were therefore a clear profit to
that gentleman: he was desired to relate this circumstance to the lady, and to
inform her in the name of the company, that the annual rent would be regularly
paid her in specie, let the currency be what it would: and that they not only
looked upon it, as their duty, but abhorred the idea of availing themselves of
depreciation. This was said to make the lady easy in her mind, and also for
giving her a plea, for claiming the actual full value of the sum of L.300,
specie, due for the rent 1779, by the late occupier who, it was said, offered
her only the L.300, in paper money, or a sum inadequate to the real value of
the rent: did R. M. here act upon trust, or upon honor? If such were his
principles, in December, 1779, why should they vary so extremely in 1784, why
should he now say, that he never thought he was to account for the bills, but
merely for their nominal proceeds? -- Wm. Turnbull's testimony to be taken on
this fact.


Now let us weigh the words that follow the above transcribed paragraph -- I
find that at the time (No. 1.) when the Royal Marine owed me upwards of three
hundred and forty thousand pounds continental currency, I had in my (No. 3.)
hands of your private funds, and those of your friends, nearly to the amount of
three hundred thousand pounds continental; and, as I continued to receive more
after that period, I readily agree (No. 6.) to set aside Mr. Swanwick's
proposition of valuing the balance in continental money, on your private
account, at one hundred for one; he meant to do justice between us; but it did
not occur to him (No. 2.) that I had received on account of the balance in my
favor, on your account, as agent of the Royal Marine, the sum of L.342,775 - 2
- 6 continental money, when it was worth sixty-one and a half for one, and that
having at the same time near L.300,000 of yours and your friends in my hands,
you ought to have the like value for at least the latter amount; and,
therefore, to save all trouble of investigation (No. 5.) as to the exact sum, I
agree (No. 4.) to compute the same sum which I received L.342,775 - 2 - 6 -- at
sixty-one and a half, and bring the amount thereof to your credit in the hard
money account, -- this (No. 7.) I think is just, and therefore, Sir, I offer it.

No. 1. Here he says, that the Royal Marine owed him more than L.340,000 --

No. 2. He says, it did not occur to Swanwick that I had received on account of
the balance in my favor, on your account, as agent of the Royal Marine, the sum
of L.342,775 - 2 - 6.

How are we to reconcile these two sentences? Did the Royal Marine owe this sum
to R. M. or to J. H.? What does the writer mean? Could such ideas occur to
Swanwick or any other? However, it had occurred to R. M. to receive L.342,775 -
2 - 6, instead of L.340,000, which he says were due to him at the very time
that not one farthing was due to him! On the contrary, he then owed more than
L.30,000 specie to the Royal Marine alone, if justice is done to him and the
King.

No. 3. Here R. M. acknowledges, that three hundred thousand pounds, of
Holker's friends money, were then in his hands, at the very time that he took
L.342,775 - 2 - 6 from the Royal Marine, which he says were due to him! If he
took this sum at the time, why did he not pay J. H's friends? If he took the
amount of L.342,775 - 2 - 6 in bills from Holker's agents, why did he not give
those bills to J. H's friends? If he kept the bills for his own account, is he
not to pay them to his friends, with interest from their date? If he took them
on account of a supposed balance, said to be due to him by the Royal Marine, is
he not to return them with interest, to the Royal Marine? It is his business to
extricate himself from this embarrassment; it is his part to get out of the
dilemma, into which his own avowal has plunged him, if he can; for, really, we
cannot, on this occasion, come to his assistance.

No. 4. Here he offers the balance, which he says he had received, namely
L.342,775 - 2 - 6, (and which he supposes to be due, when he ceased to be agent
for J. H.) at the exchange of sixty-one and a half for one, -- the rate of
depreciation in April 1780 -- But why does he not offer it at the exchange of
December, 1779, when the balance was due, and he had ceased to act as public
agent -- or of January, 1780, when Wm. Turnbull and Co. had commenced agents;
was it because the exchange then being at sixty-one and a half, instead of
forty in January, he thereby would only pay two thirds of the sum he owed in
January? The auditors will establish this point, nor shall we hereafter forget
the proposal.

No. 5. R. M. seems very desirous of avoiding all investigation, as to the
exact sum due to J. H. or to his friends, at this as well as any other period,
and therefore No. 6, he readily agrees to lay aside Swanwick's proposal of one
hundred for one; he adds No. 7, this I think is just, and therefore I offer it.

But to return to the object of depreciation, let us take up the accounts,
which were transmitted by R. M. with his letter of the 26th of February, 1784.
There we shall find a sum of L.150,000 continental, and 2 per cent. commission
This is a singular commission, claimed only in 1784, on a sum never before
charged in the public account, and on a sum paid in the first days of June,
1780, by a credit to be given by Wm. Smith, (R. M's. correspondent) to Messrs.
Wm. Turnbull and Co. agents for J. H.
thereon, charged to the debit of the Royal Marine, -- for so much he paid to
J. H. with his consent, by his order dated the 30th of May, 1780, to William
Smith Esquire. of Baltimore, when he directed him to credit in account, Messrs. Wm.
Turnbull and Co. as agents for J. H. for the above sum of L.150,000, and for
which he says, he was to understand with J. H. How, therefore, could R. M.
presume to bring this charge against the Royal Marine, for a payment made on
the thirtieth of May, 1780, and to the credit of J. H's. agents, when his
public agency had ceased in December, 1779? -- He acknowledges that he is
willing to allow the principle of depreciation, at the close of his agency, and
to extend it to all sums he received at a later period: -- and yet he does not
think proper to avail himself of the advantage of his own proposal, when he
pays money on account: certainly, this man must be moved by some extraordinary
principle of action, on this occasion: and this may be readily conceived of one
so strenuous in exertions in his own favor. Here he refuses the exchange of
sixty for one on the foregoing L. 150,000, L.150,000 valued in January, 1780,
at 40 for one, are equal to the sum of (specie) L.3750 In May, 1780, the
exchange was at Baltimore at 60 for one, which makes L.2500 to be charged
against J. H. deducted from above leaves a profit of L.1250
on this single payment to R. M. at the expense of J. H. -- and this R. M. and
his counsel offer, in Febr. 1784, as substantial justice.
which would entitle him to a sum of L. 2500, hard money.

However, upon a closer examination, the true motive will be discovered, and
the original leading principles of this man be established: -- Without this
charge of L. 150,000, nominal, R. M. would have fallen considerably in debt to
the Royal Marine, at that very period, at which he declares, that L. 342,000
and more were due to him, and this would not look well. Upon further
investigation, it will be also acknowledged, that this charge and commission
are to act nominally, though not virtually and in fact, against a sum of
450,000 Livres Tournois given him in bills in March, 1779, Vide J. H's
obversations on the public account, and his statement thereof.
and which he then claimed on account of his actual advances, the whole of
which large sum, equal to more than L. 20,000 sterling, has melted wasted away,
and perished totally and wholly through a premature unnecessary sale which
occasioned consequent depreciation, as he says, in his hands: therefore we must
own that, though R. M's mode of reasoning is not always clear, just and
consistent, still his actions, his principles and manner of presenting and
redacting estimates and accounts to his advantage, are perfectly consistent;
all calculated to acquire an overgrown fortune, at the expense of truth, of
justice, of the King and his employer, of him whom he termed his bosom friend,
of him who wishing to throw equitable advantages in the hands of R. M. had
confidentially entrusted him with the means, and generously seconded his
oftensible views. But, can this be allowed? Shall R. M. involve this sum in his
accounts, in order to make these nominal L. 150,000, Let the reader here
remark, that in January, 1779, R. M. had forgot to charge a sum of
L.99,080-10-0 against the Royal Marine, for which J. H. was to account to the
King in his own statement of his Boston operations; therefore it is probable
that these L. 150,000 are introduced in the year 1784, into the accounts of R.
M's agency for the year 1779, in order to counterbalance this heavy omission of
a charge of such consequence, in January, 1779. But thereby he makes another
nominal mistake of more than L.50,000 in his own favor. Such is the extreme
regularity of R. M's nominal mode of accounting, under his favorite supposition
of his being a banker -- a mere depositary of continental currency.
paid in Baltimore, (when he knew not probably what to do with the money) be
brought in the public account of his agency, at the very time that he actually
owed J. H. in his private account, near three times this sum, and probably
twenty times the sum in real specie, if the law, equity, usage and a scale of
depreciation are to govern and take place throughout his transactions? This
scale it would be necessary to establish, in order to explain his operations
and mode of action, even if justice did not require it.

I will here remind the reader of these observations, that the principles he
lays down in his letter, he does not even follow in those very accounts, which
he sends to his employer on the very same day; or rather he chooses in his
letter to express one idea, and as an accountant to follow another, much better
calculated to cover his mode of operation: nor is he more consistent in his
argument on this occasion than in his proposals or principles of account render.

On the argument, we have seen that he maintains, he was only a banker and
depositary for J. H. during the whole of his agency. The transactions between
J. H. and R. M. were merely of the nature of a trust, says the latter: and
therefore he will not allow any depreciation, nor account on the principles of
depreciation for any concerns, during the whole period of his agency. His
agency on the public business ceased in die first days of January, 1780, and
because he allows the principle of depreciation to take place on all occasions
subsequent thereto, either between Wm. Turnbull and Co. or him, or J. H. and R.
M. -- therefore, says our logician, I will fix the rate of value of the moneys
due to J. H. in December, by the scale in April; but I will fix no value on the
moneys I paid to Wm. Turnbull and Co. on the 30th of May, 1780, in Baltimore.
Let us now ask him, why he allows any depreciation whatever, to J. H. without
working the good deed throughout? Is he aware of the consequences of this his
concession? Does he know, that by the same principle on which this concession
is grounded, he grants all that is claimed from him? For he must either be
absurd in the extreme, and erroneous in every one of his arguments, or he is
guilty of injustice; -- he must either be deprived of the use of reason, and be
destitute of common sense or common honesty, or he must give up the bills,
unless he can procure a better title to them than appears in his letter. -- And
now for the proof of what is here advanced.

R. M. maintains, that during his agency he was not answerable for depreciation
of moneys, put (he says) into his hands. Why? Because he was only banker; he
was not agent-responsible, not a bailiff in law; but only an agent-depositary,
accountable only for nominal sums of a perishable currency: -- in other words,
he was accountable for the number of hogsheads of molasses put into his store
-- for the mere hogsheads, and not for the contents.

He afterward argues, that when he was no longer agent, he can no longer be
considered to have acted on trust; and, therefore, he will grant the principle
of depreciation.

Now let it be observed, that according to these ideas, if he ceased to be
agent he ceased also to be a banker or depositary. The question, therefore, in
this view, is -- what became of R. M? Quis invenit? I know not of a description
by which we can afterward legally define his subsequent character or
functions. He denied in his first position, that he was responsible for J. H's
concerns; he was not bailiff, because he was only agent upon trust, id est,
says he, banker and depositary. Afterward, when come to nothing, when he has
no known legal or avowed mercantile character and denomination, then he says --
after I ceased to be your agent, then I will allow the principle of
depreciation; but as it is difficult for him to change his character, we must
reason thus: he allows of depreciation when he ceased to be agent, because he
was no longer employed upon trust; and, therefore, we say, because he was
banker and depositary only. It is unlucky for him in this case, that he must
also allow depreciation on the preceding accounts; because he maintains that he
was then also banker and depositary. -- For one and the same principle must be
followed throughout; unless principles respecting his accounts are to change
with the new year, and that the principle of depreciation is not to be attended
to in 1779, but only in 1780. If he denies this reasoning to be fair and just,
then he must fall into the following absurdity and argue thus: While I was
agent (id est banker) I will not allow the principle when I ceased to be agent
then I will allow the principle, because I received the subsequent moneys not
as agent, but only as banker.

However, to put an end to all such puerile jargon, it is necessary to remind
him, that he never ceased to be agent of J. H. in those concerns entrusted to
his management, from the moment they came under his notice and care to this
hour: he only ceased in December, 1779, to act as agent in new concerns on the
public account: he is yet accountable for the previous transactions; though he
discontinued and closed his operations early in 1780, and might then have
rendered his accounts thereof, if he had thought proper not to delay the
settlement, having been constantly pressed on this score. In 1780, he engaged
for and with J. H. on his private account, in some new concerns, after that
same period, at which, he says, we are to consider his agency as terminated. --
Of the whole concerns and balances, in his hands, he owes accounts; and we are
obliged to bring suits at law, to obtain such as justice and equity prescribe.

If R. M. never ceased to be J. H's agent and bailiff and banker, as he
contends in some instances, why should he allow the principle of depreciation
in 1780 and 1781? Was it because in these last years he only received pence,
and because he received pounds, in 1777, 1778 and 1779? The reason is then most
admirable, though it would aggravate the injustice. Whether banker, or broker,
or agent and bailiff, he owes depreciation, according to his own conviction and
principle, from the time, when he first commenced to act on the concerns of J.
H. in his private and public capacity: especially, as he previously engaged to
act for his interest and that of the King, and consequently to save them and
guard them and J. H's friends, from damage, loss and ruin: -- he was agent or
banker responsible on a scale of depreciation in the end of the business and,
of course, in the beginning and progress thereof: nor can any distinction be
made between those interests and concerns, which relate to the public service
from those of a private nature; nor can any difference of principle or of value
be made, between the King's bills and dollars of Congress's money, or J. H's
dollars and his friends' dollars and bills.

Thus far, we believe the argument against R. M. to be just, candid and true;
and if granted, then it will follow, that if R. M. owes depreciation on the
proceeds of those bills he sold, because the sales were unnecessary, because
there was no employment for their proceeds, or because he had other public or
private moneys, given to him for the service, perishing in his hands -- he also
must make good the loss on the sale of those bills; for he sold them without
cause. Having proved that he took the very bills in kind, under the cover of
false and fictitious sales, made to his partner Whiteside, we have a right to
presume he sold the other bills, which he afterward claimed in that same month
at least, say March 1779, in order to apply the proceeds to his private
speculations and purposes, when money would command any thing on the most
advantageous terms; or to presume that he also got other persons to endorse
other bills for him; and this is but just to suppose and believe, unless he
will produce freely and fully his books, cashbook, etc. in order to convince us
that he was only guilty of taking improperly one sum of L.3,800 sterling,
without paying one farthing at the time on account thereof. This argument and
the consequences are fair; for the money could not have perished in his hands,
if he had not In his letter of February, 1784, he makes it, or insinuates it
as, a charge against J. H. that he drew the bills on France, before the
expenditures took place.
sold the bills before the expenditures took place; nor would the bills have
been sold at all, for much the greater part were never necessary for the
supplies or expenditures of the navy and its service; therefore the
unjustifiable sale of these bills did occasion the loss on the sale, with the
loss by depreciation on the proceeds thereof, if any did happen. Thus R. M. is
in duty and in conscience bound to make good these bills and their interest At
least the public service is not to suffer, either through the misconduct of R. M.
or J. H. and to its interest, therefore, the court, auditors and jury are
particularly to attend.
in the Royal Treasury in France, through the King's agent; because this loss
has occasioned additional loans to the King's minister, which loans have
incurred the burden of heavy interest in the time of war: and this
consideration is the more to be Because this interest may be claimed from J. H.
merely because he relled and depended upon the good faith and honor of R. M.
though he should not have received any from him.
attended to, especially as this war was waged to save R. M. from ruin, and his
country from the ravages of an implacable herd of foes. -- Nor can any of his
fellow citizens scruple to admit these principles, when they will consider the
nature of the trust reposed in R. M. and of those arguments set up by him in
his defense, and when they will recollect that he knew all these consequences,
since he says, (page 15) in order to criminate the agent, or to terrify him
from his duty -- that had he been in the place of J. H. he would not have drawn
for the King's money until it was wanted for the King's service -- they will
readily perceive, that though R. M. reasons like a child in this letter, he knew
enough of depreciation, at least in 1779, to have kept the bills on hand,
rather than to have sold them without cause or necessity, if he had not had
some excellent investment to make of the proceeds, some great speculation to
enter upon, sufficient to make good all possible claims against him; otherwise
he would not have sold them to possess himself of a perishable article, in
order to let it waste in chest, much less have reproached his employer J. H.
with the folly and injustice of his conduct in drawing the bills on France, in
order to screen himself from the consequences of selling them. No one can
suppose R. M. ignorant of his duty, nor of the nature of paper money. Why,
therefore, did he thus sacrifice the King's This must appear horrid indeed, and
it is but too true; unless R. M. can explain all his conduct, and justify it on
better ground by his books, etc.
interest in the first instance, and afterward attempt to sacrifice the King's
agent, as an atonement for his own want of fidelity to both King and agent?

After what has been said, we may now transcribe some further passages of this
letter, in order to throw some additional light on the subject. When called
upon to separate from his accounts those relative to the transactions personal
only to J. H. in order to show the advantages gained by R. M's operations, so
as to oppose them to the losses sustained by depreciation -- our ingenious
writer answers, (page 14) But I neither mean nor pretend to any such thing; I
have already said, and again repeat, I ask no credit for any savings; I am not
accountable This he has some right to maintain, because he never made one
saving, either for the King or his employer; but he sacrificed by depreciation
more than L.39,000 specie, to pay twelve; or, rather, he sacrificed L.20,000
sterling in bills, and lost the whole sum (as he says) while he was paying
L.12,000 Pennsylvania currency, with other bills and moneys given him also, and
sufficient for the whole service. Well may he wish to pay no loosings!
for any loosings; nor will I compensate to the King or to you for any
depreciation during my agency in your affairs. At the same time it is not clear
to me, that you would not have to pay rather than receive on the King's
account; for at the time With what grace will not this supposition appear, when
it is known, that by the investigation of the accounts it appears, that more
than L.100,000 continental currency was due by him at that very time, and that
at that period the above total loss of the bills had taken place. Well may he
insist that this account was settled in August, 1779.
when the settlement was made before Mr. Gerard, I was actually in advance,
though from the accounts the balance is considerably against me.

He also says, (page 14) Whether during the whole time there was or was not a
balance in my hands, is totally immaterial But not quite so immaterial to him
in the time of speculations, practicable on many of those faithful whigs, who
were willing to devote their fortunes to the safety and independence of their
country.
to me: it was always ready at your order to draw it out when you pleased: I
repeatedly, at your desire, made estimates for your government in this respect,
and my books and papers were always open to you: thus much Sir, I have thought
proper to say on the general principle.

He, however, in the remaining part of his letter, says much more on the same
subject. But to the point -- Who can believe that his books and papers were
always open to J. H. when he had such strong reasons to conceal the true
situation of the affairs of the Navy from his employer: when he pretends that
an estimate Alias the public account, signed by his Excellency Mr. Gerard and
J. H. in September, 1779.
was an account settled; when he refuses all communication of all vouchers,
Vide the letters of R. M. to J. H. dated the 2d and 3d of March, 1784.
relative to his agency, during the year 1779, -- in support of accounts sent
only in 1784, unless all claim of depreciation, whatever, is previously and
fully renounced against him: when be accuses the agent general for having drawn
those bills, which he sold afterward to receive the proceeds: when he refuses
the use of his cash-book Vide the questions and answers on the arbitration.
which would prove what he did with the proceeds of the bills, or with such of
the bills which he took in kind, under the pretense of his advances: when he
refused to open one separate set of books for the agent's business, because it
would create confusion, and give rise to a greater chance of error: when he
refused to give all and every information in his power, on the arbitration,
though he had promised to lay the truth and the whole truth before his judges,
and every document necessary to establish the facts, which promise he
previously made to his Excellency Mr. Van Berkel, before the bonds were agreed
to be signed by J. H. etc. -- After such conduct, who will believe that R. M's
books and papers were always open to J. H? What are these abovementioned
estimates? Are they conformable to the books? Are they conformable to the
accounts rendered, and to those to be settled by the auditors? Are they
accurate, correct, full and true? Does not R. M. claim balances, by the
estimates and accounts? Did he ever produce one account before April, 1780, by
which a balance appeared to be due to J. H? How, therefore, can he say or
pretend, that it was not his fault, if the balances due were not drawn out of
his hands, or that these sums of money, due by balance, were ready in his chest
to J. H's order? Is not this assertion of R. M. untrue and erroneous, if it is
proved by all the accounts, and by this same letter of the 26th of February,
that he was always craving for more bills, because, as he said, he was in
advance? How could he possibly be in advance for J. H. and at the same time
maintain, that the balances due to J. H. (balances utterly unknown to J. H. on
the public account, until the year 1784) were constantly kept on hand, to the
order of the agent general, to draw them out when he pleased? And if this
assertion is untrue, (and the accounts, as rendered originally and now
proffered, prove it to be untrue, and demonstrate that he always concealed the
balances due by him) will not this sort of argument operate against himself,
and prove that he owes depreciation, and the loss of sale upon the bills? His
assertions, excuses, and apologies, are not grounded on fact, on the solid
basis of truth. By attempting to prove his innocence, by defending with
vehemence, and with unjust insinuations against his employer, those principles
by which he insists, that he is not to be made accountable for his
transactions, is it not apparent that he knows, there are great loosings on his
mode of establishing the accounts, and that he fears the consequences of his
conduct will affect himself, and not the King, his employer, or his employers
friends? It would have been much more to his honor and reputation, if he had
said less on the general principle.

But why should he be so much afraid of the consequences? He is possessed of an
immense fortune, acquired by the means above described, and by others, more or
less laudable; but principally during 1778 and 1779, In 1778 and 1779 R. M.
accounts to J. H. for 614,000 Livres given him in J. H's bills on France, all
of which were duly honored; these were for the purchase of loan-office
certificates, bearing interest, payable in bills of Congress upon France. R. M.
maintained on the arbitration that the whole money was necessary for the King's
service: however that may be, there is not a value of 500 dollars of
certificates, bearing interest upon France, purchased by R. M. -- Whether he
did purchase any, could purchase any, or took any to himself, he will hereafter
explain. Possibly he may now maintain on the public trial, that the public
moneys were necessary for the purchase of certificates bearing interest upon
France.
through the very heavy sums entrusted to him by J. H. independent of the
public account, and this will be proved by his books, if necessary. He has put
the waste and depreciation in his own scale, or pocket: besides the use of the
money of J. H. he has moreover enjoyed the advantage of obtaining the most
useful and early intelligence, from the general confidence reposed in him by
his employer, and other superior characters; advantages, with which alone any
reasonable speculator, situated as he was, might have been satisfied. Is he
not, under these circumstances, not only liable, according to all principles of
equity and justice, but also able to make good all losses arising from the
misapplication of the public bills to his own purposes? And because these
bills, on the public and private account, amount to a large sum, is he
therefore not to pay the same? Is he to be excused from paying interest, when
on the one hand it can be proved, that it was a breach of trust in him to have
sold the bills, if there was no occasion for making sale thereof; and when on
the other hand, he has brought ruin all around him, through such a breach of
trust, and dishonor If interest was not due to the King for the use, for the
improper use of the public moneys, or others, it would be due for damages done
to J. H. by way of indemnity for delaying him in America, and withholding
accounts so necessary, involving him in every possible distress and difficulty.
on the head of his employer, both by his delays and the errors that his
fallacious estimates and accounts have made him innocently commit, and
unregardedly plunge into? Shall he not show his books in such business, to
obviate all the suspicions he has so justly given rise to, on his account, and
that of J. H?

It cannot be supposed that these and other arguments will be neglected on such
an important occasion, where every thing dear, and precious, and valuable, is
at stake between R. M. and J. H. the latter of whom will necessarily be charged
with infidelity to his trust, unless justice be obtained from the former.

J. H. certainly wishes he could terminate the present investigation of R. M's
letter and conduct; but his duty to his King and country, whom R. M. neither
fears, nor values, urges him to every exertion on this important occasion, as
well as that which he owes to himself and family.

Therefore, to proceed -- page 13. we read, The 15th of February, 1780, I
received by your order bills to the amount of 54,722 Livres 18 sols, which
were, according to that order, received of Messrs. Turnbull and Co. whom I have
credited for the same, at the then current price of 6 dollars per livre;
afterward 36,752 Livres 6 sols Tournois of these bills were paid for a
brigantine, in which you and I were concerned, and 5500 Livres were sold at one
dollar advance, is Dollrs. 5500 and 12651 Livres at three dollars advance, is
37953 Dollars. 43453 for one half of this gain you are credited by me in
account current on the 7th April, 1780; and on this sum Here he paid
depreciation till April, 1780; by his letter of the 26th of February, 1784, he
offers to value the moneys due then, by the scale of that month; but,
forgetting this proposal, by which he allows depreciation whatever, he here
reproaches J. H. with improperly claiming depreciation. Is it R. M. who reasons
thus, or the then superintendent of finance?
also you claim depreciation, when you have actually received it.

In addition to what has been said on a similar subject, respecting a sum of L.
3800 sterling, in bills sold to Whiteside, in May, 1779, (vide page 22.25) we
must express our surprise that he should mention this sum of 54,722 Livres 18
sols, when speaking of depreciation, since the remaining bills, not employed on
joint account, in the purchase of a vessel, being sold in April, J. H. needs
claim no depreciation on the 43,453 dollars (which he says, were a gain,) for
this good reason, because he actually offers it at the exchange or rate of
scale in that month, but in 1781, R. M. (through Swanwick) had offered the
advance dollars at the rate of 100 for one, and therefore J. H. had then at
least a right to claim another valuation from the principal R. M. and this is
hereby confessed.

Let us now ask, For what reason does R. M. interest J. H. in these bills? Did
he take them from William Turnbull and Co. on their joint account, or on his
account solely? What do Mr. Turnbull's books say on this occasion, and those of
R. M? That House debits him for these bills to the credit of the Royal Marine,
on account of the balance claimed by him as due to him from the Royal Marine,
because he paid nothing on account thereof. In his accounts R. M. credits them
for these bills, as bought from them, though by the foregoing entries, it would
seem he did not buy them, but assumed them on account of the balance he then
claimed, and on account whereof, he afterward took many more, to the amount of
169,000 Livres.

It is true, he may pretend to have a right to charge J. H with the value of
one half the bills paid for the brigantine Hawke, at the time, N. B. This
concern was entered into the accounts in the run of February, 1780 -- when R.
M. was no longer J. H's public agent.
but then he ought to have paid the value to the agents of J. H. Messrs.
Turnbull and Co. because no balance was due to him from the navy; but, on the
contrary, he actually owed a balance at this very period, and he ought
especially to have paid for J. Holker's share thereof, because he owed a great
deal more than his share to him on his private account, or to that of his
friends; but R. M. chose here to assume the public bills on credit, and keep J.
H's private moneys employed otherwise for his own advantage. Shall he not pay
interest on moneys and bills thus obtained and thus detained? --

The questions, therefore, on this subject are -- Was a balance due to him or
not? And how much, if any? Did he owe moneys at the time to J. H? When 36,000
Livres were only necessary for this transaction, or rather, when he had only
18,000 Livres to claim from J. H. on account of his half of the brigantine, why
then take 54,000 Livres from the subordinate agents of the Royal Marine,
leaving J. H. to account to the King as he can, for the whole sum, and which
will not be very easy, since the sale thereof was not necessary for the
service? Why take bills from J. H's agents without paying for them, when he had
moneys enough of his on hand to purchase J. H's share of the bills? Would J. H.
have consented to this arrangement at all, if R. M. had not led him to believe
in December, 1779, that he was in his debt by the accounts he produced and gave
to J. H. for his government? Would he not have insisted that if R. M. wanted
the bills he should have paid for them, since thereby it would have prevented a
sale of a similar sum, on account of, and for the subsequent expenditures of
the Royal Marine by the agents at the time? And is not R. M. answerable for
these bills to the Royal Marine, since he did not pay for them, though, he
says, he bought them; he charging J. H. for the value of 18,000 Livres paid on
his account, taking to himself the gain on the remaining bills? This would be
fair and just. Otherwise, would not J. H. be the dupe of the snares into which
R. Morris's accounts and misrepresentations at the time led him unawares? We
say snares, for R. M. could not be ignorant of their reciprocal situation, but
this was not the case with J. H.

If, notwithstanding the foregoing reasons, he should persist in refusing to
refund these bills thus unjustly taken, as we have proved, how can he insist
upon a quantity of tobacco (about 79 Vide the letter page 17 -- In this letter
he refuses to pay the bills he owes, but offers their nominal value in
continental money. At the same time 79 hogsheads of tobacco were lent, he says,
to J. H. -- these 79 hogsheads he claims, but will not permit that J. H. should
claim his bills!
hogsheads, for the cargo of this brigantine Hawke) furnished in May, 1780,
being replaced in kind by J. H. or accounted for at the present value? Why
should not J. H. be permitted to account for this tobacco at the value thereof
in May, 1780, In May, 1780, R. M. had in hand of J. H's money, more than
L.500,000 continental, representing L.64,000 specie.
since R. M. owed him ten times more money at that time, when the tobacco was
agreed to be taken as a payment on account? If R. M. says that he borrowed the
tobacco and paid it only at a later period -- whose fault is that? Had he not
the use of the value of the tobacco during the whole interval? And could he not
therewith have purchased 79 other hogsheads, to replace the tobacco at the time
if it had been convenient? Had he not employed all J. H's money in speculations
as well as his own, lest both might have perished in his hands? Or shall it be
just, that R. M. should not refund bills when he had no right to them, from the
Royal Marine, without paying for them, and at the same time be permitted to
claim tobacco, said to be lent to J. Holker, when he had his money to purchase
an equal quantity, or that same tobacco? Shall R. M's mode of statement Among
the six actions brought by J. H. against him, I must here beg leave to mention
one worthy of notice -- In an account between Mr. Le Ray De Chaumont and R. M.
the latter is yet to settle for near 200 hogsheads of tobacco, remaining due to
the former, on account of some powder which his house received in July, 1777,
the proceeds whereof Messrs. Willing, Morris and Co. were to vest in tobacco;
for these 200 hogsheads R. M. offered L.31 - 14 - 0, through his clerk Swanwick,
and something more than L.50 by his letter of February, 1784, and on the
arbitration. On this occasion he wishes to pay a balance due in tobacco to
Chaumont, at the exchange of 100 for one, or 61 and a half for 1: but as he had
lent 79 hogsheads of tobacco in 1780 to J. H. he claims the tobacco in kind. Is
this fair and honorable? Or, rather, the tobacco lent to J. H. was it not the
tobacco borrowed by R. M. from Chaumont? Would not this be a good speculation
of R. M. upon two friends, for whom he acted upon trust?
be admitted, because the bills to be repaid by him, and the tobacco he claims
from J. H. are both of a higher value, than when it was his duty to have paid
for both, to have purchased both, with J. H's moneys? In other words, shall R.
M. because he has to account for his transactions, dictate in 1784, the form
and principles of accounts at his own will and pleasure, to vary them in every
operation according to his interest, and explain away the fortune of all his
employers, or shall justice, law and equity take place in this case? We claim
nothing more.

When speaking of the improper claim of R. M. for bills on France, as early as
the 11th of March, 1779, for his pretended advances on account of the Royal
Marine, we delayed mentioning a transaction which took place about the 7th of
that same month, and under which date R. M. credits the Royal Marine for
L.24,666 continental, proceeds of L.2740 - 13 - 4 sterling, by him received in
bills on France.

When in Boston, J. H. drew on R. M. at ten days sight, various bills to the
amount of near L77,656 - 5 - 0, which were afterward reduced by J. H. while in
Boston, to L.54,981 - 11 - 3 -- they bore date of the 16th of October, 1778.

On account thereof, J. H. remitted a bill of L.61,196 - 1 - 3, drawn by a
continental agent on the commissary general of Congress, and passed by J. H. to
the order of R. M. advising him at the same time -- not to receive this money,
but in case of need for the King's service; as he wished it to remain with
Congress, on account of provisions supplied by their agent in Boston. R. M.
however got this bill paid in Philadelphia, at the treasury, on the 10th of
November following, through the hands of Benjamin Hogeland his clerk; but
whether with or without any necessity for the King's service, the accounts of
the auditors will more precisely ascertain. A few of these bills drawn in
Boston by J. H. on R. M. were paid in December, 1778, the rest in January,
February and March, 1779. However, on the 7th of March of that year, of these
Boston bills a sum of 63,338 dollars 4 s6, or thereabouts, was proffered to R.
M. for payment, being part of those drawn by J. H. to the order of Adam Babcock
of Boston, and was given by Adam Babcock's correspondent as part payment of the
L24,666 continental, necessary for the purchase of the abovementioned bills on
France for L.2740 - 13 - 4 sterling, which were also drawn at the request of R.
M. to the order of said Adam Babcock.

Here we must first observe, that in order, we suppose, to conceal this
transaction and the dates of acceptances or payment, no bills drawn on R. M.
have been produced as vouchers in support of his accounts, though all vouchers
were claimed from him and ordered to be given up by the arbitrators.

2 dly. All the bills of J. H. on R. M. from Boston, not charged as paid in
1778, are charged in his monthly account, redacted for the arbitrators, as paid
in January, 1779, though few were even accepted for payment in the run of that
month.

3 dly. This money proceeding from the bill drawn on the commissary general of
Congress, was not necessary in 1778 to R. M. Nota been. N. B. He then had a
considerable balance of Holker's private moneys, or those belonging to his
friends, to account for; besides all the proceeds of 350,000 Livres of bills on
France, sold by him for the purpose of purchasing certificates bearing interest
payable in France, which he at first said were necessary for the King's
service, and which he afterward was obliged to say, he had kept on hand also
perishing, but subject to Holker's orders, till his return from Boston; or,
rather, he had employed every farthing of the money in lands, or ships, or,
still better speculations.


4 thly. The bills on account thereof, unpaid in 1778, were taken up by J. H's
public bills selling in January, February and March, 1778, as appears by R. M's
confession in his letter, which, circumstance he mentions in order to criminate
bis employer, though he knew that the suspicions he throws out were unjust. --
Of this we shall speak more at large hereafter.

5 thly. This confession proves, that the money from Congress not being wanted
for the King's service, the whole or greatest part thereof might have been
better employed for the use of the continent, than in the hands of R. M.

6 thly. If the bills upon France were employed for the purpose of taking up in
1779, the bills drawn upon R. M. on the 16 of October 1778, is it not a strong
presumptive proof, that in November, 1779, R. M. had employed for his own
purposes the whole L.61,196 - 1 - 3, which he carefully had got paid, without
necessity, from the public treasury? Is it not apparent, that when he paid
those drafts in 1779, he had no money on hand but what arose from the daily
sale of the bills on France, supplied him by J. H. for his pretended wants?

7 thly. On the 7th of March he had not any money in chest, or a small sum, for
he took and claimed from J. H. L2740 sterling in bills, to discharge Holker's
drafts on him from Boston; these drafts and J. H's bills on France being in
both cases drawn to the order of Adam Babcock of Boston, the bills being
negociated and the drafts taken up at one and the same instant.

8 thly. This poverty of R. M's chest, in March 1779, will appear established
to perfect conviction, since he acknowledges on the 11th day following, to have
sold to Whiteside and Co. and afterward taken L.3800 sterling to himself, on
account of his advances for the Royal Marine, and for which advances he claimed
the bills from the King's agent. -- The pretended advances he would not not
have felt or dreamt of if he had been rich in chest; wherefore we may conclude,
that when he agreed upon the arbitration, that he employed all Holker's money
in his hands, without distinction whatever, as opportunities offered, he did
not say too much; since his claim of bills on the 11th of March, on account of
his advances, is supported by his claim of bills on the 7th; because he could
not take up the Boston drafts so conveniently, without either diverting the
funds on hand from some lucrative employment or vestment in view, or without
selling some object or investment, or merchandise on hand or in store, at a
lesser profit than it would have commanded at a later period.

9 thly. We must further remark, that on the payment of these drafts from
Boston, and on the negotiation of the bills, R. M. claims and is entitled to
the commission of an agent by previous stipulation, though he scarcely received a
dollar of continental money in either case, nor did he even indorse Holker's
bills, since he got them drawn to the order of Adam Babcock. Yet he maintains,
-- he was not agent responsible, or bailiff, but agent upon trust, a banker;
especially since he received no consideration for the care and custody of the
goods in store, for attending to the King's money in his chest, which,
elsewhere he says, was perishing in his hands -- Did the money of Congress in
this case, or the money arising from the bills on France of the King's agent,
perish in his hands, in his chest, in his store?

10 thly. From the above we may form an idea of the manner in which he carried
on his operations, when under cover of the confidence reposed in him by J. H.
with what zeal he held forth his aid and assistance to his country, then
struggling for independence, and working against the tide of depreciation of
their currency. Thus he attended to the interest of a generous King and nation
every where fighting for his safety, and the future happiness of himself and
his posterity! Whatever may be the case in this respect, every one will be
convinced, that depreciation at least never reached R. M. in this instance;
that no money in this instance perished in his hands; that the public bills
were not employed for public purposes, but to take up his own engagements
(having himself employed those moneys transmitted to him, to answer all demands
made upon him). Then, shall he not return the bills with interest, since the
bills employed on this occasion turned out a most advantageous speculation in
themselves? This advantageous employment we shall, for the sake of
investigation, also here explain.

L.20,000, which he received in November, were equal, according to the scale of
depreciation at 6 for one, to (specie) L.3,333 - 13 - 4 L.20,000, which he
received in March from the bills of J. H. were then at 10 for one, and are
equal to L.1,904 - 15 - 3 which deducted, leave a balance of L.1,428 - 18 - 1
in favor of R. M. -- Thus supposing the vestment of the continental money in
specie in November, and the sale thereof in March following, R. M. would have
cleared L.1428 - 18 - 1, by depreciation alone, on the money of Congress, on
one sum of L.20,000 He received L.61,196 - 1 - 3 public money.
only; and this may explain why he took up the money from the treasury on the
10th of November, without any other possible reason. But in bills the profit is
much greater -- he was only to account nominally for the proceeds of the bills
drawn at his request to the order of Adam Babcock, in March, 1780, at a later
period; and this cannot have taken place by his accounts, but in the fall of
that same year, when money was at 30 or 40 for one, and then the profit is in
proportion greater. Suppose the nominal employment on the King's account was
made when money was at forty, then the profit is L.2,833 - 13 - 4, on a sum of
L.3,333 - 13 - 4. Can such profits be allowed in equity? Can the loss on the
sale of bills be allowed in order to give R. M. such extortionate advantages?
And shall the King's agent be condemned to make good these bills in the King's
treasury in France, for the sake of such a subordinate agent, in whose honor he
had confided, because he was also confided in by his countrymen,
fellow-citizens and Congress? -- For a subordinate agent, who declared on the
arbitration, that he knew nothing of depreciation in all 1778 and 1779, and who
accuses his employer of want of fidelity to his sovereign, because he drew the
bills which he (R. M.) employed, to fulfill his own engagements? By way of
apology to him, for this severe scrutiny and investigation, we must here
transcribe what he says on the subject of those bills drawn on R. M. from
Boston, and which subject we have entered upon more fully in our first letter
of self-justification, wrote in reply to R. M's wicked insinuations in his
favorite letter of the 26th of February, 1784. (Vide page 15.)

Speaking of the claim of depreciation on general principles, and on the nature
of the accounts betwixt him and J. H. he writes:

Before I quit the subject I will select two or three instances from those
accounts, which will bring the reasoning more home to your perceptions. The
King paid 400,000 Livres for two prizes, taken by the privateers Hancock and
Boston; you agreed with the owners for L.70,000 lawful money; you paid in part
your bills for 45,000 Livres, (L.7875.) and drew on me for the remainder
L62,125 -- which sums together make L.70,000 lawful. These drafts on me, equal
to L.77,656 - 5 - 0, Pennsylvania currency, were paid by me when your public
bills were selling at 900 per cent. on sterling, reckoning Livres at 10
sterling: consequently these bills were paid with somewhat less than 200,000
Livers; the remainder on the whole transaction was a gain to you of 155,000
Livres Tournois.

This paragraph and business we have elsewhere explained, but we did not then
choose to observe to R. M. the consequences of the confession he so liberally
makes, that J. H's drafts on him drawn in October, were paid by R. M. from the
proceeds of the public bills sold in March, 1779, or with those very bills in
kind: a confession which R. M. made for the purpose only of drawing from thence
the inference, that the agent general was pocketing 155,000 Livres Tournois
their representative value; when in fact and reality R. M. was himself
contriving to pocket the greater part of this same difference, and 500,000
Livres more, under his ingenious mode of redacting and presenting accounts, and
by refusing all depreciation thereon. But how could J. H. pocket any such
difference? For when R. M. says, under the date of February, 1784, that he paid
L.77,656 - 5 - 0, Pennsylvania currency, of Holker's drafts on him, he asserts
that as a fact which he knows to be untrue; because he credits J. H. in his
accounts of Holker's Boston transactions, under the date of January the 14th,
1779, J. H's drafts from Boston amount to L.77,656 - 5 - 0 he took up in Boston
L.24,362 - 0 - 0 therefore L.52,694 - 5 - 0 only were paid by R. M. and not
L.77,656 - 5 - 0

for L.24,962 - 2 - 6 -- for as much of those same drafts which J. H. himself
took up while in Boston, at the request of the parties concerned; and be would
have done the same for all, if they had applied to him there. -- Therefore R.
M's calculation is false, his relation of the fact, wrote when the accounts
were under his eyes, is untrue. -- What shall we believe from such a man?

But to show that malice, and the fear of accounting on honest and just
principles, possessed his soul, and deprived him of all reason, when he wrote
this infidious letter, it is sufficient to remind the reader of his saying that
J. H. when he paid his own drafts on R. M. did it with the proceeds of his
public bills on France. He forgot that J. H's money and that of his friends
paid in July and August, 1778, to R. M. and his remittance on the commissary
general, are credited in account to J. H. and were to be employed by R. M. to
take up those same drafts on Philadelphia in 1778, for which (he says) the
proceeds of the public bills were employed by J. H. in March 1779. -- though
these proceeds were received by R. M. by him employed in his own speculations
or to take up his own engagements, and have entirely disappeared through
depreciation, if his statement of accounts is allowed, and have occasioned the
total loss of the bills drawn, as he says, to take up Holker's drafts from
Boston. Let us now grant to R. M. for a moment the full force of his allegation
against his employer, and with him pretend to believe -- that the difference on
this whole transaction, on these 400,000 Livres, was a gain to him (J. H.) of
155,000 Livres Tournois -- (Vide page 16.) What can we conclude from thence?
Let it be supposed, that J. H. did attempt to gain 300,000 Livres on 400,000
Livres, still he would not have attempted to gain as much as R. M. -- L.2800
out of L.3300 -- and sacrifice one third of the original value of the bills on
the sale thereof, in order to raise the L.500 necessary to make up the
difference of payment. And if J. H. is supposed to have actually made the gain,
according to R. M's words, then we shall fall into an absurdity; for all
Holker's accounts are grounded on those of R. M. which form near one third of
the value to be accounted for, and are the first to be accounted for; therefore
he has not made the gain of 155,000 Livres, since he has not ever yet been able
to redact, much less propose his accounts, in order to make any gain whatever.

From hence it is also to be concluded that J. H. has not even attempted to
make this gain; but it may still be supposed that he had that intention, and
that R. M. knew his intention: this being granted, his argument will run as
follows:

J. H. working the nefarious plan of depreciation against the King, or in other
words, making great gain himself through a nominal set of accounts, insists
with R. M. that he shall account to J. H. on a scale (...) depreciation, for
his transactions on behalf of the Royal Marine, at the very time that R. M. can
prove, that he (J. H.) had intended at least to gain 155,000 Livres by
depreciation, from one single payment of 400,000 Livres, made on behalf of the
King: and as so gross an injury to the King's interest must not take place in
favor of J. H. therefore he inserts in his letter of February, 1784, that J. H.
has actually made the gain of so large a sum. Unluckily R. M. forgot that the
assertion deserved a reply.

Is it because J. H. (to speak plain) has cheated the King, that R. M. is to
cheat J. H? Is it because J. H. had intended and attempted to cheat his King,
that R. M. is to cheat actually and effectually J. H. and also the King and J.
H's friends, through the fallacious medium of depreciation? But if J. H has
gained 155,000 Livres, and R. M. gains them upon J. H. where is the profit to
J. H? Can he in this situation be termed a cheat, with any truth? Without
having derived any advantage from his fraud, especially by R. M? At most it can
only be said that he did attempt it, but was weak enough to be outwitted in the
attempt by that confidential agent, whom he employed and paid to redact the
accounts of his own transactions -- his Boston transactions. But if this gain
is gone from J. H. how will he be able to refund the King, should his ministers
one day or other discover the attempt, and the knavery of the agent general?
How will he be able to account to the officers and crews of Count D'Estaing's
Fleet for the real value of the moneys which the commander thereof entrusted to
his good faith? And if this game is to be played upon J. H. throughout, by R.
M. how then will J. Holker's friends be redeemed from ruin, when their fortunes
will have been dissipated under the cloak of depreciation, and the loss be
explained away by R. M. in a set of accounts?

Is R. M. to attempt thus to cheat J. H. and then call out cheat first, turn
informer, and threaten J. H. Will it not surprise all impartial men, that
though J. H. may be supposed to have intended to secure to himself the
advantages of depreciation, R. M. should have imagined that he could terrify J.
H. from his claims on him, by insinuating the attempt, and reproaching him with
having selfish views to answer, when in fact there is but one principle, one
single equitable mode of settling accounts between J. H. and R. M. between J.
H. and the King, between J. H. and his friends? And has not R. M. seen J. H.
settle with Congress on these same principles, while he superintended their
finances, during the run of the year 1783? And shall R. M. make an exception to
the general rule, because he acted upon trust; because he was entrusted with
the redaction of J. H's accounts for his personal transactions in Boston?
that if he should squeak, or shake even through fear, he will go and tell the
King his master? This is too much. And is this language to be held by R. M.
when he knew that as early as January, February and March, 1779, in all
Holker's letters to the King's secretaries of state, he informs them of the
savings he has made on the Boston transactions, of the advantageous rate of
exchange of bills, then selling in Philadelphia for the payment of the debts
contracted in Boston by the King's fleet, and due to individuals, to himself,
and to Congress? This R. M. knew at the time, he knew that J. H. made his pride
thereof, and that he vaunted and gloried in his successful endeavors for the
King's interest, to R. M. himself, to Mr. Gerard, and all others to whom he
could confidentially speak on the subject. This R. M. has heard J. H. speak of
repeatedly: but, res miranda! at that very time, R. M was meditating the plan
of accusing him, some day or other, of these very exertions on the King's
behalf; and to maintain at a later period, that the whole was a cheat, because
there was a gain of 150,000 Livres to J. H. on 400,000 Livres, in order to
cover his own plan of working depreciation against J. H.

It may be supposed by some, that this was not really intended by R. M. that it
was only a hint, by way of observation, made from R. M. in a letter to J. H. so
artfully written, that though it conveyed the idea of a gain that could be made
by J. H. if his accounts were properly stated, still J. H. could never be
imprudent enough to show the letter, or make any use of it against R. M.
because the insinuation would be against J. H. and the secret of his gain of
155,000 Livres suffered to transpire. But here again R. M. is foiled in his
object; for the King's ministers were fully informed of this whole business, in
a series of letters, which explain the whole; therefore, if they are one day
imposed upon by J. H. it will be with their eyes open and in noonday; and if,
as R. M. pretends, there is any gain whatever to J. H. it will be the free
gift, the free concession of the King through his ministers: if such a profit
could exist, even then it would be but a just reward of his fidelity to the
King's service and interest: but this cannot be, since it would only enable him
to do justice to the King, to the officers and seamen of the King's navy, and
to J. H's friends in Europe, whose money was to be employed for the King's
service by J. H. and of which the greater part was afterward put into the
hands of R. M. for this very purpose.

Notwithstanding the extreme length of this memorial, we must now further
remark, that R. M. seems to lay great stress on the circumstance of the
accounts, respecting J. H's transactions in Boston in 1778, being entered in R.
M's books in 1779, at J. H's request: He asks, (Page 13) " How are they to be
separated? (i. e. from his accounts.) Where are your instructions for the
purpose at the time? He adds, in the same Page, The effort now made to separate
them, is with a view to establish your demand of depreciation: but, although it
is in that respect immaterial to me, I will not consent to it.

This refusal of R. M. is extraordinary. J. H's transactions in Boston are
perfectly distinct from those of R. M. in Philadelphia: he never would have
consented to, or could be obliged to make good any losses to the King or to J.
H. on J. H's operations and transactions in Boston, in which he had no concern;
which he neither advised, directed or concerted. On this occasion R. M. was
really a mere book-keeper to J. H. recording in the run of 1779, one part of J.
H's transactions in Boston, which took place in October and November, 1778, and
which only came to R. M's knowledge in the year following, through the
confidential communication of J. H. He was neither a banker or agent in this
business: he was not to loose by being merely a recorder of accounts; he could
not reasonably have any profit in view; he could not claim or disclaim any
depreciation thereon. Nay, page 11, he reasons on this subject in the following
words: Robert Morris, (sub-agent to J. H.) accounts to the agent general of the
Royal Marine. (i. e. to J. H.) John Holker, Daniel Bell, John Row and others,
transact business on account of the Royal Marine in Boston; the agent general
makes those gentlemen accountable to Robert Morris, (J. H. makes J. H.
accountable to R. M.) by placing the accounts of those transactions in his
hands, for the express purpose of introducing their accounts into his. And
further, in the same page: If the accounts of those gentlemen do not please
you, I care not; for I did not employ them, and inserted their accounts into
mine by your order.

Here R. M. acknowledges that he did not transact the business; he is not
responsible for the same, for he did not employ John Holker, the agent general,
nor any other of the Gentlemen; and because he recorded their transactions in
his Books, he therefore introduces their operations into the statement of his
own operations, into the accounts of his own transactions: he is desired to
state his own accounts separately and distinctly, to specify merely what he did
actually receive and pay on the public account. And though he says, that with
respect to depreciation, it is immaterial to him, he will not consent to do it,
because the effort now made to separate them, is with a view to establish your
demand of depreciation. As if the mere separation of such accounts, the
substraction of accounts where he neither received or paid one penny, could
establish or annul any claim of depreciation against him or for him.

Page 15, R. M. says, But let us return for a moment to your Boston
transactions, on which so great a stress is laid; your most favorable statement
of them can only be, a profit made by the King on the depreciation of money
belonging to individuals, applied to his use; but this is not all; you, as I
have already observed, derived the means of making those expenditures,
principally from funds credited to individuals in accounts kept by you, in my
name, at your request; (i. e. in R. M's books) comprise the whole together and
you must see, that it forms neither addition to, nor deduction from what I
possessed.

Without observing on the obscurity of the first part of this paragraph, or on
the supposed injustice of an attempt made by the agent general to make a profit
for the King, or on the propriety of doing now ultimate justice to the King or
J. H's friends, let us only attend to the latter part: -- comprise together the
whole of J. H's Boston transactions, they neither make addition to, nor
deduction from what R. M. possessed. -- Why therefore not separate such
unnecessary accounts, which can only create confusion and error, especially in
dealings with continental money; and which, when entered into R. M's accounts
under different dates of receipt and payment, give rise to the most erroneous
inductions.

Why, therefore, is the separation of these Boston accounts so strenuously
opposed by R. M? The truth in this respect we must suppose to be, that there is
existing a very heavy loss to the King on R. M's operations in 1779; in the
beginning of that year he actually received more than L.20,000 sterling, in
bills payable at the Royal treasury of France, and more than L7000 sterling in
similar bills from Messrs. Turnbull and Co. in the year 1780, besides very
large sums in continental currency, the whole for the King's account, for his
service alone; still it appears from R. M's own accounts, from his own
statement, made out by himself, from his books and from the vouchers he
produced in support of his accounts, that he never did pay for the King's
account, L.12,000 Pennsylvania currency, of real specie value, according to the
scale of depreciation fixed by law; from whence there results a loss of near
L.40,000 to the King, though he sold almost all the public bills himself, -- made
his own engagements through agents of his own choice, -- made his own contracts
and purchases, etc. Does not such an extraordinary loss and deficiency need an
investigation? Does it not afford a sufficient reason why auditors should state
R. M's transactions separately and distinctly from those personal to J. H.
where J. H. alone received and paid the moneys, so as to examine and report on
this mysterious business; especially as R. M. did receive moneys applicable
only to special particular purposes, such as, for the public service, for the
purchase of loan office certificates, for speculations in South Carolina, etc.

It must be with a view of avoiding the consequences of this great deficiency,
that R. M. says, page 11 and 13, that the part of the statement of the public
transactions, signed by his Excellency Monsieur Gerard, in Sept. 1779, was an
account settled. This is a circumstance so remarkable, and so much stress is
also laid thereon, that it is proper to relate what appears on record upon this
subject.

The statement referred to is entitled: Debtor, The Hon. John Holker, Esquire agent
to the Royal Marine of France, in account current with Robert Morris, Esquire of
Philadelphia, -- on account of said Royal Marine, Creditor --

The first charge in this statement, that appears under the date of the 19th of
Sept. 1778, is a sum of L.2520, for L.2400, paid by R. M. to Edward Evans, on
behalf of the owners and Captain of the sloop Supply, for services performed to
his Excellency Connt D'Estaing's fleet, which, with a commission of 5 per ct.
for paying this money, make L.2520 - 0 - 0

It balances by a sum of 1000 Livres Tournois L.163,355 - 8 - 6 continental
currency, in these words, To balance carried to the credit of John Holker Esquire,
agent of the Royal Marine of France, in a new account current. -- say L.163,355
- 8 - 6

The gross ammount is for a sum of L.584,158 - 13 - 5

At the foot thereof is wrote the following note:

That more money than the above balance is actually paid by me for the service
of the Royal Marine for sundry articles and services that cannot yet be brought
into the account, as the persons who received the moneys have not yet rendered
their accounts, although frequently requested; these articles will therefore
appear in the next account, viz. Matthias Slough, Esquire in payment of flour,
about L. 30,000 - 0 - 0 Hewes, Smith and Allen, for naval stores, 4,000 - 0 - 0
Ben Harrison jun. for flour, 20,000 - 0 - 0 John Michel, Esquire due for prize
goods, 1,438 - 0 - 0 John Langdon, Esquire on account of masts, etc. about 10,000 -
0 - 0 Navy Board at Boston, balance due, 3,348 - 0 - 0 Flour on hand, 27,262 -
0 - 0 Bread on hand, 10,000 - 0 - 0 Daniel Bell of Boston, for purchase of
provisions, about 150,000 - 0 - 0 William Smith of Baltimore, per ditto 100,000
- 0 - 0 L.356,048 - 0 - 0

Errors excepted.

Philadelphia, August 31, 1779. ROBERT MORRIS."

Thus stands the account, said to be settled, between J. H. and R. M. in
presence of his Excellency Monsieur Gerard. -- Notwithstanding that a very
considerable part of J. H's transactions in Boston are herein comprehended, for
which R. M. was never made, nor ever did become accountable, nor for which J.
H. never could settle with R. M. even if he had any such intention at the time.

This first statement was followed by a second, -- in which under a similar
superscription, the first article on the credit side is thus worded:

"1779. August 31, -- By balance of account settled and signed this day, --
Livres 1000 L.163,355 - 8 - 6"

On the debit side, the first, second and third charges against the Royal
Marine appear under the date of Dec. 1778.

The fourth charge bears date of January 1779.

The fifth of February 1779.

The sixth, seventh and eighth under the date of March 1779.

The ninth and tenth are of April following.

The eleventh article deserves to be related at full length:

"1779, August 20, -- To my order on Messrs. Lory and Plombard, -- (of
Charleston,) dated the 22d December last, in favor of his Excellency Monsieur
Gerard, for 88,000 dollars, to be applied to his Majesty's service, in such way
as Mons. Gerard may direct, omitted to be charged at that time, (at 7 shillings
and 6 pence,) is L.33,000 - 0 - 0"

1780. -- Under the date of 1780, without any specification of month or day
whatever, R. M. gives credit for the following sums: By the United States for
balance due on supplies furnished by their commissaries 1778, 1779, and 1780,
charged in my accounts; but being unpaid, you are to pay the same, viz. Miller
and Tracey -- (Boston transactions) -- balance L.150,444 - 0 - 6 Nathaniel
Ruggles -- (Boston do.) 10,832 - 10 - 0 Ephraim Blaine, and others --
(Philadelphia transactions) -- 503,916 - 2 - 8 By state of Pennsylvania, for
supplies furnished, charged in my accounts, but being unpaid, you are to pay
the same 40,154 - 14 - 0 L.705,347 - 7 - 2

Among the sums above specified, as Boston transactions, moneys to the amount
of L.86,919 - 13 - 9, were actually charged in the first statement, as if
actually paid; they form part of the two sums above specified, which he says
are not paid; and still he maintains that the first statement of the public
accounts, in which J. H's operations in Boston are blended and intermixed with
R. M's transactions in Philadelphia, is an account settled and signed, under
the date of the 31st of August, 1779.

The last article in this second statement reads as follows:

"1780. June 26, -- By John Holker, Esquire for the balance charged to his account
current -- Livres 4800 L.298 - 2 - 6

Errors excepted.

ROBERT MORRIS."

The gross amount of this second statement is L.1,528,119 - 14 - 2 --
Pennsylvania currency -- of continental paper: It was sent to J. H. on the 26th
or 27 of February, 1784, with R. M's letter of the 26th day of that month. But
previous thereto, another second statement of accounts for the Royal Marine,
had been handed to J. H. by which a balance in favor of R. M. of L.450,000 was
claimed from the Royal Marine: this last was made out in 1781, and R. M. says,
page 8 -- the accounts of the continental commissaries (from whence it was
stated) were only delivered to me about the middle of May, 1781.

From what has now been related, will it not be easy for any one to answer,
whether R. M's first statement of the public matters is an account settled
between the parties? Other documents will prove, that it never could be, nor
ever was intended by the parties as a settlement. What then does R. M. mean by
maintaining that it was an account settled? Surely he cannot intend thereby to
prove that his accounts cannot be separated from those of J. H. for he, of his
own accord, separates the public from the private concerns.

This riddle will be best explained thus: He wishes to make J. H. believe that
the principles of the account may be deemed settled, though not one word is
said thereon; he wishes this first statement had been really settled as to all
claim of depreciation; and as this may be maintained before auditors, it would
appear to be incumbent on them to state all R. M's accounts distinctly and
separately, under their real dates in the first instance, before they
condescend to hear the parties on their disputes, differences, or contentions,
in order thereby to understand well what may be said, and to ascertain clearly
the truth and the whole truth of this unfortunate business.

In order to prove the necessity of admitting the principles of depreciation on
his accounts, we must here relate some further facts.

A gentleman of high trust, and of honorable memory, employed R. M. as his
confidential agent in various concerns, during the years 1779 and 1780 -- to
him he accounted for the outfits of vessels, and the proceeds of return cargoes
on a footing of depreciation.

Swanwick, the clerk, attorney, agent and at present the partner of R. M. was
employed during two successive years with full powers of attorney from R. M. in
settling, claiming settlements, and offering them to all concerned, on a
valuation, or scale of depreciation, on behalf of his employer. R. M. when
employed as a banker, as a depositary of money merely, when he has paid
continental money on account of deposits made with him in hard money, he has
valued these payments according to the scale at the time of payment. When
employed as banker he admits of depreciation to every one but to J. H. -- when
employed by J. H. as agent, to transact upon trust immense purchases of
provisions and stores, to sell prizes, etc. etc. he admits no principle of
depreciation, because, he says, he was only banker and depositary. When J. H.
is interested in some unfortunate expedition to sea by his agent, and the ship
and cargo fall into the possession of the enemy, then the expenditures and
outfits are all reduced, by some scale or other to a specie value, and the
amount in specie is charged against J. H. Vide the accounts of the ship
Defense, fitted out by Wm. Smith, of Baltimore, Maryland -- in the run of 1779,
and for which a balance of L.2400 specie, is charged against J. H.
in a special particular specie account. But when adventures are somewhat more
prosperous, then the proceeds of the return cargoes, sold by R. M. or his
correspondents, are only to be accounted for nominally in a large, grand,
nominal account, where sums appear magnificent in number or in found, but
whence the reality is to be subtracted for the benefit of the accomptant; --
for the proceeds of these cargoes are, collectively with the moneys of Holker's
friends, to form one general balance, which alone is to be accounted for on
that rate of depreciation which it pleases R. M. to fix upon, according to his
ideas of what is just, right and honorable. And therefore he offers the balance
due in April, 1780, at the exchange of that month; though it results from a
long course of transactions, from July 1777, to April 1780, during the course
of his agency for J. H. and J. H's absent friends.

We will now put a period to these observations, and leave the rest to the
decision of law and equity -- Relying on our own integrity, the fairness and
importance of our claims, and the efficacy and uprightness of the laws, we can
entertain no doubt of obtaining ample and substantial justice.

ERRATA.
Page 19, line 11, for page 9, read page 13, 14, 20, 18, for page 4, read page
10.


