HUMAN NATURE IN ITS FOURFOLD STATE, OF PRIMITIVE INTEGRITY, Subsisting in The
PARENTS of MANKIND in Paradise. ENTIRE DEPRAVATION, Subsisting in The
UNREGENERATE. BEGUN RECOVERY, Subsisting in The REGENERATE. and CONSUMMATE
HAPPINESS or MISERY, Subsisting in All MANKIND in the FUTURE STATE.


IN SEVERAL PRACTICAL DISCOURSES. --

By MR. THOMAS BOSTON, Late Minister of the Gospel at ETTERICK.

A NEW EDITION, Carefully read by the AUTHOR's own Copy, wherein the Errors of
former Editions are corrected. -- To which is prefixed, A Recommendation by Mr.
MICHAEL BOSTON, late Minister of the Gospel in FALKIRK, the Author's Grandson.

JOHN ii. 24, 25. But Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew
all Men. And needed not that any should testify of Man: For he knew what was in
Man.

LUKE ix. 19. Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of.

PROVE. xxvii. 19. As in Water, Face answers to Face: So the Heart of Man to
Man.

PRINTED FOR THE BOOKSELLERS. M, DCC, LXXXVII.

A RECOMMENDATION, By the Reverend Mr. MICHAEL BOSTON, The Author's Grandson:
HUMAN NATURE in its FOURFOLD STATE, was the first production of my venerable
Ancestor, introduced to the Public. It made its first appearance in the year
1720. Since that period, it has undergone at an average, One complete Edition
every two years. Twenty thousand Copies of it have been exported to America,
from one single City in Scotland, besides those that have been sent to the
Continent from England and Ireland. The rapid sale of the Book upon its first
Publication, is a demonstrative proof of the esteem in which it was then held:
and the uninterrupted demand for it still, shows that the Principles it
inculcates, are yet held in repute. All that I need further to add, is, That
the present Edition is printed from that one Revised and Corrected by the
Author himself, and may therefore be esteemed correct.

FALKIRK Decr. 1784. MICHL. BOSTON.

PREFACE.
IT is a maxim among wise men, That the knowledge of persons is of as great use
in the conduct of human life, as the knowledge of things: and it is most
certain, that he who knows the various tempers, humors, and dispositions of
men, who can find out their turn of thought, and penetrate into the secret
springs and principles of their actings, will not be at a loss to find out
proper means for compassing his aims, will easily preserve himself from snares,
and either evite or overcome difficulties. But the knowledge of human nature,
morally considered, or, in other words of the temper and disposition of the
soul in its moral powers, is of much greater value; as it is of use in the
concerns of an unchangeable life and world: he who is possessed of so valuable
a branch of knowledge, is thereby cap^^i^ated to judge aright of himself, to
understand true Christianity, and to conceive justly of perfect happiness, and
consummate misery.

The depravity of human nature is so plainly taught, yea inculcated in sacred
Scripture, and is so obvious to every thinking man's observation, who searches
his own breast, and reflects duly on his temper and actings, that it is
surprizingly strange and wonderful* how it comes to pass, that this important
truth is so little understood* yea so much disbelieved, by men who bear the
name of gospel Ministers Are there not persons to be found in a neighboring
nation, in the character of preachers, appearing daily in pulpits, who are so
unacquanted with their Bibles and themselves, that they ridicule the doctrine
of original sin as unintelligible jargon? If they are persons of a moral life
and conversation, they seem to imagine, they cannot become better than they
are; if they are immoral. they seem to indulge a conceit, that they can become
virtuous, yea religious, when they please. These are the men who talk of the
dignity of human nature, of greatness of mind, nobleness of soul, and
generosity of spirit: as if they intended to persuade themselves and others,
that pride is a good principle, and do not know, that pride and selfishness are
the bane of mankind, productive of all the wickedness, and much of the misery
to be found in this and in the other world; and is indeed that, wherein the
depravity of human nature properly consists.

Upright Adam's nature faintly adumbrated the divine, in a moderate
s;elf-esteem, in an adequate self-love and delightful reflection on his own
borrowed excellency, regulated by a just esteem of, and supreme love to his
adored Creator: whence a peaceful serenity of mind, a loving, compassionate and
benevolent disposition of soul, a depth of thought and brightness of
imagination, delightfully employed in the rapturous contemplation of his
beloved Maker's infinite perfections thus bearing the divine image, and
resembling GOD that made him* But no sooner did he disobey the divine probatory
command, the the s^^les were cast, his moderate self-esteem degenerated into
pride, his adequate self-love shrunk into mere selfishness, and his delightful
reflections on his own excellency, varied into the trickling pleasures of
vanity and conceit: he lost view of the Author of his being^ and thenceforth,
instead of delighting in him, first dreaded, and then despised him.

The modest, and therefore hitherto anonymous author of the following
discourses, Mr. Thomas Boston, having handled this subject, in preaching to his
own obscure parochial congregation of Etterick, in the sheriffdom of Selkirk,
had a particular view to their benefit* in printing and publishing them; and
therefore the style and method is plain and simple, and the first edition
printed on coarse paper; but the subject is so comprehensive and important, so
well managed, and the book has been so well received, that it now appears in
the world more embellished as well as better corrected than formerly.

Let it suffice to recommend it to those who have a right taste of genuine
Christianity, that all the Author's notions flow so directly from the sacred
fountain, that it is to be doubted, if he has had much recourse to any other
help that his Bible and his GOD for assistance: Mean time, I am aware of an
exception from these who rank themselves among the polite part of mankind, as
that there is the same harsh peculiarity of dialect in it, which is commonly to
be found in books of practical divinity. But I beg leave to observe, That the
dialect they except against, is borrowed from sacred scripture; and like-as it
has pleased GOD, by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe; so
also to countenance what they are displeased with, by the opperations of his
Spirit on the minds of true Christians as their common experience witnesses.
However, I heartily wish, the exception were altogether removed, by some
persons digesting into a methodical treatise, the views of human nature in its
primitive perfection, in its depraved condition, and in its retrieved state,
who is master of modern style, and thoroughly understands the subjects
discoursed in this book, that by becoming all things to all men, Some, viz. Of
all ranks and kinds of men, may be gained.

I am not declaim at large in favors of religion; this were to write a book by
way of preface. Many able pens have been employed in recommending it to the
world, by strong arguments drawn from its usefulness to society, its
suitableness to the dignity of the rational nature, and the advantages arising
to men from it in this and the other world. But, after all, may not one be
allowed to doubt, if religion be rightly understood by all its patrons? may not
the beauties and excellencies of a precious gem be elegantly described by a
naturalist, or jeweller, who never saw the particular one he talked of, and
knows little of its nature, less of the construction of its parts, and nothing
of (...) proper use? Are there not men of bright parts, who reason finely in
defense of religion, and yet are so much strangers to it, that they brand the
persons who are so happy as to be possessed of it, with the hard name of
spiritualists, reckoning them a kind of Enthusiasts, unworthy of their regard.
The truth is, Christianity is a mystery, mere reason does not comprehend it
There is a spiritual discerning necessary to its being rightly understood*
whence it comes to pass that men of great learning and abilities, though they
read the Scriptures with attention, and comment learnedly upon them; yet do
not, yea cannot, enter into the vein of thought peculiar to the inspired
penman, because they share not of the same Spirit: wherefore it is, that the
Apostle Paul asserts, the natural, that is, unregenerate man, not to know the
things of God, neither indeed to be capable of knowing them, because they are
spiritually discerned.

From what has been said, it is easy to conclude. That no pedantic apology on
the part of the Author, for appearing in print, or fawning compliments to the
courteous reader, on the part of the prefacer, are to be expected The truth is,
both the one and the other are rather little arts, vailing pedantry and
conceit, than evidences of modesty and good-sense. It is of more use to
recommend the perusal of the book to persons of all ranks and degrees, from a
few suitable topics, than to show wherein this Edition differs from the first.

That all mankind, however differenced by their rank and station in the world,
have an equal concern in what is revealed concerning another and future world,
will be readily owned; and it must be as readily granted, that however
allowable it may be for men of learning and parts, to please themselves with
fineness of language, fullness of thought, and exact connection in writings
upon other subjects; yet they ought not to indulge themselves in the same taste
in discourses on divine things, lest they expose themselves to the just censure
of acting with the same indiscretion, as a person in danger of famishing by
hunger, would be guilty of, if he perversely rejected plain wholesome food, when
offered to him, for no other reason than the want of palatable sauce, or order
and splendour in serving it up.

The sacred book we call the Bible, has a peculiar sublimity in it, veiled with
unusual dialect and seeming inconnection: but it is not therefore to be
rejected by men who bear the name of Christians, a^ uncouth or unintelligible;
true wisdom dictates quite another thing, it counsels us, by frequent reading,
to acquaint ourselves well with it, become accustomed to its peculiar phrases,
and search into its sublimities: upon this ground, that the matters contained
in it, are of the utmost consequence to us, and when rightly understood, yield
a refined delight, much superior to what is to be found in reading the best
written books on the most entertaining subjects. What pleads for the parent is
a plea for the progeny; practical discourses upon divine subjects are the
genuine offspring of the sacred text, and ought therefore to be read carefully
and with attention, by persons of all ranks and degrees, though they are indeed
calculated for, and peculiarly adapted to such as move in low spheres of life.

Let it, however, be a prevailing argument with persons of all denominations,
carefully to read books of practical divinity, That many of them are not
written on the same motives and principles as other books are; the authors have
often a peculiar divine call to publish them, and well founded hope of their
being useful to advance Christianity in the world In consequence whereof it is,
that great numbers have reaped benefit by reading them, especially in childhood
and youth; many have been converted by them; and it may be questioned, if ever
there was a true Christian, since the art of printing made these books common,
who has not, in some stage of life, reaped considerable advantage from them.
This book recommends itself in a particular manner, by its being a short
substantial system of practical divinity, in so much, that it may with truth be
asserted, That a person who is thoroughly acquainted with all that is here
taught, may, without danger to his eternal interest, remain ignorant of other
things, which pertain to the science called divinity. It is therefore earnestly
recommended to the serious and frequent perusal of all, but especially of such
as are in that stage of life called youth, and are so stationed in the world,
as not to be frequently opportuned to hear sermons, and read comm^^taries on
the sacred text.

It is doubtless incumbent on masters of families to make some provision of
spiritual as well as bodily food, for their children and servants; this is
effectually done by putting practical books in their hands: and therefore this
book is humbly and earnestly recommended as a family-book, which all the
members of it are not only allowed, but desired to peruse.

As to the difference betwixt this and the former edition, which gives it
preference, it lies chiefly in the Author's not only having revised the style,
but the thought in many places, and corrected both, so as to set several
important truths in a clearer light, and make the style of the book now
uniform, which formerly was not so, because of the explications of peculiar
words and phrases in use amongst practical divines, especially of the church of
Scotland, which were interspersed throughout the former edition, and introduced
by another hand, for the sake of such persons as are not accustomed to them. It
remains, that the prefacer not only subjoin his name, which was concealed in
the first edition, as a testimony that he esteems the Author, and values the
book, but that he may thereby recommend it in a particular manner to the
perusal of persons of his own acquaintance If in his assisting toward its
being published, and in prefacing both editions, he has not run unfeat, he has
what will bear him up under all censures; the charitable ^till thank no evil,
and others will do as they please.

EDINBURGH, 18th MARCH, 1729. ROBERT WIG^THAN, M. D. G. E.

THE CONTENTS.
I. The State of INNOCENCE, or PRIMITIVE INTEGRITY, discoursed from Eccles.
vii. 29.
OF man's original righteousness, Page 19 His understanding a lamp of light,
Page ib. His will straight with the will of God, Page 20 His affections orderly
and pure, Page 21 The qualities of this righteousness, Page 22 Of man's
original happiness, Page 23 Man a glorious creature, Page ib. The favorite of
heaven, Page ib. The covenant of works, Page ib. Lord of the world, Page 26 The
forbidden true: stay to keep him from falling, Page ib. His perfect
tranquillity, Page 27 Life of pure delight, Page ib. Man immortal, Page 28
Instructions from this state, Page ib. Three sorts of persons reproved, Page 29
A lamentation over the ruins, Page 30
II. The State of NATURE, or State of ENTIRE DEPRAVATION.
HEAD I.
The SINFULNESS of Man's natural State, discoursed from GENESIS vi. 5. Page 35
THAT man's nature is corrupted, proven, Page 35 From God's word, Page ib. From
men's experience, and observation, Page ib. Fallen Adam's image, in eleven
particulars natural to men, Page 45 Of the corruption of the understanding,
Page 46 Weakness with respect to spiritual things, Page 47 Three evidences of
it, Page 48 Cross darkness in spiritual things, Page 50 Four evidences of it,
Page 51 A bias in it to evil, Page 53 Six evidences of that bias, Page 54
Aversion to spiritual truths, Page 55 Three evidences thereof, Page 56
Proneness to lies and falsehood, Page 57 Man naturally high-minded, Page 58 Of
the corruption of the will, Page ib. Utter inability for what is truly good,
Page 59 Two evidences of it, Page 60 Averseness to good, Page 61 Four evidences
of it, Page 62 Proneness to evil, Page 64 Five evidences of it, p. 64 Enmity
against God, p. ib. Against the being and nature of God, p. 65 Five queries,
for conviction on this head, p. 67 Against the Son of God, p. ib. In his
prophetical office, p. 68 Two evidences of it, p. 69 In his priestly office, p.
70 Three evidences of it, p. ib. In his kingly office, p. 71 Three evidences of
it, p. 72 A peculiar malignity against the priestly office; corrupt nature
lying cross to the gospel-contrivance of salvation, p. 73 Four proofs of it, p.
ib. Bent to the way of the law, as a covenant of works, p. 75 Four proofs of
it, p. 76 Against the Spirit of God, p. ib. Against the law as a rule of life,
p. 77 Two evidences of it, p. 77 Contumacy against the Lord, p. 78 Perverseness
in reference to the chief end, p. 78 Of the corruption of the affections, p. 79
-- of the conscience, p. 79 -- of the memory, p. 80 The body partaker of this
corruption, p. 81 How man's nature was corrupted, p. ib. The doctrine of the
corruption of nature applied, p. 82 The natural man can do nothing but sin, p.
84 God takes special notice of the sin of our nature, p. 87 Evidences of men's
overlooking the sin of our nature, p. 88 (...) in that sin is to be specially
noticed, p. 89 Why it is to be specially noticed, p. 90 How to get a view of
the corruption of nature, p. 93
HEAD II.
The MISERY of MAN's Natural State discoursed from Ephesians. ii. 3. p. 96 MAN's
natural state, a state of wrath, p. 97 What this state of wrath is, p. ib.
Wrath in the heart of God against the natural man, p. 98 Wrath in the word of
God against him, p. 98 Wrath in the hand of God against him, p. 98 On his body,
p. ib On his soul, p. ib. On his enjoyments, p. ib. He is under the power of
Satan, p. 99 Has no security for a moment's safety, p. 100 Wrath against him
at death, p. 100 -- at the general judgment, p. 101 The qualities of that
wrath, p. 102 The doctrine of the state of wrath confirmed and vindicated, p.
103 Several instructions from it, p. 103 Alarm to the unregenerate, p. 104 They
are under the covenant of works, p. 104 Their misery in that respect, p. 104
They are without God, p. 104 Their misery in that respect, p. 105 Instances of
the wrath of God, p. 105 A view of the nature of God, whose wrath it is, p. 113
How to flee from wrath, p. 113 A few words to the saints, p. 115 A word to all,
p. 117
HEAD III.
MAN'S UTTER INABILITY to recover himself, discoursed from Romans v. 6. John vi.
44. p. 117 ONLY two ways of man's recovering himself supposable, viz. the way
of the law, and the way of the gospel, p. 121 Man unable to recover himself in
the way of the law, p. 12^ He cannot (...) the commandments perfectly, p. 123
The perfection of law-obedience for fold, p. 123 He cannot satisfy the justice
of God for (...) sin, p. 123 Object. God (...) we hope to be saved, if we do as
well as we (...) Answered, p. 12^ Man (...) over himself in the way of the
gospel, to embrace and use the help suffered for his recovery, p. 124 Proven by
reveal argument, p. 12^ Object. (1.) If we be under an utter inability to do
any good, how can God require us to do it? Answered p. 125 12^ Object. (2) Why
do you then call us to believe, repent, and use the means? Answered, p. 12^
Object. (3.) The use of means needless seeing we are utterly unable to help
ourselves out of the state of sin and wrath. Answered. p. 12^ Quest. His God
promised to convert and save them, who, is the use of the means, do what they
can toward their own relief? Answered, p. 12^ The Conclusion of this head, p.
125
III. THE STATE of GRACE, or Begun R^^^ver^.
HEAD I.
REGENERATION Discoursed from 1 PET. i 23. p. 129 OF the nature of
regeneration. p. 1^0 Partial changes mistaken for this change, p. 1^^ The
change made in regeneration, what it is, p. 1^^ In general p. 1^^ In
particular, p. 1^^ The mind illuminated, p. ^^^ The will renewed, p. ^^^ Cured
of its utter in ability, (...) good, p. ^^^ Endued with a fixed (...) to (...)
p. 1^^ -- a bent and propensity (...). p. 1^^ Reconciled to the covenant of
peace, p. 138 Disposed to receive Jesus Christ, p. 138 The affections are
changed, p. 140 -- Rectified, p. 141 -- Regulated, p. 142 The conscience
renewed, p. 142 The memory bettered by regenerating grace, p. 143 The body
changed in respect of use, p. 145 The whole conversation changed, p. 148 The
resemblance betwixt natural and spiritual generation, in nine particulars, p.
151 Trial of one's state, whether born again, or not, p. 151 Some cases of
doubting Christians resolved, p. 151 Case (1.) -- The precise time and way of
one's conversion not known, p. 152 Case (2) -- Sin prevailing, -- p. ib. Case
(3.) -- Corruptions more violent than formerly, p. 154 Case (4.) -- Affections
to the creature stronger than to the Creator. -- Glowing affections to God
gone, -- p. 155 Case (5.) Seize of hypocrites and apostates, a terror, p.
155 Case (6) -- Falling short of the saints mentioned in scripture, and of
others -- p. 157 Case (7.) -- No child of God so tempted, -- p. 157 Case last.
-- Strange and unusual afflictions, -- p. 157 The necessity of regeneration, p.
159 To qualify one to do good, p. 160 To communion with God in duties, p. 161
To make one meet for heaven, p. 161 To one's being admitted into heaven, p. 161
Advices to the unregenerate, p. 162
HEAD II.
THE MYSTICAL UNION betwixt CHRIST and Believers, discoursed from John xv 5. p.
164 A General view of the mystical union, p. 165 The natural stock of all men,
Adam, p. 165 Originally a choice vine, p. 167 Now a degenerate stock, p. 168
Fruits growing on the branches of the nature of the stock, p. 168 A dead stock,
p. 169 The condition of the branches in that respect, p. 169 A killing stock,
p. 171 The condition of the branches in that respect, p. 171 The supernatural
stock, into which the branches are ingrafted, Jesus Christ, p. 172 The branches
taken out of the natural stock, and grafted into the supernatural stock, the
elect, p. 1^^ How they are cut off from the natural stock in twelve
particulars, p. 173 How ingrafted into Christ, p. 175 Christ apprehends the
sinner by his Spirit, p. 175 The sinner apprehends Christ by faith, p. 183 How
one may know one's self to be apprehended of Christ, p. 184 The benefits
flowing to believers from union with Christ, p. 184 Justification, p. 186 Peace
with God, and peace of conscience, p. 187 Adoption, p. 188 Sanctification, p.
190 Growth in grace, p. 193 Quest. If all true Christians he growing ones, what
shall be said of these who, instead of growing, are going back? Answered, p.
194 Quest. Do hypocrites grow at all? And if so, how shall we distinguish
betwixt their growth, and the growth of the Christian? Answered, p. 197
Fruitfulness, p. 197 Acceptance of their fruits of holiness, p. 198
Establishment, p. 199 Support, p. 202 The special care of the husbandman, p.
203 The duty of saints united to Christ, p. 206 A word to sinners, p. 208
IV. The ETERNAL STATE, or State of consummate Happiness or Misery.
HEAD I.
Death, discoursed from Job xxx. 23. p. 214 THE certainty of death, p. 215
Man's life vanity, p. 217 A short-lived vanity, p. 217 A flying vanity, p. 219
The doctrine of death, a looking-glass, wherein to behold the vanity of the
world, p. 220 A storehouse, for contentment and patience, p. 222 A bridle to
curb lusts conversant about the body, p. 224 A spring of Christian resolution,
p. 225 A spur to incite to prepare for death, p. 226
HEAD II.
The Difference betwixt the Righteous and the Wicked in their Death, discoursed
from Prove. xiv. 32. p. 127 THE wicked dying are driven away, p. 228 In what
cases a wicked man may be willing to die, p. 229 Whence they are driven, and
whither, p. 230 Driven away in their wickedness, p. 231 The hopelessness of
their state at death, p. 231 Their hopes of peace and pleasure in this life cut
off, p. 231 They have no solid grounds to hope for eternal happiness, p. 232
Death roots up their delusive hopes of heaven, p. 232 Make their state
absolutely and for ever hopeless, p. ^^^ Caution against false hopes of heaven:
characters of those Hopes, p. 233 Exhortation to hasten out of a sinful state,
p. 234 To be concerned for the salvation of others, p. 235 The state of the
godly in death, a hopeful state, p. 236 Christ their best friend is Lord of the
other world, p. 236 They will have a safe passage to it, p. 237 A joyful
entrance into it, p. 239 Object. -- Many of the godly, when dying, full of
fears, and have little hope. Answered, p. 241 Death uncomfortable to them, in
three cases, p. 242 Ten cases of saints anent death. Answered, p. 245
Considerations to bring saints in good terms with death, p. 246 Directions how
to prepare for death, p. 247
HEAD III.
The RESURRECTION, discoursed from John v. 28, 29. THE possibility of the
resurrection, p. 250 The certainty of the resurrection, p. 250 Who shall be
raised, p. 251 What shall be raised, p. 255 How the dead shall be raised, p.
255 The difference betwixt the godly and the wicked, in their resurrection, p.
256 The qualities of the raised bodies of the saints, p. 257 The qualities of
the raised bodies of the wicked, p. 260 Comfort to the people of God, p. 263
Terror to all natural men, p. 264
HEAD IV.
The GENERAL JUDGMENT discoursed from Mat. xxv. 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 46. p. 365
THAT there shall be a general judgment, proven, p. 267 Jesus Christ the Judge,
p. 268 The coming of the Judge, p. 270 The summons given, p. 270 The Judge's
sitting down in the tribunal, p. 272 The compearance of the parties, p. 272 The
separation betwixt the righteous and the wicked, p. 274 The trial of the
parties, p. 275 The books opened, p. 276 Sentence pronounced on the saints, p.
278 The saints judge the world, p. 280 Sentence of damnation on the ungodly, p.
281 The execution, p. 283 The general conflagration, p. 283 The place and time
of the judgment, unknown, p. 286 Comfort to the saints, p. 286 Terror to
unbelievers, p. 287 Exhortation to prepare for the judgment, p. 288
HEAD V.
The KINGDOM of HEAVEN, discoursed from Mat. xx. 34. p. 291 THE nature of the
kingdom of heaven, p. 292 The saints kingly power and authority, p. 293 Their
ensigns of royalty, p. 294 White garments, on what occasion used: much of
heaven under them, p. 294 The country where this kingdom lies, p. 295 The Royal
city, p. 299 The Royal palace, p. 299 The palace garden, p. 300 The Royal
treasures, p. 301 The temple in this kingdom, p. 301 The society there, p. 302
The society of the saints among themselves, p. 302 Society with the holy
angels, p. 303 Glorious communion with God and Christ, the perfection of
happiness, p. 304 The glorious presence of God and the Lamb, p. 305 The full
enjoyment of God and the Lamb, p. 306 By sight, p. 306 They will see Christ,
with their bodily eyes, p. 30^ They will see God with the eyes of the mind, p.
310 By experimental knowledge, p. 312 Fullness of joy unspeakable, p. 313 The
eternal duration of this kingdom, p. 313 The saints admission to the kingdom,
p. 314 The quality in which they are introduced, p. 316 Trial of the claim to
the kingdom of heaven, p. 318 Duty and comfort of the heirs of the kingdom, p.
319 Exhortation to these who have no right to it, p. 319
HEAD VI.
HELL, discoursed of from Mat. xxv. 41. p. 320 THE curse under which the damned
shall be shut up in hell, p. 321 Their misery under that curse, p. 323 The
punishment of loss, separation from God, p. 324 The horror of separation from
God, evinced by several consideration, p. 324 The punishment of sense,
departing into fire, p. 329 Hellfire more vehement and terrible than any
other, evinced by several considerations, p. 327 Six properties of the fiery
torments in hell, p. 329 Three inference from this doctrine, p. 329 Society
with devils in this miserable state, p. 331 The eternity of the whole, p. 332
What eternity is, p. 336 What is eternal in the state of the damned, p. 337
Reasonableness of the eternity of the punishment of the damned, p. 337 A
measuring reed to measure our time, and endeavors for salvation by, p. 341 A
balance to discover the lightness of what is falsely thought weighty, and the
weight of what is falsely thought light, p. 342 Exhortation to flee from the
wrath to come, p. 343
STATE I. NAMELY, The State of INNOCENCE, or Primitive Integrity, in which Man
was created.
ECCLES. vii. 29. Lo! this only have I found, That GOD has made Man upright:
But they have sought out many Inventions.


THERE are four things very necessary to be known by all that would see Heaven:
First, What Man was in the state of innocence, as GOD made him. Secondly, What
he is in the state of corrupt nature, as he has unmade himself. Thirdly, What
he must be in the state of grace, as created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
if ever he be made a partaker of the inheritance of the saints in light And,
Lastly, What he shall be in his eternal state, as made by the Judge of all,
either perfectly happy, or completely miserable, and that forever. These are
weighty points, that touch the vitals of practical godliness, from which most
men, and even many professors, in these dregs of time, are quite estranged. I
design therefore, under the divine conduct, to open up these things, and apply
them.

I begin with the first of them, namely, The state of Innocence: that beholding
man polished after the similitude of a palace* the ruins (...) the more affect
us; we may the more prize that matchless Person, whom the Father has appointed
the repairer of the breach; and that we may, with fixed resolves, betake
ourselves to that way which leads to the city that has unmovable
foundations. In the text we have three things.

1. The state of Innocence wherein man was created, God has made man upright.
By Man here, we are to understand our first Parents; the archetypal pair, the
root of mankind, the compendized world, and the fountain from whence all
generations have streamed; as may appear by comparing Genesis v. 1, 2. In the day
that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him, male and female
created he them, and blessed them, (as the root of mankind,) and called their
name Adam. The original words is the same in our text, in this sense, man was
made right, (agreeable to the nature of God, whose work is perfect) without any
imperfection, corruption, or principle of corruption in his body or soul. He
was made upright; that is, straight with the will and law of God, without any
irregularity in his soul. By the set it got in its creation, it directly
pointed toward God, as his chief end; which straight inclination was
represented as in an emblem, by the erect figure of his body a figure that no
other living creature partakes of. What David was in a gospel sense, that was
he in a legal sense, one according to God's own heart* altogether righteous,
pure and holy. God made him thus: he did not first make him, and then make him
righteous; but in the very making of him, he made him righteous. Original
righteousness was concreated with him; so that in the same moment he was a man,
he was a righteous man, morally good; with the same breath that God breathed in
him a living soul, he breathed in him a righteous soul

2. Here is man's fallen state: But they have sought out many inventions. They
fell off from their rest in God, and fell upon seeking inventions of their own
to mend their case; and they quite marred it. Their ruin was from their own
proper motion: they would not abide as God had made them, but they sought out
inventions to deform and undo themselves.

3. Observe here the certainty and importante of those things, Lo! this only
have I found. etc. Believe them they are the result of a narrow search, and a
serious inquiry performed by the wisest of men. In the two preceding verses,
Solomon represents himself as in quest of goodness in the world, but the issue
of it was he could find no satisfying issue of his search after it; though it
was not for want of pains: for he counted one by one, to find out the account:
Behold! this have I found, (says the Preacher) to wit, That (as the same word
is read in our text) yet my soul seeks, but I find not He could make no
satisfying discovery of it, which might stay his enquiry. He found good men
very rare, one, as it were* among a thousand; good women more rare, not one
good among his thousand wives and concubines, 1 Kings xi 3. But could that
satisfy the grand query, Where shall Wisdom be found? No, it could not; (and if
the experience of others in this point, run contrary to Solomon's, as it is no
reflection on his discerning it can as little decide the question, which will
remain undetermined till the last day.) But, amidst all this uncertainty, there
is one point found out, and fixed: This have I found. Ye may depend upon it as
most certain truth, and be fully satisfied in it: Lo this! fix your eyes upon
it* as a matter worthy of most deep and serious regard; to wit. That man's
nature is now depraved, but that depravation was not from God, for He made man
upright; but from themselves, They have sought out many inventions.

DOCTRINE, GOD made Man altogether righteous.
THIS is that state of innocence in which God set man down in the world. It Is
described in the holy Scriptures with a running pen, in comparison of the
following states; for it was of no continuance, but passed as a flying shadow;
by man's abusing the freedom of his own will. I shall,

First, Inquire into the Righteousness of this State wherein man was created.

Secondly, Lay before you some of the happy concomitants, and consequents
thereof.

Lastly, Apply the whole.

Of MAN's Original Righteousness.
FIRST, As to the righteousness of this state, consider, that as uncreated
righteousness, the righteousness of God is the supreme rule; so all created
righteousness, whether of men or angels, has respect to a law as its rule, and
is a conformity thereunto A creature can no more be morally independent on God*
in it is actions and powers, than it can be naturally independent on him. A
creature, as a creature, must acknowledge the Creator's will as it is supreme
law for as it cannot be without him, so it must not be but for him, and
according to his will: yet no law obliges, until it be revealed And hence it
follows, that there was a law which man, as a rational creature, was subjected
to in his creation; and that this law was revealed to him. God made man
upright, says the text This presupposes a law to which he was conformed in his
creation; as when any thing is made regular, or according to rule, of necessity
the rule itself is presupposed. Whence we may gather, that this law was no
other than the eternal, indispensible law of righteousness, observed in all
points by the second Adam, opposed by the carnal mind, some notions of which
remain yet among the Pagans, who, having not the law, are a law unto
themselves, Romans ii. 15. In a word, this law is the very same which was
afterward summed up in the Ten Commandments, and promulgate on Mount Sinai to
the Israelites, called by us the Moral Law: and man's righteousness consisted
in conformity to this law or rule. More particularly, there is a two fold
conformity required of a man; a conformity of the powers of his soul to the
law, which you may call habitual righteousness; and a conformity of all his
actions to it, which is actual righteousness. Now, God made man habitually
righteous; man was to make himself actually righteous: the former was the stock
God put into his hand; the latter, the improvement he should have made of it.
The sum of what I have said, is, that the righteousness wherein man was
created, was the conformity of all the faculties and powers of his soul to the
moral law. This is what we call original righteousness, which man was
originally endued with. We may take it up in these three things.

FIRST, Man's understanding was a lamp of light. He had perfect knowledge of
the law, and of his duty accordingly: he was made after God's image, and
consequently could not want knowledge, which is a part thereof, Col. iii. 10.
The new Man is renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created him.
And indeed this was necessary, to fit him for universal obedience, seeing no
obedience can be according to the law, unless it proceed from a sense of the
commandment of God requiring it. It Is true, Adam had not the law written upon
tables of stone, but it was written upon his mind, the knowledge thereof being
concreated with him. God impressed it upon his soul, and made him a law to
himself, as the remains of it among the heathers do testify, Romans ii. 14, 15.
And seeing man was made to be the mouth of the creation, to glorify God in his
works; we have ground to believe he had naturally an exquisite knowledge of the
works of God. We have a proof of this, in his giving names to the beasts of the
field, and the fowls of the air, and these such as express their nature:
Whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof, Genesis
ii. 19. And the dominion which God gave him over the creatures, soberly to use
and dispose of them according to his will (still in subordination to the will
of God) seems to require no less than a knowledge of their natures. And besides
all this, his perfect knowledge of the law, proves his knowledge in the
management of civil affairs, which, in respect of the law of God, a good man
will guide with discretion, Psalm. cxii. 5.

SECONDLY, His will lay straight with the will of God, Ephesians. iv. 24. There was
no corruption in his will, no bent nor inclination to evil; for that is sin
properly and truly so called: hence the apostle says, Romans vii. 7. I had not
known sin, but by the law; for I had not known lust, except the law had said,
Thou shall not covet. An inclination to evil, is really a fountain of sin, and
therefore inconsistent with that rectitude and uprightness which the text
expressly says he was endued with at his creation. The will of man then was
directed, and naturally inclined to God and goodness, though mutably. It was
disposed, by its original make, to follow the Creator's will, as the shadow
does the body; and was not left in an equal balance to good and evil: for at
that rate he had not been upright, nor habitually conform to the law, which in
no moment can allow the creature not to be inclined toward God as his chief
end, more than it can allow man to be a god to himself. The law was impressed
upon Adam's soul: now this according to the new covenant, by which the image of
God is repaired, consists in two things: 1. Putting the law into the mind,
denoting the knowledge of it: 2. Writing it in the heart, denoting inclinations
in the will, answerable to the commands of the law, Heb. viii. 10. So that, as
the will, when we consider it as renewed by grace, is by that grace natively
inclined to the same holiness in all it is parts which the law requires; so was
the will of man (when we consider him as God made him at first) endued with
natural inclinations to every thing commanded by the law. For if the regenerate
are partakers of the divine nature, as undoubtedly they are, for so says the
Scripture, 2 Pet. i. 4. And if this divine nature can import no less than
inclinations of the heart to holiness; then, surely Adam's will could not want
this inclination; for in him the image of God was perfect. It is true, it is
said, Romans ii^ ^5. That the Gentiles show the work of the law written in their
hearts* but this denotes only their knowledge of that law, such as it (...);
that the Apostle to the Hebrews, in the text cited, takes the word heart, in
another sense, distinguishing it plainly from the mind. And it must be granted,
that, when God promises in the new covenant, to write his law in the hearts of
his people, it imports quite another thing than what Heathens have: for though
they have notions of it in their mind, yet their hearts go another way; their
will has got a set and a blass quite contrary to that law; and therefore, the
expression suitable to the present purpose, must needs import, besides these
notions of the mind, inclinations of the will going along therewith; which
inclinations, though mixed with corruption in the regenerate, were pure and
unmixed in upright Adam In a word as Adam knew his Master's pleasure in the
matter of duty so his will stood inclined to what he know.

THIRDLY, His affections were orderly, pure and holy; which is a necessary part
of that uprightness wherein man was created. The Apostle has a position, 2 Thessalonians iii. 5. The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God: that is, The
Lord straighten your hearts, or make them ly straight to the love of God: and
our text tells us, man was thus made straight. The new man is created in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. iv. 24 Now this holiness as it is
distinguished from righteousness, may import the purity and orderliness of the
affections. And thus the Apostle* 1 Timothy ii. 8. will have men to pray, Lifting
up holy hands, without wrath and doubting: because, as troubled water is unfit
to receive the image of the sun; so the heart, filled with impure and
disorderly affections, is not fit for divine communications. Man's sensitive
appetite was indeed naturally carried out toward objects grateful to the
senses. For seeing man was made up of body and soul, and God made this man to
glorify and enjoy him; and for this end to use his good creatures in
subordination to himself: it is plain that man was naturally inclined both to
spiritual and sensible good; yet to spiritual good, the chief good as his
ultimate end. And therefore his sensitive motions and inclinations, were
subordinate to his reason and will, which lay straight with the will of God,
and were not, in the least, contrary to the same. Otherwise he should have been
made up of contradictions; his soul being naturally inclined to God as the
chief end, in the superior part thereof, and the same soul inclined to the
creature as the chief end in the inferior part thereof, as they call it* which
is impossible; for man, at the same instant, cannot have two chief ends. Man's
affections them in his primitive state, were pure from all defilement, free
from all disorder and distemper, because in all their motions they were duly
subjected to his clear reason, and his holy will. He had also an executive
power answerable to his will; a power to do the good which he knew should be
done, and which he inclined to do, even so fulfill the whole law of God. If it
had not been so, God would not have required of him perfect obedience; for to
say that the Lord gathers where he has not strawed, is but the blasphemy of
a wicked heart, against a good and bountiful God, Mat. xxv. 24.

From what has been said, it may be gathered, that the original righteousness
explained was universal and natural; yet mutable.

FIRST, It was universal; both with respect to the subject of it, the whole
man; and the object of it, the whole law. Universal I say, with respect to the
subject of it; for this righteousness was diffused through the whole man; it
was a blessed leaven that leavened the whole lump. There was not one wrong pin
in the tabernacle of human nature, when God set it up, however shattered it is
now. Man was then holy in soul, body, and spirit: while the soul remained
untainted, it is lodging was kept pure and undefiled: the members of the body
were consecrated vessels, and instruments of righteousness, A combat betwixt
flesh and spirit, reason and appetite; nay the least inclination to sin, lust
of the flesh in the inferior part of the soul, was utterly inconsistent with
this uprightness, in which man was created: and as been invented to vail the
corruption of man's nature, and to obscure the grace of God in Jesus Christ: it
looks very like the language of fallen Adam, laying his own sin at his Maker's
door, Genesis iii. 12. The woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of
the tree, and I did eat: But as this righteousness was universal in respect of
the subject, because it spread through the whole man, so also it was universal,
in respect of the object, the holy law: There was nothing in the law, but what
was agreeable to his reason and will, as God made him: though sin has now set
him at odds with it: his soul was shapen out, in length and breadth to the
commandment, though exceeding broad: so that this original righteousness was not
only perfect in parts, but in degrees.

SECONDLY, As it was universal, so it was natural to him, and not supernatural
in that state. Not that it was essential to man, as man; for then he could not
have lost it, without the loss of his very being; but it was con-natural to
him: He was created with it, and it was necessary to the perfection of man, as
he came out of the hand of God: necessary to constitute him in a state of
integrity. Yet,

THIRDLY, It was mutable; it was a righteousness that might be lost, as is
manifested by the doleful event: His will was not absolutely indifferent to
good or evil; God set it toward good only; yet he did not so fix and confirm
it is inclinations, that it could not alter. No, it was moveable to evil: and
that only by man himself, God having given him a sufficient power to stand in
this integrity, if he had pleased: Let no man quarrel God's works in this; for
if Adam had been unchangeably righteous, he behoved to have been so either by
nature, or by free gift: by nature he could not be so, for that is proper to
God, and incommunicable to any creature: if by free gift, then no wrong was
done him, in withholding of what he could not crave. Confirmation in a
righteous state, is a reward of grace, given upon continuing righteous, through
the state of trial; and would have been given to Adam, if he had stood out the
time appointed for probation by the Creator; and accordingly is given to the
saints, upon the account of the merits of Christ, who was obedient even to the
death And herein believers have the advantage of Adam, that they can never
totally nor finally fall away from grace.

Thus was man made originally righteous, being created in God's own image, Genesis
i. 27. which consists in the positive qualities of knowledge, righteousness and
holiness, Col. iii. 10. Ephesians. iv. 24. All that God made was very good, according
to their several natures, Genesis i. 31. And so was man morally good, being made
after the image of Him, who is good and upright, Psalm. xxv. 8 Without this, he
could not have answered the great end of his creation, which was to know, love,
and serve his God, according to his will. Nay, he could not be created
otherwise: for he behoved either to be conform to the law, in his powers,
principles, and inclinations, or not: if he was, then he was righteous: and if
not, he was a sinner, which is absurd and horrible to imagine

Of MAN'S Original Happiness.
SECONDLY, I shall lay before you some of those things which did accompany or
flow from the righteousness of man's primitive state: Happiness is the result
of holiness; and as it was an holy, so it was an happy state.

First, Man was then a very glorious creature. We have reason to suppose, that
as Moses' face shone when he came down from the mount, so man had a very
lightsome and pleasant countenance, and beautiful body, while as yet there was
no darkness of sin in him at all. But seeing God himself is glorious in
holiness, (Exodus xv. 11.) surely that spiritual comeliness the Lord put upon
man at his creation, made him a very glorious creature. O! how did light shine
in his holy conversation, to the glory of the Creator! while every action was
but the darting forth of a ray and beam of that glorious, unmixed light* which
God had set up in his soul; while that lamp of love, lighted from Heaven,
continued burning in his heart, as in the holy place; and the law of the Lord,
put in his inward parts by the finger of God, was kept by him there, as in the
most holy: There was no impurity to be seen without; no squint look in the
eyes, after any unclean thing; the tongue spoke nothing but the language of
Heaven: And, in a word, The King's son was all glorious within, and his
clothing of wrought gold.

Secondly, He was the favorite of Heaven: He shone brightly in the image of
God. who cannot but love his own image, wherever it appears. While he was
alone in the world, he was not alone, for God was with him: His communion and
fellowship was with his Creator, and that immediately; for as yet there was
nothing to turn away the face of God from the work of his own hands; seeing sin
had not as yet entered, which alone could make the breach.

By the favor of God, he was advanced to be confederate with Heaven, in the
first Covenant, called, The Covenant of Works. God reduced the Law, which he
gave in his creation, into the form of a Covenant, whereof perfect obedience
was the condition: life was the thing promised, and death the penalty. As for
the condition, one great branch of the natural Law was, that man believe
whatsoever God shall reveal, and do whatsoever he shall command: Accordingly
God making this Covenant with man, extended his duty to the not eating of the
tree of knowledge of good and evil; and the law thus extended, was the rule of
man's covenant-obedience. How easy were these terms to him, who had the natural
law written on his heart; and that inclining him to obey this positive Law,
revealed to him, it seems, by an audible voice, (Genesis ii. 16.) the matter
whereof was so very easy? And indeed it was highly reasonable that the rule and
matter of his covenant-obedience should be thus extended: that which was added,
being a thing in itself indifferent, where his obedience was to turn upon the
precise point of the will of God, the plainest evidence of true obedience, and
it being in an external thing, wherein his obedience or disobedience would be
most clear and conspicuous.

Now, upon this condition, God promised him life, the continuance of natural
life in the union of soul and body; and of spiritual life in the favor of his
Creator: he promised him also eternal life in heaven, to have been entered
into, when he should have passed the time of his trial upon earth, and the Lord
should see meet to transport him into the upper Paradise. This promise of life
was included in the threatening of death mentioned, Genesis ii. l7. For while God
says, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die; it is in effect,
If thou do not eat of it, thou shall surely live: And this was sacramentally
confirmed by another tree in the garden, called therefore, the Tree of Life,
which he was debarred from, when he had sinned, Genesis iii. 22, 23. -- Lest he
put forth his hand, and take also of the Tree of Life, and eat, and live for
ever. Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden. Yet it is
not to be thought, that man's life and death did hang only on this matter of
the forbidden fruit, but on the whole Law; for so says the Apostle, Gal. iii.
10. It is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, which
are written in the Book of the Law, to do them. That of the forbidden fruit,
was a revealed part of Adam's religion; and so behoved expressly to be laid
before him: but as to the natural Law, he naturally knew death to be the reward
of disobedience; for the very Heathens were not ignorant of this: Knowing the
judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, Romans
i. 32. And moreover, the promise included in the threatening, secured Adam's
life according to the Covenant, as long as he obeyed the natural Law with the
addition of that positive command; so that he needed nothing to be expressed to
him in the Covenant, but what concerned the eating of the forbidden fruit: That
eternal life in heaven was promised in this Covenant, is plain from this, that
the threatening was of eternal death in hell; to which when man had made himself
liable, Christ was promised, by his death to purchase eternal life: and Christ
himself expounds the promise of the Covenant of Works of eternal life, while he
promises the condition of that Covenant, to a proud young man, who though he had
not Adam's stock, yet would needs enter into life in the way of working, as
Adam was to have done under this covenant, Matthew. xix. 17. If thou will enter
into life, (viz. eternal life, by doing, ver. 16.) keep the Commandments.

The penalty was death, Genesis ii. 17 In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shall surely die: The death threatened was such, as the life promised was; and
that most justly, to wit, temporal, spiritual, and eternal death. The event is
a commentary on this: for that very day he did eat thereof, he was a dead man
in law; but the execution was stopped, because of his posterity then in his
loins; and another Covenant was prepared; however, that day his body got it is
death-wound, and became mortal. Death also seized his soul: he lost his
original righteousness and the favor of God; witness the gripes and throws of
conscience, which made him hide himself from God. And he became liable to
eternal death, which would have actually followed of course, if a Mediator had
not been provided, who found him bound with the cords of death, as a malefactor
ready to be led to execution. Thus you have a short description of the Covenant
into which the Lord brought man, in the estate of innocence.

And seems it a small thing unto you, that earth was thus confederate with
heaven? This could have been done to none but him, whom the King of heaven
delighted to honor. It was an act of grace worthy of the gracious God whose
favorite he was; for there was grace and free favor in the first covenant,
though the exceeding riches of grace, (as the Apostle calls it, Ephesians. ii 7.) was
reserved for the second. It was certainly an act of grace, favor, and
admirable condescension in God, to enter into a covenant, and such a covenant
with his own creature. Man was not at his own, but at God's disposal: Nor had
he any thing to work with, but what he had received from God. There was no
proportion betwixt the work and the promised reward. Before that covenant, man
was bound to perfect obedience, in virtue of his natural dependence on God: and
death was naturally the wages of sin; which the justice of God could and would
have required, though there had never been any covenant betwixt God and man: but
God was free; man could never have required eternal life as the reward of his
work, if there had not been such a Covenant. God was free to have disposed of
his creature as he saw meet: and if he had stood in his integrity as long as
the world should stand, and there had been no Covenant promising eternal life
to him upon his obedience; God might have withdrawn his supporting hand at
last, and so made him creep back into the womb of nothing, whence almighty
power had drawn him out: And what wrong could there have been in this, while
God should have taken back what he freely gave? But now the Covenant being
made, God becomes debtor to his own faithfulness: if man will work, he may
crave the reward on the ground of the Covenant: Well might the angels then,
upon his being raised to this dignity, have given him that salutation, Hail
thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee.

Thirdly, God made him lord of the world, prince of the inferior creatures,
universal lord and emperor of the whole earth. His Creator gave him dominion
over the fish of the sea, and over the fowls of the air, over all the earth;
yea, and every living thing that lives upon the earth: He put all things under
his feet, Psalm. viii. 6, 7, 8. He gave him a power soberly to use and dispose
of the creatures in the earth, sea, and air. Thus man was God's depute-governor
in the lower world; and this his dominion was an image of God's sovereignty.
This was common to the man and the woman; but the man had one thing peculiar to
him, to wit, that he had dominion ever the woman also, 1 Cor. xi. 7. Behold how
the creatures came to him, to own their subjection, and to do him homage as
their lord; and quietly stood before him, till he put names on them as his own,
Genesis ii. 10. Man's face struck an awe upon them; the stoutest creatures stood
astonished, tamely and quietly adoring him as their lord and ruler. Thus was
man crowned with glory and honor, Psalm. viii. 5. The Lord dealt most liberally
and bountifully with him, put all things under his feet; only he kept one
thing, one tree in the garden out of his hands, even the tree of knowledge of
good and evil.

But you may say, And did he grudge him this? I answer, Nay; but when he had
made him thus holy and happy, he graciously gave him this restriction, which
was in it is own nature, a prop and stay to keep him from falling. And this I
say, upon these three grounds. (1) As it was most proper for the honor of God,
who had made man lord of the lower world, to assert his sovereign dominion over
all, by some particular visible sign; so it was most proper for man's safety.
Man being set down in a beautiful paradise, it was an act of infinite wisdom,
and of grace too, to keep from him one single tree, as a visible testimony,
that he must hold all of his Creator, as his great Landlord; that so, while he
saw himself lord of the creatures, he might not forget that he was still God's
subject. (2.) This was a memorial of his mutable state given in to him from
heaven, to be laid up by him for his great caution: For man was created with a
free will to good, which the Tree of Life was an evidence of: but his will was
also free to evil, and the Forbidden Tree was to him a memorial thereof. It
was, in a manner, a continual watchword to him against evil, a beacon set up
before him, to bid him beware of dashing himself to pieces, on the rock of sin.
(3.) God made man upright, directed toward God as the chief end. He set him
like Moses, on the top of the hill, holding up his hands to heaven: and as
Aaron and ^^r stayed up Moses' hands, Exodus xv. 10, 11, 12. so God gave man an
erect figure of body, and forbid him the eating of this tree; to keep him in
that posture of uprightness, wherein he was created. God made the beasts
looking down toward the earth, to show that their satisfaction might be
brought from thence; and accordingly it does afford them what is commensurable
to their appetite: but the erect figure of man's body, which looks upward,
showed him, that his happiness lay above him in God; and that he was to expect
it from heaven, and not from earth. Now this fair Tree, of which he was
forbidden to eat, taught him the same lesson; that his happiness lay not in
enjoyment of the creatures, for there was a want even in Paradise: so that the
forbidden Tree was in effect the hand of all the creatures, pointing man away
from themselves to God for happiness: It was a sign of emptiness hung before
the door of the creation, with that inscription, This is not your rest.

Fourthly, As he had a perfect tranquillity within his own breast, so he had a
perfect calm without: His heart had nothing to reproach him with; conscience
then had nothing to do, but to direct, approve and feast him: and without,
there was nothing to annoy him: The happy pair lived in perfect amity; and though
their knowledge was vast, true and clear, they knew no shame: Though they were
naked, there were no blushes in their faces; for sin, the seed of shame was not
yet sown, Genesis ii. 25. and their beautiful bodies were not capable of injuries
from the air; so they had no need of clothes, which are originally the badges
of our shame: They were liable to no diseases, nor pains; and though they were
not to live idle; yet toil, weariness, and sweat of the brows, were not known
in this state.

Fifthly, Man had a life of pure delight, and undreggy pleasure in this state:
Rivers of pure pleasures run through it: The earth, with the product thereof,
was now in its glory; nothing had yet come in, to mar the beauty of the
creatures. God set him down, not in a common place of the earth; but in Eden, a
place eminent for pleasantness, as the name of it imports: nay, not only in
Eden, but in the garden of Eden; the most pleasant spot of that pleasant place:
a garden planted by God himself, to be the mansion house of this his favorite.
As, when God made the other living creatures, he said, Let the water bring
forth the moving creature, Gen i. 20. And, Let the earth bring firt^ the living
creature, ver. 24. But when man was to be made, he said, Let us make man, ver.
20. So, when the rest of the earth was to be furnished with herbs and trees,
God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, and the fruit-tree, Genesis i. 11. But
of paradise it is said, God planted it, chap. ii. 8. which cannot but denote a
singular excellency in that garden, beyond all other parts of the th^^
beautiful earth. There he wanted neither for necessity nor delight: for there
was ^ry tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food, ver. 9. He know
not these delights which luxury has invented for the gratifying of lusts: but
his delights were such as came out of the hand of God; without passing through
sinful hands, which readily leave marks of impurity on what they touch. So his
delights were pure, his pleasures refined. And yet may I now show you a more
excellent way: wisdom had entered into ^is heart: surely then knowledge was
pleasant unto his soul. What delight do some find in their discoveries of the
works of nature, by the scrapes of knowledge they have gathered! but how much
more exquisite pleasure had Adam, while his piercing eyes read the book of
God's works, which God laid before him, to the end he might glorify him in the
same; and therefore he had surely sitted him for the work! but above all, his
knowledge of God, and that as his God, and the communion he had with him, could
not but afford him the most refined and exquisite pleasure in the innermost
recesses of his heart. Great is that delight which the saints find in these
views of the glory of God, that their souls are sometimes let into, while they
are compassed about with many infirmities; but much more may well be allowed to
sinless Adam; no doubt he relished these pleasures at another rate

Lastly, He was immortal. He would never have died, if he had not sinned; it
was in case of sin that death was threatened, Genesis ii 17. which shows it to be
the consequent of sin, and not of the sinless human nature. The perfect
constitution of his body, which came out of God's hand very good; and the
righteousness and holiness of his soul, removed all inward causes of death:
nothing being prepared for the grave's devouring mouth, but the vile body,
Philip iii 21. And those who have sinned, Job xxiv. 19. And God's special care
of his innocent creature, secured him against outward violence. The apostle's
testimony is express, Romans v. 12. By one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin. Behold the door by which death came in! Satan wrought with his
lies till he got it opened, and so death entered; and therefore is he said to
have been a murderer from the beginning John viii. 44.

Thus have I shown you the holiness and happiness of man in this state. If any
shall say, What Is all this to us, who never tasted of that holy and happy
state? They must know it nearly concerns us, in so far as Adam was the root of
all mankind, our common head and representative; who received from God our
inheritance and stock to keep it for himself and his children, and to convey it
to them. The Lord put all mankind's stock (as it were) in one ship: and, as we
ourselves should have done, he made our common father the pilot. He put a
blessing in the root, to have been, if rightly managed, diffused into all the
branches. According to our text, making Adam upright, he made man upright; and
all mankind had that uprightness in him; for, if the ^oot be holy, so are the
branches. But more of this afterward. Had Adam stood, none would have
quarrelled the representation.

USE I. For Information. This shows us, (1) That not God, but man himself was
the cause of his ruin. God made him upright: his Creator set him up, but he
threw himself down. Was the Lord's directing and inclining him to good the
reason of his woeful choice? Or did heaven deal so sparingly with him, that his
pressing wants sent him to hell to seek supply? Nay, man was, and is, the cause
of his own ruin. (2.) God may most justly require of men perfect obedience to
his law, and condemn them for their not obeying it perfectly, though now they
have no ability to keep it. In so doing, he gathers but where he has strawed.
He gave man ability to keep the whole law; man has lost it by his own fault:
but his sin could never take away that right which God has to exact perfect
obedience of his creature, and to punish in case of disobedience. (3.) Behold
here the infinite obligation we ly under* to Jesus Christ the second Adam; who
with his own precious blood has bought our escheat. and freely makes offer of
it again to us, Hos xiii. 9. and that with the advantage of everlasting
security, that it can never be altogether lost any more, John x. 28, 29. Free
grace will fix those, whom free will shook down into a gulf of misery.

USE II. This reaches a reproof to three sorts of persons. (1.) To these, who
hate religion in the power of it, wherever it appears; and can take pleasure
in nothing, but in the world and their lusts. Surely those men are far from
righteousness; they are haters of God, Romans i 30. for they are haters of his
image. Upright Adam in Paradise, would have been a great eyesore to all such
persons; as he was to the serpent, whose seed they prove themselves to be, by
their malignity. (2.) It reproves those who put religion to shame, and those
who are ashamed of religion, before a graceless world. There is a generation
who make so bold with the God that made them, and can in a moment crush them,
that they ridicule piety, and make a mock of seriousness. Against whom do ye
sport your selves? Against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue?
Isa. lvii. 4. Is it not against God himself, whose image, in some measure
repaired on some of his creatures, makes them fools in your eyes? But be ye not
mockers, lest your bands be made strong, Isa. xxviii. 22. Holiness was the
glory God put on man, when he made him: but now sons of men turn that glory
into frame, because they themselves glory in their shame -- There are others
that secretly approve of religion, and in religious company will profess it:
who at other times, to be neighbour-like are ashamed to own it* so weak are
they, that they are blown over with the wind of the wicked's mouth. A broad
laughter, an impious jest, a silly gibe out of a profane mouth, is to many an
unanswerable argument against religion and seriousness; for in the cause of
religion, they are as silly doves without heart. O that such would consider
that weighty word! Mark viii 38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me,
and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall
the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father with the
holy angels. (3.) It reproves the proud self-conceited professor, who admires
himself in a garment he has patched together of rags. There are many, who,
when once they have gathered some scrapes of knowledge of religion, and have
attained to some reformation of life, do swell big with conceit of themselves;
a sad sign that the effects of the fall ly so heavy upon them, that they have
not as yet come to themselves, Luke xv. 17. They have eyes behind, to see their
seize; but no eyes within, no eyes before, to see their wants, which
would surely humble them: for true knowledge makes men to see, both what once
they were, and what they are at present; and so is humbling, and will not
suffer them to be content with any measure of grace attained; but puts them on
to press forward, forgetting the things that are behind, Philip. iii. 13, 14.
But those men are such a spectacle of commiseration, as one would be, that had
set his palace on fire, and were glorifying in a cottage he had built for
himself out of the rubbish, though so very weak, that it could not stand against
a storm.

USE III Of lamentation. Here was a stately building, man carved like a fair
palace, but now lying in ashes: let us stand and look on the ruins, and drop a
tear. This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation. Could we choose but
to weep, if we saw our country ruined, and turned by the enemy into a
wilderness? If we saw our houses on fire, and our households perishing in the
flames? But all this comes far short of the dismal sight, man fallen as a star
from heaven! Ah! may not we now say, O that we were as in months past, when
there were no stains in our nature, no clouds on our minds, no pollution in our
hearts. Had we never been in better case, the matter had been less: but they
that were brought up in scarlet, do now embrace dung-hills. Where is our
primitive glory now! Once no darkness in the mind, no rebellion in the will, no
disorder in the affections. But, ah! How is the faithful city become an harlot?
Righteousness lodged in it; but now murderers. Our silver is become dross, our
wine mixed with water. That heart which was once the temple of God, is now
turned into a den of thieves. Let our name be Ichabod, for the glory is
departed. Happy wast tho O man, who was like unto thee! No pain or sickness
could affect thee, no death could approach thee, no sigh was heard from thee,
till these bitter fruits were plucked off the forbidden tree. Heaven shone upon
thee, and earth smiled: thou wast: the companion of angels, and the envy of
devils. But how low is he now laid, who was created for dominion, and made lord
of the world! The crown is fallen from our head: woe unto us that we have
sinned. The creatures that waited to do him service, are now, since the fall,
set in battle-array against him; and the least of them having commission proves
too hard for him. Waters overflow the old world, fire consumes Sodom; the stars
in their courses fight against Sisera; frogs, flies, lice, etc turn
executioners to Pharaoh and his Egyptians; worms eat up Herod: yea, man needs a
league with the beasts, yea, with the very stones of the field, Job. v. 13.
having reason to fear, that every one that finds him will slay him. Alas! how
are we fallen? How are we plunged into a gulf of misery! The sun has come down
on us, death has come in at our windows; our enemies have put out our two eyes,
and sport themselves with our miseries. Let us then ly down in our shame, and
let our confusion cover (...). Nevertheless there is hope in Israel concerning
this thing. Come then, O sinner, look to Jesus Christ the second Adam (...) the
first Adam and his covenant: come over to the (...) di^er and Su^e^ of the new
and better covenant: and let our hearts say, Be thou our ruler, and let this
breath be under thy hand. And let (...) eye trickle down, and ^ase not without
any intermission, till the Lord (...) down and behold from heaven, L^rn. iii.
49, 50.

STATE II. NAMELY, The State of Nature, or of Entire Depravation.
HEAD I. The Sinfulness of Man's Natural State.
GENESIS vi. 5. And GOD saw that the wickedness of Man was great in the Earth*
and that every Imagination of the Thoughts of his Heart was only Evil
continually.


WE have seen what man was, as God made him, a lovely and happy creature: let
us view him now as he has unmade himself: and we shall see him a sinful and
miserable creature. This is the sad state we were brought into by the fall: a
state (...) black and doleful as the former was glorious; and this we commonly
call The state of nature, or Man's natural state, according to that of the
apostle, Ephesians ii. 2. And were by nature the children of (...) even as others.
And herein two things are to be considered; 1 st, The sinfulness; 2 dly, The
misery of this state, in which all the unregenerate do live. I begin with the
sinfulness of man's nature^ state, whereof the text gives us a full, though short
account: And (...) that the wickedness of man was great, etc.

The scope and design of these words is, to clear God's justice, in bringing
the flood on the old world. There are two particular causes of it taken notice
of in the preceding verses. (1.) Mixed marriages, ver. 2. The sons of God, the
posterity of Seth and Enos, professors of the true religion, married with the
daughters of men, the profane, cursed race of Cain. They did not carry the
matter before the Lord, that he might choose for them, Psalm. xlviii. 14. But
without any respect to the will of God, they chose; not according to the rules
of their faith, but of their fancy: they saw that they were fair^ and their
marriage with them, occasioned their divorce from God. This was one of the
causes of the deluge, which swept away the old world. Would to God all
professors in our day, could plead not guilty: but though that sin brought on the
deluge, yet the deluge has not swept away that sin; which, as of old, so in
our day, may justly be looked upon, as one of the causes of the decay of
religion. It was an ordinary thing among the Pagans, to change their gods, as
they changed their condition into a married lot: and many sad instances the
Christian world affords of the same, as if people were of Pharaoh's opinion,
That religion is only for those that have no other care upon their heads, Exodus
v. 17. (2.) Great oppression, ver. 4. There was giants in the earth in those
days, men of great stature, great strength, and monstrous wickedness, filling
the earth with violence, ver. 11. But neither their strength nor treasures of
wickedness, could profit them in the day of wrath. Yet the gain of oppression
still carries many over the terror of this dreadful example. Thus much for the
connection, and what particular crimes that generation was guilty of. But every
person that was swept away with the flood could not be guilty of these things,
and shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Therefore, in my text, there
is a general indictment drawn up against them all, The wickedness of man was
great in the earth, etc. And this is well instructed, for God saw it. Two
things are laid to their charge here.

First, Corruption of life, wickedness, great wickedness. I understand this of
the wickedness of their lives; for it is plainly distinguished from the
wickedness of their hearts. The sins of their outward conversation, were great
in the nature of them, and greatly aggravated by their attending circumstances:
and this not only among those of the race of cursed Cain, but those of holy
Seth: the wickedness of man was great. And then it is added, in the earth. (1.)
To vindicate God's severity, in that he not only cut off sinners, but defaced
the beauty of the earth; and swept off the brute creatures from it, by the
deluge; that as men had set the marks of their impiety, God might set the marks
of his indignation, on the earth. (2.) To show the heinousness of their sin, in
making the earth, which God had so adorned for the use of man, a sink of sin,
and a stage whereon to act their wickedness, in defiance of heaven. God saw
this corruption of life, he not only knew it, and took notice of it, but he
made them to know, that he did take notice of it; and that he had not forsaken
the cursed, though they had forsaken heaven.

Secondly, Corruption of nature. Every imagination of the thoughts of his heart
was only evil continually. All their wicked practices are here traced to the
fountain and springhead; a corrupt heart was the source of all. The soul which
was made upright in all its faculties, is now wholly disordered. The heart,
that was made according to God's own heart, is now the reverse of it, a forge
of evil imaginations, a sink of inordinate affections, and a storehouse of all
impiety, Mark vii. 21, 22. Behold the heart of the natural man, as it is opened
in our text. The mind is defiled; the thoughts of the heart are evil; the will
and affections are defiled: the imagination of the thoughts of the heart, ( i
e. whatsoever the heart frames within itself by thinking, such as judgment.
choice, purposes, devices, desires, every inward motion); or rather, the frame
of thoughts of the heart (namely, the frame, make, or mould, of these, 1 Chronicles.
xxix. 18.) is evil. Yea, and every imagination, every frame, of his thoughts,
is so. The heart is ever framing something; but never one right thing: the
frame of thoughts, in the heart of man, is exceeding various: yet are they
never cast into a right frame: But is there not, at least, a mixture of good in
them? No, they are only evil, there is nothing in them truly good and
acceptable to God: nor can any thing be so that comes out of that forge: where
not the Spirit of God, but the prince of the power of the air works, Ephesians. ii.
2. Whatever changes may be found in them, are only from evil to evil: for the
imagination of the heart, or frame of thoughts in natural men, is evil
continually, or every day: From the first day, to the last day in this state,
they are in midnight darkness; there is not a glimmering of the light of
holiness in them; not one holy thought can ever be produced by the unholy
heart. O what a vile heart is this! O what a corrupt nature is this! the tree
that always brings forth fruit, but never good fruit, whatever soil it be set
in, whatever pains be taken on it, must naturally be an evil tree: and what can
that heart be, whereof every imagination, every set of thoughts, is only evil,
and that continually? Surely that corruption is ingrained in our hearts,
interwoven with our very natures, has sunk into the marrow of our souls; and
will never be cured, but by a miracle of grace. Now such is man's heart, such
is his nature, till regenerating grace change it. God that searches the heart
saw man's heart was so, he took special notice of it: and the faithful and true
witness cannot mistake our case; though we are most apt to mistake ourselves in
this point, and generally do overlook it.

Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart saying. What is that to
us? Let that generation, of whom the text (...) see to that. For the Lord has
left the case of that generation on record, to be a looking glass to all
after-generations; wherein they may see their own corruption of heart, and what
their (...) would be too, if he restrained them not; for as in water face
answers to (...) so the heart of man to man, Prove xxvii. 19. Adam's (...) has
tra^ all men's hearts alike in this matter, Hence the apostle, Rom iii. 10.
proves the corruption of the nature, hearts, and lives, of all men, from what
the Psalmist says of the wicked in his day, Psalm. xiv. 1, 2, 3. Psalm. v. 9.
Psalm. cxl. 3 Psalm. x. 7. Psalm* ^xvi. 1. and from what Jeremiah says of the
wicked in his day, Jer ix. 3. and from what Isaiah says of those that lived in
his time* Isa lvii. 7, 8. and concludes with that, ver. 19. Now we know, that
what things ^ever the law says, it says to them that are under the law: that
every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God. Had
the history of the deluge been transmitted unto us, without the reason thereof
in the text, we might thence have gathered the corruption and total depravation
of man's nature: for what other quarrel could a holy and just God have with the
infants that were destroyed by the flood, seeing they had no actual sin? If we
saw a wise man, who having made a curious piece of work, and heartily approved
of it when he gave it out of his hand, as fit for the use it was designed for
rise up in wrath and break it all in pieces, when he looked on it afterward;
would we not thence conclude the frame of it had been quite marred, since it
went out of his hand, and that it does not serve for that use it was at first
designed for? How much more, when we see the holy and wise God, destroying the
work of his own hands, once solemnly pronounced by him very good, may we
conclude that the original frame thereof is utterly marred, that it cannot be
mended, but it must needs be new made, or lost altogether? Genesis vi 6, 7. And it
(...) the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieve^ him at his
heart: and the Lord said, I will destroy man, or blot him out, as a man does a
sentence out of a book, that cannot be corrected, by cutting off some letters,
syllables, or words, and interlining others here and there; but must needs be
wholly new framed. But did the deluge carry off this corruption of man's
nature? Did it mend the matter? No it did not. God, in his holy providence,
That every mouth may be stopped, and all the new world may become guilty before
God, as well as the old, permits that corruption of nature to break out in
Noah, the father of the new world, after the deluge was over. Behold him as
another Adam, firming in the fruit of a tree. Genesis ix. 20, 21. He planted a
vineyard, and he drank of the wine, and was drunken, and he was uncovered
within his tent. More than that, God gives the same reason against a new
deluge, which he gives in our text for bringing that on the world: I will not,
(says he*) again curse the ground any more for man's sake, for the imagination
of man's heart is evil from his youth. Genesis viii. 21. Whereby it is intimated,
that there is no mending of the matter by this means; and that if he would
always take the same course with men that he had done, he would be always
sending deluges on the earth, seeing the corruption of man's nature remains
still. But though the flood could not carry off the corruption of nature, yet it
pointed at the way how it is to be done; to wit, That men must be born of water
and of the Spirit, raised from spiritual death in sin, by the grace of Jesus
Christ, who came by water and blood; out of which a new world of saints arise
in regeneration* even as the new ^ ^rid of sinners out of the waters, where
they had long lain buried (as it were) in the ark. This we learn from 1 Pet
iii. 20, 21 where the apostle speaking of Noah's ark says, Wherein few, that
is, eight souls, were saved by water. (...) like figure whereunto, even baptism
does also n^w save us. Now (...) waters of the deluge being a like figure to
baptism; it plainly follow that they signified (as baptism does) the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. To conclude then, these waters,
though now dried up, may serve us for a looking glass, in which we may see the
total corruption of our nature, and the necessity of regeneration. From the
text thus explained, arises this weighty point of DOCTRINE, which he that runs
may read in it, viz That Man's nature is now wholly corrupted. Now is there a
sad alteration, a wonderful overturn, in the nature of man: where, at first,
there was nothing evil; now there is nothing good. In prosecuting of this
doctrine, I shall,

First, Confirm it.

Secondly, Represent this corruption of nature in its several parts.

Thirdly, Show you how man's nature comes to be thus corrupted.

Lastly, Make application.

That Man's Nature is corrupted.
FIRST, I am to confirm the doctrine of the corruption of nature: to hold the
glass to your eyes, wherein you may see your sinful nature: which, though God
takes particular notice of it, many do quite overlook. And here we shall
consult, 1. God's word. 2. Men's experience and observation

I. For scripture proof, let us consider,

First, How the scripture takes particular notice of fallen Adam's
communicating his image to his posterity, Gen, v. 3. Adam begat a son in his
own likeness, after his image, and called his name Seth. Compare with this, ver
1. of that chapter, In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God
made be him. Behold here, how the image after which man was made, and the image
after which he is begotten, are opposed. Man was made in the likeness of God:
that is, a holy and righteous God made a holy and righteous creature: but
fallen Adam begat a son, not in the likeness of God, but in his own likeness;
that is, corrupt sinful Adam begat a corrupt sinful son. For as the image of
God bore righteousness and immortality in it, as was cleared before, so this
image of fallen Adam bore corruption and death in it, 1 Cor. xv. 49 50. compare
ver. 22. Moses, in that fifth chapter of Genesis, being to give us the first
bill of mortality, that ever was in the world, ushers it in with this, that
dying Adam begat mortals. Having sinned, he became mortal, according to the
threatening; and so he begat a son, in his own likeness, sinful, and therefore
mortal: thus sin and death passed on all. Doubtless, he begat both Cain and
Abel in his own likeness, as well as Seth. But it is not recorded of Abel;
because he left no issue behind him, and his falling the first sacrifice to
death in the world, was a sufficient document of it: nor of Cain, to whom it
might have been thought peculiar, because of his monstrous wickedness; and
besides, all his posterity was drowned in the flood: but it is recorded of
Seth, because he was the father of the holy seed; and from him all mankind,
since the flood, has descended, and fallen Adam's own likeness with them.

Secondly, It appears from that scripture text, Job xiv. 4. Who can bring a
clean thing out of an unclean? Not one. Our first parents were unclean, how
then can we be clean? How could our immediate parents be clean? Or, how shall
our children be so? The uncleanness here aimed at is a sinful uncleanness; for
it is such as makes man's days full of trouble: and it is natural, being
derived from unclean parents: Man is born of a woman, ver. 1. And how can he be
clean that is born of a woman? Job xxxv. 4. An omnipotent God whose power is
not here challenged, could bring a clean thing out of an unclean; and did so,
in the case of the Man CHRIST; but no other can. Every person that is born
according to the course of nature, is born unclean. If the root be corrupt, so
must the branches be. Neither is the matter mended, though the parents be
sanctified ones: for they are but holy in part, and that by grace, not by
nature; and they beget their children as men, not as holy men. Wherefore, as
the circumcised parent begets an uncircumcised child, and after the purest
grain is sown, we reap corn with the chaff; so the holiest parents beget unholy
children, and cannot communicate their grace to them, as they do their nature;
which many godly parents find true, in their sad experience.

Thirdly, Consider the confession of the Psalmist David, Psalm. li. 6. Behold I
was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. Here he ascends
from his actual sin, to the fountain of it, namely, corrupt nature. He was a
man according to God's own heart; but from the beginning it was not so with
him. He was begotten in lawful marriage; but when the lump was shapen in the
womb, it was a sinful lump. Hence the corruption of nature is called the old
man; being as old as ourselves, older than grace, even in those that are
sanctified from the womb.

Fourthly, Hear our Lord's determination of the point, John iii. 5. That which
is born of the flesh, is flesh. Behold the universal corruption of mankind, all
are flesh. Not that all are frail, though that is a sad truth too; yea, and our
natural frailty is an evidence of our natural corruption; but that is not the
sense of this text: but here is the meaning of it, all are corrupt and sinful,
and that naturally: hence our Lord argues here, that because they are flesh,
therefore they must be born again, or else they cannot enter into the kingdom
of God, ver. 3, 5. And as the corruption of our nature evidenceth the absolute
necessity of regeneration; so the absolute necessity of regeneration plainly
proves the corruption of our nature: for why should a man need a second birth,
if his nature were not quite marred in the first birth? Infants must be born
again, for that is an except (John iii. 3) which admits of no conception. And
therefore, they were circumcised under the Old Testament, as having the body of
the sins of the flesh, (which is conveyed to them by natural generation) to put
off, Col. ii. 11. And now by the appointment of Jesus Christ, they are to be
baptized; which says they are unclean, and that there is no salvation for them,
but by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. iii. 5.

Fifthly* Man certainly is sunk very low now, in comparison of what he once
was: God made him but a little lower than the angels: but now we find him
likened to the beasts that perish. He hearkened to a brute, and is now become
like one of them. Like Nebuchadnezzar, his portion (in his natural state) is
with the beasts, minding only earthly things, Philip. iii. 19. Nay, brutes, in
some sort, have the advantage of the natural man, who is sunk a degree below
them. He is more witless, in what concerns him most, than the stork, or the
turtle, or the crane, or the swallow, in what is for their interest, Jer. viii.
7. He is more stupid than the ox or ass. Isa. i. 3. I find him sent to school,
to learn of the ant or ^^^not, which having no guide, or leader to go before
her; no overseer or officer to compel or stir her up to work; no ruler, but may
do as she lists, being under the dominion of none; yet provideth her meat in
the summer and harvest, Prove. vi 6, 7, 8 while the natural man has all these,
and yet exposes himself to eternal starving. Nay, more than all this, the
scripture holds out the natural man, not only as wanting the good qualities of
those creatures; but as a compound of the evil qualities of the worst of the
creatures, in which do concenter the fierceness of the lion, the craft of the
fox, the unteachableness of the wild ass, the filthiness of the dog and swine,
the poison of the asp, and such like. Truth itself calls them serpents, a
generation of vipers; yea more, even children of the devil, Mat. iii. 7. John
viii. 44. Surely then, man's nature is miserably corrupted.

Lastly, We are by nature children of wrath, Ephesians. ii. 3. We are worthy of, and
liable to the wrath of God; and this by nature: and therefore, doubtless, we
are by nature sinful creatures. We are condemned before we have done good or
evil; under the curse, ere we know what it is. But will a lion roar in the
forest while he has no prey? Amos iii. 4. that is, Will a holy and just God
roar in his wrath against man, if he be not, by his sin, made a prey for wrath?
No, he will not, he cannot. Let us conclude, then, that according to the word
of God man's nature is a corrupt nature.

II. If we consult experience, and observe the case of the world in these
things that are obvious to any person that will not shut his eye, against clear
light; we will quickly perceive such fruits, as discover this root of
bitterness: I shall propose a few things, that may serve to convince us in this
point.

First, Who sees not a flood of miseries overflowing the world? and whether can
a man go, where he shall not dip his foot, if he go not over head and ears is
it? Every one at home and abroad, in city and country, in palaces, (...)
cottages, is groaning under some one thing ^^ other, ungrateful (...) him. Some
are oppressed with poverty, some chastned with sick^;s and pain, some are
lamenting their losses; none wants a cross of (...) sort or another. No man's
condition is so soft, but there is some thorn of uneasiness in it. And at
length death the wages of sin, comes after these its harbingers, and sweeps all
away. Now, what but sin has opened the sluice? There is not a complaint nor
sigh heard in the world, nor a tear that falls from our eye, but it is an
evidence that man is fallen as a star from heaven; for God distributeth sorrow
in his anger, Job xxi. 17 This is a plain proof of the corruption of nature:
forasmuch as those that have not yet actually sinned, have their share of these
sorrows; yea, and draw their first breath in the world weeping, as if they knew
this world, at first sight, to be a Dochim, the place of weepers. There are
graves of the smallest, as well as of the largest size, in the churchyard; and
there are never wanting some in the world, who like Rachel, are weeping for
their children, because they are not, Mat. ii. 18.

Secondly, Observe how early this corruption of nature begins to appear in
young ones: Solomon observes, that even a child is known by his doings, Prove.
xx. 11. It may soon be discerned, what way the bias of the heart lies. Do not
the children of sallen Adam, before they can go alone, follow their father's
footsteps? What a vast deal of little pride, ambition, curiosity, vanity,
wilfulness, and averseness to good appears in them: And when they creep out of
infancy, there is a necessity of using the rod of correction to drive away the
foolishness that is bound in their heart, Prove. xxii 15. Which shows, that if
grace prevail not, the child will be as Ishmael, a wild ass man, as the word
is, Genesis xvi. 13

Thirdly, Take a view of the manifold gross out-breakings of sin, in the world.
The wickedness of man is yet great in the earth. Behold the bitter fruits of
the corruption of our nature, Hos. iv. 2. By swearing and lying, and killing
and stealing, and commiting adultery, they break out, (like the breaking forth
of water) and blood touches blood. The world is filled with filthiness, and
all manner of lewdness, wickedness, and profanity. Whence is this deluge of sin
on the earth, but from the breaking up of the fountains of the great deep, the
heart of man; out of which proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications,
murders, thefts. covetousness, wickedness, etc. Mark vii, 21, 22. Ye will, it
may be, thank God with a whole heart, that ye are not like these other men: and
indeed ye have better reason for it than, I fear, ye are aware of; for, as in
water, face answers to face, so the heart of man to man, Prove. xxvii. 19. As
looking into clear water, ye see your own face; so looking into your heart, ye
may see other men's there: and looking into other men's, in them ye may see
your own. So that the most vile and profane wretches that are in the world
should serve you for a looking glass; in which you ought to discern the
corruption of your own nature: and if you do so, ye would, with a heart truly
touched, thank God, and not yourselves, indeed, that ye are not as other men,
in your lives; seeing the corruption of nature is the same in you, as in them.

Fourthly, Cast your eye upon these terrible convulsions the world is thrown
into by the lust of men: Lions make not a prey of lions, nor wolves of wolves:
but men are turned wolves to one another, biting and devouring one another.
Upon how slight occasions will men sheath their swords in one another's bowels!
The world is a wilderness, where the clearest fire men can carry about with
them, will not fright away the wild beasts that inhabit it, (and that because
they are men, and not brutes) but one way or other they will be wounded. Since
Cain shed the blood of Abel, the earth has been turned into a slaughterhouse;
and the chase has been continued since Nimrod began his hunting; on the earth,
as in the sea, the greater still devouring the lesser. When we see the world in
such a ferment, every one stabbing another with words or swords, we may
conclude there is an evil spirit among them. These violent heats among Adam's
sons, speak the whole body to be distempered, the whole head to be sick, and
the whole heart faint. They surely proceed from an inward cause, James vi. 1.
Lusts that war in our members.

Fifthly, Consider the necessity of human laws, fenced with terrors and
severities; to which we may apply what the apostle says, 1 Timothy i. 9. That the
law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for
the ungodly and for sinners, etc. Man was made for society: and God himself
said of the first man, when he had created him, that it was not meet that he
should be alone: yet the case is such now, that, in society, he must be hedged
in with thorns. And that from hence we may the better see the corruption of
man's nature, consider, (1.) Every man naturally loves to be at full liberty
himself; to have his own will for his law; and if he would follow his natural
inclinations, would vote himself out of the reach of all laws, divine and
human. And hence some (the power of whose hands has been answerable to their
natural inclination) have indeed made themselves absolute, and above laws;
agreeable to man's monstrous design at first, to be as gods, Genesis iii. 5. Yet,
(2.) There is no man that would willingly adventure to live in a lawless
society: and therefore, even pirates and robbers have laws among themselves,
though the whole society cast off all respect to law and right. Thus men discover
themselves to be conscious of the corruption of nature; not daring to trust one
another, but upon security. (3.) How dangerous soever it is to break through the
hedge: yet the violence of lust makes many adventure daily to run the risk.
They will not only sacrifice their credit and conscience, which last is highly
esteemed in the world; but for the pleasure of a few moments, immediately
succeeded with terror from within, they will lay themselves open to a violent
death by the laws of the land wherein they live. (4.) The laws are often made
to yield to men's lusts. Sometimes whole societies run into such
extravagancies, that like a company of prisoners, they break off their fetters,
and put their guards to flight; and the voice of laws cannot be heard for the
noise of arms. And seldom is there a time wherein there are not some persons so
great and daring, that the laws dare not look their impetuous lusts in the
face; which made David say in the case of Joab, who had murdered Abner, Th^se
men, the son^ of Zeruiah, be too hard for me, 2 Samuel iii. 39 Lusts sometimes
grow too strong for laws, so that the law is slacked, as the pulse of a dying
man, Hab. i. 3, 4. (5.) Consider what necessity often appears of ammending old
laws, and making new ones; which have their rise from new crimes that man's
nature is very fruitful of. There would be no need of mending the hedge, if men
were not like unruly beasts, still breaking it down. It is astonishing to see*
what figure the Israelites, who were separated unto God, from among all the
nations of the earth do make in their history; what horrible confusions were
among them, when there was no king in Israel, as you may see, in the xviii.
xix. xx. and xxi. chapters of Judges: how hard it was to reform them, when they
had the best of magistrates: and how quickly they turned aside again, when they
got wicked rulers. I cannot but think, that one grand design of that sacred
history, was to discover the corruption of man's nature, the absolute need of
the Messiah, and his grace: and that we ought in the reading of it, to improve
it to that end. How cutting is that word, the Lord has to Samuel, concerning
Saul, 1 Samuel ix. 17. The same shall reign over (or, as the word is, shall
restrain) my people. O the corruption of man's nature! the awe and dread of the
God of heaven restrains them not: but they must have gods on the earth to do it
to put them to shame, Judges xviii. 7.

Sixthly, Consider the remains of that natural corruption in the saints. Though
grace has entered, yet corruption is not quite expelled: though they have got the
new creature, yet much of the old corrupt nature remains: and these struggle
together within them, as the twins in Rebekah's womb, Gal. v. 17. They said it
present with them at all times, and in all places, even in the most retired
corners. If a man have an ill neighbor, he may remove; if he have an ill
servant, he may put him away at the term: if a bad yoke fellow, he may
sometimes leave the house, and be free of molestation that way. But should the
saint go into a wilderness, or set up his tent in some remote rock in the sea,
where never foot of man, beast, nor fowl had touched, there will it be with
him. Should he be, with Paul, caught up to the third heavens, it shall come
back with him, 2 Cor xii. 7. It follows him as the shadow does the body: it
makes a blot in the fairest line he can draw. It is like the fig tree in the
wall, which, how nearly soever it was cut, yet still grow till the wall was
thrown down; for the roots of it are fixed in the heart, while the saint is in
the world, as with bands of iron and brass. It is especially active when he
would do good, Romans vii. 21. then the fowls come down upon the carcases. Hence
often in holy duties, the spirit even of a saint (as it were) evaporates: and
he is lef^ere he is aware, like Michael, with an image in the bed, instead of
an husband. I need not stand to prove the remains of the corruption of nature
in the godly, to themselves; for they groan under it; and to prove it to them,
were to hold out a candle to let men see the sun: and as for the wicked, they
are ready to account mole-hills in the saint, as big as mountains; if not to
reckon them all hypocrites. But consider these few things on this head. (1.) If
it be thus in the green tree, how must it be in the dry? The saints are not
born saints; but made so by the power of regenerati^ grace. Have they got a new
nature, and yet so much of the old remains with them? How great must that
corruption be in others, where it is altogether unmixed with grace? (2.) The
saints groan under the remains of it as a heavy burden? hear the Apostle, Romans
vii. 24. O wretched man that I am! Who shall deliver me from the (...) of this
death? What though the carnal man lives at ease and quiet, and the corruption of
nature is not his burden: is he therefore free from it? No, no; only he is
dead, and feels not the sinking weight. Many a groan is heard from a sick bed;
but never one from a grave. In the saint, as in the sick man, there is a mighty
struggle; life and death striving for the mastery: but in the natural man, as
in the dead corpse, there is no noise; because death bears full sway. (3.) The
(...) man resists the old corrupt nature: he strives to mortify it, yet it
remains: he endeavors to starve it, and by that means to weaken it; yet it is
active: how must it spread then, and strengthen itself in that soul, where it
is not starved but fed? And this is the case of all unregenerate, who make
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. If the garden of the
diligent afford him new work daily, in cutting off and rooting up; surely that
of the sluggard must needs be all grown over with thorns.

Lastly, I shall add but one observe more, and that is, That in every m^n
naturally the image of fallen Adam does appear. Some children, by their
features and lineaments of their face, do, as it were, father themselves: and
thus we do resemble our first parents. Every one of us bear the image and
impress of their fall upon him: and to evince the truth of this, I do appeal to
the consciences of all, in these following particulars.

1 st, Is not a sinful curiosity natural to us? And is not this a print of
Adam's image? Genesis iii. 6. Is not men naturally much more desirous to know new
things, than to practice old known truths? How like to old Adam do we look in
this, itching after novelties, and disrelishing old solid doctrines? We seek
after knowledge rather than holiness; and study most to know these things,
which are least edifying. Our wild and roving fancies need a bridle to curb
them, while good solid affections must be quickened and spurred up

2 dly, If the LORD, by his holy law and wise providence do put a restraint
upon us, to keep us back from any thing* does not that restraint whet the edge
of our natural inclinations, and make us so much the keener in our desires: And
in this do we not betray it plainly that we are Adam's children. Genesis iii. 2,
3, 6. I think this cannot be denied: for daily observation evinceth, that it is
a natural principle; that stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret,
is pleasant. Prove. ix. 17. The very heathens are convinced, that man was
possessed with this spirit of contradiction, though they knew not the spring of
it. How often do men give themselves the loose in these things, in which, if
God had left them at liberty, they would have bound up themselves! but corrupt
nature takes a pleasure in the very jumping over the hedge. And is it not a
repeating of our father's folly, that men will rather climb for forbidden
fruit, than gather what is shaken off the true of good providence to them, when
they have God's express allowance for it!

3 dly, Which of all the children of Adam is not naturally disposed to hear the
instruction that causes to err? And was not this the rock our first parents
split upon? Genesis iii. 4, 6. How apt is weak man, ever since that time, to
parley with temptations! God speaks once, yea twice, yet man perceives it
not. Job xxxiii 14. but readily does he listen to Satan. Men might often come
fair off if they would dismiss temptations with abhorrence, when first they
appear; if they would nip them in the bud, they would soon die away; but alas!
when we see the train laid for us, and the fire put to it, yet we stand till it
run along, and we be blown up with its force.

4 thly, Do not the eyes in our head often blind the eyes of the mind? And was
not this the very case of our first parents? Gen iii. 6. Man is never more
blind than when he is looking on the objects that are pleasant to sense. Since
the eyes of our first parents were opened to the forbidden fruit, men's eyes
have been the gates of destruction to their souls; at which impure imaginations
and sinful desires have entered the heart, to the wounding of the soul, wasting
of the conscience, and bringing dismal effects sometimes on whole societies, as
in Achan's case, Joshua vii. 21. Holy Job was aware of this danger, from these
two little rolling bodies, which a very small splinter of wood will make
useless; so as (with that King who durst not, with his ten thousand, meet him
that came with twenty thousand against him, Luke xiv. 31, 32.) he sends and
desires conditions of peace, Job xxxi. 1. I have made a covenant with mine
eyes, etc.

5 thly, Is it not natural for us, to care for the body, even at the expense of
the soul? This was one ingredient in the sin of our first parents, Genesis iii. 6.
O how happy might we be, if we were but at half the pains about our souls, that
we bestow upon our bodies! if that question, What must I do to be saved? (Acts
xvi. ^0.) did run but near as often through our minds, as those other questions
do, What shall we eat? What shall we drink? Wherewithal shall we be clothed?
Mat. vi. 21. many a (now) hopeless case would turn very hopeful. But the truth
is, most men live as if they were nothing but a lump of flesh: or as if their
soul served for no other use, but like sai^, to keep the body from corrupting;
They are flesh, John iii. 6. They mind the things of the flesh, Romans viii. 5.
and they live after the flesh, ver. 13. If the consent of the flesh be got to
an action the consent of the conscience is rarely waited for: yea, the body is
often served, when the conscience has entered a dissent.

6 thly, Is not every one by nature discontent with his present lot in the
world; or with some one thing or other in it? This also was Adam's case, Genesis
iii. 5, 6. Some one thing is always missing; so that man is a creature given to
changes. And if any doubt of this, let them look over all their enjoyments; and
after a review of them, listen to their own hearts, and they will hear a secret
murmuring for want of something: though perhaps, if they considered the matter
aright, they would see that it is better for them, to want, than to have that
something. Since the hearts of our first parents flew out at their eyes, on the
forbidden fruit, and a night of darkness was thereby brought on the world;
their posterity have a natural disease, which Solomon calls, The wandering of
the desires, (or, as the word is, The walking of the soul,) Eccl. vi 9. This is
a sort of a diabolical trance, wherein the soul traverseth the world; feeds
itself with a thousand airy nothings: snatcheth at this and the other created
excellency, in imagination and desire: goes here and there, and everywhere,
except where it should go. And the soul is never cured of this disease, till
overcoming grace bring it back, to take up its everlasting rest in God through
Christ: but till this be, if man were set again in paradise, the garden of the
Lord; all the pleasures there would not keep him from looking, yea, and leaping
over the hedge a second time.

7 thly, Are we not far more easily impressed and influenced by evil counsels
and examples, than by those that are good? You will see this was the ruin of
Adam, Gen iii. 6 Evil example, to this day, is one of Satan's master devices to
ruin men. And though we have by nature, more of the fox than of the lamb; yet
that ill property some observe in this creature, viz. That if one lamb skip
into a water, the rest that are near will suddenly follow, may be observed also
in the disposition of the children of men; to whom it is very natural to
embrace an evil way, because they see others upon it before them. Ill example
has frequently the force of a violent stream to carry us over plain duty: but
especia^^y, if the example be given by those we bear a great affection to; our
affection, in that case blinds our judgment; and what we would abhor in others,
is complied with to humor them. And nothing is more plain, than that generally
men choose rather to do what the most do, than what the best do.

8 thly, Who of all Adam's sons needs be taught the art of sowing fig leaves
together, to cover their nakedness? Genesis iii. 7. When we have ruined ourselves,
and made ourselves naked, to our shame; we naturally seek to help ourselves by
ourselves: and many poor shifts are fallen upon, as silly and insignificant as
Adam's fig leaves. What pains are men at, to cover their sin from their own
consciences, and draw all the fair colors upon it that they can? And when once
convictions are fastened upon them, so that they cannot but see themselves
naked; it is as natural for them to attempt to spin a cover to it out of their
own bowels, as for fishes to swim in the waters, or birds to fly in the air.
Therefore, the first question of the convinced is, What shall we do? Acts ii.
27. How shall we qualify ourselves? What shall we perform? Not minding that the
new creature is God's own workmanship (or deed, Ephesians. ii. 10.) more than Adam
thought of being clothed with skins of sacrifices, Genesis iii. 21.

9 thly, Do not Adam's children naturally follow his footsteps, in hiding
themselves from the presence of the LORD, Genesis iii. 8. We are every whit as
blind in this matter as he was, who thought to hide himself from the presence
of God among the shady trees of the garden. We are very apt to promise
ourselves more security in a secret sin, than in one that is openly committed.
The eye of the adulterer waits for the twilight, saying, No eye shall see me,
Job xxiv. 15. And men will freely do that in secret, which they would be
ashamed to do in the presence of a child; as if darkness could hide from an
all-seeing God. Are we not naturally careless of communion with God; ay, and
averse to it? Never was there any communion betwixt God and Adam's children*
where the Lord himself had not the first word. If he would let them alone, they
would never inquire after him. Isa. lvii. 16. I hide me. -- Did he seek after a
hiding God? Very far from it. -- He went on in the way of his heart.

10 thly, How loath are men to confess sin, to take guilt and shame to
themselves? And was it not thus in the case before us? Genesis iii. 10. Adam
confesses his nakedness, which he could not get denied; but not one word he
says of his sins: here was the reason of it, he would fain have hid it if he
could. It is as natural for us to hide sin, as to commit it. Many sad instances
thereof we have in this world; but a far clearer proof of it we shall get at
the day of judgment, the day in which God will judge the secrets of men, Romans
ii. 16. Many a foul mouth will then be seen, which is now wiped, and says, I
have done no wickedness, Prove. xxx. 20.

Lastly, Is it not natural for us to extenuate our sin, and transfer the guilt
upon others? And when God examined our guilty first parents, did not Adam lay
the blame on the woman? And did not the woman lay the blame on the serpent?
Genesis iii. 12, 13. Now Adam's children need not be taught this hellish policy;
for before they can well speak, (if they cannot get the fact denied) they will
cunningly lispout something to lessen their fault, and lay the blame upon
another. Nay, so natural is this to men, that in the greatest of sins, they
will lay the fault upon God himself; they will blaspheme his holy providence,
under the mistaken name of misfortune or ill luck, and thereby lay the blame of
their sin at heaven's door. And was not this one of Adam's tricks after his
fall? Genesis iii. 12. And the man said, the woman whom thou ga^^st to be with me,
she gave me of the tree, and I did eat. Observe the order of the speech. He
makes his apology in the first place; and then comes his confession: his
apology is long; but his confession very short; it is all comprehended in a
word, And I did eat. How pointed and distin^t is his apology, as if he was
afraid his meaning should have been mistaken? The woman, says he, or that
woman, as if he would have pointed the judge to his own work, of which we read,
Genesis ii. 22. There was but one woman then in the world; so that one would think
he needed not have been so nice and exact in pointing at her; yet she is as
carefully marked out in his defense, as if there had been ten thousand. The
woman whom thou gave me: here he speaks, as if he had been ruined with God's
gifts. And to make the shift look the blacker, it added to all this, thou
gave to be with me, a constant companion, to stand by me as a helper. This
looks as if Adam would have fathered an ill design upon the Lord, in giving him
this gift. And after all, there is a new demonstrative here, before the
sentence is complete: he says not, The woman gave me, but the woman she gave
me, emphatically, as if he had said, She, even She gave me of (...). This much
for his apology. But his confession is quickly over, in one word, (is he spoke
it) and I did eat. And there is nothing here to point to himself, and as little
to show what he had eaten. How natural is his black art to Adam's posterity? He
that runs may read it. So universally does Solomon's observe hold true, Prove.
xvii. 3. The foolishness of men perverteth his ways, and his heart fretteth
against the Lord Let us then call fallen Adam, father; let us not deny the
relation, seeing we bear his image.

And now to shut up this point, sufficiently confirmed by concurring evidence
from the Lord's word, our own experience and observation; let us be persuaded
to believe the doctrine of the corruption of our nature: and to look to the
sacred Adam, the blessed JESUS, for the application of his (...) blood, to
remove the guilt of this sin; and for the efficacy (...) his holy Spirit, to
make us new creatures, knowing that except we be born ^gain, we cannot enter
into the kingdom of God.

Of the Corruption of the Understanding.
SECONDLY, I proceed to inquire into the corruption of nature, in the several
parts thereof. But who can comprehend it? Who can take the exact dimension of
it, in its breadth, length, height, and depth? The heart is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked: Who can kn^w it? Jer. xiii. 9. However, we may
quickly perceive as much of it, as may be matter of deepest humiliation, and
may discover to us the absolute necessity of regeneration. Man in his natural
state is altogether corrupt. Both soul and body are polluted, as the apostle
proves at large, Romans iii. 10, -- 18. As for the soul, the natural corruption
has spread itself through all the faculties thereof* and is to be found in the
understanding, the will, the affections, the conscience, and the memory.

I. The Understanding, that leading faculty, is despoiled of it is primitive
glory, and covered over with confusion. We have fallen into the hands of our
grand adversary, as Samson into the hands of the Philistines, and are deprived
of our two eyes. There is none that understands, Romans iii. 11. Mind and
conscience are defiled, Tit. i. 15. The natural man's apprehension of divine
things is corrupt, Psalm. l. 21. Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an
one as thyself. His judgment is corrupt, and cannot be otherways, seeing his
eye is evil: and therefore the scriptures, that show that men did all wrong,
says, Every one did that which was right in his own eyes, Judges xvii. 7. and
xxi. 25. And his imaginations, or reasonings must be cast down, by the power of
the word, being of a piece with his judgment, 2 Cor. x. 5 But to point out this
corruption of the mind or understanding more particularly, let these following
things be considered.

First, There is a natural weakness in the minds of men, with respect to
spiritual things. The apostle determines concerning every one that is not
endued with the graces of the Spirit, That he is blind, and cannot see afar
off, 2 Pet. i. 9. Hence the Spirit of God in the scriptures, clothes, as it
were, divine truths with earthly figures, even as parents teach their children,
using similitudes, Hos. xii. 10. Which, though it does not cure, yet does
evidence this natural weakness in the minds of men. But we want not plain
proofs of it from experience. As, (1.) How hard a task is it to teach many
people the common principles of our holy religion, and to make truths so plain
as they may understand them? Here there must be precept upon precept, precept
upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, Isa. xxviii. 9. Try the same
persons in other things, they shall be found wiser in their generation than the
children of light. They understand their work and business in the world, as
well as their neighbors; though they be very stupid and unteachable in the
matters of God. Tell them how they may advance their worldly wealth, or how
they may gratify their lusts, and they will quickly understand these things;
though it is very hard to make them know how their souls may be saved; or how
their hearts may find rest in Jesus Christ. (2.) Consider these who have many
advantages, beyond the common gang of mankind; who have had the benefit of good
education and instruction; yea, and are blessed with the light of grace in that
measure, wherein it is distributed to the saints on earth: yet how small a
portion have they of the knowledge of divine things! What ignorance and
confusion do still remain in their minds! How often are they mired, even in the
matter of practical truths, and speak as a child in these things. It is a
pitiful weakness that we cannot perceive the things which God has revealed to
us: and it must needs be a sinful weakness, since the law of God requires us to
know and believe them. (3.) What dangerous mistakes are to be found amongst
men, in their concerns of greatest weight! what woeful delusions prevail over
them! do we not often see those, who otherwise, are the wisest of men, the most
notorious fools, with respect to their soul's interest, Matthew. xi. 25. Thou
have hid these things from the wise and prudent. Many that are eagle-eyed in
the trifles of time, are like owls and bats in the light of life. Nay truly,
the life of every natural man is but one continued dream and delusion: out of
which he never awakes, till either by a new light darted from heaven into his
soul, he come to himself, Luke xv. 17. or, in hell he lift up his eyes, chap.
xvi 24. And therefore in scripture account, be he never so wise, he is a fool
and a simple one.

Secondly, Man's understanding is naturally overwhelmed with gross darkness in
spiritual things. Man, at the instigation of the devil, attempting to break out
a new light in his mind, (Genesis iii. 5.) instead of that, br^ke up the doors of
the bottomless pit: so, as by the smoke thereof, he was buried in darkness.
When God at first had made man, his mind was a lamp of light: but now when he
comes to make him over again in regeneration, he finds it darkness, Ephesians. v. 8.
Ye were sometimes darkness. Sin has closed the windows of the soul, darkness is
over all that region. It is the land of darkness and shadow of death, where the
light is as darkness. The prince of darkness reigns there, and nothing but the
works of darkness are framed there. We are both spiritually blind, and cannot
be restored without a miracle of grace. This is thy case, whosoever thou art,
if thou art not born again. And that you may be convinced in this matter, take
those following evidences of it.

Evidence 1. The darkness that was upon the face of the world before, and at
the time when Christ came, arising as the sun of righteousness upon the earth.
When Adam by his sin had lost that primitive light wherewith he was endued in
his creation, it pleased God to make a gracious revelation of his mind and will
to him, touching the way of salvation, Gen iii. 15. This was handed down by
him, and other godly fathers, before the flood: yet the natural darkness of the
mind of man prevailed so far against that revelation, as to carry off all sense
of true religion from the old world, except what remained in Noah's family,
which was preserved in the ark. After the flood, as men multiplied on the
earth, the natural darkness of mind prevails again, and the light decays, till
it died out among the generality of mankind, and is preserved only among the
posterity of Shem. And even with them it was well near its setting, when God
called Abraham from serving other gods, Josh. xxiv. 15. God gives Abraham a
more clear and full revelation, and he communicates the same to his family,
Genesis xvii. 19. yet the natural darkness wears it out at length, s^^e that it
was preserved among the posterity of Jacob. They being carried down into Egypt,
that darkness prevailed so, as to leave them very little sense of true
religion: and a new revelation behoved to be made them in the wilderness. And
many a cloud of darkness got above that, now and then, during the time from
Moses to CHRIST. When CHRIST came, the world was divided into Jews and
Gentiles. The Jews, and the true light with them, were within an enclosure,
Psalm. cxliii. 19, 20. Betwixt them and the Gentile world, there was a partition
wall of GOD's making, namely, the ceremonial law; and upon that there was
reared up another of man's own making, namely, a rooted enmity betwixt the
parties, Ephesians ii. 14, 15. If we look abroad without the enclosure, (and except
those proselytes of the Gentiles, who, by means of some rays of light breaking
forth unto them from within the enclosure, having renounced idolatry,
worshipped the true God, but did not conform to the Mosaical rites) we see
nothing but dark places of the earth, full of the habitations of cru^lty, Psalm.
lxxiv. 20. Gross darkness covered the face of the Gentile world; and the way of
salvation was utterly unknown among them. They were drowned in superstition and
idolatry; and had multiplied their idols to such a vast number, that above
thirty thousand are reckoned to have been worshipped by those of Europe alone.
Whatever wisdom was among their Philosophers, the world by that wisdom knew not
God, 1 Cor. 1 21. and all their researches in religion were but groping in the
dark, Acts x^^. 27. If we look within the enclosure, and, except a few that
were groaning and waiting for the Consolation of Israel, we will see a gross
darkness on the face of that generation. Though to them were committed the
oracles of God; yet they were most corrupt in their doctrine Their traditions
were multiplied; but the knowledge of these things wherein the life of religion
lies, was lost: Masters of Israel knew not the nature and necessity of
regeneration, John iii. 10. Their religion was to build on their birth
privilege, as children of Abraham, Matthew. iii. 9. to glory in their
circumcision, and other external ordinances, Philip. iii. 2, 3. And to rest in
the law, (Romans ii. 17.) after they had, by their false glosses, cut it so
short, as they might go well near to the fulfilling of it, Matthew. v.

Thus was darkness over the face of the world, when CHRIST the true Light came
into it: and so is darkness over every soul, till he, as the Day Star, arise in
the heart. The former is an evidence of the latter. What, but the natural
darkness of men's minds, could still thus wear out the light of external
revelation in a matter upon which eternal happiness did depend? Men did not
forget the way of preserving their lives: but how quickly did they lose the
knowledge of the way of salvation of their souls; which are of infinite more
weight and worth! when patriarchs and prophets teaching was ineffectual, men
behoved to be taught of GOD himself; who alone can open the eyes of the
understanding. But, that it might appear, that the corruption of man's mind lay
deeper than to be cured by mere external revelation; there were but very few
converted by CHRIST's preaching, who spoke as never man spok^, John xii. 37,
38. The great cure on the generation remained to be performed, by the Spirit
accompanying the preaching of the apostles; who, according to the promise,
(John xlv. 12.) were to do great works. And if we look to the miracles wrought
by our blessed Lord, we will find, that by applying the remedy to the soul, for
the cure of bodily distempers, (as in the case of the man sick of the palsy,
Matthew. ix. 2.) he plainly discovered, that it was his main errand into the
world to cur^ the diseases of the soul. I find a miracle wrought upon one that
was born blind, performed in such a way, as seems to have been designed to let
the world see in it, as in a glass, their case and cure, John ix. 6. He made
clay, and anointed the eyes of the blind man, with the clay. What could more
fitly represent the blindness of men's minds, than eyes closed up with earth?
Isa vi. 1 shut their eyes; shut them up by anointing or casting them with
mortar, as the word would bear. And Chap. xliv. 18. he has shut their eyes;
the word properly signifies, he has plaistered their eyes; as the house in
which the leprosy had been, was to be plaistered, Lev. xiv. 42. Thus the Lord's
word discovers the design of that strange work; and by it shows us, that the
eyes of our understanding are naturally shut. Then the blind man must go and
wash off this clay in the pool of Siloam; no other water will serve this
purpose. If that pool had not represented him, whom the Father sent into the
world, to open the blind eyes, (Isa. xlii. 7.) I think the Evangelist had not
given us the interpretation of the name, which he says, signifies, sent, John
ix. 7. And so we may conclude, that the natural darkness of our minds is such,
as there is no cure for; but from the blood and Spirit of Jesus Christ, whose
eye salve, only can make us see, Rev. iii. 18.

Evid. 2. Every natural man's heart and life is a mass of darkness, disorder
and confusion; how refined soever he appear in the sight of men. For we
ourselves also, says the apostle Paul, were sometimes foolish, disobedient,
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, Tit. iii. 3. and yet at that
time, which this text looks to, he was blameless, touching the righteousness
which is in the law, Phil. iii. 6. This is a plain evidence that the ^ye is
evil, the whole body being full of darkness, Mat. vi. 23. The unrenewed part of
mankind is rambling through the world. like so many blind men; who will neither
take a guide, nor can guide themselves; and therefore are falling over this and
the other precipice, into destruction. Some are running after their
covetiousness, till they be pierced through with many sorrows; some sticking in
the m^re of sensuality; others dashing themselves on the rock of pride and
self-conceit; every one stumbling on some one stone of stumbling or other: all
of them are running themselves upon the sword-point of justice, while they
eagerly follow, whither their unmortified passions and affections lead them;
and while some are lying alone in the way, others are coming up, and falling
headlong over them. And therefore, Woe unto the (blind) world because of
offenses, Matthew. xviii. 7. Errors in judgment swarm in the world; because it is
night, wherein all the beasts of the forest do creep forth. All the
unregenerate are utterly mistaken in the point of true happiness; for though
Christianity has fixed that matter in point of principle; yet nothing less
than overcoming grace can fix it in the practical judgment. All men agree in
the desire to be happy: but amongst unrenewed men, touching the way to
happiness, there are almost as many opinions as there are men; they being
turned every one to his own way, Isa. liii. 6. They are like the blind
Sodomites about Lot's house, all were seeking to find the door, some grope one
part of the wall for it, some another; but none of them could certainly say, he
had found it: and so the natural man may stumble on any good but the chief
good. Look into thine own unregenerate heart, and there thou will see all
turned upside down: heaven lying under, and earth a-top, look into thy life,
there thou may see, how thou art playing the madman, snatching at shadows,
and neglecting the substance, eagerly flying after that which is not, and
slighting that which is, and will be for ever.

Evid. 3. The natural man is always as a workman left without light; either
trifling or doing mischief. Try to catch thy heart at any time thou will, and
thou shall find it either weaving the spider's web, or hatching
cockatrice-eggs, (Isa. lix. 5.) roving through the world, or digging into the
pit; filled with vanity, or else with vileness, busy doing nothing, or what is
worse than nothing. A sad sign of a dark mind.

Evid. 4. The natural man is void of the saving knowledge of spiritual things.
He knows not what a God he has to deal with; he is unacquainted with Christ;
and knows not what sin is. The greatest graceless wits are blind as moles in
these things. Ay, but some such can speak of them to good purpose: and so might
these Israelites of the temptations, signs and miracles, their eyes had seen,
(Deuteronomy. xxix. 3.) to whom nevertheless the Lord had not given an heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto that day, ver. 4. Many a man
that bears the name of a Christian, may make Pharaoh's confession of says,
Exodus v. 2. I know not the Lord, neither will they let go when he commands them
to part with. God is with them as a prince in disguise among his subjects, who
meets with no better treatment from them, than if they were his fellows, Psalm.
l. 21. Do they know Christ, or see his glory, and any beauty in him for which
he is to be desired? if they did, they would not slight him as they do: a view
of his glory would so darken all created excellency, that they would take him
for, and instead of all, and gladly close with him, as he offers himself in
the gospel, John iv. 10. Psalm ix. 10. Matthew. xiii. 44, 45, 59. Do they know
what sin is, who hug the serpent in their bosom, hold fast deceit, and refuse
to let it go? I own indeed they may have a natural knowledge of those things,
as the unbelieving Jews had or Christ, whom they saw and conversed with: but
there was spiritual glory in him, perceived by believers only, Joh i. 14 and in
respect of that glory, the (unbelieving) world knew him not, ver. 10. But the
spiritual knowledge of them they cannot have; it is above the reach of the
carnal mind, 1 Cor. ii. 14. The natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, for
they are spiritually discerned. He may indeed discourse of them; but no other
way than one can talk of honey or vinegar, who never tasted the sweetness of
the one, nor the sourness of the other. He has some notions of spiritual
truths, but sees not the things themselves, that are wrapped up in the words of
truth, 1 Timothy i. 7. Understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they
affirm. In a word natural men fear, seek, confess, they know not what. Thus may
you see man's understanding naturally is overwhelmed with gross darkness in
spiritual things.

Thirdly, There is in the mind of man a natural bias to evil, whereby it comes
to pass, that whatever difficulties it finds, while occupied about things truly
good, it acts with a great deal of ease in evil; as being in that case, in its
own element, Jer. iv. 22. The carnal mind drives heavily in the thoughts of
good; but furiously in the thoughts of evil. While holiness is before it,
fetters are upon it: but when once it has got over the hedge, it is a^ the bird
got out of the cage, and becomes a free-thinker indeed. Let us reflect a little
on the apprehension and imagination of the carnal mind; and we shall find
uncontestible evidence of this woeful bias to evil.

Evidence 1. As when a man, by a violent stroke on the head, loses his sight,
there arises to him a kind of false light, whereby he perceives a thousand
airy nothings; so man being struck blind to all that is truly good, and for his
eternal interest, has a light of another sort brought into his mind; his eyes
are opened, knowing evil, and so are the words of the tempter verified, Genesis
iii. 5. The words of the Prophet are plain, They are wise to do evil, but to do
good they have no knowledge, Jer. iv. 22. The mind of man has a natural
dexterity to devise mischief: none are so simple, as to want skill to contrive
ways to gratify their lusts, and ruin their souls: though the power of every
one's hand cannot reach to put their devises in execution. None needs to be
taught this black art; but as weeds grow up, of their c^n ^^cord in the
neglected ground, so does this wisdom (which is ^^^thly, sensual, devilish,
James iii. 15) grow up in the minds of men, by virtue of the corruption of
their nature. Why should we be surprised with the product of corrupt wits:
their cunning devices to afront heaven, to oppose and run down truth and
holiness, and to gratify their own and other men's lust? They row with the
stream; no wonder they make great progress: their stock is within them, and
increases by using of it: and the works of darkness are contrived with the
greater advantage, that the mind is wholly destitute of spiritual light, which,
if it were in them, in any measure, would so far mar the work, 1 John iii. 9.
Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin; he does it not as by art, for
his seed remains in him. But on the other hand, It is a sport for a soul to
do mischief: but a man of understanding has wisdom, Prove. x. 2^. To do with
wickedness nicely, as the word imports, is as a sport, or a play to a fool; it
comes off with him easily; and why, but because he is a fool, and has not
wisdom; which would mar the contrivances of darkness? The more natural a thing
is, it is done the more easily.

Evid. 2. Let the corrupt mind have but the advantage of one's being employed
in, or present at some piece of ^^vice to God; that so the device, if not in
itself sinful, yet may become sinful, by its unseasonableness; it shall quickly
fall on some device or expedient, by its starting aside; which deliberation, in
season, could not produce. Thus Saul, who wist not what to do, before the
priest began to consult God, is quickly determined when once the priest's hand
was in: his own heart then gave him an answer, and would not allow him to wait
an answer from the Lord, 1 Samuel xiv. 18, 19. Such a devilish dexterity has the
carnal mind, in deviling what may most effectually divert men from their duty
to God.

Evid. 3. Does not the carnal mind naturally strive to grasp spiritual things
in imagination; as if the soul were quite immersed in flesh and blood, and
would turn every thing into its own shape? Let men who are used to the forming
of the most abstracted notion, look into their own souls, and they shall find
this bias in their minds: whereof the idolatry, which did of old, and still
does, so much prevail in the world, is an uncontestable evidence. For it
plainly discovers, that men naturally would have a visible deity, and see what
they worship: and therefore they changed the glory of the uncorruptible God
into an image, Romans i. 23. The reformation of these nations (blessed be the
Lord for it) has banished idolatry, and images too, out of our churches: but
heart-reformation only can break down mental idolatry, and banish the more
subtle and refined image worship, and representation of the Deity, out of the
minds of men. The world, in the time of its darkness, was never more prone to
the former, than the unsanctified mind is to the latter. And hence are
horrible, monstrous, and misshapen thoughts of God, Christ, the glory above, and
all spiritual things.

Evid. 4. What a difficult task is it to detain the carnal mind before the
Lord! how averse is it to the entertaining of good thoughts, and dwelling in
the meditation of spiritual things! if one be driven, at any time, to think of
the great concerns of his soul, it is no harder work to hold in an unruly
hungry beast, than to hedge in the carnal mind, that it get not away to the
vanities of the world again. When God is speaking to men by his word, or they
are speaking to him in prayer, does not the mind often leave them before the
Lord, like so many idols that have eyes, but see not; and ears, but hear not?
The carcass is laid down before God, but the world gets away the heart: though
the eyes be closed, the man sees a thousand vanities: the mind, in the mean
time, is like a bird got loose out of the cage, skipping from bush to bush; so
that, in effect, the man never comes to himself, till he be gone from the
presence of the Lord. Say not, it is impossible to get the mind fixed. It is
hard indeed, but not impossible. Grace from the Lord can do it, Psalm. cviii. 1.
Agreeable objections will do it. A pleasant speculation will arrest the minds
of the inquisitive: the worldly man's mind is in little hazard of wandering,
when he is contriving of business, casting up his accounts, or telling his
money: if he answer you not at first, he tells you, he did not hear you, he was
busy; his mind was fixed. Were we admitted into the presence of a king to
petition for our lives, we would be in no hazard of gazing through the chamber
of presence: But here lies the case, the carnal mind, employed about any
spiritual good, is out of its element, and therefore cannot fix.

Evid. 5 But however hard it is to keep the mind on good thoughts, it sticks as
glue to what is evil and corrupt like itself! 2 Pet. ii. 14. Having eyes full
of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin. Their eyes cannot cease from sin;
(so the words are constructed) that is, their hearts and minds venting by the
eyes, what is within, are like a furious beast, which cannot be held in, when
once it has got out its head. Let the corrupt imagination once be let loose on
its proper object; it will be found hard work to call it back again, though both
reason and will be for its retreat. For then it is in its own element; and to
draw it off from its impurities, is as the drawing of a fish out of the water,
or the renting of a limb from a man. It runs like fire set to a train of
powder, that rests not till it can get no further.

Evid. 6. Consider how the carnal imagination supplies the want of real objects
to the corrupt heart; that it may make sinners happy, at least, in the
imaginary enjoyment of their lusts. Thus the corrupt heart feeds itself with
imagination-sins: the unclean person is filled with speculative impurities,
having eyes full of adultery; the covetous man fills his heart with the world,
though he cannot get his hands full of it; the malicious person, with delight,
acts his revenge within his own breast) the envious man, within his own narrow
soul, beholds, with satisfaction, his neighbor laid low enough; and every lust
finds the corrupt imagination a friend to it in time of need. And this it does,
not only when people are awake, but sometimes even when they are asleep;
whereby it comes to pass, that these sins are acted in dreams, which their
hearts were carried out after, while they were awake. I know some do question
the sinfulness of these things: But can it be thought they are consistent with
that holy nature and frame of spirit, which was in innocent Adam, and in Jesus
Christ, and should be in every man? It is the corruption of nature then, that
makes filthy dreamers condemned, Jude 8. Solomon had experience of the exercise
of grace in sleep: in a dream he prayed, in a dream he made the best choice;
both were accepted of God, 1 Kings iii. 5, -- 15. And if a man may, in his
sleep, do what is good and acceptable to God, why may he not also, when asleep,
do that which is evil and displeasing to God? The same Solomon would have men
aware of this; and prescribes the best remedy against it, namely, The law upon
the heart, Prove. vi. 20, 21. When thou sleep, (says he, ver. 22.) it shall
keep thee, to wit, from the sinning in thy sleep; that is, from sinful dreams:
For one's being kept from sin, (not his being kept from affliction) is the
immediate proper effect of the law of God impressed upon the heart, Psalm. cxix.
11. And thus the whole verse is to be understood, as appears from verse 23. For
the commandment is a lamp, and the law is light, and reproofs of instruction
are the way of life. Now the law is a lamp of light, as it guides in the way of
duty; and instructing reproofs from the law, are the way of life, as they keep
from sin: neither do they guide into the way of peace, but as they lead into
the way of duty; nor do they keep a man out of trouble, but as they keep him
from sin. And remarkable is the particular in which Solomon instanceth, namely,
the sin of uncleanness, to keep thee from the evil woman: and ver. 24. which is
to be joined with verse 22. enclosing the 23d in a parenthesis, as some
versions have it. These things may suffice to convince us of the natural bias
of the mind to evil.

Fourthly, There is in the carnal mind, an opposition to spiritual truths, and
an aversion to the receiving of them. It is as little a friend to divine
truths, as it is to holiness. The truths of natural religion, which do, as it
were, force their entry into the minds of natural men, they hold prisoners in
unrighteousness, Romans i. 18. And as for the truths of revealed religion, there
is an evil heart of unbelief in them, which opposes their entry; and there is
an armed force -- necessary to captivate the mind to the belief of them, 2 Cor.
x 4, 5. God has made a revelation of his mind and will to sinners, touching the
way of salvation: he has given us the doctrine of his holy word: but do natural
men believe it indeed? No, they do not; for he that believes not on the Son of
God, believes not God, as is plain from 1 John v. 10. They believe not the
promises of the word: they look on them, in effect, only as fair words; for
these that receive them, are thereby made partakers of the divine nature, 2
Pet. i. 4. The promises are as silver cords let down from heaven to draw
sinners unto God, and to waft them over into the promised land; but they cast
them from them. They believe not the threatenings of the word. As men traveling
in defarts carry fire about with them, to fright away wild beasts: so God has
made his law a firey law, Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 2. hedging it about with threats of
wrath: But men naturally are more brutish than beasts themselves; and will
needs touch the firey smoking mountain, though they should be thrust through
with a dart. I doubt not, but most, if not all of you, who are yet in the black
state of nature will here plead, Not guilty* But remember the carnal Jews in
Christ's time, were as confident as you are, and they believed Moses, John ix.
23, 29. But he confutes their confidence, roundly telling them, John v. 46. Had
ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me. Did ye believe the truths of God,
ye durst not reject, as ye do, Him who is truth itself. The very difficulty you
find in assenting to this truth, bewrays that unbelief I am charging you with.
Has it not proceeded so far with some at this day, that it has steeled their
foreheads with the impudence and impiety, openly to reject all revealed
religion? Surely it is (...) ^f the (...) of the heart their mouth speaks.
But though ye set not your mouths against the heavens, as they do, the same
bitter root of unbelief is in all men by nature, and reigns in you, and will
reign, till overcoming grace captivate your minds to the belief of the truth.
To convince you in this point, consider these three things.

Evidence 1. How few are there who have been blessed with an inward illumination,
by the special operation of the Spirit of Christ, letting them into a view of
divine truths in their spiritual and heavenly luster! How have you learned the
truths of religion, which ye pretended to believe! Ye have them merely by the
benefit of external revelation, and of your education; so that you are
Christians, just because you were not born and bred in a Pagan, but in a
Christian country. Ye are strangers to the inward work of the holy Spirit,
bearing witness by, and with the word in your hearts; and so you cannot have
the assurance of faith, with respect to that outward divine revelation made in
the word, 1 Cor. ii. 10, 11, 12. And therefore ye are still unbelievers. It is
written in the prophets, And they shall be all taught of God -- Every man
therefore that has heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me, says
our Lord, John vi. 45. Now ye have not come to Christ, therefore ye have not
been taught of God; ye have not been so taught, and therefore ye have not come;
ye believe not. Behold the revelation from which the faith even of the
fundamental principles in religion does spring, Matthew. xvi. 17, 18. Thou art
Christ, the Son of the living God -- Blessed art thou Simon Barjona; for flesh
and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. If
ever the Spirit of the LORD take a dealing with thee, to work in thee that
faith, which is of the operation of God; it may be, as much time will be spent
in razing the old foundation, as will make thee find a necessity of the working
of his ^^^ghty power, and to enable thee to believe the very foundation
principles, which now thou think thou make no doubt of, Ephesians. i. 19.

Evid. 2. How many professors have made shipwreck of their faith (such as it
was) in time of temptation and trial! See how they fall, like stars from
heaven, when Antichrist prevails, 2 Thessalonians. ii 11, 12. God shall send them
strong delusions, that they should believe a lie, that they all might be
damned, who believed not the truth. They fall into damning delusions: because
they never really believed the truth, though they themselves and others too
thought they did believe it. That house is built upon the sand, and that faith
is but ill-founded, that cannot bear out, but is quite overthrown, when the
storm ^omes.

Evid. 3. Consider the utter inconsistency of most men's lives, with the
principles of religion which they profess; ye may as soon bring east and west
together, as their principles and practice. Men believe that fire will burn
them, and therefore they will not throw themselves into it: but the truth is,
most men live as if they thought the gospel a mere fable, and the wrath of God
revealed in his word against their unrighteousness and ungodliness, a mere
scarecrow. If ye believe the doctrines of the word, how is it that ye are so
unconcerned about the state of your souls before the LORD? How is it that you
are so little concerned with that weighty point, whether ye be born again or
not? Many live as they were born, and are like to die as they live, and yet
live in peace. Do such believe the sinfulness and misery of a natural state? Do
they believe they are children of wrath? Do they believe there is no salvation
without regeneration? and no regeneration but what makes man a new creature? If
you believe the promises of the word, why do you not embrace them, and labor
to enter into the promised rest? What sluggard would not dig for a hid
treasure, if he really believed he might so obtain it? Men will work and sweat
for a maintenance; because they believe that by so doing they will get it: yet
they will be at no tolerable pains for the eternal weight of glory: why, but
because they do not believe the word of promise? Heb. iv. 1, 2. If ye believe
the threatenings, how is it that you live in your sins, live out of Christ, and
yet hope for mercy? Do such believe God to be the holy and just One, who will
by no means clear the guilty? No, no, none believe, None (or next to none)
believe what a just GOD the LORD is, and how severely he punishes.

Fifthly, There is in the mind of man a natural proneness to lies and falsehood,
which make for the safety of lusts. They go astray as soon as they be born,
speaking lies, Psalm. lvii. 3. We have this with the rest of the corruption of
our nature, from our first parents. God revealed the truth to them; but through
the solicitation of the tempter, they first doubted of it; they disbelieved it,
and embraced a lie instead of it. And for an uncontestible evidence hereof, we
may see that first article of the devil's creed, ye shall not surely die, Genesis
iii. 4. which was obtruded by him on our first parents, and by them received;
naturally embraced by their posterity, and held fast, till a light from heaven
oblige them to quit it. It spreads itself through the lives of natural men;
who, till their consciences be awakened, walk after their own lusts: still
retaining the principle, That they shall not surely die. And this is often
improved to that perfection, that the man can say, over the belly of the
denounced curse, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine
heart, to add drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy. xxix. 19. Whatever advantage the
truths of God have over error, by means of education, or otherwise; error has
always, with the natural man, this advantge against truth, namely, That there
is something within him, which says, O that it were true; so that (...) mind
lies fair for assenting to it. And here is the reason of it. The true doctrine
is, the doctrine that is according to godliness, 1 Timothy vi. 3. and the truth
which is after godliness, Tit. i, 1. Error, is the doctrine which is according
to ungodliness; for there is never an error in the mind, nor an untruth vented
in the world, (in matters of religion) but what has an affinity with one
corruption of the heart or other: according to that of the apostle, 2 Thessalonians ii.
21 They believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. So that
truth and error being otherwise attended with equal advantages for their
reception, error, by this means, has most ready access into the minds of men in
their natural state. Wherefore, it is nothing strange that men reject the
simplicity of gospel truths and institutions, and greedily embrace error and
external pomp in religion; seeing they are so agreeable to the lusts of the
heart, and the vanity of the mind of the natural man. And from hence also it
is, that so many embrace atheistical principles; for none do it but in
compliance with their irregular passions: none but these, whose advantage it
would be that there was no God.

Lastly, Man is naturally high minded; for when the gospel comes in power to
him, it is employed in casting down imaginations, and every high thing that
exalts itself against the knowledge of God, 2 Cor x. 5. Lowliness of mind is
not a flower that grows in the field of nature; but is planted by the finger of
God in a renewed heart, and learned of the lowly Jesus. It is natural to man to
think highly of himself, and what is his own; for the stroke he has got by his
fall in Adam, has produced a false light, whereby ^^ole hills about him appear
like mountains; and a thousand airy beauties present themselves to his deluded
fancy. Vain man would be wise, (so he accounts himself, and so he would be
accounted of by others) though man be born like a wild oss's colt. Job xi. 12.
His ways is right because it is his own: for every way of a man is right in his
own eyes, Prove. xxi. 2. His state is good, because he knows no better: he is
alive without the law, Romans vii. ^. and therefore his hope is strong, and his
confidence firm. It is another tower of Babel reared up against heaven; and
shall not fall while the power of darkness can hold it up. The word batters it,
yet it stands; one while breaches are made in it, but they are quickly
repaired; at another time, it is all made to shake; but still it keeps up; till
either God himself, by his Spirit, raise an heart-quake within the man, which
tumbles it down; and leaves not one stone upon another, (2 Cor. x. 41, 45.) or
death batter it down and raze the foundations of it, Luke xvi. 23. And as the
natural man thinks highly of himself, so he thinks meanly of God, whatever he
pretends, Psalm. l. 21. Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as
thyself. The doctrine of the gospel, and the mystery of Christ are foolishness
to him; and in his practice he treats them as such, 1 Cor. i. 13. and ii. 14.
He brings the word and the works of God in the government of the world, before
the bar of his carnal reason; and there they are presumptuously censured and
condemned, Hos. xiv. 9. Sometimes the ordinary restraint of providence is taken
off, and Satan is permitted to stir up the carnal mind; and in that case it is
like an ant's ne^t, uncovered and disturbed; doubts, denials, and hellish
reasons crowd in it, and cannot be laid by all the arguments brought against
them, till a power from on high captivate the mind, and still the mutiny of the
corrupt principles.

Thus much of the corruption of the understanding: which, although the half be not
told, may discover to you the absolute necessity of regenerating grace. Call
the understanding now Ichabed; for the glory is departed from it. Consider
this, ye that are yet in the state of nature, and groan ye out your case before
the Lord, that the Sun of Righteousness may arise upon you, before you be shut
up in everlasting darkness. What avails your worldly wisdom? What do your
seize in religion avail, while your understanding lies yet wrapped up in
its natural darkness and confusion, utterly void of the light of life? Whatever
be the natural man's gifts or seize, we must (as in the case of the
leper, Lev xlii 24.) pronounce him utterly unclean, his plague is in his head.
But that is not all; it is in his heart too, his will is corrupted, as I shall
show anon.

Of the Corruption of the Will.
II. The will, that commanding faculty, (which sometimes was faithful, and
ruled with God) is now turned traitor, and rules with, and for the devil. God
plan^ed it in man wholly a right seed; but now it is turned into the degenerate
plant of a strange vine. It was originally placed in a due subordination to the
will of God, as was shown before, but now it is gone wholly aside. However some
do magnify the power of free will, a view of the spirituality of the law, to
which acts of moral discipline do in no ways answer; and a deep insight into
the corruption of nature, given by the inward operation of the Spirit,
convincing of sin, righteousness and judgment, would make men find an absolute
need of the power of free grace, to remove the bands of wickedness from off the
free will. To open up this plague of the heart, I offer these following things
to be considered.

First, There is, in the unrenewed will, an utter inability for what is truly
good and acceptable in the sight of God: The natural man's will is in Satan's
fetters; hemmed in, within the circle of evil, and cannot move beyond it, more
than a dead man can raise himself out of his grave, Ephesians. ii. 1. We deny him not
a power to choose, pursue and act, what, on the matter, is good: but though he
can will what is good and right, he can will nothing aright and well. John xv.
5. Without me, i. e separate from me, as a branch from the stock, (as both the
word and context do carry it) ye can do nothing; to wit, nothing truly and
spiritually good His very choice and desire of spiritual things is carnal and
selfish, John vi. 26. Ye seek me because ye did eat of the loaves, and were
filled. He not only comes to Christ, but he cannot come. John vi. 44. And what
can one do acceptable to God, who believes not on him whom the Father has
sent? To evidence this inability for good in the unregenerate, consider these
two things.

Evidence 1. How often does the light so shine before men's eyes: that they
cannot but see the good they should choose, and the evil they should refuse; and
yet their hearts have no more power to comply with that light than if they were
arrested by some invisible hand? They see what is right; yet they follow, and
cannot (...) follow, what is wrong. Their consciences tells them the right way,
and approves of it too; yet cannot their will be brought up to it: their
corruption so chains them, that they cannot embrace it; so they sigh, and go
backward, over the belly of their light. And if it be not thus, how is it that
the word, and way of holiness meets with such entertainment in the world? How
is it that clear arguments and reason on the side of piety and a holy life,
which bear in themselves even on the carnal mind, do not bring men over to that
side? Although the being of a heaven and a hell, were but a may be, it were
sufficient to determine the will to the choice of holiness, were it capable to
be determined thereto by mere reason: but men, knowing the judgment of God,
(that they which commit such things are worthy of death) not only do the same,
but have pleasure in them that do them, Romans i 32. And how is it that these who
magnify the power of free will do not confirm their opinion before the world,
by an ocular demonstration, in a practice as far above others in holiness, as
the opinion of their natural ability is above others? Or is it maintained only
for the protection of lusts, which men may hold fast as long as they please;
and when they have no more use for them, can throw them off in a moment, and
leap out of Delilah's lap into Abraham's bosom? Whatever use some make of that
principle: it does of itself, and in its own nature, cast a broad shadow for a
shelter to wickedness of heart and life. And it may be observed, that the
generality of the hearers of the gospel, of all denominations are plagued with
it: for it is a root of bitterness, natural to all men; from whence do spring
so much fearlessness about the soul's eternal state; so many delays and
off-puts in that weighty matter, whereby much work is laid up for a deathbed
by some; while others are ruined by a legal walk, and unacquainted with the
life of faith, and the making use of Christ for sanctification; all flowing
from the persuasion of sufficient natural abilities. So agreeable is it to
corrupt nature.

Evid. 2. Let those, who, by the power of the spirit of bondage, having had the
law laid out before them, in its spirituality, for their conviction speak and
tell, if they found themselves able to incline their hearts toward it, in that
case; nay, if the more that light shone into their souls, they did not find
their hearts more and more unable to comply with it. There are some, who have
been brought unto the place of the breaking forth, who are yet in the devil's
camp, that from their experience can tell, light let into the mind, cannot give
life to the will, to enable it to comply therewith: and could give their
testimony here, if they would. But take Paul's testimony concerning it, who, in
his unconverted state, was far from believing his utter inability for good; but
learned it by experience, Romans vi.^ 9.10, 11, 1^. I own, the natural man may
have a kind of love to the law: but here lies the stress of the matter, he
looks on the holy law in a carnal dress: and so, while he hugs a creature of
his own fancy, he thinks he has the law, but in very deed he is without the
law: for as yet he sees it not in its spirituality: if he did, he would find it
the very reverse of his own nature, and what his will could not fall in with,
till changed by the power of grace.

Secondly, There is in the unrenewed will an averseness to good. Sin is the
natural man's element; he is loath to part with it, as the fishes are to come
out of the water into dry land. He not only cannot come to Christ, but he will
not come, John v. 40. He is polluted, and hates to be washen, Jer. xiii. 27
Will thou not be made clean? When shall it once be? He is sick, but utterly
averse to the remedy: he loves his disease so, that he loathes the Physician. He
is a captive, a prisoner, and a slave; but he loves his conqueror, his jailor
and master: he is fond of his fetters, prison and drudgery; and has no liking
to his liberty. For evidence of this averseness to good, in the will of man, I
shall instance in some particulars.

Evidence 1. The untowardness of children. Do we not see them naturally, lovers
of sinful liberty! How unwilling are they to be hedged in? How averse to
restraint? The world can bear witness, that they are, as bullocks unaccustomed
to the yoke; and more, that it is far easier to bring young bullocks tamely to
bear the yoke; than to bring young children under discipline, and make them
tamely submit to the restraint of sinful liberty. Every body may see in this,
as in a glass, that man is naturally wild and wilful, according to Zophar's
observe, Job xi. 12. that man is born like a wild ass's colt. What can be said
more? He is like a colt, the colt of an ass, the colt of a wild ass Compare
Jer. ii. 24. A wild ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at
her pleasure, in her occasion who can turn her away?

Evid. 2. What pain and difficulty do men often find in bringing their hearts
to religious duties? And what a task is it to the carnal heart to abide at
them? It is a pain to it, to leave the world but a little, to converse with
God. It is not easy to borrow time from the many things, to bestow it upon the
one thing needful. Men often go to God in duties, with their faces toward the
world; and when their bodies are on the mount of ordinances, their hearts will
be found at the foot of the hill, going after their covetousness, Ezekiel. xxxiii.
31. They are soon wearied of well-doing; for holy duties are not agreeable to
their corrupt nature. Take notice of them at their worldly business, set them
down with their carnal company, or let them be sucking the breasts of a lust;
time seems to them to fly, and drive furiously, so that it is gone ere they are
aware. But how heavily does it drive, while a prayer, a sermon, or a sabbath
lasts? The Lord's day is the longest day of all the week with many; and
therefore they must sleep longer that morning, and go sooner to bed that night,
than ordinarily they do; that the day may be made of a tolerable length: for
their hearts say within them, when will the s^bbath be gone? Amos viii. 5. The
hours of worship are the longest hours of that day: hence when duty is over,
they are like men eased of a burden; and when sermon is ended, many have
neither t^ grace nor the good manners to stay till the blessing be pronounced,
but like the beasts, their head is away as soon as one puts his hand to loose
them; why, but because while they are at ordinances, they are, as Doeg,
detained before the Lord, 1 Samuel xxii. 7.

Evid. 3. Consider how the will of the natural man does rebel against the
light, Job xxiv. 13. Light sometimes enters in, because he is not able to hold
it out: but he loves darkness rather than light. Sometimes by the force of
truth, the outer door of understanding is broken up; but the inner door of the
will remains fast bolted. Then lusts rise against light; corruption and
conscience encounter, and fight as in the field of battle; till corruption
getting the upper hand, conscience is forced to give back: convictions are
murdered: and truth is made and held prisoner, so that it can create no more
disturbance. While the word is preached or read, or the rod of God is upon the
natural man, sometimes convictions are darted in on him, and his spirit is
wounded, in greater or lesser measure: but these convictions not being able to
make him fall, he runs away with the arrows sticking in his conscience; and at
length, one way or other, gets them out, and licks himself whole again. Thus,
while the light shines, men, naturally averse to it, wilfully shut their eyes;
till God is provoked to blind them judicially, and they become proof against
the, word and providence too: so they may go where they will, they can sit at
ease; there is never a word from heaven to them, that goes deeper than into
their ears, Hos iv. 17. Ephraim is joined to idols, let him alone.

Evid. 4. Let us observe the resistance made by elect souls, when the Spirit of
the Lord is at work, to bring them from the power of Satan unto God. Zion's
King gets no subjects but by stroke of sword, in the day of his power, Psalm.
cx. 2, 3. None come to him, but such as are drawn by a divine hand, John vi.
44. When the Lord comes to the soul, he finds the strong man keeping the house,
and a deep peace and security there, while the soul is fast asleep in the
devil's arms. But the prey must be taken from the mighty, and the captive
delivered. Therefore the Lord awakens the sinner, opens his eyes, and strikes
him with terror, while the clouds are black above his head, and the sword of
vengeance is held to his breast. Now he is at no small pains to put a fair face
on a black heart; to shake off his fears, to make head against them, and to
divert himself from thinking on the unpleasant and ungrateful subject of his
soul's case. If he cannot so rid himself from them, carnal reason is called in
to help, and urges that there is no ground for so great fear; all may be well
enough yet: and if it be ill with him, it will be ill with many. When the
sinner is beat from this, and sees no advantage of going to hell with company,
^e resolves to leave his sins, but cannot think of breaking off so soon; there
is time enough, and he will do it afterward. Conscience says, Today if ye
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: but he cries, Tomorrow, Lord,
tomorrow, Lord; and just now Lord, till that now is never like to come. And
thus, many times, he comes from his prayers and confessions, with nothing, but
a breast full of sharper convictions; for the heart does not always cast up the
sweet morsel, as soon as confession is made with the mouth, Judges x. 10. --
16. And when conscience obliges them ^o part with some lusts, others are kept
as right eyes and right hands; and there are rueful looks after those that are
put away, as it was with the Israelites, who, with bitter hearts, did remember
the fifth they did eat in Egypt freely, Number. xi. 5. Nay, when he is so pressed,
that he must needs say before the Lord, that he is content to part with all his
idols; the heart will be giving the tongue the lie. In a word, the soul, in
this case, will shift from one thing to another; like a fish with the hook in
his jaws, till it can do no more, and power come to make it succumb, as the
wild ass in her month, Jer. ii. 24.

Thirdly, There is in the will of man a natural proneness to evil, a woeful bent
toward sin. Men naturally are bent to backsliding from God, Hos. ii 7. They
hang (as the word is) toward backsliding; even as a hanging wall, whose
breaking comes suddenly at an instant. Set holiness and life upon the one
side, sin and death upon the other; leave the unrenewed will to itself, it will
choose sin, and reject holiness. This is no more to be doubted, than that water,
poured on the side of a hill, will run downward but not upward, or that a flame
will ascend and not descend.

Evidence 1. Is not the way of evil the first way the children of men do go! Do
not their inclinations plainly appear on the wrong side, while yet they have no
cunning to hide them? In the first opening of our eyes in the world, we look
a-squint, hell-ward, not heavenward. As soon as it appears we are reasonable
creatures, it appears we are sinful creatures, Psalm. lviii. 3. The wicked are
estranged from the womb: they go astray as soon as they be born. Prove. xxii.
15. Foolishness is b^d in the heart of a child: but the rod of correction shall
drive it far from him. Folly is bound in the heart, it is woven into our very
nature. The knot will not loose, they must be broken asunder by strokes. Words
will not do it, the rod must be taken to drive it away: and if it be not driven
far away, the heart and it will meet and knit again. Not that the rod of itself
will do this: the sad experience of many parents testifies the contrary: and
Solomon himself tells you, Prove. xxvii. 22. Though thou should bray a fool in
a mortar, among wheat, with a pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from
him. It is so bound in his heart. But the rod is an ordinance of God, appointed
for that end; which, like the word, is made effectual, by the Spirit's
accompanying his own ordinance. And this, by the way, shows that parents, in
administering correction to their children, have need, first of all to correct
their own irregular passions and look upon it as a matter of awful solemnity,
setting about it with much dependence on the Lord, and following it with prayer
for the blessing, they would have it effectual.

Evid. 2. How easily are men led aside to sin! The children, who are not
persuaded to good; are otherways simple ones; easily wrought upon; those whom
the word cannot draw to holiness, are led by Satan at his pleasure. Profane
Esau, that cunning man, Genesis xxv. 27. was as easily cheated of the blessing, as
if he had been a fool or an idiot. The more natural a thing is, it is the more
easy: so Christ's yoke is easy to the saints, in so far as they are partakers
of the divine nature: and sin is easy to the unrenewed man; but to learn to do
good, as difficult as for the Ethi^pian to change his skin; because the will
naturally hangs toward evil; but is averse to good. A child can cause a round
thing to run, while he cannot move a square thing of the same weight; for the
roundness makes it fit for motion, so that it goes with a touch. Even so, when
men find the hear easily carried toward sin, while it is as a dead weight in
the way of holiness; we must bring the reason of this from the natural set and
disposition of the heart, whereby it is prone and bent to evil. Were man's will
naturally, but in an equal balance to good and evil, the one might be embraced
with as little difficulty as the other; but experience testifies, it is not so.
In the sacred history of the Israelites, especially in the book of Judges, how
often do we find them forsaking JEHOVAH, the mighty GOD, and doting upon the
idols of the nations about them? But did ever one of these nations grow sond of
Israel's GOD, and forsake their own idols? No, no; though man is naturally given
to changes, it is but from evil to evil, not from evil to good, Jer. ii 10, 11.
Has a nation changed their gods, which yet are no gods? But my people have
changed their glory, for that which does not profit. Surely the will of man
stands not in equal balance, but has a cast to the wrong side.

Evid. 3. Consider how men go on still in the way of sin, till they meet with a
stop, and that from another hand than their own; Isa. lvii. 17. I hid me, and
he went on frowardly in the way of his heart. If God withdraw his restraining
hand, and lay the reins on the sinner's neck, he is in no doubt what way to
choose; for (observe it) the way of sin is the way of his heart; his heart
naturally lies that way; it has a natural propensity to sin. As long as God
suffers them, they walk in their own way, Acts xiv. 16 The natural man is so
fixed in his woeful choice, that there needs no more to show he is often from
God's way, but to tell he is upon his own.

Evid. 4. Whatever good impressions are made upon him they do not last. Though
his heart be firm as a stone, yea, harder than the nether millstone, in point
of receiving of them; it is otherwise unstable as water, and cannot keep them.
It works against the receiving of them; and, when they are made, it works them
off, and returns to its natural bias; Hos. vi. 4. Your goodness is as the
morning cloud, and as the early dew, it goes away. The morning cloud promises
a hearty shower; but, when the sun arises, it evanisheth: the sun beats upon
the early dew, and it evaporates; so the husbandman's expectation is
disappointed. Such is the goodness of the natural man. Some sharp affliction,
or piercing conviction obliges him in some sort* to turn from his evil course:
but his will not being renewed, religion is still against the grain with him,
and therefore this goes off again, Psalm. lxxviii. 34, 36, 37. Though a stone,
thrown up into the air, may abide there a little while; yet its natural
heaviness will bring it down to the earth again: and so do unrenewed men retur^
to the wallowing in the mire; because although they were washed, yet their
swinish nature was not changed. It is hard to cause wet wood take fire, hard to
make it keep fire: but it is harder than either of these to make the unrenewed
will retain attained goodness; which is a plain evidence of the natural bent of
the will to evil.

Evid. lust. Do the saints serve the Lord now, as they were wont to serve sin
in their unconverted state? Very far from it, Romans vi. 20. When ye were the
servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness. Sin got all, and admitted no
partner; but now, when they are the servants of Christ, are they free from sin?
Nay, there are still with them some deeds of the old man, showing that he is
but dying in them. And hence their hearts often misgive them, and slip aside
unto evil, when they would do good, Romans vii. 21. They need to watch, and keep
their hearts with all diligence: and their sad experience touches them, that,
He that trusts in his own heart is a fool, Prove. xxviii. 26. If it be thus in
the green tree, how must it be in the dry?

Fourthly, There is a natural contrariety, direct opposition and enmity, in the
will of man, to God himself, and his holy will, Romans viii. 7. The carnal mind
is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed
can be. The will was once God's dep^t* in the soul, set to command there for
him; but now it is set up against him. If you would have the picture of it, i^
its natural state, the very reverse of the will of God represents it If the
fruit hanging before one's eyes, be but forbidden, that is sufficient to draw
the heart after it. Let me instance in the sin of profane swearing and cursing,
to which some are so abandoned, that they take a pride in them; belching out
horrid oaths and curses, as if hell opened with the opening of their mouths, or
landing their speeches with minced oaths, as faith, has, sai'd ye, hai'd ye,
and such like: and all this without any manner of provocation, though even that
would not excuse them. Pray tell me, (1.) What profit is there here? A thief
gets something in his hand for his pains; a drunkard gets a belly-full; but
what do ye get? Others serve the devil for pay; but ye are volun^ers, that
expect no reward, but your work itself, in affronting of heaven. And if you
repent not, you will get your reward in full ^e; when ye go to hell, your work
will follow you. The drunkard shall not have a drop of water to cool his tongue
there. Nor will the covetous man's wealth follow him into the other world: but
ye shall drive on your old trade there. And an eternity shall be long enough to
give you your heart's fill of it. (2.) What pleasure is there here, but what
flows from your trampling upon the holy law? Which of your senses does swearing
or cursing gratify? If it gratify your ears, it can only be by the noise it
makes against the heavens. Though you had a mind to give up yourselves to all
manner of profanity and sensuality, there is so little pleasure can be strained
out of these, that we must needs conclude, your love to them, in this case, is
a love to them for themselves; a devilish unhired love, without any prospect of
profit or pleasure from them otherwise. If any shall say, these are monsters of
men; be it so: yet alas! the world is fruitful of such monsters; they are to be
found almost everywhere. And allow me to say, They must be admitted as the
mouth of the whole unregenerate world against heaven, Romans iii. 14* Whose mouth
is full of cursing and bitter ^s^. Ver. 19. Now we know, that what things
soever the law says, it says to them who are under the law, that every mouth
may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God.

I have a charge against every unregenerate man and woman, young or old, to be
verified by the testimonies of the scriptures of truth, and the testimony of
their own consciences; namely, that whether they be professors or profane,
whether they be, seeing they are not born again, they are heart-enemies to God:
to the Son of God; to the Spirit of God: and to the law of God. Hear this, ye
careless souls, that live at ease in your natural state

1 st, Ye are enemies to God in your minds, Col. i. 21. Ye are not as yet
reconciled to him, the natural enmity is not as yet slain, though perhaps it lies
hid, and ye do not perceive it. (1.) Ye are enemies to the very being of God,
Psalm. xv. 1. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God. The proud man
would that none were above himself: the rebel, that there were no king; and the
unrenewed man, who is a mass of pride and rebellion, that there were no God. He
says it in his heart, he wishes it were so, though he be ashamed and afraid to
speak it out. And that all natural men are such fools, appears from the
Apostle's quoting a part of this psalm, That every mouth may be stopped, Romans
iii. 10, 11, 12, 19. I own indeed, that while the natural man looks on God as
the Creator and Preserver of the world; because he loves his own self,
therefore his heart rises not against the being of his Benefactor: but this
enmity will quickly appear, when he looks on God, as the Rector and Judge of
the world, binding him, under the pain of the curse, to exact holiness, and
girding him with the cords of death, because of his sin. Listen, in this case,
to the voice of the heart, and then will find it to be no God. (2.) Ye are
enemies to the nature of God, Job xxi. 14. They say unto God, Depart from us;
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Men set up to themselves an idol
of their own fancy, instead of God; and then fall down and worship it. They
love him no other way, than Jacob loved Leah, while he took her for Rachel.
Every natural man is an enemy to God, as he is revealed in his word. An
infinitely holy, just, powerful and true Being, is not the God whom he loves,
but the God whom he loathes. In effect men naturally are hater^ of God, Romans i.
30. And if they could, they certainly would make him another than what he is.
For, consider it is a certain truth, That whatsoever is in God, is God: and
therefore his attributes or perfections are not any thing really distinct from
himself. If God's attributes be not himself, he is a compound being, and so not
the first being (which to say is blasphemous) for the parts compounding are
before the compound itself; but he is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last.

Now upon this, I would, for your conviction, propose to your consciences a few
queries, (1.) How stand your hearts affected to the infinite purity and
holiness of God? Conscience will give an answer to this, which the tongue will
not speak out, If ye be not partakers of his holiness, ye cannot be reconciled
to it. The Pagans finding they could not be like God in holiness, made their
gods like themselves in filthiness: and thereby discovered what sort of a god
the natural man would have. God is holy; can an unholy creature love his
unspotted holiness? Nay, it is the righteous only that can give thanks at the
remembrance of his holiness, Psalm. lxxxvii. 12. God is light; can creatures of
darkness rejoice therein? Nay, every one that does evil hates the light, John
iii. 29. For, what communion has light with darkness? 2 Cor. ^i. 14. (2.) How
stand your hearts affected to the justice of God? There is not a man, who is
wedded to his lusts, as all the unregenerate are, but would be-content, with
the blood of his body, to blot that letter out of the name of God, Can the male
factor love his condemning judge? Or an unjustified sinner, a just God? No, he
cannot, Luke vii. 47. To whom little is forgiven, the same loves little. Hence
seeing men cannot get the doctrine of his Justice blotted out of the Bible; yet
it is such an eyesore to them, that they strive to blot it out of their minds.
And they ruin themselves by presuming on his mercy; while they are not careful
to get a righteousness, wherein they may stand before his Justice; but say in
their heart, The Lord will not do good; neither will he do evil, Zeph. i. 12.
(3.) How stand ye affected to the Omniscience and Omnipresence of God? Men
naturally would rather have a blind idol, than an all-seeing God; and therefore
do what they can, as Adam did, to hide themselves from the presence of the
Lord. They no more love an all-seeing, every-where-present God, than the thief
loves to have the judge witness to his evil deeds. If it could be carried by
votes, God would be voted out of the world, and closed up in heaven: For the
language of the carnal heart is, The Lord sees us not; the Lord has forsake
as the earth, Ezekiel. viii. 12 (4) How stand ye affected to the Truth and
Veracity of God? There are but few in the world that can heartily subscribe to
that sentence of the apostle, Romans iii. 4. Let God be true, but every man a
liar. Nay truly, there are many, who, in effect do hope that God will not be
true to his word. There are thousands who hear the gospel, that hope to be
saved, and think all safe with them for eternity, who never had any experience
of the new birth, nor do at all concern themselves in that question, Whether
they are burn again, or not? A question that is like to wear out from among u^
this day Our Lord's words are plain and peremptory, Except a man be b^rn again,
he cannot see the kingdom of God. What are such hopes then, but real hopes that
God (with profoundest reverence be it spoken) will recall his word, and that
Christ will prove a false prophet? What else means the sinner, who, when he
hears the words of the curs^, blesses himself in his heart, saying, I shall
have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart, Deuteronomy xxix 19. Lastly,
How stand ye affected to the Power of God? None but new creatures will love him
for it, on a fair view thereof; though others may slavishly fear him, upon the
account of it. There is not a natural man, but would contribute to the utmost
of his power to the building of another tower of Babel, to hem it in. On these
grounds, I declare every unrenewed man an enemy to God.

2 dly, Ye are enemies to the Son of God That enmity to Christ is in your
hearts, which would have made you join the husbandmen, who killed the heir, and
cast him out of the vineyard: If ye had been beset with their temptations, and
no more restrained than they were Am I a d^g, you will say, to have so treated
my sweet Savior? so said Hazael in another case; but when he had the
temptation, he was a dog to do it. Many call Christ their sweet Savior, whose
consciences can bear witness, they never sucked so much sweetness from him, as
from their sweet lusts, which are ten times sweeter to them than their Savior.
He is no other way sweet to them, than as they abuse his death and sufferings,
for the peaceable enjoyment of their lusts; that they may live as they list in
the world; and when they die, may be kept out of hell. Alas! it is but a
mistaken Christ that is sweet to you, whose souls loathe that Christ, who is the
brightness of the Father's glory, and the express image of his person. It is
with you as it was in the carnal Jews, who delighted in him while they mistook
his errand into the world, fancying that he would be a temporal deliverer to
them, Mal. iii. 1 But when he was come, and sat as a refiner and purifier of
silver, verse 2, 3. and cast them as reprobate silver, who thought to have had
no small honor in the kingdom of the Messiah; his doctrine galled their
consciences, and they rested not till they imbrued their hands in his blood. To
open your eyes in this point, which ye are so loath to believe, I will lay
before you, the enmity of your hearts against Christ and all his offices.

1. Every unregenerate man is an enemy to Christ in his Prophetical Office. He
is appointed of the Father, the great Prophet and Teacher; but not upon the
world's call, who, in their natural state, would have unanimously voted against
him: And therefore, when he came, he was condemned as a seducer and blasphemer.
For evidence of this enmity, I will instance in two things.

Evidence 1. Consider the entertainment he meets with, when he comes to teach
souls inwardly by his Spirit. Men do what they can to stop their ears, like the
deaf adder that they may not hear his voice. They always resist the Holy Ghost.
They desire not the knowledge of his ways; and therefore bid him depart from
them. The old calumny is often raised upon him, on that occasion, John x. 20.
He is mad, why hear ye him? Soul exercise raised by the spirit of bondage, is
accounted by many, nothing else but distraction, and melancholy fits; men thus
blaspheming the Lord's work, because they themselves are beside themselves, and
cannot judge of these matters.

Evid. 2. Consider the entertainment he meets with, when he comes to teach men
outwardly by his word.

(1.) His written word, the Bible, is slighted; Christ has left it to us, as
the book of our instructions, to show us what way we must steer our course, if
we would come to Emmanuel's land. It is a lamp to light us through a dark world
to eternal light. And he has left it upon us, to search it with that
diligence, wherewith men dig into mines for silver and gold. John v. 39 But ah!
how is this sacred treasure profaned by many! They ridicule the holy word, by
which they must be judged at the last day; and will rather lose their souls
than their jest, dressing up the conceit of their wanton wits in scripture
phrases; in which they act as mad a part, as one who would dig into a mine to
procure metal to melt and pour down his own and his neighbor's throat. Many
exhaust their spirits in reading romances, and their minds pursue them, as the
same does the dry stubble; while they have no heart for, nor relish of the holy
word, and therefore seldom take a Bible in their hands. What is agreeable to
the vanity of their minds, is pleasant and taking; but what recommends holiness
to their unholy hearts, makes their spirits dull and flat. What pleasure will
they find in reading of a profane ballad, or story book, to whom the Bible is
tasteless, as the white of an egg! Many lay by their Bibles with their Sabbath
day's clothes; and whatever use they have for their clothes, they have none for
their Bibles, till the return of the Sabbath. Alas! the dust or finery about
your Bibles is a witness now, and will, at the last day, be a witness of the
enmity of your hearts against Christ, as a Prophet. Besides all this, among
these who ordinarily read the scriptures, how few are there that read it as the
word of the Lord to their souls, and keep communion with him in it. They do not
make his statutes their counselors, nor does their particular case send them
to their Bibles. They are strangers to the solid comfort of the scriptures. And
if at any time they be dejected, it is something else than the word that
revives them: as Ahab was cured of his sullen sit, by the securing of Naboth's
vineyard for him.

(2.) Christ's word preached is despised. The entertainment most of the world,
to whom it has come, have always give^ (...) is that which i^ mentioned. Matthew.
xxii. 5. They made light of it. And for its sake they are d^s^ised wh^ he has
employed to preach it; whatever other since men put upon their contempt of the
ministry, John xv. 20. The servant is not greater than the Lord: if they have
persecuted me^ they will also persecute you; if they have kept my sayings, they
will (...) yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for my name's
sake. That Levi was the son of the hated, seems not to have been without a
^stery, which the (...) in all ages, has unriddled. But though the earth ^n
vessel, where in God has put the treasure, be turned, with many, into vessels
where in there is no pleasure, yet, why is the treasure itself slighted? But
slighted it is, and that with a witness this day. Lord, who has believed our
report? To whom shall we speak? Men can, without remorse, make to themselves
silent Sabbaths, one after another. And alas! when they come to ordinances, for
the most part, it is but (...) the word is, to be seen) before the Lord, and to
tread his c^urts; namely, as a company of beasts would do, if they were driven
into them, Isa. i. 12. so little reverence and awe of God appears on their
spirits. Many stand like brazen walls before the word, in whose corrupt
conversation the preaching of the word makes no breach. Nay, not a few are
growing worse and worse, under precept upon precepts and the result of all is,
They go and fall backward, and be broken, and s^ared, and taken, Isa. xxviii.
13. What tears of blood are sufficient to lament that (the gospel) the grace of
God, is thus received in vain! We are but the voice of one crying; the Speaker
is in heaven; and speaks to you from heaven by men: why do ye refuse him that
speaks? Heb. xii. 25. God has made our Master heir of all things, and we are
sent to court a spouse for him. There is none so worthy as he; none more
unworthy than they to whom this match is promised; but the prince of darkness
is preferred before the Prince of Peace. A dismal darkness overclouded the
world by Adam's fall, more terrible than if the sun, moon and stars had been
for ever wrapped up in blackness of darknes^; and there we should have eternally
lain, had not this grace of the gospel, as a shining sun, appeared to dispel
it, Tit. ii. 11. But yet we fly like night owls from it; and like the wild
beasts, lay ourselves down in our dens; when the sun arises, we are struck
blind with the light thereof; and, as creatures of darkness, love darkness
rather than light. Such is the enmity of the hearts of men against Christ, in
his prophetical office.

2. The natural man is an enemy to Christ in his priestly office. He is
appointed of the Father a Priest for ever: that, by his alone sacrifice and
intercession, sinners may have peace with, and access to God; but Christ
crucified is a stumbling block, and foolishness to the unrenewed part of
mankind, to whom he is preached, 1 Cor. i 23. They are not for him, as the new
and living way. Nor is he by the voice of the world, an High Priest over the
house of God. Corrupt nature goes quite another way to work.

Evidence 1. None of Adam's children naturally incline to receive the blessing
in borrowed robes; but would always, according to the spider's motto, owe all
to themselves; and so climb up to heaven on a thread spun out of their own
bowels. For they desire to be under the law, Gal. iv. 24. And go about to
establish their own righteousness, Romans x. 3. Man, naturally, looks on GOD as a
great Master; and himself as his servant, that must work and win heaven as his
wages. Hence, when conscience is awakened, he thinks that, to the end he may be
saved, he must answer the demands of the law; serve God as well as he can, and
pray for mercy wherein he comes short. And thus many come to duties, that never
come out of them to Jesus Christ.

Evid. 2. As men, naturally, think highly of their duties, that seem to them,
to be well done; so they look for acceptance with God according as their work
is done, not according to the share they have in the blood of Christ. Wherefore
have we fasted, say they, and thou se^st not? They Will value themselves on their
performances and seize: yea, their very opinions in religion, (Philip.
iii 4, 5, 6, 7.) taking to themselves, what they rob from Christ the great
High Priest.

Evid. 3. The natural man going to God, in duties, will always be found, either
to go without a mediator, or with more than the only Mediator JESUS CHRIST.
Nature is blind, and therefore venturous: it sets a man a going immediately to
God without Christ; to rush into his presence, and put their petitions in his
hand, without being introduced by the Secretary of heaven, or putting their
requests into his hand. So fixed is this disposition in the unrenewed heart,
that when many hearers of the gospel are conversed with upon the point of their
hopes of salvation, the name of Christ will scarcely be heard from their
mouths. Ask them how they think to obtain the pardon of sin? they will tell
you, they beg and look for mercy, because God is a merciful God; and that is
all they have to confide in. Others look for mercy for Christ's sake; but how
do they know that Christ will take their plea in hand. Why, as the Papists have
their mediators with the Mediator, so have they. They know he cannot but do it;
for they pray, confess, mourn, and have great desires, and the like; and so
have something of their own to commend them unto him: they were never made poor
in spirit, and brought empty-handed to Christ, to lay the stress of all on his
atoning blood.

3. The natural man is an enemy to Christ in his kingly office. The Father has
appointed the Mediator King in Zion, Psalm. ii. 6. And all to whom the gospel
comes, are commanded, on their highest peril, to kiss the Son, and submit
themselves unto him, ver. 12. But the natural voice of mankind is, Away with
him; as you may see, ver. 2, 3. They will not have him to reign over them, Luke
xix. 14.

Evidence 1. The workings of corrupt nature to wrest the government out of his
hands. No sooner was he born, but being born a King, Herod persecuted him,
Matthew. ii. And when he was crucified, they set up over his head his accusation
written, This is Jesus, the King of the Jews, Matthew. xxvii. 37. Though his
kingdom be a spiritual kingdom, and not of this world; yet they cannot allow
him a kingdom within a kingdom, which acknowledges no other head or supreme,
but the royal Mediator. They make (...) with his royal prerogatives, changing
his laws, institutions and ordinances, modelling his worship according to the
devices of their own hearts; introducing new offices and officers into his
kingdom, not to be found in the book of the manner of his kingdom, disposing of
the external government thereof, as may best suit their carnal designs. Such is
the enmity of the hearts of men against Zion's KING.

Evid 2 How unwilling are men, naturally to submit unto, and be hedged in by
the laws and discipline of his Kingdom! As a King, he is a Lawgiver, (Isa.
xxxiii 22.) and has appointed an external government, discipline and censors,
to control the unruly, and to keep his professed subjects in order, to be
exercised by officers of his own appointment, Matthew. xviii. 17, 18 1 Cor. xii.
28. 1 Timothy v. 17. Heb. xiii 17. But these are the great eye-sores of the carnal
world, who love sinful liberty, and therefore cry out, Let us break their bands
asunder, and cast away their cords from us, Psalm. ii. 3. Hence this work is
found to be, in a special manner, a striving against the stream of corrupt
nature, which, for the most part, puts such a face on the church, as if there
were no King in Israel, every one doing that which is right in his own eyes.

Evid. 3. However natural men may be brought to feign submission to the King of
saints, yet lusts always retain the throne and dominion in their hearts, and
they are serving diverse lusts and pleasures, Tit. iii. 3. None but these in
whom Christ is formed, do really put the crown on his head, and receive the
kingdom of Christ within them. His crown is the crown wherewith his mother
crowned him in the day of his espousals. Who are they, whom the power of grace
has not subdued, that will allow him to set up, and to put down, in their
souls, as he will? Nay, as for others, any lord shall sooner get the rule over
them, than the Lord of glory: they kindly entertain his enemies, and will never
absolutely resign themselves to his government, till conquered in a day of
power. Thus ye may see that the natural man is an enemy to Jesus Christ in all
his offices.

But O! how hard is it to convince men in this point! They are very loath to
take with it. And in a special manner, the enmity of the heart against Christ
in his priestly office, seems to be hid from the view of most of the hearers of
the gospel. Yet there appears to be a peculiar malignity in corrupt nature
against that office of his. It may be observed, that the Socinians, these
enemies of our blessed Lord, allow him to be properly a Prophet and a King, but
deny him to be properly a Priest. And this is agreeable enough to the
corruption of our nature; for under the covenant of works, the Lord was known
as a Prophet or Teacher, and also as a King or Ruler; but not at all as a
Priest: so man knows nothing of the mystery of Christ, as the way to the
Father, till it be revealed to him. And when it is revealed, the will rises up
against it; for corrupt nature lies cross to the mystery of Christ, and the
great contrivance of salvation, through a crucified Savior, revealed in the
gospel. For clearing of which weighty truth, let these four things be
considered.

First, The soul's falling in with the grand device of salvation by Jesus
Christ, and setting the matters of salvation on that footing before the Lord,
is declared by the scriptures of truth to be an undoubted mark of a real saint,
who is happy here, and shall be happy hereafter. Matthew. xi. 6. And blessed is
he, whosoever shall not be offended in me. 1 Cor. i. 23, 24. But we preach
Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks
foolishness: but unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ, the
power of God, and the wisdom of God. Philip iii. 3. For we are the circumcision
which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no
confidence in the flesh. Now how could this be, if nature could comply with
that grand device.

Secondly, Corrupt nature is the very reverse of the gospel contrivance. In the
gospel, God promises Jesus Christ as the great means of re-uniting man to
himself: he has named him as the Mediator, one in whom he is well pleased, and
will have none but him, Matthew. xvii. 5. But nature will have none of him, Psalm
lxxxi. 11 God appointed the place of meeting for the reconciliation, namely,
the flesh of Christ; accordingly, God was in Christ, (2 Cor. v. 29.) as the
tabernacle of meeting, to make up the peace with sinners; but natural men, though
they should die for ever, will not come thither John v. 40. And ye will not
come to me, that ye might have life. In the way of the gospel, the sinner must
stand before the Lord in an imp^^^d righteousness: but corrupt nature is for an
inherent righteousness: and therefore, so far as natural men follow after
righteousness, they follow after the law of righteousness, Romans ix 31, 32. and
not after the Lord our righteousness. Nature is always for building up itself,
and to have some grounds for boasting: but the great design of the gospel is to
exalt grace, to depress nature, and exclude boasting, Romans iii 27. The sum of
our natural religion is, to do good from and for ourselves, John v. 44. The sum
of the gospel religion is, to deny ourselves and to do good from and for
Christ, Philip i. 21.

Thirdly, Every thing in nature is against believing in Jesus Christ. What
beauty can the blind man discern in a crucified Savior, for which he is to be
desired? How can the will, naturally impotent, yea and averse to good, make
choice of him? Well may the soul then say to him in the day of the spiritual
siege, as the Jebusites said to David in another case, Except thou take away
the blind and the lame, thou shall not come in hither, 2 Samuel v. 6. The way of
nature is to go into one's self for all; according to the fundamental maxim of
unsanctified morality, That a man should trust in himself; which according to
the doctrine of faith, is mere foolishness; for so it is determined, Prove.
xviii. 26. He that trusts in his own heart is a fool. Now faith is the soul's
going out of itself for all: and this nature, on the other hand, determines to
be foolishness, 1 Cor. i. 18, 23. Wherefore there is need of the working of
mighty power, to cause sinners to believe, Ephesians. i. 19. Isa. liii. 1. We see
promises of welcome to sinners, in the gospel covenant, are ample, large and
free, clogged with no conditions, Isa. lv. 1. Rev. xxii. 17. If they cannot
believe his bare word, he has given them his oath upon it, Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11.
And for their greater assurance, he has appended seals to his sworn covenant,
namely, the holy sacraments. So that no more could be demanded of the most
faithless person in the world, to make us believe him, than the Lord has
condescended to give us, to make us believe himself. This plainly speaks nature
to be against believing, and these who ^lee to Christ for refuge, to have need
of strong consolation. (Heb vi. 18.) to blame their strong doubts, and
propensity to unbelief. Farther, also it may be observed, how, in the word sent
to a secure, graceless generation, their objections are answered aforehand; and
words of grace are heaped one upon another, as ye may read, Isa. lv. 7, 8, 9.
Joel ii. 13. Why? Because the Lord knows, that when these secure sinners are
thoroughly wakned, doubts, fears, and carnal reasonings against believing, will
be going within their breasts, as thick as dust in a house, raised by sweeping
a dry floor.

Lastly, ^^^rupt nature is bent toward the way of the law, or covenant of
works; and every natural man, so far as he sets himself to seek after
salvation, is engaged in that way; and will not quit it, till beat from it by
divine power. Now the way of salvation by works, and that of free grace in
Jesus Christ, are inconsistent, Romans xi. 6. And if by grace; then it is no more
of works; otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then it is
no more grace; otherwise work is no more work. Gal. iii. 13. And the law is not
of FAITH; but the man that DOES them shall live in them Wherefore, if the will
of man naturally incline to the way of salvation by the law; it lies cross to
the gospel contrivance. And that such is the natural bent of our hearts, will
appear, if these following things be considered.

1. The law was Adam's covenant; and he knew no other, as he was the head and
representative of all mankind, that were brought into it with him, and lest
under it by him, though without strength to perform the condition thereof. Hence,
this covenant is ingrained in our nature: and though we have lost our father's
strength* yet we still incline to the way he was set upon as our head and
representative in that covenant; that is, by doing to live. This is our natural
r^ ^ and the principle which men naturally take for granted, Matthew. xix. (...)
What good thing shall I DO, that I may have eternal life?

2. Consider the opposition that has always been made in the wo^ against the
doctrine of free grace in Jesus Christ, by men set^ for the way of works;
thereby discovering the natural tend like an the heart. It is manifest^ (...)
the great design of the gospel (...) ^ance is to exalt the free grace of God in
Jesus Christ, Romans iv. (...) Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by
grace. See Ephesians i. 6. (...) chap. ii 7, 9. All gospel truths center in Christ:
so that (...) the truth is to learn Christ, Ephesians. iv. 20. And to be truly
taught, (...) to be taught as the truth is in Jesus, ver. 21. All dispensations
of grace and favor from heaven, whether to nations or particular persons, have
still had something about them proclaiming a freedom of grace; as in the very
first separation made by the divine favor, Cain the elder brother is rejected,
and Abel the younger accepted. This shines through the whole history of the
Bible: but as true as it is, this has been the point principally opposed by
corrupt nature. One may well say, that of all errors in religion, since Christ,
the Seed of the woman was preached, this of works, in opposition to free grace
in him, was the first that lived; and it is likely to be the last that dies.
There have been vast numbers of errors, which sprung up one after another,
whereof, at length, the world became ashamed and weary; so that they died out.
But this has continued, from Cain the first author of this heresy, unto this
day; and never wanted some that clave to it, even in the times of greatest
light. I do not without ground, call Cain the author of it; when Abel brought
the sacrifice of atonement, a bloody offering of the firs^ings of his flock,
(like the Publican, smiting on his breast, and saying, God b^ merciful to me a
sinner) Cain advanced with his thank-offering of the first fruit of the ground,
(Genesis iv. 3, 4.) like the proud Pharisee, with his God I thank thee. For what
was the cause of Cain's wrath, and of his murdering of Abel? Was it not that he
was accepted of God for his work? Genesis iv. 4, 5. And wherefore slew he him?
Because his own works were evil, and his brother's righteous, (1 John iii. 22)
that is, done in faith and accepted, when his were done without faith, and
therefore rejected, as the Apostle teaches, Heb. xi. 4. And so he wrote his
indignation against justification and acceptance with God, through faith, in
opposition to works, in the blood of his brother, to convey it down to
pesterity. And since that time, the unbloody sacrifice has often swimmed in the
blood of those that rejected it. The promise made to Abraham of the Seed in
which all nations should be blessed, was so overclouded among his posterity in
Egypt, that the generality of them saw no need of that way of obtaining the
blessing, till God himself confuted their error, by a fiery law from Mount
Sinai, which was added because of transgressions, till the Seed should come,
Gal iii. 19. I need not insist w^ tell you, how Moses and the prophets had
still much ado, to lead the an^ ^off the conceit of their own righteousness.
The 9th chapter to h^ Deuteronomy is entirely spent on that purpose. They were
very ^ss in that point in our Savior's time; in the time of the Apostle's,
(...) in the doctrine of free grace was most clearly preached, that error (...)
its head in face of clearest light; witness the epistle to the (...) and
Galatians: And since that time it has not been wanting; (...) being the common
sink of former heresies, and this the heart ^ise of that delusion. And finally,
it may be observed, that ^s as the church declined from her purity otherwise,
the doctrine ^ree grace was obscured proportionably.

3. Such is the natural propensity of man's heart to the way of the law, in
opposition to Christ; that, as the tainted vessel turns the tas^ of the purest
liquor put into it, so the natural man turns the very gospel into law; and
transforms the covenant of grace into a covenant of works The ceremonial law
was to the Jews a real gospel; which held blood, death, and translation of
guilt before their eyes continually, as the only way of salvation: yet their
very table ( i e. their altar, with the several ordinances pertaining thereto,
Mal i. 12) was a snare unto them, Romans ii. 9. while they use it to make up the
defects in their obedience to the moral law, and clave to it so, as to reject
him whom the altar and sacrifices pointed them to, as the substance of all:
even as Hagar, whose it was only to serve, was by their father brought into her
mistress's bed; nor without a mystery in the purpose of God, for these are the
two covenants, Gal. iv. 24. Thus is the doctrine of the gospel corrupted by
Papists, and other enemies to the doctrine of free grace. And indeed, however
natural men's heads may be set right in this point; as surely as they are out
of Christ, their faith, repentance and obedience, (such as they are) are placed
by them in the room of Christ and his righteousness; and so trusted to, as if
by these they fulfilled a new law

4. Great is the difficulty in Adam's sons their parting with the law, as a
covenant of works. None part with it in that respect, but these whom the power
of the Spirit of grace separates from it. The law is our first husband, and
gets every one's virgin-love. When Christ comes to the soul, he finds it
married to the law; so as it neither can, nor will be married to another, till
it be obliged to part with the first husband, as the apostle teaches, Romans
vii. 1, 2, 3, 4. Now, that ye may see what sort of a parting this is, consider,

(1) It is a death, Romans vii. 4. Gal. iii 19. Entreaties will not prevail with
the soul here; it says to the first husband, as Ruth to Na^i, The Lord do so
to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me. And here sinners are
true to their word; they die to the law, ere they be married to Christ Death is
hard to every body: but what difficulty do ye imagine must a loving wife, on
her deathbed, find in parting with her husband, the husband of her youth, and
with the dear children she has brought forth to him: the law is that husband;
all the duties performed by the natural man, are these children. What a
struggle, as for life, will be in the heart ere they be got parted? I may have
occasion to touch upon this afterward. In the mean time, take the Apostle's
short, but pithy description of it, Rom x. 3 For they being ignorant of God's
righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not
submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. They go about to establish
their own righteousness* like an eager disputant in schools, seeking to
establish the point in question: or like a tormentor, extorting a confession
from one upon the rack. They go about to establish it to make it stand: their
righteousness is like a house built upon the sand; it cannot stand, but they
will have it to stand: it falls, they set it up again: but still it tumbles
down on them; yet they cease not to go about to make it stand. But wherefore
all this pains about a tottering righteousness? Because, such as it is, it is
their own. What ails them at Christ's righteousness? Why, that would make them
free grace's debtors for all; and that is what the proud heart by no means can
submit t^. Here lies the stress of the matter, Psalm. x 4 The wicked, through
the pride of his countenance, will not seek: (to read it without the
supplement) that is, in other terms, He cannot dig, and to beg he is ashamed:
Such is the struggle, ere the soul die to the law: But what speaks yet more of
this woeful disposition of the heart, nature oft-times gets the mastery of the
disease, insomuch that the soul, which was like to have died to the law, while
convictions were sharp and piercing, fatally recovers of the happy and
promising sickness; and (what is very natural) cleaves more closely than ever
to the law, even as a wife brought back from the gates of death would cleave to
her husband: This is the issue of the exercise of many about their souls case:
they are indeed brought to follow duties more closely; but they are as far from
Christ as ever, if not farther.

(2) It is a violent death, Rom vii 4 Ye are become dead to the law, being
killed, slain, or put to death, as the word bears. The law itself has a great
hand in this; the husband gives the wound, Gal ii. 19. I though the law am dead
to the law. The soul that dies this death, is like a loving wife matched with a
rigorous husband: she does what she can to please him, yet he is never pleased;
but tosseth, harasseth, and beats her, till she break her heart, and death sets
her free; as will afterward more fully appear. Thus it is made evident, that
men's hearts are naturally bent to the way of the law, and ly cross to the
gospel contrivance: and the second article of the charge, against you that are
unregenerate, is verified, namely* that ye are enemies to the Son of God.

3 dly, Ye are enemies to the Spirit of God. He is the Spirit of holiness; the
natural man is unholy, and loves to be so, and therefore resists the holy
Ghost, Acts vii. 51. The work of the Spirit is to convince the world of sin,
righteousness and judgment, John xvi. 8. But O how do men strive to ward off
these convictions, as ever they would ward off a blow, threatening their loss of
a right-eye, or a right hand? If the Spirit of the Lord dart them in, so as
they cannot evite them; the heart says, in effect, as Ahab to Eujah, whom he
both hated and feared: Have thou found me, O mine enemy? And indeed they treat
him as an enemy, doing their a^most to stifle convictions, and to murder these
harbingers, that come to prepare the Lord's way into the soul* come fill their
hands with business, to put their convictions ou^ o^ their heads, as Cain, who
fell a building of a city: some put them off with delays and fair promises, as
Felix did: some will sport them away in company, and some sleep them away. The
holy Spirit is the spirit of sanctification: whose work it is to subdue lusts,
and burn up corruption* how then can the natural man, whose lusts are to him as
his limbs, yea, as his life fail of be^ (...) enemy to him.

^thly. Ye are enemies to the law of (...) the natural man, d^ to be under the
law, as a covenant of works, chussing that way of salvation in opposition to
the mystery of Christ: yet as it is a rule of life, requiring universal
holiness, and discharging all manner of impurity, he is an enemy to it: Is not
subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans viii. 7. For, (1.) There
is no unrenewed man, who is not wedded to some one last or other, which his
heart can by no means part with. Now, that he cannot bring up his inclinations
to the holy law, he would fain have the law brought down to his inclinations: a
plain evidence of the enmity of the heart against it. And therefore, to delight
i^ the Law of God, after the inward man, is proposed in the word as a mark of a
gracious soul, Romans vii. 22. Psalm. i. 2. It is from this natural enmity of the
heart against the law, that all the Pharisaical gl^sses upon it have arisen:
whereby the commandment, which is in itself exceeding ^ad, has been made very
narrow, to the intent it might be the more agreeable to the natural disposition
of the heart. (2) The law laid home to the natural conscience, in its
spirituality, irritates corruption. The nearer it comes, nature rises the more
against it. In that case, it is as oil to the fire, which instead of quenching
it makes it flame the more; When the commandment came, si^ r^vived, says the
Apostle, Romans vii. 9. What reason can be assigned for this, but the natural
enmity of the heart against the holy law? Unmortified corruption, the more it
is opposed, the more it rages. Let us conclude then, that the unregenerate are
heart-enemies to God, his Son, his Spirit, and his law; that there is a natural
contrariety, opposition, and enmity in the will of man, to God himself, and his
holy will.

Fifthly, There is, in the will of man, contumacy against the Lord. Man's will
is naturally wilful in an evil course. He will have his will, though it should
ruin him: it is with him, as with the leviathan, (Job xli. 29.) D^^s are
counted as stubble; he laugheth at the shaking of a spear. The Lord calls to
him by his word, says to him, (as Paul to the jailer, when he was about to kill
himself.) Do thyself no harm: sinners, Why will ye do? Ezekiel. x^iii. 31. But
they will not hearken, Every one turns to his course, as the horse rusheth
into the battle, Jer. viii. 6. We have a promise of life, in form of a command,
Prove. iv. 4. Keep my commandments and ^iv^: it speaks impenitent sinners to be
self-destroyers, wilful self-murderers. They transgress the command of living;
as if one's servant should wilfully starve himself to death, or greedily drink
up a cup of poison, which his master commands him to forbear: even so do they:
they will not live, they will die, Prove. viii. 36 All they that hate me, love
death. O what a heart is this! It is a stony heart, (Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26) hard and
inflexible, as a stone: mercies melt it not, judgments break it not; yet it
will break ere it bow. It is an insensible heart; though there be upon the sinner
a weight of sin, which makes the earth to stagger; although there is a weight
of wrath on him, which makes the devils to tremble; yet h^ goes lightly under
the burden; he feels not the weight more than a stone: till the Spirit of the
Lord quicken him, so far as to see ^t.

Lastly, The unrenewed will is wholly perverse in reference to man's chief and
highest end. The natural man's chief end is not his God, but his self. Man is a
mere relative, dependent, borrowed being: he has no being nor goodness
originally from himself; but all he has is from God, as the first cause and
spring of all perfection, natural or moral: dependence is woven into his very
nature; so that if God should totally withdraw from him, he would dwindle into
a mere nothing. Seeing then whatever man is, he is of him: surely in whatever
he is, he should be to him; as the waters which come from the sea, do of
course, return thither again. And thus man was created, directly looking to
God, as his chi^f end: but falling into sin, he fell off from God, and turned
into himself; and like a traitor usurping the throne, he gathers in the rents
of the crown to himself: Now, this infers a total apostasy, and universal
corruption in man; for where the chief and last end is changed, there can be no
goodness there. This is the case of all men in their natural state, Psalm. xiv.
2, 3. The Lord looked down -- to see if there were any that did -- seek God.
They are all gone aside: to wit, from God; they seek not God, but themselves.
And though many fair shreds of morality are to be found amongst them, yet there
is none that does good, no not one; for though some of them run well, they are
still off the way; they never aim at the right mark. They are lovers of their
ownselves, (2 Timothy iii. 2.) more than God, verse 4. Wherefore, Jesus Christ
having come into the world, to bring men back to God again, came to bring them
out of themselves in the first place, Matthew. xvi. 25. The godly groan under the
remains of this woeful disposition of the heart: they acknowledge it, and set
themselves against it, in its subtle and dangerous insinuations. The
unregenerate, though most insensible of it, are under the power thereof; and
whithersoever they turn themselves, they cannot move without the circle of
self: they seek themselves, they act for themselves; their natural, civil and
religious actions, from whatever spring they come, do all run into, and meet
in, the dead sea of self.

Most men are so far from making God their chief end, in their natural and
civil actions; that in these matters, God is not in all their thoughts. Their
eating and drinking, and such like natural actions, are for themselves; their
own pleasure or necessity, without any higher end: Zech vii. 6. Did ye not eat
for yourselves? They have no eye to the glory of God in these things, as they
ought to have, 1 Cor. x. 31. They do not eat and drink, to keep up their bodies
for the Lord's service; they do them not, because God has said, thou shall not
kill: neither do these drops of sweetness God has put into the creature, raise
up their souls toward that ocean of delight that is in the Creator, though they
are indeed a sign hung out at heaven's door, to tell men of the fullness of
goodness that is in God himself, Acts xiv. 16. But it is self, and not God, that
is sought in them by natural men. And what are the unrenewed man's civil
actions, such as buying, selling, working, etc but fruit to himself? Hos. x. 1.
so marrying and giving in marriage* are reckoned amongst the sins of the old
world; (Matthew. xxiv 38) for they had no eye to God therein, to please him; but
all they had in view, was to please themselves, Gen vi 3. Finally, Self is
natural men's highest end, in their religious actions: They perform duties for
a name, Matthew. vi 1, 2. or some other worldly interest, John vi 26. Or, if they
be more refined, it is their peace and at most their salvation from hell and
wrath, or their own eternal happiness, that is their ch^ef and highest end,
Matthew xix. 16, -- 22. Their eyes are held, that they see not the glory of God
They seek God indeed, but not for himself, but for themselves They seek him not
at all, but for their own welfare: so their whole life is woven into one web of
practical blasphemy; making God the means, and self their end, yea, their chief
end.

And thus have I given you some rude draughts of man's will, in his natural
state, drawn by scripture and men's own experience. Call it no more Naomi but
Marah: for bitter it is, and a root of bitterness. Call it no more free will,
but slavish lust; free to evil, but free from good, till regenerating grace
loose the bands of wickedness. Now, since all must be wrong, and nothing can be
right, where the understanding and will are so corrupt; I shall briefly
dispatch what remains, as following of course, on the corruption of those prime
faculties of the soul.

The Corruption of the Affections, the Conscience and the Memory. The Body
partaker of this corruption.
III. The Affections are corrupted. The unrenewed man's affections are wholly
disordered and distempered: they are as the unruly horse, that either will not
receive, or violently runs away with the rider. So man's heart naturally is a
mother of abominations. Mark vii. 21, 22. For from within, out of the heart of
men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts,
covetousness, etc. The natural man's affections are wretchedly misplaced; he is
a spiritual monster. His heart is there, where his feet should be, fixed on the
earth; his heels are lifted up against heaven, which his heart should be set
on, Acts ix. 5. His face is toward hell, his back toward heaven; and
therefore God calls him to turn. He loves what he should hate, and hates what
he should love* (...) in what he ought to mourn for, and mourns for what he
should rejoice in: glories in his shame, and is ashamed of his glory; abhors
what he should desire, and desires what he should abhor, Prove. ii. 13.14.15.
They hit the point indeed, (as Caiaphus did in another case) who cried out on
the apostles as men that turned the world upside-down, Acts xvii. 6. for that
is the work the gospel has has to do in the world, where sin has put all things
so out of order, that heaven lies under, and earth a-top. If the unrenewed
man's affections be set on lawful objects, then they are either excessive, or
defective. Lawful enjoyments of the world Love sometimes too little, but mostly
too much of them: either they get not their due; or, if they do, it is measure
(...) over. Spiritual things have always too little of them. In a word, they
are always in, or over; never right, only evil.

Now, here is a threefold cord against heaven and holiness, not easily broken;
a blind mind, a perverse will, and disorderly distempered affections. The mind
swelled with self-con^ent, save the man should not stoop; the will opposite to
the will of God, says he will not; and the corrupt affections rising against
the Lord, in defense of the corrupt will, say, he shall not. Thus the poor
creature stands out against God and goodness; till a day of power come, in
which he is made a new creature

IV. The Conscience is corrupt and defiled, Tit i. 15. It is an evil eye, that
fills one's conversation with much darkness and confusion; being naturally
unable to do its office; till the Lord, by letting in a new light to the soul,
awaken the conscience; it remains sleepy and unactive. Conscience can never do
its work, but according to the light it has to work by. Wherefore seeing the
natural man cannot spiritually discern spiritual things, (1 Cor. ii. 14.) the
conscience naturally is quite useless in that point: being cast into such a
deep sleep, that nothing but a saving illuminations from the Lord, can set it
on work in that matter. The light of the natural conscience in good and evil,
sin and duty, is very defective; therefore though it may check for grosser sins;
yet as to the more subtle workings of sin, it cannot check for them, because
it discerns them not. Thus conscience will fly in the face of many, if at any
time they be drunk, swear, neglect prayer, or be guilty of any gross sin; who
otherwise have a profound peace; though they live in the sin of unbelief, are
strangers to spiritual worship, and the life of faith. And natural light being
but faint and languishing in many things which it does reach, conscience in
that case shoots like a stitch in one's side, which quickly goes off; its
incitements to duty, and checks for and struggles against sin, are very remiss,
which the natural man easily gets over. But because there is a false light in
the dark mind, the natural conscience following the same will call evil good,
and good evil, Isa. v. 20. And so it is often found like a blind and furious
horse, which does violently run down himself, his rider, and all that does come
in his way, John xvi. 2. Whosoever kill^th you, will think that he does God
service. When the natural conscience is awakened by the Spirit of conviction,
it will indeed rage and rore, and put the whole man in a dreadful
consternation, awfully summon all the powers of the soul to help in a strait;
make the stiff heart to tremble, and the knees to bow; set the eyes a-weeping,
the (...) ^ssing; and oblige the man to cast out the goods into the sea, which
it apprehends are like to sink the ship of the soul, though the heart (...) goes
after them. But yet it is an evil conscience, which natively leads to despair,
and will do it effectually, as in Judas's case; unless (...) or lusts prevail
over it, to lull it asleep, as in the case of Felix, Acts. ^v. 25. or the Blood
of CHRIST prevail over it, sprinkling and purging it from dead works, as in the
case of all true converts, Heb. ix. 14. and x. 23.

Lastly, Even the Memory bears evident marks of this corruption. What is good
and worthy to be minded, as it makes but slender impression, so that impression
easily wears off; the memory, as a leaking vessel, lets it slip, Heb. ii. 1. As
a sieve that is full, when in the water, lets all go when it is taken out; so
is the memory, with respect to spiritual things. But how does it retain what
ought to be forgotten? Naughty things so bear in themselves upon it, that
though men would fain have them out of mind, yet they stick there like give.
However forgetful men be in in other things, it is hard to forget an injury. So
the memory often furnishes new fuel to old lusts; makes men in old age to
re-act the sins of their youth, while it presents them again to the mind with
delight, which thereupon licks up the former vomit. And thus it is like the
riddle, that lets through the pure grain, and keeps the refuse. Thus far of the
corruption of the soul.

The Body itself also is partaker of this corruption and defilement, so far as
it is capable thereof. Wherefore the Scripture calls it sinful flesh, Romans
viii. 3. We may take this up in two things. (1.) The natural temper, or rather
distemper of the bodies of Adam's children, as it is an effect of original sin;
so it has a native tendency to sin, incites to sin, leads the soul into
snares, yea, is itself a snare to the soul. The body is a furious beast, of
such metal, that if it be not beat down, kept under, and brought into
subjection, it will cast the soul into much sin and misery, 1 Cor. ix. 27.
There Is a vileness in the body, (Phil. iii. 21.) which, as to the saints, will
never be removed, until it be melted down in a grave, and cast into a new
mould, at the resurrection to come forth a spiritual body: and will never be
carried off from the bodies of those, who are not partakers of the resurrection
to life. (2.) It serves the soul in many sins. Its members are instruments or
weapons of unrighteousness, whereby men fight against God, Romans vi. 13. The
eyes and ears are open doors, by which impure motions and sinful desires enter
the soul; the tongue is a world of iniquity; James iii. 6. an unruly evil, full
of deadly pois^n, ver. 8. By it the impure heart vents a great deal of its
filthiness. The throat is an open sepulcher, Romans iii. 13. The feet run the
devil's errands, ver. 15. The belly is made a god, Philip, iii. 19. Not only by
drunkards and riotous livers, but by every natural man, Zech. vii. 6. So the
body naturally is an agent for the devil; and a magazine of armor against the
Lord.

To conclude, man by nature is wholly corrupted: From the sole of the foot,
even unto the head, there is no soundness in him. And as in a dunghill, every
part contributes to the corruption of the whole; so the natural man, while in
that state, grows still worse and worse. The soul is made worse by the body,
and the body by the soul: and every faculty of the soul serves to corrupt
another more and more. Thus much for the second general Head.

How Man's Nature was corrupted.
THIRDLY, I shall show how man's nature comes to be thus corrupted. The
heathens perceived that man's nature was corrupted: but how sin had entered,
they could not tell. But the Scripture is very plain in that point, Romans v. 12.
By one man sin entered into the world. Ver. 19. By one man's disobedience, many
were made sinners. Adam's sin corrupted man's nature, and leavened the whole
lump of mankind. We putrified in Adam, as our root. The root was poisoned, and
so the branches were envenomed; the vine turned the vine of Sodom, and so the
grapes became grapes of gall. Adam, by his sin, became not only guilty, but
corrupt; and so transmits guilt and corruption to his posterity, Genesis v. 3. Job
xiv. 4. By his sin he stripped himself of his original righteousness, and
corrupted himself: we were in him representatively, being represented by him,
as our moral head, ^n the covenant of works; we were in him seminally, as our
natural head; hence we fell in him, and by his disobedience, were made sinners,
as Levi, in the loins of Abraham paid tithes, Heb. vii. 9, 10. His first sin is
imputed to us; therefore justly are we left under the want of his original
righteousness, which, being given to him as a common person, he cast off, by
his sin; and this is necessarily followed, in him and us, by the corruption of
the whole nature; righteousness and corruption being two contraries, one of
which must needs always be in man, as a subject capable thereof. And Adam our
common father being corrupt, we are so too; for who can bring a clean thing out
of an unclean?

Although it is sufficient to evince (...) righteousness of this dispensation,
that it was from the Lord, who does all things well; yet to silence the
murmurings of proud nature, let these few things further be considered, (1.) In
the covenant wherein Adam represented us, eternal happiness was promised to him
and his posterity upon condition of his, that is, Adam's perfect obedience, as
the representative for all mankind: whereas, if there had been no covenant,
they could not have pleaded eternal life, upon their most perfect obedience,
but might have be^, after all, reduced to nothing, notwithstanding, by natural
justice, they would have been liable to God's eternal wrath, in case of sin.
Who in that case would not have consented to that representation? (2.) Adam had
a power to stand given him, being made upright. He was as capable to stand for
himself, and all his posterity, as any after him could be for themselves. This
trial of mankind, in their head, would soon have been over, and the crown won
to them all, had he stood; whereas, had his posterity been independent on
(...), and every one left to act for himself, the trial would have been
continually a carrying on, as men came into the world. (3.) He had natural
affections the strongest to engage him, being our common ^ather. (4.) His own
stock was in the ship, his all lay at stake as well as ours. He had no separate
interest from ours; but if he forgot ours, he behoved to have forgot ours, he
behoved to have forgot his own. (5.) If he had stood, we should have had the
light of his mind, the righteousness of his will, and holiness of his
affections, with entire purity transmitted unto us; we could not have fallen;
the crown of glory, by his obedience, would have been for ever secured to him
and his. This is evident from the nature of a federal representation; and no
reason can be given why, seeing we are lost by Adam's sin, we should not have
been saved by his obedience. On the other hand, it is reasonable, that he
falling, we should, with him, bear the loss. Lastly, Such as quarrel this
dispensation, must renounce their part in Christ; for we are no otherwise made
sinners by Adam, than we are made righteous by Christ; from whom we have both
imputed and inherent righteousness. We no more made choice of the second Adam,
for our head and representative in the second covenant; than we did of the
first Adam in the first covenant.

Let none wonder that such an horrible change would be brought on by one sin of
our first parents, for thereby they turned away from God, as their chief end,
which necessarily infers an universal depravation. Their sin was a complication
of evils, a total apostasy from God, a violation of the whole law. By it they
broke all the ten commands at once. (1.) They chose new gods. They made their
belly their god, by their sensuality: self their god, by their ambition; yea,
and the devil their god, believing him, and disbelieving their Maker. (2.) Though
they received, yet they observed not that ordinance of God, about the forbidden
fruit. They contemned that ordinance so plainly enjoined them, and would needs
carve out to themselves, how to serve the Lord. (3.) They took the name of the
Lord their God in vain: despising his attributes, his justice, truth, power,
etc. They grossly profaned that sacramental tree; abused his word, by not giving
credit to it; abused that creature of his, which they should not have touched,
and violently misconstrued his providence; as if God, by forbidding them that
tree, had been standing in the way of their happiness; and therefore he
suffered them not to escape his righteous judgment. (4.) They remembered not
the Sabbath to keep it holy, but put themselves out of a condition to serve God
aright on his own day. Neither kept they that state of holy rest, wherein God
had put them. (5.) They cast off their relative duties. Eve forgets herself,
and acts without advice of her husband, to the ruin of both; Adam instead of
admonishing her to repent, yields to the temptation, and confirms her in her
wickedness. They forgot all duty to their posterity. They honored not their
Father in heaven; and therefore their days were not long in the land which the
Lord their God gave them. (6.) They ruined themselves, and all their posterity.
(7.) Gave up themselves to luxury and sensuality (8.) Took away what was not
their own, against the express will of the great Owner. (9.) They bore false
witness, and lied against the Lord, before angels, devils, and one another; in
effect giving out that they were hardly dealt by, and that heaven grudged their
happiness. (10.) They were discontent with their lot, and coveted an evil
covetousness to their house; which ruined both them and theirs. Thus was the
image of God on man defaced all at once.

The Doctrine of the Corruption of Nature applied.
USE I. For Information. Is man's nature wholly corrupted? Then,

1. No wonder the grave open it is devouring mouth for us, as soon as the womb
has cast us forth; and that the cradle be turned into a coffin, to receive the
corrupt lump: for we are all, in a spiritual sense, dead born; yea, and filthy,
(Psalm. xiv. 3.) noisome, rank, and stinking as a corrupt thing, as the word
imports. Let us not complain of the miseries we are exposed to, at our
entrance, nor of the continuance of them, while we are in the world. Here is
the venom that has poisoned all the springs of earthly enjoyments we have to
drink of. It is the corruption of man's nature, that brings forth all the
miseries of human life in churches, states, families: in men's souls and bodies.

2. Behold here, as in a glass, the spring of all the wickedness, profanity,
and formality in the world; the source of all the disorders in thy own heart
and life. Every thing acts like itself, agreeable to its own nature; and so
corrupt man acts corruptly. You need not wonder at the sinfulness of your own
heart and life, nor at the sinfulness and perverseness of others: if a man be
crooked, he cannot but halt; and if the clock be set wrong, how can it point
the hour right.

3. See here, why sin is so pleasant, and religion such a burden to carnal
spirits: sin is natural, holiness not so. Oxen cannot feed in the sea, nor
fishes in the fruitful fields. A swine brought into a palace, would get away
again, to wallow in the mire. A corrupt nature tends ever to impurity.

4. Learn from this, the nature and necessity of regeneration. First, This
discovers the nature of regeneration in these two things, (1.) It is not a
partial, but a total change, though imperfect in this life. Thy whole nature is
corrupted, and therefore the cure must go through every part. Regeneration makes
not only a new head for knowledge, but a new heart, and new affections for
holiness. All things become new, 2 Cor. v. 17. If one who has received many
wounds, should be cured of them all, save one only, he might bleed to death, by
that one, as well as a thousand. So if the change go not through the whole man,
it is naught. (2.) It is not a change made by human industry, but by the mighty
power of the Spirit of God. A man must be born of the Spirit, John iii. 5
Accidental diseases may be cured by men, but these which are natural, not
without a miracle, John ix. 22. The change wrought upon men, by good education,
or forced upon them, by a natural conscience, though it may pass among men for a
sav^ing change, it is not so; for our nature is corrupt, and none but the God
of nature can change it. Though a gardener, ingrafting a pear branch into an
apple tree, may make the apple tree bear pears; yet the art of man cannot
change the nature of the apple tree: so one may pin a new life to his old
heart, but he can never change the heart. Secondly, This also shows the
necessity of regeneration. It is absolutely necessary in order to salvation,
John iii. 3 Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. No
unclean thing can enter the new Jerusalem: but thou art wholly unclean, while
in thy natural state. If every member of thy body were disjointed, each joint
behoved to be loosed, ere the members could be set aright again. This is the
case of thy soul, as thou have heard: and therefore thou must be born again;
else thou shall never see heaven, unless it be far off, as the rich man in hell
did. Deceive not thyself: no Mercy of GOD, no Blood of CHRIST will bring thee
to heaven, in thy unregenerate state: for God will never open a fountain of
mercy, to wash away his own holiness and truth: nor did Christ shed his
precious blood, to blot out the truths of God, or to overturn God's measures
about the salvation of sinners. Heaven! What would you do there, that are not
born again? Ye that are no ways fitting for Christ the head. That would be a
strange sight, a holy head, and members wholly corrupt! a head full of
treasures of grace, members wherein are nothing but treasures of wickedness! a
head obedient to death, and heels kicking against heaven! Ye are no ways
adapted to the society above, more than beasts for converse with men. Thou art
a hater of true holiness: and at the first sight of a saint there, would cry
out, Have thou found me, O mine enemy! Nay, the unrenewed man, if it were
possible he could go to heaven, in that state, he would no otherwise go to it,
than now he comes to the duties of holiness, that is, leaving his heart behind
him.

USE II. For Lamentation. Well may we lament thy case, O natural man, for it is
the saddest case one can be in, out of hell. It is time to lament for thee; for
thou art dead already, dead whilst thou live; thou carriest about with thee a
dead soul in a living body: and because thou art dead, thou can not lament
thy own case. Thou art loathsome in the sight of God; for thou art altogether
corrupt. Thou have no good in thee; thy soul is a mass of darkness, rebellion,
and vileness before the Lord. Thou think, perhaps, that thou have a good
heart to God, good inclinations, and good desires: but God knows there is
nothing good in thee, but every imagination of thine heart is only evil. Thou
can do no good; thou can do nothing but sin. For,

First, Thou art the servant of sin, Romans vi. 17. and therefore free from
righteousness, ver. 20. Whatever righteousness be, (poor soul) thou art free of
it; thou do not, thou can not meddle with it. Thou art under the dominion
of sin, a dominion where righteousness can have no place. Thou art a child and
servant of the devil, though thou be neither wizzard nor witch: seeing thou art
yet in the state of nature, John viii. 44 Ye are of your father the devil. And
to prevent any mistake, consider, that sin and Satan have two sorts of
servants, (1.) There are some employed, as it were, in coarser work: those bear
the devil's mark in their foreheads, having no form of godliness; but are
profane, grossly ignorant, mere moralists, not so much as performing the
external duties of religion, but living to the view of the world; as sons of
earth, only minding earthly things, Philip. iii. 19. (2) There are some
employed in a more refined sort of service to sin, who carry the devil's mark
in their right hand; which they can, and do hide from the view of the world.
These are closs hypocrites, who sacrifice as much to the corrupt mind, as the
other to the flesh, Ephesians. ii. 3. These are ruined by a more undiscernable trade
of sin: pride, unbelief, self-seeking, and the like, swarm in, and prey upon
their corrupted, wholly corrupted souls. Both are servants of the same house;
the latter as far as the former from righteousness.

Secondly, How is it possible thou should be able to do any good, thou whose
nature is wholly corrupt? Can fruit grow where there is no root? Or, can there
be an effect without a cause? Can the fig tree bear olive berries? Either a
vine figs? If thy nature be wholly corrupt, as indeed it is, all thou do is
certainly so too; for no effect can exceed the virtue of its cause. Can a
corrupt tree bring forth good fruit? Matthew. vii. 18.

Ah! What a miserable spectacle is he that can do nothing but sin? Thou art the
man, whosoever thou art, that art yet in thy natural state. Hear, O sinner,
what is thy case.

First, Innumerable sins compass thee about. Mountains of guilt are lying upon
thee. Floods of impurities overwhelm thee. Living lusts of all sorts roll up
and down in the dead sea of thy soul; where no good can breathe, because of the
corruption there. Thy lips are unclean: the opening of thy mouth is as the
opening of an unripe grave, full of stench and rottenness, Romans iii. 13. Their
throat is an open sepulcher. Thy natural actions are sin, for when ye did eat,
and when ye did drink, did not ye eat for yourselves; and drink for yourselves?
Zech. vii. 6. Thy civil actions are sin, Prove. xxi. 4. The plowing of the
wicked is sin. Thy religious actions are sin, Prove. xv. 8. The sacrifice of the
wicked is an abomination to the Lord. The thoughts and imaginations of thy
heart, are only evil. A deed may be soon done, a word soon spoken, a thought
swiftly passes through the heart: but each of these is an Item in thy
accounts. O sad reckoning! as many thoughts, words, actions; as many sins. The
longer thou live, thy accounts swell the more. Should a tear be dropped for
every sin, thine head behoved to be waters, and thine eyes a fountain of tears;
for nothing but sin comes from thee. Thy heart frames nothing but evil
imaginations; there is nothing in thy life, but what is framed by thine heart;
and therefore there is nothing in thy heart or life but evil.

Secondly, All thy religion, if thou have any, is lost labor; as to acceptance
with God, or any saving effect to thyself. Art thou yet in thy natural state?
Truly then thy duties are sins, as was just now hinted. Would not the best wine
be loathsome in a vessel wherein there is no pleasure? So is the religion of an
unregenerate man. Under the law: the garment which the flesh of the sacrifice
was carried in, though it touched other things, did not make them holy: but he
that was unclean touching any thing, whether common or sacred, made it unclean.
Even so thy duties cannot make thy corrupt soul holy, though they in themselves
be good; but thy corrupt heart defiles them, and makes them unclean, Hag. ii.
12, 13, 14. Thou wast went to divide thy works into two sorts; some good, some
evil; but thou must count again and put them all under one head; for God writes
on them all, only evil. This is lamentable: It will be no wonder to see those
beg in harvest, who fold their hands to sleep in seed time: but to be laboring
with others in the spring, and yet have nothing to reap when the harvest comes,
is a very sad case; and will be the case of all professors living and dying in
their natural state.

Lastly, Thou can not help thyself. What can thou do to take away thy sin,
who art wholly corrupt? Nothing truly but sin. If a natural man begin to
relent, drop a tear for his sin and reform, presently the corrupt heart
apprehends, at least, a merit of congruity: he has done much himself, (he
thinks) and God cannot but do more for him on that account. In the mean time he
does nothing but sin: so that the congruous merit is the leper that must be put
out of the camp; the dead soul buried out of sight: and the corrupt lump cast
into the pit. How can thou think to recover thyself by any thing thou can
do? Will mud and filth wash out filthiness? and will thou purge out sin by
sinning? Job took a potsherd to scrape himself, because his hands were as full
of boils as his body. This is the case of thy corrupt soul: not to be recovered
but by Jesus Christ, whose strength was dried up like a potsherd, Psalm. xxii.
15. Thou art poor indeed, extremely miserable and poor, Rev. iii. 17. Thou have
no shalter but a refuge of lies; no garment for thy soul, but filthy rags;
nothing to nourish it but husks that cannot satisfy. More than that, thou have
got such a bruise in the loins of Adam, which is not yet cured, that thou art
without strength, Romans v 6. unable to do or work for thyself; nay, more than
all this, thou can not so much as seek aright, but lie helpless, as an
infant exposed in the open field, Ezekiel. xvi. 5.

USE III. I exhort you to believe this sad truth. Alas! it is evident, it is
very little believed in the world. Few are concerned to get their corrupt
conversation changed; but fewer, by far, to get their nature changed: Most men
know not what they are, nor what spirits they are of: they are as the eye,
which seeing many things, never sees itself. But until ye know, every one the
plague of his own heart, there is no hope of your recovery. Why will you not
believe it? Ye have plain scripture-testimony for it; but you are loath to
entertain such an ill opinion of yourselves. Alas! that is the nature of your
disease, Rev. iii. 17. Thou -- know not that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Lord open their eyes to see it,
before they die of it; and in hell lift up their eyes, and see what they will
not see now.

I shall shut up this weighty point of the corruption of man's nature, with a
few words to another doctrine from the text.

DOCTRINE God takes special notice of our natural corruption, or the sin of our
nature. This he testifies two ways, 1. By his word, as in the text. God saw --
that every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart was enly evil
continually* See Psalm xiv. 2, 3* 2. By his works. God writes his particular
notice of it, and displeasure with it, as in many of his works, so especially
in these two:

(1.) In the death of the infant children of men. Many miseries they have been
exposed to: they were drowned in the deluge, consumed in Sodom by fire and
brimstone; they have been slain with the sword, dashed against the stones, and
are still dying ordinary deaths. What is the true cause of this? On what ground
does a holy God thus pursue them? Is it the sin of their parents? That may be
the occasion of the Lord's raising the process against them: but it must be
their own sin that is the ground of the sentence passing on them: for the soul
that sins, it shall die, says God, Ezekiel. xviii. 4. Is it their own actual
sin? They have none. But as men do with toads and serpents, which they kill at
first sight, before they have done any hurt, because of their venomous nature,
so is it in this case.

(2) In the birth of the elect children of God. When the Lord is about to
change their nature, he makes the sin of their nature ly heavy on their
spirits. When he mind^ to let out the corruption, the (...) gets full depth in
their souls, reaching to the root of sin, Romans vii. 7, 8, 9. The flesh, or
corruption of nature is pierced, being crucified, as well as the affections and
lusts, Gal v. 24

USE. Let us then have a special eye upon (...) corruption and sin of our
nature. God sees it: O that we (...), and that sin were ever before us! What
avails it to notice of (...) this ^other-sin is not noticed? Turn your eyes
inward to the sin of your nature. It is to be feared, many have this work to
begin yet; that they have shut the door, while the grand thief is yet in the
house undiscovered. This is a weighty point; and in the handling of it,

I. I shall, for conviction, point at some evidences of men's overlooking the
sin of their nature, which yet the Lord takes particular notice of, (1.) Men's
looking on themselves with such confidence, as if they were in no hazard of
gross sins. Many would take it very hainously to get such a caution, a^ Christ
g^ve his Apostles, Luke xxi. ^1. Take heed of surfeiting and drunk^ess. If any
should suppose them to break out in gros^ abominations, they would be ready to
say, Am I a dog? It would raise the pride of their hearts, but not their fear
and trembling; because they know (...) the corruption of their nature. (2.)
Untenderness toward those that fall: Many in that case cast off all bowels of
Christian compassion; for they do not consider themselves, lest they also be
tempted, Gal. vi. 1. Men's passions are often highest against the faults of
others, when sin sleeps soundly in their own breasts. Even good David, when he
was at his worst, was most violent against the faults of others. While his
conscience was asleep under his guilt, in the matter of Uriah; the Spirit of
the Lord takes notice, that his anger was greatly kindled against the man, in
the parable* 2 Samuel xii. 5. And on good grounds, it is thought, it was at the
same time that he treated the Ammonites so cruelly, as is related, ver. 31.
Putting them under saw^, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron, and
making them pass throw the brick kiln. Grace makes men zealous against sin in
others, as well as in themselves: but eyes turned inward to the corruption of
nature, clothe them with pity and compassion; and fill them with thankfulness
to the Lord, that they themselves were not the persons left to be such
spectacles of human frailty. (3.) There are not a few, who, if they be kept
from affliction in worldly things, and from gross out-breakings in their
conversation, know not what it is to have a sad heart. If they meet with a
cross, which their proud hearts cannot stoop to bear, they will be ready to
say, O to be gone: but the corruption of their nature never makes them long for
heaven. Lusts scandalously breaking out at a time, will mar their peace: but
the sin of their nature never makes them a heavy heart. (4.) Delaying of
repentance, in hopes to set about it afterward. Many have their own appointed
time for repentance and reformation: as if they were such complete masters over
their lusts, that they can allow them to gather more strength, and yet overcome
them. They take up resolutions to amend, without an eye to Jesus Christ, union
with him, and strength from him; a plain evidence they are strangers to
themselves; and so they are left to themselves, and their flourishing
resolutions wither; for as they see not the necessity, so they get not the
benefit of the dew from heaven to water them. (5.) Men's venturing frankly on
temptations and promising liberally on their own heads. They cast themselves
fearlesly into temptation, in confidence of their coming off fairly: but were
they sensible of the corruption of their nature, they would beware of entering
on the devil's ground: as one girt about with bag^ of gunpowder, would be loath
to walk where sparks of fire are flying, lest he should be blown up.
Self-jealousing well become^ Christians. Lord, is it I? They that know the
deceit of their bow, will not be very confident that they shall hit the mark.
(^.) Unacquaintedness with heart-plagues. The knowledge of the plagues of the
heart, is a rare qualification. There are indeed some of them: written in such
great characters, that he who runs may read them: but there are others more
subtle, which few do discern. How few are the^ to whom the bias of the heart
to unbelief, is a burden? Nay, they perceive it not. Many have had sharp
conviction^ of other si^s that were (...) to this day convinced of their
unbelief; though that is the sin specially aimed at in a thorough conviction,
John xvi 8, 9. -- He will reprove the world of sin, -- because they believe not
on me. A disposition to establish our own righteousness is a weed that
naturally grows in every man's heart: but few sweat at the plucking of it up:
it lurks undiscovered. The bias of the heart to the way of the covenant of
works, is a hidden plague of the heart to many. All the difficulty they find
is, in getting up their hearts to duties: they find no difficulty in getting
their hearts off them, and over them to Jesus Christ. How hard is it to stave
men off from their own righteousness? Yet it is very hard to convince them of
their leaning to it at all. Lastly, Pride and self-conceit. A view of the
corruption of nature would be very humbling; and oblige him that has it, to
reckon himself the chief of sinners. Under the greatest seize and
enlargements, it would be ballast to his heart, and hide pride from his eyes.
The want of thorough humiliation, piercing to the sin of one's nature, is the
ruin of many professors: for digging deep makes great difference betwixt wise
and foolish builders, Luke vi. 48, 49.

II. I will lay before you a few things, in which ye should have a special eye
to the sin of your nature. (1.) Have a special eye to it in your application to
Jesus Christ. Do you find any need of Christ, which sends you to him as the
Physician of souls? O forget not your disease when you are with the Physician.
They never yet knew well their errand to Christ, that went not to him for the
sin of their nature: for his blood to take away the guilt of it, and his Spirit
to break the power of it. Though in the bitterness of your souls, you should lay
before him a catalogue of your sins of ommission and commission, which might
reach from earth to heaven; yet if the sin of your nature were wanting in it,
assure yourselves, you have forgot the best part of the errand a poor sinner
has to the Physician of souls. What would it have availed the people of
Jericho, to have set before Elisha all the vessels in their city full of the
water that was naught, if they had not led him forth to the spring, to cast in
the salt there? 2 Kings ii. 19.20, 21. The application is easy. (2.) Have a
special eye toward it in your repentance, whether initial or progressive, in
your first repentance, and in the renewing of your repentance, afterward. Though
a man be sick, there is no fear of death, if the sickness strike not his heart;
and there is as little fear of the death of sin, as long as the sin of our
nature is not touched. But if ye would repent indeed, let the streams lead you
up to the fountain; and mourn over your corrupt nature, as the cause of all
sin, in heart, lip, and life. Psalm. li. 4, 5. Against thee, thee only have I
sinned, and none this evil in thy sight -- Behold, I was shapen in iniquity,
and in sin did my mother conceive me. (4.) Have a special eye upon it, in your
mortification. Gal. v. 24. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh.
It is the root of bitterness, that must be struck at, which the ax of
mortification must be laid to; else we labor in vain. In vain do men go about
to purge the streams, while they are at no pains about the muddy fountain: It
is vain religion to attempt to make the (...) truly good, while the corruption
of nature retains its ancient vigor, and the power of it is not broken.
Lastly, Ye are to eye it in your daily walk. He that would walk aright, must
have one eye upwards to Jesus Christ; and another inward to the corruption of
his own nature. It is not enough that we look about us, we must also look
within us. There the wall is weakest: there our greatest enemy lies; and there
are grounds for daily watching and mourning.

III. I shall offer some reasons, why we should especially notice the sin of
our nature.

1. Because of all sins it is the most extensive and diffusive. It goes through
the whole man, and spoils all. Other sins mar particular parts of the image of
God; but this does at once deface the whole. A disease affecting any particular
member of the body is ill; but that which affects the whole is worse. The
corruption of nature is the poison of the old serpent, cast into the fountain
of action: and so infects every action, every breathing of the soul.

1. It is the cause of all particular lusts, and actual sins, in our hearts and
lives. It is the spawn which the great Leviathan has left in the souls of men;
from whence comes all the fry of actual sins and abominations. Mark vii. 21.
Out of the heart of men proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, etc. It is the
bitter fountain: particular lusts are but rivulets running from it: which bring
forth into the life, a part only, and not the whole of what is within. Now the
fountain is still above the streams: so where the water is good, it is best in
the fountain* where it is ill, it is worst there. The corruption of nature
being that which defiles all, itself must needs be the most abominable thing.

3. It Is virtually all sin: for it is the seed of all sins which want but the
occasion to set up their heads: being in the corruption of nature, as the
effect in the virtue of its cause. Hence it is called a body of death, (Romans
vii. 24) as consisting of the several members, belonging to such a body of
sins, (Col ii 11.) whose life lies in spiritual death. It is the cursed ground,
fit to bring forth all manner of noxious weeds. As the whole nest of venomous
creatures must needs be more dreadful, than any few of them that come creeping
forth; so the sin of thy nature, that mother of abominations must be worse than
any particular lusts, that appear stirring in thy heart and life. Never did
every sin appear in the conversation of the vilest wretch that ever lived; but
look thou into thy corrupt nature, and there thou may see all and every sin
in the seed and root thereof. There is a ^^lness of all unrighteousness there,
Romans i.29. There is atheism, idolatry, blasphemy, murder, adultery, and
whatsoever is vile. Possibly none of these appear to thee in thy heart: but
there is more in that unfathomable depth of wickedness, than thou know. Thy
corrupt heart is like an ant's nest, on which, while the stone lies, none of
them appear: but take off the stone, stir them up, but with the point of a
straw, you will see what a swarm is there, and how lively they be Just such a
sight would thy heart afford thee, did the Lord but withdraw the restraint he
has upon it, and suffer Satan to stir it up by temptation.

4.The sin of our nature is, of all sins, the most fixed and abiding. Sinful
actions, though the guilt and stain of them may remain, yet in themselves they
are passing. The drunkard is not always at his cup, nor the unclean person
always acting lewdness. But the corruption of nature is an abiding sin: it
remains with men in its full power by night and by day, at all times, fixed as
with bands of iron and brass: till their nature be changed by converting grace;
and the remains of it continue with the godly, until the death of the body.
Pride, envy, covetousness, and the like, are not always stirring in thee. But
the proud, envious, carnal nature is still with thee: even as the clock that is
wrong, is not always striking wrong; but the wrong set continues with it,
without great intermission.

5. It is the great reigning sin, Romans vi. 12. Let not sin therefore reign in
your mortal body, that you should obey it in the lusts thereof. There are three
things you may observe in the corrupt heart. (1.) There is the corrupt nature;
the corrupt set of the heart whereby men are unapt for all good, and fitted for
all evil. This the apostle here calls, sin which reigns. (2.) There are
particular lusts, or dispositions of that corrupt nature, which the Apostle
calls the lusts thereof; such as pride, covetousness, etc (3.) There is one
among these, which is (like Saul amongst the people) higher by far than the
rest, namely, the sin which does so easily beset us, Heb. xii. 1. This we
usually call the predominate sin, because it does, as it were, reign over other
particular lusts; so that other lusts must yield to it. These three are like a
river which divides itself into many streams, whereof one is greater than the
rest. The corruption of nature is the river-head, which has many particular
lusts, in which it runs: but it mainly disburdens itself into what is commonly
called one's predominate sin. Now all of these being fed by the sin of our
nature; it is evident that sin is the great reigning sin, which never loses
its superiority over particular lusts, that live and die with it, and by it.
But as in some rivers, the main stream runs not always in one and the same
channel: so particular predominants may be changed, as lusts in youth may be
succeeded by covetousness in old age. Now, what does it avail to reform in
other sins, while the great reigning sin remains in its full power? What though
some particular lust be broken? If that sin, the sin of our nature keep the
throne, it will set up another in its stead: as when a watercourse is stopped in
one place, while the fountain is not dammed up, it will stream forth another
way. And thus some cast off their prodigality, but covetousness comes up in its
stead: some cast away their profanity, and the corruption of nature sends not
its main stream that way as before: but it rans in another channel, namely, in
that of a legal disposition, self-righteousness, or the like, so that people
are ruined by their not eying the sin of their nature.

Lastly, It is an hereditary evil, Psalm. li. 5. In sin did my mother conceive
me. Particular lusts are not so, but in the virtue of their cause. A prodigal
father may have a frugal son: but this disease is necessarily propagated in
nature, and therefore hardest to cure. Surely then the word should be given out
against this sin, as against the King of Israel, 1 Kings xxii. 31. Fight
neither with small nor great, save only with this: for this sin being broke,
all other sins are broken with it; and while it stands entire, there is no
victory.

IV. That ye may get a view of the corruption of your nature, I would recommend
to you three things (1.) Study to know the spirituality and extent of the law
of God, for that is the glass wherein you may see yourselves (2.) Observe your
hearts at all times, but especially under temptation. Temptation is a fire that
brings up the scum of the vile heart: do ye carefully mark the first risings of
corruption. Lastly, Go to God through Jesus Christ, for illumination by his
Spirit. Lay out your soul before the Lord, as willing to know the vileness of
your nature: say unto him, That which I know not, teach thou m^: and be willing
to take in light from the word. Believe, and you shall see. It is by the word
the Spirit teaches, but, without the Spirit's teaching, all other teaching
will be to little purpose. Though the gospel should shine about you, like the sun
at noonday; and this great truth be never so plainly preached: you will never
see yourselves aright, until the Spirit of the Lord light his candle within
your breast: the fullness and glory of Christ, the corruption and vileness of
our nature, are never rightly learned, but where the Spirit of Christ is the
teacher.

And now to shut up this weighty point, let the consideration of what is said,
commend Christ to you all. Ye that are brought out of your natural state of
corruption unto Christ, be humble; still coming to Christ, and improving your
union with him, to the further weakening of the remains of this natural
corruption. Is your nature changed? It is but in part so. The day was, ye could
not stir; now ye are cured: but remember the cure is not yet perfected, ye
still go halting. And though it were better with you than it is; the remembrance
of what you were by nature, should keep you low. Ye that are yet in your
natural state, take with it: believe the corruption of your nature: and let
Christ and his grace be precious in your eyes. O that ye would at length be
serious about the state of your souls! What mind ye to do? Ye must die; ye must
appear before the judgment seat of God. Will ye ly down, and sleep another
night at ease, in this case? Do it not: for before another day you may be
sisted before God's dreadful tribunal, in the grave clothes of your corrupt
state; and your vile souls cast into the pit of destruction, as a corrupt lump,
to be for ever buried out of God's sight. For I testify unto you all, there is
no peace with God, no pardon, no heaven for you, in this state: there is but a
step betwixt you and eternal destruction from the presence of the Lord: if the
brittle thread of your life, which may be broke with a touch, ere you are
aware, be indeed broken while you are in this state; you are ruined for ever,
and without remedy. But come speedily to Jesus Christ: he has cleansed as vile
souls as yours; and he will yet cleanse the blood that he has cleansed, Joel
iii. 21. Thus far of the sinfulness of man's natural state.

HEAD II. The MISERY of MAN's Natural State.
EPHESIANS ii. 3. We -- were by nature the children of wrath, even as others.


HAVING showed you the sinfulness of man's natural state, I come now to lay
before you the misery of it. A sinful state cannot be but a miserable state. If
sin go before, wrath follows of course. Corruption and destruction are so knit
together, that the Holy Ghost calls destruction, even eternal destruction,
corruption, Gal. vi. 8. He that sows to his flesh,shall of the flesh reap
corruption, that is, everlasting destruction; as is clear from its being
opposed to life everlasting, in the following clause. And so the Apostle having
shown the Ephesians their real state by nature, to wit, that they were dead in
sins and trespasses, altogether corrupt; he tells them in the words of the
text, their relative state, namely, that the pit was dug for them, while in
that state of corruption: being dead in sins, they were by nature children of
wrath, even as others.

In the words we have four things,

1. The misery of a natural state; it is a state of wrath, as well as a state
of sin. We were, says the Apostle, children of wrath, bound over, and liable to
the wrath of God; under wrath in some measure; and, in wrath, bound over to
more, even the full measure of it in hell, where the floods of it go over the
prisoners for ever. Thus Saul, in his wrath, adjudging David to die, (1 Samuel
xx. 31.) and David, in his wrath, passing sentence of death against the man in
the parable, (2 Samuel xii. 5.) say each of them, of his supposed criminal, He
shall surely die: or, as the words in the first language are, he is a son of
death. So the natural man is a child of wrath, a son of death. He is a
malefactor dead in law, lying in chains of guilt: a criminal held fast in his
setters, till the day of execution: which will not fail, unless a pardon be
obtained from his God, who is his judge and party too. By that means, indeed,
children of wrath may become children of the kingdom. The phrase in the text,
however common it is in holy language, is very significant. And as it is
evident, that the Apostle calling natural men, the children of disobedience,
(ver. 2) means more, than that they were disobedient children; for such may the
Lord's own children be: so to be children of wrath, is more than simply to be
liable to, or under wrath. Jesus Christ was liable to, and under wrath: but I
doubt we have any warrant to say, he was a child of wrath. The phrase seems to
intimate, that men are, whatsoever they are in their natural state, under the
wrath of God; that they are wholly under wrath: wrath is, as it were, woven
into their very nature, and mixeth itself with the whole of the man; who is (if
I may so speak) a very lump of wrath, a child of hell, as the iron in the fire
is all fire, For men naturally are children of wrath, come forth, so to speak,
out of the womb of wrath; Jonah's gourd was the son of a night, (which we
render came up in a night, Jonah iv. 10.) as if it had come out of the womb of
the night; (as we read of the womb of the morning, Psalm. cx. 3.) and so, the
birth following the belly whence it came, was soon gone. The sparks of fire are
called sons of the burning coal, Job v. 7. marg. Isa. xxi. 10. O my threshing,
and the corn (or son) of my floor, threshen in the floor of wrath, and, as it
were brought forth by it. Thus the natural man is a child of wrath: it comes
into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones, Psalm. cix. 18. For,
though Judas was the only son of perdition amongst the Apostles; yet all men, by
nature, are of the same family.

2. There is the rise of this misery: men have it by nature. They owe it to
their nature: not to their substance or offense: for that neither is nor was
sin, and therefore cannot make them children of wrath; though for sin it may be
under wrath: not to their nature as qualified, at man's creation, by his Maker:
but to their nature as vitiated and corrupted by the fall. To the vicious
quality, or corruption of their nature, (whereof before) which is their
principle of action, and ceasing from action, the only principle is an
unregenerate state. Now by this nature, men are children of wrath; as in time
of pestilential infection, one draws in death together with the disease then
raging. Wherefore seeing from our first being, as children of Adam, we be
corrupt children, shapen in iniquity, conceived in sin; we are also, from that
moment, children of wrath.

3. The university of this misery. All are by nature children of wrath; We,
says the Apostle, even as others; Jews as well as Gentiles. Those that are
now, by grace, the children of God, were, by nature, in no better case, than
those that are still in their natural state.

Lastly, There is a glorious and happy change intimated here; we were children
of wrath, but are not so now; grace has brought us out of that fearful state.
This the Apostle says of himself and other believers. And thus, it well becomes
the people of God to be often standing on the shore looking back to the red sea
of the state of wrath, they were sometimes weltering in, even as others.

Man's natural State, a State of Wrath.
DOCTRINE, The state of nature is a state of wrath. Every one in a natural
unregenerate state, is in a state of wrath. We are born children of wrath; and
continue so, until we be born again. Nay, as soon as we were children of Adam,
we were children of wrath.

I shall usher in what I am to say on this point, with a few observes touching
the universality of this state of wrath; which may serve to prepare the way of
the word into your consciences.

Wrath has gone as wide as ever sin went. When angels sinned, the wrath of God
brake in upon them as a flood; God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast
them down to hell, 2 Pet. ii. 4. And thereby it was demonstrated, that no
natural excellency in the creature will shield it from the wrath of God; if
once it becomes a sinful creature. The finest and the nicest piece of the
workmanship of heaven, if once the Creator's image upon it be defaced by sin,
God can and will dash it in pieces, in his wrath; unless satisfaction be made
to justice, and that image be repaired; neither of which the sinner himself can
do. Adam sinned; and the whole lump of mankind was leavened, and bound over to
the fiery oven of God's wrath. And from the text ye may learn, (1.) That
ignorance of that state cannot free men from it; the Gentiles that knew not
God, were by nature children of wrath, even as others. A man's house may be on
fire, his wife and children perishing in the flames; while he knows nothing of
it, and therefore is not concerned about it. Such is your case, O ye that are
ignorant of these things! wrath is silently sinking into your souls, while you
are blessing yourselves, saying, Ye shall have peace. Ye need not a more
certain token, that ye are children of wrath, than that ye never yet saw
yourselves such. Ye cannot be the children of God, that never yet saw
yourselves children of the devil. Ye cannot be in the way to heaven, that never
saw yourselves by nature in the high road to hell. Ye are grossly ignorant of
your state by nature; and so ignorant of God, and of Christ, and your need of
him: and though ye look on your ignorance as a covert from wrath; yet take it out
of the mouth of God himself, that it will ruin you if it be not removed, Isa.
xxvii. 11. It is a people of no understanding: therefore he that made them will
not have mercy on them. See 2 Thessalonians. i. 8. Hos. iv. 6. (2.) No outward
privileges can exempt men from this state of wrath; for the Jews, the children
of the kingdom, God's peculiar people, were children of wrath even as others.
Though ye be church members, partakers of all church privileges; though you be
descended of godly parents, of great and honorable families; be what ye will,
ye are by nature, heirs of hell, children of wrath. (3.) No profession, nor
seize in a profession of religion, do or can exempt a man from this state
of wrath. Paul was one of the straitest sect of the Jewish religion, Acts xxvi.
5, yet a child of wrath, even as others, till he was converted. The close
hypocrite, and the profane, are alike as to their state; however different
their conversations be: and they will be alike in their fatal end, Psalm. cxxv.
5. As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them
forth with the workers of iniquity. (4.) Young ones that are yet but setting
out into the world, have not that to do, to make themselves children of wrath,
by following the graceless multitude. They are children of wrath by nature: so
it is done already: they were born heirs of hell; they will indeed make
themselves more so, if they do not, while they are young, flee from the wrath
they were born to, by fleeing to Jesus Christ. -- Lastly, Whatever men are now
by grace, they were even as others, by nature. And this may be a sad meditation
to them, that have been at ease from their youth, and have had no changes.

Now, these things being premised, I shall, in the first place, show what this
state of wrath is; next, confirm the doctrine; and then apply it.

I. I am to show what this state of wrath is. But who can fully describe the
wrath of an angry God? None can do it. Yet so much of it must be discovered, as
may serve to convince men of the absolute necessity of fleeing to Jesus Christ,
out of that state of wrath. Anger in men is a passion, and commotion of the
spirit for an injury received, with a desire to resent the same. When it comes
to a height, and is fixed in one's spirit, it is called wrath. Now there are no
passions in God, properly speaking: they are inconsistent with his absolute
uuchangeableness, and independency; and therefore Paul and Barnabas (to remove
the mistake of the Lycaonians, who thought they were gods) tell them, they were
men of like passions with themselves, Acts xiv. 15. Wrath then is attributed to
God, not in respect of the affection of wrath, but the effects thereof. Wrath
is a fire in the bowels of a man, tormenting the man himself: but there is no
perturbation in God. His wrath does not in the least mar that infinite rep^^e
and happiness, which he has in himself. It is a most pure undisturbed act of
his will producing dreadful effects against the sinner. It is little we know of
an infinite God: but condescending to our weakness, he is pleased to speak of
himself to us, after the manner of men. Let us therefore notice man's wrath,
but remove every thing in our consideration of the wrath of God, that argues
imperfection: and so we may attain to some view of it, however scanty. By this
means we are led to take up the wrath of God against the natural man in these
three.

First, There is wrath in the heart of God against him. The Lord approves him
not, but is displeased with him. Every natural man lies under the displeasure
of God; and that is heavier than mountains of brass, Although he be pleased with
himself, and others be pleased with him too; yet God looks down on him, as
displeased. First, His person is under God's displeasure: Thou hate all
workers of iniquity, Psalm. v. 5. A godly man's sin is displeasing to God, yet
his person is still accepted in the Beloved, Ephesians. i. 6, But God is angry with
the wicked every day, Psalm. vii. 11. There is a fire of wrath burns continually
against him, in the heart of God. They are as dogs and swine, most abominable
creatures in the sight of God. Though their natural state be gilded over with a
shining profession, yet they are abhorred of God: they are to him as smoke in
his nose, Isa. lxv. 5. and lukewarm water, to be spewed out of his mouth, Rev,
iii. 16. whited sepulchers, Matthew. xxiii. 27. a generation of vipers, Matthew.
xii. 34. and a people of his wrath, Isa. x. 6.

Secondly, He is displeased with all they do: It is impossible for them to
please him, being unbelievers, Heb. xi. 6. He hates their persons: and so has
no pleasure in, but is displeased with their best works, Isa lvi. 3. He that
sacrifices a lamb, as if he cut off a dog's neck, etc. Their duty, as done by
them, is an abomination to the Lord, Prove xv. 8. And as men turn their back
upon them whom they are angry with; so the Lord's refusing communion with the
natural man in his duties, is a plain indication of this wrath.

Secondly, There is wrath in the word of God against him. When wrath is in the
heart, it seeks a vent by the lips: so God fights against the natural man with
the sword of his mouth, Rev ii. 16. The Lord's word never speaks good of him,
but always curses or condemns him. Hence it is, that when he is awakened,
the word read or preached often increases his horror. Firs;t, It condemns all
his actions, together with his corrupt nature. There is nothing he does, but
the law declares it to be sin. It is a rule of perfect obedience, from which he
always in all things, declines; and so it rejects every thing he does as sin.
Secondly, It pronounces his doom, and denounces God's curse against him, Gal.
iii. 10. For as many as are of the works of the law, are under the curse: for
it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, which are
written in the book of law, to do them. Be he never so well in the world, it
pronounces a woe from heaven against him, Isa.iii. 11. The Bible is a quiver
filled with arrows of wrath against him, ready to be poured in on his soul.
God's threatenings in his word, hang over his head as a black cloud, ready to
shower down on him every moment. The word is indeed the saint's security
against wrath, but it binds the natural man's sin and wrath together, as a
certain pledge of his ruin, if he continue in that state. So the conscience
being awakened, and perceiving this tie made by the law, the man is filled with
terrors in his soul.

Thirdly, There is wrath in the hand of God against the natural man. He is
under heavy strokes of wrath already, and is liable to more.

1 st, There is wrath on his body. It is a piece of cursed day, which wrath is
sinking into by virtue of the threatening of the first covenant, Genesis ii. 17. In
the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. There is never a
disease, gripe nor stitch, that affects him, but it comes on him with the sting
of God's indignation in it. They are all cords of death, sent before to bind
the prisoner.

2 dly, There is wrath upon his soul. (1.) He can have no communion with God;
he is foolish, and shall not stand in God's sight, Psalm v. 5. When Adam sinned,
God turned him out of paradise: and natural men are, as Adam left them,
banished from the gracious presence of the Lord; and can have no access to him
in that state. There is war betwixt heaven and them: and so all commerce is cut
off. They are without God in the world, Ephesians. ii. 12. The sun is gone down on
them, and there is not the least glimpse of favor toward them from heaven.
(2) Hence the soul is left to pine away in its iniquity. The natural darkness
of their minds, the averseness to good in their wills, the disorder of their
assertions, and distemper of their consciences, and all their natural plagues,
we left upon them in a penal way; and being so left, increase daily. God casts
a portion of worldly goods to them, more or less; as a bone is thrown to a dog:
but alas! his wrath against them appears, in that they get no grace. The
Physician of souls comes by them, and goes by them, and cures others beside
them; while they are consuming away in their iniquity, and ripning daily for
utter destruction. (3.) They ly open to fearful additional plagues on their
souls, even in this life. First, Sometimes they meet with deadning strokes;
silent blows from the hand of an angry God; arrows of wrath that enter into
their souls without noise, Isa. vi. 10. Make the heart of this people fat, and
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, etc.
God strives with them for a while, and convictions enter their consciences; but
they rebel against the light: and by a secret judgment, they are knocked on the
head; so that, from that time, they do as it were, live and rot above ground.
Their hearts are deadned; their affections withered; their consciences
stupefied; and their whole souls blasted; cast forth as a branch, and withered,
John xv. 16. They are plagued with judicial blindness. They shut their eyes
against the light, and they are given over to the devil, the god of this world,
to be blinded more, 2 Cor. iv. 4. Yea, God sends them strong delusions, that
they should believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 11. even conscience, like a self light
on the shore leads them upon rocks; by which they are broken in pieces. They
harden themselves against God; and he gives up with them, and leaves them to
Satan and their own hearts, whereby they are hardened more and more. They are
often given up unto ^^e affections, Romans i. 26. The reins are laid on their
necks; and they are left to run into all excess, as their furious lusts draw
them. Secondly, Sometimes they meet with quickening strokes, whereby their souls
become (...) mount Sinai; where nothing is seen, but fire and smoke: (...)
heard, but the thunder of God's wrath, and the voice of the trumpet of a broken
law, waxing louder and louder* which makes them (...) Pastner, (Jer. xx. 4.) A
terror to themselves. God takes the filthy garments of their sins, which they
were wont to sleep in securely; overlays them with brimstone, and sets them on
fire about their ears: so they have a hell within them.

3 dly, There is wrath on the natural man's enjoyments. Whatever be wanting in
his house, there is one thing that is never wanting there, Prove. iii. 33. The
curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked. Wrath is on all that he has;
on the bread that he eats, the liquor he drinks, and clothes which he wears.
His basket and store are cursed, Deuteronomy. xxviii. 17. Some things fall wrong with
him; and that comes to pass by virtue of his wrath; other things go according
to his wish, and there is wrath in that too; for it is a snare to his soul,
Prove. i 32. The prosperity of fools shall destroy them. This wrath turns his
blessings into curses, Mal ii. 2. I will curse your blessings: yea, I have
cursed them already. The holy law is a killing letter to him, 2 Cor. iii. 6.
The ministry of the gospel, a savor of death unto death, chap. ii. 15. In the
sacrament of the Lord's supper, he eats and drinks damnation to himself, 1
Cor xi. 29. Nay, more than all that, Christ himself is to him, a stone of
stumbling, and a rock of offense, 1 Pet. ii. 8. Thus wrath follows the natural
man, as his shadow does his body.

4 thly, He is under the power of Satan, Acts xxvi. 18. The devil has overcome
him, so he is his by conquest; his lawful captive, Isa. xlix. 24. The natural
man is condemned already, John iii. 18. and therefore under the heavy hand of
him that has the power of death, that is the devil. And he keeps his prisoner,
in the prison of a natural state, bound hand and foot, Isa. lxi 1. Laden with
diverse lusts, as chains wherewith he holds them fast. Thou need not, as many
do, call on the devil to take thee; for he has a fast hold of thee already, as
a child of wrath.

Lastly, The natural man has no security for a moment's safety from the wrath
of God its coming on him to the uttermost. The curse of the law denounced
against him, has already tied him to the stake: so that the arrows of justice
may pierce his soul; and in him may meet all the miseries and plagues that flow
from the avenging wrath of God. See how he is set as a mark to the arrows of
wrath, Psalm. vii. 11, 12, 13. God is angry with the wicked every day. If he
turn not, he will whet his sword: he has bent his bow, and made it ready; he
has also prepared for him the instruments of death. Does he ly down to sleep?
There is not a promise, he knows of, or can know, to secure him that he shall
not be in hell ere he awake. Justice is pursuing, and cries for vengeance on
the sinner: the law casts the fire balls of its curses continually upon him:
wasted and long tired patience is that which keeps in his life: he walks amidst
enemies armed against him: his name may be Magor Missabib, i. e. terror round
about, Jer. xx. 3. Angels, devils, men, beasts, stones, heaven, and earth, are
in readiness, on a word of command from the Lord, to ruin him.

Thus the natural man lives, but he must die too; and death is a dreadful
messenger to him It comes upon him armed with wrath, and puts three sad charges
in his hand (1) Death charge him to bid an eternal farewell to all things in
this world; to leave it, and make away to another world. Ah! what a dredful
charge must this be to a child of wrath! He can have no comfort from heaven;
for God is his enemy: and as for the things of the world, and the enjoyment of
his lusts, which were the only springs of his comfort; these are in a moment
dried up to him for ever. He is not ready for another world: he was not
thinking of removing so soon: or if he was, yet he has no portion secured to
him in another world, but that which he was born to, and was increasing all his
days, namely, a treasure of wrath. But go he must; his clay god, the world,
must be parted with, and what has he more? There was never a glimmering of
light, or favor from heaven, to his soul: and now the wrath that did hang in
the threatening as a cloud like a man's hand, is darkning the face of the whole
heaven above him: and if he look unto the earth, (from whence all his light was
wont to come) behold trouble and darkness, dirtness of anguish; and he shall be
driven to darkness, Isa. viii 22. (2) Death charge soul and body to part till
the great day* His soul is required of him, Luke xii 20. O what a miserable
parting must this be to a child of wrath! care was indeed taken to provide for
the body things necessary for this life* but alas! there is nothing laid up for
another life to it; nothing to be a seed of glorious resurrection: as it lived,
so it must die, and rise again sinful flesh; fuel for the fire of God's wrath.
As for the soul, he was never solicitous to provide for it. It lay in the body,
dead to God* and all things truly good; and so must be carried out into the
pit, in the grave cloths of its natural state: for now that death comes, the
companions in sin must part. (3.) Death charge the soul to compear before the
tribunal of God, while the body lies to be carried to the grave, Eccles. xii.
7. The spirit shall return unto God who gave it. Heb. ix 2, 7. It is appointed
unto all men once to die, but after this the judgment. Well were it for the
sinful soul if it might be buried together with the body. But that cannot be:
it must go and receive its sentence; and shall be shut up in the prison of
hell, while the cursed body lies imprisoned in the grave, till the day of the
general judgment.

When the end of the world, appointed of God, is come; the trumpet shall sound,
and the dead arise. Then shall the weary earth, at the command of the Judge,
cast forth the bodies; the cursed bodies of these that lived and died in their
natural state: The sea, death, and hell, shall deliver up their dead, Rev. xx.
13. Their miserable bodies and souls shall be reunited, and they sitted before
the tribunal of Christ. Then shall they receive that fearful sentence, D^part
from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
angels, Matthew. xx. 41. Whereupon they shall go away into everlasting
punishment, ver. 49. They shall be eternally shut up in hell, never to get the
least drop of comfort, nor the least ease of their torment. There they will be
punished with the punishment of loss: being excommunicated for ever from the
presence of God, his angels and saints. All means of grace, all hopes of a
delivery, shall be for ever cut off from their eyes. They shall not have a drop
of water to cool their tongues, Luke xvi. 24, 25. They shall be punished with
the punishment of sense. They must not only depart from God; but depart into
fire, into everlasting fire. There the worm, that shall gnaw them, shall never
die; the fire, that shall scorch them, shall never be quenched. God shall,
through all eternity, hold them up with the one hand, and pour the full vials of
wrath into them with the other.

This is that state of wrath natural men live in; being under much of the wrath
of God, and liable to more. But for a further view of it, let us consider the
qualities of that wrath (1.) It is irresistible, there is no standing before
it. Who may stand in thy sight, when once thou art angry? Psalm. lxxxvi. 7. Can
the worm, or the moth, defend itself against him that designs to crush it? As
little can worm man stand before an angry God Foolish man indeed practically
bids a defiance to heaven: but the Lord often, even in this world, opens such
sluices of wrath upon them, as all their might cannot stop; but they are
carried away thereby, as with a flood. How much more will it be so in hell?
(2.) It is unsupportable. What one cannot resist, he will set himself to bear:
but, Who shall dwell with devouring fire? Who shall dwell with everlasting
burnings? God's wrath is a weight that will sink men into the lowest hell. It
is a burden no man is able to stand under. A wounded spirit who can bear it?
Prove. xviii. 14. (3.) It is unavoidable to such as will go on impenitently in
their sinful course. He that being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy, Prove. xxix 1. We may now fly
from it indeed, by flying to Jesus Christ: but such as fly from Christ, shall
never be able to avoid it. Whither can men fly from an avenging God? Where will
they find a shelter? The hills will not hear them; the mountains will be deaf
to their loudest cries; when they cry to them, to hide them from the wrath of
the Lamb. (4.) It is powerful and fierce wrath, Psalm. xc. 11. Who knows the
power of thine anger? Even according to thy fean, so is thy wrath. We are apt
to fear the wrath of man more than we ought: but no man can apprehend the wrath
of God to be more dreadful than it really is: the power of it can never be
known to the utmost; seeing it is infinite, and (properly speaking) has no
utmost: how fierce soever it be, either on earth, or in hell, God can still
carry it further. Every thing in God is most perfect in its kind; and therefore
no wrath is so fierce as his. O sinner, how will thou be able to endure that
wrath, which will tear thee in pieces, Psalm. l. 22. and grind thee to powder,
Luke xx 18. The history of the two she bears, that tare the children of Bethel,
is an awful on, 2 Kings ii. 23, 24. But the united force of the rage of lions,
leopards, and she bears bereaved of their whelps, is not sufficient to give us
even a scanty view of the power of the wrath of God, Hos. xiii. 7, 8. Therefore
I will be unto them as a lion; as a leopard by the way will I observe them. I
will meet them as a bear that is bereaved of her whelps, and will rent the caul
of their heart, etc. (5) It is penetrating and piercing wrath. It is burning
wrath, and firey indignation. There is no pain more exquisite, than that which
is caused by fire; and no fire so piercing as the fire of God's indignation,
that burns into the lowest hell, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 22. The arrows of men's wrath can
pierce flesh, blood and bones: but cannot reach the soul: but the wrath of God
will sink into the soul, and so pierce a man in the most tender part. Like as,
when a person is thunderstruck, oft-times there is not a wound to be seen in
the skin; yet life is gone, and the bones are, as it were, melted: so God's
wrath can penetrate into, and melt one's soul within him, when his earthly
comforts stand about him entire, and untouched as in Belshazzar's case, Dan. v.
6. (6.) It is constant wrath, running parallel with the man's continuance in an
unregenerate state; constantly attending him, from the womb to the grave. There
are few so dark days, but the sun sometimes looks out from under the clouds:
but the wrath of God, is an abiding cloud on the subjects of it, John iii 36.
The wrath of God abides on him that believes not. (7.) It is eternal. O
miserable soul! If thou fly not from this wrath unto Jesus Christ, thy misery
had a beginning, but it shall never have an end. Should devouring death wholly
swallow thee up, and for ever hold thee fast in a grave; it would be kind, but
thou must live again, and never die; that thou may be ever dying, in the
hands of the living God. Cold death will quench the flame of man's wrath
against us, if nothing else do it: but God's wrath, when it has come on the
sinner, millions of ages will still be the wrath to come, Matthew. iii. 7. 1 Thessalonians. i. 10. As the water of a river is still coming, how much soever of it
has passed. While God is, he will pursue the quarrel. Lastly, Howsoever
dreadful it is, and though it be eternal, yet it is most just wrath: it is a
clear fire, without the least smoke of unjustice. The sea of wrath raging with
greatest fury against the sinner, is clear as crystal. The Judge of all the
earth can do no wrong. He knows no transports of passion, for they are
inconsistent with the perfection of his nature. Is God unrighteous, who takes
vengeance? (I speak as a man) God forbid: for then, how shall God judge the
world? Romans iii. 5, 6.

The Doctrine of the State of Wrath confirmed and vindicated.
II. I shall confirm the doctrine. Consider, (1.) How peremptory the threatening
of the first covenant is; In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
die, Genesis ii. 17. Hereby sin and punishment being connected, the veracity of
God ascertains the execution of the threatening. Now all men being by nature
under this covenant, the breach of it lays them under the curse. (2.) The
justice of God requires that a child of sin be a child of wrath; that the law
being broken, the sanction thereof should take place. God, as man's ruler and
Judge, cannot but do right, Genesis xviii. 25 Now it is a righteous thing with God
to recompense sin with wrath, 2 Thessalonians. i. 6. He is of purer eyes than to behold
evil, Hab. i. 13. And he hat^^ all the workers of iniquity, Psalm. v. 6. (3.)
The horrors of a natural conscience prove this. There is a conscience in the
breasts of men, which can tell them, they are sinners; and therefore liable to
the wrath of God. Let men, at any time, soberly commune with themselves, and
they will find they have the witness in themselves, knowing the judgment of
God, that they which commit such things, are worthy of death, Romans i. 32. (4)
The pangs of the new birth, the work of the spirit of bondage on elect souls,
in order to their conversion, demonstrate this. Hereby their natural sinfulness
and misery, as liable to the wrath of God, are plainly taught them, filling
their hearts with fear of that wrath. Now that this spirit of bondage is no
other than the Spirit of God, whose work is to convince of sin, righteousness,
and judgment, (John xvi. 8.) this testimony must needs be true; for the Spirit
of truth cannot witness an untruth. Mean while, true believers being freed from
the state of wrath, receive not the spirit of bondage again to fear, but
receive the Spirit of adoption, Romans iii. 15. And therefore, if fears of that
nature do arise, after the soul's union with Christ: they come from the saint's
own spirit, or from a worse. Lastly, The sufferings of Christ plainly prove
this doctrine. Wherefore was the Son of God, a Son under wrath, but because the
children of men were children of wrath? He suffered the wrath of God, not for
himself, but for those that were liable to it in their own persons. Nay, this
not only speaks us to have been liable to wrath; but also that wrath must have
a vent, in the punishing of sin. If this was done in the green tree, what will
become of the dry? What a miserable case must a sinner be in that is out of
Christ; that is not vitally united to Christ, and partakes not of his Spirit?
God, who spared not his own Son, surely will not spare such an one.

But the unregenerate man, who has no great value for the honor of God, will
be apt to rise up against his Judge, and in his own heart condemn his
procedure. Nevertheless the Judge being infinitely just, the sentence must be
righteous. And therefore, to stop thy mouth, O proud sinner, and to still thy
clamor against the righteous Judge, consider, First, Thou art a sinner by
nature, and it is highly reasonable that guilt and wrath be as old as sin. Why
should not God begin to vindicate his honor, as soon as vile worms begin to
impare it? Why shall not a serpent bite the thief, as soon as he leaps over the
hedge? Why should not the threatening take hold of the sinner, as soon as he
casts away the command? The poisonous nature of the serpent affords a man
sufficient ground to kill it, as soon as ever he can reach it; and, by this
time thou may be convinced, that thy nature is a very compound of enmity
against God. Secondly, Thou have not only an enmity against God, in thy nature;
but have discovered it, by actual sins, which are in his eye acts of hostility.
Thou has brought forth thy lust into the field of battle against thy Sovereign
LORD. And now, that thou art such a criminal, thy condemnation is just: for,
besides the sin of thy nature, thou have done that against heaven, which if
thou had done against men, thy life behoved to have gone for it; and shall not
wrath from heaven overtake thee? (1.) Thou art guilty of high treason, and
rebellion against the King of heaven. The thought and wish of thy heart, which
he knows as well as the language of thy mouth, has been, no God, Psalm. xiv. 1.
Thou have rejected his government, blown the trumpet, and set up the standard
of rebellion against him: being one of these that say, We will not have this
m^n to reign over us, Luke xix. 14 Thou have striven against, and quenched his
Spirit; practically disowned his laws proclaimed by his messengers; stopped
thine ears at their voice, and sent them away mourning for thy pride. Thou have
conspired with his grand enemy the devil. Although thou art a sworn servant of
the King of glory, daily receiving of his favors, and living on his bounty:
thou art holding a correspondence, and have contracted a friendship with his
greatest enemy, and art acting for him against thy Lord; for the lusts of the
de^il ye will do, John viii. 44 (2) Thou art a murderer before the Lord. Thou
have laid the stumbling block of thine iniquity before the blind world; and
have ruined the souls of others by thy sinful course. And though thou do not
see now; the time may come, when thou shall see the blood of thy relations,
neighbors, acquaintances and others, upon thy head, Matthew. xviii. 7. Woe unto
the world because of offenses -- Woe to that man by whom the offense com^th.
Yea, thou art a self-murderer before God, Prove. viii 36. He that sins
against me, wrongeth his own soul* all they that hate me, love death. Ezekiel.
xviii. 31. Why will ye die? The laws of man (...) as far as they can against
the self murderer, denying his body a bur^ place amongst others, and
confiscating his goods: what wonder is it the Law of God is so severe against
soul-murderers? Is it strange, that they who will need^ depart from God now,
cost what it will, be forced to depart from him at (...), into everlasting
fire? But what is yet more criminal, thou art guilty of the murder of the Son
of God, for the Lord will reckon thee among those that pierced him, Rev. 1.7.
Thou have rejected him as well as the Jews did; and by thy rejecting him, thou
have justified their deed. They indeed did not acknowledge him to be the Son of
God, but thou do. What they did against him, was in a state of humiliation;
but thou have acted against him, in his state of exaltation. These things will
aggravate thy condemnation. What wonder then, if the voice of the Lamb, change
to the roaring of the lion, against the traitor and murderer.

Object. But some will say, Is there not a vast disproportion betwixt our sin
and that wrath you talk of? I answer, No; God punishes no more than the sinner
deserves. To rectify your mist^, in this matter, consider, (1) The vast rewards
God ^is annexed to obedience. His word is no more full of fiery wrath against
sin, that it is of graci^s rewards to the obedience it requires. If heaven be
in the p^mis^s, it is altogether equal that hell be in the threatenings If death
were not in the balance with life, eternal misery with eternal happines^, where
were the proportion? Moreover, sin deserves the misery, but our best works do
not deserve the happiness: yet both are set before us; sin and misery, holiness
and happiness What reason is there then to complain? (2.) How severe soever the
threatenings be, yet all has enough ado to reach the end of the law. Fear him,
says our LORD, which, after he has killed, has power to cast into hell; yea,
I say unto you, fear him, Luke xii. 5. This bespeaks our dread of divine power
and majesty; but yet how few fear him indeed! The LORD knows the sinner's heart
to be exceedingly intent upon fulfilling their lusts: they cleave so fondly to
those fulsome breasts, that a small force does not suffice to draw them from
them. They that travel through deserts, where they are in hazard from wild
beasts, have need to carry fire along with them: and they have need of a hard
wedge that have knotty timber to cleave; so a holy law must be fenced with a
dreadful wrath, in a world lying in wickedness. But who are they that complain
of that wrath as too great* but those to whom it is too little to draw them off
from their sinful courses? It was the man who pretended to fear his Lord,
because he was an austere man, that kept his pound laid up in a napkin: and so
he was condemned out of his own mouth, Luke xix. 20, 21.22. Thou art that man,
even thou whose objection I am answering. How can the wrath thou art under, and
liable to, be too great, while yet it is not sufficient to awaken thee to fly
from it? Is it time to relax the penalties of the law, when men are trampling
the commands of it under foot? (3.) Consider how God dealt with his own Son,
whom he spared not, Romans viii. 32. The wrath of God seized on his soul and body
both, and brought him into the dust of death. That his sufferings were not
eternal, flowed from the quality of the sufferer, who was infinite; and
therefore able to bear at once, the whole load of wrath: and upon that account,
his sufferings were infinite in value. But in value, they must be protracted to
an eternity. And what confidence can a rebel subject have to quarrel (for his
part) a punishment execute on the King's Son? (4.) The sinner does against God
what he can. Behold thou have done evil things as thou could, Jer. iii. 5.
That thou have not done more, and worse; thanks to him who restrained thee; to
the chain which the wolf was kept in by, not to thyself. No wonder God show his
power on the sinner, who puts forth his power against God, as far as it will
reach. The unregenerate man puts no period to his sinful course; and would put
no bounds to it neither, if he were not restrained by divine power for wise
ends: and therefore it is just he be for ever under wrath. (5.) It is infinite
majesty sin strikes against; and so it is, in some sort, an infinite evil. Sin
rises in its demerit, according to the quality of the party offended. If a man
wound his neighbor, his goods must go for it; but if he wound his prince, his
life must go to make amends for that The infinity of God makes infinite wrath
the just demerit of sin. God is infinitely displeased with sin: and when he
acts, he must act like himself, and show his displeasure by proportionable
means. Lastly, Those that shall lie for ever under his wrath, will be eternally
sinning; and therefore must eternally suffer: not only in respect of divine
judicial procedure; but because sin is its own punishment, in the same manner
that holy obedience is its own reward.

The Doctrine of the Misery of Man's natural State applied.
USE (1) Of information. Is our state by nature a state of wrath? Then,

1. Surely we are not born innocent. These chains of wrath, which by nature are
upon us, speak us to be born criminals. The swaddling bands wherewith infants
are bound hand and foot as soon as they are born, may put us in mind of the
cords of wrath, with which they are held prisoners, as children of wrath.

2. What desperate madness is it for sinners to go on in their sinful course:
What is it but to heap coals of fire on thine own head, and lay more and more
fuel to the fire of wrath, to treasure up unto thyself wrath against the day of
wrath, Romans ii. 5. Thou may perish, when his wrath is kindled but a little,
Psalm. ii. 12. Why will thou increase it yet more: Thou art already bound with
such cords of death, ^s will not easily be loosed: what need is there of more?
Stand, careless sinner, and consider this.

3. Thou have no reason to complain, as long as thou art out of hell. Wherefore
does a living man complain? Lam. iii. 39* If one who has forfeited his life, be
banished his native country, and exposed to many hardships; he may well bear
all patiently, seeing his life is spared. Do ye murmur, for that ye are under
pain of sickness? Nay, bless God ye are not there, where the worm never dies.
Do thou grudge that thou art not in so good a condition in the world as some
of thy neighbors are? Be thankful rather, that ye are not in the case of the
damned. Is thy substance gone from thee? Wonder that the fire of God's wrath
has not consumed thyself. Kiss the rod, O sinner, and acknowledge mercy: for
God punishes us less than our iniquities deserve, Ezra ix 13.

4 Here is a memorandum, both for poor and rich. (1.) The poorest that go from
door to door, and has not one penny left them by their parents, were born to
an inheritance. Their first father Adam left them children of wrath; and
continuing in their natural state, they cannot miss of it; for this is the
portion of a wicked man from God, and the heritage appointed to him by God, Job
xx 29. An heritage, that will furnish them with an habitation, who have not
where to lay their head: they shall be cast into utter darkness, Matthew. xxv.
30. for to them is reserved the blackn^ss of darkness for ever, Jude 13. where
their bed shall be sorrow; The^ (...) down in sorrow, Isa. l. 11. their food
shall be judgment, for God will seed them with judgment, Ezekiel. xxxiv. 16 and
their drink shall be the red wine of God's wrath, the dregs whereof all the
wicked of the earth shall wring out, and drink them, Psalm. lxxv 8. I know, that
these who are destitute of worldly goods, and withal void of the knowledge and
grace of God, who therefore may be called the devil's poor, will be apt to say
here, We hope God will make us suffer all our misery in this world, and we
shall be happy in the next: as if their miserable outward condition in time,
would secure their happiness in eternity. A gross and fatal mistake! And this
is another inheritance they have, viz lies, vanity, and things wherein there is
no profit, Jer xvi 19 But the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, Isa
xxviii. 17. Do thou think, O sinner, that God who commands judges on earth,
not to respect the person of the poor in judgment* Lev xix 15. will pervert
judgment for thee? Nay, know for certain, that however miserable thou art here,
thou shall be eternally miserable hereafter, if thou live and die in thy
natural state (2) Many that have enough in the world, have far more than they
know of Thou had, (it may be) O unregenerate man, an estate, a good portion,
or a large stock left thee by thy father; thou have improven it, and the sun of
prosperity shines upon thee; so that thou can say with Esau, Genesis xxxiii. 9.
I have enough. But know, thou have more than all that, an inheritance thou do
not consider of: thou art a child of wrath, an heir of hell. That is an
heritage which will abide with thee, amidst all the changes in the world: as
long as thou continuest in an unregenerate state. When thou shall leave thy
substance to others, this shall go along with thyself, into another world It is
no wonder a slaughter ox be fed to the full, and is not toiled as others are,
Job xxi. 30. The wicked is reserved to the day of destruction; they shall be
brought forth to the day of wrath. Well then, Rejoice, let thine heart cheer
thee; walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: live
above reproofs and warnings from the word of God; show thyself a man of a fine
spirit, by casting off all fear of God; mock at seriousness; live like thyself,
a child of wrath, an heir of hell: But know thou, that for all these things,
God will bring thee into judgment, Eccles xi 9. Assure thy self, thy breaking
shall come suddenly, at an instant, Isa. x^. 13. For as the crackling of thorns
under a pot, so is the laughter of a fool, Eccl vii. 6. The fair blaze and
great noise they make, is quickly gone; so shall thy mirth be. And then that
wrath that is now silently sinking into thy soul, shall make a fearful hissing

5. Woe to him, that, like Moah, has been at ease from his youth, Jer. xlviii.
11 and never saw the black cloud of wrath hanging over His head. There are many
who have no changes, therefore the fear ^t God, Psalm. lv. 19. They have lived
in a good belief (as they call it) all their days; that is, they never had
power to believe an ill report of their souls state. Many have come by their
religion too easily; and as it came lightly to them, so it will go from them,
when their trial comes. Do ye think men flee from the wrath, in a morning
dream? Or will they flee from the wrath, they never saw pursuing them.

6. Think it not strange if ye see one in great distress about his soul's
condition, who was wont to be as jovial, and as little concerned about
salvation, as any of his neighbors. Can one get a right view of himself, as in
a state of wrath, and not be pierced with sorrows, terrors, anxiety? When a
weight, quite above one's strength, lies upon him, and he is alone; he can
neither stir hand nor foot: but when one comes to lift it off him, he will
struggle to get from under it. Thunderclaps of wrath from the word of God
conveyed to the soul by the Spirit of the Lord, will surely keep a man awake.

Lastly, It is no wonder wrath come upon churches and nations, and upon us in
this land, and that infants, and children yet unborn smart under it. Most of
the society are yet children of wrath; few are fleeing from it. or taking the
way to prevent it; but people of all ranks are helping it on. The Jews rejected
Christ; and their children have been smarting under wrath these sixteen hundred
years. God grant that the bad entertainment given to Christ and his gospel, by
this generation, be not pursued with wrath on the succeeding one.

USE (2) Of Exhortation. And here, 1. I shall drop a word to these who are yet
in an unregenerate state. 2 To those that are brought out of it. 3. To all
indifferently.

I. To you that are yet in an unregenerate state, I would sound the alarm, and
warn you to see to yourselves, while yet there is hope. O ye children of wrath,
take no rest in this dismal state; but flee to Jesus Christ the only refuge.
Haste and make your escape thither. The state of wrath is too hot a climate for
you to live in, Micah ii. 10. Arise ye and depart, for this is not your rest. O
sinner know thou where thou art? Do thou not see thy danger? The curse has
entered into thy soul: wrath is thy covering; the heavens are growing blacker
and blacker above thy head: the earth is weary of thee, the pit is opening her
mouth for thee; and should the thread of thy life be cut this moment, thou art
henceforth past all hopes for ever. Sirs, if we saw you putting a cup of poison
to your mouth; we would fly to you and snatch it out of your hands. If we saw
the house on fire about you, while ye were fast asleep in it; we would run to
you, and drag you out of it. But alas! ye are in ten thousand tha^ greater
hazard; yet we can do no more but tell you your danger; invite, exhort,
beseech, and obtest you, to look to yourselves; and lament your stupidity and
obstinacy, when we cannot prevail with you to take warning. If there were no
hope of your recovery, we should be silent, and would not torment you before
the time: but though ye be lost and undone, there is hope in Israel concerning
this thing. Wherefore, I cry unto you in the name of the Lord, and in the words
of the prophet, Zech. ix. 12. Turn ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope.
Flee to Jesus Christ out of this your natural state.

Motive 1 While ye are in this state, ye must stand or fall according to the
law, or covenant of works. If ye understood this aright, it would strike
through your hearts, as a thousand darts. One had better be a slave to the
Turks, condemned to the galleys, or under Egyptian bondage, than be under the
covenant of works now. All mankind were brought under it in Adam, as we heard
before: and thou in thy unregenerate state, are still where Adam left thee. It
is true, there is another covenant brought in: but what is that to thee, who
art not brought into it? Thou must needs be under one of the two covenants;
either under the law, or under grace. That thou art not under grace, the
dominion of sin over thee, manifestly evinceth; therefore thou art under the
law, Romans vi. 14. Do not think God has laid aside the first covenant, Matthew. v.
17, 18. Gal. iii. 10. No, he will magnify the law, and make it honorable. It
is broken indeed on thy part: but it is absurd to think, that therefore your
obligation is dissolved. Nay, thou must stand and fall by it, till thou can
produce thy discharge from God himself, who is thy party in that covenant; and
this thou can not pretend to, seeing thou art not in Christ.

Now, to give you a view of your misery, in this respect, consider these
following things, (1.) Hereby ye are bound over to death, in virtue of the
threatening of death in that covenant, Genesis ii. 17. The condition being broken,
ye fall under the penalty. So it concludes you under wrath. (2) There is no
salvation for you under this covenant, but on a condition impossible to be
performed by you. The justice of God must be satisfied for the wrong you have
done already. God has written this truth in characters of the blood of his own
Son. Yea, and you must perfectly obey the law for the time to come. So says
the law, Gal. iii. 12. The man that does them, shall live in them. Come then, O
sinner, see if thou can make a ladder, whereby thou may reach the throne of
God; stretch forth thine arms, and try, if thou can fly on the wings of the
wind, catch hold of the clouds, and pierce through these visible heavens; and
then either climb over, or break through the jasper walls of the city above.
These things shall thou do, as soon as thou shall reach heaven in thy natural
state, or under this covenant. (3.) There is no pardon under this covenant.
Pardon is the benefit of another covenant, with which thou have nothing to do,
Acts xiii. 9. And by him all that believe are justified from all things, from
which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses. As for thee, thou art in
the hand of a merciless creditor, which will take thee by the throat, saying,
Pay what thou owe; and cast thee into prison, there to remain, till thou have
paid the utmost farthing: unless thou be so wise as to get a cautioner in
time, who is able to answer for all thy debt, and get up thy discharge. This
Jesus Christ alone can do. Thou abidest under this covenant, and pleadest
mercy: but what is thy plea founded on? There is not one promise of mercy or
pardon in that covenant. Do thou plead mercy, for mercy's sake? Justice will
step in betwixt it and thee; and plead God's covenant threatening, which he
cannot deny. (4) There Is no place for repentance in this covenant so as the
sinner can be helped by it. For as soon as ever thou sinnest, the law lays its
curse on thee, which is a dead weight thou can by no means throw off; no, not
though thine head were waters, and thine eyes a fountain of tears, to weep day
and night for thy sin. That is what the law cannot do, in that it is weak
through the flesh, Romans viii 3. Now thou art another profane Esau, that has
sold the blessing; and there is no place for repentance though thou seek it
carefully with tears, while under that covenant. (5.) There is no accepting of
the will for the deed under this covenant, which was not made for good will,
but good works. The mistake in this point ruins many. They are not in Christ,
but stand under the first covenant; and yet they will plead this privilege.
This is just as if one having made a feast for those of his own family, when
they sit down at table, another man's servant that has run away from his
master, should presumptuously come forward and sit down among them: would not
the master of the feast give such a stranger that check, Friend, how came
thou in hither? And since he is none of his family, command him to be gone
quickly. Though a master accept the good will of his own child for the dead, can
a hired servant expect that privilege? (6.) Ye have nothing to do with Christ,
while under this covenant. By the law of God a woman cannot be married to two
husbands at once: either death or divorce must dissolve the first marriage, ere
she can marry another. So we must first be dead to the law, ere we can be
married to Christ, Romans vii. 4. The law is the first husband; Jesus Christ, who
raises the dead, marries the widow, that was heart-broken, and slain by the
first husband. But while the soul is in the house with the first husband, it
cannot plead a marriage-relation to Christ; nor the benefits of a
marriage-covenant, which is not yet entered into, Gal. v. 4. Christ is become
of no effect to you; whosoever of you are justified by the law, ye are fallen
from grace. Peace, pardon, and such like benefits are all benefits of the
covenant of grace. And ye must not think to stand off from Christ, and the
marriage-covenant with him, and yet plead these benefits; more than one man's
wife can plead the benefit of a contract of marriage past betwixt another man
and his own wife. Lastly, See the bill of exclusion, past in the court of
heaven, against all under the covenant of works, Gal. iv. 30. The son of the
^^nd-woman shall not be heir. compare ver. 24. Heirs of wrath must not be heirs
of glory. Whom the first covenant has power to exclude out of heaven, the
second covenant cannot bring into it.

Objection. Then it is impossible for us to be saved. Answer, It is so, while
you are in that state. But if you would be out of that dreadful condition,
hasten out of that state. If a murderer be under sentence of death, so long as
he lives within the kingdom, the laws will reach his life; but if he can make
his escape, and get over the sea, into the dominions of another prince, our
laws cannot reach him there This is what we would have you to do: flee out of
the kingdom of darkness, into the kingdom of God s dear Son; out of the
dominion of the law, into the dominion of grace; then all the curses of the
law, or covenant of works, shall never be able to reach you.

Motive 2. O ye children of wrath your state is wretched, for ye have lost God;
and that is an unspeakable loss. Ye are without God in the world, Ephesians. ii. 12.
Whatever you may call yours, you cannot call God yours. If we look to the
earth* perhaps you can tell us, that land, that house* or that herd of cattle,
is yours: But let us look upward to heaven, is that God, that grace, that glory
yours? Truly, you have neither part nor lot in that matter. When Nebuchadnezzar
talks of cities and kingdoms, O how big does he speak! Great Babylon that I
have built, -- my power, -- my majesty! but he tells a poor tale, when he comes
to speak of God, saying, Your God, Dan. ii. 47. and iv. 30. Alas! sinner,
whatever thou have, God is gone from thee. O the misery of a godless soul! Have
thou lost God? Then, (1.) The sap and substance of all that thou have in the
world, is gone. The godless man, have what he will, is one that has not, Mat
xxv 29. I defy the unregenerate man to attain to soul-satisfaction, whatever he
possesses; since God is not his God. All his days he eats in darkness: in
every condition, there is a secret dissatisfaction haunts his heart like a
ghost: the soul wants something, though perhaps it knows not what it is: and so
it will be always, till the soul return to God, the fountain of satisfaction.
(2.) Thou can do nothing to purpose for thyself; for God is gone, his soul is
departed from thee, Jer. vi. 3. like a leg out of joint hanging by, whereof a
man has no use, as the word there used does bear. Losing God, thou have lost
the fountain of good; and so, all grace, all goodness, all the saving instances
of his Spirit, What can thou do then? What fruit can thou bring forth, more
than a branch cut off from the stock? John xv. 5. Thou art become unprofitable,
Romans iii. 12. as a filthy rotten thing fit only for the dunghill. (3.) Death
his come up into the windows, yea, and has settled on thy face; for God, in
whose favor is life, Psalm. xxx. 5. is gone from thee, and so the soul of thy
soul is departed. What a loathsome hump is the body, when the soul is gone? Far
more loathsome is thy soul in this case. Thou art dead while thou live. Do not
deny it; seeing thy speech is laid, thine eyes closed, and all spiritual motion
in thee cease. Thy true friends, who see thy case, do lament, because thou
art gone into the land of silence. (4) Thou have not a steady friend among all
the creatures of God; for now that thou (...) the Master's savor, all the
(...) is set against thee: Conscience is thine enemy: the word never speaks
good of thee: God's people loathe thee, (...) as they see what thou art, Psalm.
xv. 22. The beasts and (...) of the ^^ld are banded together against thee, Job
v. 23. Hos. ^^. ^8 Thy most, drink, clothes, grudge to be serviceable to the
wreth that has lost God, and abuses them to his dishonor. (...) thunder thee:
yea, the whole creation grows, and (...) together, because of thee, and such
as thou art, (...) will have nothing to do with thee; for there shall (...)
enter^ into it any thing that defiles, Rev. xxi. 22. Only hell from (...), to
meet thee at thy coming. Isa. xiv. 9. Lastly, Thy hell is begun already. What
makes hell, but exclusion from the presence of God? Depart from me ye cursed.
Now ye are gone from God already, with the curse upon you. That shall be your
punishment at length (if ye return not) which is now your choice. As a gracious
state is a state of glory in the bud; so a graceless state is hell in the bud;
which if it continue, will come to perfection at length.

Motive 3. Consider the dreadful instances of the wrath of God; and let them
serve to awaken thee to flee out of this state. Consider, (1.) How it is fallen
on men. Even in this world, many have been set up as monuments of divine
vengeance; that others might fear. Wrath has swept away multitudes, who have
fallen together by the hand of an angry God. Consider how the Lord spared not
the old world, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly: and turning
the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow,
making them an example unto those that after should live ungodly, 2 Pet. ii. 5,
6. But it is yet more dreadful to think of that wepping, wailing and gnashing
of teeth, amongst those, who in hell lift up their eyes, but cannot get a drop
of water to cool their tongues. Believe these things, and be warned by them;
lest destruction come upon thee, for a warning to others. (2.) Consider how
wrath fell upon the fallen angels, whose case is absolutely hopeless. They were
the first that ventured to break the hedge of the divine law; and God set them
up as monuments of his wrath against sin. They once left their own habitation,
and were never allowed to look in again at the hole of the door; but they are
reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great
day, Jude 6. Lastly, Behold how an angry God dealt with his own Son, standing
in the room of elect sinners, Rom viii. 32. God spared not his own Son. Sparing
mercy might have been expected, if any at all. If any person could have
obtained it surely his own Son would have go it; but he spared him not. The
Father's delight is made a man of sorrows: he who is the wisdom of God, becomes
sore amazed* ready to faint away with a fit of horror. The weight of this wrath
makes him sweat great drops of blood By the fierceness of this fire, his heart
was like (...) in the midst of his bowels. Behold here how severe God is
against sin! the sun was struck blind with this terrible sight! rocks were
rent! graves opened! death, as it were in the excess of astonishment, letting
its prisoners slip away. What is a deluge, a shower of fire and crimstone on
Sodomites, the terrible noise of a dissolving world, the whole fabric of
heaven and earth falling down at once, angels cast down from heaven into the
bottomless p^? What are all these, I say, in comparison with this? God
suffering! groaning, dying upon a cross! infinite holiness did it, to make sin
look like itself, viz. infinite^ ^odious. And will men live at ease while
exposed to (...) wrath.

Lastly, Consider that a God he is, with whom thou have to do, whose wrath thou
art liable unto: He is a God of infinite acknowledge and wisdom; so that none
of thy sins, however secret, can be hid from him. He infallibly finds out all
means whereby wrath may be executed, toward the satisfying of justice. He is of
infinite power, and so can do what he will against the sinner. How heavy must
the strokes of wrath be, which are laid on by an omnipotent hand! infinite
power can make the sinner prisoner, even when he is in his greatest rage
against heaven. It can bring again the several parcels of dust, out of the
grave; put them together again, reunite the soul and the body, sist them before
the tribunal, hurry them away to the pit, and hold them up with the one hand
through eternity, while they are lashed with the other. He is infinitely just,
and therefore must punish; it were acting contrary to his nature to suffer the
sinner to escape wrath. Hence the executing of this wrath is pleasing to him;
for though the Lord has no delight in the death of the sinner, as it is the
destruction of his own creature, yet he delights in it, as it is the execution
of justice. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest. Mark the reason, For the righteous Lord loves righteousness,
Psalm. xi. 6, 7. I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be
comforted, Ezekiel. v. 13. I also will laugh at your calamity, Prove. i. 26.
Finally, He lives for ever, to pursue the quarrel. Let us therefore conclude,
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

Be awakened then, O young sinner; be awakened, O old sinner, who art yet in
the state thou wast born in. Your security is none of God's allowance, it is
the sleep of death: rise out of it ere the pit close its mouth on you. It is
true, you may put on a breast plate of iron, make your bow brass, and your
hearts as an adamant: who can help it? But God will break that brazen bow, and
make that adamantine heart, at last, to fly into a thousand pieces. Ye may, if
ye will, labor to put those things out of your heads, that ye may yet sleep in
a sound skin, though in a state of wrath. Ye may run away with the arrows
sticking in your consciences to your work, to work them away; or to your beds,
to sleep them out; or to company, to sport and laugh them away: but convictions
so stifled, will have a fearful resurrection: and the day is coming, when the
arrows of wrath shall so stick in thy soul, as thou shall never be able to
pluck them out through the ages of eternity, unless thou take warning in time.

But if any desire to flee from the wrath to come; and for that end, to know
what course to take; I offer them these few advices, and obtest and beseech
them, as they love their own souls, to fall in with them. (1) Retire yourselves
into some secret place, and there meditate on this your misery. Believe it, and
fix your thoughts on it. Let each put the ^uestion to himself, How can I live
in this state? How can I die in it? How will I rise again, and stand before the
tribunal of God in it? (2) Consider seriously the sin of your nature, heart and
life. A kindly sight of wrath flows from a deep sense of sin. They who see
themselves exceeding (...), will find no great difficulty to perceive
themselves to be heirs of wrath. (3.) Labor to justify God in this matter. To
quarrel with God about it, and to rage like a wild bull in a net, will but fix
you the more in it. Humiliation of soul, before the Lord, is necessary for an
escape. God will not sell deliverance, but freely gives it to those, who see
themselves altogether unworthy of his favor. Lastly, Turn your eyes, O
prisoners of hope, toward the Lord Jesus Christ; and embrace him as he
offers himself, in the gospel. There is no salvation in any other, Acts iv.
12. God is a consuming fire; ye are children of wrath: if the Mediator
interpose not betwixt him and you, ye are undone for ever. If ye would be safe,
come under his shadow: one drop of that wrath cannot fall there, for he
delivers us from the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. i 10. Accept of him in his
covenant, wherein he offers himself to thee: and so thou shall, as the
captive woman, redeem thy life, by marrying the Conqueror. His blood will
quench that fire of wrath, which burns against thee: in the white raiment of
his righteousness thou shall be safe; for no storm of wrath can pierce it.

II. I shall drop a few words to the saints.

First, Remember, that at that time, (namely, when ye were in your natural
state) ye were without Christ -- having no hope, and without God in the world
Call to mind that state, ye were in formerly; and review the misery of it.
There are five memorials, I may thence give in to the whole assembly of the
saints, who are no more children of wrath: but heirs of God, and joint heirs
with Christ, tho as yet in their minority. (1) Remember, that in the day our
Lord took you by the hand, ye were in no better condition than others? O what
moved him to take you, when he past by your neighbors! he found you children
of wrath, even as others; but he did not leave you so. He came into the common
prison, where you lay in your fetters, even as others: and from amongst the
multitude of condemned malefactors, he picked out you, commanded your fetters
to be taken off, put a pardon in your hand, and brought you into the glorious
liberty of the children of God; while he left others in the devil's fetters.
(2) Remember there was nothing in you to engage him to love you, in the day he
first appeared for your deliverance Ye were children of wrath, even as others,
fit for hell, and altogether unfit for heaven: yet the King brought you into
the palace: the King's Son made love to you a condemned criminal, and espoused
you to himself, on the day in which ye might have had been led forth to
execution. Even so, Father, for so it seems good in the sight, Matthew ix. 26.
(3) Remember, ye were fitter to be lothed than loved in that day. Wonder, that
when he saw you in your blood, he looked not at you with abhorrence, and passed
by you. Wonder that ever such a time could be a time of love, Ezekiel xvi. 8. (4.)
Remember, ye are decked with borrowed feathers. It is his comeliness, which is
upon you, ver 14. It was he that took off your prison garments, and clothed you
with robes of righteousness, garments of salvation garments where with ye are
arrayed as the lilies, which toil not, neither do they spin. He took the child^
from off your arms, the rope from about your neck; put you in such a dress as
ye might be fit for the court of heaven, even to eat at the King's table. (5.)
Remember your faults this day; as Pharaoh's butler, who had forgotten Joseph.
Mind how you have forgotten, and how unkindly you have treated him, who
remembered you in your low estate. Is this your kindness to your friend? In the
day of your deliverance, did ye think, ye could have thus required him, your
Lord?

Secondly, Pity the children of wrath, the world that lies in wickedness. Can
ye be unconcerned for them, ye who were once in the same condition? Ye have got
ashore indeed, but your fellows are yet in hazard of perishing; and will not ye
make them all possible help for their deliverance? What they are, ye sometimes
were This may draw pity from you, and engage you to use all means for their
recovery. See Tit. iii. 1, 2, 3.

Thirdly, Admire that matchless love, which brought you out of the state of
wrath Christ's love was active love, he loved thy soul from the pit of
corruption. It was no easy work to purchase the life of the condemned sinner?
but he gave his life for thy life. He gave his precious blood to quench that
flame of wrath, which otherwise would have burnt thee up. Men get the best view
of the stars, from the bottom of a deep pit: from this pit of misery into which
thou wast cast by the first Adam, thou may get the best view of the Sun of
righteousness, in all its dimensions. He is the second Adam, who took thee out
of the horrible pit, and out of the miry clay. How broad were the skirts of
that love, which covered such a multitude of sins! behold the length of it,
reaching from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. ciii 17. The depth of it, going
so low as to deliver thee from the lowest hell, Psalm. lxxxvi. 13. The height of
it, in raising thee up to sit in heavenly places, Ephesians. ii. 6.

Fourthly, Be humble, carry low sails, walk softly all your years* Be not proud
of your gifts, graces, privileges, or seize: but remember ye were
children of wrath, even as others. The peacock walks slowly, hangs down his
starry feathers, while he looks to his black feet. Look ye to the hole of the
pit, whence ye are dug, and walk humbly as it becomes free grace's debtors.

Lastly, Be wholly for your Lord. Every wife is obliged to be dutiful to her
husband; but double ^^es lie upon her who was taken from a prison or a
dunghill. If your Lord has delivered you from wrath, ye ought, upon that very
account, to be wholly his: to act for him, to suffer for him and to do whatever
he calls you to. The saints have no reason to complain of their lot in the
world, whatever it be. Well may they bear the cross for him, by whom the curse
was born away from them. Well may they bear the wrath of men, in his cause, who
has freed them from the wrath of God; and cheerfully go to a fire for him, by
whom hellfire is quenched to them. Soul and body, and all thou had in the
world, were sometimes under wrath: he has removed that wrath, had not all these
be at his service* That thy soul is not overwhelmed with the wrath of God, is
owing purely to Jesus Christ; and shall it not then be a temple for his Spirit?
That thy heart is not filled with horror and despair, is owing to him only; to
whom then should it be devoted but to him alone? That thine eyes are not
blinded with the smoke of the pit, thy hands are not fertered with chains of
darkness, thy tongue is not broiling in the fire of hell, and thy feet are not
standing in that lake that burns with fire and brimstone, is owing purely to
Jesus Christ; and shall not these eyes be employed for him, these hands act for
him, that tongue speak for him, and these feet speedily run his errands? To him
who believes that he was a child of wrath, even as others, but is now delivered
by the blessed Jesus; nothing will appear too much, to do or suffer for his
deliverer, when he has a fair call to it.

III. To conclude with a word to all; let no man think lightly of sin, which
lays the sinner open to the wrath of God. Let not the sin of our nature, which
wreaths the yoke of God's wrath, so early, about our necks, seem a small thing
in our eyes. Fear the Lord, because of his dreadful wrath. Tremble at the
thought of sin, against which God has such fiery indignation. Look on his
wrath, and stand in awe, and sin not. Do you think this is to press you to
slavish fear? If it were so, one had better be a slave to God with a trembling
heart; than a free man to the devil, with a feared conscience and a heart of
adamant. But it is not so, you may love him, and thus fear him too; yea, ye
ought to do it, though ye were saints of the first magnitude. See Psalm. cxix.
10. Matthew. x. 28. Luke xii. 5. Heb. xii 28, 29. Although ye have past the gulf of
wrath, being in Jesus Christ, yet it is but reasonable, your hearts shiver,
when ye look back to it. Your sin still deserves wrath even as the sins of
others: and it would be terrible to be in a fiery furnace; although by a miracle,
we were so fenced against it, as that it could not harm us.

HEAD III. Man's utter Inability to recover himself.
ROMANS v. 6. For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died
for the ungodly.

JOHN vi. 44. No men can come to me, except the Father, which has sent me,
draw him.


WE have now had a view of the total corruption of man's nature, and that load
of wrath which lies on him, that gulf of misery he is plunged into in his
natural state. But there is one part of his misery that deserves particular
consideration; namely, his utter inability to recover himself, the knowledge of
which is necessary for the due humiliation of a sinner. What I design here is,
only to propose a few things, whereby to convince the unregenerate man of this
his inability; that he may see an absolute need of Christ, and of the power of
his grace.

As a man that is fallen into a pit, cannot be supposed to help himself out of
it, but by one of two ways; either by doing all himself alone, or taking hold
of, and improving the help offered him by others: so an unconverted man cannot
be supposed to help himself out of that state, but either in the way of the
law, or covenant of warks, by doing all himself without Christ: or else in the
way of the gospel, or covenant of grace, by exerting his own strength to lay
hold upon, and to make use of the help offered him by a Savior. But alas! the
unconverted man is dead in the pit, and cannot help himself, either of these
ways. Not the first way: for the first text tells us, that when our Lord came
to help us, we were without strength, unable to recover ourselves. We were
ungodly; therefore under a burden of guilt and wrath; yet without strength,
unable to stand under it: and unable to throw it off, or get from under it: so
that all mankind had undoubtedly perished, had not Christ died for the ungodly,
and brought help to them who could never have recovered themselves But when
Christ comes, and offers help to sinners, cannot they take it? Cannot they
improve help when it comes to their hands? No, the second text tells us, they
cannot: No man can come unto me, (i e. believe in me, John vi. 35.) except the
Father draw him. This is a drawing which enables them to come who till then
could not come; and therefore could not help themselves, by improving the help
offered It is a drawing, which is always effectual; for it can be no less than
hearing and learning of the Father, which whosoever partakes of, comes to Christ,
ver 25 Therefore, it is not drawing in the way of mere moral suasion, which may
be, yea, and always is ineffectual: but it is drawing by mighty power, Ephesians.
i. 19 absolutely necessary for them that have no power in themselves, to come
and take hold of the offered help.

Hearken then, O unregenerate man, and be convinced, that as thou art in a most
miserable state by nature; so thou art utterly unable to recover thyself, any
manner of way. Thou art ruined; and what way will thou go to work, to recover
thyself? Which of these two ways will thou choose? Will thou try it alone? Or
will thou make use of help? Will thou fall on the way of works, or on the way
of the gospel? I know very well, thou will not so much as try the way of the
gospel, till once thou have found the recovery impracticable, in the way of the
law. Therefore we shall begin, where corrupt nature teaches men to begin, viz.
at the way of the law of works.

I. Sinner, I would have thee believe that thy working will never effect it.
Work and do thy best; thou shall never be able to work thyself out of this
state of corruption and wrath. Thou must have Christ, else thou shall perish
eternally. It is only Christ in you, can be the hope of glory. But if thou will
needs try it; then I must lay before thee, from the unalterable word of the
living God, two things which thou must do for thyself. And if thou can do
them: it must be yielded, that thou art able to recover thyself; but if not,
then thou can do nothing this way, for thy recovery.

FIRST, If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments, Matthew. xix. 17.
That is, if thou will by doing, enter into life, then perfectly keep the ten
commands. For the scope of these words is, to beat down the pride of man's
heart; and to let him see the absolute need of a Savior, from the
impossibility of keeping the law. The answer is given, suitable to the address.
Our Lord checks him for his compliment, Good Master, ver. 16. telling him,
There is none good, but One, that is God, ver. 17. As if he had said, you think
yourself a good man, and me another? but where goodness is spoken of, men and
angels may vail their faces before the good God. And as to his question,
wherein he discovered his legal disposition, Christ does not answer him,
saying, Believe and thou shall be saved; that would not have been so seasonable
in the case of one, who thought he could do well enough for himself, if he but
knew, what good things he should do; but, suitable to the humor the man was
in, he bid him keep the commandments; keep them nicely and accurately, as those
that watch malefactors in prison, lest any of them escape, and their life go
for their's. See then, O unregenerate man, what can thou do in this matter;
for if thou will recover thyself in this way, thou must perfectly keep the
commandments of God.

And, (1.) Thy obedience must be perfect, in respect of the principle of it;
that is, thy soul, the principle of action, must be perfectly pure, and
altogether without sin. For the law requires all moral perfection; not only
actual, but habitual, and so condemns original sin; impurity of nature, as well
as of actions. Now, if thou can bring this to pass; thou shall be able to
answer that question of Solomon's, so, as never one of Adam's posterity could
yet answer it, Prove. xx 9 Who can say, I have made my heart clean? But if thou
can not, the very want of this perfection is a sin; and so lays thee open to
the curse, and cuts thee off from life. Yea, it makes all thine actions, even
thy best actions sinful, for who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Job
xiv. 4. And do thou think by sin, to help thyself out of sin and misery? (2.)
Thy obedience must also be perfect in parts. It must be as broad as the whole
law of God: if thou lackest one thing, thou art undone; for the law denounces
the curse on him that continues not in every thing written therein, Gal. iii.
10. Thou must give internal and external obedience to the whole law; keep all
the commands, in heart and life. If thou breakest any one of them, that will
insure thy ruin. A vain thought, or idle word, will still shut thee up under
the curse. (3.) It must be perfect in respect of degrees; as was the obedience
of Adam, while he stood in his innocence. This the law requires, and will
accept of no less, Mat. xxii. 37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. If one degree of that
love required by the law, be wanting; if each part of thy obedience be not
screwed up to the greatest height commanded; that want is a breach of the law,
and so leaves thee still under the curse. One may bring as many buckets of
water to a house that is on fire, as he is able to carry, and yet it may be
consumed; and will be so, if he bring not as many as will quench the fire. Even
so, although thou should do what thou art able, in keeping the commands; if
thou fail in the least degree of obedience which the law enjoins, thou art
certainly ruined for ever; unless thou take hold of Christ, renouncing all thy
righteousness as filthy rags. See Romans x. 5. Gal. iii. 10. Lastly, It must be
perpetual, as the man Christ's obedience was, who always did the things that
pleased the Father; for the tenor of the law is, Cursed is he that continues
not in all things written in the law, to do them. Hence, though Adam's obedience
was for a while absolutely perfect; yet because at length he tripped in one
point, viz. in eating the forbidden fruit, he fell under the curse of the law.
If one should live a dutiful subject to his prince, till the close of his days,
and then conspire against him; he must die for his treason. Even so, though thou
should, all the time of thy life, live in perfect obedience to the law of
God; and only, at the hour of death, entertain a vain thought, or pronounce an
idle word: that idle word, or vain thought, would blot out all thy former
righteousness, and ruin thee; namely, in this way, in which thou art seeking to
recover thyself.

Now such is the obedience thou must perform, if thou would recover thyself
in the way of the law. But though thou should thus obey: the law stakes thee
down in the state of wrath, till another demand of it be satisfied, viz.

SECONDLY, Thou must pay what thou owe It is undeniable thou art a sinner;
and whatever thou may be in time to come, justice must be satisfied for thy
sin already committed. The honor of the law must be maintained, by thy
suffering the denounced wrath. It may be thou have changed thy course of life,
or art now resolved to do it, and set about the keeping of the commands of God:
but what have thou done, or what will thou do, with the old debt? Your
obedience to God, though it were perfect, is a debt due to him, for the time
wherein it is performed; and can no more satisfy for former sins, than a
tenant's paying the current year's rent, can satisfy the master for all
bygones. Can the paying of new debts acquit a man from old accounts? Nay,
deceive not yourselves, you will find these laid up in store with God, and
sealed up among his treasures, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 34. It remains then, that either
thou must bear that wrath, to which, for thy sin, thou art liable according to
the law; or else, thou must acknowledge thou can not bear it, and thereupon
have recourse to the surety, the Lord Jesus Christ: Let me now ask thee, art
thou able to satisfy the justice of God? Can thou pay thy own debt? Surely
not: for, seeing he is an infinite God, whom thou have offended; the
punishment, being suited to the quality of the offense, must be infinite. But
so it is, thy punishment, or sufferings for sin, cannot be infinite in value,
seeing thou art a finite creature: therefore they must be infinite in duration
or continuance; that is, they must be eternal. And so all thy sufferings in
this world, are but an earnest of what thou must suffer in the world to come.

Now, sinner, if thou can answer these demands, thou may recover thyself in
the way of the law. But art thou not conscious of thy inability to do any of
these things, much more to do them all? Yet if thou do not all, thou do
nothing. Turn then to what course of life thou will, thou art still in a state
of wrath. Screw up thy obedience to the greatest height thou can; suffer what
God lays upon thee, yea add, if thou will to the burden, and walk under all,
without the least impatience: yet all this will not satisfy the demands of the
law; and therefore thou art still a ruined creature. Alas! sinner, what art
thou doing, while thou strivest to help thyself; but do not receive and unite
with Jesus Christ? Thou art laboring in the fire, wearying thyself for very
vanity; laboring to enter into heaven by the door, which Adam's sin so bolted,
as neither he, nor any of his lost posterity can ever enter by it. Do thou
not see the flaming sword of justice keeping thee off from the tree of life?
Do thou not hear the law denouncing a curse on thee for all thou art doing;
even for thy obedience, thy prayers, thy tears, thy reformation of life, etc.
because being under the law's dominion, thy best works are not so good, as it
requires them to be, under the pain of the curse? Believe it, sirs, if you live
and die out of Christ, without being actually united to him as the second Adam,
a life-giving Spirit, and without coming under the covert of his atoning blood;
though you should do the utmost that any man on earth can do, in keeping the
commands of GOD, ye shall never see the face of GOD in peace. If you should
from this moment, bid an eternal farewell to this world's joy, and all the
affairs thereof; and henceforth busy yourselves with nothing, but the salvation
of your souls: if you should go into some wilderness, live upon the grass of
the field, and be companions of dragons and owls: if you should retire to some
dark cavern of the earth, and weep there for your sins, until ye have wept
yourselves blind yea, wept out all the moisture of your body; if ye should
confess with your tongue, until it cleave to the roof of your mouth; pray, till
your knees grow hard as horns; fast, till your body become like a skeleton; and
after all this, give it to be burnt, the word is gone out of the Lord's mouth
in righteousness, and cannot return; you should perish for ever,
notwithstanding of all this, as not being in Christ, John xiv. 6. No man comes
unto the Father but by me. Acts iv. 12. Neither is there salvation in any
other. Mark xvi. ^6 He that believes not, shall be damned.

Object. But God is a merciful God, and he knows we are not able to answer his
demands: we hope therefore to be saved, if we do as well as we can, and keep
the commands as well as we are able. Ans. (1.) Though thou art able to do many
things, thou art not able to do one thing aright: thou can do nothing
acceptable to God, being out of Christ, John xv. 5. Without me ye can do
nothing. An unrenewed man, as thou art, can do nothing but sin; as we have
already evinced. Thy best actions are sin, and so they increase thy debt to
justice; how then can it be expected they should lessen it? (2) If God should
offer to save men upon condition that they did all they could do, in obedience
to his commands: we have ground to think, that these who would betake
themselves to that way, should never be saved. For where is the man, that does
as well as he can? Who sees not many false steps he has made, which he might
have evited? There are so many things to be done, so many temptations to carry
us out of the road of duty, and our nature is so very apt to be set on fire of
hell; that we would surely fail, even in some point, that is within the compass
of our natural abilities. But (3.) Though thou should do all thou art able to
do, in vain do thou hope to be saved in that way. What word of God is this
hope of thine founded on? It is neither founded on law nor gospel, and
therefore it is but a delusion. It is not founded on the gospel; for the gospel
leads the soul out of itself, to Jesus Christ for all: and it establishes the
law, Romans iii. 31. whereas this hope of yours cannot be established, but on the
ruin of the law, which God will magnify and make honorable. And hence it
appears, that it is not founded on the law neither. When God set Adam a working
for happiness to himself, and his posterity, perfect obedience was the
condition required of him; and a curse was denounced in case of disobedience.
The law being broken by him, he and his posterity were subjected to the
penalty, for sin committed; and withal still bound to perfect obedience: for it
is absurd to think that man's sinning and suffering for his sin, should free
him from his duty of obedience to his Creator. When Christ came in the room of
the elect, to purchase their salvation, the same were the terms. Justice had
the elect under arrest: if he minds to deliver them, the terms are known. He
must satisfy for their sin, by suffering the punishment due to it; he must do
what they cannot do, viz. obey the law perfectly, and so fulfill all
righteousness. Accordingly, all this he did, and so became the end of the law
for righteousness to every one that believes, Rom x. 4. And now do thou
think God will abate of these terms to thee, when his own Son got no abatement
of them? Expect it not, though thou should beg it with tears of blood; for if
they prevailed, they behoved to prevail against the truth, justice and honor
of God, Gal. iii. 10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
which are written in the (...) of the law, to do them. Ver. 22. And the law is
not of faith, but the man that does them, shall live in them. It is true, that
God is merciful* he cannot but be merciful, unless he save you in a way that is
neither consistent with his law nor gospel? Has not his goodness and mercy
sufficiently appeared, in sending the Son of his love, to do what the law could
not do, in that it was weak through the flesh? He has provided help for them
that cannot help themselves: but thou, insensible of thine own weakness, wilt
needs think to recover thyself by thine own works; while thou art no more able
to do it, than to remove mountains of brass out of their place

Wherefore I conclude thou art utterly unable to recover thyself, by the way of
works, or of the law. O that thou would conclude the same concerning thyself!

II. Let us try next, what the sinner can do to recover himself, in the way of
the gospel: It is likely, thou think, that howbeit thou can not do all, by
thyself alone; yet Jesus Christ offering thee help, thou can of thyself
embrace it, and use it to thy recovery. But, O sinner, be convinced of thine
absolute need of the grace of Christ, for truly there is help offered, but thou
can not accept of it: there is a rope cast out to hale ship-wrecked sinners
to land: but alas! they have no hands to catch hold of it. They are like
infants exposed in the open field, that must starve, though their food be lying
by them, unless one put it into their mouths. To convince natural men of this,
let it be considered,

First, That although Christ is offered in the gospel, yet they cannot believe
in him. Saving faith is the faith of God's elect; the special gift of God to
them, wrought in them by his Spirit. Salvation is offered to them that will
believe in Christ; but how can ye believe? John v. 44. It is offered to these
that will come to Christ; but no man can come unto him, except the Father draw
him. It is offered to them that will look to him, as lifted up on the pole of
the gospel, Isa. xiv 22. but the natural man is spiritually blind. Rev iii. 17.
and as to the things of the Spirit of God, he cannot know them, for they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. ii. 14. Nay, whosoever will, he is welcome; let
him come. Rev. xxii. 17. But there must be a day of power on the sinner, before
he will be willing, Psalm cx. 3.

Secondly, Man naturally has nothing, wherewithal to improve, to his recovery,
the help brought in by the gospel. He is cast away in a state of wrath; but is
bound hand and foot, so that he cannot lay hold of the cords of love, thrown
out to him in the gospel. The most skilful artificer cannot work without
instruments, nor can the most cunning musician play well on an instrument that
is out of tune. How can one believe, how can he repent, whose understanding is
darkness, Ephesians. v 8 whose heart is a stony heart, inflexible, insensible, Ezekiel.
xxxvi. 26. whose affections are wholly disordered and dstempered; who is averse
to good, and bent to evil? The arms of natural abilities are too short to reach
supernatural help: hence those who most excel in them, are often times most
estranged from spiritual things, Matthew. xi 24 Thou have hid these things from
the wise and prudent.

Thirdly, Man cannot work a saving change on himself: but so changed he must
be, else he can neither believe nor repent, nor ever see heaven No action can
be without a suitable principle. Believing, repenting, and the like, are the
product of the new nature; and can never be produced by the old corrupt nature.
Now, what can the natural man do in this matter? He must be regenerate,
begotten again into a bo^y h^p^: but as the child cannot be active in his own
generation; so a man cannot be active but passive only, in his own
regeneration. The heart is shut against Christ: man cannot open it, only God
can do it by his grace, Acts xvi. 14. He is dead in sin: he must be quickened
raised out of his grave: who can do this but God himself? Ephesians. ii 1, 5. Nay, he
must be created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians ii. 10. These are works of
omnipotency, and can be done by no less power.

Fourthly, Man, in his depraved state, is under an utter inability to do any
thing truly good as was cleared before at large: how then can he obey the
gospel? His nature is the very reverse of the gospel: how can he, of himself,
fall in with that device of salvation, and accept the offered remedy? The
corruption of man's nature infallibly concludes his utter inability to recover
himself any manner of way: and whosoever is convinced of the one, must needs admit
the other; for they stand and fall together. Were all the purchase of Christ
offered to the unregenerate man, for one good thought, he cannot command it, 2
Cor. iii. ^. Not that we are sufficient of ourselves, to think any thing as of
ourselves. Were it offered on condition of a good word, yet how can ye, being
evil, speak good things? Matthew xii. 35. Nay, were it left to yourselves, to
choose what is easiest; Christ himself tells you, John xv. 5. Without me, ye can
do nothing.

Lastly, The natural man cannot but resist the Lord, offering to help him;
howbeit that resistance is infallibly overcome in the elect, by converting
grace. Can the stony heart choose but resist the stroke? There is not only an
inability, but an enmity and obstinacy in man's will by nature. God knows,
natural man, (whether thou know it or not) that thou art obstinate, and thy
neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass, Isa. xlviii. 4. and cannot be
overcome, but by him, who has broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of
iron in sund^r. Hence is there such hard work in converting a sinner Sometimes
he seems to be caught in the net of the gospel; yet quickly he slips away
again. The hook catches hold of him: but he struggles, till getting free of
it, he makes away with a bleeding wound. When good hopes are conceived of him,
by these that travel in birth, for the forming of of Christ in him; there is
oft-times nothing brought forth but wind. The deceitful heart makes many a
shift to avoid a Savior, and to cheat the man of his eternal happiness. Thus
the natural man lies sunk in a state of sin and wrath, utterly unable to
recover himself.

Object. (1.) If we be under an utter inability to do any good, how ^an God
require us to do it? Ans. God making man upright, Eccles. vii. 29. gave him a
power to do every thing he should require of him: this power, man lost by his
own fault. We were bound to serve God, and to do whatsoever he commanded us, as
being his creatures; and also, we were under the superadded tie of a covenant,
for that effect. Now, we having, by our own fault, disabled ourselves; shall
God lose his right of requiring our task, because we have thrown away the
strength he gave us, wherewithal to perform it? Has the creditor no right to
require payment of his money, because the debtor has squandered it away, and
is not able to pay him? Truly, if God can require no more of us than we are
able to do; we need no more to save us from wrath, but to make ourselves unable
for every duty, and to incapacitate ourselves for serving of God any manner of
way, as profane men frequently do: and so the deeper one is immersed in sin, he
will be the more secure from wrath; for where God can require no duty of us, we
do not sin in omitting it; and where there is no sin, there can be no wrath.
(As to what may be urged by the unhumbled soul, against the putting of our
stock in Adam's hand; the righteousness of that dispensation was cleared
before.) But moreover, the unrenewed man is daily throwing away the very
remains of natural abilities; that light and strength which are to be found
amongst the ruins of mankind. Nay, farther, he will not believe his own utter
inability to help himself; so that out of his own mouth he will be condemned.
Even those who make their natural impotency to good, a cover to their sloth,
do, with others, delay the work of turning to God from time to time; under
convictions, make large promises of reformation, which afterward they never
regard; and delay their repentance to a deathbed, as if they could help
themselves in a moment; which speaks them to be far from a due sense of their
natural inability, whatever they pretend.

Now, if God can require of men, the duty they are not able to do; he can, in
justice, punish them for their not doing it, notwithstanding of their
inability. If he have power to exact the debt of obedience, he has also power
to cast the insolvent debtor in his prison, for his not paying it. Further,
though unregenerate men have no gracious abilities; yet they want not natural
abilities, which nevertheless they will not improve. There are many things they
can do, which they do not, they will not do them; and therefore, their
damnation will be just, Nay, all their inability to good is voluntary; they
will not come to Christ, John v. 40. They will not repent, they will die, Ezekiel.
xviii. 51. So they will be justly condemned: because they will not turn to God,
nor come to Christ; but love their chains better than their liberty, and
darkness rather than light, John iii. 10.

Object. (2.) Why do you then preach Christ to us; call us to come to him, to
believe, repent, and use the means of salvation? Ans Because it is your duty so
to do. It is your duty to accept of Christ as he is offered in the gospel; to
repent of your sins, and to be holy in all manner of conversation: these things
are commanded you of God; and his command, not your ability, is the measure of
your duty. Moreover, these calls and exhortations, are the means that God is
pleased to make use of, for converting his elect, and working grace in their
hearts: to them, faith comes by hearing, Romans x. 17. while they are as unable
to help themselves as the rest of mankind are. Upon very good grounds may we,
at the command of God, who raises the dead, go to their graves, and cry in his
name, awake thou that sleep, and rise from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light, Ephesians. v. 14. And seeing the elect are not to be known, and
distinguished from others before conversion: as the sun shines on the blind
man's face, and the rain falls on the rocks as well as on the fruitful plains;
so we preach Christ to all, and shoot the arrow at a venture, which God himself
directs as he sees meet. Moreover these calls and exhortations are not
altogether in vain, even to those that are not converted by them. Such persons
may be convinced, though they be not converted: although they be not sanctified by
these means; yet they may be restrained by them, from running into that excess
of wickedness, which otherwise they would arrive at. The means of grace serve,
as it were, to embalm many dead souls, which are never quickened by them; though
they do not restore them to life; yet they keep them from smelling so rank as
otherwise they would do. Finally, Though ye cannot recover yourselves; nor take
hold of the saving help offered to you in the gospel: yet even by the power of
nature, ye may use the outward and ordinary means, whereby Christ communicates
the benefits of redemption to ruined sinners, who are utterly unable to recover
themselves out of the state of sin and wrath. Ye may, and can, if ye please, do
many things, that would set you in a fair way for help from the Lord Jesus
Christ. Ye may go so far on, as to be not far from the kingdom of God, as the
discreet scribe had done, Mark xii. 34. though (it would seem) he was destitute
of supernatural abilities. Though ye cannot cure yourselves; yet ye may come to
the pool, where many such diseased persons as ye are, have been cured: ye have
none to put you into it, yet ye may ly at the side of it: and who knows but the
Lord may return, and leave a blessing behind him, as in the case of the
impotent man, recorded, John v 5, 6, 7, 8. I hope Satan does not chain you to
your houses, nor stake you down in your fields on the Lord's day; but ye are at
liberty, and can wait at the posts of wisdom's door, if ye will. And when ye
come thither, he does not beat drums at your ears, that ye cannot hear what is
said: there is no force upon you obliging you to apply all you hear to others;
ye may apply to yourselves what belongs to your state and condition: and when
you go home, you are not fettered in your houses, where perhaps no religious
discourse is to be heard; but ye may retire to some separate place, where ye
can meditate, and pose your conscience with pertinent questions, upon what ye
have heard. Ye are not possessed with a dumb devil, that ye cannot get your
mouths opened in prayer to God. Ye are not so driven out of your beds to your
worldly business, and from your worldly business to your beds again; but ye
might, if ye would, bestow some prayers to God upon the case of your perishing
souls. Ye may examine yourselves, as to the state of your souls, in a solemn
manner, as in the presence of God; ye may discern that ye have no grace, and
that ye are lost and undone without it; and may cry unto God for it. These
things are within the compass of natural abilities, and may be practiced where
there is no grace. It must aggravate your guilt, that you will not be at so
much pains about the state and case of your precious souls. And if ye do not
what you can do: ye will be condemned, not only for your want of grace, but for
your despising of it.

Object. (3.) But all this is needless, seeing we are utterly unable to keep
ourselves out of the state of sin and wrath. Ans. Give no place to that
delusion, which puts asunder what God has joined, namely, the use of means,
and a sense of our own impotency. If ever the Spirit of God graciously
influence your souls, ye will become thoroughly sensible of your absolute
inability, and yet enter upon a vigorous use of means. Ye will do for
yourselves, as if ye were to do all; and yet overlook all ye do, as if ye had
done nothing. Will ye do nothing for yourselves, because ye cannot do all? Lay
down no such impious conclusion against your own souls. Do what you can; and it
may be, while ye are doing what ye can for yourselves, God will do for you what
ye cannot. Understandest thou what thou read? said Philip to the eunuch: How
can I, said he, except some man should guide me, Acts viii. 30, 31. He could
not understand the scripture he read: yet he could read it: he did what he
could, he read; and while he was reading, God sent him an interpreter. The
Israelites were in a great strait at the red sea: and how could they help
themselves, when upon the one hand were mountains, and on the other, the
enemies garrison; when Pharaoh and his host were behind them, and the red sea
before them? What could they do? Speak unto the children of Israel, says the
LORD to Moses, that they go forward, Exodus xiv. 15. For what end should they go
forward? Can they make a passage to themselves through the sea? No: but let
them go forward, says the Lord: though they cannot turn sea to dry land, yet
they can go forward to the shore: and so they did: and when they did what they
could, God did for them what they could not do.

Quest. Has God promised to convert and save them, who in the use of means, do
what they can toward their own relief? Ans. We may not speak wickedly for God:
natural men being strangers to the covenants of promise, Ephesians. ii. 12. have no
such promise made to them Nevertheless they do not act rationally, unless they
exert the powers they have, and do what they can. For, (1.) It is possible this
course may succeed with them. If ye do what ye can, it may be, God will do for
you what you cannot do for yourselves. This is sufficient to determine a man,
in a matter of the utmost importance, such as this is, Acts viii. 22. Pray God
if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee. Joel ii 14. Who
knows if he will return? If success may be, the trial should be If in a wreck
at sea, all the sailors and passengers had betaken themselves, each to a broken
board for safety; and one of them should see all the rest perish,
notwithstanding of their utmost endeavors to save themselves: yet the very
possibility of escaping by that means, would determine that one, still to do
his best with his board. Why then do ye not reason with yourselves, as the four
lepers did, who sat at the gates of Samaria, 2 Kings vii. 3, 4. Why do ye not
say, If we sit still, not doing what we can, we die; let us put it to a trial,
if we be saved, we shall live; if not, we shall but die. (2.) It is probable
this course may succeed. God is good and merciful: he loves to surprise men
with his grace, and is often found of them, that sought him not, Isa. lxv. 1.
If ye do thus, ye are so far in the road of your duty; and ye are using the
means, which the Lord is wont to bless, for men's spiritual recovery: ye lay
yourselves in the way of the great Physician; and so it is probable ye may be
healed. Lydia went, with others, to the place where prayer was wont to be made;
and the Lord opened her heart, Acts xvi. 13, 14. Ye plow and sow, though nobody
can tell you for certain, that ye will get so much as your seed again: Ye use
means for the recovery of your health, though ye are not sure they will succeed.
In these cases, probability determines you; and why not in this also?
Importunity, we see, doe^ very much with men: therefore pray, meditate, desire
help of God; be much at the throne of grace, supplicating for grace; and do not
faint. Though God regard not you, who, in your present state, are but one mass of
sin; universally depraved, and vitiated in all the powers of your soul: yet he
may regard his own ordinance. Though he regards not your prayers, your
meditations, etc. yet he may regard prayer, meditation, and the like means of
his own appointment, and so bless them to you. Wherefore, if ye will not do
what ye can: ye are not only dead, but you declare yourselves unworthy of
eternal life.

To conclude, let the saints admire the freedom and power of grace, which came
to them in their helpless condition, made their chains fall off, the iron gate
to open to them, raised the fallen creatures; and brought them out of the state
of sin and wrath, wherein they would have lain and perished, had they not been
mercifully visited. Let the natural man be sensible of his utter inability to
recover himself. Know thou art without strength; and can not come to Christ,
till thou be drawn. Thou art lost, and can not help thyself. This may shake
the foundation of thy nopes, who never saw thy absolute need of Christ and
his grace; but think to shift for thyself, by thy civility, morality, drowsy
wishes and duties; and by a faith and repentance, which have sprung up out of
thy natural powers, without the power and efficacy of the grace of Christ. O be
convinced of thy absolute need of Christ, and his overcoming grace; believe thy
utter inability to recover thyself: and so thou may be humbled, shaken out of
thy self-confidence, and ly down in dust and ashes, groaning out thy miserable
case before the Lord: A kindly sense of thy natural impotency, the impotency of
depraved human nature, would be a step toward a delivery.

Thus far of man's natural state, the state of enti^^ depravation.

STATE III. NAMELY, The STATE of GRACE; or Begun Recovery.
HEAD I. REGENERATION.
1 PET. i. 23. Being born again, not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible,
by the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever.


WE proceed now to the state of grace, the state of begun recovery of human
nature, into which, all that shall partake of eternal happiness, are
translated, sooner, or later, while in this world. It is the result of a
gracious change, made upon these who shall inherit eternal life; which change
may be taken up in these two, (1.) In opposition to their natural real state,
the state of corruption, there is a change made upon them in regeneration;
whereby their nature is changed. (2.) In opposition to their natural relative
state, the state of wrath, there is a change made upon them, in their union
with the Lord Jesus Christ; by which they are set beyond the reach of
condemnation. These therefore, namely, regeneration, and union with Christ, I
design to handle, as the great and comprehensive changes on a sinner,
constituting him in the state of grace.

The first of these we have in the text, together with the outward and ordinary
means, by which it is brought about. The apostle here, to excite the saints to
the study of holiness, and particularly of brotherly love, put them in mind of
their spiritual original. He tells them they were born again; and that of
incorruptible seed, the word of God. This speaks them to be brethren, partakers
of the same new nature; which is the root from which holiness, and particularly
brotherly love, does spring. We are once sinners; we must be born again, that
we may be saints. The simple word signifies to be begotten; and so it may be
read, Matthew. xi. 11. to be conceived, Matthew. i. 20 and to be born, Matthew ii. ^.
According, the compound word used in the text, may be taken in its full
latitude, the last notion presupposing the two former: and so regeneration is a
supernatural real change on the whole man, fitly compared to natural or
corporal generation, as will afterward appear. The ordinary means of
regeneration called the seed, whereof the new creature is formed, is not
corruptible seed. Of such indeed, our bodies are generated: but the spiritual
seed, of which the new creature is generated, is incorruptible; namely, the
word of God, which lives and abides for ever. The sound of the word of God,
passes even as other sounds do: but the word lasts, lives and abides, in
respect of its everlasting effects on all upon whom it operates This word,
which by the gospel is preached unto you, (ver. 25.) impregnated by the Spirit
of God, is the means of regeneration; and by it are dead sinners raised to life.

DOCTRINE. All men in the state of grace are born again. All gracious persons,
namely, such as are in a state of favor with God, and endued with gracious
qualities and dispositions, are regenerate persons In discoursing this subject,
I shall show what regeneration is: Next, Why it is so called, and then apply
the doctrine.

Of the Nature of Regeneration.
I. For the better understanding of the nature of regeneration, take this along
with you in the first place. That as there are false conceptions in nature, so
there are also in grace: and by these many are deluded, mistaking some partial
changes made upon them, for this great and thorough change. To remove such
mistakes, let these few things be considered. (1.) Many call the church their
mother, whom God will not own to be his children, Cant. i. 6. My mother s
children (i. e. false brethren) were angry with me. All that are baptized are
not born again. Simon was baptized, yet still in the gall of bitterness, and in
the bond of iniquity, Acts viii. 13, 23. Where Christianity is the religion of
the country, many will be called by the name of Christ, who have no more of
him, but the name: and no wonder, seeing the devil had his goats among Christ's
sheep, in these places, where but few professed the Christian religion, 1 John
ii. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us. (2) Good education is
not regeneration. Education may chain up men's lusts, but cannot change their
hearts. A wolf is still a ravenous beast, though it be in chains. Joash was
very devout during the life of his good tutor Jehoiada; but afterward he
quickly showed what spirit he was of, by his sudden apostasy, 2 Chronicles. xxiv. 2,
17, 18. Good example is of mighty influence to change the outward man; but that
change often goes off, when one changes his company; of which the world affords
many sad instances. (3.) A turning from open profanity, to civility and
sobriety, falls short of this saving change. Some are, for a while, very loose,
especially in their younger years; but at length they reform, and leave their
profane ^^urses Here is a change, yet but such an one, as may be found in them,
utterly (...) of the grace of God and whose righteousness is so far from
exceeding, that it does not come up to the righteousness of the Suri^^ and
^^^ris^es. (4.) One may engage in all the outward duties of religion, and yet
not be born again. Though lead be cast into various shapes, it remains still but
a base metal. Men may escape the pollutions of the world, and yet be but dogs
and swine, 2 Pet. ii 20, 22. All the external acts of religion are within the
compass o^ natural abilities. Yea, hypocrites may have the counterfeit of all
the graces of the Spirit: for we read of true holiness, Ephesians. iv 23. and faith
unfeigned, 1 Timothy i 5. which shows us, that there is a counterfeit holiness, and
a feigned faith. (5.) Men may advance to a great deal of strictness in their
own way of religion; and yet be strangers to the new birth, Acts xxxvi. 5.
After the most strictest sect of our religion, I lived a Pharisee. Nature has
its own unsanctified strictness in religion. The Pharisees had so much of it,
that they looked on Christ as little better than a mere libertine. A man whose
conscience has been awakened, and who lives under the felt influence of the
covenant of works, what will he not do, that is within the compass of natural
abilities? It was a truth, though it came out of a hellish mouth, that skin for
skin, all that a man has will he give for his life, Job ii. 4. (6.) One may
have sharp soul-exercises and pangs, and yet die in the birth. Many have been
in pain, that have but as it were brought forth wind. There may be sore pangs
and throws of conscience, which turn to nothing at last. Pharaoh and Simon
Magus had such convictions, as made them desire the prayers of others for them.
Judas repented himself; and under terrors of conscience, gave back his
ill-gotten pieces of silver. All is not gold that glisters. Trees may blossom
fairly in the spring, on which no fruit is to be found in the harvest: and some
have sharp soul-exercises, which are nothing but foretastes of hell.

The new birth, however in appearance hopefully begun, may be marred two ways.
First, Some, like Zarah, Genesis xxxviii 28, 29 are brought to the birth, but go
back again. They have sharp convictions for a while: but these go off, and they
turn as careless about their salvation, as profane as ever: and usually worse
than ever, their last state is worse than their first, Mat. xii. 45. They get
awakening grace, but not converting grace; and that goes off by degrees, as the
light of the declining day, till it issue in midnight darkness. Secondly Some
like Ishmael, come forth too soon; they are born before the time of the
promise, Gen xvi. 1, 2. compare Gal. iv. 22. and downward. They take up with a
mere law-work, and stay not till the time of the promise of the gospel. They
snatch at consolation, not waiting till it be given them; and foolishly draw
their comfort (...) the law that wounded them. They apply the healing pluster
to themselves, before their wound be sufficiently s^^rched. The (...) that
rigorous husband, severely beats them, and throws in (...) and vengeance upon
their souls: then they fall a reforming (...) mourning, promising and vowing,
till this ghost be laid; (...) they fall asleep again in the arms of the law;
but they are (...) shaken out of themselves and their own righteousness, not
(...) forward to Jesus Christ. Lastly, There may be a wond^^^ (...) of the
affections, in souls that are not at all touched with regenerating grace Where
there is no grace, there may, notwithstanding, be a flood of tears as in Esau,
who found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears, Heb
xii. 17. There may be great flashes of joy; as in the hearers of the word,
represented in the parable by the stony ground, who anon with joy receive it,
Matthew. xiii. 20. There may also be great desire after good things, and great
delight in them too; as in these hypocrites described, Isa lviii. 2. Yet they
seek me daily, and delight to know my ways. -- They take delight in approaching
unto God. See how high they may sometimes stand, who yet fall away, Heb. vi. 4,
5, 6 They may be enlightened, taste of the heavenly gift, be partakers of the
holy Ghost, taste the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come
Common operations of the divine Spirit, like a land flood, make a strange
turning of things up-side-down. And when they are over, all runs again in the
ordinary channel. All these things may be, where the sanctifying Spirit of
Christ never rests upon the soul, but the stony heart still remains; and in
that case, these affections cannot but wither because they have no root.

But regeneration is a real thorough change, whereby the man is made a new
creature, 2 Cor. v. 17. The Lord God makes the creature a new creature, as the
goldsmith melts down the vessel of dishonor and makes it a vessel of honor.
Man is, in respect of his natural state, altogether disjointed by the fall;
every faculty of the soul is, as it were, dislocate: in regeneration the Lord
loses every joint, and sets it right again. Now this change made in
regeneration is,

1. A change of qualities or dispositions: it is not a change of the substance,
but of the qualities of the soul. Vicious qualities are removed, and the
contrary dispositions are brought in, in their room. The old man is put off,
Ephesians. iv. 22. the n^w man put on, ver. 24. Man lost none of the rational
faculties of his soul by sin; he had an understanding still, but it was
darkened; he had still a will, but it was contrary to the will of God. So in
regeneration there is not a new substance created, but new qualities are
infused; light instead of darkness, righteousness instead of unrighteousness.

2. It is a supernatural change; he that is born again, is born of the Spirit,
John iii 5. Great changes may be made by the power of nature, especially when
assisted by external revelation. And nature may be so elevated by the common
influences of the Spirit, that one may thereby be turned into another man, (as
Soul was, 1 Samuel x 6.) who yet never becomes a new man. But in regeneration
nature itself is changed, and we become partakers of the divine nature; and
this must needs be a supernatural change. How can we that are dead in
trespasses and sins, renew ourselves, more than a dead man can raise himself
out of his grave? Who, but the sanctifying Spirit of Christ, can form Christ in
a soul, changing it into the same image? Who, but the Spirit of sanctification
can give the new heart? Well may we say, when we see a man thus changed, This
is the finger of God.

3. It is a change into the likeness of God, 2 Cor iii. 18. We -- beholding as
in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image. Every thing
that generates, generates its like: the child bears the image of the parent;
and they that are born of God, bear God's image. Man aspiring to be as God,
made himself like the devil. In his natural state he resembles the devil, as a
child does the father, John viii 44. Ye are of your father the devil. But when
this happy change comes, the image of Satan is defaced, and the image of God
restored. Christ himself, who is the brightness of his Father's glory, is the
pattern, after which the new creature is made, Romans viii 29. For whom he did
for^know, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son
Hence he is said to be conformed in the regenerate, Gal. iv. 19.

4 It is an universal change; all things become new, 2 Cor. vi. 17. It is a
blessed leaven that leavens the whole lump, the whole spirit, and soul and body.
Original sin infects the whole man; and regenerating grace, which is the salve,
goes as far as the sore. This fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness; goodness
of the mind, goodness of the will, goodness of the affections, goodness of the
whole man One gets not only a new head to know religion, or a new tongue to
talk of it; but a new heart to love and embrace it, in the whole of his
conversation. When the Lord opens the sluice of grace on the soul's new
birthday, the waters run through the whole man, to purify and make him
fruitful. In these natural changes spoken of before, there are, as it were,
pieces of new cloth put into an old garment; a new life sewed to an old heart:
but the gracious change is a thorough change, a change both of heart and life.

5. Yet it is but an imperfect change. Though every part of the man is renewed,
there is no part of him perfectly renewed. As an infant has all the parts of a
man, but none of them are come to their perfect growth; so regeneration brings
a perfection of parts, to be brought forward in the gradual advances of
sanctification, 1 Pet ii. 2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the
word, that ye may grow thereby. Although in regeneration there is a heavenly
light let into the mind; yet there is still some darkness there: though the will
is renewed, it is not perfectly renewed; there is still some of the old
inclination to sin remaining: and thus it will be till that which is in part be
done away, and the light of glory come Adam was created at his full stature;
but they that are born, must have their time to grow up; so these that are born
again, do come forth into the new world of grace, but imperfectly holy; though
Adam, being created upright, was at the same time perfectly righteous, without
the least mixture of sinful imperfection

Lastly, Nevertheless (...) a lasting change, which never goes off. The seed is
incorruptible says the text; and so is the creature that is formed of it. The
life given in regeneration, whatever decays it may fall under, can never be
utterly lost. Hi^ (...) in him, who is born of God, 1 John iii. 9. Though the
branches should be cut down, the root shall abide in the earth; and being
watered with the dew of heaven, shall sprout again: for the root of the
righteous shall not be moved, Prove xii. 3.

But to come to particulars.

First, In regeneration the mind is savingly enlightened. There is a new light
let into the understanding, so that they who were sometimes darkness, are now
light in the Lord, Ephesians. v 8. The beams of the light of life make their way into
the dark dungeon of the heart: then night is over, and the morning-light is
come, which will shine more and more unto the perfect day. Now the man is
illuminated,

1. In the knowledge of God. He has far other thoughts of God, than ever he had
before, Hos. ii. 20. I will even betrothe thee unto me in faithfulness, and
thou shall know the Lord. The Spirit of the Lord brings him back to that
question, What is God? And catechiseth him anew upon that grand point, so as he
is made to say, I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine
eyes sees thee, Job xlii. 5. The spotless purity of God, his exact justice,
his all sufficiency, and other glorious perfections revealed in his word, are,
by this new light, discovered to the soul, with a plainness and certainty that
does as far exceed the knowledge it had of these things before, as ocular
demonstration exceeds common fame. For now he sees what he only heard of before.

2. He is enlightened in the knowledge of sin. He has other thoughts of it,
than he was wont to have. Formerly his sight could not pierce through the cover
Satan laid over it: but now the Spirit of God strips it before him, wipes off
the paint and fairding; and he sees it in its native colors, as the worst of
evils: exceeding sinful, Romans vii. 12. O what deformed monsters do formerly
beloved lusts appear! were they right eyes, he would pluck them out: were they
right hands, he would consent to their cutting off. He sees how offensive sin
is to God, how destructive it is to the soul; and calls himself fool, for
fighting so long against the Lord, and harboring that destroyer as a bosom
friend.

3. He is instructed in the knowledge of himself. Regenerating grace causes
the prodigal to come to himself, Luke xv 17. and makes men full of eyes within,
knowing every one the p^^^e of his own heart. The mind being savingly
enlightened, the man sees how desperately corrupt his nature is; what enmity
against God and his holy law has long lodged there: so that his soul lothes
itself. No open sepulcher, no puddle, so vile and loathsome in his eyes as
himself, Ezekiel. xxxvi 31. Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your
doings that were not good, and shall loathe yourselves in your own sight He is
no worse than he was before: but the sun is shining: and so these pollutions
are seen, which he could not discern, when there was no dawning in him: as the
word is, Isa. viii. 20. while as yet the day of grace was not broken with him.

4. He is enlightened in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. i. 23, 24. But we
preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks
foolishness: but unto them that are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ, the
power of God, and the wisdom of God. The truth is, unregenerate men, though
capable of preaching Christ, have not (properly speaking) the knowledge of him,
but only an opinion, a good opinion of him; as one has of many controverted
points of doctrine, wherein he is far from certainty. As when ye meet with a
stranger upon the road, he behaving himself discreetly, ye conceive a good
opinion of him; and therefore willingly converse with him; but yet ye will not
commit your money to him; because, though you have a good opinion of the man, he
is a stranger to you, ye do not know him. So many, they think well of Christ;
but they will never commit themselves to him; seeing they know him not. But
saving illumination carries the soul beyond opinion, to the certain knowledge
of Christ and his excellency, 1 Thessalonians. i. 5. For our gospel came not unto you
in word only, but also in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance.
The light of grace thus discovers the suitableness of the mystery of Christ, to
the divine perfections, and to the sinner's case. Hence the regenerate admire
the glorious plan of salvation through Christ crucified, lay their whole weight
upon it, and heartily acquiesce therein: for whatever he be to others, he is to
them Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God. But unrenewed men, not
seeing this, are offended in him; they will not venture their souls in that
bottom, but betake themselves to the broken boards of their own righteousness.
The same light convincingly discovers a superlative worth, a transcendant glory
and excellency in Christ; which darken all created excellencies, as the rising
sun makes the stars to hide their heads: and so it engages the merchant-man to
sell all that he has, to buy the one pearl of great price, Matthew. xiii. 45,
46. makes the soul well content, to take Christ for all, and instead of all.
Even as an unskilful merchant, to whom one offers a pearl of great price, for
all his petty wares, dares not venture on the bargain; for though he thinks, that
one pearl may be more worth than all he has, yet he is not sure of it: but when
a jeweller comes to him, and assures him, it is worth double all his wares; he
then greedily embraces the bargain, and cheerfully parts with all that he has
for that pearl. Finally, This illumination in the knowledge of Christ,
convincingly discovers to men a fullness in him, sufficient for the supply of
all their wants; enough to satisfy the boundless desires of an immortal soul
They are persuaded such fullness is in him, and that in order to be communicate:
they depend upon it, as a certain truth; and therefore their souls take up
their eternal rest in him.

4. The man is instructed in the knowledge of the vanity of the world, Psalm.
cxix. 96. I have seen an end of all perfection. Regenerating grace elevates the
soul, sets it, as it were, amongst the stars, from whence this earth cannot but
appear a little, yea, a very little thing; even as heaven appeared before,
while the soul was immersed in the earth. Grace brings a man into a new world;
while this world is reputed but a stage of vanity, an howling wilderness, a
valley of tears. God has hung the sign of vanity at the door of all created
enjoyments; yet how do men throng into the house, calling and looking for
somewhat that is satisfying; even after it has been a thousand times told them,
there is no such thing in it, it is not to be got there, Isa. lvi. 10. Thou art
wearied in the greatness of thy ways; yet said thou not, There is no hope.
Why are men so foolish? The truth of the matter lies here, they do not see by
the light of grace, they do not spiritually discern, that sign of vanity They
have often indeed made a rational discovery of it: but can that truly wean the
heart from the world? Nay, no more than painted fire can burn off the
prisoner's bands. But the light of grace is the light of life, powerful and
efficacious

Lastly, (To sum up all in one word) In regenerationthe mind is enlightened in
the knowledge of spiritual things, 1 John ii 20 Ye have an unction from the
holy One (that is, from Jesus Christ, Rev. iii 18. It is an allusion to the
sanctuary, whence the holy oil was brought to anoint the priests) and ye know
all things, viz necessary to salvation. Though men be not book-learned, if they
be born again, they are Spirit-learned; for all such are taught of God, John
vi. 45. The Spirit of regeneration teaches them what they knew not before; and
what they did know, as by the ear only, he teaches them over again as by the
eye. The light of grace is an overcoming light, determining men to assent to
divine truths on the mere testimony of God. It is no easy thing for the mind of
man, to acquiesce in divine revelation. Many pretend great respect to the
scriptures, whom, nevertheless, the clear scripture-testimony will not divorce
from their pre-conceived opinions. But this illumination will make men's minds
run, as captives, after Christ's chariot-wheels; which, for their part, shall
be allowed to drive over, and cast down their own imaginations, and every high
thing that exalts itself against the knowledge of God. 2 Cor. x 5. It will
make them receive the kingdom of God as a little child, Mark x. 15. who thinks
he has sufficient ground to believe any thing, if his father do but say it is
so.

Secondly, The will is renewed. The Lord takes away the stony heart, and gives
a heart of flesh, Ezekiel. xxxvi 26. And so, of stones raises up children to
Abraham. Regenerating grace is powerful and efficacious, and gives the will a
new set It does not indeed force it: but sweetly, yet powerfully draws it, so
that his people are willing in the ^ay of his power, Psalm. cx. 3. There is
heavenly oratory in the Mediator's lips, to persuade sinners, Psalm. xlv. 2
Grace is poured into thy lips. There are cords of a man, and bands of love in
his hands, to draw them after him, Hos xi. 4. Love makes a net for elect souls,
which will infallibly catch them, and hale them to land. The cords of Christ's
love are strong cords: and they need to be so; for every sinner is heavier than
a mountain of brass: and Satan, together with the heart itself, draw the
contrary way But love is strong as death; and the Lord's love to the soul he
died for, is strongest love; which acts so powerfully, that it must come off
victorious.

I. The will is cured of its utter inability to will what is good. While the
opening of the prison to them that are bound is proclaimed in the gospel: The
Spirit of God comes to the prison door, opens it, go to the prisoner; and by
the power of his grace makes his chains fall off; breaks the bond of iniquity,
wherewith he was held in sin, so as he could neither will nor do any thing
truly good; brings him forth into a large place, Working in him both to will
and to do, of his good pleasure, Phil ii. 13. Then it is that the soul, that
was fixed to the earth, can move heavenward; the withered hand is restored, and
can be stretched out.

2. There is wrought in the will a fixed aversion to evil. In regeneration, a
man gets a new spirit put within him, Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26. and that spirit lusts
against the flesh, Gal. v. 17. The sweet morsel of sin, so greedily swallowed
down, he now lothes, and would fain be rid of it; even as willingly as one,
that had drunk a cup of poison, would throw it up again. When the spring is
stopped, the mud lies in the well unmoved: but when once the spring is cleared,
the waters springing up, will work the mud away by degrees Even so, while a man
continues in an unregenerate state, sin lies at ease in the heart: but as soon
as the Lord strikes the rocky heart, with the rod of his strength in the day of
conversion, grace is in him a well of water, springing up into everlasting
life, John iv. working away natural corruption, and gradually purifying the
heart, Acts xv. 9. The renewed will rises up against sin, strikes at the root
thereof, and the branches too. Lusts are now grievous, and the soul endeavors
to starve them: the corrupt nature is the source of all evil, and therefore the
soul will be often laying it before the great Physician. O what sorrow, shame
and self-loathing fill the heart, in the day that grace makes its triumphant
entrance into it? For now the madman is come to himself, and the remembrance of
his follies cannot but cut him to the heart.

Lastly, The will is endued with an inclination, bent, and propensity to good
In its depraved state, it lay quite another way; being prone and bent to evil
only: but now, by a pull of the omnipotent, all-conquering arm, it is drawn
from evil to good, and gets another set. And as the former set was natural; so
this is natural too, in respect of the new nature given in regeneration which
has its own holy lustings, as well as the corrupt old nature has its sinful
lustings, Gal. v. 17. The will, as renewed, inclines and points toward God and
godliness. When God made man, his will, in respect of its intention, was
directed toward God, as his chief end; in respect of its choice, it pointed
toward that which God willed. When man unmade himself, his will was framed
into the very reverse hereof: he made himself his chief end, and his own will
his law. But when man is new made, in regeneration, grace rectifies this
disorder in some measure, though not perfectly indeed; because we are but renewed
in part, while in this world. It brings back the sinner, out of himself, to God
as his chief end, truly, though not perfectly, Psalm. lxxiii. 25. Whom have I in
heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.
Philip. i. 21. For to me to live is Christ. It makes him to deny himself, and
whatever way he turns, to point habitually toward God; who is the center of
the gracious soul, its home, its dewlling place in all generations, Psalm. xc.
1. By regenerating grace, the will is framed into a conformity to the will of
God. It is conformed to his preceptive will, being endued with holy
inclinations, agreeable to every one of his commands. The whole law is
impressed on the gracious soul: every part of it is written over on the renewed
heart. And although remaining corruption makes such blots in the writing, that
oft-times the man himself cannot read it: yet he that wrote it can read it at
all times; it is never quite blotted out, nor can be. What he has written, he
has written, it shall stand: For this is the covenant, -- I will put my laws
into their mind, and write them in their hearts, Heb. viii. 10. And it is a
covenant of salt, a perpetual covenant. It is also conformed to his
providential will; so that the man will no more be master of his own process;
nor carve out his lot for himself. He learns to say, from his heart, The will
of the Lord be done, -- he shall choose our inheritance for us, Psalm. xlvii. 4.
Thus the will is disposed to fall in with those things, which, in its depraved
state, it could never be reconciled to.

Particularly, (1.) The Lord is reconciled to the covenant of peace. The Lord
God promises a covenant of peace to sinners; a covenant which he himself has
framed, and registrated in the Bible: but they are not pleased with it; nay, an
unrenewed heart cannot be pleased with it. Were it put into their hands, to
frame it according to their mind; they would blot many things out of it, which
God has put in; and put in many things, God has kept out. But the renewed heart
is entirely satisfied with the covenant, 2 Samuel xxiii. 5. He has made with me
an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and sure; this is all my
salvation, and all my desire. Though the covenant could not be brought down to
their depraved will, their will is, by grace, brought up to the covenant; they
are well-pleased with it: there is nothing in it they would have out; nor is
any thing left out of it, which they would have in. (2.) The will is disposed
to receive Christ Jesus the Lord. The soul is content to submit to him.
Regenerating grace undermines, and brings down the towering imaginations of the
heart, raised up against its rightful lord: it breaks the iron sinew, which
kept the sinner from bowing to him, and disposed him to be no (...)
stiffnecked, but to yield to himself. He is willing to take on the yoke of
Christ's commands, to take up the cross and to follow h^^ He is content to take
Christ on any terms, Psalm. xc. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy
power.

Now, the mind being savingly enlightened, and the will renewed; the sinner is
thereby determined and enabled to answer the gospel-call. So the main work in
regeneration is done; the fort of the heart is taken: there is room made for
the Lord Jesus Christ, in the innermost parts of the soul; the outer-door of
the will being now opened to him, as well as the inner-door of the
understanding. In one word, Christ is passively received into the heart; he is
come into the soul by his quickening spirit, whereby spiritual life is given to
the man, who in himself was dead to sin. And his first vital act we may
conceive to be an active receiving of Jesus Christ discerned in his glorious
excellencies; that is, a believing on him, a closing with him, as discerned,
offered, and exhibited in the word of his grace, the glorious gospel* the
immediate effect of which is union with him, John i. 12, 13. To as many as
received him, to them gave he power (or privilege) to become the sons of God,
even to them that believe on his Name; which were born, not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but o^ GOD. Ephesians. iii. 17. That
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. Christ having taken the heart by
storm, and triumphantly entered into it, in regeneration, the soul by faith
yields itself to him, as it is expressed, 2 Chronicles. xxx. 8. Thus, this glorious
King, who came into the heart by his Spirit; dwells in it by faith. The soul
being drawn, runs; and being effectually called, comes.

Thirdly, In regeneration; there is a happy change made on the affections; they
are both rectified and regulated.

1. This change rectifies the affections, placing them on suitable objects, 2 Thessalonians. iii. 5. The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God. The regenerate
man's desires are rectified; they are set on God himself, and the things above.
He who before, cried with the world, Who will show us any good? he changes his
note, and says, Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon us, Psalm. iv.
Sometimes he saw no beauty in Christ, for which he was to be desired; but now
he is all desires, he is altogether lovely, Cant. v. 16. The main stream of his
desires is turned to run toward God: for there is the one thing he desires,
Psalm. xxvii. 4. He desires to be holy, as well as to be happy; and rather to be
gracious than great. His hopes, which before were low, and staked down to
things on earth, are now raised, and set on the glory which is to be revealed.
He entertains the hope of eternal life, founded on the word of promise, Tit. i.
2. Which hope he has, as an anchor of the soul, fixing the heart under trials,
Heb. vi. 18. And it puts him upon purifying himself, even as God is pure, John
iii. 3. For he is begotten again unto a lively hope, 1 Pet. i. 3. His love is
raised, and set on God himself, Psalm. xxviii. 1. On his holy law, Psalm. cxix.
97. Though it strike against his most beloved l^^t, he says, The law is holy, and
the commandment holy, and just, and good, Romans vii. 12. He loves the ordinances
of God, Psalm. lxxxi^. 1. How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts?
Being passed from death unto life, he loves the brethren, (1 John iii. 1^.) the
people of God, as the, are called, 1 Pet. i. 10. He loves God for himself, and
what is God's, for his sake. Yea, as being a child of God, he loves his own
enemies. His heavenly Father is compassionate and benevolent: he makes his sun
to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just, and on the
unjust: and therefore he is in the like manner disposed, Matthew. v. 44, 45. His
hatred is turned against sin in himself and others, Psalm. ci. 3. I hate the
work of them that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me. He groans under the
remains of it, and longs for deliverance, Romans vii. 24. O wretched man that I
am! Who shall deliver me from the body of this death? His joys and delights are
in God the Lord, in the light of his countenance, in his law, and in his
people; because they are like him. Sin is what he chiefly fears; it is a
fountain of sorrow to him now, though formerly a spring of pleasure.

2. It regulates the affections placed on suitable objects. Our affections,
when placed on the creature, are naturally exorbitant: when we joy in it, we
are apt to over-joy; and when we sorrow, we are ready to sorrow overmuch: but
grace bridles these affections, clips their wings, and keeps them within
bounds, that they overflow not at all their banks. It makes a man hate his
father and mother, and wife and children, -- yea, and his own life also,
comparatively; that is, to love them less than he loves God, Luke xiv. 26. It
also sanctifies lawful affections; bringing them forth from right principles,
and directing them to right ends. There may be unholy desires after Christ and
his grace; as when men desire Christ, not from any love to him, but merely out
of love to themselves. Give us of your oil, said the foolish virgins, for our
lamps are gone out, Matthew. xxv. 8. There may be an unsanctified sorrow for sin;
as when one sorroweth for it, not because it is displeasing to God, but, only
because of the wrath annexed to it, as did Pharaoh, Judas, and others. So a man
may love his father and mother, from more natural principles, without any
respect to the command of God binding him thereto. But grace sanctifies the
affections in such cases, making them to run in a new channel of love to God,
respect to his commands, and regard to his glory. Again, grace screws up the
affections where they are too low: It gives the chief seat in them to God: and
pulls down all other rivals, whether persons or things, making them ly at his
feet, Psalm. lxxiii. 25. Whom have I in heaven, but thee? And there is none upon
earth, that I desire beside thee. He is loved for himself: and other persons or
things, for his sake. What is lovely in them, to the renewed heart, is some ray
of the divine goodness appearing in them: for unto gracious souls they shine
only by borrowed light. This accounts for the saints loving all men, and yet
hating those that hate God, and contemning the wicked as vile persons They h^^e
and contemn them for their wickedness: there is nothing of God in that, and
therefore nothing lovely or honorable in it: ^^ut they love them for their
commendable qualities, or perfections, whether natural or moral; because, in
whomsoever these are, they are from God, and can be traced to him as their
fountain. Finally, Regenerating grace sets the affections so firmly on God,
that the man is disposed, at God's command, to quit his hold of every thing
else, in order to keep his hold of Christ; to hate father and mother, in
comparison with Christ, Luke xiv 20. It makes even lawful enjoyments like
Joseph's mantle, to hang loose about a man; that he may quit them when he is in
hazard to be ensnared by holding them.

If the stream of our affections was never thus turned; we are, doubtless,
going down the stream into the pit. If the lust of the ^ye, the lust of the
flesh, and the pride of life, have the throne in our hearts, which should be
possessed by the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; if we never had so much love to
God, as to ourselves; if sin has been somewhat bitter to us, but never so ^^ter
as suffering, never so bitter as the pain of being weaned from it: truly we are
strangers to this saving change For grace turns the affections upside-down,
whenever it comes into the heart.

Fourthly, The conscience is renewed. Now, that a new light is set up in the
soul in regeneration; conscience is enlightened* instructed, and informed That
candle of the Lord, (Prove xx. 27) is now snuffed and brightned; so as it
shines, and sends forth its light into the most retired corners of the heart;
discovering sins which the soul was not aware of before: and, in a special
manner, discovering the corruption or depravity of nature, that seed and spawn
whence all actual sins proceed This produces the new complaint, Rom vii 24. O
wretched man that I am! who shall deliver m^ from the body of this death? That
conscience, which lay sleeping in the man's bosom before, is now awakened, and
makes its voice to be heard through the whole soul: and therefore there is no
more rest for him in the sluggard's bed; he must get up and be doing, arise,
haste and escape for his life. It powerfully incites to obedience; even in the
most spiritual acts, which lay not within the view of the natural conscience;
and powerfully restrains from sin, even from these sins which do not ly open to
the observation of the world. It urges the sovereign authority of God, to
which the heart is now reconciled and which it willingly acknowledges: and so
it engages the man to his duty, whatever be the hazard from the world; for it
fills the heart so with the fear of God, that the force of the fear of man is
broken. This has engaged many to put their life* in their hand, and follow the
cause of religion they once contemned, and resolutely walk in the path they
formerly abhorred, Gal. i. 23 ^^e which persecuted us in sin (...) past, now
preaches the faith which one* he destroyed. Guilt now makes the conscience to
smart It has bitter remorse for sins past, which fills the soul with anxiety,
sorrow and self loathing. And every new reflection on these sins, is apt to
affect, and make its wounds breed afresh with regret. It is made tender, in
point of sin and duty, for the time to come; being once burnt, it dreads the
fire; and f^^r to break the hedge, where it was formerly bit by the serpent.
Totally* The renewed conscience drives the sinner to Jesus Christ, as the only
physician that can draw out the sting of guilt; and whose blood alone can purge
the conscience from dead works, Heb. ix. 14. refusing all ease offered to it
from any other hand. And this is an evidence, that the conscience is not only
fired, as it may be in an unregenerate state; but oiled also with regenerating
grace.

Fifthly, As the Memory wanted not its share of depravity, it is also bettered
by regenerating grace. The memory is weakened with respect to those things that
are not worth their room therein; and men are taught to forget injuries, and
drop their resentments, Mat. v. 44, 45. Do good to them that hate you, and pray
for them which despitefully use you, -- That ye may be (i. e. appear to be) the
children of your Father which is in heaven. It is strengthened for spiritual
things. We have Solomon's receipt for an ill memory, Prove. iii. 1. My son,
says he, forget not my law. But how shall it be kept in mind? Let thine heart
keep my commandments. Grace makes a heart-memory, even where there is no good
head-memory, Psalm. cxix. 11. Thy word have I hid in mine heart. The heart truly
touched with the powerful sweetness of truth, will help the memory to retain
what is so relished. Did divine truths make deeper impressions on our hearts,
they would thereby impress themselves with more force on our memories, Psalm.
cxix. 93. I will never forget thy precepts, for with them thou have quickened
me. Grace sanctifies the memory. Many have large, but unsanctified memories;
which serve only to gather knowledge, whereby to aggravate their condemnation;
but the renewed memory serves to remember his commandments to do them, Psalm.
ciii. 18. It is a sacred storehouse, from whence a Christian is furnished in
his way to Zion: for faith and hope are often supplied out of it, in a dark
hour. It is the storehouse of former experiences; and these are the believer's
way-marks, by noticing of which he comes to know where he is, even in a dark
time, Psalm. xlii 6. O my God, my soul is cast down within me: therefore will I
remember thee from the land of Jordan, etc. It also helps the soul to godly
sorrow and self-loathing, presenting old guilt anew before the conscience: and
making it bleed afresh, though the sin be already pardoned, Psalm. xxv. 7.
Remember not the sins of my youth. And where unpardoned guilt is lying on the
sleeping conscience, it is often employed to bring in a word, which in a moment
sets the whole soul assi^^: as when Peter remembered the words of Jesus, -- be
went out and wept bitterly, Matthew. xxvi. 75. The word of God laid up in a
sanctified memory, serves a man to resist temptations, puts the sword in his
hand against the spiritual enemies, and is a light to direct his steps in the
way of religion and righteousness.

Sixthly, There is a change made on the Body, and the members thereof, in
respect of their use: they are consecrated to the Lord. Even the Body is -- for
the Lord, 1 Cor. vi. 13. It is the temple of the holy Ghost, ver. 19. The
members thereof, that were formerly instruments of unrighteousness unto sin,
become instruments of righteousness unto God, Romans vi. 13. Servants to
righteousness unto holiness, ver. 19. The eye that conveyed sinful imaginations
into the heart, is under a covenant, Job xxxi. to do so no more; but to serve
the soul in viewing the works, and reading the word of God. The ear that had
often been death's porter to let in sin, is turned to be the gate of life, by
which the word of life enters the soul. The tongue that set on fire the whole
course of nature, is restored to the office it was designed for by the Creator;
namely, to be an instrument of glorifying him, and setting forth his praise. In
a word, the whole man is for God, in soul and body, which by this blessed
change are made his.

Lastly, This gracious change shines forth in the conversation. Even the
outward man is renewed A new heart makes newness of life. When the King's
daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of wrought gold, Psalm. xlv.
13. The single eye makes the whole body full of light, Matthew. vi. 22. This
change will appear in every part of one's conversation, particularly in these
following things.

I. In the change of his company. Though sometime he despised the company of the
saints, now they are the excellent in whom is all his delight, Psalm. xvi. 3. I
am a companion of all that fear thee, says the royal Psalmist, Psalm. cxix. 63.
A renewed man joins himself with the saints: for he and they are like minded,
in that which is their main work and business; they have all one new nature;
they are traveling to Immanuel's land, and converse together in the language
of Canaan. In vain do men pretend to religion, while ungodly company is their
choice; for a companions of fools shall be destroyed, Prove. xiii. 20. Religion
will make a man shy of throwing himself into an ungodly family, or any
unnecessary familiarity with wicked men; as one that is clean, will beware of
going into an infected house.

2. In his relative capacity, he will be a new man. Grace makes men gracious in
their several relations, and natively leads them to the conscientious
performance of relative duties. It does not only make good men, and good women;
but makes good subjects, good husbands, good wives, children, servants, and in
a word, good relatives in the church, commonwealth, and family. It is a just
exception made against the religion of many; namely, that they are bad
relatives, they are ill husbands, wives, masters, servants, etc. How will we
prove ourselves to be new creatures, if we be still just such as we were
before, in our several relations, 2 Cor. v. 17. Therefore if any man be in
Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away; behold all things are
become new. Real godliness will gain a testimony to a man, from the consciences
of his nearest relations, though they know more of his sinful infirmities, than
others do; as we see in that case. 2 Kings iv. 2. Thy servant, my husband, is
dead, and th^^ know that thy servant did fear the Lord.

3. In the way of his following his worldly business, there is a great change.
It appears to be no more his all, as some time it was. Though saints apply
themselves to worldly business, as well as others; yet their hearts are not
swallowed up in it. It is evident they are carrying on a trade with heaven, as
well as a trade with earth, Philip. iii 20. For our conversation is in heaven.
And they go about their employment in the world as a duty laid upon them by the
Lord of all; doing their lawful business, as the will of God, Ephesians vi. 7.
working, because he has said, Thou shall not steal.

4. They have a special concern for the advancement of the kingdom of Christ in
the world: they espouse the interests of religion, and prefer Jerusalem above
their chief joy, Psalm. cxxxvii 6. How privately soever they live, grace makes
them of a public spirit, which will concern itself in the ark and work of God;
in the gospel of God; and in the people of God; even these of them whom they
never saw in the face. As children of God, they naturally care for these
things. They have a new and unwonted concern for the spiritual good of others.
And no sooner do they taste of the power of grace themselves, but they are
inclined to set up to be agents for Christ and holiness, in this world; as
appears in the case of the woman of Samaria, who, when Christ had manifested
himself to her, went her way into the city, and says unto the men, Come, see a
man which told me all things that ever I did! Is not this the Christ? John iv.
28, 29. They have seen and felt the evil of sin, and therefore pity, the world
lying in wickedness. They would fain pluck the brands out of the fire,
remembering that they themselves were plucked out of it. They will labor to
commend religion to others, both by word and example; and rather deny
themselves their liberty in indifferent things, than by the uncharitable use of
it, destroy others, 1 Cor. viii. 13 Wherefore, if m^at make my brother to
offend, I will eat no flesh while the world stands, lest I make my brother to
offend

5. In their use of lawful comforts, there is a great change They rest not in
them, as their end; but use them, as means to help them in their way. They draw
their satisfaction from the higher springs, even while the lower springs are
running. Thus Hannah having obtained a son, rejoiced not so much in the gift,
as in the giver, 1 Samuel ii. 1 And Hann^h prayed, and said, My heart rejoiceth
in the Lord. Yea, when the comforts of life are gone, they can subsist without
them, and rejoice in the Lord, although the fig tree do not blossom, Hab. iii.
17, 18. Grace teaches to use the conveniences of a present life passingly; and
to show a holy moderation in all things. The heart, which formerly immersed
itself in these things without fear, is now shy of being overmuch pleased with
them; and being apprehensive of danger, uses them warily: as the dogs of Eg^p^
run while they lap their water out of the river Nile, for fear of the (...)
that are in it.

Lastly, This change shines forth in the man's performance of religions duties.
He who lived in the neglect of them, will do so no more, if once the grace of
God enter into his heart. If a man be newborn, he will desire the sincere milk
of the word; 1 Pet ii 2. Whenever the prayerless person gets the Spirit of
grace, he will be in him a Spirit if supplication, Z^ch xii. 10. It is as
natural for one that is born again to fall a praying, as for the newborn babe
to fall a-crying, Acts ix. 11. (...) heart will be a temple for God, and his
house a (...) which before it is superficial and carnal, is now (...) and (...)
are ^^nched (...) rests not in the mere performi^^ (...) done; but in every
duty (...) considering them as me^^ (...), and reckoning himself disappointed
(...) the nature of regeneration.

The Resemblance (...).
II. I come to (...) generation, a being born again. It is so (...) of the
resemblance betwixt natural and spiritual generation, which he in the following
pa^^iculars.

First, Natural generation (...) ^^ysterie is thing: and so is spiritual
generation. John iii. 8. The ^ind b^^w^th where is lists, and thou hear
the sound (...), but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes: so
is every one that is born of the Spirit. The work of the Spirit is felt, but
his way of working is a mystery we cannot comprehend. A new light is let into
the mind, and the will is renowed; but how that light is conveyed thither, how
the will is fettered with cords of love, and how the rebel is made a willing
captive, we can no more tell, than we can tell, how the bones do grow in (...)
of her that is with child, Eccles. xi 5. As a man hears the sound of the wind,
and finds it stirring; but knows not where i^ b^gins, and where it ends; so is
every one that is born of the spirits (...) finds the change that is made upon
him, but how it is produced, (...) not. One thing he may know, that whereas he
was blind, now he sees: but the seed of grace does spring and grow up, he
knows not how, Mark iv. 26, 27.

Secondly, In both, the creature comes to a being, it had not before. The child
is not, till he be generate; and a man has no gracious being, no being in
grace, till he be regenerate. Regeneration is not so much the curing of a sick
man, as the quickening of a dead man, Ephesians. ii. 1, 5. Man in his depraved state
i^ a mere nonentity in grace: and is brought into a new being, by the power of
him, who calls things that be not, as though they ^ver^; being created in
Jesus Christ unto good works, Ephesians. ii. 10. Therefore (...) Lord Jesus, to give
ground of hope to the L^^^ans, in their wretched no miserable state, proposes
himself as the beginning of (...) creation of God, Rev. iii. 14. Namely, the
active beginning of it; for all thing (...) by him at first, John i. 3. From
whence they might gather (...) he made them when they were nothing, (...), when
worse than nothing; the same hand that made (...) could make them new creatures.

Thirdly, As the child is merely passive in generation, so is the child of God
in regeneration. The one contributes nothing to its own generation; neither
does the other contribute any thing, by way of efficiency, to its own
regeneration: for though a man may lay himself down at the pool: yet he has no
hand in moving of the water, n^ efficacy in performing of the cure. One is born
the child of a king, another the child of a beggar: the child has no hand at
all in this difference. God leaves some in their depraved state; others he
brings into a state of grace or regeneracy. If thou be thus honored, no thanks
to thee; for who makes thee to differ from another? 1 Cor. iv. 7.

Fourthly, There is a wonderful contexture of parts in both births. Admirable
is the structure of man's body, in which there is such a variety of organs:
nothing wanting, nothing superfluous. The Psalmist considering his own body,
looks on it as a piece of mavelous work: I (...) fearfully and wonderfully
made, says he, Psalm. cxxxix. 14. and curiously wrought in the lower parts of
the earth, ver. 15. That is, in the womb, where I know not how the bones do
grow, more than I know what is a-doing in the lowest parts of the earth. In
natural generation, we are curiously wrought, as a piece of needle work; as the
word imports: even so it is in regeneration, Psalm. xlv. 14. She shall be
brought unto the King, in raiment of needle work, raiment curiously wrought. It
is the same word in both texts. And what that raiment is, the Apostle tells us,
Ephesians. iv. 24. It is the new man, which, after God, is created in righteousness
and true h^liness. That is the raiment, he says, in the same place, we must
put on; not excluding the imputed righteousness of Christ. Both are curiously
wrought, as masterpieces of the manifold wisdom of God. O the wonderful
contexture of graces in the new creature! O glorious creature, new-made, after
the image of God! It is grace for grace in Christ, which makes up the new man,
John i 16. Even as in bodily generation, the child has member for member in the
parent; has every member the parent has, in a certain proportion.

Fifthly, All this, in both cases, has its rise from that which is in itself
very small and inconsiderable. O the power of God, in making such a creature of
the corruptible seed! and much more in bringing forth the new creature from so
small beginnings: it is as the little cloud like a man's hand, which spread
till heaven was black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain, 1 Kings
xiii 44, 45. A man gets a word at a sermon, which hundreds beside him hear and
let slip: but it remains with him, works in him, and never leaves him, till the
little word be turned up side-down by it; that is, till he become a new man. It
is like the vapor that got up into Abasuerus's head, and cut off sleep from
his eyes, Esther vi 1. which proved a spring of such motions, as never ceased,
until Mordecai, in royal pomp, was brought on horseback through the street,
proud Haman trudging at his foot; the same Haman afterward hanged, Mordecai
advanced, and the church delivered from Haman's hellish (...). The grain of
mustard seed -- becomes a tree, Matthew. xiii. 21, 22. God loves to bring great
things out of small beginnings.

Sixthly, Natural generation is carried on by degrees, Job x. 10. Have thou not
poured me out as milk, and cruddled me like cheese? So is regeneration. It is
with the soul, ordinarily, in regeneration, as with the blind man cured by our
Lord, who first saw men as trees walking, afterward saw every man clearly,
Matthew. viii. 23, 24, 25. It is true, regeneration being, strictly speaking, a
passing from death to life, the soul is quickened in a moment: like as, when the
embryo is brought to perfection in the womb, the soul is infused into the
lifeless lump. Nevertheless, we may imagine somewhat like conception in
spiritual generation, whereby the soul is prepared for quickening: and the new
creature is capable of growth, 1 Pet. ii. 2. and of life more abundantly, John
x. 10.

Seventhly, In both there are new relations. The regenerate may call GOD,
Father: for they are his children, John i. 12, 13. begotten of him, 1 Pet. i.
3. The bride, the Lamb's wife, (that is the church) is their mother, Gal. iv.
27. They are related, as brethren, as sisters, to angels and glorified saints,
the family of heaven. They are of the heavenly stock: and the meanest of them,
the base things of the world, 1 Cor. i. 28. the kinless things, as the word
imports, who cannot boost of the blood that runs in their veins, are yet, by
their new birth, near of kin with the excellent of the earth.

Eighthly, There is a likeness betwixt the parent and the child. Every thing
that generates, generates its like; and the regenerate are partakers of the
divine nature, 2 Pet i. 4. the moral perfections of the divine nature are in
measure and degree communicated (...) renewed soul, and thus the divine image
is retrieved; so that, as the child resembles the father, the new creature
resembles God himself, being holy as he is holy.

Lastly, As there is no birth without pain, both to the mother and to the
child; so there is great pain in bringing forth the new creature. The children
have more or less of these birth-pains, whereby they are pricked in their
heart, Acts ii. 37. The soul has sore pains when under conviction and
humiliation, A wounded spirit who can bear? The mother is pained, Zion
travails, Isa. lxvi. 8. she sighs, groans, cries, and has hard labor, in her
ministers and members, to bring ^orth children to her Lord, Gal. iv. 10. My
little children, of whom I travail in birth again, until Christ be formed in
you. And never was a mother more feelingly touched with joy, that a man-child
was born into the world, than she is upon the new birth of her children. But w^
is more remarkable than all this, we read, not only of our Lord (...) Christ's
travail, (or toil of soul) Isa. liii. 11. but (what l^^ ^ore directly to our
purpose) of his pains, or pangs, as of one traveling in child birth; so the
word used Acts ii. 24. properly signifies. Well may he call the new creature,
as Rachel called her dear-bought son, Benoni, i. e. The son of my sorrow: and,
as she called another, Naphtali, i. e. my wrestling: for the pangs of that
travail put him to strong crying and tears, Heb. v. 7. yea, in an agony and
bloody sweat, Luke xxii. 44. And, in the end, he died of these pangs, they
became to him the pains of death, Acts ii. 24.

The Doctrine of Regeneration applied.
USE I. By what is said, you may try whether you are in the state of grace or
not. If ye be brought out of the state of wrath or ruin, into the state of
grace or salvation; ye are new creatures, ye are born again. But ye will say,
"How shall we know whether "we be born again or not?" Ans. Do you ask me, if
the sun were risen, and how you should know, whether it were risen, or not? I
would bid you look up to the heavens, and see it with your eyes. And would you
know if the light be risen in your heart? Look in, and see. Grace is light, and
discovers itself. Look into thy mind, see if it has been illuminate in the
knowledge of God. Have thou been inwardly taught what God is? Were thine eyes
ever turned inward to see thyself, the sinfulness of thy depraved state; the
corruption of thy nature; the sins of thy heart and life? Wast thou ever let
into a view of the exceeding sinfulness of sin? Have thine eyes seen King Jesus
in his beauty; the manifold wisdom of God in him, his transcendent excellency,
and absolute fullness and sufficiency, with the vanity and emptiness of all
things else? Next, What change is there on thy will? Are the setters taken off,
wherewith it was sometimes bound up from moving heavenwards? And has thy will
got a new set? Do thou find an aversion to sin, and a proneness to good
wrought in thy heart? Is thy soul turned toward God as thy chief end; is thy
will new-molded, into some measure of conformity to the preceptive and
providential will of God: Art thou heartily reconciled to the covenant of
peace, and sixedly disposed to the receiving of Christ* as he is offered in the
gospel? And as to a change on your affections, are they rectified, and placed
on right objects? Are your desires going on after God? Are they "to his name,
and remembrance of him?" Isa. xxvi. 8. Are your hopes in him? Is your love set
upon him, and your hatred set against sin? Does your offending a good God
affect your heart with sorrow, and do you fear sin more than suffering? Are
your affections regulated? Are they, with respect to created comforts brought
down, as being too high: and with respect to God in Christ, screwed up, as
being too low? Has he the chief seat in your heart? And are all your lawful
worldly comforts and enjoyments laid at his feet? Has thy conscience been
enlightened and awakened, refusing all ease, but from the application of the
blood of a Redeemer? Is thy memory sanctified, thy body consecrated to the
service of God? And art thou now walking in newness of life? Thus ye may
discover, whether, ye are born again or not.

But, for your further help in this matter, I will discourse a little of
another sign of regeneration, namely, The love of the brethren; an evidence
whereby the weakest and most timorous saints have often had comfort, when they
could have little or no consolation from other marks proposed to them. This the
Apostle lays down, 1 John iii. 14. We know that we have passed from death unto
life, because we love the brethren. It is not to be thought, that the Apostle,
by the brethren in this place, means brethren by a common relation to the first
Adam, but to the second Adam, Christ Jesus: because, however true it is, that
universal benevolence, a good will to the whole race of mankind, takes place in
the renewed soul, as being a lively lineament of the divine image; yet the
whole context speaks of those that are the sons of God, ver. 1, 2. children of
God, ver. 10. born of God, ver. 9. distinguishing betwixt the children of God,
and the children of the devil, ver. 10. betwixt these that are of the devil,
ver. 8, 12. and these that are of God, ver. 10. And the text itself comes in as
a reason why we should not marvel that the world hates the brethren, the
children of God, ver. 13. How can we marvel at it, seeing the love of the
brethren is an evidence of one's having passed from death to life? And
therefore it were absurd to look for that love amongst the men of the world,
when are dead in trespasses and sin. They cannot love the brethren: no marvel
then that they hate them. Wherefore it is plain, that by brethren here, are
meant brethren by regeneration.

Now, in order to set this mark of regeneration in a true light, consider these
three things. (1.) This love to the brethren, is a love to them as such. Then
do we love them in the sense of the text, when the grace, or image of God in
them, is the chief motive of our love to them. When we love the godly for their
godliness, the saints for their sanctity or holiness: then we love God in them,
and so may conclude, we are born of God; for every one that loves him that
begat, loves him also that is begotten of him, 1 John v. 1. Hypocrites may
love saints, on account of a civil relation to them; because of their obliging
conversation; for their being of the same opinion with themselves in religious
matters: and on many other such like accounts, whereby wicked men may be
induced to love the godly. But happy they, who can love them for naked grace in
them; for their heaven-born temper and disposition; who can pick this pearl out
of a dunghill of infirmities in, and about them; lay hold on it, and love them
for it. (2.) It is a love that will be given to all, in whom the grace of God
appears. They that love one saint, because he is a saint, will have love to all
the saints, Ephesians. i. 15. They will love all, who to their discerning, bear the
image of God. They that cannot love a gracious person in rags, but confine
their love to these of them who wear gay clothing, have not this love to the
brethren in them. There who can conf^ne their love to a party, to whom God has
not confined his grace, (...) too narrow to be put among the children. In what
points soever men differ from us, in their judgment or way: yet if they appear
to agree with us, in love to God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, and in bearing
his image; we will love them as brethren, if we ourselves be of the heavenly
family And, (3.) If this love be in ^^^che more grace any person appear to be
possessed of, he will be the more beloved by us. The more vehemently the holy
fire of grace does ^lame in any, the hearts of true Christians will be the more
warmed in love to them It is not with the saints as with many other men, who
(...) themselves the standard for others: and love them so (...) they think
they are like themselves. But, if they seem to out-mine, and larken them, their
love is turned to hatred and envy; and they endeavor to detract from the du^
praise of their exemplary piety; because nothing relisheth with them in the
practice of religion, that goes beyond their own measure; what of the life and
power of religion appears in others, serves only to raise the serpentine grudge
in their Pharisaical hearts. But, as for them that are born again; their love
and affection to the brethren, bears proportion to the degrees of the divine
image they discern in them.

Now, if ye would improve these things to the knowledge of your state, I would
advise you, (1.) To set apart some time, when ye are at home, for a review of
your case, and try your state, by what has been said. Many have comfort and
clearness as to their state, at a sermon; who in a little time lose it again:
because, while they hear the word preached, they make application of it; but do
not consider of these things more deliberately and leisurely when alone. The
action is too sudden and short, to give lasting comfort. And it is often so
indeliberate, that it has bad consequences. Therefore, set about this work at
home, after earnest and (...) prayer to God for his help in it. Complain not of
your want (...) while the night follows the busy day; or of place, (...) and
outhouses are to be got. (2.) Renew your repentance before the Lord. Guilt
lying on the conscience, unrepented of, may darken all your evidences and marks
of grace. It provokes the Spirit of grace to depart; and when he goes, our
light ceases. It is not sit time for a (...) to read his evidences, when the
candle is blown out by some conscience-wounding guilt. Lastly, Exert the powers
of the new nature; let the graces of the divine Spirit in you, discover
themselves by action. If ye would know whether there is a sacred fire in your
breast, or not, ye must blow the ^^al: for although it be, and be a live-coal;
yet if it be under the ashes, it will give you no light. Settle in your hearts
a firm purpose, through the grace that is in Christ Jesus, to comply with every
known duty, and watch against every known sin; having a readiness of mind, to
be instructed in what ye know not. If gracious souls would thus manage their
inquiries into their state; it is likely, they would have a comfortable issue.
And if others w^u^d take such a solemn review and make ^rial of their state
^mpartially, sist^^g themselves before the tribunal of their own consciences;
they might have a timely discovery of ^h^ir own naught^ness: but the neglect of
self examination (...) men under sad delusions, as to their state; and depr^^^s
many saints of the comfortable fight of the (...) of God in them.

But that I may afford some further help to true Christians, in their inquiries
into th^^^ state; I shall propose and briefly answer same cases o^ doubts,
which may possibly hinder some persons from the comfortable (...) of their
happy state. The children's bread must not be with held; (...) while it is
reached to them, the dogs should snatch at it.

CASE I. I doubt if I be regenerate, because I know not the precise time of my
conversion; nor can I trace the particular steps, in the way in which it was
brought to (...). Ans. Th^' it is very desirable, to be able to give an
account of the beginning and the gradual advances of the Lord's work upon our
souls, as some sain^s can distinctly do, (how beit the manner of the Spirit's
wo^king is still a mystery) yet this is not necessary to evidence the truth of
grace. Happy he that can say, in this ca^e, as the blind man in the gospel, One
thing I know, that whereas I was blind, now I see, Likeas when we see flames,
we know there is fire; though we know not how or when it began: so the truth of
grace in us may be discerned: though we know not how, or when, it was dropped into
our hearts. If thou can perceive the happy change, which is wrought on thy
soul: if thou find thy mind is enlightened, thy will inclined to comply with
the will of God in all things; especially to fall in with the divine plan of
salvation through a crucified Redeemer: in vain do thou trouble thyself, and
refuse comfort, because thou know not how and what way it was brought about.

CASE II. "If I were a new creature, sin could not prevail against me as it
does." Ans. Though we must not lay pillows for hypocrites to rest their heads
upon, who indulge themselves in their sins, and make the doctrine of God's
grace subservient to their lusts, lying down contentedly in the bond of
iniquity, like men that are fond of golden chains: yet it must be owned, the
just man falls seven times a day, and iniquity may prevail against the
children of God. But, if thou art groaning under the weight of the body of
death, the corruption of thy nature; loathing thyself for the sins of thy heart
and life; striving to mortify thy lusts; fleeing daily to the blood of Christ
for pardon; and looking to his Spirit for sanctification: though thou may be
obliged to say with the Psalmist, Iniquities prevail against me? Yet thou
may add ^ith him, As for our transgressions, thou shall purge them away,
Psalm. lxv. 3. The new creature does not yet possess the house alone: it dwells
beside an ill neighbor; namely, remaining corruption, the reliqu^^s of
depraved nature. These struggle together for the m^stery: The flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, Gal. v ^ And sometimes
corruption prev^^ls, bringing the (...) of God into captivity to the law of
sin, Rom vii. 23. Let not therefore the prevailing of corruption, make thee in
this case conclude thou art none of God's children: but let it humble thee to
be the more watchful, and to thirst the more intensely after Jesus Christ, his
blood and Spirit; and that very disposition will evidence a principle of grace
in thee, which seeks the destruction of sin, that prevails so often against
thee.

CASE III. I find the motions of sin in my heart more violent, since the Lord
began his work on my soul, than they were before that time. Can this consist
with a change of my nature? Ans D^eadful is the case of many, wh^^ after God
has had a remarkable dealing with their souls, tending to their reformation,
have thrown off all bonds; and have become grossly and openly ^mmoral and
profane; as if the devil had returned into their hearts, with seven spirits
worse than himself. All I shall say to such persons is, that their state is
exceeding dangerous: they are in danger of sinning against the Holy Ghost:
therefore let them repent, before it be too late. But if it be not th^^ with
you: though corruption is bestirring itself more violently than formerly, as if
all the forces of hell were raised, to hold fast, to b^ing back a fugitive; I
say, these stirrings may consist with a change of your nature. When the
restraint of grace is newly laid upon corruption, it is no wonder if this last
acts more vigorously than before, warring against the law of the mind, Romans
vii. 23. The motions of sin may really be most violent; when a new principle is
brought in to cast it out. And, as the sun, sending its beams through the
window, discovers the motes in the house, and their motions, which were not
seen before: so the light of grace may discover the rising and actings of
corruption, in another manner than ever the man saw them before; though they
really do not rise nor act more vigorously. Sin is not quite dead in the
regenerate soul, it is but dying; and, dying a lingering death, being
crucified, no wonder there be great fightings, when it is sick at the heart,
and death is at the door. Besides temptations may be more in number, and
stronger, while Satan is striving to bring you back who are escaped, than while
he endeavored only to retain you: After ye were illuminated, ye endured a
great fight of afflictions, says the Apostle, to the Hebrews, chap. x. 32. But
cast not away your confidence, ver. 34. Remember his grace is sufficient for
you, and the God of peace will bruise Satan under your feet shortly. Pharaoh
and his Egyptians never made such a formidable appearance against the
Israelites, as at the Red sea, after they were brought out of Egypt: but then
were the pursuers nearest to a total overthrow, Exodus xiv. Let not this case
therefore make you raze your foundations: but be ye emptied of yourselves, and
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; and ye shall come off
victorious.

CASE IV. But when I compare my love: God, with my love to some created
enjoyments, I find the pulse of my affections beat stronger to the creature
than the Creator. How then can I call him father? Nay, alas! these turnings of
heart within me, and glowings of affection to him which sometimes I had, are
gone; so that I fear, all the love I ever had to the LORD, h^^ been but a fit
and flash of affection, such as hypocrites often have. Ans. It cannot be
denied, that the predominant love of the world, is a certain mark of an
unregenerate state, 1 John ii. 15. If any man love the world, the love of the
Father is not in him. Nevertheless, th^se are not always the strongest
affections, which are most violent. A man's affection may be more moved on some
occations by an object that is little regarded, tha^ by another, that is
exceedingly beloved; even as a little brook ^^^etimes makes a greater noise
than a great river. The strength of our affections is to be measured by the
firmness and fixedness of the root: not by the violence of their actings.
Suppose a person meeting with a friend w^o has been long abroad, finds his
affection more vehemently acting toward his friend on that occasion, than
toward his own wife and children; will he therefore say that he loves his
friend more than them? Surely no. Even so, although the Christian may find
himself more moved in his love to the creature, than in his love to God; yet he
is not therefore to be said to love the creature more than God; seeing love to
God is always more firmly rooted in a gracious heart, than love to any created
enjoyment whatsoever: as appears when competition arises in such a manner, that
the one or the other is to be forgone. Would you then know your case? Retire
into your own hearts, and there lay the two in the balance, and try which of
them weighs down the other. Ask thyself, as in the sight of God, whether thou
would part with Christ for the creature, or part with the creature for
Christ, if thou were left to thy choice in the matter? If you find your heart
disposed to part with what is dearest to you in the world for Christ, at his
call: you have no reason to conclude you love the creature more than God; but
on the contrary, that you love God more than the creature; albeit you do not
feel such v^ol^^^ motions in the love of God, as in the love of some created
thing, Matt^ x. 37. He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy
of me. Luke xiv. 26. If any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother,
-- he cannot be my disciple. From which texts compared, we may infer, that he
who hates, i. e. is rea^y to part with father and mother for Christ, is, in our
Lord's account, one that loves them less than him; and not one who loves father
and mother more than him. M^reover, ye are to consider there is a twofold love
to Christ. (1.) There is a sensible love to ^^m, which ^s felt as a dart in the
heart; and makes a holy love-sickness in the soul, aris^ng either from want of
enjoyment, as in the case of the spouse, Can^ v. 8. I charge you, O daughters
of Jerusalem, if ye find my bl^^a, this ye tell him, that I am sick of love: or
else from the (...), as in that case, Can^. ii. 5. Stay me with f^^gons,
comfo^t mo^^^ apples: for I am sick of love. These glowings of affections are
usually wrought in young converts, who are ordinarily made to sing in the day
of their youth, Hos. ii. 14. While the fire-edge is upon the young convert, be
looks upon others, reputed to be godly, and not finding them in such a temper
and disposition as himself, he is ready to censure them; and think there is far
less religion in the world, than indeed there is. But when his own cup comes to
se^^^ below the brim, and he finds that in himself, which made him question the
state of others, he is more humbled, and feels more and more the necessity of
daily recourse to the blood of Christ for pardon, and to the Spirit of Christ
for sanctification; and thus grows downwards in humiliation; self-loathing, and
self-denial. (2.) There is a rational love to Christ, which, without these
sensible emotions felt in the former case, evidences itself by a dutiful regard
to the divine authority and command. When one bears such a love to Christ, though
the vehement stirrings of affection be wanting, yet he is truly tender of
offending a gracious God; endeavors to walk before him unto all pleasing; and
grieved at the heart, for what is displeasing unto him, 1 John v. 3. For this
is the love of God, that we keep his commandments. Now, although that sensible
love does not always continue with you: yet ye have no reason to account it a
hypocritical fit, while the rational love remains with you, more than a
faithful and loving wife needs question her love to her husband, when her
fondness is abated.

CASE V. The seize of hypocrites and apostates are a terror to me, and
come like a shaking sto^^ on me, when I am about to conclude from the marks of
grace which I seem to find in myself, that I (...) the state of grace. Ans.
These things should indeed stir us up (...) a most serious and impartial
examination of ourselves; but ought not to keep us in a continued suspense as
to our state. Sirs, ye see the outside of hypocrites, their duties, their
gifts, their tears, etc. but ye see not their inside; ye do not discern their
hearts, the bias of their spirits. Upon what ye see of them, ye found a
judgment of charity, as to their state; and ye do well to judge charitably in
such a case, because ye cannot know the secret springs of their actings: But ye
are speaking, and ought to have a judgment of certainty, as to your own state;
and therefore are to look in to that part of religion, which none in the world
but yourselves can discern in you; and which ye can as little see in others. An
hypocrite's religion may appear far greater than that of a sincere soul: but,
that which makes the greatest figure in the eyes of men, is often least worth
before God. I would rather utter one of these groans the Apostle speaks of,
Romans viii. 26. than shed Esau's tears, have Balaam's prophetic spirit, or the
joy of the stony-ground hearers. The fire that shall try every man's work, will
try, not of what bulk it is, but of what sort it is, 1 Cor. iii. 13. Now, ye
may know what bulk of religion another has: and what though it be more bulky than
your own? God does not regard that: Why then do you make such a matter of it?
It is impossible for you, without divine revelation, certainly to know of what
sort another man's religion is: but ye may certainly know what sort your own is
of, without extraordinary revelation; otherwise the Apostle would not exhort
the saints to give diligence to make their calling and election sure, 2 Pet i.
10. Therefore, the seize of hypo^rites and apostates should not disturb
you in your serious inquiry into your own state. But I Will tell you two things
wherein the meanest saints go beyond the most refined hypocrites. (1) In
denying themselves, renouncing all confidence in themselves, and their own
works, acquiescing in, being well-pleased with, and venturing their souls upon
God's plan of salvation through Jesus Christ, Matthew. v. 3. Blessed are the poor
in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. And chap. xi. 6. Blessed is he
whosoever shall not be offended in me. Philip. iii. 3. We are the circumcision
which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no
confidence in the flesh. (2.) In a real hatred of all sin; being willing to
part with every lust, without exception, and comply with every duty the Lord
makes, or shall make known to them: Psalm. cxix 6. Then shall I not be ashamed,
when I have respect unto all thy commandments. Try yourselves by these.

CASE VI. I see myself fall so far short of the saints mentioned in the
scriptures, and of several excellent persons of my own acquaintance; that, when
I look on them, I can hardly look on myself as one of the same family with
them. Ans. It is indeed matter of humiliation, that we get not forward to that
measure of grace and holiness, which we see is attainable in this life. This
should make us more vigorously press toward the mark: But surely it is from
the devil, that weak Christians make a rack for themselves of the seize
of the strong. And to yield to this temptation, is as unreasonable, as for a
child to dispute away his relation to his father, because he is not of the same
stature with his elder brethren. There are saints of several sizes in Christ's
family: some fathers, some young men, and some little children, 1 John ii. 13,
14.

CASE VII. I never read in the word of God, nor did I ever know of a child of
God so tempted, and so left of God as I am; and therefore no saint's case being
like mine, I cannot but conclude I am none of their number. Ans. This objection
arises to some from their unacquaintedness with the scriptures, and with
experienced Christians. It is profitable in this case, to impart the matter to
some experienced Christian friend, or to some godly minister. This has been a
blessed mean of peace to some persons; while their case, which appeared to them
to be singular, has been evinced to have been the case of other saints. The
scripture give instances of very horrid temptations, wherewith the saints have
been assaulted: Job was tempted to blaspheme; this was the great thing the
^^vil aimed at, in the case of that g^^^t saint, Job i. 11. He will curse thee
to thy f^^e. Chap. ii. 9. Curse God and die, As^ph was tempted to think, it was
in vain to be religious; which was in effect to throw (...) religion, Psalm
lxx^ii. 13. Verily I have cleansed my (...) in vain. Ye^, Christ himself was
tempted to cast himself down from a pinnacle of the temple, and to worship the
devil, Matthew iv. 6, 9. And many of the children of God have not only been
attacked with, but have actually yielded to very gross temptations for a time.
Peter denied CHRIST, and cursed and swore that he know him not. Mark xiv. 71.
Paul, when a persecuter, compelled even saints to blaspheme, Acts xxvi. 10, 11.
Many of the saints can, from their sad experience, bear witness to very gross
temptations, which have astonished their spirits, made their very flesh to
tremble, and sickened their bodies. Satan's fiery darts make terrible work; and
will cost pains to quench them, by a vigorous managing of the shi^ld of faith,
Ephesians. vi 16. Sometimes, he makes such desperate attacks, that never was one
more put to it, in running to and fro, without intermission to quench the
fireballs incessantly thrown into his house by an enemy designing to burn the
house about him; than the poor tempted saint is, to repel satanical injections.
But these injections, these horrid temptations, though they are a dreadful
affliction, they are not the sins of the tempted, unless they make them theirs
by consenting to them. They will be charged upon the tempter alone, if they be
not consented to; and will no more be laid to the charge of the tempted party,
than a bastard's being laid down at the chaste man's door, will fix guilt upon
him. But, suppose neither minister nor private Christian, to whom you go^ can
tell you of any who has been in your case; yet you ought not thence to infer,
that your case certainly is singular, far less to give over hopes: for it is
not to be thought, that every godly minister, or private Christian, has had the
experience of all the cases a child of God may be in. And we need not doubt but
some have had distresses known only to God, and their own consciences; and, so,
to others these distresses are as if they had never been. Yea, and though the
scripture do contain suitable directions for every case a child of God can be
in; and these illustrated with a sufficient number of examples: yet it is not
to be imagined, that there are in the scriptures perfect instances of every
particular case incident to the saints. Therefore, howbeit you cannot find an
instance of your case in the scripture; yet bring your case to it, and you
shall find suitable remedies prescribed there for it And study rather to make
use of Christ for your case, who has salve for all sores; than to know if ever
any was in your case Though one should show you an instance of your case, in an
undoubted saint; yet none could promise it would certainly give you ease: for a
scrupulous conscience would readily find out some difference. And if nothing
but a perfect conformity of another's case to yours, will satisfy, it will be
hard, if not impossible to satisfy you. For it is with people's cases, as with
their natural faces: though faces of all men are of one make; and some are so
very like others, that, at first view we are ready to take them for the same:
yet if you view them more accurately, you will see something in every face,
distinguishing it from all others: though possibly you cannot tell what it is;
wherefore I conclude, that if you can find in yourselves the marks of
regeneration, proposed to you from the word; you ought to conclude, you are in
the state of grace, though your case were singular, which is indeed unlikely.

CASE last, The afflictions I meet with are strange and unusual. I doubt if
ever a child of God was trysted with such dispensations of providence as I am
Ans. Much of what was said on the preceding case, may be helped in this. Holy
Job was assaulted with this temptation, Job v. 1. To which ^f the saints will thou turn^ But he rejected it, and held fast his integrity. The Apostle
supposes Christians may be tempted to think strange concerning the fiery
trial, 1 Pet. iv. 12 But they have need of larger experience than Solomon's who
will venture to say, See this is new, Eccles. i. 10. And what though, in
respect of the outward dispensations of providence it happen to you according
to the work of the wicked? You may be just notwithstanding; according to
Solomon's observe, Eccles. viii. 14. Sometimes we travel in ways, where we
cannot perceive the prints of the foot of man or beast; yet we cannot from
thence conclude, that there was never any there before us: so, albeit thou
can not perceive the footsteps of the flock in the way of thine affliction;
thou must not therefore conclude, thou art the first that ever traveled that
road. But, what, if it were so, that thou were indeed the first? Some one saint
or other behoved to be the first, in drinking of each bitter cup the rest have
drunk of. What warrant have you or I, to limit the holy One of Isra^l to a
trodden path, in his dispensations toward us? Thy way is in the sea, and thy
path in the great waters, and thy footsteps are not known, Psalm. lxxvii. 19. If
the Lord should carry you to heaven by some retired road, and let you in at a
backdoor, (so to speak) you would have no ground to complain. Learn to allow
sovereignity a latitude; be at your duty; and let no affliction ca^t a vail
over any evidences you otherwise have for your being in the state of grace: for
no man knows either their love or ha^red by all that is before them, Eccles.
ix. 1.

USE II. Ye that are strangers to this new birth, be convinced of the absolute
necessity of it Are all in the state of grace born again? Then ye have neither
part nor lot in it, who are not born again. I must tell you in the words of our
Lord and Savior, (and O that he would speak them to your hearts) ye must b^
born again, John iii. 7. And for your conviction, consider these few things.

First, Regeneration is absolutely necessary to qualify you to do any thing
really good and acceptable to God. Wh^le you are not born again, your best
works are but glistering sins; for though the matter of them is good* they are
quite marred in the making. Consider, (1.) That without regeneration there is
no faith, and without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb xi. 6. Faith is
a vital act of the newborn soul. The Evangelist, showing the different
entertainment our Lord Jesus had from different persons, some receiving him,
some rejecting him, points at regenerating grace, as the true rise of that
difference; without which never one would have received him. He tells us, that
as many as received him, were these which were born -- of God, John i. 11, 12,
13. Unregenerate men may presume; but true faith they cannot have. Faith is a
flower, that grows not in the field of nature. As the tree cannot grow without
a root, neither can a man believe without the new nature, whereof the principle
of believing is a part. (2.) Without regeneration a man's works are dead works.
As is the principle, so must the effects be: if the lungs be rotten, the breath
will be unsavory; and he who at best is dead in sin, his works at best will be
but dead works. Unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure --
being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work, reprobate, Tit i.
15, 16. Could we say of a man, that he is more blameless in his life, than any
other in the world; that he macerates his body with fasting; and has made his
knees as horns with continual praying; but he is not born again: that exception
would mar all. And if one should say, there is a well-proportioned body, but
the soul is gone, it is but a dead lump. This is a melting consideration Thou
do many things materially good, but God says, All these things avail not, as
long as I see the old nature reigning in the man, Gal. vi. 15. For in Jesus
Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature.

If thou art not born again, (1.) All thy reformation is naught in the sight of
God. Thou have shut the door, but the thief is still in the house. It may be
thou art not what once thou wast, yet thou art not what thou must be, if ever
thou see heaven; for, except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom
of God, John iii. 3. (2.) Thy prayers are an abomination to the Lord, Prove xv.
8. It may be, others admire thy seriousness; thou criest as for thy life: but
God accounts of the opening of thy mouth, as one would account of the opening
of a grave full of rottenness, Romans iii. 13. Their throat is an open sepulcher.
Others are affected with thy prayers; which seem to them, as if thy would rend
the heavens: but God accounts them as the howling of a dog: They have not cried
unto me with their heart, when they howled upon their beds, Hos. vii. 14.
Others take thee for a wrestler and prevailer with God; but he can take no
delight with thee, nor thy prayers neither, Isa. lxvi. 3. He that kills an
ox, is as if he slew a man: he that sacrifices a lamb, is as if he cut off a
dog's neck, -- he that burns incense, as if he blessed an idol. Why not?
Because thou art yet in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. (3.) All
thou have done for God and his cause in the world, though it may be followed
with temporal rewards, yet is lost as to divine acceptance. This is clear from
the case of Jehu; who was indeed rewarded with a kingdom, for his executing due
vengeance upon the house of Ahab; as being a work good, for the matter of it,
because it was commanded of God, as you may see, 2 Kings x. 13. Yet he was
punished for it in has posterity, because he did it not in a right manner, Hos
i. 4. I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu. God looks
mainly to the heart: and if so, truly albeit thy outward appearance be fairer
than that of many others, yet the hidden man of thy heart, is loathsome; thou
look well before men, but art thou, as Moses was, fair to God, as the margin
has it, Acts vii 20 O what a difference is there betwixt the characters of Asa
and Amaziah: The high places were not removed: nevertheless, Asa his heart was
perf^ct with the Lord all his days, 1 Kings xv. 14. Amaziah did that which was
right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. xxv. 2.
It may be, thou art zealous against sin in others, and do admonish them to
their duty, and reprove them for their sin; and they hate thee, because thou
do thy duty. But I must tell thee, God hates thee too, because thou do it
not in a right manner; and that thou can never do, whilst thou art not born
again. Lastly, All thy struggles against sin, in thine own heart and life, are
naught. The proud Pharisee afflicted his body with fasting, and God struck his
soul in the mean time with a sentence of condemnation, Luke xviii. Balaam
struggled with his covetous temper to that degree, that though he loved the
wages of unrighteousness, yet he would not win them by cursing Israel, but he
died the death of the wicked, Numb. xxxi. 8. All thou do while in an
unregenerate state is for thyself: and therefore it will fare with thee, as
with a subject, who having reduced the rebels, put the crown on his own head;
and therefore loses all his good service, and his head too.

Obj^ct. If it be thus with us, then we need never perform any religious duty
at all. Ans. The conclusion is not just No inability of thine can loose thee
from the duty God's law lays on thee: and there is less evil in thy doing thy
duty, than there is in the omitting of it. But there is a mids betwixt omitting
of duty, and the doing of it as thou do it. A man orders masons to build a
house: if they quite neglect the work, that will not be accepted; if they fall
on, and build upon the old rotten foundation, neither will that please; but
they must raze the old foundation, and build on firm ground Go thou and do
likewise. In the mean time, it is not in vain for thee, even for thee, to seek
the Lord: for though he regards thee not, yet he may have respect to his own
ordinance, and do thee good thereby, as was said before.

Secondly, Without regeneration there is no communion with God. There is a
society on earth, whose fellowship is with the Father, and with the Son Jesus
Christ, 1 John i. 3. But out of that society all the unregenerate are excluded;
for they are all enemies to God, as ye heard before at large. Now, can two walk
together, except they be agreed? Amos iii. 3. They are all unholy: and what
communion has light with darkness -- Christ with ^^lial? 2 Cor. vi. 14, 15.
They may have a show and semblance of holiness, but they are strangers to true
holiness, and therefore without God in the world. How sad is this case, to be
employed in religious duties, but to have no fellowship with God in them! ye
would not be content with your meat, unless it fed you; nor with your clothes,
unless they kept you warm: and and how can you satisfy yourselves with your
duties, while they are not effectual to your communion with God?

Thirdly, Regeneration is absolutely necessary to qualify you for heaven. None
go to heaven but they that are made meet for it, Col. i. 12. As it was with
Solomon's temple, 1 Kings vi 7. so it is with the temple above: It is built of
stone made ready before it is brought thither; namely, of lively stones, 1 Pet
ii. 5 wrought for the same thing, 2 Cor. v 5. for they cannot be laid in that
glorious building, just as they came out of the quarry of depraved nature:
Jewels of gold are not meet for swine, and far less jewels of glory for
unrenewed sinners. Beggars in their rags are not meet for king's houses; nor
sinners to enter into the king's palace, without the raiment of needle work,
Psalm. xlv 14, 15. What wise man would bring fishes out of the water to feed in
his meadow? or send his oxen to feed in the sea? Even as little are the
unregenerate meet for heaven, or is heaven meet for them It would never be
liked of by them.

The unregenerate would find f^ult with heaven on several accounts. As (1.)
That it is a strange country. Heaven is the renewed man's native country: his
Father is in heaven; his mother is Jerusalem, which is above, Gal. iv 26 He is
born from above, John iii 3. Heaven is his home, 2 Cor. v. 1. Therefore he
looks on himself as a stranger on this earth, and his head is homeward, Heb.
xi. 16 They desire a better country, that is, an heavenly. But the unregenerate
man is the man of the earth, Psalm. x. 18. written in the earth, Jer. xvii 13.
Now, home is home, be it never so homely, therefore he minds earthly things,
Philip. iii. 19. There is a peculiar sweetness in our native soil; and hardly
are men drawn to leave it, and dwell in a strange country. In no case does that
prevail more, than in this; for unrenewed men would quit their pretensions to
heaven, were it not that they see they cannot make a better of it. (2.) There
is nothing thereof what they delight most in, as most agreeable to the carnal
heart, Rev. xxi. 27. And there shall in no wise enter into it, any thing that
d^fileth. When Mahomet gave out paradise to be a place of sensual delights, his
religion was greedily embraced: for that is the heaven men naturally choose. If
the covetous man could get bags full of gold there, and the voluptuous man can
promise himself his sensual delights there; they might be reconciled to heaven,
and meet for it too: but since it is not so, though they may utter fair words
about it, truly it has little of their hearts. (3.) Ever^ corner there is
filled with that, which of all things they have the least liking of: and that
is holiness, true holiness, perfect holiness Were one that abhors swine's
flesh, bidden to a feast, where all the dishes were of that sort of meat, but
variously prepared; he would find fault with every dish at the table,
notwithstanding all the art used to make them palatable. It is true, there is
joys in heaven, but it is holy joy: there are pleasures in heaven, but they are
holy pleasures: there are places to stand by in heaven, but it is holy ground.
That holiness that casts up in every place, and in every thing there, would mar
all to the unregenerate (4.) Were they carried thither, they would not only
change their place, which would be a great heart break to them: but they would
change their company too. Truly they would never like the company there, who
care not for communion with God here; nor value the fellowship of his people,
at least in the vitals of practical godliness. Many indeed mix themselves with
the godly on earth, to procure a name to themselves, and to cover the
naughtiness of their hearts: but that trade could not be managed there. (5.)
They would never like the employment of heaven, they care so little for it now.
The business of the saints there, would be an intolerable burden to them,
seeing it is not agreeable to their nature To be taken up in beholding,
admiring, and praising of him that sits upon the throne, and of the Lamb,
would be work unsuitable, and therefore unsavory to an unrenewed soul. Lastly,
They would find this fault with it, that the whole is of everlasting
continuance. This would be a killing ingredient in it, to them. How would such
as now account the Sabbath Day a burden, brook the celebrating of an
everlasting Sabbath in the heavens?

Lastly, Regeneration is absolutely necessary to your being admitted into
heaven, John iii. 3. No heaven without it Though carnal men could digest all
these things, which make heaven so unsuitable for them; yet God will never
suffer them to come thither Therefore born again ye must be: else ye shall
never see heaven, ye shall perish eternally. For, (1.) There is a bill of
exclusion against you in the court of heaven, and against all your sort: Except
a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God, John iii. 3. Here is a
bar before you, that men and angels cannot remove. And to hope for heaven, over
the belly of this peremptory sentence, is to hope that God will recall his word,
and sacrifice his truth and faithfulness to your safety; which is infinitely
more than to hope the earth shall be forsaken for you, and the rock removed out
of his place (2) There is no holiness without regeneration. It is the new man,
which is created in true holiness, Ephesians. iv. 24. And no heaven without holiness;
for without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. xii. 14 Will the gates of
pearl be opened, to let in dogs and swine? No; their place is without, Rev.
xxii. 15. God will not admit such into the holy place of communion with him
here; and will he admit them into the holiest of all hereafter? Will he take
the children of the devil, and give them to sit with him in his throne? Or will
he bring the unclean into the city, whose street is pure gold? Be not deceived,
grace and glory are but two links of one chain, which God has joined, and no
man shall put asunder. None are transplanted into the paradise above, but out
of the nursery of grace below. If ye be unholy while in this world, ye will be
for ever miserable in the world to come. (3.) All the unregenerate are without
Christ, and therefore having no hope while in that case, Ephesians. ii. 12. Will
Christ prepare mansions of glory for them, that refuse to receive him into
their hearts? Nay; rather, will he not laugh at their calamity, who now ^et at
naught all his counsel? Prove. i. 25, 26. Lastly, There is an infallible
connection betwixt a finally unregenerate state and damnation, rising from the
nature of the things themselves: and from the decree of heaven, which is fixed
and unmovable as mountains of brass, John iii. 3. Romans viii. 6. To be carnally
minded is death. An unregenerate state is hell in the bud. It is eternal
destruction in embryo; growing daily, though thou do not discern it. Death is
painted on many a fair face, in this life. Depraved nature makes men meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the damned, in utter darkness. (1.) The heart
of stone within thee, is a sinking weight, as a stone naturally goes downward;
so the hard stony heart tends downward to the bottomless pit. Ye are hardened
against reproof: though ye are told your danger; yet you will not see it, ye
will not believe it. But remember, that the conscience its being now feared
with a hot iron, is a sad presage of everlasting burnings. (2.) Your
unfruitfulness under the means of grace, fits you for the ax of God's
judgments, Matthew. iii. 10. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is
hewn down, and cast into the fire. The withered branch is fuel for the fire,
John xv. 6. Tremble at this ye despisers of the gospel: if ye be not thereby
made meet for heaven, ye will be like the barren ground, bearing briers and
thorns, nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned, Heb. vi. 8. (3.) The
hellish disposition of mind, which discover themselves in profanity of life,
fit the guilty for the regions of horror. A profane life will have a miserable
end. They which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God, Gal. v.
19, 20, 21. Think on this, ye prayerless persons, ye mockers of religion, ye
cursers and swearers, ye unclean, and unjust persons, who have not so much as
moral honesty to keep you from lying, cheating and stealing. What sort of a
tree think ye it to be, upon which these fruits grow? Is it a tree of
righteousness, which the Lord has planted? Or is it such an one as cumbers the
ground, which God will pluck up for fuel to the fire of his wrath? (4.) Your
being dead in sin makes you meet to be wrapped in flames of brimstone, as a
winding sheet; and to be buried in the bottomless pit, as in a grave. Great was
the cry in Egypt, when the firstborn in each family was dead; but are there
not many families, where all are dead together? Nay, many there are, who are
twice dead, plucked up by the roots. Sometime, in their life, they have been
rouzed by apprehensions of death, and its consequences; but now they are so far
on in their way to the land of darkness, that they hardly ever have the least
glimmering of light from heaven. (5.) The darkness of your minds presageth
eternal darkness O the horrible ignorance some are plagued with while others
who have got some rays of morning light into their heads; are utterly void of
spiritual light in their hearts! If ye knew your case, ye would cry out, Oh!
darkness! darkness! darkness making way for the blackness of darkness for ever!
The face-covering is upon you already, as condemned persons; so near are ye to
everlasting darkness. It is only Jesus Christ who can stop the execution, pull
the napkin off the face of the condemned malefactor, and put a pardon in his
hand, Isa. xxv. 7. And he will destroy in this mountain, the face of the
covering cast over all people, i e. The face-covering cast over the condemned,
as in Haman's case, Esther vii. 8. As the word went out of the king's mouth,
they covered Human's face. Lastly, The chains of darkness ye are bound with in
the prison of your depraved state, Isa. lxi. 1. fits you to be cast into the
burning fiery furnace. Ah miserable men! Sometimes their consciences stir
within them, and they begin to think of amending their ways. But alas! they are
in chains, they cannot do it. They are chained by the heart; their lusts cleave
so fast to them, that they cannot, nay, they will not, shake them off. Thus you
see what affinity there is betwixt an unregenerate state, and the state of the
damned, the state of absosolute and irretrievable misery; be convinced then,
that ye must be born again; put a high value on the new birth, and eagerly
desire it.

The text tells you, that the word is the seed, whereof the new creature is
formed: therefore take heed to it, and entertain it, for it is your life. Apply
yourselves to the reading of the Scripture. Ye that cannot read, cause others
read it to you. Wait diligently on the preaching of the word, as by divine
appointment, the special mean of conversion: for -- it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor. i. 21. Wherefore
cast not yourselves out of Christ's way; reject not the means of grace, lest ye
be found to judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life. Attend carefully to the
word preached. Hear every sermon, as if you were hearing for eternity: and take
heed, the fowls of the air pick not up this seed from you as it is sown. Give
thyself wholly to it, 1 Timothy iv 15. Receive it not as the word of men, but (as
it is in truth) the word of God, 1 Thessalonians ii. 13. And hear it with application,
looking on it as a message sent from heaven, to you in particular though not to
you only, Rev iii. 22 He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says
unto the churches Lay it up in your hearts, meditate upon it: and be not as the
unclean beasts, that chew not the cud. But by earnest prayer beg the dew of
heaven may fall on thy heart, that the seed may spring up there.

More particularly, (1.) Receive the testimony of the word of God, concerning
the misery of an unregenerate state, the sinfulness thereof, and the absolute
necessity of regeneration. (2.) Receive its testimony concerning God, what a
holy and just one he is. (3.) Examine thy ways by it; namely, the thoughts of
thy heart, the expressions of thy lips, and the tenor of thy life Look back
through the several periods of thy life, and see thy sins from the precepts of
the word; and learn from its threatenings, what thou art liable to, on the
account of these sins. (4.) View the corruption of thy nature, by the help of
the same word of God; as a glass which represents our ugly face in a lively
manner. Were these things deeply rooted in the heart, they might be the seed of
that fear and sorrow, on account of thy soul's state, which are necessary to
prepare and stir thee up to look after a Savior. Fix your thoughts upon him
offered to thee in the gospel, as fully suited to thy case; having, by his
obedience to the death, perfectly satisfied the justice of God, and brought in
everlasting righteousness. This may prove the seed of humiliation, desire, hope
and faith; and put thee on to stretch out the withered hand unto him, at his
own command.

Let these things sink deeply into your hearts, and improve them diligently.
Remember, whatever ye be, ye MUST be born again; else it had been better for
you, ye had never been born Wherefore, if any of you shall live and die in an
unregenerate state, ye will be inexcusable, having been fairly warned of your
hazard.

HEAD II. The MYSTICAL UNION betwixt CHRIST and Believers.
JOHN xv. 5. I am the Vine, ye are the Branches.


HAVING spoken of the change, made by regeneration on all those that shall
inherit eternal life, in opposition to their natural real state, the state of
degeneracy; I proceed to speak of the change made upon them, in their union
with the Lord Jesus Christ, in opposition to their natural relative state, the
state of misery. The doctrine of the saints union with Christ is very plainly
and fully insisted on, from the beginning of the 12th verse of this chapter;
which is a part of our Lord's farewell sermon to his disciples. Sorrow had now
filled their hearts; they were apt to say, Alas! What will become of us, when
our Master is taken trom our head? Who will then instruct us? Who will solve
our doubts? How will we be supported under our difficulties and
discouragements? How will we be able to live without our wonted communications
with him? Wherefore our Lord Jesus Christ seasonably teaches them the mystery
of their union with him, comparing himself to the vine-stock, and them to the
branches.

He compares, I say, (1.) Himself to a vine stock: I am the Vine: He had been
celebrating, with his disciples, the Sacrament of his Supper, that sign and
seal of his people's union with himself; and had told them, he would drink no
more of the fruit of the vine, till he should drink it new with them in his
Father's kingdom: and now he shows himself to be the Vine, from whence the wine
of their consolation should come. The vine has less beauty than many other
trees: but is exceeding fruitful; fitly representing the low condition our Lord
was then in, yet bringing many sons to glory. But that which is chiefly aimed
at, in his comparing himself to a vine, is to represent himself as the
supporter and nourisher of his people, in whom they live, and bring forth
fruit. (2.) He compares them to the branches, ye are the branches of that Vine.
Ye are the branches knit to, and growing on this stock: drawing all your life
and sap from it. It is a beautiful comparison; as if he had said, I am as a
Vine, ye are as the branche^ of that Vine. Now there are two sorts of branches:
(1.) Natural branches, which at first spring out of the stock: these are the
branches that are in the tree, and were never out of it. (2) There are
ingrafted branches, which are branches broken off from the tree that first gave
their life; and put into another to grow upon it. Thus branches come to be on a
tree, which originally were not on it. The branches mentioned in the text, are
of the latter sort; branches broken off, (as the word in the original language
denotes) namely, from the tree that first gave them life. None of the children
of men are natural branches of the second Adam, viz. Jesus Christ the true
Vine; they are all the natural branches of the first Adam, that degenerate
vine; but the elect are all of them sooner or later broken off from the natural
stock, and ingrafted into Christ the true Vine.

DOCT. They who are in the state of grace, are ingrafted in, and united to, the
Lord Jesus Christ. They are taken out of their natural stock, cut off from it;
and are now ingrafted into Christ as the new stock. In handling of this, I
shall speak to the Mystical Union, (1.) More generally. (2.) More particularly.

A general View of the Mystical Union.
FIRST, In the general, for understanding the union betwixt the Lord Jesus
Christ, and his elect, who believe in him, and on him.

1. It is a spiritual union. Man and wife, by their marriage-union, become one
flesh: Christ and true believers, by this union, become one spirit, 2 Cor. vi.
17. As one soul or spirit actuates both the head, and the members, in the
natural body; so the one Spirit of God dwells in Christ and the Christian; for,
If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Rom viii. 9.
Corporal union is made by contract; so the stones in a building are united: but
this is an union of another nature. Were it possible we could eat the flesh,
and drink the blood of Christ, in a corporal and carnal manner; it would profit
nothing, John vi. 63. It was not Mary's bearing him in her womb, but her
believing on him, that made her a saint, Luke xi. 27, 28. A certain woman --
said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou have
sucked But he said, Yea, rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God,
and keep it

2. It is a real union. Such is our weakness in our present state, so much are
we immersed in sin, that we are prone to form in our fancy an image of every
thing proposed to us; and as to whatsoever is denied us, we are apt to suspect
it to be but a fiction, or what has no reality. But nothing is more real, than
what is spiritual; as approaching nearest to the nature of Him who is the
fountain of all reality, namely, God himself. We do not see with our eyes the
union betwixt our own soul and body; neither can we represent it to ourselves
truly, by imagination, as we do sensible things: yet the reality of it is not
to be doubted. Faith is no fancy, but the substance of things hoped for, Heb
xi. Neither is the union thereby made betwixt Christ and believers, imaginary,
but most real: for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones,
Ephesians v. 30.

3. It is a most close and intimate union. Believers, regenerate persons, who
fiduciously credit him and rely on him, have put on Christ, Gal. iii 27. If
that be not enough, he is in them, John xvii. 23. formed in them, as the child
in the mother's belly, Gal. iv. 19. He is the foundation, 1Cor iii 11. They are
the lively stones built upon him, 1 Pet ii. 5. He is the Head, and they the
body, Ephesians. i. 22, 23. Nay, he lives in them, as their very souls in their
bodies, Gal. ii. 30. And, what is more than all this, they are one in the
Father, and the Son, as the Father is in Christ, and Christ in the Father, John
xvii 21. That they all may be one, as thou the Father art in me, and I in thee,
they also may be one in us.

4. Though it is not a mere legal union, yet it is an union sustained in law.
Christ as the cautioner, the Christians as the principal debtors, are one, in
the eye of the law. When the elect had run themselves, with the rest of
mankind, in debt to the justice of God; Christ became surety for them, and paid
the debt. When they believe on him, they are united to him in a spiritual
marriage-union; which takes effect so far, that what he did and suffered for
them, is reckoned in law, as if they had done and suffered for themselves.
Hence they are said to be crucified with Jesus, Gal. ii. 20. Buried with him,
Col. ii 12. Yea, raised up together, (namely, with Christ) and made to sit
together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. ii. 6. In which places,
saints on earth, of whom the Apostle there speaks, cannot be said to be
sitting, but in the way of law-reckoning.

5. It is an indissoluble union. Once in Christ, ever in him. Having taken up
his habitation in the heart, he never removes. None can untie this happy knot.
Who will dissolve this union? Will he himself o it? No, he will not; we have
his word for it: I will not turn away from them, Jer. xxxii. 40. But perhaps
the sinner will do this mischief for himself; no, he shall not, They shall not
depart from me, says their God, ibid. Can devils do it? No, unless they be
stronger than Christ, and his Father too: Neither shall any man pluck them out
of my hand, says our Lord, John x. 28. And none is able to pluck them out of
my Father's hand, ver. 39. But, what say you of death, which parts husband and
wife; yea, separates the soul from the body? Will not death do it? No; the
Apostle, Romans viii. 38 39. is persuaded that neither death, (as terrible is it
is) nor life, (as desirable as it is) nor devils, those evil angels, nor the
devil's persecuting agents, though they be principalities or powers on earth; nor
evil things present, already lying on us, nor evil things to come on us; nor
the height of worldly felicity, nor depth of worldly misery; nor any other
creature, good or ill, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord As death separated Christ's soul from his body, but
could not separate either his soul or body from his divine nature; so, though the
saints should be separated from their nearest relations in the world, and from
all their earthly enjoyments; yea, though their souls should be separate from
their bodies, and their bodies separate in a thousand pieces, their bones
scattered, as when one cutteth or cleaves wood: yet soul and body, and every
piece of the body, the smallest dust of it shall remain united to the Lord
Christ: for even in death, they sleep in Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 14 And, he keeps
all their bones, Psalm. xxxiv. 20 Union with Christ, is the grace wherein we
stand, firm and stable, as mount Zion, which cannot be removed.

Lastly, It is a mysterious union. The gospel is a doctrine of mysteries. It
discovers to us the substantial union of the three Persons in one Godhead, 1
John v 7. These three are one: the hypostatical union of the divine and human
natures, in the person of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy iii. 16. God was
manifest in the flesh: and the mystical union, betwixt Christ and believers;
this is a great mystery also, Ephesians. v. 32. O what mysteries are here! the head
in heaven, the members on earth, yet really united! Christ in the believer,
living in him, walking in him: and the believer dwelling in God, putting on the
Lord Jesus, eating his flesh, and drinking his blood? this makes the saints a
mystery to the world; yea, a mystery to themselves.

SECONDLY I come now more particularly to speak of this union with, and
ingrafting into Jesus Christ. And, (1.) I shall consider the natural stock,
which the branches are taken out of (2.) The supernatural stock, they are
ingrafted into. (3) What branches are cut off the old stock, and put into the
new. (4) How it is done. And, Lastly, The benefits flowing from this union and
ingrafting.

Of the natural and supernatural Stocks, and the Branches, taken out of the
former, and ingrafted into the latter.
I. Let us take a view of the stock, which the branches are taken out of. The
two Adams, that is Adam and CHRIST, are the two stocks: for the scripture
speaks of these two, as if there had never been more men in the world than
they, 1 Cor. xv. 45. The first man Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam
was made a quickening Spirit. Ver. 47. The first man is of the earth, earthy:
the second man is the Lord from heaven. And the reason is, there were never
any, that were not branches of one of these two; all men being either in the
one stock or in the other; for in these two sorts all mankind stands divided:
Ver. 48. As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy: and as is the
heavenly, ^u^^ are they also that are heavenly. The first Adam then is the
natural stock: on this stock are the branches found growing at first; which are
afterward cut off, and ingrafted into Christ. As for the fallen angels, as
they had no relation to the first Adam, so they have none to second.

There are four things to be remembered here, (1.) That all mankind (the man
Christ excepted) are naturally branches of the first Adam, Romans v. 12. By one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin: and so death passed upon all
men. (2.) The bond which knit us unto the natural stock, was the covenant of
works. Adam being our natural root, was made the moral root also; bearing all
his posterity as representing them in the covenant of works. For, by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, Romans v. 19 Now, there behoved to be a
peculiar relation betwixt that one man and the many, as a foundation for
imputing his sin to them. This relation did not arise from the mere natural
bond betwixt him and us, as a father to his children; for so we are related to
our immediate parents, whose sins are not thereupon imputed to us as Adam's sin
is. It behoved then to arise from a moral bond betwixt Adam and us; the bond of
a covenant, which could be no other than the covenant of works, wherein we were
united to him as branches to a stock. Hence Jesus Christ, though a son of Adam,
Luke iii 23, 38. was none of these branches; for seeing he came not of Adam, in
virtue of the blessing of marriage, which was given before the fall, (Genesis i
28. Be fruitful and multiply, etc.) but in virtue of a special promise made
after the fall, (Genesis iii. 15. The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's
head.) Adam could not represent him in a covenant made before his fall. (3.) As
it is impossible for a branch to be in two stocks at once; so no man can be, at
one and the same time, both in the first and second Adam. (4) Hence it
evidently follows, that all who are not ingrafted in Jesus Christ, are yet
branches of the old stock; and so partake of the nature of the same. Now, as to
the first Adam, our natural stock: Consider,

First, What a stock he was originally. He was a vine of the Lord's planting, a
choice vine, a noble vine wholly a right seed There was a consultation of the
Trinity, at the planting of this vine, Genesis i. 26. Let us make man in our own
image, often our own likeness. There was no rottenness, at the heart of it.
There was sap and juice enough in it, to have nourished all the branches, to
bring forth fruit unto God. My meaning is, Adam was made able perfectly to keep
the commandments of God, which would have procured eternal life to himself, and
to all his posterity; for seeing all die by Adam's disobedience; all should
have had life, by his obedience, if he had stood. Consider,

Secondly, What that stock now is: ah! most unlike to what it was, when planted
by the Author and Fountain of all good. A blast from hell, and a bite with the
venomous teeth of the old serpent, have made it a degenerate stock, a dead
stock; nay, a killing stock.

1 st, It is a degenerate naughty stock. Therefore the Lord God said to Adam,
in that dismal day, Where art thou? Gen iii 9. In what condition art thou now?
How art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine, unto me? Or,
where wast thou? Why not in the place of meeting with me? Why so long a-coming?
What means this fearful change, this hiding of thyself from me? Alas! the
stock is degenerate, quite spoiled, become altogether naught, and brings forth
wild grapes. Converse with the devil is preferred to communion with God Satan
is believed; and God, who is truth itself, disbelieved. He who was the friend
of God, is now in conspiracy against him. Darkness is come into the room of
light: ignorance prevails in the mind, where divine knowledge shone: the will,
sometime righteous or regular, is now turned rebel against its Lord: and the
whole man is in dreadful disorder.

Before I go further, let me stop and observe, Here is a mirror both for saints
and sinners. Sinners, stand here and consider, what you are: and saints learn
ye, what on^e ye were. Ye, sinners, are branches of a degenerate stock. Fruit
you may bear indeed; but now that your vine is the vine of Sodom, your grapes
must, of course, be grapes of gall, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 32. The Scripture speaks of
two sorts of fruit, which grow on the branches upon the natural stock: and it
is plain enough, they are of the nature of their degenerate stock. (1.) The
wild grapes of wickedness, Isa. v. 2. These grow in abundance by influence from
hell. See Gal. v. 19, 20, 21. At their gates are all manner of these fruits,
both new and old. Storms come from heaven to put them back; but they still
grow. They are struck at with the sword of the Spirit, the word of God:
conscience gives them many a secret blow: yet they thrive. (2) Fruit to
themselves, Hos. x. 1. What else are all the unrenewed man's acts of obedience,
his reformation, sober deportment, his prayers, and good works? They are all
done, chiefly, for himself, not for the glory of God. These fruits are like the
apples of Sodom, fair to look at, but fall to ashes, when handled and tried. Ye
think ye have not only the leaves of a profession, but the fruits of a holy
practice too; but, if ye be not broken off from the old stock, and ingrafted in
Christ Jesus, God accepts not, nor regards your fruits.

Here I must take occasion to tell you, there are five faults will be found in
heaven, with your best fruits. (1.) Their bitterness; your clusters (...)
bitter, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 32. There is a spirit of bitterness, where with some come
before the Lord, in religious duties, living in malice and envy; and which some
professors entertain against others, because they outshine them, by holiness
of life, or because they are not of their opinion or way. This, wheresoever it
reigns, is a fearful symptom of an unregenerate state. But, I do not so much
mean this, as that which is common to all the branches of the old stock;
namely, the leaven of hypocrisy, Luke xii. 1. which sowers and embitters every
duty they perform. The wisdom that is full of good fruits, is without
hypocrisy, James iii. 17. (2.) Their ill savor. Their works are abominable,
for themselves are corrupt, Psalm. xiv. 1. They all savor of the old stock, not
of the new; it is the peculiar privilege of the saints, that they are unto God
a sweet savor of Christ, 2 Cor. ii. 15. The unregenerate man's fruits savor
not of love to Christ* (...) of the blood of Christ, nor of the incense of his
intercession; and therefore will never be accepted of in heaven. (3.) Their
unr^peness. Their grape is an unripe grape, Job xv. 33. There is no influence
on them from the Sun of Righteousness, to bring them to perfection. They have
the shape of fruit, but no more. The matter of duty is in them; but they want
right principles and ends: their works are not wrought in God, John iii. 21.
Their prayers drop from their lips, before their hearts be impregnate with the
vital sap of the Spirit of supplication: their tears fall from their eyes, ere
their hearts be truly softened: their feet turn to new paths, and their way is
altered; while yet their nature is not changed. (4.) Their lightness. Being
weighed in the balances, they are found wanting, Dan. v. 27. For evidence
whereof, you may observe, they do not humble the soul, but lift it up in prid^.
The good fruits of holiness bear down the branches they grow upon, making them
to salute the ground. 1 Cor. xv. 10 I labored more abundantly than they all:
yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me. But the blasted fruits of
unrenewed men's performance, hang lightly on branches towering up to heaven, J^
xvii. 13. Now know I, that the Lord will do me good, seeing (...) to my priest.
They look indeed so high, that God cannot b^id them: Wherefore have we fasted,
say they, and thou se^st not? Isa. lviii. 3. The more duties they do, and the
better they (...) to perform them; the less are they humbled, the more they are
lifted up. This disposition of the sinner, is the ex^act reverse of wh^ (...)
to be found in the saint. To men, who neither are in Christ, nor are s^ous to
be ^^und in him, their duties are like wi^^y bladders, wher^with they think to
swim ashore to Immanuel'^ land: but these must needs break, and they
consequently sink; because they take not Christ for the lifter-up of their
head, Psalm. iii. 3. Lastly, They are not all manner of pleasant fruits, Cant.
^. 13. Christ, as a King, must be served with variety. Where God makes the
heart his garden, he plants it as Solomon d^ns, (...) of all kinds of fruits,
Eccles. ^^. 5. And accordingly it brings for^ (...) of the ^^irit in (...)
goodness. Ephesians v. 9. But the ungodly (...): their ^edience is never universal;
there is always some one thin^ (...) other excepted. In one word, their fruits
are fruits of an ill tree, that cannot be accepted in heaven.

2 dly, Our natural stock is a dead stock, according to the threatening, Genesis
ii. 17 in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. Our root now is
rottenness, no marvel the blossom go up as dust. The stroke is gone to the
heart; the sap is let out, and the tree is withered. The curse of the first
covenant, like a hot thunderbolt from heaven has lighted on it, and ruined it.
It is cursed now as the fig tree, Matthew. xxi. 19. Let no fruit grow on (...),
henceforth for ever. Now it is good for nothing, but to cumber the ground, and
furnish fuel for Tophet.

Let me enlarge a little here also. Every unrenewed man is a branch of a dead
stock. When thou see, O sinner, a dead stock of a tree, exhausted of all its
sap, having branches on it in the same condition; look on it as a lively
representation of thy soul's state. (1.) Where the stock is dead, the branches
must needs be barren. Alas! the barrenness of many professors plainly discovers
on what stock they are growing. It is easy to pretend to faith, but show me thy
faith without thy works, if thou can, James ii. 17. (2.) A dead stock can
convey no sap to the branches, to make them bring forth fruit. The covenant of
works was the bond of our union with the natural stock; but now it is become
weak through the flesh; that is, through the degeneracy and depravity of human
nature, Rom vii. 3. It is strong enough to command, and to bind heavy burdens
on the shoulders of those who are not in Christ; but it affords no strength to
bear them. The sap that was once in the root, is now gone: and the law, like a
merciless creditor, apprehends Adam's heirs, saying, Pay what thou owe; when,
alas! his effects are riotously spent (3.) All pains and cost are lost on the
tree, whose life is gone. In vain do men labor to get fruit on the branches,
when there is no sap in the root. First, The gardiner's pains are lost:
ministers lose their labor on the branches of the old stock, while they
continue in it. Many sermons are preached to no purpose; because there is no
life to give sensation. Sleeping men may be awakened; but the dead cannot be
raised without a miracle: even so, the dead sinner must remain so, if he be not
restored to life, by a miracle of grace.

Secondly, The influences of heaven are lost on such a tree: in vain does the
rain fall upon it: in vain is it laid open to the winter-cold and frosts. The
Lord of the vineyard digs about many a dead soul, but it is not bettered.
Bruise the fool in a mortar, his folly will not depart. Though he meets with many
crosses, yet he retains his lusts: let him be laid on a sickbed, he will there
ly like a sick beast, groaning under his pain; but not mourning for, nor
turning from his sin. Let death itself stare him in the face; he will
presumptuously maintain his hope, as if he would look the grim messenger out of
countenance. Sometimes there are common operations of the divine Spirit
performed on him: he is sent home with a trembling heart; and with arrows of
conviction sticking in his soul; but at length he prevails against these
things, and turns as secure as ever. Thirdly, Summer and winter are alike to
the branches of the dead stock. When others about them are budding, blossoming,
and bringing forth fruit; there is no change on them; the dead stock has no
growing time at all. Perhaps it may be difficult to know, in the winter, what
trees are dead, and what are alive; but the spring plainly discovers it. There
are some seasons, wherein there is little life to be perceived, even among
saints; yet times of reviving come at length. But even when the vine
flourishes, and the pomegranates bud forth (when saving grace is discovering
itself, by its lively actings, wheresoever it is) the branches on the old stock
are still withered: when the dry bones are coming together, bone to bone,
amongst saints; the sinners bones are still lying about the grave's mouth. They
are trees that cumber the ground, are near to be cut down: and will be cut down
for the fire, if God in mercy prevent it not by cutting them off from that
stock, and ingrafting them into another.

(...), Our natural stock is a killing stock. If the stock die, how can the
branches live? If the sap be gone from the root and heart, the branches must
needs wi^her. In Adam all die, 1 Cor. xv. 22. The root died in Paradise: and
all the branches in it, and with it. The root is impoisoned, (...) the branches
come to be infected: death is in the pot; and all that taste of the pulse, or
pottage are killed.

Know then, that every natural man is a branch of a killing stock. Our natural
root not only gives us not life, but it has a killing power reaching all the
branches thereof. There are four things, which the first Adam conveys to all
his branches; and they are abiding in, and lying on, such of them as are not
ingrafted to Christ. First. A corrupt nature. He sinned, and his nature was
thereby corrupted or depraved; and this corruption is conveyed to all his
posterity. He was infected and the contagion spread itself over all his seed.
Secondly, Guilt, that is an obligation to punishment, Rom v. 21. By one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin: and so death passed upon all m^n, for
that all have sinned. The threatenings of the law, as cords of death, are
twisted about the branches of the old stock; to draw them over the hedge into
the fire. And till they be cut off from this stock by the pruning knife; the
sword of vengeance hangs over their heads, to cut them down. Thirdly, This
killing stock transmits the curse into the branches. The stock, as the stock,
(for I speak not of Adam in his personal and private capacity) being cursed; so
are the branches. Gal iii. 10. For as many as are of the works of the law, are
under the curse This curse affects the whole man, and all that belongs to him,
every thing he possesses; and works three ways. (1.) As poison, infecting*
thus their blessings are cursed, Mal ii. 2. Whatever the man enjoys, it can do
him no good, but evil; being the imp^soned by the curse. His prosperity in the
world destroys him, Prove. i. 32. The ministry of the gospel is a savor of
death unto death, to him, 2 Cor. ii. 16. His seeming seize in religion
are cursed to him: his knowledge serves but to puff him up, and his duties to
keep him back from Christ. (2.) It worke^h as a moth, consuming and wasting by
little and little, Hos. ^. 12 Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth. There
is a worm at the root, consuming them by degrees. Thus the curse pursued S^ul,
till it wormed him out of all his enjoyments, and out of the very show he had
of religion. Sometimes they decay like the f^t of lambs, and melt away as the
snow in a sunshine (2.) It acts as a lion rampant, Hos. v. 14. I will be
unto Ephraim as a lion. The Lord rains on them snares, fire and brimstone, and
an horrible tempest, in such a manner, that they are hurried away with the
stream. He teareth their enjoyments from them in his wrath, pursues them with
terrors, rents their souls from their bodies, and throws the deadhed branch
into the fire. Thus the curse devours like fire, which none can quench. Lastly,
This killing stock transmits death to the branches upon it. Adam took the
poisonous cup, and drunk it off: this occasioned death to himself and us. We
came into the world spiritually dead, thereby obnoxious to eternal death, and
absolutely liable to temporal death. This root is to us like the Scythian
river, which, they say, brings forth little bladders every day, out of which
come certain small flies, which are bred in the morning, winged at noon, and
dead at night: a very lively emblem of our mortal state.

Now, Sirs, is it not absolutely necessary to be broken off from this our
natural stock? What will our fair leaves of a profession, or our fruits of
duties avail, if we be still branches of the degenerate, dead and killing
stock? But, alas! among the many questions tossed among us, few are taken up
about these, Whether am I broken off from the old stock, or not? Whether am I
ingrafted in Christ, or not? Ah! wherefore all this waste! Why is there so much
noise about religion amongst many, who can give no good account of their having
laid a good foundation, being mere strangers to experimental religion? I fear,
if God do not, in mercy, timeously undermine the religion of many of us, and
let us see we have none at all; our root will be found rottenness, and our
blossom go up as dust, in a dying hour. Therefore, let us look to our state,
that we be not found fools in our latter end.

II. Let us now view the supernatural stock in which the branches, cut off from
the natural stock, are ingrafted. Jesus Christ is sometimes called the branch,
Zech. ii. 8. So he is, in respect of his human nature; being a branch, and the
top branch of the house of David. Sometimes he is called a root, Isa. xi. 10.
we have both together, Rev. xxii. 16. I am the root, and the offspring of
David: David's root, as God; and his offspring, as man. The text tells, that
he is the Vine: he, as Mediator, is the vine-stock, whereof believers are the
branches. As the sap comes from the earth into the root and stock, and from
thence is diffused into the branches; so by Christ, as Mediator, divine life is
conveyed from the fountain unto these who are united to him by faith, John vi
57 As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that
eats me, even he shall live by me. Now Christ is Mediator, not as God only,
as some have asserted: nor yet as man only, as the Papists generally hold: but
he is Mediator as God-man, Acts xx. 28 -- The church of God, which he has
purchased with his blood. Heb. ix 14. Christ, who, through the eternal Spirit,
offered himself without spot to God. The divine and human natures have their
distinct actings, yet a joint operation in this, discharging the office of a
Mediator. This is illustrated by the similitude of a fiery sword, which at once
cuts and burns: cutting it burns, and burning it cutteth; the steel cuts, and
the fire burns. Wherefore Christ, God-man, is the stock, whereof believers are
the branches: and they are united to whole Christ. They are united to him in
his human nature, as being members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones,
Ephesians v. 30. and they are united to him in his divine nature; for so the Apostle
speaks of this union, Col. i. 27. Christ, in you, the hope of glory. And by him
they are united to the Father, and to the Holy Ghost, 1 John iv. 15. Whosoever
shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and he in God.
Faith, the bond of this union, receives whole Christ, God-man: and so unites us
to him as such.

Behold here, O believers, your high privilege Ye were once branches of a
degenerate stock, even as others: but ye are, by grace, become branches of the
true Vine, John xv. 1. Ye are cut out of a dead and killing stock; and
ingrafted in the last Adam, who was made a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. xv. 45.
Your loss by the first Adam is made up, with great advantage, by your union
with the second. Adam, at his best estate, was but a shrub, in comparison with
Christ the tree of life. He was but a servant, Christ is the Son, the Heir, and
Lord of all things, the Lord from heaven. It cannot be denied, that grace was
shown in the first covenant: but it is as far exceeded by the grace of the
second covenant, as the twilight is, by the light of the midday.

III. What branches are taken out of the natural stock, and grafted into this
Vine? Ans These are the elect, and none other. They, and they only, are grafted
into Christ; and consequently none but they are cut off from the killing stock.
For them alone he interceeds, that they may be one in him, and his Father, John
xvii. 9, 23. Faith, the bond of this union, is given to none else: it is the
faith of God's elect, Tit. i. 1. The Lord passed by many branches growing on
the natural stock, and cuts off only here one, and there one, and grafts them
into the true Vine, according as free love has determined. Often does he pitch
upon the most unlikely branch, leaving the top-boughs; passing by the mighty,
and the noble, and calling the weak, base, and despised, 1 Cor i. 26, 27. Yea,
he often leaves the fair and smooth, and takes the rugged and knotty, and such
were some of you, but ye are washed, etc 1 Cor. vi 11. If ye enquire, why so?
We find no other reason but because they were chosen in him, Ephesians ^ 4
Predestined to the adoption of children, by Jesus Christ, ver. 5. Thus are
they gathered together in Christ: wh^le the rest are left growing on their
natural stock, to be afterward bound up in oundles for the fire Wherefore, to
whomsoever the gospel may come in vain, it will have a blessed effect on God's
elect, Acts xiii. 48. As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed! Where
the Lord has much people, the gospel will have much success, sooner or latter.
Such as are to be saved, will be add^^ to the mystical body of Christ.

How the ^ranches are taken out of the natural Stock, and ingrafted into the
supernatural Stock.
IV. I am to show how the branches are cut off from the natural stock, the
first Adam, and grafted into the true Vine, the Lord Jesus Christ. Thanks to
the husbandman, not to the branch, that it is cut off from its natural stock,
and ingrafted into a new one. The sinner, in his coming off from the first
stock, is passive; and neither can nor will come off from it of his own accord;
but clings to it, till almighty power make him to fall off, John vi 44. No man
can come unto me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him. And chap. v.
40. Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life. The ingrafted branches are
God's husbandry, 1 Cor. iii. 9 The planting of the Lord, Isa. lxi. 3. The
ordinary means he makes use of in this work, is the ministry of the word, 1
Cor. iii 9 We are laborers together with God. But the efficacy thereof is
wholly from him, whatever the minister's part or piety be, ver. 7. Neither is
he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters: but God that gives the
increase. The Apostle preached to the Jews, yet the body of that people
remained in infidelity, Romans x. 16. Who has believed our report? Yea, Christ
himself, who spoke as never man spoke, says concerning the success of his own
ministry, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, Isa
xlix. The branches may be hacked by the preaching of the word: but the stroke
will never go through, till it be carried home on them, by an omnipotent arm.
However God's ordinary way is, by the foolishness of preaching to save them
that believe, 1 Cor i. 21.

The cutting off of the branch from the natural stock, is performed by the
prunning knife of the law, in the hand of the Spirit of God, Gal. ii. ^9. For
I, through the law, am dead to the law. It is by the bond of the covenant of
works, as I said before, that we are knit to our natural stock: and therefore,
as a wife, unwilling to be put away, plead^ and hangs by the marriage tie; so
do men by the covenant of works. They hold by it, like the man who held the
ship with his hands; and when one hand was cut off, held it with the other; and
when both were cut off, held it with his teeth This will appear from a distinct
view of the Lord's work on men, in bringing them off from the old stock* which
I now offer in these following particulars.

First, When the Spirit of the Lord comes to deal with a person, to bring him
to Christ; he finds him the Laodlee^'s case, in a sound sleep of security,
dreaming of heaven and the favor of God though full of sin against the holy One
of Israel. Rev. iii 17. Thou know si^n^ no that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. And therefore he darts in some beams
of light into the dark soul; and lets the man see he is a lost man, if he turn
not over a new leaf, and betake himself to a new course of life. Thus by the
Spirit of the Lord, acting as a spirit of bondage, there is a criminal court
erected in the man's breast; where he is arraigned, accused, and condemned for
breaking the law of God, convinced of sin and judgment, John xvi. 8. And now he
can no longer sleep securely in his former course of life. This is the first
stroke the branch gets, in order to cutting off.

Secondly, Hereupon the man forsake his former profane courses; his lying,
swearing, Sabbath-breaking, stealing, and such like practices, though they be
dear to him as right eyes, he will rather quit them, than ruin his soul. The
ship is like to sink, and therefore he throws his goods overboard, that he
himself may not perish. And now he begins to bless himself in his heart, and
look joyfully on his evidences for heaven; thinking himself a better servant to
God than many others, Luke xviii. 11. God, I thank that I am not as other men
are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, etc. But he soon gets another stroke
with the ax of the law, showing him that it is only he that does what is
written in the law, who can be saved by (...); and that his negative holiness
is too scanty a cover from the storm of God's wrath. And thus, although his
sins of commission only were heavy on him before: his sins of omission now
crowd into his thought^, attended with a train of law-curses and vengeance. And
c^th o^ the ter^ commands discharges thunderclaps of wrath against him, for
his omitting required duties.

Thirdly, Upon this he turns to a positively holy course of life. He not only
is not profane, but he performs religious duties: he prays, seeks the knowledge
of the principles of religion, strictly observes the Lord's day, and, like
Herod, does away things, and ^^ars sermons gladly. In one word, there is a
great conformity in his ^^^ard conversation, to the letter of both tables of
the law. And now there is a mighty change upon the man, that his neighbors
cannot miss to take notice of. Hence he is cheerfully admitted by the godly
into their society, as a praying person, and can confer with them about
religious matters, yea, and about soul-exercise, which some are not acquainted
with. And their good opinion of him confirms his good opinion of himself. This
step in religion is fatal to many, who never get beyond it. But here the Lord
reaches the elect-branch a farther stroke. Conscience flies in the man's face,
for some wrong steps in his conversation: the neglect of some duty, or
commission of some sin, which is a blot in his conversation: and then the
flaming sword of the law appears again over his head: and the curse rings in
his ears, for cursed is he that continues not in all things written in the law
to do them, Gal. iii. 10.

Fourthly, On this account he is obliged to seek another salve for his sore. He
goes to God, confesses his sin; seeks the pardon of it, promising to watch
against it for the time to come; and so finds ease, and thinks he may very well
take it, seeing the scripture says, If we confess our sins* he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, 1 John i. 9. not considering that he grasps at a
privilege, which is theirs only who are ingrafted into Christ, and under the
covenant of grace; and which the branches yet growing on the old stock cannot
plead. And here sometimes there are formal and express vows made against such
and such sins, and binding to such and such duties. Thus many go on all their
days; knowing no other religion but to do duties, and to confess, and pray for
pardon of that wherein they fail; promising themselves eternal happiness,
though they are utter strangers to Christ. Here many elect ones have been cast
down wounded, and many reprobates have been slain; while the wounds of neither
of them have been deep enough, to cut them off from their natural stock. But
the Spirit of the Lord gives yet a deeper stroke to the branch which is to be
cut off; showing him, that, as yet, he is but an outside saint; and
discovering to him the filthy lusts lodged in his heart, which he took no
notice of before, Rom vii. 9. When the commandment came, sin revived, and I
died. Then he sees his heart a dunghill of hellish lusts; filled with
covetousness, pride, malice, filthiness, and the like. Now, as soon as the door
of the chambers of his imagery is thus opened to him, and he sees what they do
there in the dark, his outside religion is blown up as insufficient; and he
learns a new lesson in religion; namely, That he is not a Jew which is one
outwardly, Romans ii. 28.

Fifthly, Upon this he goes further, even to in side religion; sets to work
more vigorously than ever, mourns over the evils of his heart, and strives to
bear down the weeds he finds growing in that neglected garden. He labors to
curb his pride and passion; and to banish speculative impurities; prays more
fervently, hears attentively, and strives to get his heart affected in every
religious duty he performs; and thus he comes to think himself not only an
outside, but an inside Christian. Wonder not at this: for there is nothing in
it beyond the power of nature, or what one may attain to under a vigorous
influence of the covenant of works. Therefore another yet deeper stroke is
reached. The law charge home on the man's conscience, thal he was a
transgressor from the womb; that he came into the world a guilty creature: and
that, in (...) ^^ints of his ignorance, (...) even since his eyes were opened,
he has been guilty of many actual sins, either altogether overlooked by him, or
not sufficiently mourned over: (For spiritual sores, not healed by the blood of
Christ, but skinned over some other way, are easily ruffled, and as soon break
out again.) And therefore the law takes him by the throat, saying, Pay what
thou owe.

Sixthly, Then the sinner says in his heart, Have patience with me, and I will
pay thee all: and so falls to work to pacify an offended God, and to atone for
these sins. He renews his repentance, such as it is; bears patiently the
afflictions laid upon him; yea, he afflicts himself, denies himself the use of
his lawful comforts, sighs deeply, mourns bitterly, cries with tears for a
pardon, till he has wrought up his heart to a conceit of having obtained it;
having thus done penance for what is past, and resolving to be a good servant
to God, and to hold on in outward and inward obedience, for the time to come.
But the stroke must go nearer the heart yet, ere the branch fall off. The Lord
discovers to him, in the glass of the law, how he sins in all he does, even
when he does the best he can; and therefore the dreadful sound returns to his
ears, Gal. iii. 10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, etc.
When ye fasted and mourned, says the Lord, Did ye at all fast unto me, even to
me? Will muddy water make clean clothes? Will you satisfy for one sin with
another? Did not your thoughts wander in such a duty? Were not your affections
flat in another? Did not your heart give a whorish look to such an idol? And
did it not rise in a fit of impatience under such an affliction? Should I
accept this of your hands? Cursed be the deceiver, which sacrifices to the
Lord a corrupt thing, Mal. i. 13, 14. And thus he becomes so far broke off,
that he sees he is not able to satisfy the demands of the law.

Seventhly, Hence, like a broken man, who finds he is not able to pay all his
debts, he goes about to compound with his creditor. And being in pursuit of
ease and comfort, he does what he can to fulfill the law; and wherein he fails,
he looks that God will accept the will for the deed. Thus doing his duty, and
having a will to do better, he cheats himself in a persuasion of the goodness
of his state: and hereby thousands are ruined. But the elect get another
stroke, which loses their hold in this case. The doctrine of the law is born
in on their consciences; demonstrating to them, that exact and perfect
obedience is required by it, under pain of the curse: and that it is doing, and
not wishing to do, which will avail. Wishing to do better will not answer the
law's demands: and therefore the curse sounds again, Cursed is every one that
continues not -- to do them; that is, actually to do them. In vain is wishing
then.

Eighthly, Being broken off from hopes of compounding with the l^w, he falls a
borrowing. He sees that all he can do to obey the law, and all his desires to
be, and to do better, will not save his soul: therefore he goes to Christ,
entreating, that his righteousness may make up what is wanting in his own, and
cover all the defects of his doings and sufferings; that so God, for Christ's
sake, may accept them, and thereupon be reconciled. Thus doing what he can to
fulfill the law, and looking to Christ to make up all his defects, he comes at
length, again to sleep in a sound skin. Many persons are ruined this way. This
was the error of the Galatians, which Paul, in his epistle to them, disputes
against. But the Spirit of God breaks off the sinner from this hold also: by
bearing in on his cons^ience that great truth, Gal. iii. 12. The law is not of
faith; but the man that does them shall live in them. There is no mixing of the
law and faith in this business; the sinner must hold by one of them, and let
the other go: the way of the law, and the way of faith, are so far different,
that it is not possible for a sinner to walk in the one, but he must ^o^e off
from the other: and if he be for doing, he must do all alone; Christ will not
do a part for him, if he do not all. A garment pieced up of sundry sorts of
righteousness, is not a garment meet for the court of heaven. Thus the man, who
was in a dream, and thought he was eating, is awakened by the stroke, and
behold his soul is faint; his heart sinks in him like a stone; while he finds
he can neither bear his burden himself alone, nor can he get help under it.

Ninthly, What can one do, who must needs pay, and yet neither has as much of
his own as will bring him out of debt, nor can he get as much to borrow; and to
beg he is ashamed? What can such a one do, I say, but sell himself, as the man
under the law, that was waxen poor? Lev. xxv. 47. Therefore the sinner beat off
from so many holds, goes about to make a bargain with Christ, and to sell
himself to the Son of God, (if I may so speak) solemnly promising and vowing,
that he will be a servant to Christ, as long as he lives, if he will save his
soul. And here oft-times the sinner makes a personal covenant with Christ,
resigning himself to him on these terms; yea, and takes the sacrament, to make
the bargain sure. Hereupon the man's great care is, how to obey Christ, keep
his commands, and so fulfill his bargain. And, in this the soul finds a false,
unfound peace, for a while; till the Spirit of the Lord fetch another stroke,
to cut off the man from this refuge of lies likewise. And that happens in this
manner: When he fails of the duties he engaged to, and falls again into the sin
he covenanted against; it is powerfully carried home on his conscience, that
his covenant is broken: so all his comfort goes, and terrors afresh seize on
his soul, as one that has broken covenant with Christ, and commonly the man, to
help himself, renews his covenant but breaks again as before. And how is it
possible it should be otherwise, seeing he is still upon the old stock? Thus
the work of many, all their days, as to their souls, is nothing but a making
and breaking such covenants, over and over again.

Objects Some, perhaps, will say, Who lives and sins not? Who is there that
fails not of the duties he is engaged to?If you reject this way as unsound,
who then can be saved? -- Answ. True believers will be saved; namely, all who
do, by faith, take hold of God's covenant. But this kind (...) govenant is
men's own covenant, devised of their own heart; not God'^ covenant revealed in
the gospel of his grace^ and the maki^^ of it is nothing else, but the making
of a covenant of works with Christ, confounding the law and the gospel; a
covenant he will never subscribe to, though we should sign it with our heart's
blood. Romans iv 14. For if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made
void, and the promise made of none effect. Ver. ^6 Therefore it is of faith,
that it might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the
seed. Chap. xi. 6. And if by grace, then it is no more of works: otherwise
grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then it is no more grace:
otherwise work is no more work God's covenant is everlasting: once in, never
out of it again; and the mercies of it are sure mercies, Isa. lv. 3. But that
covenant of ^^urs is a tottering covenant, never sure, but broken every day.
(...) is a mere servile covenant, giving Christ service for salvation: but
God's covenant is a filial covenant, in which the sinner takes Christ, and his
salvation freely offered, and so becomes a son, John i. 12. But as many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the ^^ns of God: and being become
a son, he serves his Father, not that (...) inheritance may become his, but
because it is his, through Jesus Christ. See Gal. iv. 24. and downward. To
enter into that spurious covenant, is to buy from Christ with money; but to
take hold of God's covenant is to buy of him without money, and without price,
Isa. l^. 1. that is to say, to beg of him. In that covenant men work for life;
in God's covenant they come to Christ for life, and work from life. When a
person under that covenant fails in his duty, all is gone: the covenant must be
made over again. But under God's covenant, although the man fail in his duty,
and for his failures fall under the discipline of the covenant, and lies under
the weight of it, till such time as he has recourse anew to the blood of Christ
for pardon, and renew his repentance; yet all that he trusted to for life and
salvation, namely, the righteousness of Christ, still stands entire, and the
covenant remains firm. See Romans vii. 24, 25. and viii. 1.

Now, though (...) lives in making and breaking such covenants of their own
(...) upon (...) re^king o^ them wearing weake^ and weake^ by degree (...) it
creates them little or no uneasiness: at the man (...) the good work is carried
on, till it be accomplished in (...) off from the old stock, ti^^; these
covenants to be (...) every touch; and the terro^ of God, being (...) upon
(...) spirit, and the waters at every (...), getting (...) cease from catching
^old of such covenants (...) other way.

Tenthly, Therefore the (...) at C^rt^^'s ^^^r for mercy: but, yet he is (...)
on his personal worth. For, as the (...) the one only Mediator; so the branches
of the old stock, have always something to produce, which they think may
commend them to Christ, and engage him to take their cause in hand. They cannot
think of coming to the spiritual market, without money in their hand They are
like persons, who have once had an estate of their own, but are reduced to
extreme poverty, and forced to b^g When they come to beg, they still remember
their former character; and though they have lost their substance, yet they
retain much of their former spirit, therefore they cannot think they ought to
be treated as ordinary beggars; but deserve a particular regard; and, if that
be not given them, their spirits rise against him to whom they ad^^^ themselves
for supply. Thus God gives the unhumbled sinner many com^^^ mercies: and shuts
him not up in the pit, according to his deserving^ but all this is nothing in
his eyes. He must be set down at the children's table, otherwise he reckons
himself hardly dealt with, and wronged* for he is not yet brought so low, as to
think, God may be justified when he speaks, (against him) and clear from all
iniqui^^, when he judges him, according to his real demerit, Psalm. li. 4 He
thinks, perhaps, that even before he was enlightened, he was better than many
others; he considers his reformation of life, his repentance, and grief and
tears his sin has cost him, his earnest desires after Christ, his prayers, and
wrestlings for mercy; and uses all these now, as bribes for mercy, laying no
small weight upon them, in his addresses to the throne of grace. But here the
Spirit of the Lord shoots a sheaf of arrows into the man's heart, whereby his
confidence in these things is sunk and destroyed; and instead of thinking
himself better than many, he is made to see himself worse than any. The
naughtiness of his reformation of life is discovered. His repentance appears to
him no better than the repentance of Judas; his tears like Esau's, and his
desires after Christ to be selfish and loathsome, like theirs who sought Christ
because of the loaves. John vi. 26. His answer from God seems now to be, Away
proud beggar, How shall I put thee among the children? He seems to look sternly
on him, for his slighting of Jesus Christ by unbelief, which is a sin he fearce
discerned before. But now, (...) length, he beholds it in its crimson colors;
and is pierced to the heart, as with a thousand darts, while he sees how i^ has
been going on blindly, sinning against the remedy of sin, and in the whole
coarse of his life, trampling on the blood of the Son of God. And now he is, in
his own eyes, the miserable object of law-vengeance, yea, and gospel-vengeance
too.

Eleventhly, The man being thus far humbled, will no more plead, he is worthy
for wh^m Christ should do this thing: but, on the contrary, looks on himself as
unworthy of Christ, and unworthy of the favor of God. We may compare him, in
this case, to the young man who followed Christ, having a linen cloth cast
about his naked body (...) on whom, when the young men laid hold, he left the
linen cloth, and fied from them naked, Mark xiv. 51, 52. Even so the man had
been following Christ, in the thin and coldrise garment of his own personal
worthiness; but by it, even by it, which he so much trusted to, the law
catches hold of him, to make him prisoner; and then he is fain to leave it,
and flees away naked; yet not to Christ, but from him. If you now tell him, he
is welcome to Christ, if he will come to him; he is apt to say, Can such a vile
and unworthy wretch as I, be welcome to the holy Jesus? If a plaster be
applied to his wounded soul, it will not stick He says, Depart from m^, for I
am a sinful man, O Lord, Luke v. 8. No man needs speak to him of his
repentance, for his comfort; he can quickly espy such faults in it as makes it
naught: nor of his tears, for he is assured, they have never come into the
Lord's bottle. He dispute himself away from Christ; and concludes, now that he
has been such a slighter of Christ, and is such an unholy and vile creature, he
cannot, he will not, he ought nor, to come to Christ; and that he must either
be in better case, or else he will never believe. And hence, he now makes his
strongest efforts, to amend what was amiss in his way before: He prays more
earnestly than ever, mourns more bitterly, strives against sin in heart and
life, more vigorously, and watches more diligently; if by any means he may, at
length be fit to come to Christ. One would think the man is well humbled now:
But ah! devilish pride lurks under the veil of all this seeming humility. Like
a kindly br^nch of the old stock; he adheres still; and will not submit to the
righteousness ^f God, Romans x 3. He will not come to the market of free grace,
without money. He is bidden to the marriage of the King's Son, where the
bridegroom himself furnishes all the guests with wedding garments, stripping
them of their own: but he will not come, because he wants a wedding garment;
howbeit he is very busy making one ready. This is sad work; and therefore he
must have a deeper stroke yet; else he is ruined. This stroke is reached him
with the ax of the law, in its irritating power. Thus the law girding the soul
with cords of death, and holding it in with the rigorous commands of obedience,
under the pain of the curse; and God, in his holy and wise conduct, withdrawing
his restraining grace; corruption is irritated, lusts become violent, and the
more they are striven against, the more they rage, like a furious horse checked
with the b^^. Then do corruptions set up their heads, which he never saw in
himself before. Here oft-times atheism, blasphemy, and, in one word, horrible
things concerning God, terrible thoughts concerning the faith, arise in his
breast: so that his heart is a very hell within him. Thus, while he is sweeping
the house of his heart, not yet watered with gospel grace, these corruptions
which lay quiet before in neglected corners, sly up and down in it like dust.
He is as one who is mending a dam, and while he is repairing breaches in it, and
strengthening every part of it, a mighty flood comes down, overturns his work,
and drives all away before it, as well what was newly laid, as what was laid
before. Read, Romans vii. 8, 9, 10, 13. This is a stroke which goes to the heart:
and, by it, his hope of getting himself nore sit to come to Christ, is cut off.

Lastly, Now the time is come when the man betwixt hope and despair, resolves
to go to Christ as he is: and therefore, like a dying man stretching himself,
just before his breath goes out, he rallies the broken forces of his soul;
tries to believe, and in some sort lays hold on Jesus Christ. And now the
branch hangs on the old stock, by one single tack of a natural faith, produced
by the natural vigor of one's own spirit, under a most pressing necessity,
Psalm. lxxxviii. 34, 35. When he slew them, then they sought him, and they
returned and enquired early after God. And they remembered that God was their
rock, and the high God their Redeemer. Hos. viii. 2. Israel shall cry unto me,
My God, we know thee. But the Lord minding to perfect his work, fetches yet
another stroke, whereby the branch falls quite off. The Spirit of God
convincingly discovers to the sinner, his utter inability to do any thing that
is good: and so he dies, Romans vii. 9. That voice powerfully strikes through
his soul, How can ye believe? John v. 44. Thou can no more believe, than thou
can reach up thine hand to heaven, and bring Christ down from thence. And
thus at length he sees, he can neither help himself by working, nor by
believing: and having no more to hang by on the old stock, he therefore falls
off. And while he is distressed thus, seeing himself like to be swept away with
the flood of God's wrath; and yet unable so much as to stretch forth a hand to
lay hold of a twig of the tree of life, growing on the banks of the river; he
is taken up, and ingrafted into the true Vine, the Lord Jesus Christ giving him
the spirit of faith.

By what has been said upon this head, I design not to rack or distress tender
consciences; for, though there are but few such, at the day, yet, God forbid I
should offend any of Christ's little ones. But, alas! a dead sleep is fallen
upon this generation; they will not be awakened, let us go as near the quick as
we will: and therefore, I fear there is another sort of awakening abiding this
sermon-proof generation, which shall make the ears of them that hear it to
tingle. However, I would not have this to be looked upon as the sovereign God's
stinted method of breaking off sinners from the old stock: but this I assert as
a certain truth, that all who are in Christ, have been broken off from all
these several confidences; and that they who were never broken off from them,
are yet in their natural stock. Nevertheless, if the house be pulled down, and
the old foundation razed: it is all a case, whether it was taken down stone by
stone, or whether it was undetermined, and all fell down together.

Now it is, that the branch is ingrafted in Jesus Christ. And, as the law, in
the hand of the Spirit of God, was the instrume^^ to cut off the branch from
the natural stock, so the gospel, in the hand of the same Spirit, is the
instrument used for ingrafting it in the supernatural stock, 1 John i. 3. That
which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have
fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ. See Isa. lxi. 1, 2, 3. The gospel is the silver cord let down
from heaven, to draw perishing sinners to land. And, though the preaching of the
law prepares the way of the Lord; yet it is in the word of the gospel, that
Christ and a sinner meet. Now, as in the natural grafting, the branch being
taken up is put into the stock; and being put into it, takes with it; and so
they are united: even so in the spiritual ingrafting, Christ apprehends the
sinner; and the sinner being apprehended of Christ, apprehends him; and so they
become one, Philip. iii. 12.

First, Christ apprehends the sinner by his Spirit, and draws him to himself, 1
Cor. xii 13. For by one Spirit, we are all baptized into one body. The same
Spirit, which is in the Mediator himself, he communicates to his elect in due
time; never to depart from them, but to abide in them, as a principle of life.
Thus, he takes hold of them, by his own Spirit put into them; and so the
withered branch gets life. The soul is now in the hands of the Lord of life,
and possessed by the Spirit of life: how then can it but live? The man gets a
ravishing light of Christ's excellency, in the glass of the gospel: he sees him
a full, suitable, and willing Savior; and gets a heart to take him for, and
instead of all. The spirit of faith furnishes him with feet to come to Christ,
and hands to receive him. What by nature he could not do, by grace he can; the
Holy Spirit working in him the work of faith with power.

Secondly, The Sinner, thus apprehended, apprehends Christ by faith, and so
takes with the blessed stock, Ephesians. iii. 17. That Christ may dwell in your
hearts by faith. The soul that before tried many ways of escape, but all in
vain, does now look again, with the eye of faith, which proves the healing
look. As Aaron's rod, laid up in the tabernacle, budded, and brought forth
buds, Numb. xvii. 8. So the dead branch apprehended by the Lord of life, put
into, and bound up with, the glorious quickening stock, by the Spirit of life,
buds forth in actual believing on Jesus Christ, whereby this union is
completed. We having the same spirit of faith -- believe, 2 Cor. iv. 13. Thus
the stock and the graft are united, Christ and the Christian are married: faith
being the soul's consent to the spiritual marriage covenant, which, as it is
proposed in the gospel to mankind sinners indefinitely, so it is demonstrated,
attested, and brought home, to the man in particular, by the Holy Spirit: and
so be, being joined to the Lord, is one Spirit with him. Hereby a believer liv^
in and for Christ, and Christ lives in, and for the believer, Gal. ii. ^ I am
crucified with Christ: Nevertheless, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
(...). Hos. iii. 3. Thou shall not be for another man, so will I (...) be for
thee. The ^o^ds then of this blessed union are, the Spirit on Christ's part,
and says (...) the believer's part.

Now, both the souls and bodies of believers are united to Christ. He that is
joined to the Lord is one spirit, 1 Cor vi 17. The very bodi^^ of believers
have this honor put upon them, that they are the templ^^ of the holy Ghost,
ver. 19. And the members of Christ, ver. 15. When they sleep in the dust, they
sleep in Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 14. And it is in virtue of this union, they shall
be raised up out of the dust again, Romans viii. 11. He shall quicken your m^tal
bodies, by his Spirit (...) dwells in you. In token of this mystical union,
the church of believers is called by the name of her head and husband, 1 Cor.
xii 12. For as the body is one, and has many members, -- so also is Christ

USE From what is said, we may draw these following inferences:

1 The preaching of the law is most necessary. He that would ingraft, must
needs use the snedding knife. Sinners have many shifts to keep them from
Christ; many things by which they keep their hold of the natural stock:
therefore, they have need to be closely pursued, and hunted out of their
sculking holes, and refuge of lies.

2. Yet it is the gospel that crowns the work: the law makes nothing perfect^^^
^he law lays open the wound, but it is the gospel that heals. The law strips a
man, wounds him, and leaves him half-dead: the gospel binds up his wounds,
pouring in wine and oil, to heal them. By the law we are broken off: but, it is
by the gospel we are taken up, and implanted in Christ.

3. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans viii 9.
We are told of a monster in nature, having two bodies differently animated, as
appeared from contrary affections at one and the same time; but so united, that
they were served with the selfsame legs Even so, however men may cleave to
Christ, call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves upon the God of
Israel, Isa. xlvii 2. And they may be bound up as branches in him, John xv. 2.
by the outward ties of sacraments: yet, if the Spirit that dwells in Christ,
dwell not in them they are not one with him. There is a great difference
betwixt adhesion and ingrafting. The ivy clasps and twists itself about the
oak; but it is not one with it, for it still grows on its own root: so, to
alled^ (...) Isa. iv. 1. many professors take hold of Christ, and eat their own
bread, and wear their own appar^l, only they are called by his name. They stay
themselves upon him, but grow upon their own root: they take him to support
their hopes, but their delights are elsewhere.

4. The union betwixt Christ and his mystical members, is firm and indissoluble
Were it so that the believer only apprehended Christ, but Christ apprehended
^ot him: we could promise little on the stability of such an union; it might
quickly be dissolved: but, as the believer apprehends Christ by faith; so
Christ apprehends him by his Spirit and none shall pluck him out of his hand.
Did the child only keep hold of the nurse, it might at length weary and let go
its hold, and so fall away: but if she have her arms about the child, it is in
no hazard of falling away, even though it be not actually holden by her: so,
whatever sinful intermissions may happen in the exercise of faith, yet the
union remains sure, by reason of the constant indwelling of the Spirit. Blessed
Jesus! All his saints are in thy hand, Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 3. It is observed by some,
that the word Abba, is the same, whether you read it forward or backward!
whatever the believer's case be, the Lord is still to him Abba, Father.

Lastly, They have an unsure hold of Christ, whom he has not apprehended by his
Spirit. There are many half-marriages here, where the soul apprehends Christ,
but is not apprehended of him. Hence many fall away, and never rise again: they
let go their hold of Christ; and when that is gone, all is gone. These are the
branches in Christ, that bear not fruit, which the husbandman takes away,
John xv. 2. Quest. How can that be? Ans. These branches are set in the stock,
by a profession, or an unsound hypocritical faith; they are bound up with it,
in the external use of the sacraments: but the stock and they are never knit;
therefore they cannot bear fruit. And they need not be cut off, nor broken off;
they are by the husbandman only taken away, or, (as the word primarily
signifies) lifted up; and so taken away, because there is nothing to hold them:
they are indeed bound up with the stock; but they have never united with it.

Quest, How shall I know if I am apprehended of Christ? Ans. You may be
satisfied in this inquiry, if you consider and apply these two things.

First, When Christ apprehends a man by his Spirit, he is so drawn, that he
comes away to Christ with his whole heart: for true believing is believing with
all the heart, Acts viii. 37. Our Lord's followers are like these who followed
Saul at first, men whose hearts God has touched, 1 Samuel x. 26. When the Spirit
pours in overcoming grace, they pour out their hearts like water before him,
Psalm. lxii. 8. They flow unto him, like a river, Isa. ii. 2. All nations shall
flow unto it: namely, to the mountain of the Lord's house. It denotes not only
the abundance of converts; but the disposition of their souls, in coming to
Christ: they come heartily and freely, as drawn with loving kindness, Jer.
xxxi. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, Psalm. cx. 3. i.
e. free, ready, open-hearted, giving themselves to thee as free will off^^^ngs.
When the bridegroom has the bride's heart, it is a right marriage* but some
give their hand to Christ, who give him not their heart. They that are only
driven to Christ by terror, will surely ^eave him again, when that terror is
gone. Terror may break a heart of stone; but the pieces into which it is
broken, still continue to be stone: the terrors cannot soften it into a heart
of flesh. Yet terror may begin the work, which love crowns: The strong wind,
the earthquake, and the fire going before: the still small voice, in which the
Lord is, may come after them. When the blessed Jesus is seeking sinners to
match with him, they are bold and perverse, they will not speak with him, (...)
he has wounded them, made them captives, and (...) them with the ^^rds of
death. When this is done, then it is that he makes love t^ (...), and (...)
their hearts. The Lord tells us, Hos. ii 16 -- 20. That his chosen Israel shall
be married unto himself. But, how will the bride's consent be won? Why, in the
first place, he will bring her into the wilderness, as he did the people, when
he brought them out of Egypt, ver. 14. There the will be hardly dealt with,
scorched with thirst, and bitten with serpents: and then he will speak
comfortably to her, or, as ^he expression is, he will speak upon her heart. The
sinner is first driven, and then drawn to Christ. It is with the soul, as with
Noah's dove; she was forced back again to the ark, because she could find
nothing else to rest upon: but when she did return, she would have rested on
the out side of it, if Noah had not put forth his hand, and pulled her in, Genesis
viii. 9. The Lord sends the avenger of blood in pursuit of the criminal; and
he, with a sad heart, leaves his own city; and, with tears in his eyes, parts
with his old acquaintance, because he dare not stay with them: and he frees for
his life to the city of refuge. This is not at all his choice, it is forced
work; necessity has no law. But, when he comes to the gates, and sees the
beauty of the place, the excellency and loveliness of it charms him; and then
he enters it with heart and goodwill, saying, This is my rest, and here I will
stay; and, as one said in another case, I had perished unless I had p^rished.

Secondly, When Christ apprehends a soul, the heart is disengaged from, and
turned against, sin. As in cutting off the branch from the old stock, the great
idol self is brought down, the man is powerfully taught to deny himself: so, in
the apprehending of the sinner by his Spirit, that union is dissolved, which
was betwixt the man and his lusts, while he was in the flesh, as the Apostle
expresses it. Romans viii. 5. his heart is loosed from them, though formerly ^s
dear to him, as the members of his body; as his eyes, legs, or arms; and,
instead of taking pleasure in them as some time he did; he longs to be rid of
them. When the Lord Jesus comes to a soul, in the day of converting grace; he
finds it like Jerusalem, in the day of her nativity, (Ezekiel. xvi. 4.) with its
navel not cut, drawing its fulsome nourishment and satisfaction from its lusts:
but, he cuts off thi^ communication, that he may set the soul on the breasts of
his own consolations, and give it rest in himself. And thus the Lord wounds the
head and heart of sin, and the soul comes to him, saying, Surely our fathers
have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there are no pro^it, Jer. xvi.
19.

Of the Benefits flowing to true believers, from their union with Christ.
V. And lastly, I come to speak of the benefits flowing to true believers from
their union with Christ. The chief of the particular benefits believers have by
it, are justification, peace, adoption, sanctification, growth in grace
fruitfulness in good works, acceptance of these good works, establishment in a
state of grace, support and a special conduct of providence about them. As for
communion with Christ, it is such a benefit, as being the immediate consequent
of union with him, comprehends all the rest as mediate ones. For look, as the
branch, immediately upon its union with the stock, has communion with the
stock, in all that is in it: so the believer uniting with Christ, has
communion with him; in which he launcheth forth into an ocean of happiness, is
led into a paradise of pleasures, and has a saving interest in the treasure hid
in the field of the gospel, the unsearchable riches of Christ. As soon as the
believer is united to Christ, Christ himself, in whom all fullness dwells, is
his, Cant ii 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his. And, how shall he not with
him freely give us ALL things? Romans vii. 32 Whether Paul, or Apollos, or
Cephas* or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come,
ALL are yours, 1 Cor iii 22. Thus communion with Christ is the great
comprehensive blessing, necessarily flowing from our union with him. Let us now
consider the particular benefits flowing from it, beforementioned.

The First particular benefit that a sinner has by his union with Christ is
Justification; for being united to Christ, he has communion with him in his
right usness, 1 Cor. i. 30. "But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is
made unto us wisdom and righteousness" He stands no more condemned; but
justified before God, as being in Christ, Romans viii 1 There is therefore now no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. The branches hereof are pardon
o^ sin, and personal acceptance.

1 s^, His sins are pardoned, the guilt of them is removed. The bond obliging
him to pay his debt, is cancelled God the Father takes the pen, dips it in the
blood of his Son, crosses the sinner's accounts, and blotteth them out of his
debt-book. The sinner, out of Christ, is bound over to the wrath of God: he is
under an obligation in law, to go to the prison of hell, and there to ly till
he has paid the utmost farthing. This arises from the terrible sanction with
which the law is fenced, which is no less than death, Genesis ii. 17. So that the
sinner passing the bounds assigned him, is as Shemei, in another case, a man of
death, 1 Kings ii. 42. But now, being united to Christ, God says, Deliver him
from going down to the pit; I have found a ransom, Job xxxiii 24. The sentence
of condemnation is reversed, the believer is absolved, and set beyond the reach
of the condemning law. His sins, which sometimes were set before the Lord, Psalm
xc. 8. so that they could not be hid, God now takes and casts them all behind
his back, Isa. xxxvii. 17. Yea, he casts them into the depths of the sea, Mi^^h
vii. 19. What falls into a brook may be got up again; but what is cast into the
sea cannot be recovered. Ay, but there are some shallow places in the sea:
true, but their sins are not cast in there, but into the depths of the sea; and
the depths of the sea are devouring depths, from whence they shall never come
forth again. But, what if they do not sink? He will cast them in with force; so
that they shall go to the ground, and sink as lead in the mighty waters of the
Reds^^er's blood. They are not only forgiven, but forgotten, Jer. xxxi. 34. I
will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sins no more. And though
their after sins do, in themselves, deserve eternal wrath, and do actually make
them liable to temporal strokes, and fatherly chastisements, according to the
tenor of the covenant of grace, Psalm lxxxix. 30. -- 33. Yet they can never be
actually liable to eternal wrath, or the curse of the law; for they are dead to
the law in Christ, Romans vii 4. And they can never fall from their union with
Christ; nor can they be in Christ, and yet under condemnati^n, Rom viii. 1.
There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. This
is an inference drawn from that doctrine of the believer's being dead to the
law, delivered by the Apostle, chap. vii. 1 -- 6. As is clear from the 2d, 3d,
and 4th verses of this viii. chap. And in this respect, the justified man is
"the blessed man, unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity," Psalm. xxxii. 2 As
one who has no design to charge a debt on another, sets it not down in his
count-book.

2 dly, The believer is accept^d as righteous in God's sight, 2 Cor. v 21. For
he is found in Christ, not having his own righteousness, but that which is
through the says of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil
iii. 9. He could never be accepted of God, as ^igh^eou^, upon the account of
his own righteousness: because, at best it is but imperfect; and all
righteousness, properly so called, which will abide a trial before the throne
of God, is perfect. The very name of it implies perfection: for unless a work
be perfectly conform to the law it ^ not right, but wrong: and so cannot make a
man righteous before God, whose judgment is ^^^ding to truth. Yet if justice
demand a righteousness of one that is in Christ, upon which he may be accounted
righteous before the Lord: Surely shall such an one say, In the LORD have I
righteousness, Isa. xiv 24. The law is fulfilled* its commands are obeyed, its
sanction is satisfied. The believer's Cautioner has paid the debt. It was
exacted, and he answered for it.

Thus the person united to Christ, is justified. You may conceive of the whole
proceeding herein, in this manner. The avenger of blood pursuing the criminal,
Christ, as the Savior of lost sinners, does by the Spirit apprehend him, and
draw him to himself; and he by Faith lays hold on Christ: so the Lord our
righteousness, and the unrighteous creature unite. From this union with Christ,
results a communion with him, in his unsearchable riches, and consequently, in
his righteousness, that white raiment which he has for clothing of the naked,
Rev. iii. 18. Thus the righteousness of Christ becomes his: and because it is
his by unquestionable title, it is imputed to him; it is reckoned his, in the
judgment of God, which is always according to the truth of the thing. And so
the believing sinner having a righteousness which fully answers the demands of
the law, he is pardoned, and accepted as righteous. See Isa. xlv. 22, 24, 25.
Romans iii 24. and chap. v. 1. Now he is a free man, Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of these whom God justifies? Can justice lay any thing to their
charge? No, for it is satisfied. Can the ^aw? No, for it has got all its
demands of them in Jesus Christ, Gal ii 26. I am cruc^fied with Christ. What
can the law require more, after it has wounded their head; poured in wrath, in
full measure, into their soul; and cut off their life, and brought it into the
dust of death; in so far as it has done all this to Jesus Christ, who is their
Head, Ephesians. i. 22. their Soul, Acts ii 25, 27 and their Life, Col. iii. 4. What
is become of the sinner's own handwriting, which would prove the debt upon
him? Christ has blotted it out, Col. ii. 14. But, it may be, justice may get
its eye upon it again^ no, he took it ^ut of the way. But, O that it had been
torn in pieces, may the sinner say: yea so it is; the nails that pierced
Christ's hands and feet, are driven through it, he nailed it. But what if the
torn pieces be set together again? That cannot be; for he nailed it to his
cross, and his cross was buried with him, but will never rise more, seeing
Christ (...) no more Where is the face-covering that was upon the condemned
man? Christ has destroyed it, Isa. xxv. 7. Where is death, that stood before
the sinner with a grim face, and an open mouth, ready to devour him? Christ has
swallowed it up in victory, ver 8. Glory, glory, glory to him that thus loved
us, and washed u^ from our sins in his own blood!

The second benefit flowing from the same spring of union with Christ, and
coming by the way of justification, is Peace; peace with God, and peace of
conscience, according to the measure of the sense the justified have of their
peace with God, Romans v. 1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace
with God. Chap xiv. 27. For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Whereas God was their enemy
before, now he is reconciled to them in Christ; they are in a covenant of peace
with him; and as Abraham was, so they are the friends of God. He is
well-pleased with them, in his beloved Son. His word, which spoke terror to
them formerly, now speaks peace, if they rightly take up its language. And
there is love in all his dispensations toward them, which makes all work
together for their good: Their consciences are purg^d of that guilt and
filthiness that sometime lay upon them: his conscience purifying blood streams
through their souls, by virtue of their union with him, Heb. ix. 14. How much
more shall the blood of Christ -- purge your conscience from dead works, to
serve the living God? The bonds laid on their consciences, by the Spirit of
God, acting as the spirit of bondage, are taken off, never more to be laid on
by that hand, Romans vii. 15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage
again to fear. Hereby the conscience is (...) as soon as the soul becomes
conscious of the application of that (...) which falls out sooner or later,
according to the treasure of faith, and ^ the only wise God sees meet to time
it. Unbelievers may have troubled consciences, which they may get ^^^ted again:
but alas! their consciences become peaceable, ere they become pure; so their
peace is but the seed of a greater horror and confusion. Carelessness may give
ease for a while, to a sick conscience; men neglecting its wounds, they close
again of their own accord, before the filthy matter is purged out Many bury
their guilt in the grave of an ill memory: conscience smarts a little: at
length the man forgets his sin, and there is an end of it: but that is only an
ease before death. Business, or the affairs of life, often give ease in this
case. When Cain is banished from the presence of the Lord, he falls a building
of cities. When the evil spirit came upon Saul, he calls not for his Bible, nor
for the priests to converse with him about his case; but for music, to play it
away. So many, when their consciences begin to be uneasy, they fill their heads
and hands with business, to divert themselves, and to regain ease at any rate.
Yea, some will sin over the belly of their convictions, and so some get ease to
their consciences, as Hazael gave to his master, by stiffling him Again the
performing of duties may give some ease to a disquieted conscience; and this is
all that legal professors have recourse to, for quieting of their consciences.
When conscience is wounded; they will pray, confess, mourn, and resolve to do
so no more: and so they become whole again, without any application of the
blood of Christ, by faith. But they, whose consciences are rightly quieted:
come for peace and purging to the blood of sprinkling. Sin is a sweet morsel,
that makes God's elect sick souls, ere they get it vomited up. It leaves a
sting behind it, which some one time or other, will create them no little pain.

Elihu shows us both the case and cure, Job xxxiii. Behold the case one may be
in, whom God has thoughts of love to. He darteth convictions into his
conscience; and makes them stick so fast, that he cannot rid himself of them,
ver. 16. He opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction, his very
body sickens, ver. 19. He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and the
multitude of his bones with strong pain. He loses his stomach, ver. 20. His
life abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat. His body pines away, so that
there is nothing on him but skin and bone, ver. 21. His flesh is consumed away,
that it cannot be seen, and his bones that were not seen, stick out. Though he is
not prepared for death, he has no hopes of life, ver. 22. His soul draws near
unto the grave, and (which is the height of his misery) his life to the
destroyers: he is looking every moment when devils, these destroyers, Romans ix.
11. these murderers, or man-slayers, John viii. 44. will come and carry away
his soul to hell. O dreadful case! yet there is hope. God designs to k^^p back
his soul from the pit, ver. 18 a (...) he bring him forward to the brink of it.
Now, see how the (...) is cured. The physician's art cannot prevail here: The
disease lies more inward, than that his medicines can reach it. (...) soul
could that be, brought the body into this disorder, and therefore the ^eene,
lies must be applied to the sick man's soul and conscience. The physician for
this case must be a spiritual physician the remedies (...) be spiritual, a
righteousness, a ransom or atonement. Upon the application of these, the soul
is cur^d, the conscience is quieted, and the body recovers, ver. 23, 24, 25. 26
If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand to show
unto man his uprightness: then he is gracious unto him, and says. Deliver him
from going down to the pit. I have found a ransom. His flesh shall be fresher
than a child^s he shall return to the days of his youth. He shall pray unto
God, and he shall be favorable unto him, and he shall see his face with joy.
The proper physician for this patient, is a messenger, an interpreter, ver. 23.
that is as some expositors, not without ground, understand it, the great
Physician Jesus Christ, whom Job had called his Redeemer, chap xix. ^^ He is a
messenger, the Messenger of the Covenant of Peace, Mal iii. 1 who comes
seasonably to the sick man. He is an Interpreter, the great Interpreter of
God's counsels of love to sinners, John i. 28 One among a thousand, even the
chief among ten thousand, Cant v 10. One chosen out of the people, Psalm lxxxix.
29. One to whom the Lord has given the tongue of the learned, -- to speak a
word in season to him that is weary, Isa l. 4, 5, 6. It is he that is with him,
by his Spirit, now, to convince him of righteousness, John xvi. 8 as he was
with him before, to convince him ^f sin and judgment. His work now is to show
unto him his uprightness, or his righteousness, i. e. the Interpreter Christ
his righteousness; which is the only righteousness arising from the paying of a
ransom, and upon which a sinner is delivered from going down to the pit, ver.
24. And thus Christ is said to declare God's name, Psalm. xxii. 22. and to
preach righteousness, Psalm. xl. 9. The phrase is remarkable: it is not to show
unto the man, but unto man, his righteousness; which not obscurely intimates,
that he is more than a man, who shows; or declares this righteousness. Compare
Amos iv. 13. He that forms the mountains, and created the wind, and declares
unto man what is his thought. There seems to be in it a sweet allusion to the
first declaration of this righteousness unto man, or as the word is, unto Adam
after the fall, while he lay under terror from apprehensions of the wrath of
God: which declaration was made by the Messenger, the Interpreter, namely, the
eternal word of the Son of God, called The voice of the Lord God, Genesis iii. 8.
and by him appearing probably in human shape. Now, while, by ^his Spirit he is
the Preacher of righteousness to the man, it is supposed the man lays hold on
the offered righteousness; whereupon the ransom is applied to him, and he is
delivered from going down to the pit: for God has a ransom for him. This is
intimate to him: God says Deliver him, ver. 24. Hereupon his conscience, being
purged by the blood of atonement, is pacified, and sweetly quited: he shall
pray upon God -- and see his face with joy, which before he beheld with horror,
ver. 26. That is a New Testament language, Having an High Priest over the house
of God, she shall draw near with a true heart, in (...) "assurance of faith,
having his heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, Heb. x. 21, 22. But then,
what becomes of the body, the weak and weary flesh? Why, His flesh shall be
fresher than a child's he shall return to the days of his youth, ver. 25 Yea,
all his bones, (which were chastened with strong pain, ver. 19.) shall say,
Lord, who is like unto thee? Psalm. xxxv 10.

A Third benefit flowing from union with Christ, is Adoption. Believers, being
united to Christ, become children of God, and members of the family of heaven.
By their union with him, who is the Son of God by nature, they become the sons
of God by grace, John i. 12. As when a branch is cut off from one tree, and
grafted in the branch of another; the ingrafted branch, by means of its union
with the adopting branch (as some not unfitly have called it) is made a branch
of the same stock, with that into which it is ingrafted: so sinners being
ingrafted into Jesus Christ, whose name is the Branch, his Father is their
Father, his God their God, John xx. 17. And thus they, who are by nature
children of the devil, become the children of God. They have the Spirit of
adoption, Romans viii. 15. namely, the Spirit of his Son, which bring them to
God, as children to a father; to pour out their complaints in his bosom, and to
seek necessary supply, Gal. iv. 6. Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Under all their
weaknesses, they have fatherly pity, and compassion shown them, Psalm. ciii. 13.
Like as a father pitieth his children: so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.
Although they were but foundlings, found in a desert land; yet now that to them
belongs the adoption, he keeps them as the apple of his eye, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 10.
Whosoever pursue them, they have a refuge, Prove. xiv. 26. His children shall
have a (...) of refuge. In a time of common calamity, they have chambers for
protection, where they may be hid, until the indignation be overpass, Isa.
xxvi. 20. And he is not only their refuge for protection, but their portion for
provision, in that refuge; Psalm. cxlii. 5. Thou art my refuge and my portion in
the land of the living. They are provided for, for eternity, Heb. xi. 16. He
has prepared for them a city And what he sees they have need of for time, they
shall not want, Matthew. vi. 31, 32. Take no thought, saying, What shall we eat?
Or, what shall we drink? Or, wherewithal shall we be clothed? For your heavenly
Father knows that ye have need of all these things. Seasonable correction is
likewise their privilege as sons: so they are not suffered to pass with their
faults, as happens to others who are not children, but servants of the family,
and will be turned out of doors for their miscarriages at length Heb. xii. 7 If
ye endure chastening, God deals with young with sons: for what son is he whom
the Father chasteneth (...) they are (...) of, and shall inherit the promises,
Heb. vi 12. Nay, they are ^^rs of God, who himself is the porti^n of their
(...) and saint heirs with Christ, Romans viii. 17. And (...) children of the
great King, and young heirs of glory, they have angels for their attendants,
who are sent forth to minister for them that shall be heirs of salvation, Heb.
i. 14.

A Fourth benefit is Sanctification, 1 Cor. i. 30. But of him are ye in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification.
Being united to Christ, they partake of his Spirit, which is the Spirit of
holiness. There is a fullness of the Spirit in Christ, and it is not like the
fullness of a vessel, which only retains what is poured into it; but it is the
fullness of a fountain for diffusion and communication, which is always sending
forth its water, and yet is always full. The Spirit of Christ, that spiritual
sap, which is in the stock, and from thence is communicate to the branches, is
the Spirit of grace, Zec. xii. 10: And where the Spirit of grace dwells, there
will be found a complication of all graces. Holiness is not one grace only, but
all the graces of the Spirit: it is a constellation of graces; it is all the
graces in their seed and root. And as the sap conveyed from the stock into the
branch, goes through it, and through every part of it; so the Spirit of God
sanctifies the whole man. The poison of sin was diffused through the whole
spirit, soul and body of the man; and sanctifying grace pursues it into every
corner, 1 Thessalonians. v. 23. Every part of the man is sanctified, though no part is
perfectly so. The truth we are sanctified by, is not held in the head, as in a
prison: but runs, with its sanctifying influences, through heart and life.
There are indeed some graces in every believer, which appear as top-branches
above the rest: as meekness in Moses, patience in Job: but seeing there is in
every child of God, a holy principle going along with the holy law, in all the
parts thereof, loving, liking, and approving of it; as appears from their
universal respect to the commands of God: it is evident they are endued with
all the graces of the Spirit; because there can be no more in the effect, than
there was in the cause.

Now, this sanctifying Spirit, whereof believers partake, is unto them, (1.) A
Spirit of mortification. Through the Spirit they mortify the deeds of the body,
Romans viii. 13. Sin is crucified in them, Gal v. 24. They are planted together
(namely, with Christ) in the likeness of his death, which was a lingering
death, Romans vi. 5. Sin in the saint, though not quite dead, yet is dying. If it
were dead, it would be taken down from the cross and buried out of his sight:
but, it hangs there as yet, working and struggling under its mortal wounds.
Look, as when a tree has got such a stroke as re^ches the heart of it, all the
leaves and branches thereof begin to fade and decay: so, where the sanctifying
Spirit comes, and breaks the power of sin, there is a gradual ceasing from i^,
and dying to it, in the whole man; so that he no longer lives in the flesh, to
the lusts of men. He does not make sin his trade and business; it is not his
great design to seek himself, and to satisfy his corrupt inclinations: but he
is for Immanuel's land; and is walking in the highway to it, the way, which is
called, The way of holiness: though the wind from hell, that was on his back
before, blows now full in his face, makes his traveling uneasy, and often
drives him off the highway. (2.) This Spirit is a spirit of vivification to
them; for he is the Spirit of life, and makes them live unto righteousness,
Ezekiel. xxxvi. 27. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in
my statutes. These that have been planted together, with Christ, in the
likeness of his death, shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection, Romans
vi. 5. At Christ's resurrection, when his soul was reunited with his body,
every member of that blessed body was enabled again to perform the actions of
life: so, the soul being influenced by the sanctifying Spirit of Christ, is
enabled more and more to perform all the actions of spiritual life. And as the
whole of the law, and not some scraps of it only, is written on the holy heart;
so believers are enabled to transcribe that law in their conversation. And,
although they cannot write one line of it without blots; yet God, for Christ's
sake, accepts of the performances, in point of sanctification: they being
disciples to his own Son, and led by his own Spirit.

This sanctifying Spirit, communicated by the Lord Jesus to his members, is the
spiritual nourishment the branches have from the Stock into which they are
ingrafted; whereby the life of grace, given them in regeneration, is preserved,
continued and actuated. It is the nourishment whereby the new creature lives,
and is nourished up toward perfection. Spiritual life needs to be sed, and
must have supply of nourishment: and believers derive the same from Christ
their head, whom the Father has constituted the head of influences to all his
members, Col ii. 19. And not holding the head, from which all the body, by
joints and hands having nourishment ministered, or supplied, etc. Now, this
supply is, "the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ," Phil i 19. The saints
seed richly, eating Christ's flesh, and drinking his blood, for their spiritual
nourishment: yet our Lord himself teaches us, that it is the Spirit that
quickneth, even that Spirit who dwells in that blessed body, John vi 63. The
human nature is united to the divine nature* in the person of the Son, and so
(like the bowl in Zechariah's candlestick* Zech. iv.) lies at the
fountainhead, as the glorious means of conveyance of influences, from the
fountain of the Deity; and receives not the Spirit by measure, but ever has a
fullness of the Spirit, by reason of that personal union. Hence, believer being
united to the man Christ, (as the seven lamps to the bowl, by their seven
pipes, Zech. iv. 2.) his flesh is to them meat indeed, and his blood drink
indeed: for, feeding on that blessed body (i.e. effectually app^ing Christ to
their souls by faith) they partake more and more of that Spirit, who dwells
therein, to their spiritual nourishment. The holiness of God could never admit
of an immediate union with the sinful creature, nor (consequently) an immediate
communion with it: yet, the creature could not live the life of grace, without
communion with the fountain of life: Therefore, that the honor of God's
holiness, and the salvation of sinners, might jointly be provided for: the
second person of the glorious Trinity, took, into a personal union with
himself, a sinless human nature; that so this holy harmless and un^^f^^d
humanity, might immediately receive a fullness of the Spirit, of which he might
communicate to his members by his divine power and efficacy. And likeas, if
there were a tree, having its root in the earth, and its branches reaching to
heaven; the vast distance betwixt the root and the branches would not interrupt
the communication betwixt the root and the top branch: even so, the distance
betwixt the man Christ, who is in heaven, and his members, who are on earth,
cannot hinder the communication betwixt them. What though the parts of mystical
Christ ( viz. the head and the members) are not contigu^us, as joined together
in the way of a corporal union? The union is not therefore the less real and
effectual. Yea, our Lord himself shows us, that albeit we should eat his flesh,
in a corporal and carnal manner, yet, it would profit nothing, John vi. 63. we
would not be one whit holier thereby. But the members of Christ on earth, are
united to their head in heaven, by the invisible bond of the self-same Spirit
dwelling in both: in him as the head, and in them as the members, even, as the
wheels, in Ezeckiel's vision, were not contiguous to the living creatures, yet
were united to them, by an invisible bond of one spirit in both; so that when
the living creatures went, the wheels went by that,; and when the living
creatures were lift up from the earth, the wheels were lift up, Ezekiel. i. 19.
For, says the Prophet, the spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels,
ver. 20.

Hence, we may see the difference betwixt true Sanctification, and that shadow
of it, which is to be found amongst some strict professors of Chr^stianity, who
yet are not true Christians, are not regenerate by the Spirit of Christ, and is
of the same kind with what has appeared in many sober he^^hens. True
sanctification is the result of the soul's union with the holy Jesus, the first
and immediate receptacle of the sanctifying Spirit; out of those fullness his
members do, by virtue of their union with him, receive sanctifying influences.
The other is the mere product of the man's own spirit, which, whatever it has,
or seems to have of the matter of true holiness, yet does not arise from the
supernatural principles, nor to the high aims and ends thereof: for* as it
comes from self, so it runs out into the dead sea of self again; and it is as
wide of true holiness, as nature does of grace. They who have this bastard
holiness, are like common boat-men, who serve themselves with their own ^ars*
whereas, the ship bound for (...)'s land, sails by the blowing of the divine
Spirit. How is it possible there should be true sanctification without Christ?
Can there be true sanctification, without partaking of the Spirit of holiness?
Can we partake of that Spirit, but by Jesus Christ, the way, the truth, and the
life? The falling dew shall as soon make its way through the flinty rock, as
influences of grace shall come from God to sinners, any other way, but through
him whom the Father has constituted the head of influences, Col. i. 19. For it
pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell. and, chap. ii. 19.
And not holding the head, from which all the body, by joints and bands having
nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase of God.
Hence see how it comes to pass, that many f^^l a^^y from their seeming
sanctification, and never recover: it is because they are not branches truly
knit to the true Vine. Mean while, others recover from their decays, because of
their union with the life-giving stock, by the quickening Spirit, 1 John ii.
19. They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us,
they would no doubt have continued with us.

A Fifth benefit is growth in grace. Having nourishment ministered, they
increase with the increase of God, Col ii 19. The righteous shall flourish like
the palm tree, he shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon, Psalm. xcii. 12. Grace is
of a growing nature: in the way to Zion they go from strength to strength.
Though the holy man be at first a little child in grace, yet at length he
becomes a young man, a father, 1 John ii. 13. Though he does not but creep in
the way to heaven sometimes; yet afterward he walks, he runs, he mounts up
with wings as eagles, Isa. xl. 31. If a branch grafted into a stock never
grows, it is a plain evidence of its not having knit with the stock.

But some may perhaps say, "If all true Christians be growing ones, what shall
be said of these, who instead of growing, are going back?" I answer, First,
There is a great difference between the Christian's growing simply, and his
growing at all times. All true Christians do grow, but I do not say, they grow
at all times. A tree that has life and nourishment, grows to its perfection,
yet it is not always growing; it grows not in the winter. Christians also have
their winters wherein the influences of grace, necessary for growth, are
ceased, Cant. v. 2. I sleep. It is by faith, the believer derives gracious
influence from Jesus Christ; likeas each lamp in the candlestick received oil
from the bowl, by the pipe going betwixt them, Zech iv. 2. Now, if that pipe be
stopped, if the saints faithly dormant and unactive; then all the rest of the
graces will become dim, and seem ready to be extinguished. In consequence
whereof, depraved nature will gather strength, and become active. What then
will become of the soul? Why, there is still one sure ground of hope. The
saint's faith is not as the hypocrite's, like a pipe laid short of the
fountain, whereby there can be no conveyance: it still remains a bond of union
betwixt Christ and the soul; and therefore, because Christ lives, the believer
shall live also, John xiv. 19. The Lord Jesus puts in his hand by the hole of
the door, and clears the means of conveyance: and their influences for growth
flow and the believer's graces look fresh and green again, Hos. xiv. 7. They
that dwell under his shadow shall return: they shall revive as the corn, and
grow as the vine. In the worst of times, the saints have a principle of growth
in them, 1 John iii. 9. His seed remains in him. And therefore after decays
they revive again: namely when the winter is over, and the Sun of righteousness
returns to them with his warm influences. Mud thrown into a pool may ly there
at ease; but if it be cast into a fountain, the spring will at length work it
out, and run clear as formerly. Secondly, Christians may mistake their growth,
and that two ways. (1.) By judging of their case according to their present
feeling. They observe themselves, and cannot perceive themselves to be growing:
but there is no reason thence to conclude they are not growing, Mark iv. 27.
The seed springs and grows up, he knows not how. Should one fix his eye ever
so steadfastly, on the sun running his race, or on a growing tree; he would not
p^rceive the sun moving, or the tree growing: but, if he compare the tree as it
now is, with what it was some years ago; and consider the place in the heavens,
where the sun was in the morning; he will certainly perceive the tree has
grown, and the sun has moved. In like manner may the Christian know, whether he
be in a growing or declining state, by comparing his present with his former
condition (2) Christians may mistake their case, by measuring their growth by
the advances of the top only, not of the root. Though a man be not growing
taller, he may be growing stronger. If a tree be taking with the ground, fixing
itself in the earth, and spreading out its roots; it is certainly growing,
although it be nothing taller than formerly. So, albeit a Christian may want
the sweet consolation and flashes of affection, which sometimes he has had; yet
if he be growing in humility, self-denial, and sense of needy dependence on
Jesus Christ, he is a growing Christian, Hos. xiv. 5. I will be as the dew unto
Israel, he shall cast forth his roots as Lebanon.

Quest. But do hypocrites grow at all? And if so, how shall we distinguish
betwixt their growth, and true Christian growth? Ans. To the first part of the
question, hypocrites do grow. The tares have their growth, as well as the
wheat: and the seed that fell among thorns did spring up, Luke viii. 7. only it
did bring no fruit to perfection, ver. 14 Yea, a true Christian may have a
false growth. James and John seemed to grow in the grace of holy zeal, when
their spirits grew so hot in the cause of Christ, that they would have fired
whole villages, for not receiving their Lord and Master, Luke ix. 54 They said,
Lord, will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, to consume them,
even as Elias did? But it was indeed no such thing; and therefore he turned and
rebuked them, ver. 55. and said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of.
To the second part of the question, it is answered, that there is a peculiar
beauty in true Christian growth, distinguishing it from all false growth: it is
universal, regular, proportionable. It is a growing up to him in all things,
which is the head, Ephesians. iv. 15. The growing Christian grows proportionably in
all the parts of the new man. Under the kindly influences of "the Sun of
righteousness, believers "grow up as calves in the stall, Mal. iv. 2. Ye would
think it a monstrous growth, in these creatures, if ye saw their heads grow,
and not their bodies, or if ye saw one leg grow, and another not: if all the
parts do not grow proportionably Ay, but such is the growth of many, in
religion. They grow like rickety children, who have a big head, but a slender
body: they get more knowledge into their heads, but no more holiness into their
hearts and lives: They grow very hot outwardly, but very cold inwardly; like
men in a fit of the ague. They are more taken up about the externals of
religion, than formerly; yet as great strangers to the power of godliness as
ever. If a garden is watered with the hand, some of the plants will readily get
much some little, and some no water at all; and therefore some wither, while
others are coming forward: but after a shower from the clouds, all come forward
together. In like manner all the graces of the Spirit grow proportionably, by
the special influences of divine grace. The branches ingrafted in Christ,
growing aright, do grow in all the several ways of growth at once. They grow
inward, growing into Christ, (Ephesians. iv. 15) uniting more closely with him; and
cleaving more firmly to him, as the head of influences, which is the spring of
all other true Christian growth. They grow outward, in good works in their life
and conversation. They not only, with Naphtali, give goodly words; but, like
Joseph, they are fruitful bought. They grow upward in heavenly-mindedness, and
contempt of the world; for their conversation is in heaven, Philip. iii 20. And
finally, they grow downward in humility and self-lothing. The branches of the
largest growth in Christ, are in their own eyes, less than the least of all
saints, Ephesians. iii. 8. The chief of sinners, 1 Timothy i 15. More brutish than any
man, Prove. xxx. 2. They see, they can do nothing, no not so much as to think
any thing, as of themselves, 2 Cor iii 5 that they deserve nothing, being not
worthy of the least of all the mercies showed unto them, Genesis xxxii. 10. and
that they are nothing, 2 Cor. xii. 2

A Sixth benefit is Fruitfulness. The branch ingrafted into Christ, is not
barren, but brings forth fruit. John xv. 5. He that abides in me, and I in
him, the same brings forth much fruit. For that very end are souls married to
Christ, that they may bring forth fruit unto God, Romans vii 4. They may be
branches in Christ, by prof^ssion, but not by real implantation, that are
barren branches. Whosoever are united to Christ, bring forth the fruits of
gospel-obedience and true holiness. Faith is always followed with good works.
The believer is not only come out of the grave of his natural state; but he has
put off his grave clothes, namely, reigning lusts, in the which he walked
sometime, like a ghost: being dead while he lived in them, Col iii 7, 8. For
Christ has said of him as of Lazarus, Loose him, and let him go And now that he
has put on Christ* he personates him (so to speak) as a beggar, in borrowed
robes, represents a king on the stage, "walking as he also walked" Now "the
fruit of the Spirit in him is in all goodness." Ephesians v 9 The fruits of holiness
will be found in the hearts, lips, and lives of those who are united to Christ.
The hidden man of the heart, is not only a temple built for God, and
consecrated to him; but used and employed for him; where love, fear, trust, and
all the other parts of unseen religion are exercised, Phil iii 3. For we are of
the circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit The heart is no more the
devil's common, where thoughts go free; for there even vain thoughts are hated,
Psalm cxix 123 But it is God's enclosure, hedged about as a garden from him,
Cant. iv. 16. It is true, there are weeds of corruption there, because the
ground is not yet perfectly healed: but the man, in the day of his new
creation, is set to dress it, and keep it. A live-coal from the altar has
touched his lips, and they are purified, Psalm. xv 1, 2, 3. Lord, who shall
abide in thy tabernacle? Who shall dwell in thy holy hill? He that speaks the
truth in his heart He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor takes up a
reproach against his neighbor There may be indeed a smooth tongue where there
is a false heart. The voice may be Jacob's, while the hands are Esau's. But, If
any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain, James i. 26. The power of
godliness will rule over the tongue, though a world of iniquity. If one be a
Galilean, his speech will bewray him, he will not speak the language of Ashdod,
but the language of Canaan. He will neither be dumb in religion; nor will his
tongue walk at random, seeing to the double guard nature has given the tongue,
grace has added a third: The fruits of holiness will be found in his outward
conversation, for he has clean hands, as well as a pure heart, Psalm. xxiv. 4.
He is a godly man, and religiously discharges the duties of the first table of
the law: he is a righteous man, and honestly performs the duties of the second
table. In his conversation he is a good Christian, and a good neighbor too. He
carries it toward God, as if men's eyes were upon him; and toward men, as
believing God's eye to be upon him. These things which God has joined, in his
law, he dare not, in his practice, put asunder.

Thus the branches of Christ are full of good fruits. And those fruits are a
cluster, of vital actions, whereof Jesus Christ is the principle and end: the
principle: for he lives in them, and the life they live, is by the says of the
Son of God, Gal. i. 20. The end, for they live to him, and to them to live is
Christ, Philip i. 21. The duties of religion are in the world, like fatherless
children* in rags: some will not take them in, because they never loved them
nor their Father: (...) take them in, because they may be serviceable to them:
but the saints take them in for their Father's sake; that is, for Christ's
sake; and they are lovely in their eyes, because they are like him (...) is the
new life of the (...) surely it could never have been hammered out of the
natural powers of their souls, by the united force of all created power. In
eternal b^rrenness should their womb have been shut up; but that being married
to Christ they "bring forth fruit unto God.' Romans vii. 4.

If you ask me, How your nourishment, growth and fruitfulness may be forwarded?
I offer these few advices (1.) Make sure work, as to your knitting with the
stock, by faith unfeigned; and beware of hypocrisy: a branch that is not found
at the heart, will certainly wither. The trees of the Lord's planting are trees
of righteousness, Isa. lxi. 3. So when others fade, they bring forth fruit.
Hypocrisy is a disease in the vitals of religion, which will consume all at
length. It is a leak in the ship, that will certainly sink it. Sincerity of
grace will make it lasting, be it never so weak: as the smallest twig, that is
found at the heart, will draw nourishment from the stock, and grow, while the
greatest bough^ that is rotten, can never recover, because it receives no
nourishment. (2.) Labor to be steadfast in the truths and way of God. An
unsettled and wavering judgment is a great enemy to Christian growth and
fruitfulness, as the Apostle teaches, Ephesians. iv. 14, 15. That we henceforth be no
more children, tossed to and ^ro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine. But speaking the truth in love, may grow up unto him in all things,
which is the head, even Christ. A rolling stone gathers no fog, and a wavering
judgment makes a fruitless life. Though a tree be never so sound, yet how can
it grow, or be fruitful if ye be still removing it out of one soil into
another? (3.) Endeavor to cut off the suckers, as gardeners do that their
trees may thrive. These are unmortified lusts. Therefore mortify your members
that are upon the earth, Col. iii. 5. When the Israelites got meat to their
lusts, they got leanness to their souls. She that has many hungry children
about her hand, and must be still putting into their mouths, will have much ado
to get a bit put into her own. They must refuse the craving of inordinate
affections, who would have their souls to prosper. Lastly, Improve, for these
ends, the ordinances of God. The courts of our God are the place, where the
trees of righteousness flourish, Psalm xcii. 13. The waters of the sanctuary
are the means appointed of God, to cause his people grew as willows by the
water courses. Therefore drink in with "desire the sincere milk of the word
that ye may grow thereby, 1 Pet. ii. 2. Come to these wells of salvation: not
to look at them only, but to draw water out of them. The sacrament of the
Lord's supper is in a special manner appointed for those ^^der* It is not only
a solemn puplick profession, and a seal of our union and communion with Christ;
but it is a means of most intimate communion with him; and strengthens our
union with him, our faith, love, repentance, and other graces, 1 Cor. x. 26.
The (...) of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the (...) of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? And chap. xii. 13. We have been all made to drink into one spirit. Give
yourselves unto prayer; open your mouths wide, and he will fill them. By these
means the branches in Christ may be further nourished, grow up, and bring forth
much fruit.

A seventh benfit is, The acceptance of their fruits of holiness before the
Lord. Though they be very imperfect they are accepted, because they savor of
Christ the blessed stock, which the branches grow upon; while the fruits of
others are rejected of God, Genesis ii. 4, 5. And the Lord had respect unto Abel,
and to his offering: But unto Cain and his offering he had not respect. Compare
Heb. xi. 3. By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than
Cain. O how defective are the saints duties in the eye of the law! The believer
himself espies many faults in his best performances; yet the Lord graciously
receives them There is no grace planted in the heart, but there is a weed of
corruption hard by its side, while the saints are in this lower world. Their
very sincerity is not without mixture of dissimulation or hypocrisy, Gal. ii.
13. Hence there are defects in the exercise of every grace; in the performance
of every duty: depraved nature always drops something to stain their best
works. There is still a mixture of darkness with their clearest light. Yet this
does not mar their acceptance, Cant. vi. 10. Who is she that looks forth as
the morning? or as the dawning? Behold how Christ's spouse is esteemed and
accepted of her Lord, even when she looks forth as the morning, whose beauty is
mixed with the blackness of the night! When the morning was looking out, as the
word is, Judges xix. 26. i. e. in the dawning of the day, as we read it. So the
very dawning of grace, and good will to Christ, grace peeping out from under a
mass of darkness in believers, is pleasant and acceptable to him, as the break
of day is to the weary traveller. Though the remains of unbelief make their
hand of faith to shake and tremble; yet the Lord is so well pleased with it,
that he employs it to carry away pardons and supplies of grace, from the throne
of grace, and the fountain of grace. His faith was effectual, who cried out,
and said with tears, Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbelief, Mark ix. 24.
Though the remains of sensual affections make the flame of their love weak and
smoaky; he turns his eyes from the smoke, and beholds the flame, how fair it
is, Cant. iv. 10. How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse! The smell of
their under garments of inherent holiness, as imperfect as it is, is like the
smell of Lebanon, ver. 11. and that because they are covered with their elder
brother's clothes, which make the sons of God to "smell as a field which the
Lord has blessed." Their good works are accepted: their cups of cold water
given to a disciple, in the name of a disciple, shall not want a reward. Though
they cannot offer for the tabernacle, gold silver, and brass, and onyx-stone,
let them come forward with what they have; if it were but goats hair, it shall
not be rejected; if it were but rams skins, they shall be kindly accepted; for
they are dyed red, dipped by faith in the Mediator's blood, and so presented unto
God. A very ordinary work done in faith, and from faith, if it were but the
building of a wall about the holy city, is a great work, Neh. vi. 3. If it were
but the bestowing of a box of ointment on Christ, it shall never be forgotten,
Matthew. xxvi. 13. Even a cup of cold water only given to one of Christ's little
ones, in the name of a disciple, shall be rewarded, Matthew. x. 42. Nay, not a
good word for Christ, shall drop from their mouths but it shall be registered in
God's book of remembrance, Mal. iii. 16. Nor shall a tear drop from their eyes
for him, but he will put it in his bottle, Psalm. lvi. 8. Their will is accepted
for the deed: their sorrow for the want of will, for the will itself, 2 Cor.
viii. 12. For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to
that a man has, and not according to that he has not. Their groanings, when
they cannot well word their desires, are heard in heaven; the meaning of these
groans is well known there, and they will be returned like the dove with an
olive branch of peace in her mouth. See Romans viii. 26, 27. Their mites are
better than other men's talents. Their lisping and broken sentences are more
pleasant to their Father in heaven, than the most fluent and flourishing
speeches of those that are not in Christ. Their voice is sweet, even when they
are ashamed it should be heard; their countenance is comely even when they
blush, and draw a vail over it, Cant. ii. 14. The Mediator takes their
petitions, blots out some parts, rectifies others, and then presents them to
the Father, in consequence whereof they pass in the court of heaven.

Every true Christian is a temple to God. If ye look for sacrifices, they are
not wanting there; they offer the sacrifice of praise, and they "do good; with
such sacrifices God is well pleased," Heb. xiii. 15, 16. Christ himself is the
altar that sanctifies the gift, ver. 10. But what comes of the skins and dung
of their sacrifices? They are carried away without the camp. If we look for
incense, it is there too. The graces of the Spirit are found in their hearts:
and the Spirit of a crucified Christ, fires them and puts them in exercise;
likeas the fire was brought from the altar of burnt-offering, to set the
incense on flame: then they mount heavenward, like pillars of smoke, Cant.
iii. 6. But the best of incense will leave ashes behind it: yes indeed; but as
the priest took away the ashes of the incense in a golden dish, and threw them
out; so our great High Priest takes away the ashes and refuse of all the saints
services, by his mediation in their behalf.

An Eighth benefit flowing from union with Christ is Establishment. The
Christian cannot fall away, but must persevere unto the end, John x. 28. They
shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. Indeed if
a branch do not knit with the stock, it will fall away when shaking winds
arise: but the branch knit to the stock stands fast, whatever winds blows.
Sometimes a stormy wind of temptation blows from hell, and tosseth the branches
in Christ the true vine: but their union with him, is their security; moved
they may be, but removed they never can be. The Lord "will with the temptation
also make a way to escape," 1 Cor. x. 13. Calms are never of any continuance:
there is almost always some wind blowing; and therefore branches are rarely
altogether at rest. But sometimes violent winds arise, which threaten to rend
them from off their stock. Even so it is with saints; they are daily put to it,
to keep their ground against temptation: but sometimes the wind from hell
rises so high, and blows so furiously, that it makes even top-branches to
sweep the ground; yet being knit to Christ their stock, they get up again, in
spite of the most violent efforts of the prince of the power of the air, Psalm.
xciv. 18. "When I said my foot slippeth, thy mercy, O Lord, held me up." But
the Christian improves by this trial; and is so far from being damaged, that he
is benefited by it, in so far as it discovers what hold the soul has of Christ,
and what hold Christ has of the soul. And lo^k as the wind in the billows,
which would blow out the candle, blows up the fire: even so it often comes to
pass that such temptations do enliven the true Christian, awakening the graces
of the Spirit in him; and by that means, discover both the reality, and the
strength of grace in him. And hence, as Luther, that great man of God, says,
One Christian who has had experience of temptation, is worth a thousand others

Sometimes a stormy wind of trouble and persecution from the men of the world,
blows upon the vine, i. e mystical Christ: but union with the stock is a
sufficient security to the branches. In a time of the church's peace and
outward prosperity, while the ang^ls hold the winds that they blow not, there
are a great many branches taken up, and put into the stock, which never knit
with it, nor live by it, though they be bound up with it, by the bonds of
external ordinances. Now these may stand a while on the stock; and stand with
great ease, while the calm lasts. But when once the storms arise, and the winds
blow; they will begin to fall off, one after another: and the higher the wind
rises, the greater will the number be that falls. Yea some strong boughs of
that sort, when they fall, will, by their weight, carry others of their own
kind, quite down to the earth with them; and will bruise and press down some
true branches in such a manner, that they would also fall off, were it not for
their being knit to the stock; in virtue whereof they get up their heads again,
and cannot fall off* because of that fast hold the stock has of them. Then it
is that many branches, sometime high and eminent, are found lying on the earth
withered, and fit to be gathered up and cast into the fire, Matthew. xiii. 6.

And when the sun was up, they were scorched, and because they had no ^ot, ^h^
withered away John i^. 6. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a
branch, and is withered, and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and
they are burned. But however violently the winds blow, none of the truly
ingrafted branches, that are knit with the stock, are found missing, when the
storm is chang^d into a calm, John xvii. 12. Those that thou gave me, I have
kept, and none of them is lost. The least twig growing in Christ shall stand it
out, and subsist; when the tallest cedars growing on their own root, shall be
laid flat on the ground, Romans viii. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or p^, or sword: See ver. 36, 37, 38, 39. However severely Israel be
sifted, yet shall not the least grain, or as it is in the original language, a
little stone fall upon the earth, Amos ix. 9. It is an allusion to the sifting
of fine peeble stones from among heaps of dust and sand: though the sand and dust
fall to the ground, be blown away with the wind, and trampled under foot; yet
there shall not fall on the earth so much as a little stone, such is the
exactness of the sieve, and care of the sifter. There is nothing more ready to
fall on the earth than a stone: yet if professors of religion be lively stones
built on Christ the chief corner stone; although they be little stones, they
shall not fall to the earth, whatever storm beat upon them. See 1 Pet. ii. 4,
5, 6 All the good grain in the church of Christ is of this kind; they are
stones in respect of solidity; and lively stones, in respect of activity. If
men be solid substantial Christians, they will not be like chaff tossed to and
fro with every wind; having so much of the liveliness that they have nothing of
the stone: and if they be lively Christians, whose spirit will stir in them, as
Paul's did, when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry, Act xvii. 16. they
will not ly like stones, to be turned over hither and thither, cut and carved,
according to the lusts of men; having so much of the stone, as leaves nothing
of livelin^ss in them.

Our God's house is a great house, wherein are not only vessels of gold, but
also of earth, 2 Timothy ii. 20. Both these are apt to contract filthiness; and
therefore, when God brings trouble upon the church, he has an eye to both. As
for the vessels of gold, they are not destroyed, but purged by a fiery trial in
the furnace of affliction, as goldsmiths purge their gold, Isa i. 25. And I
will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross But destruction is
to the vessels of earth: they shall be broken in shivers, as a potter's vessel,
ver. 28. And the destruction ( or breaking) of the transgressors, and of the
sinners, shall be together. It seems to be an allution to that law, for
breaking the vessels of earth, when unclean; while vessels of wood, and
consequently vessels of gold were only to be rinsed, Lev. xv 12.

A Ninth benefit is Support. If thou be a branch ingrafted in Christ, the root
bears thee. The believer leans on Christ; as a weak woman in a journey,
leaning upon her beloved husband, Cant. viii. 5. He stays himself upon him, as
a feeble old man stays himself on his staff, Isa. l. 10. He rolls himself on
him, as one rolls a burden he is not able to walk under, off his own back, upon
another who is able to bear it, Psalm. xxii 8. Marg. There are many weights to
hang upon, and press down the branches in Christ the true Vine. But ye know,
whatever weights hang on branches, the stock bears all; it bears the branch and
the weight that is upon it too.

1 st, Christ supports believers in him, under a weight of outward troubles.
That is a large prrmise, Isa. xliii. 2. When thou passest through the waters, I
will be with thee: and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee. See
how David was supported under a heavy load, 1 Samuel xxx. 6. His city Ziklag was
burnt, his wives were taken captives, his men spoke of stoning him; nothing was
left him but his God and his faith; but by his faith he encouraged himself in
his God. The Lord comes and lays his cross on his people's shoulders; it
presses them down; they are like to sink under it, and therefore cry, "Master,
save us, we perish:" but he supports them under their burden; he bears them up,
and they bear their cross. Thus the Christian having a weight of outward
troubles upon him, goes lightly under his burden, having withal the everlasting
arms underneath him. The Christian has a spring of comfort, which he cannot
lose; and therefore never wants something to support him. If one have all his
riches in money, robbers may take these away; and then what has he more? But
though the landed man be robbed of his money, yet his lands remain for his
support. They that build their comfort on worldly goods, may quickly be
comfortless: but they that are united to Christ, shall find comfort when all
the streams of worldly enjoyments are dried up, Job vi. 13. Is not my help in
me? And is wisdom driven quite from me? q. d. Though my substance is gone;
though my servants, my children, my health, and soundness of body, are all
gone; yet my grace is not gone too. Though the Sabeans have driven away my oxen
and asses, and the Chaldeans have driven away camels; they have not driven away
my faith and my hope too: these are yet in me, they are not driven from me; so
that by them I can fetch comfort from heaven, when I can have none from earth.

2 dly, Christ supports his people under a weight of inward troubles and
discouragements. Many times "heart and flesh fail them," but then, "God is the
strength of their heart," Psalm. lxxiii. 26. They may have a weight of guilt
pressing them. This is a load that will make their back to stoop, and the
spirits to sink: but he takes it off, and puts a pardon in their hand, while
they cast their burden over upon him. Christ takes the soul, as one marries a
widow, under a burden of debt: and so when the creditors come to Christ's
spouse, she carries them to her husband, confesses the debt, declares she is
not able to pay, and lays all over upon him. The Christian sometimes, through
carelessness, loses his discharge; he cannot find it, however he search for
it. The law takes that opportunity; and bends up a process against him for a
debt paid already. God hides his face, and the soul is distressed. Many arrows
go through the heart now; many long accounts are laid before the man, which he
reads and acknowledges. Often does he see the officers coming to apprehend him,
and the prison door open to receive him. What else keeps him from sinking
utterly under discouragements in this case, but that the everlasting arms of a
Mediator are underneath him, and that he relies upon the great Cautioner?
Further, they may have a weight of strong lusts pressing them. They have a body
of death upon them. Death is a weight that presses the soul out of the body. A
leg or an arm of death (if I may so speak) would be a terrible load. (One
lively lust will sometimes ly so heavy on a child of God, that he can no more
remove it, than a child could throw a giant from off him.) How then are they
supported under a whole body of death? Why, their support is from the root that
bears them, from the everlasting arm that is underneath them. His grace is
sufficient for them, 2 Cor. xiii. 9. The great stay of the believer is not the
grace of God within him, that is a well, whose streams sometimes run dry: but
it is the grace of God without him, the grace that is in Jesus Christ; which is
an ever-flowing fountain, to which the believer can never come amiss. For the
Apostle tells us in the same verse, it is the power of Christ. "Most gladly
therefore," says he, will I rather glory in my ininfirmities, that the power
of Christ may rest upon me, or tabernacle above me, as the cloud of glory did
on the Israelites, which God spread for a covering, or shelter to them in the
wilderness, Psalm. cv. 39. compare Isa. iv. 5, 6. So that the believer in this
combat, like the eagle, first flies aloft (by faith) and then comes down on the
prey, Psalm. xxxiv. 5. They looked to him, and were lightened. And finally, they
have a weight of weakness and wants upon them, but they cast over that burden
on the Lord their strength, and he sustains them, Psalm. lv. 22. With all their
wants and weaknesses, they are cast upon him; as the poor, weak and naked babe,
coming out of the womb, is cast into the lap of one appointed to take care of
it, Psalm. xxii. 10. Though they be destitute (as a shrub in the wilderness,
which the foot of every beast may tread down) the Lord will regard them, Psalm.
cii. 17. It is no marvel, the weakest plant may be safe in a garden: but our
Lord Jesus Christ is a hedge for protection to his weak and destitute ones,
even in a wilderness.

Object. But if the saints be supported, how is it that they fall so often
under temptation and discouragements? Ans. (1.) How long soever they fall at
any time, they never fall off; and that is a great matter. They "are kept by
the power of of God through faith unto salvation," 1 Pet. i. 5. Hypocrites may
so fall, so as to fall off, and fall into the pit, as a bucket falls into a
well when the chain breaks. But though the child of God may fall, and that so
low, as the water goes over his head; yet there is still a bond of union
betwixt Christ and him: the cha^n is not broken: he will not go to the ground:
he will be drawn up again, Luke xxii. 31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon,
Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat; but I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. (2.) The falls of the saints flow
from their not improving their union with Christ, their not making use of him
by faith, for staying or bearing them up, Psalm. xxvi. 13. "I had fainted,
unless I had believed." While the nurse holds the child in her arms, it cannot
fall to the ground: yet if the unwary child hold not by her, it may fall
backwards in her arms to its great hurt. Thus David's fall broke his bones*
Psalm. ^ 8. but it did not break the bond of union betwixt Christ and him: The
Holy Spirit, the bond of that union, was not taken from him, ver. 11.

The Last benefit I shall name, is, The special care of the husbandman, John
xv. 1, 2. I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. -- Every branch
that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit.
Believers, by virtue of their union with Christ, are the object of God's
special care and providence. Mystical Christ is God's vine, other societies in
the world are but wild olive trees. The men of the world are but God's
outfield; the saints are his vineyard, which he has a special propriety in, and
a special concern for, Cant. viii. 12. My vineyard, which is mine, is before
me. He that slumbers not, nor sleeps, is the keeper of it, he does keep it lest
any hurt it, he will keep it night and day: he in whose hand is the dew of
heaven, will water it every moment, Isa. xxvii. 3. He dresseth and purges it,
in order to further fruitfulness, John xv. 2. He cuts off the luxuriant twigs
that mar the fruitfulness of the branch. This is done, espcially by the word,
and by the cross of afflictions. The saints need the ministry of the word, as
much as the vineyard needs one to dress and prune the vines, 1 Cor. iii. 9.
We are laborers togethers with God: ye are God's husbandry, ye are God's
building. And they need the cross too, 1 Pet. i. 6.

And therefore, if we should reckon the cross amongst the benefits flowing to
believers from their union with Christ. I judge, we should not reckon it amiss.
Sure I am. in their sufferings they suffer with him, Romans viii. 17. And the
assurances they have of the cross, have rather the nature of a promise, as of a
threatening, Psalm. lxxxix. 30.31.32.33. If his children forsake my law, -- then
will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes.
Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him: nor suffer
thy faithfulness to fail. This looks like a tutor's engaging to a dying father,
to take care of the children left upon him; and to give them both nurture and
admonition, for their good. The covenant of grace does truly beat the spears of
affliction into pruning hooks, to them that are in Christ, Isa. xxvii. 9. By
this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit
to take away h^s sin. Why then should we be angry with ^ur cross? Why should we
be frighted at it? The believer must take up his cross, and fol^ow his leader,
the Lord Jesus Christ. He must ^ke up his ilk-day's cross, Luke ix. 23 If any
man will come after me, let him deny (...), and take up his cross daily. Yea,
he must t^ke up his holy days cross too, Lam. ii. 22 Thou have called, a^ a
solemn day, by terrors round about The church of the Jews had, of a long time,
many a pleasing meeting at the temple, on solemn days, for the worship of G^d:
but they got a solemnity of another nature, when God called together, about the
temple and city, the Chaldean army that burnt the temple, and laid Jerusalem on
heaps. And now, that the church of God is yet militant in this lower r^g^on,
how can it be but the clouds will return after the rain? But the cross of
Christ (which name the saints t^oubles do bear) is kindly ^ame to the believer.
It is a cross indeed; but no to the b^lie^er's graces, but to his corruptions.
The hypocr^es seeming graces may ^ndeed breathe out then last on a cross, as
these of the ^tony ground hearers did. Matthew xiii 6. And when the sun (of
persecu^^on, ver. 26) was up, they were scorched: And because they had not
root, they withered away. But never did one of the red graces in a believer die
upon the cross yet. Nay, as the candle sh^nes brightest in the night, and the
fire burns fiercest in intense frost: So the believer's graces are, ordinarily
most vigorous in a time of trouble.

There is a certain ple^sure and sweetness in the cross, to them who have their
senses exercised to discern and to find ^out. There is a certain sweetness in
one's seeing himself upon his trials for heaven, and standing candidate for
glory. ^here is a pleasure in traveling over these mountains, where the
Christian can see the prints of Christ's own feet, and the footsteps of the
flock, who have been there before him. How pleasant is it to a saint, in the
exercise of grace, to see how a good God crosses his corrupt inclinations, and
prevents his folly! How sweet is it to behold these thieves upon the cross! How
refined a pleasure is there in observing how God draws away provision from
unruly lusts, and so pincheth them, that the Christian may get them governed!
Of a truth there is a paradise within this thorn hedge. Many a time the people
of God are in bonds; which are never loosed, till they be bound with cords of
^ffliction. God takes them, and throws them into a fiery furnace, that burns
off their bond; and then like the three children, Dan iii 25. they are loose,
walking (...) the midst of the fire. God gives his children a potion, with o^
^ter ingredient: If that will not work upon them, he w^l put in a second, a
third, and so on, as there is need, that they may wo^k^ (...) for their good,
Romans viii. 28. With cross-winds he b^ens (...) the harbor. They are often
found in such ways, as that the ^r^ (...) ^he happiest foot they can meet with*
and well may they salute it, as David did Abigail, saying, Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me, 1 Samuel xxv. 32. Worldly
things are often such a load to the Christian, that he moves but very slowly
heavenward God sends a wind of trouble, that blows the burden off the man's
back: and then he walks more speedily on his way; after God has drawn some
gilded earth from him, that was drawing his heart away from God Zeph. iii. 12.
I will also leave in the midst of thee, an afflicted and poor people, and they
shall trust in the name of the Lord. It was an observe of an heathen moralist,
That no history makes mention of any man, who has been made better by riches.
I doubt if our modern histories can supply the defect of ancient histories in
this point. But sure I am many have been the worse of riches: thousands have
been hugged to death, in the embraces of a smiling world; and many good men
have got wounds from outward prosperity, that behoved to be cured by the cross.
I remember to have read of one, who having an imposthume in his breast, had in
vain used the help of physicians: but being wounded with a sword, the
imposthume broke; and his life was saved by that accident, which threatened
immediate death. Often have spiritual imposthumes gathered in the breasts of
God's people* in the time of outward prosperity, and been thus broken and
discussed by the cross. It is kindly for believers to be healed by stripes;
although they are usually so weak as to cry out for fear, at the sight of the
pruning-hook, as if it were the destroying ^x: and to think the Lord is coming
to kill them when he is indeed coming to cure them.

I shall now conclude, addressing myself in a few words, first to saints, and
next to sinners.

I. To you that are saints, I say,

First, Strive to obtain and keep up actual communion and fellowship with Jesus
Christ; that is, to be still deriving fresh supplies of grace, from the
fountain thereof, in him, by faith; and making suitable returns of them, in the
exercise of grace and holy obedience. Beware of estrangement betwixt Christ and
your souls. If it has got in already, (which seems to be the case of many in
this day,) endeavor to get it removed. There are multitudes in the world that
slight Christ, though ye should not slight him: many have turned their backs on
him, that sometimes looked fall for heaven. The warm sun of outward peace and
prosperity has caused some cast their cloak of religion from them, who held it
fast when the wind of trouble was blowing upon them: and will ye also go away?
John vi 67. The greatest ingratitude is stamped on your slighting of communion
with Christ, Jer ii 31 Have I been a wilderness unto Israel* a land of
darkness? Wherefore say my people, We are lords, we will come no more unto
thee? Oh! beloved, "Is this your kindness to your friend*" It is unbecoming any
wise to slight converse with her husband, (...) her especially who was taken
from a prison or a dunghill, as ye were by our Lord. But remember, I pray you,
this is a very ill chosen time to live at a distance from God: -- it is a time
in which divine providence frowns upon the land we live in; the clouds of wrath
are gathering, and are thick above our heads? It is not a time for you to be
out of your chambers, Isa xxvi. 20. They that now are walking most closly with
God, may have enough ado to stand when the trial comes; how hard will it be for
others then, who are like to be surprised with troubles, when guilt is lying on
their consciences unremoved. To be awakened out of a sound sleep, and cast into
a raging sea, as Jonah was, will be a fearful trial. To feel trouble before we
see it coming, to be past hope, before we have any fear, is a very sad case
Wherefore break down your idols of jealousy, mortify these lusts, these
irregular appetites and desires, that have stolen away your hearts, and left
you, like Samson, without his hair, and say, I will go and return to my first
husband; for then it was better with ^e the now, Hos. ii. 7.

Secondly, Walk as becomes those that are united to Christ. Evidence your union
with him by walking as he also walked, 1 John ii. 6. If ye be brought from
under the power of darkness, let your light shine before men. Shine as lights
in the world, holding forth the word of life, as the lanthorn holds the candle,
which being in it, shines through it, Philip. ii. 15, 16. Now that ye profess
Christ to be in you, let his image shine forth in your conversation, and
remember the business of your lives is to prove by practical arguments what ye
profess.

1. Ye know the character of a wife, She that is married, c^^eth how she may
please her husband. Go you and do likewise (...) worthy of the Lord, unto all
pleasing, Col. i. 10. This is the great business of life; you must please him,
though it should displease all the world. What he hates must be hateful to you,
because he hates it. Whatever lusts come in suit of your hearts, deny them,
seeing "the grace of God has appeared, teaching so to do:" and you are, joi^d
to the Lord. Let him be a covering to your eyes* for you have not your choice
to make, it is made already; and you must not dishonor your Head. A man takes
care of hi^ feet, for that, if he catch hold there, it flies up to his head.
Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the member of an harlot?
God forbid, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. vi. 15. Will thou take that heart of
thine, which is Christ' dwelling place, and lodge his enemies there? Will thou
take that body, which is his temple, and defile it, by using the members
thereof, as the instrument of sin?

2. Be careful to bring forth fruit, and much fruit. The branch well laden with
fruit, is the glory of the vine, and of the husband (...) too, John xv 8 Herein
is my Father glorified. that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my disciples. A
barren tree stands safer in a wood, than an orchard: And branches in Christ
that bring me (...) fruit, will be taken away and cast into the fire.

3. Be heavenly-minded and maintain a holy contempt of the world. Ye are united
to Christ, he is your Head and Husband, and is in heaven: Wherefore your hearts
should be there also, Col. iii 1: If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those
things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God Let the
serpent's seed go on their belly* and eat the dust of this earth: but let the
members of Christ be ashamed to bow down and feed with them

4 Live and act dependently depending by faith on Jesus Christ. That which
grows on its own root, is a tree, not a branch. It is of the nature of a
branch, to depend on the stock for all, and to derive all its sap from thence.
Depend on him for life, light, strength, and all spiritual benefits. Gal. ii.
^0. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: and the life which I now live
in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God For this cause, in the
mystical union, strength is united to weakness, life to death* and heaven to
earth; that weakness death and earth, may mount up on borrowed wings Depend on
him for temporal benefits also, Matthew vi. 2. Give us this day our daily bread.
If we have trusted him with our eternal concerns, let us be ashamed to distrust
him in the matter of our provision in the world.

Lastly, Be of a ^eek disposition, and an uniting temper with the fellow
members of Christ's body, as being united to the meek Jesus, the blessed center
of union. There is a prophecy to this purpose concerning the kingdom of Christ,
Isa. ^^.6. The wolf shall dwell with the ^amb; and the leopard shall ly down
with the kid. It is an allusion to the beasts in Noah's ark. The beasts of
prev, that were w^nt to kill and devo^^ others, when once they came into the
ark* lay down in peace with them: the lamb was an no haz^rd by the wolf her^;
nor the kid by the leopard. There was a beautiful accomplishment of it in the
primitive church, Act. iv. 32. "And the multitude of them that bel^ev^d, were
of one heart, and of one soul." And this prevails in all members of Christ,
according to the measure of the grace of God in them. Man is born naked, he
comes naked into this world as ^f God design^d him for the picture of peace:
and sure^y when he is born again he comes not into the new world of grace, with
c^aws to te^^, a sword to wound, and a fire in his hand to burn up his
fellow members in Christ, because they cannot see with his light. Oh! it is sad
to see Christ's lillies as thorns in one another's faces: Christ's lambs
devouring one another like lions, and God's ^^amond cutting one another: yet it
must be remembered, t^ a^ sin is no proper cement for the members of Christ though
Herod and Pontius Pilate may be made friends, that way. The apostle' rule is
plain, Heb. xii 14. "Follow peace with all men and holiness." To follow peace
no further than our humor, credit, and such like things will allow us, it is
too short: to pursue it further than holiness, that is, conformity to the
divine will allows us, is too far. Peace is precious, yet it may be bought too
dear: wherefore we must rather want it, than purchase it, at the expense of
truth or holiness But other way, i^ cannot be over dear bought; and it will
always b^ precious in the eye of the sons of peace.

II. And now, si^^ers, what shall I say to you? I have given you some view of
the privileges of these in the state of grace: ye have seen them afar off But
alas! they are not yours, because ye are not in Christ's. The sinfulness of an
unregenerate state is yours; and the misery of it is yours also: but, ye have
neither part nor lot this matter. The guilt of all your sins lies upon you; ye
have no part in the righteousness of Christ. There is no peace to you, no peace
with God, no true peace of conscience; for ye have no saving interest in the
great Peace maker Ye are none of God's family: the adoption we spoke (...)
belongs not to you. Ye have no part in the Spirit of sanctification; and* in
one word, ye have no inheritance among them that are sanctified All I can say
to you in this matter, is that the ca^^^ no^ desperate, they may yet be yours,
Rev. iii. 20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with
me. Heaven is proposing an union with earth still, the potter is making suit to
his own clay, and the gates of the city of refuge are not yet closed. O! that
we could compel you to come in.

Thus far of the State of Grace.

STATE IV. NAMELY, The ETERNAL STATE: or, State of consummate Happiness, or
Misery.
HEAD I. Of DEATH.
JOB xxx. 23. For I know that thou will bring me to Death, and to the House
appointed for all Living.


I Come now to discourse of man's eternal state, into which he enters by death.
Of this entrance, Job takes a solemn serious view, in the words of the text;
which contain a general truth, and a particular application of it. The general
truth is supposed; namely, that all men must, by death, remove out of this
world: they must die. But, whither must they go? They must go to the house
appointed for all living: to the grave, that darksome, gloomy, solitary house,
in the land of forgetfulness. Wheresoever the body is laid up, till the
resurrection; thither, as to a dwelling house, death brings us home. While we
are in the body, we are but in a lodging-house: in an inn, on our way
home-ward. When we come to our grave, we come to our home, our long-home,
Eccles. xii. 5. All living must be inhabitants of this house, good and bad, old
and young. Man's life is a stream, running into death's devouring deeps. They,
who now live in palaces, must quit them, and go home to this house; and they,
who have not where to lay their heads, shall thus have a house at length. It is
appointed for all by him, whose counsel shall stand This appointment cannot be
shifted; it is a law, which mortals cannot transgress. Job's application of
this general truth to himself, is expressed in these words: I know that thou will bring me to death, etc He knew, that he behoved to meet with death; that
his soul and body behoved to part; that, God, who had set the tryst, would
certainly see it kept. Sometimes Job was inviting death to come to him, and
carry him home to his house; yea, he was in hazard of running to it before the
time, Job vii. 15. My soul chooses strangling and death, rather than my life.
But here he considers God would bring him to it; yea. bring him back to it as
the word imports. Whereby he seems to intimate, that we have no life in this
world, but as runaways from death, which stretches out its cold arms, to
receive us from the womb; but though we do then narrowly escape its clutches,
we cannot escape long; we will be brought back again to it. Job knew this, he
had laid his account with it, and was looking for it.

DOCTRINE, All must die.
Although this doctrine be confirmed by the experience of all former
generations, ever since Abel entered into the house appointed for all living:
and though the living know that they shall die; yet it is needful to discourse
of the certainty of death, that it may be impressed on the mind, and duly
considered.

Wherefore consider first. There is an unalterable statute of death, under
which men are concluded. It is appointed unto men once to die, Heb. ix. 27. It
is laid up for them, as parents lay up for their children: they may look for
it, and cannot miss it; seeing God has designed and reserved it for them. There
is no peradventure in it; we must needs die, 2 Samuel xiv. 14. Though some men
will not hear of death, yet every man must see death, Psalm. lxxxix. 48. Death
is a champion all must grapple with: we must enter the lists with it, and it
will have the mastery, Eccles. viii. 8. There is no man that has power over
the spirit, to retain the spirit, neither has he power in the day of wrath.
They indeed who are found alive at Christ's coming, shall all be changed, 1
Cor. xv. 51. But that change will be equivalent to death, will answer the
purposes of it. All other persons must go. the common road, the way of all
flesh. Secondly, Let us consult daily observation. Every man sees that wise
men die, likewise the fool and brutish person, Psalm. xlix. 10. There is room
enough, on this earth, for us; notwithstanding of the multitudes that were upon
it before us; they are gone to make room for us; as we must depa^ to leave room
for others. It is long since death began to transport men into another world,
and vast shoals and multitudes are gone thither already: yet the trade is going
on st^ll; death is carrying off new inhabitants, daily, to the house appointed
for all living. Who could ever bear the grave say, It is enough? Long has it
been getting, but still it asks. This world is like a great fair or market,
where same are coming in, others going out: while the assembly that is in it is
confused, and the more part know not wherefore they are come together; or like
a town situate on the road, to a great city ^^ro' which some travelers are
past, some are passing, while others are only coming in, Eccles. iv. One
generation passes away, and another generation comes: but the earth abides
for ever. Death is an inexorable, irresistible messenger; who cannot be
diverted from executing his order, by the force of the mighty, the br^bes of
the rich, nor the intreates of the poor. It does not reverence the hoary head,
nor pity the ^arm^ess babe. The bold and daring cannot outbrave it: nor can ^e
f^nt-hearted obtain discharge in this war. Thirdly, The human body consis^ of
perishing principles, Genesis iii. 19. "Dust thou art, and unto dust she th^^
return." The strongest are but brytle earthen vess^, easil^ broken i^ shivers
The soul is but me^^ly ^oused, (...) this mortal body, which is not a house of
stone, but a house of clay; the mud walls cannot but moulder away, especially
s^g the foundation is not on a rock, but in the dust; they are crushed before
the moth, though this insect be tender, that the gentle touch of a finger will
dispatch it, Job iv. 19. These principles are like gunpowder; every small
spark, lighting on them, will set them on fi^e, and blow up the house. The
stone of a raisin, or a hair in milk, have choked men, and laid the house of
clay in the dust. If we consider be frame and structure of our bodies. how
fearfully and wonderfully we are made; and on how regular and exact a motion of
the fluid^, and balance of humors, our life depends; and that death has as
many doors to enter in by, as the body has pores: and if we compare the soul
and body together, we may justly reckon. there is s^e that more astonishing in
our life, than in our death; and that it is more strange, to see dust walking
up and down on the dust, than lying down in it. Though the lamp of our life be
not violently blown out; yet the flame most go out at length, for want of oil.
And what are those distempers and diseases, we are liable to, but death's
h^rbingers, that come to prepare its way? They meet us, as soon as we set our
foot on earth; to tell us at our entry, that we do but come into the world to
go out again. Howbeit, some are snatched away in a moment, without being warned
by sickness or disease. Fourthly, We have sinful souls, and therefore have
dying bodies: death follows sin, as the shadow follows the body. The wicked
must die, by virtue of the threatening of the covenant of works, Genesis ii. 17.
"In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die." And the godly
must die too; that, as death entered by sin, sin may go out by death. Christ
has taken away the sting of death, as to them; albeit he has not as yet removed
death itself. Wherefore, though it fasten on them, as the viper did on Paul's
hand, it shall do them no harm: but because the leprosy of sin is in the walls
of the house, it must be broken down, and all the materials thereof carries
forth. Lastly, Man's life in this world, according to the scripture account of
it, is but a few degrees removed from death The scripture (...) presents it as
a vain and empty thing. short in its continuance, and swift in its passing away

First, Man's life is a vain and empty thing, while it is: it vanishes away:
and lo! it is not, Job viii. 6. My days are vainty. If ye suspect afflicted Job
of partiality in this matter, hear the wise and prosperous Solomon's character
of the days of his life, Eccles viii. 15. All things have I seen in the days of
my vanity, i. e. my vain days. Moses, who was a very active man compares our
days to a sleep, Psalm. xc. 5 They are as a sleep, which is not noticed, till it
be ended. The resemblance is pat: few men have right apprehensions of life,
until death awaken them; then we begin to know we were living. We spend our
years as a tale that is told, ver. 9 When an idle tale is a-telling, it may
affect a little; but when it is ended, it is forgot: and so is man forgotten,
when the fable of his life is ended. It is as a dream, or vision of the night,
in which there is nothing solid: when one awakes, all evanisheth, Job xx. 8. He
shall fly away as a dream, and shall not be found; yea he shall be chased away
as a vision of the night. It is but a vain show or image, Psalm. xxxix. 6
"Surely every man walks in a vain show," Man in this world, is but, as it
were, a walking statue: his life is but an image of life; there is so much of
death in it.

If we look on our life, in the several periods of it, we will find it a heap
of vanities. Childhood and youth are vanity, Eccles xi. 10. We come into the
world, the most helpless of all animals: young birds and beasts can do
something for themselves, but infant man is altogether unable to help himself.
Our childhood is spent in pitiful trifling pleasures, which become the scorn of
our own after-thoughts Youth is a flower that soon withers; a blossom that
quickly falls off; it is a space of time in which we are rash, foolish, and
inconsiderate, pleasing ourselves with a variety of vanities, and swimming, as
it were, through a flo^d of them. But ere we are aware, it is past, and we are
in middle age, encompassed with a thick cloud of cares, through which we must
grope; and finding ourselves beset with pricking thorns of difficulties;
through them we must force our way, to accomplish the projects and contrivances
of our riper thoughts. And the more we solace ourselves in any earthly
enjoyment we attain to, the more bitterness do we find in parting with it. Then
comes old age, attended with its own train of infirmities, labor and sorrow,
Psalm xc 10 and sets us down next door to the grave. In a word, All flesh is
grass, Isa. xl 6. Every stage, or period in life, is vanity. Man at his best
state (middle age, when the heat of youth is spent, and the sorrow old age have
not yet overtaken him) is altogether vanity, Psalm. xxxix 5 Death carries off
some in the bud of childhood, others in the blossom of youth, and others when
they are come to their fruit: few are left standing, till, like ripe corn, they
forsake the ground: all die one time or other.

Secondly, Man's life is a short thing: it is not only a vanity but a
short-lived vanity. Consider, First, How the life of man is reckoned in the
scripture. It was indeed sometimes reckoned by hundreds of years: but no man
ever arrived at a thousand, which yet bears no proportion to eternity. Now,
hundreds are brought down to scores, threescore and ten, or fourscore is its
utmost length, Psalm. xc 10. But few men arrive at that length of life. Death
does but rarely wait, till men be bowing down, by reason of age, to meet the
grave. Yet, as if years were too big a word, for such a small thing as the life
of man on earth; we find it counted by months, Job xiv 5 "The number of his
months are with thee." Our course, like that of the moon, is run in a little
time; we are always waxing or waneing, till we disappear. But frequently it is
reckoned by days; and these but few, Job xiv 1. Man that is born of a woman is
of few days. Nay, it is but one day in scripture account; and that a hireling's
day, who will precisely observe when his day ends, and give over his work, ver.
6. Till he shall accomplish as an hireling his day. Yea, the scripture brings
it down to the shortest space of time, and calls it a moment, 2 Cor. iv. 17.
Our light afflion (though it last all our life long) is but for a moment. But
elsewhere it is brought down to yet a lower pitch, farther than which one
cannot carry it, Psalm xxxix. 5. Mine age is nothing before thee. Agreeable to
this, Solomon tells us, Eccles. iii. 2. There is a time to be born, and a time
to die; but makes no mention of a time to live, as if our life were but a skip
from the womb to the grave. Secondly, Consider the various similitudes by which
the scripture represents the shortness of man's life. Hear Hezekiah, Isa.
xxxviii. 12. "Mine age is departed, and is removed from me as a shepherd's
tent; I have cut off, like a weaver, my life." The shepherd's tent is soon
removed; for the flocks must not feed long in one place: such is a man's life
on earth, quickly gone. It is a web, he is incessantly working; he is not idle
so much as one moment, in a short time it is wrought, and then it is cut off.
Every breathing is a thread in this web, when the last breath is drawn, the web
is woven out, he expires and then it is cut off, he breathes no more. Man is
like grass and like a flower, Isa. xl. 6 All flesh (even the strongest and most
healthy flesh) is grass, and all the godliness thereof is as the flower of the
field. The grass is flourishing in the morning; but, in the evening, being cut
down by the mowers, it is withered: so man sometimes is walking up and down at
ease in the morning; and in the evening, is lying a corpse, being knocked down
by a sudden stroke, with one or other of death's weapons. The flower, at best,
is but a weak and tender thing, of short continuance, wherever it grows: but
(observe) man is not compared to the flower of the garden; but to the flower of
the field, which the foot of every beast may tread down at any time. Thus is
our life liable to a thousand accidents, every day; any of which may cut us
off. But though we should escape all these, yet at length this grass withers,
this flower fades of itself. It is carried off, "as the clouds is consumed and
vanishes away." Job vii. 9 It looks big as the morning cloud, which promises
great things, and raises the expectations of the husbandman; but the sun
rises, and the cloud is scattered; death comes, and man evanisheth. The
Apostle James proposes the question, What is your life? chap. iv. 14. Hear his
own answer, It is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then
vanishes away. It is frail, uncertain, and lasts not. It is smoke, which
goes out of the chimney, as if it would darken the face of the heavens; but
quickly is scattered, and appears no more: thus goes man's life, and where is
he? It is a wind, Job vii. 7. O remember that my life is wind^ It is but a
passing blast, a short puff, a wind that passes away and comes not again,
Psalm lxxviii. 39. Our breath is in our nostrils, as it were always upon the
wind to depart; ever passing and repassing like a traveller; until it go away
for good and all, not to return, till the heavens be no more.

Lastly, Man's life is a swift thing; not only a passing, but a flying vanity.
Have you not observed how swiftly a shadow has run along the ground, in a
cloudy and windy day, suddenly darkening the places beautified before with the
beams of the sun, but as suddenly disappearing? Such is the life of man on the
earth, for "he flees as a shadow, and continues not," Job xiv 2. A weaer's
shuttle is very swift in its motion; in a moment it is thrown from one side of
the web to the other: yet our days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle, chap.
vii 6 How quickly is man tossed through time into eternity! See how Job
describes the swiftness of the time of life, chap. ix 25. Now my days are
swifter than a post: they flee away, they see no good. ver 26 They are hasted
away as the swift ships; as the eagle that hastes to the prey. He compares his
days with a post, a foot post; a runner, who runs speedily to carry tidings,
and will make no stay. But, though the post were like Ah^naaz, who overrun
Cush^ our days would be swifter than he, for they flee away, like a m^n fleeing
for his life, before the pursuing enemy; he runs with his utmost vigor, yet
our days run as fast as he. Howbeit, that is not all. Even he who is fleeing
for his life, cannot run always; he must needs sometimes stand still, ly down,
or run in somewhere, as Sisera did into Jael's tent, to refresh himself; but
our time never halts. Therefore it is compared to ships, which can sail night
and day without intermission, till they be at their port; and swift ships,
ships of desire, in which men quickly arrive at the desired haven; or, ships of
pleasure, that sail more swiftly than ships of burden. Yet the wind failing,
the ships course is marred: but our time always runs with a rapid course.
Therefore it is compared to the eagle flying: not with his ordinary flight, for
that is not sufficient to represent the swiftness of our days; but when he
flies upon his prey, which is with an extraordinary swiftness. And thus, even
thus, our days fly away.

Having thus discoursed of death, let us improve it, in discerning the vanity
of the world; in bearing up with Christian commitment and patience, under all
troubles and difficulties in it; in martifying our lusts; in ^leaving unto the
Lord with purpose of heart," on all hazards; and in preparing for death's
approach.

And first, Let us hence as in a looking-glass, behold the vanity of the world;
and of all these thing in it, (...) men so much value and esteem and therefore
set their hearts upon. The rich and the poor are equally intent upon this
world; they bow the knee to it; yet it is but a clay god: they court the bulky
vanity, and run keenly to catch the shadow; the rich man is hugged to death in
its embraces; and the poor man wearies himself in the fruitless pursuit. (What
wonder if the world's smiles overcome us; when we pursue it so eagerly, even
while it frowns upon it?) But look into the grave. O man, consider and be wise;
listen to the doctrine of death; and learn, (1.) That hold as fast as thou
can, thou shall be forced to let go thy hold of the world at length Though
thou load thyself with the fruits of this earth; yet all shall fail off when
thou come to creep into thy hole, the house, under ground, appointed for all
living. When death comes, thou must bid an eternal farewell to thy enjoyments
in this world: thou must leave thy goods to another: and whose shall those
things be, which thou have provided? Luke xii 20. -- (2.) "Thy portion of these
things shall be very little ere long" If thou ly down on the grass, and stretch
thyself at full length, and observe the print of thy body when thou risest,
thou may see how much of this earth will fall to thy sh^re at last. It may be
thou shall get a coffin, and a winding sheet: but thou art not sure of that:
Many who have had abundance of wealth, yet have not had so much when they took
up their new house in the land of silence. But however that be more ye cannot
expect. It was a mortifying lesson, Saladine, when dying, give to his soldiers:
He called for his standard bearer, and ordered him to take his winding sheet
upon his pike; and go out to the camp with it, and tell them, That of all his
conquests, victories and triumphs, he had nothing now left him. but that piece
of linen to wrap his body in the buriel Lastly, "This world is a false friend,"
who leaves a man in time of greatest need; and flees from him when he but most
ado. When thou art lying on a death bed, all thy friends and relations cannot
rescue thee; all thy substance cannot ransom thee; nor procure thee a reprie^e
for one day; nay, not for one hour. Yea, the more than possessest of this
word's goods, thy sorrow at death is like (...) be the greater: for though one
may live more commodiously in a palace than in a cottage; yet he may di^ more
easily in the cottage, where he has very little to make him fond of life.

Second It may serve as a st^^^ house for Christian contentment and (...) under
worldly losses and crosses A closs application or the (...) of death it an
excellent remedy against fretting; and gives some ease to a rankled heart. When
Job had sustained very great l^ (...) contented, with the (...) Naked (...)
shall I return thither: The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be
the (...) of the Lord When providence br^ (...) mortality or (...) cattle, ^ow
ready are you (...) complain! But the (...) consideration of your own (...)
which you have a not^ (...) from such provide (...)) may be of use to silenc^
(...) and quiet you rankled spirits. Lo^^ to i e (...) ^ing, and learn. (1.)
That ye must abide a sorer thrust than the loss of (...) good Do not cry out
for a thrust i^ the (...) there will be a home-thrust at the heart You (...)
lose your dearest relations: the wife may lose her husband; and the husband his
wife: the parents may lose their dear children, and the (...). But if any of
these trials happen to you, remember you must lose your own life at last: and
"Wherefore does a ^^ng man complains." (...) It is a^s profitable to consider,
under affliction, how our case m^^ht have been worse that it is. Whatever (...)
consumed, or taken from us, "It is of the Lord's mercies that we ourselves are
not consumed," ver. 22. (2) It is but for a short space of time we are to be in
this world. It is but little our necessities require in this short space of ^e;
when death comes, we will stand in need of none of these things. Why should men
rack their head with cares how to provide for tomorrow: while they know not if
they shall need any thing tomorrow Though a man's provision, for his journey, be
near sp^t, he is not disquieted, if he think he is near home* are you work
(...) ^ght, and is there little of your candle left? It may be there is as
little sand in your glass? and if so, ye have little use for it. (3.) Ye have
matters of greater weight that challenge your care Death's at the do^^ b^ are
you lose not your souls. If blood breakout at one part of the body, they use to
open a vein in another part of it to turn the stream of blood; and so to stop
it Thus the Spirit of God sometimes cries men of sorrow for earthly things; by
opening the heart-vein to blood for sin. Did we pursue heavenly things the more
vigorously th^^ our affairs in this life prosper not, we should thereby gain a
double (...): our worldly sorrow would be ^^verted, and our best treasure
increased. (4) (...) nature will not last long. The world's smiles and (...)
will be quickly b^^^ed together in everlasting forgetfulness. Its ^es go as
(...) as the fo^^ on the w^ (...) in a^ (...) our earthly (...), and (...)
along with it: (...) all accompany (...) There the (...) troubling, and (...)
at re^t. Ver. 18 The^ the prisoners rest together they hear not the voice of
the op^ (...) The (...) and great are there, and the (...) free from (...)
maker. Cast your eyes on eternity, and ye will (...). The truth is, our tim^ is
so (...) not allow either our joys or griefs. to come to perfection* Wherefore,
let them that weep, be as though they weeped not, and they that rejoice, as though
they rejoiced not, etc 1 Cor. vii 29, 30, 31 (5) Death will put all men on a
level The king and the beggar must dwell in one house, when they come to their
journey's end; though their entertainment by the way be very different The small
and the great are there, Job iii. 19. We are in this world as on a stage: it is
no great matter, whether a man act the part of a prince or a peasant; for when
they have acted their parts, they must both get behind the curtain, and appear
no more. Lastly, If thou be not in Christ, whatever thy afflictions now be,
troubles a thousand times worse, are abiding thee in another world Death will
turn thy crosses into pure unmixed curses: and then how gladly would thou
return to thy former afflicted state, and purchase it at any rate; were there
any possibility of such a return. If thou be in Christ, thou may well bear
thy cross. Death will put an end to all thy troubles. If a man on a journey be
not well accomodate* where he lodges only for a night, he will not trouble
himself much about the matter; because he is not to stay there: it is not his
home. Ye are on the road to eternity; let it not disquiet you, that you meet
with some hardships in the inn of this world. Fret not, because it is not so
well with you as with some others* One man travels with a cane in his hand; his
fellow-traveller (perhaps) has but a common stick, or staff: either of them
will serve the turn It is no great matter which of them be yours; both will be
laid aside when you come to your journey's end.

Thirdly It may serve for a orid^^, to curb all manner of lusts, particularly
those conversant about the boay. A serious visit made to cold death. and that
solitary mansion, the grave, might be of good use to repress them.

1 st, It may be of use to cause men remit of their inordinate care for the
body; which is to many the bane of their souls. Often do these questions, What
shall we eat? What shall we drink? And wherewithal shall we be clothed? leave
no room for another of more importan^^, viz. "Wherewith shall I come before the
Lord?" The soul is put to the r^^k, to answer these mean questions, in favor
of (...) eternal interests are neglected. But ah! why are men so busy to repair
the rumous cottage; leaving the (...) to bleed to death of his wounds,
unheeded, unregarded! Why so much care for the boay, to the neglecting of the
concerns of the immortal soul? O! be not so anxious for what can only serve
your bodies; (...), ere long, the clods of cold earth will serve for back and
belly too.

2 dly, It may ^te your pride on account of bodily endowments, which (...) man
is apt to glory in. Value not yourselve on the blossom of youth; for while ye
are in your blooming years, ye are but ripening for a grave: and death (...)
stroke, without asking any body's age. Glory not in ^our strength, it will
quickly be gone ^ the time will soon be, when you shall not be able to turn
yourselves on a bed; and you must be carried by your grieving friends to your
long-home. And what signifies your healthful constitution? Death does not
always enter in soonest where it begins soonest to knock at the door; but makes
as great dispatch with some in a few hours, a^ with others in many years. Value
not yourselves on your beauty, which shall consume in the grave, Psalm. xlix. 14
Remember the change death makes on the fairest face, Job xiv. 20 "Thou changest
his countenance, and sends him away." Death makes the greatest beauty so
loathsome, that it must be buried out of sight. Could a looking-glass be used
in the house appointed for all living; it would be a terror to these, who now
look oftener into their glasses than into their Bibles. And what though the body
be gorgeously arrayed? The finest clothes are but badges of our sin and shame;
and, in a little time will, be exchanged for a winding sheet; when the body
will become a feast to the worms

3 dly, It may be a mighty check upon sensuality and fleshly lusts, 1 Pet. ii.
11. I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which
war against the soul. It is hard to cause wet wood take fire; and when the fire
does take hold of it, it is soon extinguished. Sensuality makes men most unfit
for divine communications, and is an effectual means to quench the Spirit.
Intemperance in eating and drinking, carries on the ruin of soul and body at
once; and hastens death, while it makes the man most unmeet for it. Therefore,
take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and so that day come upon you unawares, Luke xxi.
34. But O, how often is the soul struck through with a dart, in gratifying the
senses! At these doors destruction enters in. Therefore Joh made a covenant
with his eyes, chap xxxi. 1. The mouth of a strange woman is a deep pity he
that is abhorred of the Lord, shall fall therein, Prove. xxii. 14* "Let him that
stands, take heed lest he fall." Beware of lasciviousness; study modesty in
your apparel, words and actions. The ravens of the valley of death will at
length pick out the wanton ey^^ The obscene filthy tongue will at length be
quiet, in the land of silence! and grim death embracing the body in its cold
arms, will effectually allay the heat of all fleshly lusts.

Lastly, In a word, it may check our earthly mindedness; and at once knock down
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and ^^e pride of life. Ah! if we
must die, why are we thus? Why so fond of temporal things; so anxious to get
them, so eager in the embraces of them, so mightily touched with the loss of
them? Let me* upon a view of the house appointed for all living, bespeak the
worldling in the words of Solomon, Prove. xxiii. 5. Will thou set th^^ eyes upon
that which is not? For riches certainly make themselves wings; they flee away,
as an eagle toward heaven. Riches and all worldly things are but a fair
nothing; they are that which is not. They are not what they seem to be: they
are all but gilded vanities, that deceive the eye. Comparatively they are not
there is infinitely more of nothingness and not being, than of being and
reality, in the best of them. What is the world, and all that is in it, but a
fashion, or fair show, such as men make on a stage, a passing show? 1 Cor. vii.
31. Royal pomp is but a gaudy show, or appearance, in God's account, Acts xxv.
23. The best name they get, is good things: but, observe it, they are only the
wicked man's good things, Luke xvi. 25 Thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy
good things, says Abraham, in the parable, to the rich man in hell And well may
the m^n of the world call these things their goods: for there is no other good
in them, about them, nor attending them. Now will thou set thine eyes upon
empty shows and fancies? Will thou cause thine eyes to fly on them, as the word
is? Shall men's hearts fly out at their eyes upon them, as a ravenous bird on
its prey? If they do, let them know, that, at length these shall fly as fast
away from them, as ever their eyes flew upon them: like a flock of fair
feathered birds, that settle on a fool's ground; the which, when he runs to
catch them as his own, do immediately take wing, fly away, and, sitting down on
his neighbor's ground, elude his expectation, Luke xii. 20. Thou fool, this
night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall these things be?
Though you do not make wings to them, as many do; they make themselves wings, and
fly away; not as a tame house-bird, which may be catched again; nor as an hawk,
that will show where she is by her bells, and be called again with the lure:
but as an eagle, which quickly flies out of sight, and cannot be recalled.
Forbear thou to behold these things, O martal! there is ho reason. thou
should set thine eyes upon them. This world is a great inn, in the road to
eternity, to which thou art traveling. Thou art attended by these things, as
servants belonging to the inn, where thou lodgest, they wait upon thee, while
thou art there; and when thou go away, they will convoy thee to the door.
But they are not thine, they will not go away with thee; but return to wait on
other strangers, as they did on thee.

Fifthl^, It may serve as a spr^ng of Christian resolution, to cleave to
Christ, adhere to his truths, and continue in his ways; whatever he may suffer
for so doing. It would much allay the fear of man, that brings a share. Who
art thou, that thou should be afraid of a man that shall die?Isa. li 12. Look
on persecutors as pieces of brittle clay, that shall be dashed to pieces: for
then shall ye despise them as soes, that are mortal: whose terrors to others in
the land of the living, shall quickly die with themselves. The serious
consideration of the shortness of our time, and the certainty of death, will
teach us, that all the advantage we can make by our apostasy, in time of trial,
is not worth the while; it is not worth going out of the way to get it; and
what we refuse to forego for Christ's sake, may quickly be taken from us by
death. But, we can never lose it so honorably, as for the cause of Christ and
his gospel: for, what glory is it that ye give up what ye have in the world,
when God takes it away from you by death, whether you will or not? This
consideration may teach us to undervalue life itself, and choose to forego it,
rather than to sin. The worst that men can do, is to take away that life which
we cannot long keep, though all the world should conspire to help us to retain
the Spirit. And if we refuse to offer it up to God, when he calls for it in
defense of his honor, he can take it from us another away; as it fared with
him, who could not burn for Christ, but was afterward burnt by an accidental
fire in his house.

Lastly, It may serve for a spur, to incite us to prepare for death. Consider,
(1.) Your eternal state will be according to the state in which you die: death
will open the doors of heaven, or hell to you. As the tree falls. so it shall
ly through eternity. If the infant be dead-born, the whole world will not raise
it to life again: and if one die out of Christ, in an unregenerate state, there
is no more hope of him for ever. (2.) Seriously consider, what it is to go into
another world; a world of spirits, wherewith we are not acquainted. How
frightful is converse with spirits to poor mortals in this life! and, how
dreadful is the case, when men are hurried away into another world, not knowing
but devils may be their companions for ever! let us then give all diligence to
make, and advance, our acquaintance with the Lord of that world. (3.) It is but
a short time ye have to prepare for death, therefore, now or never; seeing the
time assigned for preparation will soon be over, Eccles. ix. 10. Whatsoever thy
hand finds to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou go. How can we be idle,
having so great a work to do, and so little time to do it in? But if the time
be short* the work of preparation for death, though hard work, will not last
long. The shadows of the evening make the labourer work cheerfully; knowing the
time to be at hand, when he shall be called in from his labor. (4.) Much of
our short time is over already; and the youngest of us all cannot assure
himself, that there is as much of his time to come, as is past. Our life in the
world is but a short preface to long eternity; and much of the tale is told.
Oh! shall we not double our diligence, when so much of our time is spent, and
so little of our great work is done? (5.) The present time is flying away and
we cannot bring back time past, it has taken an eternal farewell (...) us:
there is no kindling the fire again that is burnt to ashes. The time to come is
not ours: and we have no assurance of a share in it, when it comes. We have
nothing we can call ours, but the present moment; and that is flying away: how
soon our time may be at an end we know not. Die we must, but who can tell us,
when? If death kept one set time for all, we were in no hazard of a surprise:
but daily observation shows us, there (...) no such thing. Now the flying
shadow of our life allows no time for loitering. The rivers run speedily into
the sea from whence they came; but not so speedily as man to the dust from
whence he came. The stream of time is the swiftest current, and quickly runs
out to eternity -- Lastly, If once death carry us off, there is no coming back
again to mend our matters, Job xiv. 14. "If a man die, shall he live again?"
Dying is a thing we cannot get a trial of; it is what we can do only once, Heb.
ix. 27. "It is appointed unto men ONCE to die." And that which can be but once
done, and yet is of so much importance, that our all depends on having it done
right; we have need to use the utmost diligence, that we may do it well.
Therefore prepare for death, and do it timeously.

If ye, who are unregenerate, ask me, what ye shall do, to prepare for death,
that ye may die safely? I answer, I have told you already, what must be done.
And that is, your nature and state must be changed: ye must be born agian; ye
must be united to Jesus Christ by faith. And till this is done, ye are not
capable of other directions, which belong to one's dying comfortably; whereof
we may discourse afterward in the due place.

HEAD II. The Difference betwixt the Righteous and the Wicked in their Death.
PROVERBS xiv. 32. The Wicked is driven away in his Wickedness: But the
Righteous has hope in his Death.


THIS text looks like the cloud betwixt the Israelites and Egyptians, having a
dark side toward the latter, and a bright side toward the former. It
represents death like Pharaoh's jailer, brining the chief butler and the chief
baker out of one prison; the one to be restored to his office, and the other to
be led to execution. It shows the difference betwixt the godly and ungodly in
their death; who, as they act a very different part in life; so, in death, have
a vastly different exit.

First, As to the death of a wicked m^n: here is, (1) The manner of his passing
out of the world, He is driven away; namely, in his death, as is clear from the
opposite clause. He is forcibly thrust out of his place in this world; driven
away as chaff before the wind. (2) The state he passes away in. He dies in a
sinful and hopeless state. First, In a sinful state; he is driven away in his
wickedness. He lived in it, and he dies in it: his filthy garments of sin, in
which he wrapped up himself in his life, are his prison-garments, in which he
shall ly wrapped up for ever. Secondly, In a hopeless state; but the righteous
has hope in his death: which plainly imports the hopelesness of the wicked in
their death. Whereby is not meant, that no wicked man shall have any hope at
all, when he is a-dying; but shall die in despair. No: sometimes it is so
indeed; but frequently it is otherwise: foolish virgins may, and often do hope
to the last breath. But the wicked man has no solid hope: and as for the
delusive hopes he entertains himself with, death will root them up, and he
shall be for ever irretrievably miserable.

Secondly, As to the death of a righteous man; he has hope in his death. This
is ushered in with a but, importing a removal of these dreadful circumstances,
with which the wicked man is attended, who is driven away in his wickedness:
but the godly are not so. Not so, (1.) In the manner of their passing out of
the world. The righteous is not driven away as chaff before the wind; but led
away as a bride to the marriage-chamber, carried away by the angels into
Abraham's bosom, Luke xvi. 22. (2.) Not so as to their state, when passing out
of this life. The righteous man dies, (1.) Not in a sinful, but in a holy
state. He goes not away in his sin, but out of it. In his life he was putting
off the old man, changing his prison-garments: and now the remaining rags of
them are removed, and he is adorned with robes of glory. (2.) Not in a
hopeless, but a hopeful state. He has hope in his death: he has the grace of
hope, and the well-sounded expectation of better things, than ever he had in
this world: and though the stream of his hope at death may run shallow; yet he
has still as much of it, as makes him venture his eternal interests upon the
Lord Jesus Christ.

DOCTRINE I. The Wicked dying, are driven away in their Wickedness, and in a
hopeless State.
In speaking to this doctrine, (1) I shall show how, and in what sense, the
wicked are driven away in their wickedness, at death. (2.) I shall discover the
hopelesness of their state at death. And lastly, Apply the whole.

I. How, and in what sense the wicked are driven away in their wickedness. In
discoursing of this matter, I shall briefly inquire, (1.) What is meant by
their being driven away. (2.) Whence they shall be driven, and whither. (3) In
what respects they may be said, to be driven away in their wickedness. But,
before I proceed let me advertise you; that you are mistaken if you think, that
no persons are to called wicked, but they who are avowedly vicious and
profane; as if the devil could dwell in none but those whose name is legion.
In scripture account, all who are not righteous, in the manner hereafter
explained, are reckoned wicked And therefore the text divides the whole world
into two sorts, the righteous, and the wicked; and ye will see the same thing
in that other text, Mal. iii. 18. Then shall ye return, and discern between the
righteous and the wicked Wherefore, if ye be not righteous, ye are wicked. If
ye have not an imputed righteousness, and an implanted righteousness, or
holiness; if ye be yet in your natural state unregenerated, not united to
Christ by faith: howsoever moral, and blameless in the eyes of men, your
conversation may be; ye are the wicked, who shall be driven away in their
wickedness, if death find you in that state. Now,

FIRST, As to the meaning of this phrase driven away; there are three things in
it: the wicked shall be taken away suddenly, violently, and irresistibly.

First, Unrenewed men shall be taken away suddenly at death. Not that all
wicked men die suddenly; nor that they are all wicked who die so, God forbid!
But, (1.) Death commonly comes upon them unexpected, and so surpriseth them; as
the deluge came surprisingly on the old world, though they were forewarned of it
long before it came: as travail comes on a woman with child, with surprising
suddenness; although looked for and expected, 1 Thessalonians. v. 3. Death seizes
them, as a creditor does his debtor, to hale him to prison, Psalm. lv. 15. And
that when they are not aware. Death comes in, as a thief* at the window, and
finds them full of busy thoughts about this life, which that very day perish.
(2.) Death always seizes them unprepared for it: the old house falls down
about their ears, before they have another provided. When death casts them to
the door, they have not where to lay their heads; unless it be on a bed of fire
and brimestone. The soul and body are as it were hugging one another in mutual
embraces: when death comes like a whirlwind, and separtes them. (3.) Death
hurries them away in a moment to destruction, and makes a most dismal change:
the man, for the most part, never knows where he is, till in hell he lift up
his eyes, Luke xvi. 23. The floods of wrath suddenly overwhelm his soul; and
ere he is aware, he is plunged in the bottomless pit.

Secondly, The unrenewed man is taken away out of the world violently Driving
is a violent action: he is chosed out of the world, Job xviii 18. Fain would he
stay if he could: but death drags him away like a malefactor to the execution
He sought no other portion, than the profits and pleasures of this world; he
has no other; he really desires no other: how can he then go away out of it,
if he were not driven?

Quest. "But may not a wicked man be willing to die? Ans. He may indeed be
willing to die; but (observe) it is only in one of three cases. (1.) In a fit
of passion, by reason of some trouble that he is impatient to be rid of. Thus
many persons, when their passion has got the better of their reason, and when,
on that account, they are most unfit to die, will be ready to cry, O to be
gone! but should their desire be granted, and death come at their call, they
would quickly show they were not in earnest; and that if they go, they must be
driven away against their wills. (2) When they are brim-full of despair, they
may be willing to die. Thus Saul murdered himself: and Spira wished to be in
hell, that he might know the uttermost of what he believed he was to suffer. In
this manner men may seek after death, while it flies from them. But fearful is
the violence these do undergo, whom the terrors of God do thus drive. (3.) When
they are dreaming of happiness after death. Foolish virgins, under the power of
delusion, as to their state, may be willing to die, having no fear of lying
down in sorrow. How many are there, who can give no scripture ground for their
hope, who yet have no bands in their death! Many are driven to darkness
sleeping; they go off like lambs, who would rore like lions, did they but know
what place they are going to: though the chariot, in which they are, drive
furiously to the depths of hell; yet they fear not, because they are fast
asleep.

Lastly, The unregenerate man is taken away irresistibly. He must go, though
sore against his will. Death will take no refusal, nor admit of any delay; though
the man has not lived half his days, according to his own computation. If he
will not bow, it will break him. If he will not come forth, it will pull the
house down about his ears; for there he must not stay Although the physician
help, friends groan, the wife and children cry, and the man himself use his
utmost efforts to retain the Spirit, his soul is required of him; yield he
must, and go where he shall never more see light.

SECONDLY, Let us consider, whence they are driven, and whither. When the
wicked die, (1.) They are driven out of this world, where they sinned; into the
other world, where they must be judged, and receive their particular sentences,
Heb ix. It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment. They
shall no more return to their beloved earth. Though their hearts are wedded to
their earthly enjoyments, they must leave them; they can carry nothing hence.
How sorrowful must their departure be, when they have nothing in view, so good
as that which they leave behind them! (2) They are driven out of the society of
the saints on earth, into the society of the damned in hell, Luke xvi 22. "The
rich man also died and was buried." ver. 23. "And in hell he lift up his eyes."
What a multitude of the devil's goats do now take place among Christ's sheep!
but at death they shall be led forth with the workers of iniquity, Psalm.
cxxv.5. There is a mixed multitude in this world, but no mixture in the other;
each party is there set by themselves. Though hypocrites grow here as tares
among the wheat, death will root them up* and they shall be bound in bundles
for the fire. -- (3.) They are driven out of time into eternity. While time
lasts with them, there is hope; but when time goes, all hope goes with it.
Precious time is now lavishly spent: it lies so heavy upon the hands of many,
that they think themselves obliged to take several ways to drive away time. But
beware of being at a loss what to do in life: improve time for eternity, whilst
you have it: for ^re long death will drive it from you, and you from it, so as
ye shall never meet again. (4.) They are driven out of their specious pretenses
to piety. Death strips them of the splended robes of a fair profession, with
which some of them were adorned; and turns them off the stage, in the rags of a
wicked heart and life. The word hypocrite properly signifies a stage player,
who appears to be what indeed he is not. This world is the stage on which these
children of the devil personate the children of God. Their show of religion is
the player's coat, under which one must look, who will judge of them aright.
Now death turns them out of their coat, and then they appear in their native
dress: it unveils them, and takes off their mask. There are none in the other
world, who pretend to be better than they really are. Depraved nature acts in
the regions of horror, unallayed, and undisguised. Lastly, They are driven away
from all means of grace: and are set beyond the line, quite out of all prospect
of mercy. There is no more an opportunity to buy oil for the lamp; it is gone
out at death, and can never be lighted again. There may be offers of mercy and
peace made after they are gone; but they are to others, not to them; there are
no such offers in the place, to which they are driven; these offers are only
made in that place, from which they are driven away.

LASTLY, In what respect may they be said to be driven away in their
wickedness? Ans. (1.) In respect of their being driven away in their sinful
unconverted state. Having lived enemies to God, they die in a state of enmity
to him: for none are brought into the eternal state of consummate happiness,
but by the way of the state of grace, or begun recovery in this life. The child
that is dead in the womb, is born dead, and is cast out of the womb into the
grave: so he who is dead, while he lives, or is spiritually dead, is cast
forth of the womb of time, in the same state of death, into the pit of utter
misery. O miserable death, to die in the gall of bitterness and bond of
iniquity! it had been incomparably better for such as die thus, that they had
never been born. (2.) In regard they die sinning, acting wickedly against God.
in contradiction to the divine law: for they can do nothing but sin while they
live. So death takes them in the very act of sinning; violently draws them from
the embraces of their lusts, and drives them away to the tribunal to receive
their sentence. It is a remarkable expression, Job xxxvi. 14. They (...) in
youth: the marginal reading (...), their soul dies in youth; their lusts being
lively their desires vigorous, and expectations big, as is common in youth. And
their life is (...) unclean: or, and the company (^r herd) of th^^ dies among
the Sodomites, i. e. is taken away in the (...) of their sin and wickedness* as
the Sodomites were, Genesis ^^x. Luke vi^. ^^, ^9. (3) In as much as they are
driven away, loaded with the guilt of all their sins* this is the winding
sheet, that shall ly down with them in the dust. Job xx. 11. Their works follow
them into the other world: they go away with the yoke of their transgressions
wreathed about their neck. Guilt is a bad companion in life, but how terrible
will it be in drain! it lies now, perhaps, like cold brimstone on their
bottom'^ consciences; but, when death opens the way for sparks of divine
vengeance, like fire, to fall upon it; it will make dreadful stone in the
conscience, in which the soul will be as it were wrapped up for ever. Lastly, The
wicked are driven away in their wickedness, in so far as they die under the
absolute power of their wickedness. While there is hope, there is some
restraint on the worst of men: and these moral endowments, which God gives to a
number of m^n, for the benefit of mankind in this life, are so many allays and
restraints upon the impetuous wickedness of human nature. But all hope being
cut off, and these gifts withdrawn, the wickedness of the wicked will then
arrive at its perfection. As the seeds of grace sown in the hearts of the
(...), come to their full maturity at death: so wicked and hellish dispositions
in the reprobate come then to their highest pitch. Their prayers to God will
then be turned to horrible curses; and their praises to hideous blasphemies,
Matthew. xxii. 13. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. This gives a
dismal but genuine view of the state of the wicked in another world.

If, I shall discover the hopelesness of the state of unrenewed men, at death.
It appears to be very hopeless, if we consider these four things:

First, Death cuts off all their hopes and prospects of peace and pleasure in
this life, Luke xii. 19. Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years,
take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry. Ver. 20. But God said unto him. Thou
fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee; then whose shall those
things be, which thou have provided? They look for great matters in this world,
they hope to increase their wealth, to see their families prosper, and to live
at ease; but death comes like a stormy wind, and shakes off all their fond
hopes, like green fruit from off a tree. When he is about to fill his belly,
God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him? Job xx. 23. He may begin a web
of contrivances, for advancing his worldly interest: but before he gets it
wrought out, death comes and cuts it out. His breath goes forth, he returns
to his earth: in that very day his thoughts perish, Psalm. cxlvi. 4.

Secondly, When death comes, they have no solid grounds to hope for eternal
happiness. For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he has gamed, when God
takes away his soul? Job xxvii. 8. Whatever hopes they fondly entertain, they
are not founded on God's word, which is the only sure ground of hope: if they
knew their own case, they would see themselves only happy in a dream. And
indeed what hope can they have? The law is plain against them, and condemns
them. The curses of it (these cords of death) are about them already. The
Savior, whom they slighted, is now their Judge; and their Judge is their
enemy. How then can they hope? They have bolted the door of mercy against
themselves by their unbelief. They have despised the remedy, and therefore must
die without mercy. They have no saving interest in Jesus Christ, the only
channel of conveyance, in which mercy flows; and therefore they can never taste
of it. The sword of justice guards the door of mercy, so as none can enter in,
but the members of the mystical body of Christ over whose heads is a covert of
atoning blood the Mediator's blood. These indeed may pass without harm, for
justice has nothing to require of them. But others cannot pass, since they are
not in Christ: death comes to them with the sting in it* the sting of
unpardoned guilt. It is armed against them with all the force the sanction of a
holy law can give it, 1 Cor. xv. 56. The sting of death is sin, and the
strength of sin is the law. When that law was given on Sinai, the whole mount
quaked greatly, Exodus xix. 18. When the Redeemer was making satisfaction for
the elect's breaking of it, the earth did quake, and the rocks rent, Matthew.
xxvii. 51. What possible ground of hope then is there to the wicked man, when
death comes upon him armed with the force of this law? How can he escape that
fire, which "burnt unto the midst of heaven?" Deuteronomy. iv 11. How shall he be able
to stand in that smoke, that "ascended as the smoke of a furnace?' Exodus xix.
18. How will be endure the terrible thunders and lightnings, ver. 16. and dwell
in the darkness, clouds and thick darkness? Deuteronomy. iv. 11. All these
resemblances heaped together, do but faintly represent the fearful tempest of
wrath and indignation, which shall pursue the wicked to the lowest hell: and
for ever abide on them, who are driven to darkness at death.

Thirdly, Death roots up their delusive hopes of eternal happiness: then it is
their covenant with death, and agreement with hell is broken. They are awakned
out of their golden dreams, and at length lift up their eyes: Job viii. 14.
Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spider's web. They
trust all shall be well with them after death: but this their trust is but a
web woven out of their own bowels, with a great deal of art and industry. They
wrap themselves up in this their hope, as the spider wraps herself in her web.
But it is but a weak and slender defense; for however it may withstand the
threatenings of the word of God; death, that besom of destruction, will sweep
them and it both away, so as there shall not be the least shred of it left
them; but he, who this moment will not let his hope go, shall next moment be
utterly hopeless Death overturns the house built on the sand: it leaves no man
under the power of delusion.

Lastly, Death makes their state absolutely, and for ever hopeless. Matters
cannot be retrieved and amended after death. For (1.) Time once gone can never
be recalled. ^f cries or tears* price or pains, could bring time back again;
the wicked man might have hope in his death. But tears of blood will not
prevail; nor will his roaring for millions of ages, cause it to return. The sun
will not stand still until the sluggard awake, and enter on his journey; and
when once it is gone down, he needs not expect the night to be turned into day
for his sake; he must lodge through the long night of eternity, where his time
left him. (2.) There is no returning to this life, to amend what is amiss: it
is a state of probation and trial, which terminates at death; and therefore we
cannot return to it again: it is but once we thus live, and once we die. Death
carries the wicked man to his own place, Acts i. 25. This life is our working
day: death closes our day and our work together. We may readily imagine the
wicked might have some hope in their death; if, after death has opened their
eyes, they could return to life, and have but the trial of one Sabbath, one
offer of Christ, one day, or but one hour more, to make up their peace with
God: but, man lies down, and rises not till the heavens be no more; they
shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep, Job xiv. 12. Lastly, In the
other world, men have no access to get their ruined state and condition
retrieved, if they never so fain would. For there is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou go, Eccles. ix. 10. Now, a
man may flee from the wrath to come; now he may get into a refuge: but when
once death has done its work, the door is shut: there are no more offers of
mercy, no more pardons: where the tree is fallen, there it must ly.

Let what has been said, be carefully pondered, and that it may be of use, let
me exhort you,

First, To take heed that ye entertain no hopes of heaven, but what are built
on a solid foundation: tremble to think what fair hopes of happiness death
sweeps away like cobweb^: how the hopes of many are cut off, when they seem to
themselves to be on the very threshold of heaven; how, in the moment they
expected to be carried by angels into Abraham's bosom, into the regions of
bliss and peace, they are carried by devils into the society of the damned in
hell, into the place of torment, and regions of horror. I beseech you to
beware, (1.) Of a hope built up, where the ground was never cleared. The wise
builder dug deep, Luke vi. 48. Were your hopes of heaven never shaken; but
ye have had good hopes all your days? Alas for it; you may see the mystery of
your case explained, Luke xi. 21. When a strong man armed keeps his place,
his goods are in peace. But if they have been shaken; take heed lest there have
only some breaches been made in the old building which you have got repaired
again, by ways and means of your own I assure you your hope (howsoever fair a
building it is) is not to trust to; unless your old hopes have been razed, and
you have built on a foundation quite new (2) Beware of that hope which looks
brisk in the dark; but loses all its luster, when it is set in the light of
God's word, when it is examined and tried by the touchstone of divine
revelation, John iii 20. For every one that does evil, hatcth the light,
neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. Ver. 21. But he
that does the truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest,
that they are wrought in God. That hope, which cannot abide scripture-trial,
but sinks when searched into by sacred truth, is a delusion, and not a true
hope: for God's word is always a friend to the graces of God's Spirit, and an
enemy to delusion. (3.) Beware of that hope, which stands without being
supported by scripture-evidences. Alas! many are big with hopes, who cannot
give, because they really have not any scripture-grounds for them. Thou hopest
that all shall be well with thee after death: but what word of God ^s it, on
which thou have own caused to hope? Psalm. cxix. 49. What scriptue-evidence have
thou to prove, that thy hope is not the hope of the hypocrite? What have thou,
after impartial self-examination, as in the sight of God, found ^o thy self,
which the word of God determines to be a sure evidence of his right to eternal
life, who is possessed of it? Numbers of men are (...) with such hopes as stand
unsupported by scripture-evidence. Men are fond and tenacious of these hopes;
but death will throw them down and leave the self-deceiver hopeless. Lastly,
Beware of that hope of heaven, which does not prepare and dispose you for
heaven, which ^er makes your soul more holy, 1 John iii. 3. Every man that has
this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure The hope of the most
part of men is, rather a hope to be free of pain and torment in another life;
than a hope of true happiness, the nature whereof is not understood and
discerned: and therefore it stakes down in sloth and indolence, and does not
excite to mortification and a heavenly life.. So far are they from hoping
aright for heaven; that they (...) own, if they speak their genuine sentiments,
removing out of this world into any other place whatsoever, is rather their
fear than their hope. The glory of the heavenly city does not at all draw their
hearts upwards toward it; nor do they lift up their heads with joy, in the
prospect of arriving at it. If they had the true hope of the marriage-day, they
would, as the bird, the Lamb's wife, be making themselves ready for it, Rev
xix. 7. But their hopes are produced by their sloth, and their sloth is
nourished by their hopes Oh! Sirs, as ye would not be driven away hopeless in
your death, beware of these hopes. Raze them now, and build on a new
foundation; lest death leave not one stone of them upon another, and ye never
be able to hope any more.

Secondly, Hasten, O sinners, out of your wickedness, out of your sinful state,
and out of your wicked life: if ye would not at death be driven away in your
wickedness. Remember the fatal end of the wicked man, as the text represents
it. I know there is a great difference in the death of the wicked, in respect
of some circumstances: but all of them, in their death, agree in this, that
they are driven away in their wickedness. Some of them die resolutely, as if
they scorned to be afraid. Some in raging despair, so filled with horror, that
they cry out, as if they were already in hell: others in sullen despondency,
oppressed with fears, insomuch, that their hearts are sunk within him, upon the
remembrance of misspent time, and the view they have of eternity; having
neither head nor heart to do any thing for their own relief. And others die
stupid: they lived like beasts, and they die like beasts, without any concern
on their spirits about their eternal state. They groan under their bodily
distress, but have no sense of the danger of their souls. One may with almost
as much prospect of success speak to a stone, as to speak to them: vain is the
attempt to teach them, nothing that can be said moves them. To discourse to
them, either of the joys of heaven, or the torments of hell, is to plow on a
rock, or beat the air. Some die like the foolish virgins, dreaming of heaven:
their foreheads are steeled against the fears of hell, with presumptuous hopes
of heaven. Their business, who would be useful to them, is not to answer doubts
about the case of their souls; but to dispute them out of their false hopes.
But which way soever the unconverted man dies, he is driv^n away in his
wickedness. O dreadful case! Oh, let the consideration of so horrible a
departure out of this world, move you to betake yourselves to Jesus Christ, as
an all-sufficient Savior, an Almighty Redeemer. Let it prevail to drive you
out of your wickedness, to holiness of heart and life. Though you reckon it
pleasant to live in wickedness; you cannot but own it is better to die in it.
And if you leave it not in time, you shall go in your wickedness to hell, the
proper place of it, that it may be set there in its own base. For when you are
passing out of this world, all your sins from the eldest to the youngest of
them, will swarm about you, hang upon you, accompany you to the other world;
and, as so many furies, surround you there for ever

Lastly, O be concerned for others, especially for your relations, that they
may not continue in their sinful natural state, but be brought into a state of
salvation; lest they be driven away in their wickedness at death What would ye
not do to prevent any of your friends dying an untimely and violent death? But
alas! do not ye see them in hazard of being driven away in their wickedness? Is
not death approaching them, even the youngest of them? And are they not
strangers to true Christianity, remaining in that state in which they came into
the world? Oh! make haste to pluck the brand out of the fire, before it be
burnt to ashes. The death of relations often leaves a sting in the hearts of
these they leave behind them, for that they do not do for their souls, as they
had opportunity; and that now the opportunity is for ever taken out of their
hands.

DOCTRINE II. The State of the Godly in Death, is a hopeful State.
We have seen the dark side of the cloud looking toward ungodly men, passing
out of the world: let us now take a view of the bright side of it, shining on
the godly, as they are entering upon their eternal state. In discoursing this
subject, I shall confirm this doctrine, answer an objection against it, and
then make some practical improvement of the whole.

For confirmation, let it be observed, That although the passage out of this
world by death, have a frightful aspect to poor mortals; and to miscarry in it
must needs be of fatal consequence; yet the following circumstances make the
state of the godly in their death, happy and hopeful.

First, They have a trusty good friend before them in the other world; Jesus
Christ their best friend, is Lord of that land to which death carries them.
When Joseph sent for his father to come down to him to Egypt, telling him, God
had made him Lord over all Egypt, Genesis xlv. 9. and when Jacob saw the wagons
Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob revived, ver. 27. He frankly
resolves to undertake the journey. I think, when the Lord calls a godly man,
out of this world, he sends him such glad tidings, and such a kind invitation
into the other world; that if he had faith to believe it, his spirit must
revive, when he sees the wagon of death, which comes to carry him thither. It
is true indeed, he has a weighty trial to undergo; after death the judgment.
But the case of the godly is altogether hopeful; for the Lord of the land is
their husband, and their husband is their Judge: The Father has committed all
judgment unto the Son, John v. 22. And surely the case of the wife is hopeful,
when her own husband is her judge; even such a husband as hates putting away.
No husband is so loving and so tender of his spouse, as the Lord Christ is of
his. One would think, it would be a very bad land, which a wife would not
willingly go to, where her husband is the ruler and judge. Moreover, their
Judge is the Advocate, 1 John ii. 1. We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous. And therefore they need not fear their being put back,
and falling into condemnation. What can be more favorable? Can they think,
that he who pleads their cause, will himself pass sentence against them: Yet
further, their Advocate is the Redeemer; they are redeemed with the prcious
blood of Christ, 1 Pet. i. 18, 19. So when he pleads for them, he is pleading
his own cause. Though an advocate may be careless of the interest of one who
employs him; surely he will do his utmost to defend his own right, which he
has purchased with his money: and shall not their Advocate defend the purchase
of his own blood? But more than all that, their Redeemer is their head, and
they are his members, Ephesians. v. 23, 32. Though one were so silly as to let his
own purchase go, without standing up to defend his right, yet surely he will
not quit a limb of his own body. Is not their case then hopeful in death, who
are so closely linked and allied to the Lord of the other world, who has the
keys of hell and death.

Secondly, They shall have a safe passage to another world. They must indeed go
through the valley of the shadow of death; but though it be in itself a dark and
shady va^e, it shall be a valley of hope to them: they shall not be driven
through it, but walk through it; as men in perfect safety, who fear no evil, Psalm.
xxiii. 4. Why should they fear? They have the Lord of the land's safe conduct,
his pass sealed with his own blood, namely, the blessed covenant, which is the
saint's deathbed comfort. 2 Samuel xxiii. 5. Although my house be not so with
God, yet he has made with me an everlasting COVENANT, ordered in all things
and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he cause it
not to grow. Who then can harm them? It i^ safe riding in Christ's chariot
(Cant. iii. 9.) both through life and death. They have good and honorable
attendants, a guard, even a guard of angels. These encamp about them in the
time of their life: and surely will not leave them in the day of their death.
These happy ministering spirits are attendants on their Lord's bride, and will
doubtless convey her safe home to his house. When friends in mournful mood
stand by the faint's bedside, waiting to see him draw his last breath; his
soul is waited for of holy angels, to be carried by them into Abraham's bosom,
Luke xvi. 22. The captain of the saint's salvation is the captain of this holy
guard: he was their guide even unto death, and he will be their guide through
it too. Psalm xxiii. 4. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil; for thou art with me. They may without fear pass
that river, being confident it shall not overflow them; and may walk through
that fire, being sure they shall not be burnt by it.

Death can do them no harm. It cannot even hurt their bodies: for though it
separate the soul from the body, it cannot separate the body from the Lord
Christ. Even death is to them but sleep in Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 14. They
continue members of Christ, though in a grave. Their dust is precious dust,
laid up in a grave, as in their Lord's cabinet. They lie in a grave ^ellowing;
as precious fruit laid up to be brought forth to him at the resurrection. The
husbandman has corn in his barn, and corn lying in the ground: the latter is
more precious to him than the former; because he looks to get it returned with
increase. Even so the dead bodies of the saints are valued by their Savior:
they are sown in corruption, to he raised in incorruption; sown in dishonor,
raised in glory, 1 Cor. xv. ^^, 43. It cannot hurt their souls. It is with the
souls of the saints as death as with Paul and his company in their voyage,
whereof we have the history, Acts xxvii. the ship was broke in pieces, but the
passengers got all safe to land. When the dying saint's speech is laid, his
eyes set, and his last breath drawn, the soul gets safe away into the heavenly
paradise, leaving the body to return to its earth, but in the joyful hope of a
reunion at its glorious resurrection. How can death hurt the godly? It is a
foiled enemy: if it cast them down, it is only that they may rise up more
glorious. Our Savior Jesus Christ has abolished DEATH, 2 Timothy i. 10. The soul
and life of it is gone: it is but a walking shade that may fright, but cannot
hurt saints; it is only the shadow of death to them; it is not the thing
itself: their dying is but as dying, or somewhat like dying. The Apostle tells
us, It is Christ that died, Romans viii. 34. Stephen, the first Christian martyr,
though stoned to death, yet but fell asleep, Acts viii. 34. Certainly the
nature of death is quite changed with respect to the saints. It is not to them,
what it was to Jesus Christ their head: It is not the invenomed ruinating
thing, wrapped up in the sanction of the first covenant, Gen ii. 19. In the day
thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die. It comes to the godly without its
sting: they may meet it with that salutation, O death, where is thy sting? is
this Mara? Is this bitter death? It went out full into the world, when the
first Adam opened the door to it: but the second Adam has brought it again
empty to his own people. I feel a sting, may the dying saint say; yet it is but
a bee-sting, stinging only through the skin: but O death, where is thy sting,
thine old sting, the serpent's sting, that stings to the heart and soul? The
sting of death is Sin: but that is taken away. If death arrest the saint, and
carry him before the Judge, to answer for the debt he contracted, the debt will
be sound paid by the glorious Cautioner: and he has the discharge to show. The
thorn of guilt is pulled out of the man's conscience; and his name is blotted
out of the black roll, and written among the living in Jerusalem. It is true,
it is a great journey to go through the valley of the shadow of death: but the
saint's burden is taken away from off his back, his iniquity is pardoned, he
may walk at case; no lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast: the redeemed
may walk at leisure there, free from all apprehensions of danger.

Lastly, They shall have a joyful entrance into the other world. Their arrival
in the regions of bliss, will be celebrated with rapturous hymns of praise to
their glorious Redeemer. A dying day is a good day to a godly man. Yea, it is
his best day; it is better to him than his birthday, or than the most joyous
day he ever had on earth. A good name, says the wise man, is better than
precious ointment: and the day of death, than the day of one's birth, Eccl.
vii. 1. The notion of the immortality of the soul, and of future happiness,
which obtained among some Pagan nations, had wonderful effects on them. Some of
them when they mourned for the dead, did it in women's apparel; that being
moved with the indecency of the garb, they might the sooner lay aside their
mourning. Others buried them without any lamentation or mourning: but had a
sacrifice, and a feast for friends upon that occasion. Some were wont to mourn
at births, and rejoice at burials. But the practice of some Indian nations is
yet more strange. of whom it is reported, that upon the husband's decease, his
several wives were it use to contend, before the judges, which of them was the
best beloved wife: and she, in whose favors it was determined, with a cheerful
countenance, threw herself into the flames prepared for her husband's corpse,
was burned with it, and reckoned happy, while the rest lived in grief, and were
accounted miserable. But, howsoever lame notions of a future state, assisted by
pride, affectation of applause, apprehensions of difficulties in this life, and
such like principles, proper to depraved human nature, may influence rude,
uncultivated minds, when strengthened by the arts of hell: O! what solid joy and
consolation may they have who are true Christians, being in Christ, who has
brought life and immortality to light by the gospel! 2 Timothy i. 10. Death is one
of these all things, that work together for good, to them that love God, Romans
viii. 28. When the body dies, the soul is perfected: the body of death goes off
at the death of the body. What harm did the jailer to Pharaoh's butler, when he
opened the prison door to him, and let him out? Is the bird in worse case, when
at liberty, than when confined in a cage? Thus, and no worse, are the souls of
the saints treated by death. It comes to the godly man, as Haman came to
Mordecai with the royal apparel and the horse, Esther iv. 11. with commission
to do them honor; howsoever aukwardly it be performed: I question not but
Haman performed the ceremony with a very ill mein, a pale face, a down look,
and a cloudy contenance, and like one who came to hang him, rather than to
honor him. But he, whom the king delighted to honor, behoved to be honored;
and Haman, Mordecai's grand enemy, must be the man employed to put this honor
upon him. Glory, glory, glory, blessing and praise to our Redeemer, our
Savior, our Mediator, by whose death, grim devouring death is made to do such
a good office to those, whom it might otherwise have hurried away in their
wickedness, to utter and eternal destruction! a dying day is, in itself, a
joyful day to the godly, it is their redemption-day; when the captives are
delivered, when the prisoners are set free. It is the day of the pilgrims
coming home from their pilgrimage; the day in which the heirs of glory return
from their travels to their own country, and their Father's house; and enter
into actual possession of the glorious inheritance. It is their marriage day;
now is the time of espousals; but then the marriage is consumate, and a
marriage feast begun, which has no period. If so, is not the state of the godly
in death a hopeful state? ^BJECT. But if the state of the godly in their death
be so (...) ^peful, how comes it to pass that many of them, when dying are full
of fears, and have little hope: ANSW. It must be owned, that saints do not all
die in one and the same manner; there is a diversity among them, as well as
among the wicked; yet the worst case of a dying saint is indeed a hopeful one.
Some die triumphantly, in a full assurance of faith. 2 Timothy iv. 6. The time of
my departure is at hand. ver. 7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith. ver. 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness. They get a taste of the joys of heaven, while here on
earth; and begin the songs of Zion, while yet in a strange land. Others die in
a solid fiducial dependence on their Lord and Savior: though they cannot sing
triumphantly, yet they can and will say confidently, The Lord is their God.
Though they cannot triumph over death, with old Simeon, having Christ in his
arms, and saying, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according
to thy word. For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, Luke ii. 29, 30. yet they
can say with dying Jacob, 'I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord.' Genesis xlix.
18. His left hand is under their head to support them; though his right hand
does not embrace them: they firmly believe, though they are not filled with joy
in believing. They can plead the covenant, and hang by the promise, although
their house is not so with God, as they could wish. But the dying-day of some
saints may be like that day mentioned. Zech. xiv. 7. Not day, nor night. They
may die under great doubts and fears; setting as it were, in a cloud, and going
to heaven in a mist. They may go mourning without the sun, and never put off
their spirit of heaviness, till death strip them of it. They may be carried to
heaven through the confines of hell; and may be pursued by the devouring lion,
even to the very gates of the new Jerusalem; and may be compared to a ship
almost wrecked in sight of the harbor, which yet gets safe into her port, 1
Cor. iii. 15. If any man's works shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss: but he
himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire. There is s^^ty amidst their fears,
but danger in the wicked's strongest confidence; and there is a blessed seed of
gladness in their greatest sorrows, Light is sown for the righteous, and
gladness for the upright in heart, Psalm. xcvii. 11.

Now, saints are liable to such perplexity in their death, because, though they
be Christians indeed, yet they are men of alike passions with others; and death
is a frightful object in itself, whatever dress it appear in: the stern
countenance, with which it looks at mortals, can hardly mis^ of causing them
shrink. Moreover, the saints are of all men the most jealous of themselves.
They think of eternity, and of a tribunal, more deeply than others do: with
them, it is a more serious thing to die than the rest of mankind are aware of.
They know the deceits of the heart, the subtilities of depraved human nature,
better than others do. And therefore they may have much ado^ keep up hope on a
deathbed: while others pass off quietly, like (...) to the slaughter: the
rather that Satan, who uses all his art^: support the hopes of the hypocrite,
will do his utmost to mar the p^ and increase the fears of the saint. Finally,
The bad frame of (...) and ill condition, in which death sometimes seizes a
true Christian may cause this perplexity. By his being in the state of grace
(...) indeed always habitually prepared for death, and his dying (...) is
insured; but there is more requisite to his actual preparation, and dying
comfortably; his spirit must be in good condition too.

Wherefore, there are three cases, in which death cannot but be very
uncomfortable to a child of God. (1.) If it seize him at a time when the guilt
of some particular sin unrepented of, i^ lying on his conscience; and death
comes on that very account, to take him out of the land of the living; as was
the cause of many of the Corinthian believers, 1 Cor. xi. 30. For this cause
(namely, of unworthy communicating) many are weak and sickly among you, and
many sleep. If a person is surprised with the approach of death, while lying
under the guilt of some unpardoned sin, it cannot but cause a mighty
consternation. (2) When death catches him ^pping. The mighty cry must be
frightful to sleeping virgins. The man who lies in a ruinous house, and awakens
not till the timber begins to crack, and the stones to drop down about his
ears, may indeed get out of it safely, but not without fears of being crushed
by its fall. When a Christian has been going on in a course of security and
backsliding, and awakens not till death comes to his bedside; it is no marvel
if he get a fearful awakening. Lastly, When he has lost sight of his saving
interest in Christ, and cannot produce evidences of his title to heaven. It is
hard to meet death without some evidence of a tittle to eternal life at hand:
hard to go through the dark valley without the candle of the Lord shining upon
the head. It is a terrible adventure to lau^h out into eternity, when a man can
make no better of it, than a leap in the dark, not knowing where he shall
light, whether in heaven or hell.

Nevertheless, the state of the saints, in their death, is always in itself
hopeful. The presumptuous hopes of the ungodly, in their death, cannot make
their state hopeful; neither can the hopelesness of a saint make his state
hopeless: for God judges according to the truth of the thing, not according to
men's opinions about it. Howbeit the saints can no more be altogether without
hope, than they can be altogether without faith. Their faith may be very weak,
but it fails not; and their hope very low, yet they will; and do, hope to the
end. Even while the godly seem to be carried away with the streams of doubts
and fears; there remains still as much hope as determines them to lay hold on
the tree of life, that grows on the banks of the river. Jonah ii. 4. Then I
said, I am cast out of thy sight: yet I will look again toward thy holy temple.

USE. This speaks comfort to the godly against the fear of death. A godly man
may be called a happy man, before his death; because, whatever befall him in
life, he shall certainly be happy at death. You who are in Christ, who are true
Christians, have hope in your end; and such hope as may comfort you against all
those fears, which arise from the consideration of a dying hour. This I shall
branch out, in answering some cases briefly.

CASE I. The prospect of death (will some of the saints say) is uneasy to me,
not knowing what shall become of my family, when I am gone. ANSW. The righteous
has hope in his death, as to his family, as well as to himself. Although you
have little for the present, to live upon; which has been the case of many of
God's chosen ones, 1 Cor. iv. 11. We (namely the Apostles, ver. 9) both hunger
and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain
dewlling place: and though you have nothing to leave them, as was the case of
that son of the prophet's, who did fear the Lord, and yet died in debt which he
was unable to pay; as his poor widow represents, 2 Kings iv. 1. yet you have a
good friend to leave them too; a covenanted God, to whom you may confidently
commit them, Jer. xlix. 11. Leave thy fatherless children, I will preserve them
alive, and let thy widows trust in me. The world can bear witness of signal
settlements made upon the children of providence; such as by their pious
parents have been cast upon God's providential care. It has been often remarked
that they wanted neither provision nor education Moses is an eminent instance
of this. He, albeit he was an outcast infant, (Exodus ii. 3.) yet was learned in
all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts vii. 22. and became king in Jeshurum,
Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 5. O! may we not be ashamed, that we do not securely trust him
with the concerns of our families, to whom, as our Savior and Redeemer, we
have committed our eternal interests!

CASE II. Death will take us away from our dear friends; yea, we shall not see
the Lord in the land of the living, in the blessed ordinances. ANSW. It will
take you to your best friend, the Lord Christ. And the friends you leave behind
you, if they be indeed persons of worth, you will meet them again, when they
come to heaven: and you will never be separated any more. If death take you
away from the temple below, it will carry you to the temple above. It will
indeed take you from the streams, but it will set you down by the fountain. If
it put out your candle, it will carry you where there is no night, where there
is an eternal day.

CASE III. I have so much ado, in time of health, to satisfy myself, as to my
interest in Christ, about my being a real Christian, a regenerate man; that I
judge, it is almost impossible I should die comfortably. ANSW. If it is thus
with you, then double your diligence, to make your calling and election sure.
Endeavor to grow in knowledge, and walk closely with God; be diligent in
self-examination; and pray earnestly for the Holy Spirit, whereby you may know
the things freely given you of God. If you are enabled by the power and Spirit
of Christ, thus diligently to prosecute your spiritual concer^ though the time
of your life be neither day or night, yet at eve^ time, it may be light. Many
weak Christians indulge doubts and fears about their spiritual state, as if
they placed, at least, some part of religion in this impudent practice: but
toward the period of life, they are forced to think and act in another manner.
The traveller, who reckons he has time to spare, may stand still debating with
himself, whether this or the other be the right way; but when the sun begins to
set, he is forced to lay aside his scruples, and resolutely to go forward on
the road he judges to be the right one, lest he ly all night in the open
fields. Thus some Christians, who perplex themselves much, throughout the
course of their lives, with jealous doubts and fears, content themselves, when
they come to die, with such evidences of the safety of their state, as they
could not be satisfied with before; and, by disputing less against themselves,
and believing more, court the peace they formerly rejected, and gain it too.

CASE IV. I am under a sad decay, in respect of my spiritual condition. ANSW.
Bodily consumptions may make death easy, but it is not so in spiritual decays.
I will not say, that a godly man cannot be in such a case, when he dies; but I
believe it is rarely so. Ordinarily (I suppose) a cry comes to awaken sleepy
virgins before death come. Samson is set to grind in the prison, until his
locks grow again. David and Solomon fell under great spiritual decays: but,
before they died, they recovered their spiritual strength and vigor. However,
bestir ye yourselves without delay, to strengthen the things that remain: your
fright will be the less, that ye awake from spiritual sleep, ere death come to
your bedside: and you ought to lose no time, seeing you know not how soon
death may seize you.

CASE V. It is terrible to think of the other world, that world of spirits
which I have so little acquaintance with. ANSW. Thy best friend is Lord of that
other world. Abraham's bosom is kindly, even to these who never saw his fac^*
After death thy soul becomes capable of converse with the blesse^ inhabitants
of that other world. The spirits of just men made perfect were once such as thy
spirit now is. And as for the angels, howsoever they be of a superior nature in
the rank of beings, yet our nature is dignified above theirs, in the man
Christ: and they are, all of them, thy Lord's servants, and so thy
fellow servants.

CASE VI. "The pangs of death are terrible." ANSW. Yet not so terrible as pangs
of conscience, caused by a piercing sense of guilt, and apprehensions of divine
wrath, with which, I suppose thee to be not altogether unacquainted. But who
would not endure bodily sickness, that the soul may become sound, and every
whit whole? Each pang of death will set sin a step nearer the door; and with
the last breath, the body of sin will breath out its last. The pains of death
will not last long; and the Lord thy God will not leave, but support thee,
under them.

CASE VII. "But I am like to be cut off in the midst of my days." ANSW. Do not
complain, you will be the sooner at home: you have thereby the advantage of
your fellow laborers, who were at work before you in the vineyard. God, in the
course of his providence, hides some of his saints early in the grave, that
they may be taken away from the evil to come. An early removal out of this
world prevents much sin and misery: and they have no ground of complaint, who
get the residue of their years in Immanuel's land. Surely thou shall live as
long as thou have work cut out for thee, by the great Master, to be done for
him in this world; and when that is at an end, it is high time to be gone.

CASE VIII. "I am afraid of sudden death." ANSW. Thou may indeed die so. Good
Eli died suddenly, 1 Samuel iv. 18. Yet death found him watching, ver. 12. Watch
therefore, for ye know not what hour the Lord does come, Matthew. xxiv. 42. But
be not afraid, it is an unexpressible comfort, that death, come when it will,
can never catch thee out of Christ; and therefore can never seize thee, as a
jailor, to hurry thee into the prison of hell. Sudden death may hasten and
facilitate thy passage to heaven, but can do thee no prejudice.

CASE IX. I am afraid it may be my lot to die wanting the exercise of reason.
ANSW. I make no question but a child of God, a true Christian, may die in this
case. But what harm? There is no hazard in it, as to his eternal state: a
disease, at death, may divest him of his reason, but not of his religion. When
a man going a long voyage, has put his affairs in order, and put all his goods
aboard; he himself may be carried aboard the ship sleeping: all is safe with
him, although he knows not where he is, till he awaken in the ship. Even so the
godly man, who dies in this case, may die uncomfortably but not unsafely.

CASE last. I am naturally timorous, and the very thoughts of death are
terrible to me. ANSW. The less you think on death, the thoughts of it will be
the more frightful: but make it familiar to you by frequent meditations upon
it, and you may thereby allay your fears. Look at the white and bright side of
the cloud: take faith's view of the city that has foundations: so shall you
see hope in your death. Be duly affected with the body of sin and death, and
frequent interruptions of your communion with God, and with the glory which
dwells on the other side death: this will contribute much to remove slavish
fear.

It is pity saints should be so fond of life as they often are: they ought
always to be in good terms with death. When matters are duly considered, it
might well be expected every child of God, every regenerate man, should
generously profess concerning this life, what Job did, chap. vii. 16. I loathe
it, I would not live always. In order to gain their hearts to this desirable
temper, I offer the following additional considerations.

First, Consider the sinfulness that attends life in this world* While ye live
here, ye sin, and see others sinning. Ye brea^ infectious air. Ye live in a
pest house. Is it at all strange to loathe such a life? (1.) Your own pilgrim's
sores are running on you. Does not the sin of your nature make you groan daily?
Are you not sensible, that though the cure be begun, it is yet far from being
perfected? Has not the leprosy got into the walls of the house, which cannot be
removed without pulling it down? Is not your nature so vitiate, that no less
than the separation of the soul from the body can root out the disease? Have
you not your sores without, as well as your sickness within? Do ye not leave
marks of your pollution, on whatsoever passes through your hands? Are not all
your actions tainted and blemished with defects and imperfections? Who else
then should be much in love with life, but such whose sickness is their health,
and who glory in their shame? (2.) The loathsome sores of others are always
before your eyes, go where you will. The follies and wickedness of men are
every where conspicuous, and make but an unpleasant scene. The sinful world is
but an unsightly company, a disagreeable crowd, in which the most loathsome are
the most numerous. (3.) Are not your own sores ofttimes breaking out again,
after hea^ing? Frequent relapses may well cause us remit of our fondness for
this life. To be ever struggling, and anon falling into the mire again, makes
weary work. Do ye never wish for cold death, thereby effectually to cool the
heat of these lusts, which so often take fire again; even after a flood of
godly sorrow has gone over them? (4.) Do not ye sometimes infect others, and
others infect you? There is no society in the world, in which every member of
it does not sometimes lay a stumbling block before the rest. The best carry
about with them the tinder of a corrupt nature, which they cannot be rid of
while they live, and which is liable to be kindled at all times, and in all
places; yea, they are apt to inflame others, and become the occasions of
^^ning. Certainly these things are apt to imbitter this life to the saints.

Secondly, Consider the misery and trouble that attend it. Rest is desirable,
but it is not to be found on this side of the grave. Worldly troubles attend
all men in this life. This world is a sea of trouble, where one wave rolls upon
another. They, who fancy themselves beyond the reach of trouble, are mistaken:
no state, no stage of life, is exempted from it. The crowned head is surrounded
with thorny cares. Honor many times paves the way to deep disgrace: riches,
for the most part, are kept to the hurt of the owners. The fairest ro^e wants
not prickles; and the heaviest cross is sometimes found wrapped up in the
greatest earthly comfort. Spiritual troubles attend the saints in this life.
They are like travelers in a cloudy night, in which the moon sometimes breaks
out from under one cloud, but quickly hides her head again under another: no
wonder they long to be at their journey's end. The sudden alterations the best
frame of spirit is liable to, the perplexing doubts, confound^g fears,
short-lived joys, and long-running sorrows, which have a certain affinity with
the present life, must needs create in the saints a desire to be with Christ,
which is best of all.

Lastly, Consider the great imperfections attending this life. While the soul
is lodged in this cottage of clay, the necessities of the body are many; it is
always craving. The mud-walls must be repaired and patched up daily, till the
clay-cottage fall down for good and all. Eating, drinking, sleeping, and the
like, are, in themselves, but mean employments for a rational creature; and
will be reputed such by the heaven-born soul. They are badges of imperfection,
and, as such, unpleasant to the mind, aspiring unto that life and immortality,
which is brought to light through the gospel: and would be very grievous, if
this state of things were of long continuance. Does not the gracious soul often
find itself yoked with the body, as with a companion in travel, unable to keep
pace with it? When the spirit is willing, the flesh is weak. When the soul
would mount upward, the body is as a clog upon it, and as a stone tied to the
foot of a bird attempting to fly. The truth is, O believer! thy soul in this
body is, at best, but like a diamond in a ring, where much of it is obscured:
it is far sunk in the vile clay, till relieved by death.

I conclude this subject with a few directions how to prepare for death, so as
we may die comfortably. I speak not here of habitual preparation for death,
which a true Christian, in virtue of his gracious state, never wants, from the
time he is born again and united to Christ; but of actual preparation or
readiness in respect of his circumstantiate case, frame, and disposition of
mind and spirit; the want of which makes even a saint very unfit to die.

First, Let it be your constant care to keep a clean conscience, a conscience
void of offense toward God, and toward man, Acts xxiv. 17. Beware of a standing
controversy betwixt God and you, on the account of some iniquity regarded in
the heart. When an honest man is about to leave his country, and not to return,
he settles accounts with those he had dealings with, and lays down methods for
paying his debts timeously; lest he be reckoned a bankrupt, and be attacked by
an officer, when he is going off. Guilt lying on the conscience is a fountain
of fears; and will readily sting severely, when death stares the criminal in
the face. Hence it is, that many, even of God's children, when a dying, are
made to wish passionately, and desire eagerly that they may live to do, what
they ought to have done, before that time. Wherefore, walk closely with God, be
diligent, strict and exact in your course; beware of a loose, careless, and
irregular conversation: as ye would not lay up for yourselves, anguish and
bitterness of spirit, in a dying hour. And because, through the infirmity
cleaving to us, in our present state of imperfection, in many things we offend
all, renew your repentance daily, and be ever washing in the Redeemer's blood.
As long as ye are in the world, ye will need to wash your feet, John xiii. 10.
that is, to make application to the blood of Christ, anew, for purging your
consciences from the guilt of daily miscarriages. Let death find you at the
fountain; and if so, it will find you ready to answer its call.

Secondly, Be always watchful, waiting for your change, Like unto men that wait
for their Lord, that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him
immediately. Luke xxi. 36. Beware of slumbering and sleeping, while the
bridegroom tarries. To be awakened out of spiritual slumber, by a surprising
call to pass into a another world, is a very fr^ghtful thing: but he who is
daily for the coming of his Lord, shall comfortably receive the grim messenger,
while he beholds him ushering in Him, of whom he may confidently say, This is
my God, and I have waited for him. The way to die comfortable, is to die daily.
Be often essaying (as it were) to die. Bring yourselves familiarly acquainted
with death, by making many visits to the grave, in serious meditations upon it.
This was Job's practice, chap. xvii. 13, 14. I have made my bed in the
darkness. Go thou, and do likewise; and when death comes, thou shall have
nothing ado but to ly down ^ "I have said to corruption, thou art my father; to
the worm, thou art my mother and my sister." Do thou say so too; and thou will
be the fitter to go home to their house. Be frequently reflecting upon your
conduct, and considering what course of life you wish to be found in when death
arrests you: and act accordingly. When you do the duties of your station in
life, or are employed in acts of worship, think with yourselves, that, it may
be, this is the last oppertunity: and therefore act as if you was never to do
more of that kind. When you ly down at night, compose your spirits as if you
was not to awake till the heavens be no more. And when you awake in the
morning, consider that new day as your last, and live accordingly. Surely that
night comes, of which you will never see the morning; or that morning, of
which you will never see the night. But which of your mornings or nights, will
be such, you know not.

Thirdly, Employ yourselves much in weaning your hearts from the world. The man
who is making ready to go abroad, busies himself in taking leave of his
friends. Let the mantle of earthly enjoyments hang loose about you, that it may
be easily dropped, when death comes to carry you away into another world.
Moderate your affections toward your lawful comforts of life: and let not your
hearts be too much taken with them. The traveller acts unwisely, who suffers
himself to be so allured with the conveniences of the inn where he lodges, as
to make his necessary departure from it grievous. Feed with fear, and walk
through the world as pilgrims and strangers. Likeas, when the corn is forsaking
the ground, it is ready for the sickle: when the fruit is ripe, it falls off
the tree easily: so, when a Christian's heart is truly weaned from the world,
he is prepared for death, and it will be the more easy to him. A heart
disengaged from the world is an heavenly one: and then are we ready for heaven,
when our heart is there before us, Matthew. vi. 21.

Fourthly, Be diligent in gathering and laying up evidences of your title to
heaven, for your support and comfort at the hour of death. The neglect hereof
mars the joy and consolation which some Christians might otherwise have at
their death. Wherefore examine yourselves frequently, as to your spiritual
state; that evidences, which ly hid and unobserved, may be brought to light and
taken notice of. And if you would manage this work successfully, make solemn
serious work of it. Set apart some time for it. And, after earnest prayer to
God, through Jesus Christ, for the enlightening influences of the Holy Spirit,
whereby ye may be enabled to understand his own word, to discern his own work
in your souls; sist yourselves before the tribunal of your consciences, that ye
may judge yourselves in this weighty matter.

And in the first place, Let the marks of a regenerate state be fixed, from the
Lord's word: and have recourse to some particular text for that purpose; such
as Prove. viii. 17. "I love them that love me." Compare Luke xiv. 26. "If any
man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, and wife and children, and
brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple."
Psalm. cxix. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy
commandments. Psalm. xviii. 23. I was also upright before him: and I kept myself
from mine iniquity. Compare Romans vii. 22, 23. For I delight in the law of God,
after the inwardman: but I see another law in my members warring against the
law of my mind, etc. 1 John iii. 3. And every man that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself, even as he is pure, Matthew. v. 3. Blessed are the poor in
spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Phil. iii. 3. For we are the
circumcision which worship ( or serve) God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. The sum of the evidence arising
from these texts, lies here. A real Christian is one who loves God for himself,
as well as for his benefits: and that with a supreme love, above all persons
and all things: he has an awful and impartial regard to God's commands: he
opposes and wrestleth against that sin, which of all others most easily besets
him: he approves and loves the holy law, even in that very point, wherein it
strikes against his most beloved lust: his hope of heaven engages him in the
study of universal holiness; in the which he aims at perfection, though he
cannot reach it in this life: he serves the Lord, not only in acts of worship,
but in the whole of his conversation; and as to both, is spiritual in the
principle, motives, aims, and ends of his service: yet he sees nothing in
himself to trust to before the Lord: Christ and his fullness is the stay of his
soul: and his confidence is cut off from all that is not Christ, or in Christ,
in point of justification, or acceptance with G^d; and in p^nt of
sanctification too. Every one in whom these character are found, has a title to
heaven, according to the word. It is convenient and profitable to mark such
texts for this sp^cial use, a^ they occur, while you read the scriptures, or
hear sermons. The marks of a regenerate state that fixed; in the next place, i^
partially search and try your own hearts th^reby, as in the sight of God, with
depend^nce on him for spiritual discerning, that ye may know whether they be in
you or not. And when ^e f^d them, form the conclusion deliberately and
distinctly; namely, that therefore you are regenerate, and have a title to
heaven. Thus you may gather evidences. But be sure to have recourse to G^d in
Christ by earnest prayer, for the testimony of the Spirit, whose office is to
bear witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God, Rom v^. 16.
M^reover, carefully observ^ the course and m^th^d of Providence toward you; and
likewise how your soul is affect^d under the same* in the various steps
thereof: compare both with sc^ipture-doctrines, prom^ses, threatenings and
examples: s^ shall ye perceive, if the Lord deals with you as he uses to do
unto ^h^se that love his name: and if you be going forth by the footsteps of
the flock, this may afford you comfortable evidence. W^k tenderly and
circumspectly; and the Lord will manifest himself to you, according to his
prom^se, John xiv. 21 He that ^a^ my comm^ndments and keeps them, he it is
that loves me: and he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father: and I w^ll
love him, and will manifest myself to him. But it is in vain to think on
succ^ssful self-examination, if ye be loose and irregular in your conversation.

Lastly, Dispatch the work of your day and generation with speed and dil^gence.
David, after he had served his own generation by the will of God, f^ll on
sl^ep, Acts x^^i. 36 God has alloted us cer^ain pieces of work of this kind,
which ought to be d^s^atched before the time of working be over Eccles. ix. 10
Whatsoever thy hand finde^h to do, do it with thy might: ^r there is n^ work,
nor kn^wledge, ^r wisdom in the grav^. whither thou go. Gal. vi. 10 As we
have therefore opportunity, le^ u^ do good unto all men, especial^y unto them
who are of the household of faith. If a passenger, after he is got of sh^pboard,
and the ship is gett^ng under sail. remember that he h^s omi^ted to d^spatch a
piece of necessary business when he was ash^r^, it must needs be uneasy to him;
even so reflecti^n in a dying h^ur upon neglected seasons, and lost
opportunities, cannot fall to a quiet a Christ^an. Wherefore whatever is
incumbent upon (...) God's honor, and the good of others; either as the duty
of thy station, or by special opportunity put into thy hand, perform a
seasonably, if thou would die comfortably.

HEAD III The RESURRECTION.
JOHN v. 28. Marvel not at this: For the Hour is coming, in the which all that
are in the Graves, shall hear his Voice:

Ver. 29. And shall come forth, they that have done Good, unto the Resurrection
of Life; and they that have done Evil, unto the resurrection of Damnation.


THESE words are part of the defense our Lord Jesus Christ makes for himself,
when persecuted by the Jews for curing the impotent man, and ordering him to
carry away his bed on the Sabbath; and for vindicating his conduct, when
accused by them of having thereby profaned that day. On this occasion he
professes himself not only Lord of the Sabbath, but also Lord of life and
death; declaring in the words of the text, the resurrection of the dead to be
brought to pass by his power. This he introduces with these words, as with a
solemn preface: Marvel not at this: i. e at this strange discourse of mine: do
not wonder to hear me, whose appearance is so very mean in your eyes, talk at
this rate: for the day is coming, in which the dead shall be raised by my power.

Observe in this text, (1.) The doctrine of the resurrection asserted, All that
are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth. The dead bodies,
which are reduced to dust, shall revive, and evidence life by hearing and
moving. (2) The Author of it, Jesus Christ, the Son of man, ver. 27. The dead
shall hear his voice* and be raised thereby. (3) The number that shall be
raised: All that are in the graves: i. e all the dead bodies of men, howsoever
differently disposed of, as it were in different kinds of graves; or all the
dead, good or bad. They are not all buried in graves, properly so called; some
are burnt to ashes, some drowned, and buried in the bellies of si^es; yea, some
devoured by man-eaters, called Cannibals: but wheresoever the m^tter or
substance, of which the body was composed, is to be fo^d, thence they shall
come forth. (4.) The great distinction that shall be made betwixt the godly and
the wicked They shall (...) again in the resurrection. None of the godly will
be missing* though perhaps they either had no burial, or a very obscure (...)
all the wicked shall come forth; their vaulted tombs shall (...) longer than
the voice is ^^tered. But the former shall have a joyful resurrection to life,
whilst the latter have a dreadful resurrection to damnation Lastly, The set
time of this great event: there i^ (...), or certain fixed period of time,
appointed of God for it We are not told when that ^ur will be, but that it is
coming: for this, among other reasons, that we may always be ready.

DOCTRINE. There shall be a Resurrection of the Dead.
In d^scoursing of this subject, I shall first show the certainty of the
resurrection; next, I shall inquire into the nature of it; and lastly, make
some practical improvement of the whole.

I. In showing the certainty of the resurrection, I shall evince, (1.) That God
can raise the dead. And, (2.) That he will do it; which are the two grounds or
topics laid down by Christ himself, when disputing with the Sadduc, (...) Matthew
xxii. 29 Jesus answered and said unto them, Ye do err, not knowing the
scriptures, nor the power of God.

First, Seeing God is almighty, surely he can raise the dead. We have instances
of this powerful work of God, both in the Old and New Testament. The son of the
widow in Sar^ptu, was raised from the dead, 1 Kings xvii 22. The Shunam^te's
son, 2 Kings iv 35 And the man (...) into the sepulcher of Elish^, chap. xiii.
21. In which we may observe a gradation, the second of these miraculous events
being more illustri^ than the first, and the third than the second The first of
these persons was raised when he was but newly dead, the prophet Elijah who
raised him, being present at his decease. The Second, when he had lai^ dead a
considerable time: namely, while his mother traveled from Sh^e^ to mount
Carmel, (reckoned about the distance of sixteen miles) and returned from th^e
to her house with Elisha, who raised him. The last* not till they were burying
him, and the corpse was ca^t into the prophets grave. In like manner in the New
Testament. S^'s daughter, (Mark v. 41.) and D^rc^s, (Acts ix. 40) were both
^sed to life, when lately dead: the widow's son in Nain when they were carrying
him out to bury him, Luke vii. 11.15. And Lazarus, when s^inking in the grave,
John xi. 39, 44.

Can men make curious glasses out of ashes. reduce ^er^ into ashes, and raise
them again out of these ashes, restor^ them to their former beauty; and cannot
the great Creator, who (...) things of nothing, raise man's body, after it is
reduced into dust. If (...) object^, How can man's bodies be raised up again
after they are diss^l^ed into dust, and the ashes of many generations are
mingled: gr^ Scripture and not reason furnish the answer* With men it is
imp^ssible, but not with God. It is absurd for men to deny that God can do a
thing, because they see not how it (...) be done. How small a portion do we
know of his ways! how absolutely the incapable are we of ^ing distinctly of the
extent of a^nty power, and much more (...) comprehending its actings, and the
method of procedure (...) but many illiterate men are as great infidels to many
chemical experiments, as some learned men are to the doctrine of the
resurrection: and as these last are ready to deride the former, so the Lord
will have them in derisi^n What a mystery was it to the Indians that the
Europeans could, by a piece of paper converse together, at the distance of some
hundreds of miles? And how much were they astonished to see them with their
guns, produce as it were thunder and lightning in a moment and at pleasure kill
men afar off? Shall some men do such things a^ are wonders in the eyes of
others, because they cannot comprehend them: and shall men confine the infinite
power of God within the narrow boundaries of their own shallow capacities, in a
matter noways contrary to reason? An inferior nature has but a very imperfect
conception of the power of a superior. Brutes do not conceive of the actings of
reason in men: and men have but lame notions of the power of angels: how lame
and inadequate a conception. then, must a f^it* nature have of the power of
that which is infinit^! tho we cannot conceive how God acts, yet we ought to
believe he can do above what we can think o^ can conceive of.

Wherefore, let the bodies of men be laid in the grave; let them rot there, and
be resolved into the most minute particles* or let them be burnt, and the ashes
cast into rivers, or thrown up into the air, to be scattered by the wind: let
the dust of a thousand generations be mingled, and the streams of the dead
bodies wander to and fro in the air: let birds or wild beasts eat the dead
bodies, or the fishes of the sea devour them, so that the parts of human
bodies, thus destroyed, pass into substantial parts of birds, beasts, or
fishes; or what is more than that, let man-eaters, who themselves must die, and
rise again, devour human bodies; and let others devour them again: and then let
our modern Sadducces propose the question in these case^; as the ancient
Sadducces did, in the case of the woman, who had been married to seven husbands
successively, Matthew. xxii. 8. We answer, as our blessed Lord and Savior did,
ver. 26. Ye do e^, not knowing the scrip^ures, nor the power of God. We believe
God to be omni^ctent and omnip^nt: infinite in know^edge and in p^w^r: and
hence, agreeable to the dictates of reason we conclude the possibility of the
resurrection, even in the cases supposed.

Material things may change their forms and shapes, may be resolved into the
principle^ of which they are formed: but they are not an^thilated* or reduced
to nothing; nor can they be so, by any created power. God is omniscient his
unde^standing is inf^nite: therefore he knows all things whatsoever; what they
w^ at any time, what they are and where they are to be found. Though the
countryman, who comes into the apothecary's shop, cannot find out the drug he
wants; yet the apothecary himself knows what he has in his shop, whence it
came, and where it is to be found And in a mingle of many different seeds, the
expert gardener can distinguish betwixt seed and seed. Why then may not
omniscience distinguish betwixt dust and dust? Can he who knows all things to
perfection be liable to any mistake about his own creatures? Whosoever believes an
infinite unde^standing* must needs own, that no mass of dust is so jumbled
together, but God perfectly comprehends, and infallibly knows how the most
minute particle, and every one of them, is to be matched. And therefore, he
knows where the particles of each dead body are; whether in the earth, sea, or
air, how confused soever they ly. And particularly, he knows where to find the
pri^itive substance of the man ^ater; howsoever evaporated or reduced, as it
were into air or vapor b^ sweat or perspiration: and how to separate the parts
of the body that was eaten, from the body of the eaten, how soever incorporate,
or made one body with it: and so understands, not only how, but wh^nce, he is
to bring back the primitive substance of the man-ea^er to (...) proper place:
and also to separate, from the man eater's body, that part of the devoured body
which goes into its substance, and is indeed but a very small part of it. It is
certain the bodies of men, as of all other animals, or living creatures* are in
a continual flux: they grow, and are sustained by daily food: so small a part
whereof becomes nourishment, that the most part is ev^te. And it is reckoned
that, at least, as much of the food is evacuate insensibly by perspiration, as
is voided by other perceptible ways Yea, the nourishing part of the food, when
assimilate, and thereby become a part of the body, is evacuate by perspiration
through the pores of the skin. and again suppl^ed by the use of the food: yet
the body is still reckoned one, and the same body. Whence we may conclude that
it is not essential to the resurrection of the body, that every particle of the
matter* which at any time was part of a human body should be restored to it,
when it is raised up from death to life. Were it so, the bodies of men would
become of so huge a size, that they would bear no resemblance of the persons.
It is sufficient to denominate it the same body that died, when it is risen
again; if the body that is r^sed be formed in its former proportions of the
same particles of matter. which at any time were its constituent parts,
howsoever it be refined likeas we reckon it is the sname body that was pined
away by long sickness, which becomes fat and fair again after recovery.

Now to this infinite understanding join infinite power, whereby he is able to
sub^ (...) unto himself; and this glorious great work appears most reasonable.
If omniscience discover every little particle of dust, (...) it is, and how it
is to be matched; cannot omnip^tence bring the^ and join them together in their
order? Can the watch-maker take (...) the several pieces of a watch, lying in a
confused heap before him, and set each in its proper place; and cannot God put
the human body into order, of^^r its des^on! Did he speak this world into being
out of nothing; and can he not form man's body out of its p^e-existent matter?
If he (...) things, which be not, as though they were; surely he can call this
(...) dissolved, to be as they were before the compound was resolved into its
parts and principles: Wherefore, God c^n raise the dead. And, "Why should it be
thought "a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead? Acts
xxvi. 8.

Secondly, God will do it. He not only can do it; but he certainly will do it,
because he has said it. Our text is very full to this purpose, All that are in
their graves shall hear his voice: and shall come forth; they that have done
good, unto the resurrection of li^e, and they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of damnation. These words relate to, and are an explanation of,
that part of Daniel's prophecy, Dan. xii. 2. "And many of them that sleep in
the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and so^e to shame
and everlasting contempt." The which appears to have been calculate to confront
the doctrine of the Sadaucees; which the Holy Ghost knew was to be at a great
height, in the Jewish church, under the persecution of Antiochus. There are
many other texts in the O^d and New Testaments that might here be adduced; such
as Acts xxiv. 15. And have hope toward God, which they themselves also allow,
that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, of the just and u^just. And Job
xx 26, 27. And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
shall I see God: whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and
not another; though my reins be consumed within me. But I need not multiply
testimonies, in a matter so clearly and frequently taught in sacred scripture.
Our Lord and ^aviour himself proves it, against the Sadducees in that
remarkable text, Luke xx. 37, 38. Now that the dead are raised, even Moses
showed at the bush, when he calls the Lord, the the God of Abraham, and the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jac^b; For he is not a God of the dead, but of the
living: for all live unto him. These holy patriarchs were now dead:
nevertheless, the Lord JEHOVAH is called their God, namely, in virtue of the
covenant of grace, and in the sense thereof; in which sense, the phrase
comprehends all bl^ssedness, as that, which by the covenant, is secured to them
who are in it, Heb. xi. 16. God is not ashamed to be called their God: for he
has prepared for them a city. He is not called the God of their souls only;
but their God, the God of their persons, souls and bodies; the which, by virtue
of his truth and faithfulness, must have its full effect; now it cannot have
its full effect on the dead, who, in as far as they are dead, are far from all
blessedness; but on the living, who alone are capable of it* therefore, since
God is still called their God, they are living in respect of God, although
their bodies are yet in the grave; for in respect of him, who by his power can
restore them to life, and in his covenant has declared his will and purpose so
to do, and whose promise cannot fail, they all are to be reckoned to live: and,
consistent with the covenant, their death is but a sleep, out of which, in
v^rtue of the same covenant, securing all bl^ssedness to their persons, their
whole man, they must and shall certainly be awakened. The Apostle Paul proves
the resurrection at large, 1 Cor. xv. and shows it to be a fundamental article,
the denial whereof is subversive of Christianity, ver. 13, 14. If there be no
resur^^^tion of the dead, then is Christ not risen. And if Christ be not taken,
then is our preaching vain, and your faith also in vain.

To assist us in conceiving of it, the scripture gives us types of the
resurrection of the dead; as the dry bones living, Ezekiel. xxxv^i. Jonah's coming
out of the whale's belly, Mat. xii 40. And nature affords us emblems and
resemblances of it, as the sun's setting and rising again; night and day,
winter and summer, sleeping and awaking; swallows in winter lying void of all
appearance of life, in ruinous bu^ld^ngs, and subterraneous caverns, and
reviving again in the spring season; the seeds dying under the clod, and
thereafter springing up again: all which, and the like, may justly be admitted,
as designed by the God of nature, though not for proofs, yet for memorials, of
the resurrection; whereof we have assurance from the scripture, 1 Cor xv. 36.
Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickn^d, except it die

II I shall enquire into the nature of the resurrection, showing, 1 st, Who
shall be raised. 2 dly, What shall be raised. 3 dly, How the dead shall be
raised.

First, Who shall be raised. Our text tells us who they are; namely, All that
are in the graves, i e all mankind, who are dead As for those persons who shall
be found alive at the second coming of Christ; they shall not die, and soon
thereafter be r^ised again: but such a change shall suddenly pass upon them. as
shall be to them instead of dying and rising again; so that their bodies shall
become like to those bodies which are raised out of the graves, 1 Cor. xv. 51,
52. We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed; in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye. Hence these who are to be judged at the great day, are
distinguished into quick and dead, Acts x 42. All the dead shall arise, whether
godly or wicked, just or unjust, (Acts xxiv. 15.) old or young: the whole race
of mankind, even these who never saw the sun, but died in their mother's belly,
Rev. xx 12. "And I saw the dead sm^ll and great stand before God." The sea and
earth shall give up their dead, without reserve none shall be kept back.

Secondly, What shall be raised? The bodies of mankind. A man is said to die
when the soul is separated from the body, and returns unto God who gave it,
Eccles. xii 7. B^t it is the body only which is laid in the grave, and can be
properly said to be rai^ed: wherefore the resurrection is, st^ictly speaking,
competent to the body only. Moreover, it is the same body that dies. which
shall rise again. At the resurrection, men shall not appear with other b^d^es
for substance, than these which they now have, and which are said down in the
grave: but with the self-same bodies endowed with other qualities. The very
notion of a resurrection implies thi^; since nothing can be said to rise again,
but that which falls. But to illustrate it a little, First. it is plain from
scripture-testimony. The Apostle tells, it is this mortal which must put on
immortality, 1 Cor. xv. 5^ and that Christ shall change our vile body that it
may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, Philip. iii. 21. Death in
scripture language, is a sleep, and the resurrection an awaking out of that
sle^p, Job xiv. 12. which shows the b^ rising up, to be the self same that
died. Secondly, The equity of the divine procedure, both with respect to the
godly and the wicked, evinces this. It is not reckoned equal among men, that
one do the work, and another get the reward. Though the glorifying of the body
of saints, is not, properly speaki^g, and in a strict ^ense, the reward of
their services or sufferings on earth: yet this is evident, that it is not at
all agreeable to the manner of the divine dispensation, that one body serve
him, and another be glorified: that one fight, and another receive the crown.
How can it be imagined that the temples of the Holy Ghost (as these bodies of
believers are termed, 1 C^r. vi. 19.) should always ly in rubbish; and others
be rear^d up in their stead; That these members of Christ (ver. 15.) shall
per^sh utterly, and other bodies come in their room? Nay, surely as these
bodies of the saints now be^r a part in glorifyng God, and some of them suffer
in his cause: so they shall partake of the glory that is to be revealed. And
these bodies of the wicked, which are laid in the dust, shall be raised again;
that the same body, which sinned, may suffer. Shall one body sin here, and
another suffer in hell for that sin? Shall that body, which was the soul's
companion in si^, ly for ever hid in the dust; and another body, which did not
act any part in sinning, be its companion in torment? No, no; it is that body,
which now takes up all their thoughts to provide for its back and belly, that
shall be raised up. to suffer in hell. I^ is that tongue that is now the
sw^aring, lying tongue, which will need wa^^r to cool it. in eternal flames.
These same feet, that now stand in the way of sinners, and carry men in their
ungodly courses, shall st^nd in the burning lake. And these now covetous and
lascivious eyes, shall take p^rt in the fire and smoke of the pit.

Thirdly How the dead shall be raised The same Jesus, who was crucified without
the ga^e o^ Jerusalem, shall, at the last day, to the conviction of all, be
declared b^th Lord and Christ: ^ppear^ng as Judge of the world attended with
his mighty angels 2 Thessalonians i. 7. he shall descend from heaven with a shout, with
the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God. 1 Thessalonians. iv. 16. The
trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised, and these who are alive,
changed; 1 Cor. xv. 52 Whether th^s shout, voice and trumpet do denote some
audible voice, or only the workings of divine power, for the raising of the
dead, and other awful purposes of that day, (though the former seems probable) I
will not positively determine. There is no question but this coming of the
Judge of the world will be in greater majesty and terror, than we can conceive:
yet that awful grandeur, majesty and state, which was displayed at the giving
of the law, viz. thunders heard, lightnings and a thick cloud upon the mount
seen, the Lord descending in fire, the whole mount quaking greatly, and the
voice of the trumpet waxing louder, and lauder, (Exodus xix. 16, 18, 19.) may
help forward a becoming thought of it. However, the sound of this trumpet shall
be heard all the world over; ^t shall reach to the depths of the sea, and into
the bowels of the earth. At this loud alarm, bones shall come together, bone to
his bone: the scattered dust of all the dead shall be gathered together, dust
to his dust, neither shall one thrust another, they shall walk every one in his
path: and meeting together again, shall make up that very same body, which
crumbled into dust in the grave. And at the same alarming voice, shall every
soul come again into its own body, never more to be separated. The dead can
stay no longer in their graves, but must bid an eternal farewell to their
long-homes. They hear his voice, and must come forth, and receive their final
sentence.

Now, as there is a great difference betwixt the godly and the wicked in their
life, and in their death; so will there be also in their resurrection.

The godly, shall be raised up out of their graves, by virtue of the Spirit of
Christ, the blessed bond of their union with him. Romans viii. 11. He that raised
up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his Spirit
that dwells in you. Jesus Christ arose from the dead, as the first fruits of
them that slept, 1 Cor. xv. 20. So they that are Christ's shall follow at his
coming, ver. 23. The mystical Head having got above the waters of death, he
cannot but bring forth the members after him in due time.

They shall come forth with unexpressible joy; for then shall that passage of
scripture, which, in its immediate scope, respected the Babylonish captivity,
be fully accomplished in its extensive spiritual view, Isa. xxvi. 19. Awake and
sing, ye that dwell in the dust. As a bride, adorned for her husband, goes
forth of her bedchamber unto the marriage; so shall the saints go forth of
their graves, unto the marriage of the Lamb. Joseph had a joyful out-going from
the prison, Daniel from the lion's den, and Jonah from the whale's belley; yet
those are but saint representations of the saints ^d going from the grave at
the resurrection. Then shall they sing the song of Moses and of the Lamb, in
highest strains; death being quite swallowed up in victory. They had, while in
life, sometimes sung, by faith, the triumphant song over death and the grave, O
death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? (1 Cor. xv.55.) But
when they sing the same, from sight and sense; the black ^^nd of doubts and
fears, which frequently disturbed them, and d^^quieted their minds, is for ever
c^^h^ered.

May we not supp^ ^he sou^ and body of every saint, -- in mutual embraces, to
rejoice in each other, and triumph in the^r happy meeting again? And may not
one imagine the body to address the soul thus? O my soul, have we got together
again, after so long a separation! art thou come back into thine old
habitation, never more to remove! O joyful meeting! how unlike is our present
state to what our case was, when a separation was made betw^xt us at death! now
is our mourning turned into joy; the light and gladness sometimes sown, are now
sprung up; and there is perpetual spring in Immanuel's land. Blessed be the
day, in which I was united to thee; whose chief care was to get Christ in us
the hope of glory, and to make me a temple for his Holy Spirit. O blessed Soul,
which, in the time of our pilgrimage, kept thine eye on the land then afar off,
but now near at hand! thou tookest me up into secret places, and there made
me bow these knees before the Lord, that I might bear a part in our
humiliations before him: and now is the one time, and I am liftted up. Thou
did employ this tongue, in confessions, petitions and thanksgivings; which
henceforth shall be employed in praising for evermore. Thou made these
(sometimes) weeping eyes s^w that seed of tears, which is now sp^ung up in joy
that shall never end. I was happily beat down by thee, and kept in subjection;
while others pampered their flesh, and made their bellies their gods, to their
own destruction: and, now I gloriously arise, to take my place in the mansions
of glory; whilst they are dragged out of their graves, to be cast into fiery
flames. Now, my Soul, thou shall complain no more of a sick and pained body;
thou shall be no more clogged with weak and weary flesh: I shall now hold pace
with thee in the praises of our God for evermore. And may not the Soul say? O
happy day in which I return to dwell in that blessed Body, which was, and is,
and will be for ever, a member of Christ, a temple of the Holy Spirit! now
shall I be eternally knit to thee: the silver cord shall never be loosed more:
death shall ^e^er make another separation betwixt us. Arise then, my Body, and
come away: and let these eyes, which served to weep over my sins, behold now,
with j^y, the face of our glorious Redeemer; lo! this is our God, and we have
waited for him. Let these ears, which served to hear the word of life, in the
temple below, come now and near the hallelujahs in the temple above. Let these
feet, that carried me to the congregation of saints on earth, take their pl^ce
now among these who stand by. And let that tongue, which confessed Christ
before men, and used to be still dropping something to his commendation, join
the choir of the upper-house in his praises for evermore. Thou shall fast no
more, but keep an everlasting feast: thou shall weep no more, neither shall thy
countenance be over-clouded; but thou shall shine for ever, as a star in the
firmament. We took part together in the fight, come now, let us go together to
receive and wear the crown.

But, on the other hand, the wicked shall be raised by the power of Christ, as
a just Judge, who is to render vengeance to his enemies. The same divine power,
which shut up their souls in hell, and kept their bodies in a grave, as in a
prison, shall bring them forth, that soul and body together may receive the
dreadful sentence of eternal damna^^on, and be shut up together in the prison
of hell!

They shall come forth of their graves, with unspeakable horror and
consternation. They shall be dragged forth as so many malefactors out of a
dungeon, to be led to execution; crying to the mountains and to the rocks, to
fall on them, and hide them from the face of the Lamb. Fearful was the cry in
Egypt, that night the destroying angel went through, and sl^w their firstborn.
Dreadful were the shouts, at the earth opening her mou^h, and swallowing up
Da^han and Abiram, and all that appertained to them. What hideous crying then
must there be, when, at the sound of the l^st trumpet, the earth and sea shall
open their mouths, and cast forth all the wicked world, delivering them up to
the dreadful Judge? How w^ll they cry, roar, and tear themselves! how will the
j^vial companions weep and howl, and curse one another! how will the earth be
filled with their doleful shrieks and lamentations while they are pulled out
like sheep for the slaughter? They who, while they lived in the world, were
profane debauchees, covetous worldli^g^, or formal hypocrites, shall then, in
anguish of mind, wr^^g their hands, beat their breasts, and bitterly lament
their case: ro^ring forth their complaints, and calling themselves beasts,
fools and madmen, for having acted so mad a part in this life, and not having
believed what they then see. They were driven away in their wickedness at
death: and now all their sins rise with them, and, like so many serpents, twist
themselves about their wretched souls, and bodies too, which now have a
frightful meeting, after a long separation.

Then we may suppose the miserable body thus to accost the soul: Have thou
again found me, O mine enemy, my worst enemy, savage soul. more cruel than a
thousand tigers? Cursed be the day that ever we met. O that I had remained a
lifeless lump, rotten in the belly of my mother; and had never received sense,
life, nor motion. O that I had rather been the body of a toad or s^ro^nt, than
thy body; for then I had lain still, and had not seen this terrible day: If I
behoved to be thine, O that I had been thy ass, or one of thy dogs, rather than
thy body; for then would thou have taken more true care of me than thou
did. O cruel kindness! have thou thus hugged me to death, thus nourished me
to the slaughter? Is this the effect of thy tenderness for me? Is this what I
am to reap of thy pains and concern about me! What do riches and pleasure avail
now, when this fearful reckoning is come, of which thou had fair warning? O
cruel grave, why did then not close thy mouth upon me for ever? Why did
thou not hold fast thy prisoner? Why have thou shaken me out, while I lay
still, and was at rest? Cursed Soul wherefore did thou not abide in thy
place, wrapped up in flames of fire? Wherefore art thou come back to take me also
down to the bars of the pit? Thou madst me an instrument of unrighteousness;
and now I must be thrown into the fire. This tongue was by thee employed in
mocking at religion, cursing, swearing, lying, backbiting, and boasting; and
withheld from glorifying God: and now it must not have so much as a drop of
water to cool it in the flames. Thou did withdraw mine ears from hearing the
sermons which gave warning of this day. Thou foundest ways and means to stop
them from attending to seasonable exhortations, admonitions and reproofs. But
why did thou not stop them from hearing the sound of this dreadful trumpet?
Why do thou not now rove and fly away on the wings of imagination, thereby,
as it were, transporting me during these frightful transactions, as thou was
wont to do, when I was set down at sermons, communions, prayers, and godly
conferences: that I might now have as little sense of the one, as I formerly
had of the other? But ah! I must burn for ever, for thy love to thy lusts, thy
profanity, thy sensuality, thy unbelief and hypocrisy.

But may not the soul answer? Wretched and vile carcass am I now driven back
into thee! O that thou had lain for ever rotting in thy grave! Had I not
torment enough before? Must I be knit to thee again, that being joined together
as two dry sticks for the fire, the wrath of God may the more keenly burn us
up? It was by caring for you, I lost myself. It was your back and your belly,
and the gratifying of your senses, which ruined me. How often was I ensnared by
your ears? How often betrayed by your eyes? It was to spare you, that I
neglected opportunities of making peace with God, loitered away sabbaths, lived
in the neglect of prayer, went to the house of mirth, rather than to the house
of mourning; and that I chused to deny Christ, and forsake his cause and
interests in the world; and so am fallen a sacrifice to your cursed ease. When
at any time my conscience began to awake, and I was setting myself to think of
my sins, and the misery I have felt since we parted, and now feel; it was you
that diverted me from these thoughts, and drew me off to make provision for
thee, O wretched flesh. By your silken cords of fleshly lusts I was drawn to
destruction, over the belly of my light and conscience: but now they are turned
into iron chains, with which I am to be held under wrath for evermore. Ah!
wretched profits! ah! cursed pleasures! for which I must ly for ever in utter
darkness. But no complaints will then avail. O that men were wise, that they
understood this, that they would consider their latter end!

As to the Qualities with which the bodies of the saints shall be endowed at
the resurrection: the Apostle tells us, they shall be raised incorruptible,
glorious, powerful, and spiritual, 1 Cor. xv. 42, 43.44. It is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption. It is sown in dishonor, it is raised
in glory. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. It is sown a natural
body, it is raised a spiritual body.

First, The bodies of the saints shall be raised incorruptible They are now, as
the bodies of others, a very mass of corruption, ^ull of the seeds of diseases
and death; and when dead, become so nauseous, even to their dearest friends,
that they must be buried out of their sight, in a grave, there to rot and be
consumed: yea loathsome sores and diseases make some of them very unsightly,
even while alive. But at the resurrection they leave all the seeds of
corruption behind them, in the grave; and rise incorruptible, incapable of the
least indisposition. sickness, or sor^; and much more of dying. External
violences and inward causes of pain shall for ever cease: they shall feel it no
more: yea, they shall have an everlasting youth and vigor; being no more
subject to the d^s which age produced in this life.

Secondly, They shall be glorious bodies; not only beautiful, comely, and well
proportioned, but full of splendour and brightness. The most beautiful face, and
best proportioned body that now appears in the world i^ not to be armed in
comparison with the body of the me^nest saint at the resurrection; for then
shall the righteous shine forth as the sun, Matthew. xiii. 43. If there was a
dazzling glory on Moses's face, when he came down from the mount; and if
Stephen's face was as it had been the face of an angel, when he stood before
the council, how much more shall the faces of the saints be beautiful and
glorious, full of sweet agreeable majesty, when they have put off all
corruption, and shine as the sun? But observe, this beauty of the saints is not
restricted to their faces, but diffuses itself through their whole bodies: for
the whole body is raised in glory, and shall be fashioned like unto their Lord
and Savior's glorious body: in whose tran^figuration not only did his face
shine as the sun, but also his raiment was white as the light, Matthew. xvii. 2.
Whatever defects or deformities the bodies of the saints had, when laid in the
grave, occasioned by acci^ents in life, or arising from secret causes of their
formation in the womb, they shall rise out of the grave free of all these. But
suppose (...) of the Lord Jesus, the scars or prints of the wounds and bruises
some of the saints received while on earth, for his sake, (...) remain in their
bodies after the resurrection: likeas the print of the nails remained in the
Lord Jesus's body, after his resurrection; these marks will rather be badges of
distinction, and add to their glory, than d^^r^ct from their beauty. But
howsoever that be, surely Isaac's eye shall not then be dim nor will Jacob
halt; Leah shall not be tender eyed, nor M^phi^oeth l^ene of his legs For as
the goldsmith melts do in the old crazy ^essel, and casts it over again (...) a
new mold, bringing it forth with a new luster; so shall the v^le body which lay
d^ssolved in the grave, come forth at the resurrection in perfect beauty and
comely pr^p^rtion.

Thirdly, They shall be powerful and strong bodies. The strongest men on earth
being frail and mortal may justly be reckoned w^ak and feeble: in regard their
strength howsoever great, is quickly worn out and consumed. Many of the saints
now have bodies weaker than others; but "the feeble among them, (to allude to
Zech xii. 8.) at that day, shall be as David, and the house of David shall be
as God." A grave divine says, that one shall be stronger at the resurrection,
than an hundred, yea, than thousands are now. Certainly great, and vastly
great, must the strength of glorified bodies be, seeing they shall bear up
under an exceeding and eternal weight of glory. The mortal body is not at all
adapted to such a state. Do transports of joy occasion death, as well as
excessive grief does? And can it bear up under a weight of glory? Can it
subsist in union with a soul filled with heaven's raptures? Surely no. The
mortal body would sink under that load, and such a fill would make the earthen
pitcher to fly all in pieces. The Scripture has plainly told us, that flesh and
blood, (namely) in their present frail state, though it were the flesh and
blood of a giant, cannot inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. xv. 50. How strong
must the bodily eyes be, which, to the soul's eternal comfort, shall behold the
dazzling glory and splendour of the new J^rusalem; and steadfastly look at the
transcendent glory and brightness of the Man CHRIST, the Lamb, who is the light
of that city, the inhabitants whereof shall shine as the sun? The Lord of
heaven does now, in mercy, hold back the face of his throne, and spreads his
cloud upon it; that mortals may not be confounded with the rays of glory, which
shine forth from it, Job xxvi 9. But then the vail shall be removed, and they
made able to behold it, to their unspeakable joy. How strong must their bodies
be, who shall not rest night nor day; but be without intermission for ever
employed in the heavenly temple, to sing and proclaim the praises of God,
without weariness, which is a weakness incident to the frail mortal, but
incompetent to the glorified body!

Lastly, They shall be spiritual bodies. Not, that they shall be changed into
spirits; but they shall be spiritual, in respect of their spirit like qualities
and endowments. The body shall be, absolutely, subservient to the soul, subject
to it, and influenced by it; and therefore, no more a clog to its activity, nor
the animal appetites a snare to it. There will be no need to beat it down, nor
to drag it to the service of God. The soul, in this life, is so much influenced
by the body, that in Scripture-style, it is said to be carnal: but then, the
body shall be spiritual, readily serving the soul in the business of heaven;
and in that only, as if it had no more relation of earth, than a spirit. It
will have no further need of the now necessary supports of life namely, food
and raiment, and the like: They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more.
Rev. vii. 16. For in the resurrection, they neither marry, nor are given in
marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven. Then shall the saints be
strong without meat or drink; warm without clothes; ever in perfect h^alth
without medicine; and ever fresh and vigorous, though they shall never sleep,
but serve him night and day in his temple. Rev. vii. 15. They will need none of
these things, more than spirits do. They will be nimble and active as spirits,
and of a most refined constitution. The body that is now lumpish and heavy,
shall then be most sprightly. No such thing at melancholy shall be found to
make the heart heavy, and the spirits flag and sink. Where the carcass is,
there shall the saints, as so many eagles, be gat^ered together. I shall not
further dip into this matter: The day will declare it.

As to the qualities of the bodies of the wicked, at the resurrection, I find
the Scripture speaks but little of them. Whatever they may need, they shall not
get a drop of water to cool their tongues, Luke xvi. 24, 25. Whatever may be
said of their weakness it is certain they will be continued for ever in life;
that they may be ever dying: they shall bear up howsoever unwillingly, under
the load of God's wrath, and shall not faint away under it. The smoke of their
torment ascends up for ever and ever. And they have no rest day nor night.
Surely they shall not partake of the glory and beauty of the saints. All their
glory dies with them, and shall never rise again. Daniel tells us, they shall
awake to sham^, and everlasting contempt, chap. xii. 2. Shame follows sin, as
the shadow follows the body: but the wicked in this world walk in the dark,
and often under a disguise: nevertheless, when the Judge comes in flaming fire,
at the last day, they will be brought to the light; their mask will be taken
off, and the shame of their nakedness will clearly appear to themselves and
others, and fill their faces with confusion. Their shame will be too deep for
blushes but "all faces shall gather blackness," at that day, when they shall go
forth of their graves, as malefactors out of their prisons to execution; for
their resurrection is the resurrection of damnation. The greatest beauties, who
now pride themselves in their comeliness of body not regarding their deformed
souls, will then appear with ghastly countenances, a grim and death-like
visage. Their looks will be frightful, and they will be horrible spectacles,
coming forth of their graves like infernal furies out of the pit. They shall
rise also to everlasting contempt. They shall then be the most contemptible
creatures, filled with contempt from God* as vessels of dishonor: whatever
honorable uses they have been employed to, in this world; and filled also with
contempt from men. They will be most despicable in the eyes of the saints, even
of those saints, who gave them honor here; either for their high station, the
gifts of God in them or because they were of the same human nature with
themselves. But then shall their bodies be as so many loathsome carcases, which
they shall go forth and look upon with abhorrence: yea, they shall be an
abhorring unto all flesh, Isa. lxvi. 24. The word here rendered an abhorring is
the same which in the other text is rendered contempt; and Isaiah and David
point at one and the same thing, namely, the lothsomness of the wicked, at the
resurrection. They will be loathsome in the eyes of one another, The unclean
wretches were never so lovely to each other, as then they will be loathsome:
dear companions in sin will then be an abhorring, each one to his fellow: and
the wicked, great and honorable men, shall be no more regarded by their wicked
subjects, their servants, their slaves; than the mire in the streets.

USE I. Of comfort to the people of God. The doctrine of the resurrection is a
spring of consolation and joy unto you. Think on it, O believers, when ye are
in the house of mourning, for the loss of your godly relations or friends, that
ye sorrow not, even as others, which have no hope; for ye will meet again, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 13, 14. They are but lain down, to rest in their beds for a little
while, (Isa. lvii 2.) but in the morning of the resurrection they will awake
again, and come forth of their graves. The vessel of honor was but coarse, it
had much alloy of base met^l in it; it was too weak, too dim and inglorious,
for the upper-house, whatever luster it had in the lower one. It was cracked, it
was polluted; and therefore it behoved to be melted down that it may be refined
and fashioned more gloriously. Do but wait a while, and you shall see it come
forth out of the furnace of earth, vying with the stars in brightness; nay, as
the sun when he goes forth in his might. Have you laid your infant children in
the grave? You will see them again. Your God calls himself the God of your
seed; which, according to our Savior's exposition, secures the glorious
resurrection of the body. Wherefore let the covenant you embraced, for
yourself, and your babes now in the dust, comfort your hearts, in the joyful
expectation, that, by virtue thereof, they shall be raised up in glory; and
that, as being no more infants of days, but brought to a full and perfect
stature, as is generally supposed. Be not discouraged by reason of a weak and
sickly b^dy; there is a day coming, when thou shall be every whit whole. At the
resurrection, Timothy shall be no more liable to his often infirmities; his
body, that was weak and sickly, even in youth, shall be raised in power:
Lazarus shall be heal and sound, his body being raised incorruptible. And
although, perhaps, thy weakness will not allow thee, now, to go one furlong to
meet the Lord in public ordinances; yet the day comes, when thy body shall be
no more a clog to thee, but thou shall meet the Lord in the air, 1 Thessalonians. iv.
17. It will be with the saints coming up from the grave, as with the
Israelites, when they came out of Egypt, Psalm. cv. 37 There was not one feeb^e
p^son among their tribes. Have thou an uncomely, or deformed b^y? There is a
glory within, which will then s^ all right without; according to all the desire
of thine heart it shall rise a glorious, beautiful, handsome, and well
proportioned body. Its unc^ness, or deformi^ies may go with it to the grave,
but they shall not ^me back wi^h it. O, that these, who are now so desirous, to
be be^utiful and handsome, would not be too hasty to effect it with their
foolish and sinful arts; but wait and study the heavenly art of beautifying the
body, by endeavoring now to become all glorious within, with the graces of
God's Spirit! this would at length make them admirable and everlasting
beauties. Thou must indeed, O believer, grapple with death, and shall get the
first fall: but thou shall rise again, and come off victorious at last. Thou
must go down to the grave, but though it be thy long home, it will not be thine
everlasting home. Thou will not hear the voice of thy friends there; but thou
shall hear the voice of Christ there. Thou may be carried thither with
mourning, but thou shall come up from it rejoicing. Thy friends indeed will
leave thee there, but thy God will not. What God said to Jacob concerning his
going down to Egypt, (Genesis xlvi. 3, 4) he says to thee, anent thy going down to
the grave, Fear not to go down -- I will go down with thee -- and I will surely
bring thee up again. O solid comfort! O glorious hopes! Wherefore comfort
yourselves, and one another with these words, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 18.

USE II. Of terror to all unregenerate men. Ye who are yet in your natural
state, look at this piece of the eternal state; and consider what will be your
part in it, if ye be not in time brought into the state of grace. Think, O
sinner, on that day, when the trumpet shall sound, at the voice of which, the
bars of the pit shall be broken asunder, the doors of the grave shall fly open,
the devouring depths of the sea shall throw up their dead, the earth cast forth
hers; and death every where in the excess of astonishment, shall let go its
prisoners; and thy wretched soul and body shall be reunited, to be sisted
before the tribunal of God. Then, if thou had a thousand worlds at thy
disposal, thou would gladly give them all away, upon condition thou might
ly still in thy grave, with the hundredth part of that ease, wherewith thou
have sometimes lain at home, on the Lord's day: or (if that cannot be obtained)
that thou might be but a spectator of the transactions of that day; as thou
have been at some solemn occasions, and rich gospel feasts: or (if even that is
not to be purchased) that a mountain or a rock might fall on thee, and cover
thee from the face of the Lamb. Ah! how are men bewitched, thus to trifle away
the precious time of life, in (almost) as little concern about death, as if
they were like the beasts that perish! some will be telling where their corpse
must be laid; while yet they have not seriously considered, whether their
graves shall be their beds, where they shall awake with joy in the morning of
the resurrection; or their prisons, out of which they shall be brought to
receive the fearful sentence. Remember, now is your seed-time; and as ye sow,
ye shall reap. God's seed-time begins at death; and at the resurrection, the
bodies of the wicked, that were sown full of sins, that ly down with them in
the dust, (Job xx 11.) shall spring up again, sinful, wretched, and vile. Your
bodies, which are now instruments of sin, the Lord will lay aside for the fire,
at death; and bring them forth for the fire, at the resurrection. That body,
which is not now employed in God's service, but is abused by uncleanness and
lasciviousness, will then be brought forth in all its vileness, thenceforth to
lodge with unclean spirits. The body of the drunkard shall then stagger by
reason of the wine of the wrath of God, poured out to him, and poured into him,
without mixture. These, who now please themselves in their revellings, will
reel to and fro at another rate; when, instead of their songs and music, they
shall hear the sound of the last trumpet. Many toil their bodies for worldly
gain, who will be loath to distress them for the benefit of their souls; by
labor, unreasonably hard, they will quite disfit them for the service of God;
and, when they have done, will reckon it a very good reason for shifting duty,
that they are already tired out with other business: but the day comes, when
they will be made to abide a yet greater stress. They will go several miles for
back and belley, who will not go half the way for the good of their immortal
souls; they will be sickly and unable on the Lord's day, who will be tolerably
well all the rest of the week. But when that trumpet sounds, the dead shall
find their feet, and none shall be missing in that great congregation. When the
bodies of the saints shine as the sun, fearful will the looks of their
persecutors be. Fearful will their condition be, who sometimes shut up the
saints in nasty prisons, stigmatized, burned them to ashes, hanged them, and
stuck up their heads and hands in public places, to fright others from the
ways of righteousness, which they suffered for. Many faces now fair, will then
gather blackness. They shall be no more admired and caressed for that beauty,
which has a worm at the root, that will cause it to issue in lothsomness and
deformity. Ah! what is that beauty, under which there lurks a monstrous,
deformed, and graceless heart? What but a sorry paint, a slight varnish; which
will leave the body so much the more ugly, before that flaming-fire, in which
the Judge shall be revealed from heaven, taking vengeance on them that know not
God, and that obey not the gospel, 2 Thessalonians. ^. 7, 8. They shall be stripped of
all their ornaments, and not have a rag to cover their nakedness: but their
carcases shall be an abhorring to all flesh, and serve as a foil to set off the
beauty and glory of the righteous, and make it appear the brighter.

Now is the time to secure, for yourselves, a part in the resurrection of the
just. The which if ye would do, unite with Jesus Christ by faith, rising
spiritually from sin, and glorifying God with your bodies He is the
resurrection and the life, John xi. 25. If your bodies be members of Christ,
temples of the Holy Ghost; they shall certainly arise in glory. Get into this
ark now, and ye shall come forth with joy into the new world. Rise from your
sins: cast away these grave-clothes, putting off your former lusts. How can one
imagine, that these, who continue dead while they live, shall come forth, at
the last day, unto the resurrection of life? But that will be the privilege of
all those, who having first consecrated their souls and bodies to the Lord by
faith, do glorify him with their bodies, as well as their souls; living and
acting to him, and for him, yea, and suffering for him too, when he calls them
to it.

HEAD IV. The General JUDGMENT.
MATTHEW. xxv. 31, 32, 33, 34, 41, 46. When the Son of Man shall come in his
Glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of
his Glory:

And before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one
from another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats:

And he shall set the Sheep on his right Hand, but the Goats on the left.

Then shall the King say unto them on his right Hand, Come ye blessed, etc.

-- Unto them on the left Hand, Depart from me ye cursed, etc.

And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the Righteous into
Life eternal.


THE dead being raised, and these found alive at the coming of the Judge,
changed, follows the General Judgment, plainly and awfully described in this
portion of Scripture; in which we shall take notice of the following
particulars. (1.) The coming of the Judge, When the Son of man shall come in
his glory, etc. The Judge is Jesus Christ, the Son of man; the same, by whose
almighty power, as he is God, the dead will be raised. He is also called the
King, ver. 34. The judging of the world being an act of the Royal Mediator's
kingly office. He will come in glory; glorious in his own Person, and having a
glorious retinue, even all the holy angels with him, to minister unto him at
this great solemnity. (2.) The Judge's mounting the tribunal. He is a King, and
therefore it is a throne, a glorious throne, shall sit upon the throne of his
glory, ver. 31. (3.) The compearance of the parties. These are all nations; all
and every one, sma^l and great, of whatsoever nation, who ever were, are, or
shall be on the face of the earth; all shall be gathered before him; sisted
before his tribunal. (4.) The sorting of them: He shall separate the elect
Sheep, and reprobate goats, setting each party by themselves: as a Shepherd who
feeds his sheep and goats together all the day, separates them at night, ver.
32. The godly he will set on his right hand, as the most honorable place; the
wicked on the left, ver 33. Yet so as they shall be both before him, ver. 32.
It seems to be an allusion to a custom in the Jewish courts, in which, one s^t
at the right hand of the Judge, who wrote the sentence of absolution; another
at their left, who wrote the sentence of condemnation. (5) The sentencing of
the parties, and that according to their works; the righteous being absolved,
and the wicked condemned, ver 34, 41. Lastly, The execution of both sentences,
in the driving away of the wicked into hell, and carrying the godly to heaven,
ver. 49.

DOCTRINE. There shall be a general Judgment.
This doctrine I shall, (1.) confirm, (2.) explain: and (3.) apply.

I. For confirmation of this great truth, that there shall be a general
judgment.

First, It is evident from plain Scripture-testimonies. The world has, in all
ages been told of it. Enoch, before the flood, taught it in his prophecy,
related Jude, ver. 14, 15. Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his
saints, to execute judgment upon all, etc. Daniel describes it, chap. vii. 9,
10. I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit,
whose garments was white as snow, and the hair of his head like pure wool: his
throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire. A fiery stream
issued and came forth from before him: thousand thousands stood before him: the
judgment was set, and the books were opened. The Apostle is very express, Acts
xvii. 31. He has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained. See Matthew xvi. 27. 2 Cor. v.
10. 2 Thessalonians. i 7, 8, 9, 10. Rev. xx. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. God has not only said
it, but he has sworn it, Romans xiv. 10, 11. We must all stand before the
judgment seat of Christ: For it is written, As I live, says the Lord, every
knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God. So that the truth
of God is most solemnly plighted for it.

Secondly, The rectoral justice and goodness of God, the sovereign Ruler of the
world, do necessarily require it, inasmuch as they require its being well with
the righteous, and ill with the wicked. Howbeit, we often now see wickedness
exalted* while truth and righteousness fall in the streets; piety oppressed,
while profanity and irrelig^n do triumph. This is so very ordinary, that every
one, who s^cerely embraces the way of holiness, must, and does lay his account
with the loss of all he has, which the world can take away from him. Luke xiv.
26. If any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be
my disciple. But it is consistent with the justice and goodness of God, that
the affairs of men should always cuntinue in this state, which they appear in,
from one generation to another; but that every man be rewarded according to his
works: and since that is not done in this life, there must be a judgment to
come: Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them
that trouble you: and to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, 2 Thessalonians. i. 6, 7. There will be a day, in
which the tables will be turned; and the wicked shall be called to an account
for all their sins, and suffer the due punishment of them; and the pious shall
be the prosperous; for, as the Apostle argues for the happy resurrection of the
saints, If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable, 1 Cor xv. 19. It is true, God sometimes punishes the wicked, in
this life; that men may know, he is a God that judges in the earth: but yet
much wickedness remains unpunished, and undiscovered; to be a pledge of the
judgment to come. If none of the wicked were punished here, they would conclude
that God had utterly forsaken the earth; if all of them were punished in this
life, men would be apt to think, there is no after-reckoning. Therefore, in the
wisdom of God, some are punished now, and some not. Sometimes the Lord smites
sinners, in the very act of sin; to show unto the world, that he is witness to
all their wickedness* and will call him to an account for it. Sometimes he
delays long, ere he strike; that he may discover to the world, that he forgets
not men^ ill deeds, though he does not presently punish them. Besides all this,
the sins of many do out live them; and the impure fountain, by them opened,
runs long after they are dead and gone. As in the case of Jeroboam the first
king of the ten tribes; whose sin did run on all along unto the end of that
unhappy kingdom, 2 Kings xvii. 22. The children of Israel walked in all the
sins of Jeroboam, which he did; they departed not from them: Ver. 23. Until the
Lord removed Israel out of his sight.

Thirdly, The resurrection of Christ is a certain proof, that there shall be a
day of judgment. This argument Paul uses, to con^ince the Atheniens: says he,
He has given assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead,
Acts xvii. 31. The Judge is already named, his patent written and sealed, yea,
and rea^ before all men, in his rising again from the dead. Hereby God has
given assurance of it. (or offered faith, Marg.) He has, by raising Christ
from the dead, exhibited his credentials as Judge of the world. When, in the
days of his humiliation, he was sifted before a tr^ arraigned, accused and
condemned of men; he plainly told them of thi^ judgment, and that he himself
would be the Judge. Matthew xxvi. 64. Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man
sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. And now
that he was raised from the dead, though condemned as a blasphemer on this very
head; is it not an undeniable proof, from heaven, of the truth of what he
asserted? Moreover, this was one of the great ends of Christ's death and
resurrection: For to this end Christ both died and rose, and revived, that he
might be the Lord (i.e. The Lord Judge, as is evident from the context) both of
the dead and of the living, Romans xiv. 9.

Lastly, Every man bears about with him a witness to this within his own
breast, Romans ii. 15. Which show the work of the law written in their hearts,
their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while
accusing, or else excusing one another. There is a tribunal erected within
every man, where conscience is accuser, witness, and judge, binding over the
sinner to the judgment of God. This fills the most profligate wretches with
horror, and inwardly stings them, upon the commission of some atrocious crime;
in effect summoning them to answer for it, before the the Judge of the quick
and dead. And this it does, even when the crime is secret, and hid from the
eyes of the world It reaches those whom the laws of men cannot reach, because
of their power or craft. When men have fled from the judgment of their
fellow creatures; yet, go where they will, conscience, as the supreme Judge's
officer, still keeps hold of them, reserving them in its chains to the judgment
of the great day. And whether they escape punishment from men, or fall by the
hand of public justice, when they perceive death's approach, they hear from
within, of this after-reckoning; being constrained to hearken thereto, in these
the most serious minutes of their life. If there be some, in whom nothing of
this does appear, we have no more ground thence to conclude against it, than we
have to conclude, that because some men do not groan, therefore they have no
pain; or that dying is a mere jest, because there have been, who have seemed to
make little else of it. A good face may be put upon an ill conscience: and the
more hopeless men's case is, they reckon it the more their interest to make no
reflections on their state and case. But every one, who will consult himself
seriously, shall find in himself the witness to the judgment to come. Even the
heathens wanted not a notion of it, though mixed with fictions of their own.
Hence, though some of the Athenians, when they heard of the resurrection of the
dead, mocked, Acts xvii. 32. yet there is no account of their mocking, when
they heard of the general judgment, ver 31.

II. For explication, the following particulars may serve to give some view of
the nature and transactions of that great day.

First, God shall judge the world by Jesus Christ. He will judge the world in
righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained, Acts xvii. 31. The Psalmist
tells us, that God is judge himself, Psalm. I. 6. The holy blessed Trinity,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is Judge, in effect of ju^^ at a^t^ority,
dominion, and power: but the Son incarnate is the Judge, in respect of
dispensation, and special exercise (...) power. The judgment shall be exercised
or performed (...) as the Royal Mediator; for he has a delegated power of
judgment from the Father, as his servant, his King, whom he has set upon the
holy hill of Zion, (Psalm. ii 6.) and to whom he has com^^^ all judgment, John
v. 22. This is a part of the Mediator's exaltation, given him, in consequence
of his voluntary humiliation, Philip ii. 8, 9, 10. He humbled himself, and
become obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God has
also highly exalted him, and given him a name, which is above every name,
(i.e.) power and authority over all, to wit) That at (or in) the name of Jesus
(not, the name of Jesus; that is not the name above every name, being common to
others, as to Justus, Col. iv. 11. and Joshua, Heb iv. 8) every knee shall how.
The which is explained by the Apostle himself, of standing before the
judgment seat of Christ, Romans xiv.10, 11. So he who was judged and condemned of
men, shall be the Judge of men and angels.

Secondly, Jesus Christ the Judge, descending from heaven into the air, (1 Thessalonians. iv. 16, 17) shall come in the clouds of heaven, with power and great
glory, Matthew. xxiv. 30. This his coming will be a mighty surprise to the world,
which will be found in deep security: fool^sh virgins sleeping, and the wise
slumbering. There will then be much luxury and debauchery in the world, little
sobriety and watchfulness; a great throng of business, but a great scarcity of
faith and holiness. As it was in the days of Noah, so also shall it be in days
of the Son of man. They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were
given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark: and the flood
came and destroyed them all. Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot: they
did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded. --
Even thus shall it be in the day, when the Son of man is revealed. Luke xvii.
26, 27, 28, 30. The coming of the Judge will surprise some at markets, buying
and selling; others at table, eating and drinking, and making merry: others
busy with their new plantings; some building new houses; nay, some's
wedding day will be their own, and the world's judgment-day. But the Judge
comes! the markets are marred; the buyer throws away what he has bought; the
seller casts down his money: they are raised from the table, and their mirth is
extinguished in a moment; though the tree be set in the earth, the gardner may
not stay to cast the earth about it; the workmen throw away their tools, when
the house is half built, and the owner regards it no more; the bridegroom,
bride, and guests must leave the wedding-feast, and appear before the tribunal:
for, Behold he ^^^eth with clouds, and every eye shall see him, Rev. i. 7. He
shall come most gloriously: for he will come in the glory of his Father, with
the holy angels, Mark viii. 38. When he came in the flesh, to die for sinners,
he laid aside the robes of his glory, and was despised and rejected of men: but
when he comes again, to judge the world, such shall be his visible glory and
majesty, that it shall cast an eternal vail over all earthly glory, and fill
his greatest enemies with fear and dread. Never had prince, or potentate in the
world, such a glorious train, as will accompany this Judge: all the holy angels
shall come with him, for his honor and service. Then he, who was led to the
cross with a band of soldiers, will be gloriously attended to the place of
judgment, by (not a multitude of the heavenly host, but) the whole host of
angels; all his holy angels, say the text.

Thirdly, At the coming of the Judge, the summons are given to the parties, by
the sound of the last trumpet; at which the dead are raised, and these found
alive changed; of which before, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 16, 17. O loud trumpet, that shall
be heard at once, in all corners of the earth, and of the sea? O wonderful
voice, that will not only disturb those who sleep in the dust; but effectually
awaken, rouse them out of their sleep, and raise them from death! Were trumpets
sounding now, drums beating, furious soldiers crying and killing men, women and
children running and shrieking, the wounded groaning and dying; those who are
in the graves, would have no more disturbance, than if the world were in most
profound peace. Yea, were stormy winds casting down the lofty oaks, the the
seas roaring and swallowing up the ships, the most dreadful thunders going
along the heavens, lightnings everywhere flashing, the earth quaking,
trembling, opening, and swallowing up whole cities, and burying multitudes at
once; the dead would still enjoy a perfect repose, and sleep soundly in the
dust; though their own dust should be thrown out of its place. But at the sound
of this trumpet they shall all awake. The morning is come, they can sleep no
longer; the time of the dead, that they must be judged: they must get out of
their graves, and appear before the Judge.

Fourthly, The Judge shall sit down on the tribunal; he shall sit on the throne
of his glory. Sometime he stood before a tribunal on earth, and was condemned
as a malefactor: then shall he sit on his own tribunal, and judge the world.
Sometime he hung upon the cross, covered with shame: then he shall sit on a
throne of glory. What this throne shall be, whether a bright cloud, or what
else, I shall not inquire. Our eyes will give an answer to that question at
length. John saw a great white throne, Rev. xx. 11. His throne (says Daniel)
was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire, chap. vii. 9.
Whatever it be, doubtless it shall be a throne glorious beyond expression; and,
in comparison with which, the most glorious throne on the earth is but a seat
on a dunghill; and the sight of it will equally surprise kings, who sit on
thrones in this life, and beggars, who sat in dunghills. It will be a throne,
for stateliness and glory, suited to the quality of him who shall sit on it
Never had a judge such a throne, and never had a throne such a judge on it.

Leaving the discovery of the nature of the throne until that day, it concerns
us more nearly to consider what a Judge will sit upon it; a point in which we
are not left to uncertain conj^ctures. The Judge on the throne will be (1.) A
visible Judge, visible to our bodily eyes, Rev. i. 7. Every eye shall see him
When God give the law on m^n at Sinai, the people saw no similitude, only they
heard a voice: but when he calls the world to an account, how they have
observed his law; the man Christ being Judge, we shall see our Judge with our
eyes, either to our eternal comfort or confusion; according to the
entertainment we give him now. That very body which was crucified without the
gates of Jerusalem, betwixt two thieves, shall then be seen on the throne,
shining in glory. We now see him symbolically in the sacrament of his supper:
the saints see him by the eye of faith: then, all shall see him with these eyes
now in their heads. (2) A Judge having full authority and power, to render unto
every one according to his works. Christ, as God, has authority of himself;
and as Mediator, he has a judicial power and authority, which his Father has
invested him with, according to the covenant betwixt the Father and the Son,
for the redemption of sinners. And his divine glory will be a light, by which
all men shall see clearly to read his commission for this great and honorable
employment. All power is given unto him in heaven and in earth, Matthew. xxviii
18. He has the keys of hell and of death, Rev. i. 18. There can be no appeal
from his tribunal: sentence once, past there, must stand for ever; there is no
reversing of it. All appeals are from an inferior court to a superior one; but
when God gives sentence against a man, where can he find a higher court to
bring his process too? This judgment is the Mediator's judgment; and therefore
the last judgment. If the Intercessor be against us, who can be for us? If
Christ condemn us, who will absolve us? (3.) A Judge of infinite wisdom. His
eyes will pierce (...) and ci^^r^y discern, the most intricate cases. His
omniscience qualified him for judging of the most retired thoughts, as well as
of words and works. The most subtle sinner, shall not be able to ^^w him, nor,
by any artful management, to palate the crime. He is the (...) of hearts, to
whom nothing can be hid or perpl^xed, but all things are naked and open unto
his eyes, Heb. v. 13. 14.) A most just Judge; a Judge of perfect integrity. He
is the righteous Judge (2 Timothy iv. 8) and his throne, a great white throne (Rev
xx 11) from whence no judgment shall proceed, but w^^t ^s most pure and
sootless. The Thebans printed justice bl^nd, and without hand^: for judges
ought not to respect persons, nor take bribes. The Are^p^gites judged in the
dark; that they might not reg^rd who spok^, b^t what was spoken. With the Judge
on this throne, there will be no respect of persons; he will neither regard the
persons of the rich, nor of the poor; but just judgment shall go forth in every
one's cause. Lastly, An omnipotent Judge, able to put his sentence in
execution. The united force of devils and wicked men will be altogether unable
to withstand him. They cannot retard the execution of the sentence against
them, one moment; far less can they stop it altogether, Thousand thousands (of
angels) minister unto him, Dan. vii. 10. And, by the breath of his mouth, he
can drive the cursed herd whither he pleases.

Fifthly, The parties shall compear. These are men and devils. Although these
last, the fallen angels, were, from the first moment of their sinning,
subjected to the wrath of God, and were cast down to hell; and wheresoever they
go, they carry their hell about with them: yet, it is evident, that they are
reserved unto judgment, (2 Pet. ii. 14.) namely, unto the judgment of the great
day, Jude 6. And then they shall be solemnly and publicly judged, 1 Cor vi. 3.
Know ye not that we shall judge angels? At that day they shall answer for their
trade of sinning and tempting to sin, which they have been carrying on from the
beginning. Then many a hellish brat, which Satan has laid down at the saints
door, but not adopted by them, shall be laid at the door of the true father of
it, that is, the devil. And he shall receive the due reward of all the
dishonor he has done to God, and of all the mischief he has done to men. Those
wicked spirits now in chains (though not in such strait custody, but that they
go about like roaring lions, seeking whom they may devour) shall then receive
their final sentence, and be shut up in their den, namely, in the prison of
hell; where they shall be held in extreme and unspeakable torment through all
eternity, Rev.xx. 10. And the devil that decieved them, was cast into the lake
of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be
tormented day and night for ever and ever. In prospect of which, the devils
said to Christ, Art thou come hither to torment us before the time? Matthew.
viii. 29.

But what we are chiefly concerned to take notice of, is the case of men at
that day. All men must compear before this tribunal. All of each sex, and of
every age, quality and condition; the great and small, noble and ignoble; none
are excepted. Adam and Eve, with all their sons and daughters; every one who
has had, or, to the end of the world, shall have a living soul united to a
body; will make up this great congregation. Even those, who refused to come to
the throne of grace, shall be forced to the bar of justice: for there can be no
hiding from the all-seeing Judge, no flying from him who is present
everywhere, no resisting of him who is armed with almighty power. We must all
stand before the judgment seat of Christ, 2 Cor v. 10. Before him shall be
gathered all nations, says the text. This is to be done by the ministry of
angels. By them shall the elect be gathered, Mark xiii. 27. Then shall he send
his angels, and shall gather together his elect from the four winds. And they
also shall gather the reprobate, Matthew. xiii. 40, 41 So shall it be in the end
of this world, The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall
gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity.
From all corners of the world shall the inhabitants thereof be gathered into
the place where he shall set his throne for judgment.

Sixthly, There shall be a separation made betwixt the righteous and the
wicked; the fair company of the elect sheep being set on Christ's right hand,
and the reprobate goats on his left. There is no necessity to wait for this
separation, till the trial be over; since the parties do rise out of their
graves, with plain outward marks of distinction, as was cleared before The
separation seems to be effected by that double gathering before mentioned; the
one of the elect, Mark xiii. 27. the other of them that do iniquity, Matthew.
xiii. 41. The elect, being caught up together in the clouds, meet the Lord in
the air, (1 Thessalonians iv. 17.) and so are set on his right hand: and the reprobate
left on the earth (Matthew. xxv. 40) upon the Judge's left hand Here is now a
total separation of two parties, who were always opposite to each other, in
their principles, aims, and manner of life; who, when together, were a burden
the one to the other, under which the one groaned, and the other raged: but now
they are freely parted, never to come together any more. The iron and clay
(allude to Daniel ii. 41, 43.) which could never mix, are quite separated: the
one being drawn up into the air, by the attractive virtue of the stone cut out
of the mountain, namely, Jesus Christ: the other left upon its earth, to be
trod under foot.

Now let us look to the right hand, and there we will see a glorious company of
saints, shining as so many stars in their orbs: and with a cheerful countenance
beholding him, who sits upon the throne. Here will be two wonderful sights,
which the world used not to see. (1.) A great congregation of saints, in which
not so much as one hypocrite, There was a bloody Cain in Adam's family, a
cursed Ham in Noah's family, in the ark; a treacherous Judas, in Christ's own
family: but in that company shall be none but sealed ones, members of Christ,
having all one Father. And this is a sight reserved for that day. (2.) All the
godly upon one side. Seldom or never do the saints on earth make such a
harmony, but there are some jarring strings among them. It is not to be
expected, that men who see but in part, though they be all going to one city,
will agree as to every step in the way: no, we need not look for it in this
state of imperfection. But at that day, Paul and Barnabas shall meet in peace
and unity, though once the contention was so sharp between them, that they
departed asunder, the one from the other. Acts xv. 39. There shall be no more
divisions, no more separate standing, amongst those who belong to Christ. All
the godly of the different parties shall then be upon one side; seeing,
whatever were their differences in lesser things, while in the world, yet, even
then, they met and concentred all in one Lord Jesus Christ, by a (...) and
lively faith, and in the one way of holiness or practical godliness. And the
naughty hypocrites, of whatsoever party, shall be led forth with the workers of
iniquity.

Look to the left hand, and there you will see the cursed goats (all the wicked
ones from Cain to the last ungodly person, who shall be in the world) gathered
together into one most miserable congregation. There are many assemblies of the
wicked now: then there shall be but one. But all of them shall be present
there, brought together as one herd for the slaughter, bellowing and roaring.
weeping and howling for the miseries come, and that are coming to them. (And
remember thou shall not be a mere spectator, to look at these two so different
companies; but must thyself take thy place in one of the two, and shall share
with the company* whatever hand it be upon.) These who now abhor no society so
much, as that of the saints, would then be glad to be allowed to get in among
them, though it were but to ly among their feet. But then not one tare shall be
found with the wheat; he will thoroughly purge his floor. Many of the right hand
men of this world will be left hand men in that day. Many, who must have the
door and the right hand of these, who are better than they, (if the righteous
be more excellent than his neighbor) shall then be turned to the left hand, as
most despicable wretches O how terrible will this separation be to the ungodly!
how dreadful will this gathering them together into one company be! what they
will not believe, they will then see, namely, that but few are saved. They
think it enough now, to be neighbor like, and can securely follow the
multitude: but the multitude on the left hand will yield them no comfort How
will it sting the ungodly Christian, to see himself set on the same hand with
Turks and Pagans! how will it gall men to find themselves standing, profane
Protestants with idolatrous Papists; praying people with their profane
neighbors who mocked at religious exercises: formal professors strangers to
the new birth and the power of godliness, with persecutors! now there are many
opposite societies in the world, but then all the ungodly shall be in one
society. And how dreadful will the faces of companions in sin be to one another
there! what doleful shrieks, when the whoremonger and his whore shall meet;
when the drunkards, who have had many a jovial day together, shall see one
another in the face: when the husband and wife, the parents and children, the
master and servants and neighbors, who have been shares and stumbling blocks
to one another, to the ruin of their own souls, and these of their relatives,
shall meet again in that miserable society! Then will there be curses instead
of salutations; and tearing of themselves, and raging against one another,
instead of the wonted embraces

Seventhly, The parties shall be tried. The trial cannot be difficult, in
regard the Judge is omniscient, and nothing can be hid from him. But, that his
righteous judgment may be made evident to all, he will set the hidden things of
darkness in clearest light at that trial, 1 Cor iv. 5.

Men shall be tried, First, Upon their works: for God shall bring every work
into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be
evil, Eccles. xii 14. The Judge will try every man's conversation, and set his
deeds, done in the body, with all the circumstances thereof, in a true light.
Then will many actions, commended and applauded of men, as good and just, be
discovered to have been evil and abominable, in the sight of God: and many
works, now condemned by the world, will be approven and commended by the great
Judge, as good and just. Secret things will be brought to light: and what was
hid from the view of the world, shall be laid open. Wickedness, which has kept
its lurking-place in spite of all human search, will then be brought forth to
the glory of God, and the confusion of impenitent sinners who hid it. The world
appears now very vile, in the eyes of those who are exercised to godliness: but
it will then appear a thousand times more vile, when that, which is done of men
in secret, comes to be discovered. Every good action shall then be remembered;
and the hidden religion and good works, most industriously concealed by the
saints, from the eyes of men, shall no more ly hid: for though the Lord will
not allow men to proclaim every man his own goodness; yet he himself will do it
in due time. Secondly, Their words shall be judged, Matthew. xii. 37. For by thy
words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned. Not a
word spoken for God, and his cause in the world, from love to himself, shall be
forgotten. They are all kept in remembrance, and shall be brought forth as
evidences of faith, and of an interest in Christ, Mal. iii. 16. Then they that
feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard
it: and a book of remembrance was written before him. Ver. 17. And they shall
be mine, says the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels. And the
tongue, which did run at random, shall then confess to God: and the speaker
shall find it to have been followed, and every word noted that dropped from his
unsancti^ied lips. Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof in the day of judgment, Matthew. xii. 36. And if they shall give
account of idle words, that is, words spoken to no good purpose, neither to
God's glory, one's own, or one's neighbor's good: how much more shall men's
wicked words, their sinful oaths, curses, lies, filthy communications, and
bitter words be called over again, that day? The tongues of many shall then
fall upon themselves, and ruin them. Thirdly, Men's thoughts shall be brought
into judgment: the Judge "will make manifest the counsel of the hearts," 1 Cor.
iv. 5. Thoughts go free from man's judgment, but not from the judgment of the
heart-searching God, who knows men's thoughts, without the help of signs to
discern them by. The secret springs of men's actions will then be brought to
light; and the sins, that never came further than the heart, will then be laid
open. O what a figure will man's corrupt nature make, when his (...) is turned
out, and all his speculative impurities are exposed! the rottenness that is
within many a whited sepulcher, the speculative filthiness and wantonness,
murder and malignity, now lurking in the hearts of men, as in the chamber of
imagery, will then be discovered; and what good was in the hearts of any, shall
no more lie concealed. If it was in their hearts to build a house to the Lord,
they shall hear, that they did well that it was in their heart.

This trial will be righteous and impartial, accurate and searching, clear and
evident. The Judge is the righteous Judge, and he will do right to every one.
He has a just balance for good and evil actions, and for honest and false
hearts. The fig-leave cover of hypocrisy will then be blown aside, and the
hypocrite's nakedness will appear; as when the Lord came to judge Adam and Eve,
in the cool (or, as the word is, in the wind) of the day, Genesis iii.8. The fire
(which tries things most exquisitely) shall try every man's work, of what sort
it is, 1 Cor. iii 13. Man's judgment is oft-times perplexed and confused; but
here the whole process shall be clear and evident, as written with a sunbeam.
It shall be clear to the Judge, to whom no case can be intricate; to the
parties, who shall be convinced, Jude 15. And the multitudes on both sides,
shall see the judge is clear when he judges: for then the heavens shall
declare his righteousness, in the audience of all the world; and so it shall be
universally known, Psalm. l. 6.

On these accounts it is, that this trial is held out in the scripture under
the notion of opening of books; and men are said to be judged out of those
things written in the books, Rev. xx 12. The Judge of the world, who infallibly
knows all things, has no need of books to be laid before him, to prevent
mistake in any point of law or fact: but the expression points at his
proceeding, as most nice, accurate, just, and well grounded, in every step of
it. Now, there are four books that shall be opened in that day.

First, The book of God's remembrance or omniscience, Mal. iii. 19. This is an
exact record of every man's state, thoughts, words, and deeds, good or evil: it
is, as it were, a day-book, in which the Lord puts down all that passes in
men's hearts, lips, and lives, and it is a-filling up every day that one lives.
In it are recorded men's sins and good works, secret and open, with all their
circumstances. Here are registered all their privileges, mercies temporal and
spiritual, some-time laid to their hand; the checks, admonitions, and rebukes,
given by teachers, neighbors, afflictions, and men's own consciences; every
thing in its due order. This book will serve only as a libel in respect of the
ungodly; but it will be for another use in respect of godly, namely, for a
memorial of their good. The opening of it is the Judge's bringing to light what
is written in it; the reading as it were, of the libel and memorial,
respectively, in their hearing.

Secondly, The book of conscience will be opened, and shall be at a thousand
witnesses to prove the fact, Romans ii. 1^. Which show the work of the law
written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness. Conscience is a
censor going with every man whithersoever he goes, taking an account of his
deeds done in the body, and, as it were noting them in a book; the which being
opened, will be found a double of the former, so far as it relates to one's own
state and case Much is written in it, which cannot be read now; the writing of
conscience being in many cases, like to that which is made with the juice of
lemons, not to be read, till it be held before the fire: but then men shall
read it clearly and distinctly: the fire which is to try every man's work, will
m^ke the book of conscience legible in every point. Though the book be sealed now
(the conscience blind, dumb and deaf) the seals will then be broken, and the
book opened. There shall be no more a weak or misinformed conscience among
those on the right hand, or these on the left. There shall not be a silent
conscience, and far less a scared conscience amongst all the ungodly crew: but
their consciences shall be most quick-sighted, and most lively, in that day.
None shall then call good evil, or evil good. Ignorance of what sin is, and
what things are sins, will have no place among them: and the subtle reasonings
of men, in favor of their lusts, will then be for ever baffled by their own
consciences. None shall have the favor (if I may so speak) of lying under the
soft cover of delusion: but they shall all be convicted by their conscience.
Nill they, will they, they shall look on this book, read and be confounded, and
stand speechless, knowing that nothing is charged upon them by mistake; since
this is a book, which was always in their own custody. Thus shall the Judge
make every man see himself, in the glass of his own conscience, which will make
quick work.

Thirdly, The book of the Law shall be opened. This book is the standard and
rule, by which is known what i^ right, and what is wrong; as also, what
sentence is to be passed accordinly, on these who are under it. As to the
opening of this book, in its statutory part, which shows what is sin, and what
is duty; it falls in with the opening of the book of conscience. For conscience
is set, by the Sovereign Lawgiver, in every man's breast, to be his private
teacher, to show him the law, and his private pastor, to make application of
the same; and, at that day, it will be perfectly fit for its office; so that
the conscience, which is most stupid now, shall then read to the man, most
accurate, but dreadful lectures, on the law. But what seems (mainly at least)
pointed at, by the opening of this book, is the opening of that part of it,
which determines the reward of men's works. Now, the law promises life, upon
perfect obedience: but none can be found on the right hand, or on the left, who
will pretend to that, when once the book of conscience is opened, it threatens
death upon disobedience, and will effectually bring it upon all under its
dominion. And this part of the book of the law, determining the reward of men's
works, is opened, only to show what must be the portion of the ungodly, and
that there they may read their sentence before it be pronounced. But it is not
opened for the sentence of the saints; for no sentence absolving a sinner could
ever be drawn out of it. The law promises life, not as it is a rule of
actions, but as a covenant of works: And therefore innocent man could not have
demanded life upon his obedience, till the law was reduced into the form of a
covenant; as was shown before. But the saints having been, in this life,
brought under a new covenant, namely, the covenant of grace, were dead to the
law, as a covenant of works, and it was dead to them. Wherefore, as they shall
not have any fears of death from it, so they can have no hopes of life from it,
since they are not under the law, but under grace, Romans vi. 14 But, for their
sentence, another book is opened; of which in the next place.

Thus the book of the law is opened, for the sentence against all those on the
left hand: and by it they will clearly see the justice of the judgment against
them, and how the Judge proceeds therein according to law. Nevertheless, there
will be this difference, namely, that these who had only the natural law, and
lived not under any special revelation, shall be judged by that law of nature
they had in their hearts: which law bears, that they who commit such things (as
they will stand convicted of) are worthy of death, Romans i. 32. But these, who
had the written law, to whom the word of God came, as it has sounded in the
visible church, shall be judged by that written law. So says the Apostle, Romans
ii. 12. For as many as have sinned without (the written) law, shall perish
without (the written) law: and as many as have sinned in the law (i e. under
the written law) shall be judged by the (written) law.

Lastly, Another book shall be opened, which is the book of life, Rev. xx. 12.
In this, the names of all the elect are written, as Christ said to his
disciples, Luke x. 20 Your names are written in heaven. This book contains
God's gracious and unchangeable purpose, to bring all the elect to eteral life;
and that, in order thereto, they be redeemed by the blood of his Son,
effectually called, justified, adopted, sanctified, and raised up by him at the
last day without sin. It is now lodged in the Mediator's hand, as the book of
the manner of the kingdom; and having perfected the work the Father gave them
to do; he shall, on the great day produce, and open the book, and present the
persons therein named, faultless before the presence of his glory, Jude 24. Not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. v. 27. None of them all, who
are named in the book, shall be missing. They shall be found qualified,
according to the order of the book, redeemed, called, justified, sanctified,
raised up without spot: what remains then, but that, according to the same
book, they obtain the great end, namely, everlasting life. This may be gathered
from that precious promise, Rev. iii. 5. He that overcomes, the same shall be
clothed in white raiment, (being raised in glory) and I will not blot out his
name out of the book of life. But I will confess his name (it shall be, as it
were, read out among the rest of God's elect) before my Father, and before his
angels. Here is now the ground of the saints' absolviture, the ground of the
blessed sentence they shall receive The book of life being opened, it will be
known to all, who are elected, and who are not. Thus far of the trial of the
parties.

Eighthly, Then shall the Judge pronounce that blessed sentence on the saints,
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world, Matthew xxv 34. It is most probable, the Man CHRIST will
pronounce it with an audible voice; which not only all the saints, but all the
wicked likewise, shall hear and understand. Who can conceive the inexpressible
joy, with which these happy ones shall hear these words? Who can imagine that
fullness of joy, which shall be poured into their hearts, with these words
reaching their ears? And who can conceive how much of hell shall break into the
hearts of all the ungodly crew, by these words of heaven? It is certain this
sentence shall be pronounced before the sentence of damnation, Matthew. xxv. 34.
Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed* etc. Ver
41. Then shall he say also to them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed,
etc. There is no need of this order, that the saints may, without fear or
astonishment, hear the other sentence on the reprobate: they who are raised in
glory, caught up to meet the Lord in the air, presented without spot, and whose
souls (for the far greater part of them) have been so long in heaven before,
shall not be capable of any such fear. But hereby they will be orderly brought
in, to sit in judgment, as Christ's assessors, against the ungodly: whose
torment will be aggravated by it. It will be a hell to them, to be kept out of
hell, till they see the doors of heaven opened to receive the saints, who once
dwelt in the same world with them; and perhaps in the same country, parish, or
town, and sat under the same ministry with themselves. Thus will they see
heaven afar off, to make their hell the hotter. Like that unbelieving lord, 2
Kings vii. 19, 20. They "shall see the plenty with their eyes* but shall not
eat thereof." Every word of the blessed sentence shall be like an envenomed
arrow shot into their hearts, while they see what they have lost, and from
thence gather what they are to expect

This sentence passes on the saints according to their works, Rev xx 12 But
not for their works, nor f^r their faith neither, as if eternal life were
merited by them The sentence itself overthrows this absurd conceit. The kingdom
they are called to, was "prepared for them, from the foundation of the world;"
not left to be merited by themselves, who were but of yesterday. They inherit
it as sons, but procure it not to themselves, as servants do the reward of
their work. They were redeemed by the blood of Christ, and clothed with his
spotless righteousness, which is the proper cause of the sentence. They were
also qualified for heaven, by the sanctification of his Spirit; and hence it is
according to their works; so that the ungodly world shall see now, that the
Judge of the quick and dead does good to them who were good. Therefore it is
added to the sentence, For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc. Ver. 35,
36. which does not denote the ground, but the evidence of their right to
heaven; as if a judge should say, he absolves a man pursued for debt; for the
witnesses depone. that it is paid already. So the Apostle says, 1 Cor x. 5.
"But with many of them God was not well pleased, for they were overthrown in
the wilderness." Their overthrow in the wilderness was not the ground of God's
displeasure with them, but it was an evidence of it. And thus our Lord teaches
us the necessary connection betwixt glory and good works, namely, works
evangelically good; works having a respect to Jesus Christ, and done out of
faith in him, and love to him, without which they will not be regarded in that
day And the saints will so far be judged according to such works, that the
degrees of glory amongst them shall be according to these works: for it is an
eternal truth, He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly, 2 Cor. ix. 6.

Thus shall the good works of the godly have a glorious, not a gratuitous
reward; a reward of grace, not of debt, which will fill them with wonder at the
riches of free grace, and the Lord's condescending to take any notice,
especially such public notice, of their poor worthless works. The which seems
to be the import of what they are said to answer, saying, Lord, when saw we
thee an hungered, etc. Ver. 37, 38, 39. And may they not justly wonder to see
themselves set down to the marriage-supper of the Lamb, in consequence of a
dinner or supper, a little meat or drink (such as they had) which they gave to
an hungry or thirsty member of Christ, for his sake? Oh plentiful harvest
following upon the seed of good works^ rivers of pleasure springing up from
(perhaps) a cup of cold water given to a disciple, in the name of a disciple!
eternal mansions of glory rising out of a night's lodging given to a saint, who
was a stranger! everlasting robes of glory given in exchange of a new coat, or
it (may be) an old one, bestowed on some saint, who had not necessary clothing!
a visit to a sick saint, repaid by Christ himself, coming in the glory of his
Father, with all his holy angels! a visit made to a poor prisoner, for the
cause of Christ, repaid with a visit from the Judge of all, taking away the
visitant with him to the palace of heaven, there to be ever with himself! these
things will be matter of everlasting wonder; and should stir up all, to sow
liberally in time, while the seed-time of good works does last. But it is
Christ's stamp on good works, that puts a value on them, in the eye of a
gracious God; which seems to be the import of our Lord's reply, ver. 40. In as
much as ye have done it, unto one of the least of the se my brethren, ye have
done it unto me.

IX. Now the saints having received their own sentence, they shall judge the
world, 1 Cor. vi. 2. This was not fulfilled, when the empire became Christian,
and Christians were made magistrates. No, the Psalmist tells us, This hooour
have all the saints, Psalm cxlix. 9. And the Apostle in the forecited place,
adds, And if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the
smallest matters? Ver. 3. Know ye not that we shall judge angels? Being called,
they come to receive their kingdom, in the view of angels and men: they go, as
it were, from the bar to the throne, To him that overcomes, will I grant to
sit with me on my throne, Rev iii 21. They shall not only judge the world, in
Christ their head, by way of communion with him; by their works compared with
these of the ungodly; or, by way of testimony against them: but they shall be
assessors to Jesus Christ the Judge, giving their voice against them,
consenting to his judgment as just, and saying Amen, to the doom pronounced
against all the ungodly: as is said of the saints, upon the judgment of the
great whore, Rev. xix. 1, 2. Hallelujah, for true and righteous are his
judgments. Thus the upright shall have dominion over them, in the morning, of
the resurrection Psalm. xlix. 14. Then, and not till then, shall that fully be
accomplished, which ye may read, Psalm. cxlix. 6, 7, 8, 9. Let the high praises
of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand, to execute
vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the people, -- this honor
have all his saints. O! what a strange turn of affairs, will appear here. what
an astonishing sight will it be, to see wicked churchmen and statesmen standing
as criminals before the saints, whom sometimes they condemned as heretics,
rebels and traitors! to see men of riches and power stand pale-faced before
these whom they oppressed! to see the mocker stand trembling before these he
mocked: the worldly-wise man before these whom he accounted fools! then shall
the despised faces of the saints be dreadful faces to the wicked: and those who
sometimes were the song of the drunkards, shall then be a terror to them All
wrongs must be righted at length, and every one set in his proper place.

Tenthly, The Judge shall pronounce the sentence of damnation on all the
ungodly multitude. Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart
from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
angels, ver. 41. Fearful doom! and that from the same mouth, from whence
proceeded the sentence of absolution before. It was an aggravation of the
misery of the Jews, when their city was destroyed, that they were ruined by
one, who was accounted the darling of the world. O! what an aggravation of the
misery of the wicked will it be, that he shall pronounce this sentence also! to
hear the curse from mount Zion, must needs be most terrible. To be damned by
him, who came to save sinners, must be double damnation. But thus it shall he.
The Lamb of God shall rare, as a lion, against them! he shall excommunicate,
and cast them out of his presence for ever, by a sentence from the throne,
saying, Depart from me ye cursed: he shall adjudge them to everlasting fire,
and the society of devils for evermore. And this sentence also, we suppose,
shall be pronounced with an audible voice, by the man Christ. And all the
saints shall say, Hallelujah, true and righteous are his judgments. None were
so compassionate as the saints, when on earth, during the time of God's
patience. But now that time is at an end; their compassion on the ungodly is
swallowed up in joy, in the Mediator's glory, and his executing of just
judgment, by which his enemies are made his footstool. Though sometimes the
righteous man did weep in secret places for their pride, and because they would
not hear; yet then he shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance; he shall vash
his feet in the blood of the wicked, Psalm. lviii. 10. No pity shall then be
shown to them, from their nearest relations. The godly wife shall applaud the
justice of the Judge, in the condemnation of her ungodly husband: the godly
husband shall say Amen to the damnation of her who lay in his bosom: the godly
parents shall say Hallelujah, at the passing of the sentence against their
ungodly child: and the godly child shall, from his heart approve the damnation
of his wicked parents, the father wh^ him, and the mother who bore him. The
sentence is just (...) judged according to their works, Rev. xx. 12.

There is no wrong done them. "For I was an hungry," says our Lord, and ye
g^^^ me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger, and
ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick, and in prison, and ye
visited me not, Ver. 42, 43. These are not only evidences of their ungodly and
cursed state, but most proper causes and grounds of their condemnation: for
though good works do not merit salvation, yet evil works merit damnation. Sins
of one kind only, namely, of omission, are here mentioned; not that these alone
shall then be discovered, (for the opening of the books lay all open) but
because these, though there were no more, are sufficient to damn unpardoned
sinners. And if men shall be condemned for sins of omission, much more for sins
of commission. The omission of works of charity and mercy, is condescended on
particularly, to stop the mouths of the wicked; for it is most just, that he
have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy, James ii. 13. The
mentioning of the omission of acts of charity and mercy toward the distressed
members of Christ, intimates, that it is the judgment of those who have heard
of Christ in the gospel, that is principally intended here, in this portion of
Scripture, and that the slighting of Christ will be the great cause of the ruin
of those who hear the gospel: but the enmity of the hearts of the wicked
against himself, is discovered by the entertainment they now give to his
members.

In vain will they say, When saw we thee an hungered, or a-thirsty etc. ver. 44.
For the s^ord reckons, and will reckon, the world's unkindness to his people,
unkindness to himself: In as much as ye did it not to one of the least of
these, ye did it not to me, Ver. 45. O meat and drink unhappily spared, when a
member of Christ was in need of it! O wretched neglect, that the stranger saint
was not taken in! it had been better for them, they had quitted their own room,
and their own bed, than he had wanted lodging. O cursed clothing, may the
wicked say, that was in my house, locked up in my chest, or hanging in my
wardrobe, and was not brought out to clothe such a one! O that I had stripped
myself, rather than he had gone away without clothing? Cursed business, that
diverted me from visiting such a sick saint? O that I had rather watched whole
nights with him. Wretch that I was! why did I sit at ease in my house, when he
was in prison, and did not visit him? But now the tables are turned: Christ's
servants shall eat, but I shall be hungry; his servants shall drink, but I
shall be thirsty; they rejoice, but I am ashamed, Isa. lxv 13. They are taken
in, but I am cast out, and bid depart: they are clothed with robes of glory,
but I walk naked, and they see my shame, Rev. xvi 15. They are now raised up on
high, beyond the reach of sickness or pain; but I must now ly down in sorrow,
Isa. l 1^. Now shall they go to the palace of heaven, but I must go to the
prison of hell.

But if our Lord thus resents men's neglecting to help his people under these,
and the like distresses; what may they expect, who are the authors and
instruments of them? If they shall be fed with wrath, who fed them not, when
they were hungry; what shall become of those, who robbed and spoiled them, and
took their own bread away from them? What a full cup of wrath shall be the
portion of those who were so far from giving them meat or drink, when hungry or
thirsty, that they made it a crime for others to entertain them, and made
themselves drunken with their blood! they must lodge with devils for ever-more,
who took not in the Lord's people, when strangers: then, what a lodging shall
those have, who drove them out of their own houses, out of their native land,
and mad them strangers? Men will be condemned for not clothing them, when
naked: then, how heavy must the sentence of those be, who have stripped them, and
made them go without clothing? Surely, if not visiting of them in sickness, or
in a prison, shall be so severely punished; they shall not escape a most heavy
doom who have cast them into prisons, and have put them under such hardships,
as have impaired their health, brought sickness on them, and cut their days in
prison, or out of prison.

To put a face upon such wicked practices, men will pretend to retain an honor
for Christ and religion, while they thus treat his members, walking in his
ways, and keeping the truth. They are here represented to say, When saw we the
(...) hungered, or a-thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and
did not minister unto thee? Ver. 44. And if they should say, Our bread, drink,
lodging, clothing and visits, were indeed refused, but not to Christ; but to a
set of men, of a bad character, men who turned the world up-side-down (Acts
xvii. 6) who troubled Israel (2 Kings xviii. 17.) an humorous and fantastic
sort of people, having laws diverse from all people; factious and rebellious
(they did not keep the king's laws) and therefore a very dangerous set of men;
it was not for the king's profit to suffer them. Either iii 8 But although men
cast iniquity upon the godly, and give them ill names, that they may treat them
as criminals; all these pretenses will avail them nothing, in the great day,
before the righteous Judge, nor before their own consciences neither; but the
real ground of their enmity against the saints, will be found (to their own
conviction) to be their enmity against Christ himself. This seems to be the
import of the objection of the damned, (ver. 44. and of the answer to it ver
45) In as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these ye did it not to
me.

Lastly, Sentence being past on both parties, follows the full execution of the
same, ver. 46. And these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the
righteous into life eternal. The damned shall get no reprieve, but go to their
place without delay; they shall be driven away from the judgment seat into
hell* and the saints shall enter into the king's palace (Psalm. xlv. 15) namely
into heaven the seat of the blessed. But our Lord Christ, and his glorious
company, shall keep the field that day, and see the backs of all their enemies;
for the damned go off first.

In this day of the Lord, the great day, shall be the general conflagration; by
which ^^os^ visible heavens, the earth, and sea shall pass away. Not that they
shall be annihilated, (^r reduced to nothing) that is not the ^peration of
fire: but they shall be dissolved, and purged by that (...), from all the
effects of sin, or of the curse, upon the^; and then r^n^wed, and made more
glorious and stable. Of this conflagration, the Apostle Peter speaks, 2 Pet.
iii. 10. But the day of the Lord will come, as a thief in the night: in the
which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall in
l with fervent heat: the earth also, and the works that are therein shall be
burnt up. See also ver. 7, 12. And of the renewi^g of the world, he adds, ver.
13. "Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new heavens, and a new
earth, wherein dwells righteousness."

It seems most agreeable to the scriptures, and to the nature of the thing, to
conceive this conflagration to follow after the general judgment; sentence
being past on both parties before it. And I judge to probable, that it will
fall in with the putting of the sentence in execution against the damned; so as
they shall (according to their se^^e^ce) depart, and the heavens and the earth
pass away, together and at once, at that furious rebuke from the throne,
driving away the damned out of the world (in this fire) to the everlasting fire
prepared for the devil and his angels. Even as, in the deluge, with which the
Apostle Peter compares the conflagration, or burning of the world, (2 Pet. iii.
6 7.) the world itself, and the wicked upon it, perished together; the ^am^
water which destroyed the earth, sweeping away the inhabitants. For it is not
likely, that the wicked shall at all stand on ^he new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness, (2 Pet. iii. 13) and as for this earth, it shall flee away,
(which seems to denote a very quick dispatch) and it shall flee from his face,
who sits on the throne, Rev. xx. 11. And I saw a great white throne, and him
that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heavens fled away. The
execution of the sentence on the wicked, is also thus expressed; they shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence, or from the face of
the Lord. 2 Thessalonians i. 9. The original word is the same in both texts, the which,
being compared, seem to say, that these creatures abused by the wicked, being
left to stand, as witnesses against them in the judgment, are, after sentence
past on their abusers, made to pass away with them from the face of the Judge.
It is true, the fleeing away of the earth and heaven is narrated (Rev. xx. 11.)
before the judgment: but that will not prove its going before the judgment,
ver. 12. before the resurrection, ver. 13. will prove the judgment to be before
it. Further, it is remarkable, in the execution of the sentence Rev. xx. 14,
15. that not only the reprobate are cast into the lake, but death and hell are
cast into it likewise: all effects of sin, and of the curse, are removed out of
the world, (for which very cause shall the conflagration be) and they are
confined to the place of the damned Besides all this, it is evident the end of
the world is by the conflagration: and the Apostle tells us, (1 Cor. xv. 24,
25.) that Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to
God, even the Father: when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority,
and power. For he must reign, till he has put all enemies under his feet. The
which last, as it must be done before the end: so it seems not to be done, but
by putting the sentence in execution, past in the day of judgment, against the
wicked.

Now if the burning of Sodom and Gommorrah, that are set forth for an example,
(Jude 7.) was so dreadful: how terrible will that day, be, when the whole world
shall be at once in flames! how will wretched worldlings look, when their
darling world shall be all on fire? Then shall strong castles, and towering
palaces, with all their rich furniture, go up together in one flame with the
lowest cottages. What heart can fully conceive the terror of that day to the
wicked, when the whole fabric of heaven and earth shall at once be dissolved by
that fire! when that miserable company shall be driven from the tribunal to the
pit, with fire within them, and fire without them; and fire behind them, and on
every hand of them; and fire before them, awaiting them in the lake: whither
this fire (for ought appears) may follow them!

As for the particular place of this judgment, though some point as to the
valley of Jehoshaphat for it, yet our Lord, who infallibly knew it, being asked
the question by his disciples, where Lord? told them only, Wheresoever the body
is, thither will the eagles be gathered together, Luke xvii. 37. After which
answer, it is too much for men to renew the question. As for the time when it
shall be; in vain do men search for what the Lord has purposely kept secret,
Acts i. 8. It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father
has put in his own power. The Apostle Paul, after having very plainly described
the second coming of Christ, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 16, 17. adds, (chap. v. 1, 2.) But of
the times and seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you. For
yourselves know perfectly, that the day of Lord so comes, as a thief in the
night. Nevertheless, some in several ages, have made very bold with the time;
and several particular years, which are now past, have been given out to the
world, for the time of the end, by men who have pried into the secrets of God.
Time has proclaimed to the world their rashness and folly: and it is likely
they will be no more happy in their conjectures, whose determinate time is yet
to come. Let us rest in that he comes. God has kept the day hid from us, that
we may be every day ready for it, Matthew. xxv. 13. Watch therefore, for ye know
neither the day nor the hour, wherein the Son of man comes. And let us
remember, that the last day of our life will determine our state in the last
day of the world: and as we die so shall we be judged.

I shall now shut up this subject, with some application of what has been said.

USE I. Of comfort to all the saints. Here is abundance of consolation to all
who are in the state of grace. Whatever be your afflictions in the world, this
day will make up all your losses. "Though you have lain among the pots, yet
shall ye be as the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with
yellow gold," Psalm. lxviii. 13. Though the world reproach, judge and condemn
you; the Judge will, at that day, absolve you, and bring forth your
righteousness as the light. The world's fools will then appear to have been the
only wise men who were in it. Though the cross be heavy, you may well bear it
in expectation of the crown of righteousness, which the righteous Judge will
then give you. If the world do despise you, and treat you with the utmost
contempt, regard it not: the day comes wherein you shall sit with Christ in
his throne. Be not discouraged, by reason of manifold temptations; but resist
the devil, in confidence of a full and complete victory; for you shall judge
the tempter at last. Though you have had wrestling now with the body of sin and
death; yet ye shall get all your enemies under your feet, at length, and be
presenced faultless before the presence of his glory. Let not the terror of
that day dispirit you, when you think upon it: let these who have slighted the
Judge, and continue enemies to him, and to the way of holiness, d^o^p and hang
down their heads, when they think of his coming: but lift ye up your heads,
with joy, for the last day will be your best day. The Judge is your Head and
Husband, your Redeemer, and your Advocate. Ye must appear before the judgment
^^at, but ye shall not come into condemnation, John v. 24. His coming will not
be against you, but for you. He came in the flesh, to remove the lawful
impediments of the spiritual marriage, by his death, he came in the gospel to
you, to espouse you to himself: he will come, at the last day, to solemnize the
marriage, and take the bride home to his Father's house. Even so come, Lord
Jesus.

USE II. Of terror to all unbelievers. This may serve to awaken a secure
generation, a world lying in wickedness, as if they were never to be called to
an account for it; and slighting the Mediator, as if he were not to judge them.
Ah! how few have the lively impressions of the judgment to come! most men live,
as if what is said of it, from the word, were but idle tales. The profane lives
of many, speak the thoughts of it to be far from their hearts, and in very deed
make a mock of it before the world, saying, in effect, Where is the promise of
his coming? The hypocrisy of others, who blind the eyes of the world with a
splendid profession, being in appearance Christ's sheep, while they are indeed
the devil's goats, is an evidence, that the great separation of the sheep from
the goats is very little laid to heart. How do many indulge themselves in
secret wickedness, of which they would be ashamed before witnesses: not
considering that their most secret thoughts and actions will, at that day, be
discovered, before the great congregation! how eagerly are men's hearts set on
the world, as if it were to be their everlasting habitation! the solemn
assemblies, and public ordinances, wherein the Judge is upon a transaction of
peace with the criminals, are undervalued: men's heart, will swim like feathers
in the waters of the sanctuary, that will sink, like stones, to the bottom, in
cares of this life: they will be very serious in trifles of this world, and
trifle in the most serious and weighty things of another world. But O! consider
the day that is approaching, in which Christ shall come to judgment; the world
shall be summoned, by the sound of the last trumpet, to compear before his
tribunal. The Judge shall sit on his throne, and all nations shall be si^t^d
before him; the separation shall be made betwixt the godly and the wicked, the
books opened, and the dead judged out of them, one party shall be adjudged to
everlasting life, and the other to everlasting fire, according to their works.

It would be a sight of admirable curiosity, if thou could wrap up thyself in
some dark cloud, or hide thyself in the cleft of some hig^ rock, from whence
thou might espy wicked kings, princes, judges, and great ones of the earth,
rising out of their marble tombs, and brought to the bar, to answer for all
their cruelty, injustice, oppression, and profanity, without any marks of
distinction, but what their wickedness puts upon them: profane, unholy and
unfaithful churchmen, pursued with the curses of the ruined people, from their
graves to the judgment seat, and charged with the blood of souls, to whom they
gave no faithful warning: mighty men standing trembling before the Judge,
unable to recover their wonted boldness, to out-wit him with their subtilities,
or defend themselves by their strength: delicate women cast forth of their
graves, as abominable branches, drogged to the tribunal, to answer for their
ungodly lives: the ignorant, suddenly taught in the law, to their cost; and the
learned declared, before the world, fools and laborious triflers; the athiest
convinced, the hypocrite unmasked; and the profane, at long run, turned serious
about his eternal state: secret murders, adulteries, thefts, cheats, and other
works of darkness, which scorned all human search, discovered and laid open
before the world, with their most minute circumstances: no regard had to the
rich, no pity shown to the poor: the scales of the world turned; oppressed and
despised piety set on high; and prosperous wickedness at last brought low: all,
not found in Christ, arraigned, convicted, and condemned without respect of
persons, and driven from the tribunal to the pit; while these found in him, at
that day, being absolved before the world, go with him into heaven. Nay, but
thou can not so escape. Thyself, whosoever thou art, not being in Christ,
must bear a part in this tragical and frightful action.

Sinner, that same Lord Christ, whom thou now despisest, whom thou woundest
through the sides of his messengers, and before whom thou do prefer thy
lusts, will be thy Judge. And a neglected Savior will be a severe Judge. O!
what mountain, what rock will thou get to fall on thee, and hide thee from the
face of him that sits on the throne? Thou have now a rock within thee, a
heart of adamant, so that thou can count the darts of the word as stubble,
and laugh at the shaking of the spear: but that rock will rent, at the sight of
the Judge; that hard heart will then break, and thou shall weep and wail, when
weeping and wailing will be to no purpose. Death's bands will fall off; the
grave will vomit thee out; and the mountains shall skip from thee; and the
rocks refuse to grind thee to powder. How will these cursed eyes abide the
sight of the Judge! behold he comes! where is the profane swearers, who tore
his wounds? The wretched worldling, now abandoned of his god? The formal
hypocrite, who kissed him, and betrayed him? The despiser of the gospel, who
sent him away in his messengers groaning, profaned his ordinances, and trampled
under foot his precious blood: O murderer, (...) slain man is thy Judge: there
is he whom thou did so maltreat: behold the neglected Lamb of God appearing
as a lion against thee. How will (...) This fiery looks! that rocky heart now
kept out against him, shall then be blown up: that face, which refuses to
blush now, shall then gather blackness: arrows of wrath shall pierce, where
arrows of conviction cannot enter now. What will thou answer him, when he
rises up, and charge thee with thy unbelief and impenitency? Will thou say,
thou wast not warned? Conscience within thee will give thee the lie: the secret
groans and wear^ness of those, who warned thee, will witness the contrary. If a
c^^ld or a fool did tell you, that your house were on fire, you would
immediately run to quench i^; but, in matters of eternal concern men will first
fill their hearts with prejudices against the messengers, and then cast their
message behind their backs. But these silly sh^f^s and pretenses will not
avail, in the day of the Lord. How will these cursed ears, now deaf to the call
of the gospel, inviting sinners to come to Christ, hear the fearful sentence,
Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels? No sleepy hearer shall be there: no man's heart will then wander:
their hearts and eyes will then be fixed on their misery, which they will not
now believe. O that we knew in this our day, the things that belong to our
peace.

Lastly, Be exhorted to believe this great truth; and believe it so as you may
prepare for the judgment betimes. Set up a secret tribunal in your own breasts,
and often call yourselves to an account there. Make the Judge your friend in
time, by closing with him in the offer of the gospel; and give all diligence,
that ye may be found in Christ, at that day Cast off the works of darkness, and
live, as believing you are, at all times, and in all places, under the eye of
your Judge, who will bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing.
Be fruitful in good works, knowing that as ye sow, ye shall reap. Study piety
toward God, righteousness and charity toward men. Lay up in store plenty of
works of charity and mercy, toward them who are in distress, especially such
as are of the household of faith, that they may be produced that day as
evidences, that ye belong to Christ. Shut not up your bowels of mercy, now,
toward the needy; lest ye, then, find no mercy. Take heed, that in all your
works, ye be single and sincere; aiming, in them all, at the glory of your
Lord, a testimony of your love to him, and obedience to his command. Leave it
to hypocrites, who have their reward, to proclaim every man his own goodness,
and to sound a trumpet, when they do their alms. It is a base and unchristian
spirit, which cannot have satisfaction in a good work, unless it be exposed to
the view of others: it is utterly unworthy of one, who believes that the last
trumpet shall call together the whole world; before whom the Judge himself
shall publish works truly good, how secretly soever they were done. Live in a
believing expectation of the coming of the Lord. Let your loins be always girt,
and your lamps burning: so when he comes, whether in the last day of your life,
or in the last day of the world, ye shall be able to say with joy, Lo, this is
our God, and we have waited for him.

HEAD V. The Kingdom of HEAVEN.
MATTHEW. xxv. 34. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world.


HAVING from this portion of scripture, which the text is a part of, discoursed
of the general judgment; and being to speak of the everlasting happiness of ^he
saints, and the everlasting misery of the wicked, from the respective sentences
^o be pronounced upon them, in the great day; I shall take them in the order
wherein they ly before us; the rather that, a sentence is first past upon the
righteous, so the execution thereof i^ first begun, though possibly the other
may be fully executed before it be completed.

The words of the text contain the joyful sentence itself, together with an
historical introduction thereto, which gives us an account of the Judge
pronouncing the sentence; the King, Je^us Christ; the parties on whom it is
given, them on his right hand: and the time when, then, as soon as the trial is
over. Of the^e I have spoken already. It is the sentence itself we are now to
consider. Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. Stand a-back, O ye pro^ane goa^s;
have away all unregenerate souls, not united to Jesus Christ: this is not for
you. Come, O ye saints, brought out of your natural state, into the state of
grace; behold here the state of glory awa^^^ng you. Here is glory let down to
us in words and syllables; a looking-glass, in which you may see your
everl^sting happiness; a sch^me (or draught) of Christ's Father's house,
wherein there are many mansians.

This glorious sentence bears two things. (1.) The complete happiness to which
the saints are adjudged, the kingdom (2) their solemn admission to it, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit. etc. First, Their complete happiness is a
kingdom. A kingdom is the top of worldly felicity; there is nothing on earth
greater than a kingdom: therefore the hidden weight of glory in heaven is held
^o^th to us under that no^ion. But it is not an ordinary k^ng^om, it ^s the
kingdom; the kingdom of heaven, surpassing all the kingdoms of the earth in
glory, honor, pr^^, and pleasure, infinitely more than they do in these excel
the low and inglorious condition of a b^g^ar in rags and on a dunghill.
Secondly, There is a solemn admission of the sa^^ts unto this the^r kingdom,
Come ye, inherit the kingdom. In the view o^^^n^ess, men ^^d devils, they are
^nve^ed with royalty, and (...) rated before the whole world, by Jesus Christ
the heir ^f all things, who has all power in heaven, and in earth. Their right
to the kingdom is (...) recognized and owned! They are admitted to i^, as (...)
heirs of the kingdom, ^o possess by inheritance or lot, as the word properly
signifie^; because of old, inh^ritances were disp^^ed by lot, as Canaan to
Israel, God's firstborn, as they are cal^^d. Ex^d. iv. 22 And because this
kingdom i^ the Father's kingdom, therefore they are op^nly acknowledged in
their admission to it, to be the bl^ss^d of Christ's Father: the which b^^ssing
was given them long before this sentence, but is now solemnly recognized and
confirmed to them by the Mediator, in his Father's name. It is observable, he
says no^, Ye bl^ssed of the Father, but Ye blessed of my Father; to show us,
that (...) blessings are derived upon us from the Father, the fountain of
blessing as he is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we
are blessed, Ephesians. i. 3. (...) finally, they are admitted to this kingdom, as
that which was prepared for them from the foundation of the world, in God's
eternal purpose, before they, o^ any of them were; that all the world may see
eternal life to be the free g^ft of God.

DOCTRINE, The Saints shall be made completely happy in the Possession of the
Kingdom of Heaven.
Two things I shall here inquire into, (1.) The nature of this kingdom. (2) The
admission of the saints thereto. And then I shall make some practical
improvement of the whole.

FIRST, As to the nature of the kingdom of heaven, our knowledge of it is very
imperfect; for eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him. 1 Cor.
ii. 9. As, by f^miliar resemblances, parents instruct their little children,
concerning things, of which otherwise they can have no tolerable notion: so our
graci^u^ God, in contemplation of our weakness, is pleased to represent to us
heaven's happiness, under similitudes taken from earthly things, glorious in
the eyes of men; si^ce naked discoveries of the heavenly glory, divested of
earth^y resemblances, would be too bright for our weak eyes, and in them we
would but lose ourselves. Wherefore now, one can but speak as a child of these
things, which the day will fully discover.

The state of glory is represented under the notion of a kingdom; a kingdom
among men, being that in which the greatest number of earthly good things does
c^ncen^er. Now every saint shall, as a king, inherit a kingdom. All Christ's
subjects shall be kings, each one with his crown upon his head: not that the
great K^^g shall divest himself of his royalty, but he will make all his
children partakers of his kingdom

I. The saints shall have kingly power and authority given them. Our Lord gives
not empty title ^o his favou^^res; he makes them kings indeed. The dominion of
the saints will be a dominion far exceeding that of the greatest monarch ever
was on earth. They will be absolute masters over sin, that sometime had
dominion over them. They will have a complete ru^e over their own spirits; an
entire management of all their affections and inclinations, which now create
them so much molestation: the turbulent root of corrupt afflictions shall be
for ever expelled out of that kingdom, and never be able any more to give them
the least disturbance. They shall have power over the nations, the u^godly of
all nations, and shall rule them with a rod of iron, R^v ii 26 27. The wh^le
world of the wicked shall be broken before them: Satan shall be bruised under
their feet, Romans xvi 20. He shall never be able to fallen a temptation on them
any more: but he will be judged by them: and in their sight, cast with the
reprobate crew unto the l^ke of fire and br^mstone. So shall the rule over
their oppressors. Having fought the good fight, and got the victory, Christ
will entertain them as Joshua did his captains, causing them come near, and put
their feet on the necks of kings, Josh. x. 24

II. They shall have the ensigns of royalty. For a throne, Christ will grant
them to sit with him on his throne, Rev iii 12. They will be advanced to the
highest h^nour and dignity they are capable of; and, in the enjoyment of (...),
they will have an eternal undisturbed repose, after all the tossings they meet
with in the world, in their way to the throne For a crown, they shall receive a
crown of glory, that fades not away, 1 Pet. v. 4. Not a crown of flowers, as
subjects being conquerors, or victors, sometimes have got: such a crown quickly
fades, but their crown never fades. Not a crown of gold, such (...) r^^hly
kings do wear: even a crown of gold is often staired, and at b^st can never
make them happy who wear it. But it shall be a crown of glory. A crown of glory
is a crown of life, (Rev ii. 10.) that life which knows no end: a crown which
death can never make to fall off one's head. It must be an abiding crown; for
it is a crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy iv. 8. It was purchased for them by
Christ's righteousness, which is imputed to them; they are qualified for it by
inherent righteousness; God's righteousness or faithfulness secures is to them.
They shall have a scepter, a rod of iron, (Rev. ii. 27.) terrible to all the
wicked world. And a sword toe, a two-edged sword in their hand, to execute
vengeance upon the heath^n, and punishment upon the people, Psalm. cxlix 6, 7.
They shall have royal apparel. The royal robes in this kingdom are white robes,
Rev. iii. 4. They shall walk with me in white. And these last do, in a very
particular manner, point at the inconceivable glory of the state of the saints
in heaven

The Lord is pleased often to represent unto us the glorious state of the
saints, under the notion of their being clothed in white garments. It is
promised to the overcomer, that he shall be clothed in white raiment, Rev. iii.
5. The elders about the throne are clothed in white raiment, chap. iv. 4. The
multitude before the throne are clothed with white robes, chap. vii. 9 arrayed
in white robes, ver. 13. made white in the blood of the Lamb, ver. 14. I own
the last two testimonies adduced, do respect the state of the saints on earth:
but withal the terms are borrowed from the state of the church in heaven. All
garments, properly so called, being badges of sin and shame, shall be laid
aside by the saints, when they come to their state of glory. But if we consider
on what occasions white garments were wont to be put on, we shall find much of
heaven under them.

First, The Romans when they manumitted their bond-servants, gave them a white
garment, as a badge of their freedom. So shall the saints that day get on their
white robes; for it is the day of the glorious liberty of the children of God,
(Romans viii. 21.) the day of the redemption of their body, ver. 23. They shall
no more see the house of bondage, nor ly any more among the pots. If we compare
the state of the saints on earth with that of the wicked, it is indeed a state
of freedom; whereas the other is a state of slavery: but in comparison with
their state in heaven, it is but a servitude. A saint on earth is indeed a
young prince, and heir to the crown; but his motto may be, I serve, for "^he
differs nothing from a servant, though he be lord of all," Gal. iv. 1. What
are the groans of a saint, the sordid and base work he is sometimes found
employed in, the black and tattered garments he walks in, but badges of this
comparative servitude? But from the day the saints come to the crown, they
receive their complete freedom, and serve no ^ore. They shall be fully freed
from sin, which of all evils is the worst, both in itself, and in their
apprehension too: how great then must that freedom be, when these Egyptians
whom they see today, they shall see them again no more for ever? They shall be
free from all temptation to sin: Satan can have no access to temptation, any
more, by himself, nor by his agents. A full answer will then be given to that
petition, they have so often repeated, Lead us not into temptation. No hissing
serpent can come into the paradise above: no snare nor trap can be laid there,
to catch the feet of the saints: they may walk there fearlesly, for they can be
in no hazard: there are no lions dens, no mountains of the leopards, in the
promised land. Nay, they shall be set beyond the possibility of sinning, for
they shall be confirmed in goodness. It will be the consumminate freedom of
their will, to be for ever unalterably determined to good. And they shall be
freed from all the effects of sin; There shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, Rev. xxx. 4: What
kingdom is like unto this? Death makes its way now into a palace, as easily as
into a cottage: sorrow fills the heart of one who wears a crown on his head,
royal robes are no fence against pain, and crying by reason of pain. But in
this kingdom no misery can have place. All reproaches shall be wiped off; and
never shall a tear drop any more from their eyes They shall not complain of
desertions again; the Lord will never hide his face from them: but the Sun of
righteousness shining upon them in his meridian-brightness, will dispel all
clouds, and give them an everlasting day, without the least mixture of
darkness. A deluge of wrath, after a fearful thunderclap from the throne, will
sweep away the wicked from before the judgment seat, into the lake of fire: but
they are, in the first place, like Noah brought into the ark, and out of harm's
way.

Secondly, White raiment has been a token of purity, Therefore the Lamb's wise
is arrayed in fine linen, clean and white, Rev xix. 8. And those who stood
before the throne washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the
Lamb, chap. vii. 14. The saints shall then put on the robes of perfect purity,
and shine in spotless holiness, like the sun in his strength, without the least
cloud to intercept his light. Absolute innocence shall then be restored, and
every appearance of sin banished far from his kingdom The guilt of sin, and
reigning power of it, are now taken away in the saints; nevertheless sin
dwells in them, Romans vii. 20. But then it shall be no more in them: the
corrupt nature will be quite removed, that root of bitterness will be plucked
up, and no vestiges of it left in their souls: their nature shall be altogether
pure and sinless. There shall be no darkness in their minds; but the
understanding of every saint, when he is come to his kingdom, will be as a
globe of pure and unmixed light. There shall not be the least aversion to good,
or inclination to evil, in their wills: but they will be brought to a perfect
conformity to the will of God; blessed with angelical purity, and sixed therein
Their affections shall not be liable to the least disorder or irregularity: it
will cost them no trouble to keep them right: they will get such a set of
purity, as they can never lose. They will be so refined from all earthly dross,
as never to savor more of any thing but heaven. Were it possible they should
be set again amidst the ensnaring objects of an evil world, they should walk
among them without the least defilement; as the sun shines on the dunghill, yet
untainted, and as the angels preserved their purity in the midst of Sodom.
Their graces shall then be perfected; and all the imperfections now cleaving to
them, done away. There will be no more ground of complaints of weakness of
grace: none in that kingdom shall complain of an ill heart, or a corrupt
nature. It does not yet appear what we shall be, but -- when he shall appear,
we shall be like him. 1 John iii. 2.

Thirdly, Among the Jews, these who desired to be admitted into the priestly
office, being tried, and found to be of the priest's line, and without blemish,
were clothed in white, and enrolled among the priests. This seems to be alluded
to, Rev. iii. 5. He that overcomes -- the saints shall be clothed in white
raiment, and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life. So the
saints shall not be kings only, but priests withal; for they are a Royal
Priesthood, 1 Pet. ii. 9. They will be priests upon their thrones. They are
judicially found descended from the great High Priest of their profession,
begotten of him by his Spirit, of the incorruptible seed of the word, and
without blemish: so the trial being over, they are admitted to be priests in
the temple above, that they may dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. There
is nothing upon earth more glorious than a kingdom, nothing more venerable than
the priesthood: and both meet together in the glorified state of the saints.
The general assembly of the firstborn, (Heb. xii. 23.) whose is the priesthood
the double portion, appearing in their white robes of glory, will be a reverend
and glorious company. That day will show them to be the persons, whom the Lord
has chosen out of all the tribes of the earth, to be near unto him, and to
enter into his temple, even into his holy place. Their priesthood, begun on
earth, shall be brought to its perfection, while they shall be employed in
offering the sacrifice of praise to God and the Lamb, for ever and ever. They
got not their portion, in the earth, with the rest of the tribes: but the Lord
himself was their portion, and will be their double portion, through the ages
of eternity.

Fourthly, They were wont to wear white raiment, in a time of triumph; to the
which also there seems to be an allusion, Rev. iii. 5. "He that overcomes, the
same shall be clothed in white raiment." And what is heaven but an everlasting
triumph! None get thither, but such as fight, and overcome too. Though Canaan
was given to the Israelites, an inheritance: they behoved to conquer it, ere
they could be possessors of it. The saints, in this world, are in the field of
battle; often in red garments, garments rolled in blood: but the day
approaches, in which they shall stand before the throne, and before the Lamb,
clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands, (Rev. vii. 9.) having
obtained a complete victory over all their enemies. The palm was used as a sign
of victory; because that tree, oppressed with weights, yields not, but rather
shoots upwards. And palm trees were carved on the doors of the most holy
place, (1 Kings vi. 32.) which was a special type of heaven; for heaven is the
place, which the saints are received into, as conquerors.

Behold the joy and peace of the saints in their white robes. The joys arising
from the view of past dangers, and of riches and honors gained at the very
door of death, do most sensibly touch one's heart: and this will be an
ingredient in the everlasting happiness of the saints, which could have had no
place, in the heaven of innocent Adam, and his sinless offspring, supposing him
to have stood Surely the glorified saints will not forget the entertainment
they met with in the world: it will be for the glory of God to remember it, and
also for the heightening of their joy. The Sicilian king, by birth the son of a
potter, acted a wise part, in that he would be served at his table, with
earthen vessels: the which could not but put an additional sweetness in his
meals, not to be relished by one born heir to the crown. Can ever meat be so
sweet to any, as to the hungry man! Or can any have such a relish of plenty, as
he who has been under pinching straits: The more difficulties the saints have
passed through, in their way to heaven, the place will be the sweeter to them,
when they come at it. Every happy stroke, struck in the spiritual warfare, will
be a jewel in their crown of glory. Each victory obtained against sin, Satan
and the world, will raise their triumphant joy the higher. The remembrance of
the cross will sweeten the crown: and the memory of their travel through the
wilderness, will put an additional verdure on the fields of glory; while they
walk through them, minding the day, when they went mourning without the sun.

And now that they appear triumphing in white robes, it is a sign they have
obtained an honorable place; such a peace as their enemies can disturb no
more. So every thing peculiarly adapted to their militant condition is laid
aside. The sword is laid down; and they betake themselves to the pen of a ready
writer, to commemorate the praises of him, by whom they overcame. Public
ordinances, preaching, sacraments, shall be honorably laid aside; there is no
temple there, Rev. xxi* 22. Sometimes these were sweet to them: but the
travelers being all got home, the inns, appointed for their entertainment by
the way, are shut up; the candles are put out, when the sun is risen; and the
tabernacle used in the wilderness is folded up, when the temple of glory is
come in its room. Many of the saints duties will then be laid aside; as one
gives his staff out of his hand, when he is come to the end of his journey.
Praying shall then be turned to praising: and, there being no sin to confess,
no wants to seek the supply of; confession and petition shall be swallowed up
in everlasting thanksgiving. There will be no mourning, in heaven: they have
sown in tears, the reaping time of joy is come, and God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes, Rev. xxi. 4. No need of mortification there; and
self-examination is then at an end. They will not need to watch any more; the
danger is over. Patience has had its perfect work, and there is no use for it
there. Faith is turned into sight, and hope is swallowed up in the ocean of
sensible and full enjoyment. All the rebels are subdued, the saints quietly set
on their throne: and so the forces, needful in the time of the spiritual
warfare, are disbanded; and they carry on their triumph in profoundest peace.

Lastly, White garments were worn, on festival days, in token of joy. And so
shall the saints be clothed in white raiment; for they shall keep an
everlasting sabbath to the Lord, Heb. iv. 9. There remains therefore a rest
(or keeping of a sabbath) to the people of God. The sabbath, in the esteem of
saints, is the queen of days: and they shall have an endless sabbatism in the
kingdom of heaven; so shall their garments be always white. They will have an
eternal rest, with an uninterrupted joy: for heaven is not a resting place,
where men may sleep out an eternity; (there they rest not day nor night) but
their work is their rest and continual recreation, and toil and weariness have
no place there. They rest there in God, who is the center of their souls. Here
they find the complement, or satisfaction of all their desires; having the full
enjoyment of God, and uninterrupted communion with him. This is the point, unto
the which till the soul come, it will always be restless: but, that point
reached, it rests; for he is the last end, and the soul can go no farther. It
cannot understand, will, nor desire more; but in him it has what is
commensurable to its boundless desires. This is the happy end of all the
labors of the saints; their toil and sorrows issue in a joyful rest. The
Chaldeans measuring the natural day, put the day first, and the night last: but
the Jews counted the night first, and the day last. Even so, the wicked begin
with a day of rest and pleasure, but end with a night of everlasting toil and
sorrow: but God's people have their gloomy night first, and then comes their
day of eternal rest. The which Abraham, in the parable, observed to the rich
man in hell, Luke xvi. 25. Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst
thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and
thou art tormented.

III. If one enquires where the kingdom of the saints lies? It is not in this
world; it lies in a better country, that is, an heavenly, (Heb. xi. 16.) a
country better than the best of this world; namely, the heavenly Canaan,
Immanuel's land, where nothing is wanting to complete the happiness of the
inhabitants. This is the happy country, blessed with a perpetual spring, and
which yields all things for necessity, convenience, and delight. There men
shall cat angels food; they shall be entertained with the hidden manna, (Rev.
ii. 17) without being set to the painful gathering of it: they will be fed to
the full, with the product of the land falling into their mouths, without the
least toil to them. That land enjoys an everlasting day, for there is no night
there, Rev. xxi. 25. An eternal sunshine beautifies this better country, but
there is no scorching heat there: No clouds shall be seen there for ever: yet
it is not a land of drought; the trees of the Lord's planting are set by the
rivers of water, and shall never want moisture, for they will have an eternal
supply of the Spirit, by Jesus Christ, from his Father. This is the country
from whence our Lord came, and whither he is gone again: the country which all
the holy patriarchs and prophets had their eye upon, while on earth; and which
all the saints, who have gone before us, have fought their way to; and unto
which, the martyrs have joyfully swimmed, through a sea of blood. This earth is
the place of the saints pilgrimage: that is, their country, where they find
their everlasting rest.

IV. The royal city is that great city, the holy Jerusalem, described, at
large, Rev. xxi. 10 to the end of the chapter. (It is true, some learned
divines place this city in the earth: but the particulars of the description
seem to me to favor those most, who point us to the other world for it.) The
saints shall reign in that city, whose wall is of jasper, (ver. 16) and the
foundations of the wall garnished with all manner of precious stones, (ver.
19.) and the streets of pure gold, (ver. 20) so that their feet shall be set on
that, which the men of this world set their hearts upon. This is the city God
has prepared for them, Heb. xi. 16. A city that has foundations, (ver. 10.) A
continuing city, (chap xiii. 14.) which shall stand and flourish, when all the
cities of the world are laid in ashes; and which shall not be moved, when the
foundations of the world are overturned. It is a city that never changes its
inhabitants: none of them shall ever be removed out of it: for life and
immortality reign there, and no death can enter into it. It is blessed with a
perfect and perpetual peace, and can never be in the least disturbed. Nothing
from without can annoy it; the gates therefore are not shut at all by day, and
there is no night there, Rev. xxi. 25. There can nothing from within trouble
it. No want of provision there; no scarcity; no discord amongst the
inhabitants. Whatever contentions are amongst the saints now; no vestige of
their former jarrings shall remain there. Love to God, and to one another,
shall be perfected: and these of them, who stood at greater distance here, will
joyfully embrace and delight in one another there.

V. The royal palace is Christ's Father's house, in which are many mansions,
John xiv. 2. There shall the saints dwell for ever. That is the house prepared
for all the heirs of glory, even these of them who dwell in the meanest cottage
now, or have not where to lay their heads. As our Lord calls his saints to a
kingdom; he will provide them a house suitable to the dignity he puts upon
them. Heaven will be a convenient, spacious, and glorious house, for those whom
the King delights to honor. Never was a house purchased, at so dear a rate
as this, being the purchase of the Mediator's blood; and no less could it be
afforded for to them: never was there so much ado, to fit inhabitants for a
house. The saints were, by nature, utterly unfit for this house, and human art
and industry could not make them meet for it. But the Father gives the designed
inhabitants to his Son, to be by him redeemed: the Son pays the price of their
redemption, even his own precious blood; that, with the allowance of justice,
they may have access to the house: and the holy Spirit sanctifies them by his
grace; that they may be meet to come in thither, where no unclean thing can
enter. And no marvel, for it is the King's palace, they enter into, (Psalm. xlv.
15.) The house of the kingdom, where the great King keeps his court, where he
has his throne, and shows forth his glory, in a singular manner beyond what
mortals can conceive.

VI. Paradise is their Palace-garden. This day shall thou be with me in
paradise, said our Savior to the penitent th^ef on the cross, Luke xxiii. 43.
Heaven is a paradise for pleasure and delight, where there is both wo^d and
water; A pure river, of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the
throne of God, and of the Lamb; and (...) either (...) of the river, the tree
of life, which bears twelve (...) of (...), and ^^^lds her fruit every month,
Rev. x^^^. 1, 2. (...) happy mig^^ (...) Adam have been in the earthly
paradise, where the^^ was nothing wanting for necessity, nor delight! Eden was
the^ at pleasant spot of the uncorrupted earth, and paradise the most pleasant
spot of Eden; but what is earth in (...) of heaven? The glorified saints are
advanced to the heavenly paradise There they shall not only see, but eat of the
tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God, Rev. ii. 7. They
shall behold the Mediator's glory, and be satisfied with his goodness. No
flaming sword will be there, to keep the way of that tree of life; but they
shall freely eat of it, and live for ever. And they shall drink of the river of
pleasures, (Psalm. xxxvi. 8.) these sweetest and purest pleasures, the which
Immanual's land does afford; and shall swim in an ocean of unmixed delight for
evermore.

VII. They shall have royal treasures, sufficient to support the dignity they
are advanced unto. Since the street of the royal city is pure gold, and the
twelve gates thereof are twelve pearls; their treasure must be of that which is
better than gold or pearl. It is an eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. iv. 17. O
precious treasure! a treasure not liable to insensible corruption, by moths or
rust; a treasure which none can steel from them, Matthew. vi. 20. Never did any
kingdom afford such a precious treasure, nor a treasure of such variety: for he
that overcomes shall inherit all things, Rev. xxi. 7. No treasures on earth
are stored with all things: if they were all put together in one, there would
be far more valuable things wanting in that one, than found in it. This then is
the peculi^^ to asure of these kings, who inherit the kingdom of heaven. They
shall want nothing, that may contribute to their full satisfaction. Now they
are rich in hope: but then they will have their riches in hand. Now all things
are theirs in respect of right: then all shall be theirs in possession. They
may go for ever through Immanuel's land, and behold the glory and riches
thereof, with the satisfying thought, that all they see is their own. It is
pity these should ever be uneasy under the want of earthly good things, who may
be sure, they shall inherit all things at length.

VIII Albiet there is no (material) temple therein, no mediate serving of God
in the use of ordinances, as here on earth; yet, as for this kingdom, The Lord
God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it, Rev. xxi. 22 As the temple was
the glory of Canaan, so will the celestial temple be the glory of heaven. The
saints shall be brought in thither as a Royal priesthood, to dwell in the house
of the Lord for ever; for Jesus Christ will then make every saint a pillar in
the temple of God, and he shall go no more out, (Rev. iii. 12.) as the Priests
and Levites did, in their courses, go out of the material temple. There the
saints shall have the cloud of glory, the divine presence, with most intimate,
uninterrupted communion with God: there they shall have Jesus Christ as the
true ark, wherein the fiery law shall be for ever hid from their eyes; and the
mercy-seat, from which nothing shall be breathed, but everlasting peace and
good will toward them: the cherubims, the society of holy angels, who shall
join with them in eternal admiration of the mystery of Christ: the golden
candlestick, with its seven lamps, for the glory of God does lighten it, and
the Lamb is the light thereof, Rev. xxi. 23. The incense-altar, in the
intercession of Christ, who ever lives to make intercession for them (Heb.
vii. 25.) eternally exhibiting the merits of his death and sufferings, and
efficaciously willing for ever, that these, whom the Father has given him, be
with him: and the shewbread table, in the perpetual feast, they shall have
together, in the enjoyment of God. This leads me more particularly to consider,

IX. The Society in this kingdom. What would royal power and authority, ensigns
of royalty, richest treasures, and all other advantages of a kingdom, avail
without comfortable society? Some crowned heads have had but a sorry life
through the want of it: their palaces have been but unto them as prisons, and
their badges of honor as chains on a prisoner: while hated of all, they had
none they could trust in, or whom they could have comfortable fellowship with.
But the chief part of heaven's happiness lies in the blessed society the saints
shall have there. For clearing of which, consider these few things:

First, The society of the saints, among themselves, will be no small part of
heaven's happiness. The communion of saints on earth is highly prized by all
these who are traveling through the world unto Zion; and companions in sin can
never have such true pleasure and delight in one another, as sometime the
Lord's people have in praying together, and conversing about these things which
the world is a stranger to. Here the saints are but few in company, at best:
and some of them are so posted, as they seem to themselves to dwell alone:
having no access to such, as they could freely unbosom themselves to, in the
matter of their spiritual case. They sigh and say, Woe is me, for I am as when
they have gathered the summer fruits -- there is no cluster to eat -- the good
man is perished out of the earth, Mic. vii 1, 2. But in the general assembly of
the firstborn in heaven, none of all the saints, who ever were, or will be on
the earth, shall be missing. They will be all of them together in one place,
all possess one kingdom, and all sit down together to the marriage-supper of
the Lamb. Here the best of the saints want not their sinful imperfections,
making their society less comfortable: but there they shall be perfect, without
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. v. 27. And all natural, as well as
sinful imperfections perfections are then done away; they shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, Dan. xii. 3

There we will see Adam and Eve in the heavenly paradise, freely eating of the
tree of life; Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the holy patriarchs, no more
wandering from land to land, but come to their everlasting rest; all the
prophets feeding their eyes on the glory of him, of whose coming they
prophesied; the twelve Apostles of the Lamb, sitting on their twelve thrones;
all the holy martyrs in their long white robes, with their crowns on their
heads the godly kings advanced to a kingdom which cannot be moved; and them
that turn many to righteousness, shining as the stars for ever and ever. There
will we see our godly friends, relations and acquaintances, pillars in the
temple of temple of God, to go no more out from us. And it is more than
probable, that the saints will know one another in heaven: that, at least, they
will know their friends, relatives, and these they were acquainted with on
earth, and such as have been most eminent in the church: howbeit that knowledge
will be purged from all earthly thoughts and affections. This seems to be
included in that perfection of happiness to which the saints shall be advanced
there. If Adam knew who and what Eve was at first sight, when the Lord God
brought her to him, (Genesis ii. 23, 24) why should one question, but husbands and
wives, parents and children, will know each other in glory? if the
Thessalonians, converted by Paul's ministry, shall be his crown of rejoicing,
in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his coming, (1 Thessalonians. ii 19.) Why
may not one conclude, that ministers shall know their people, and people their
ministers in heaven? And if the disciples, on the mount of transfiguration,
knew Moses and Elias, whom they had never seen before, (Matthew. ii. 19) we have
ground to think, we shall know them too, and such as they, when we come to
heaven. The communion of saints shall be most intimate there; they shall sit
down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. viii. 11.
Lazarus was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom, (Luke xvi. 23) which
denotes most intimate and familiar society. And though diversity of tongues
shall cease, (1 Cor. xiii. 8.) I make no question, but there will be an use of
speech in heaven; and that the saints will glorify God in their bodies there,
as well as in their spirits, speaking forth his praises with an audible voice.
(As for the language, we shall understand, what it is, when we come thither.)
When Paul was caught up to the third heaven, the seat of the blessed, he heard
there unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter, 2 Cor. xii.
4. Moses and Elias, on the mount with Christ, talked with him, Matthew. xvii. 3.
and spoke of his disease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem, Luke ix. 31.

Secondly, The saints will have the society of all the holy angels there. And
aumerable company of angels shall be companions to them in their glorified
state. Happy were the shepherds, who heard the song of the heavenly host, when
Christ was born, but thrice happy they, who shall join their voices with
theirs, in the choir of saints and angels in heaven, when he shall be glorified
in all, who shall be about him there. Then shall we be brought acquainted with
the blessed spirits, who never sinned. How bright will these morning-stars
shine in the holy place! they were ministering spirits to the heirs of
salvation, loved them for their Lord and Master's sake; encamped round about
them, to preserve them from danger; how joyfully will they welcome them to
their everlasting habitations; and rejoice to see them come at length to their
kingdom, as the tutor does in the prosperity of his pupils! The saints shall be
no more afraid of them, as sometime they were wont to be: they shall then have
put off mortality, and infirmities of the flesh, and be themselves, as the
angels of God, fit to entertain communion and fellowship with these shining
ones. And both being brought under one head, the Lord Jesus Christ; they shall
join in the praises of God, and of the Lamb, saying, with a loud voice, Worthy
is the Lamb that was slain, etc. Rev. v. 11, 12. Whether the angels sha]l (as
some think) assume airy bodies, that they may be seen by the bodily eyes of the
saints, and be in nearer capacity to converse with them, I know not: but as
they want not ways of converse amongst themselves, we have reason to think,
that conversation, betwixt them and the saints, shall not be for ever blocked
up.

Lastly, They shall have society with the Lord himself in heaven, glorious
communion with God and Christ, which is the perfection of happiness. I choose to
speak of communion with God, and the man Christ together; because as we derive
our grace from the Lamb, so we will derive our glory from him too; the man
Christ being (if I may be allowed the expression) the center of the divine
glory in heaven, from whence it is diffused unto all the saints. This seems to
be taught us by these scriptures, which express heaven's happiness by being
with Christ, Luke xxiii. 43. This day shall thou be with me in paradise, John
xxvii. 24. Father I will that th^se also, whom thou have given me, be with me.
(And remarkable to this purpose is what follows, that they may behold my
glory.) 1 Thessalonians. iv. 17. So shall we ever be with the Lord, to wit, the Lord
Christ, whom we shall meet in the air. This also seems to be the import of
these scriptures, wherein God and the Lamb, the slain Savior, are jointly
spoken of, in the point of the happiness of the saints in heaven, Rev. vii. 17.
For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall
lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes, Chap. xxi. 3. Behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he
will dwell with them, to wit, as in a tabernacle, (so the word signifies) that
is, in the flesh of Christ, (compare John i. 14. and ver. 22.) "The Lord God
Almighty, and the Lamb are the temple of it." Here lies the chief happiness of
the saints in heaven, that without which they could never be happy, though
lodged in that glorious place, and blessed with the society of angels there.
What I will venture to say of it, shall be comprised in three things.

1 st. The saints in heaven shall have the glorious present^ of God, and of the
Lamb: God himself shall be with them, Rev. xxi 3. And they shall ever be with
the Lord. God is everywhere present, in respect of his essence; the saints
militant have his special glorious presence: but in heaven they have his
glorious presence. There they are brought near to the throne of the great King,
and stand before him, where he shows his inconceivable glory. There they have
the tabernacle of God, on which the cloud of glory rests, the all glorious
human nature of Christ, wherein the fullness of the Godhead dwells, not veiled
as in the days of his humiliation, but shining through that blessed flesh,
(that all the saints may behold his glory) and making that body more glorious
than a thousand sons: so that the city has no need of the sun, nor of the moon,
but the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof,
(properly, the candle thereof) Rev xxi 23. i. e. The Lamb is the luminary, or
luminous body, which gives light to the city; as the sun and moon now give
light to the world, or as a candle lightens a dark room: and the light
proceeding from that glorious luminary, for the city is the glory of God.
Sometime that candle burnt very dim, it was hid under a bushel, in the time of
his humiliati^^; but that, now and then, it darted out some rays of this light,
which dazzled the eyes of the spectators: but now it is set on high, in the
city of God, where it shines, and shall shine for ever, in perfection of glory.
It was sometimes laid aside, as a stone disallowed of the builders: but now it
is, and for ever will be, the light or luminary of that city; and that, like
unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper stone clear as crystal, ver. 11.

Who can conceive the happiness of the saints, in the presence chamber of the
great King, where he sits in his chair of state, making his glory eminently to
appear in the man Christ? His gracious presence makes a mighty change upon the
saints in this world: his glorious presence in heaven then must needs screw up
their graces to their perfection, and elevate their capacities. The saints do
experience, that the presence of God now with them in his grace, can make a
little heaven of a sort of hell: how great then must the glory of heaven be, by
his presence there in his glory! If a candle, in some sort, beautifies a
cottage or prison, how will the shining sun beautify a palace or paradise! The
gracious presence of God made a wilderness lightsom to Moses, the valley of the
shadow of death to David, a fiery furnace to the three children: what a
ravishing beauty shall then arise from the sun of righteousness, shining in his
meridian brightness on the street of the city laid with pure gold? This
glorious presence of God in heaven will put a glory on the saints themselves.
The pleasant garden has no beauty, when the-darkness of the night sits down on
it; but the shining sun puts a glory on the blackest mountains: so these who
are now as bottles in the s^^ak, when set in the glorious presence of God, will
be glorious both in soul and body.

2 dly, The saints in heaven shall have the full enjoyment of God and of the
Lamb. This is it that perfectly satisfies the rational creature; and here is
the saints everlasting rest. This will make up all their wants, and fill the
desires of their souls, which after all here obtained, still cry, Give give,
not without some anxiety; because though they do enjoy God, yet they do not
enjoy him fully. As to the way and manner of this enjoyment, our Lord tells us,
John xvii. 3. This is life eternal, that they may know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Now there are two ways, how a desirable
object is known most perfectly and satisfyingly; the one is by sight, the other
by experience: sight satisfies the understanding, and experience satisfies the
will. Accordingly one may say, that the saints enjoy God and the Lamb in
heaven, (1.) By an intuitive knowledge. (2.) By an experimental knowledge, both
of them perfect, I mean, in respect of the capacity of the creature; for
otherwise a creature's perfect knowledge of an infinite Being is impossible.
The saints below enjoy God, in that knowledge they have of him by report, from
his his holy word which they believe; they see him likewise darkly in the glass
of ordinances, which do, as it were, represent the bridegroom's picture, or
shadow, while he is absent: they have also some experimental knowledge of him,
they taste that God is good, and that the Lord is gracious. But the saints
above shall not need a good report of the King, they shall see himself;
therefore faith cease: they will behold his own face; therefore ordinances
are no more; there is no need of a glass: they shall drink, and drink
abundantly of that whereof they have tasted; and so hope cease, for they are
at the utmost bounds of their desires.

1. The saints in heaven shall enjoy God and the Lamb, by sight, and that in a
most perfect manner, 1 Cor. xiii. 12. For now we see through a glass darkly;
but then face to face. Here our sight is but mediate, as by a glass, in which
we see not things themselves, but the images of things: but there we shall have
an immediate view of God and the Lamb. Here our knowledge is but obscure; there
it shall be clear without the least mixture of darkness. The Lord does now
converse with his saints, through the lattesses of ordinances: but then shall
they be in the presence chamber with him. There is a vail now on the glorious
face as to us: but when we come to the upper house, that vail, through which
some rays of beauty are now darted, will be found entirely taken off; and then
shall glorious excellencies and perfections, not se^^^n^am by mortals, be
clearly discovered, for we shall see his face, Rev. xxii. 4. The phrase seems
to be borrowed from the honor put on some in the courts of monarchs, to be
attendants on the king's person. We read, Jer. liii. 25. of seven men of them
that were (Heb. Seers of the king's face, i. e. as we read it) near the king's
person. O unspeakable glory! the great King keeps his court in heaven; and the
saints shall all be his courtiers, ever near the King's person, seeing his
face. The throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall
serve him, and they shall see his face, Rev. xxii. 3, 4.

(1.) They shall see Jesus Christ with their bodily eyes, since he will never
lay aside the human nature. They will always behold that glorious blessed body,
which is personally united to the divine nature, and exalted far above
principalities and powers, and every name that is named. There we will see,
with our eyes, that very body, which was born of Mary at Bethlehem, and
crucified at Jerusalem betwixt two thieves; that blessed head that was crowned
with thorns; the face that was spit upon; the hands and feet that were nailed
to the cross; all shining with unconceivable glory. The glory of the man Christ
will attract the eyes of all the saints, and he will be for ever admired in all
them that believe, 2 Thessalonians. i. 10. Were each star, in the heavens, shining as
the sun in its meridian brightness, and the light of the sun so increased, as
the stars, in that case, should bear the same proportion to the sun, in point
of light, that they do now; it might possibly be some faint resemblance of the
glory of the man Christ, in comparison with that of the saints; for though the
saints shall shine forth as the sun* yet not they, but the Lamb shall be the
light of the city. The wise men fell down, and worshipped him, when they saw
him a young child, with Mary his mother, in the house. But O! what a ravishing,
sight will it be to see him in his kingdom on his throne, at the Father's right
hand! The Word was made flesh, (John i. 14.) and the glory of God shall shine
through that flesh, and the joys of heaven, spring out from it, unto the
saints, who shall see and enjoy God, in Christ. For since the union betwixt
Christ and the saints is never dissolved but they continue his members for
ever; and the members cannot draw their life, but from their Head; seeing that
which is dependent on the head, as to the vital influence, is no member:
therefore Jesus Christ will remain the everlasting bond of union betwixt God
and the saints; from whence their eternal life shall spring, John xvii. 2, 3.
Thou have given him power overall flesh, that he should give eternal life to as
many as thou have given him. And this is life eternal, that they might know
thee the only true God, etc. Ver. 22, 23. And the glory which thou gave me, I
have given them, that they may be one, even as we are one: I in them, and thou
in me, that they may be made perfect in one. Wherefore the immediate enjoyment
of God in heaven is to be understood, in respect of the laying aside of word
and sacraments, and such external means, as we enjoy God by in this world; but
not, as if the saints should then cast off their dependence on their Head for
vital influences: nay, the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed
them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters, Rev. vii. 17.

Now when we shall behold him, who died for us, that we might live for
evermore, whose matchless love made him swim through the Red Sea, of God's
wrath, to make a path in the midst of it for us, by which we might pass safely
to Canaan's land: then we will see what a glorious One he was, who suffered all
this for us; what entertainment he had in the upper-house; what hallelujahs of
angels could not hinder him to hear the groans of a pershing multitude on
earth, and to come down for their help: and what a glory he laid aside for us.
Then will we be more able to comprehend with all saints, what is the breadth,
and length, and depth, and height: and to know the love of Christ, which
passes knowledge, Ephesians. iii. 19 When the saints shall remember, that the waters
of wrath he was plunged into, are the wells of salvation from whence they draw
all their joy; that they have got the cup of salvation, in exchange of the cup
of wrath his Father gave him to drink, which his sinless human nature shivered
at: how will their hearts leap within them, burn with seraphick love, like
coals of juniper, and the arch of heaven ring with their songs of salvation?
The Jews celebrating the feast of tabernacles, (which was the most joyful of
all their feasts, and lasted seven days) went once every day about the altar,
singing hosanna, with their myrtle, palm and willow-branches in their hand,
(the two former signs of victory, the last of chastity) in the mean time
bending their boughs toward the altar. When the saints are presented as a
chaste virgin to Christ, and as conquerors have got their palms in their hands,
how joyfully will they compass the altar evermore; and sing their hosannas, (or
rather their hallelujahs) about it, bending their palms toward it,
acknowledging themselves to owe all unto the Lamb that was slain, and redeemed
them with his blood! and to this agrees what John saw, Rev. vii 9, 10. A great
multitude -- stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white
robes, and palms in their hands: and cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation
to our God which sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.

(2.) They shall see God, Matthew. v. 8. They will be happy in seeing the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost (not with their bodily eyes, in respect of which God is
invisible 1 Timothy i 17. but) with the eyes of their understanding; being blessed
with the most perfect, full, and clear knowledge of God and divine things,
which the creature is capable of. This is called the beatifick vision, and is
the perfection of the understanding, the utmost term thereof. It is but an
obscure delineation of the glory of God, that mortals can have on earth; a
sight, as it were of his back part, Exodus xxxiii. 23. But there they will see
his face, Rev. xxii. 4. They shall see him in the fullness of his glory, and
behold him fixedly; whereas it is but a passing view they can have of him here,
Exodus xxxiv. 6. There is a vast difference betwixt the sight of a king in his
night-clothes, quickly passing by us; and a fixed leisure view of him sitting
on his throne in his royal robes, his crown on his head, and his septre in his
hand: such a difference will there be, between the greatest manifestation of
God that ever a saint had on earth; and the display of his glory that shall be
seen in heaven. There the saints shall eternally, without interruption, feed
their eyes upon him, and be ever viewing his glorious perfections. And as their
bodily eyes shall be strengthened and fitted, to behold the glorious majesty of
the man Christ; as eagles gaze on the sun, without being blinded thereby: so
their minds shall have such an elevation, as will fit them to see God in his
glory (...) capacities shall be enlarged, according to the measure in which he
shall be pleased to communicate himself unto them for their complete happiness.

This blissful sight of God, being quite above our present capacities, we must
needs be much in the dark about it. But it seems to be something else, than the
fight of that glory, which we will see with our bodily eyes, in the saints and
in the man Christ, or any other splendour or refulgence from the Godhead
whatsoever* for no created thing can be our chief good and happiness, nor fully
satisfy our souls; and it is plain, that these things are somewhat different
from God himself. Therefore I conceive, that the souls of the saints shall see
God himself: so the scriptures teach us, that we shall see face to face, and
know even as we are known, 1 Cor xiii 12. And that we shall see him as he is, 1
John iii. 12. Howbeit the saints can never have an adequate conception of God;
they cannot comprehend that which is infinite. They may touch the mountain, but
cannot grasp it in their arms They cannot with one glance of their eye, behold
what grows on every side: but the divine perfections will be an unbounded
field, in which the glorified shall walk eternally, seeing more and more of
God: since they can never come to the end of that which is infinite. They may
bring their vessels to this ocean every moment, and fill them with new waters.
What a ravishing sight would it be, to see all the perfections, and lovely
qualities, that are scattered here and there among the creatures, gathered
together into one! but even such a sight would be infinitely below this
blissful sight the saints shall have in heaven. For they shall see God, in whom
all these perfections shall eminently appear, with infinitely more; whereof
there is no vestige to be found in the creature. In him shall they see every
thing desirable, and nothing but what is desirable.

Then shall they be perfectly satisfied, as to the love of God toward them,
which they are now ready to question on every turn. They will be no more set to
persuade themselves of it, by marks, signs, and testimonies: they will have an
intuitive knowledge of it. They shall (with the profoundest reverence be it
spoken) look into the heart of God, and there see the love he bore to them from
all eternity, and the love and good will he will bear to them for evermore. The
glorified shall have a most clear and distinct understanding of divine truths,
for in his light we shall see light, Psalm. xxxvi. 9. The light of glory will be
a complete commentary on the Bible, and loose all the hard and knotty questions
in divinity. There is no joy on earth, comparable to that which arises from
the discovery of truth; no discovery of truth comparable to the discovery of
scripture-truth, made by the Spirit of the Lord unto the soul. I rejoice at thy
word, says the Psalmist, as one that finds great spoil, Psalm. cxix. 162. Yet
it is but an imperfect discovery we have of it while here. How ravishing then
will it be, to see the opening of the whole treasure, hid in that field! they
shall also be let into the understanding of the works of God. The beauty in the
works of creation and providence will then be set in a due light. Natural
knowledge will be brought to perfection by the light of glory. The web of
providence concerning the church, and all men whatsoever, will then be cut out,
and laid before the eyes of the saints, and it will appear a most beautiful
mixture; so as they shall say together, on the view of it, he has done all
things well. But, in a special manner, the work of redemption shall be the
eternal wonder of the saints, and they will admire and praise the glorious
contrivance for ever. Then shall they get a full view of its suitableness to
the divine perfections, and to the case of sinners: and clearly read the
covenant, that past betwixt the Father and the Son, from all eternity, touching
their salvation. They shall for ever wonder and praise, and praise and wonder
at the mysteries of wisdom and love, goodness and holiness, mercy and justice,
appearing in the glorious device. Their souls shall be eternally satisfied with
the fight of God himself, and of their election by the Father, their redemption
by the Son, and application thereof to them by the Holy Spirit.

2. The saints in heaven shall enjoy God in Christ by experimental knowledge,
which is, when the object itself is given and possessed. This is the
participation of the divine goodness in full measure; which is the perfection
of the will, and utmost term thereof. The Lamb shall lead them unto living
fountains of waters, Rev. vii. 17. These are no other but God himself, the
fountain of living waters, who will fully and freely communicate himself unto
them. He will pour out of his goodness eternally into their souls: and then
shall they have a most lively sensation, in the innermost part of their souls,
of all that goodness they heard of, and believed to be in him; and of what they
see in him by the light of glory. This will be an everlasting practical
exposition of that word, which men and angels cannot sufficiently unfold, to
wit, God himself shall -- be their God, Rev. xi. 3. God will communicate
himself unto them fully: they will no more be set to taste of the streams of
divine goodness in ordinances, as they were wont, but shall drink at the
fountainhead. They will be no more entertained with sips and drops, but filled
with all the fullness of God. And this will be the entertainment of every saint:
for though in created things, what is given to one, is withheld from another;
yet an infinite good can fully communicate itself to all, and fill all. These
who are heirs of God, the great heritage, shall then enter into a full
possession of their inheritances: and the Lord will open his treasures of
goodness unto them, that their enjoyment may be full. They shall not be stinted
to any measure: but the enjoyment shall go as far as their enlarged capacities
can reach. As a narrow vessel cannot contain the ocean, to neither can the
finite creature comprehend an infinite good: but no measure shall be set to the
enjoyment, but what arises from the capacity of the creature. So that,
although there be degrees of glory, yet all shall be filled, and have what they
can hold; though some would be capable to hold more than others, there will be no
want to any of them, all shall be fully satisfied, and perfectly blessed in the
full enjoyment of divine goodness, according to their enlarged capacities. As
when bottles of different sizes are filled, some contain more, others less; yet
all of them have what they can contain. The glorified shall have all, in God,
for the satisfaction of all their desires. No created thing can afford
satisfaction to all our desires: clothes may warm us, but they cannot feed us;
the light is comfortable, but cannot nourish us. But in God we shall have all
our desires, and we shall desire nothing without him. They shall be the happy
ones, that desire nothing but what is truly desirable; and withal have all they
desire. God will be all in all to the saints; he will be their life, health,
riches, honor, peace, and all good things. He will communicate himself freely
to them: the door of access to him shall never be shut again, for one moment.
They may, when they will, take of the fruits of the tree of life, for they will
find it on each side the river, Rev. xxii. 2. There will be no vail betwixt God
and them, to be drawn aside; but his fullness shall ever stand open to them. No
door to knock at, in heaven; no asking to go before receiving; the Lord will
allow his people an unrestrained familiarity with himself there.

Now they are in part made partakers of the divine nature: but then they shall
perfectly partake of it; that is to say, God will communicate to them his own
image, make all his goodness not only pass before them, but pass into them, and
stamp the image of all his own perfections upon them, so far as the creature is
capable to receive the same; from whence shall result a perfect likeness to
him, in all things in or about them, which completes the happiness of the
creature. And this is what the Psalmist seems to have had in view, Psalm. xvii.
15. I shall be satisfied when I awake, with thy likeness; the perfection of
God's image, following upon the beatifick vision. And so says John, 1 John iii
2 We shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. Hence there shall be a
most close and intimate union betwixt God and the saints: God shall be in them,
and they in God, in the way of a most glorious and perfect union; for then
shall they dwell in love made perfect. God is love, and he that dwells in
love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John iv. 16. How will the saints knit
with God, and he with them; when he shall see nothing in them but his own
image; when their love shall arrive at its perfection, no nature, but the
divine nature, being left in them, and all imperfection swallowed up in that
glorious tran^formation into the likeness of God! their love to the Lord being
purged from the dross of self-love, shall be most pure; so as they will love
nothing but God, and in God. It shall be no more saint and languishing, but
burn like coals of juniper. It will be a light without darkness, a flaming fire
without smoke. As the live coal, when all the moisture is gone out of it, is
all fire; so will the saints be all love, when they come to the full enjoyment
of God in heaven, by intuitive and experimental knowledge of him, by sight and
full participation of the divine goodness.

Lastly, From this glorious presence and enjoyment shall arise an unspeakable
joy, which the saints shall be filled with. In thy presence is fullness of joy,
Psalm. xvi. 11. The saints sometimes enjoy God in the world, when their eyes
being held, that they cannot perceive it, they have not the comfort of the
enjoyment; but then, all mistakes being removed, they shall not only enjoy God,
but rest in the enjoyment with inexpressible joy and satisfaction. The desire
of earthly things breeds torment, and the enjoyment of them often ends in
loathing. But though the glorified saints shall ever desire more and more of
God, their desires shall not be mixed with the least anxiety, since the fullness
of the Godhead stands always open to them; therefore they shall hunger no more,
they shall not have the least uneasiness, in their eternal appetite after the
hidden manna: neither shall continued enjoyment breed loathing; they shall
never think they have too much; therefore it is added, neither shall the sun
light on them, nor any heat, Rev. vii. 16. The enjoyment of God and the Lamb
will be ever fresh and new to them, through the ages of eternity: for they
shall drink of living fountains of waters, where new waters are continually
springing up in abundance, ver. 17. They shall eat of the tree of life, which,
for variety, affords twelve manner of fruits, and these always new and fresh,
for it yields, every month, Rev. xxii. 2. Their joy shall be pure and unmixed,
without any dregs of sorrow: not slight and momentary, but solid and
everlasting, without interruption. They will enter into joy, Matthew. xxv. 21.
Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. The expression is somewhat unusual, and
brings me in mind of that word of our suffering Redeemer, Mark xiv. 34. My soul
is exceeding sorrowful unto death. His soul was beset with sorrows, as the
word, there used, will bear, the floods of sorrow went round about him,
encompassing him on every hand; whithersoever he turned his eyes, sorrow was
before him; it sprang in upon them from heaven, earth, and hell, all at once:
thus was he entered into sorrow, and therefore says, Psalm. lxix. 2. I am come
into deep waters, where the floods overflow me. Now wherefore all this, but
that his own might enter into joy? Joy sometimes enters into us now, with much
ado to get access, while we are compassed with sorrows: but then joy shall not
only enter into us, but we shall enter into it, and swim for ever in an ocean
of joy: where we will see nothing but joy, whithersoever we turn our eyes. The
presence and enjoyment of God and the Lamb will satisfy us with pleasures for
evermore: and the glory of our souls and bodies, arising from thence, will
afford us everlasting delight. The spirit of heaviness, how closely soever it
cleaves to any of the saints now, shall drop off then: their weeping shall be
turned into songs of joy, and bottles of tears shall issue in rivers of
pleasures. Happy they who now sow in tears, which shall spring up in joy, in
heaven, and bow their heads there with a weight of glory upon them.

Thus far of the society in this kingdom of the saints.

X. In the last place, The kingdom shall endure for ever. As every thing in it
is eternal, so the saints shall have an undoubted certainty and full assurance
of the eternal duration of the same. This is a necessary ingredient in perfect
happiness: for the least uncertainty, as to the continuance of any good with
one, is not without some fear, anxiety and torment; and therefore is utterly
inconsistent with perfect happiness. But the glorified shall never have fear,
nor cause of fear, of any loss: they shall be ever with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. iv.
17. They shall all attain the full persuasion, that nothing shall be able to
separate them from the love of God; nor from the full enjoyment of him, for
ever. The inheritance reserved in heaven is incorruptible; it has no principle
of corruption in itself, to make it liable to decay, but endures for evermore:
It is undefiled: nothing from without can mar^its beauty, nor is there any
thing in itself to offend those who enjoy it: And therefore it fades not away;
but ever remains in its native luster, and primitive beauty, 1 Pet. i. 4.
Hitherto of the nature of the kingdom of heaven.

SECONDLY, Proceed we now to speak of the admission of the saints into this
their kingdom; where I shall briefly touch upon two things, (1) The formal
admission, in the call unto them from the Judge, to come to their kingdom (2.)
The quality in which they are admitted and introduced to it.

I. Their admission, the text shows to be by a voice from the throne; the King
calling to them from the throne, before angels and men, to come to their
kingdom. Come and go are but short words: but they will be such as will afford
matter of thought to all mankind, through the ages of eternity; since upon the
one depends everlasting happiness, and upon the other everlasting misery. Now
our Lord bids the worst of sinners, who hear the gospel, Come: but the most
part will not come unto him. Some few, whose hearts are touched by his Spirit,
do embrace the call, and their souls within them say, Behold, we come unto
thee: they give themselves to the Lord, forsake the world and their lusts for
him; they bear his yoke, and cast it not off, no not in the heat of the day,
when the weight of it (perhaps) makes them sweat the blood out of their bodies.
Behold the fools! says the carnal world, whither are they going? But stay a
little. O foolish world! From the same mouth, whence they had the call they are
now following, another call shall come which will make amends for all, Come, ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the heaven.

The saints shall find an expressible sweetness in this call, to come. (1.)
Hereby Jesus Christ shows his desire of their society in the upper house, that
they may be ever with him there. Thus he will open his heart unto them, as
sometimes he did to his Father concerning them, saying, Father, I will that
they -- be with me, where I am, John xvii. 24. Now the travel of his soul
stands before the throne, not only the souls, but the bodies he has redeemed:
and they must come, for he must be completely satisfied. (2.) Hereby they are
solemnly invited to the marriage supper of the Lamb. They were invited to the
lower table, by the voice of the servants, and the secret workings of the
Spirit within them; and they came, and did partake of the feast of divine
communications in the lower house: but Jesus Christ in person shall invite
them, before all the world, to the higher table. (3.) By this he admits them
into the mansions of glory. The keys of heaven hang at the girdle of our royal
Mediator: All power in heaven is given to him, (Mat. xxvii. 18.) and none get
in thither, but whom he admits. When they were living on earth, with the rest
of the world, he opened the everlasting doors of their hearts, entered into them
himself, and shut them again; so as sin could never re-enter, to reign there as
formerly: and now he opens heaven's doors to them, draws his doves into the
ark, and shuts them in there; so as the law, death and hell, can never get them
out again. The saints in this life were still laboring to enter into that
rest: but Satan was always pulling them back, their corruption always drawing
them down; in so much that they have sometimes been left to hang by a hair of a
promise, (if I may be allowed the expression) not without fears of falling into
the lake of fire: but now Christ gives the word for their admission; they are
brought in, and put beyond all hazard. Lastly, Thus he speaks to them, as the
person introducing them into the kingdom, into the presence chamber of the
Great King, and unto the throne. JESUS CHRIST is the Great Secretary of heaven,
whose it is to bring the saints into the gracious presence of God: and to whom
alone it belongs to bring them into the glorious presence of God in heaven.
Truly heaven would be a strange place to them, if Jesus was not there: but the
Son will introduce his brethren into his Father's kingdom; they shall go in
with him to the marriage, Matthew. xxv. 10.

II. Let us consider in what quality they are introduced by him.

First, He brings them in as the blessed of his Father: so runs the call from
the throne, Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. It is Christ's Father's house
they are to come into: therefore he puts them in mind, that they are blessed of
his Father; dear to the Father, as well as to himself. This is it that makes
heaven home to them; namely, that it is Christ's Father's house, where we may
be assured of welcome, being married to the Son, and being his Father's choice
for that very end. He brings them in for his Father's sake, as well as for his
own: they are the blessed of his Father; who, as he is the fountain of the
Deity, is also the fountain of all blessings conferred on the children of men.
They are these to whom God designed well from eternity. They were blessed in
the eternal purpose of God, being elected to everlasting life: at the opening
of the book of life, their names are found written therein. So that, bringing
them to the kingdom, he does but bring them to what the Father, from all
eternity, designed for them; being saved by the Son, they are saved according
to his (i. e. the Father's) purpose, 2 Timothy i. 9. They are these to whom the
Father has spoken well. He spoke well to them in his word, which must now
receive its full accomplishment. They had his promise of the kingdom, lived and
died in the faith of it: and now they come to receive the thing promised, Unto
them he has done well. A gift is often in scripture called a blessing: and
God's blessing is ever real, like Isaac's blessing, by which Jacob became his
heir: they were all by grace justified, sanctified, and made to persevere unto
the end; now they are raised up in glory, and being tried, stand in the
judgment: what remains then, but that God crown his own work of grace in them,
in giving them their kingdom, in the full enjoyment of himself for ever?
Finally, They are these whom God has consecrated: the which also is a scripture
notion of blessing, 1 Cor. x. 16. God set them apart for himself, to be kings
and priests unto him; and the Mediator introduces them as such to their
kingdom and priesthood.

Secondly, Christ introduces them as heirs of the kingdom to the actual
possession of it. Come, ye blessed, inherit the kingdom. They are the children
of God, by regeneration and adoption: And if children, then heirs, heirs of
God, and joint heirs with Christ, Romans viii. 17. Now is the general assembly of
the firstborn before the throne: their minority is overpast, and the time
appointed of the Father for their receiving of their inheritance is come. The
Mediator purchased the inheritance for them with his own blood; their rights
and evidences were drawn long ago, and registered in the Bible; nay, they had
insoftment of their inheritance in the person of Jesus Christ, as their proxy,
when he ascended into heaven, whither the forerunner is, for us, entered, Heb.
vi. 20. Nothing remains, but that they enter into personal possession
thereof, which begun at death, is perfected at the last day: when the saints,
in their bodies as well as their souls, go into their kingdom.

Lastly, They are introduced to it, as these it was prepared for from the
foundation of the world. The kingdom was prepared for them in the eternal
purpose of God, before they or any of them had a being, which shows it to be a
gift of free grace to them. It was. from eternity the divine purpose, that
there should be such a kingdom for the elect; and that all impediments which
might mar their access to it, should be removed out of the way; and withal, by
the same eternal decree, every one's place in it was determined and set apart,
to be reserved for him, that each of the children coming home at length into
their Father's house, might find his own place awaiting him and ready for him;
as at Readiness table David's place was empty, when he was not there to occupy it
himself, 1 Samuel xx. 25. And now that the appointed time is come, they are
brought in to take their several places in glory, set apart and reserved for
them, till they should come at them.

USE. I shall shut up my discourse on this subject, with a word of application,
(1.) To all who claim a right to this kingdom, (2.) To these who have indeed a
right to it. (3.) To these who have not a right thereto.

First, Since it is evident, there is no promiscuous admission into the kingdom
of heaven, and none do obtain it, but these whose claim to it is solemnly tried
by the great Judge, and, after trial, sustained as good and valid; it is
necessary that all of us impartially try and examine, whether, according to the
laws of the kingdom, contained in the holy scriptures, we can verify and make
good our claim to this kingdom? The hopes of heaven, which most men have, are
built on such sandy foundations, as can never abide the trial; having no ground
in the word, but in their own deluded fancy: such hopes will leave those who
entertain them, miserably disappointed at last. Wherefore it is not only our
duty, but our interest, to put the matter to a fair trail, in time. If we find,
we have no right to heaven indeed, we are yet in the way; and what we have not,
we may obtain: but if we find we have a right to it, we will then have the
comfort of a happy prospect into eternity; which is the greatest comfort one is
capable of in the world. If ye enquire, How ye may know whither ye have a right
to heaven, or not? I answer, ye must know that by the state ye are now in. If
ye are yet in your natural state, ye are children of wrath, and not children of
this kingdom: for that state, to them who live and die in it, issues in eternal
misery. If you be brought into the state of grace, you have a just claim to the
state of glory; for grace will certainly issue in glory at length. This kingdom
is an inheritance, which none but the children of God can justly claim: now we
become the children of God, by regeneration and union with Christ his Son; and
if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, Rom viii.
17. These then are the great points, upon which one's evidences for the state
of glory do depend. And therefore I refer you to what is said on the state of
grace, for clearing of you as to your right to glory.

If you be heirs of glory, the kingdom of God is within you, by virtue of your
regeneration and union with Christ. (1.) The kingdom of heaven has the throne
in thy heart, if thou have a right to that kingdom: Christ is in thee: and God
is in thee; and having chosen him for thy portion, thy soul has taken up its
everlasting rest in him, and gets no kindly rest but in him; as the dove, until
she came into the ark. To him the soul habitually inclines, by virtue of the
new nature, the divine nature, which the heirs of glory are partakers of, Psalm
lxxiii. 25. "Whom have I in heaven but thee." "And there is none upon earth
that I desire besides thee," (2.) The laws of heaven are in thy heart, if thou
art an heir of heaven, Heb. viii. 10. I will put my laws into their mind, and
write them in their hearts. Thy mind is enlightened in the knowledge of the
laws of the kingdom, by the Spirit of the Lord, the instructor of all the heirs
of glory: for whoever may want instruction, sure an heir to a crown shall not
want it. It is written in the prophets; and they shall all be taught of God.
John vi. 45. Therefore though father and mother leave them early, or be in no
concern about their Christian education, and they be soon put to work for their
daily bread; yet they shall not lack teaching. Withal thy heart is charged, and
thou bear God's image, which consists in righteousness and true holiness,
Ephesians. iv. 24. Thy soul is reconciled to the whole law of God, and at war with
all known sin. In vain do they pretend to the holy kindgom, who are not holy in
heart and life; for without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. xii. 14.
If heaven is a rest, it is for spiritual laborers, and not for loiterers. If
it is an eternal triumph, they are not in the way to it, who avoid the
spiritual warfare, and are in no care to subdue corruption, resist temptation,
and to cut their way to it, through the opposition made by the devil, the
world, and the flesh. (3.) The treasure in heaven is the ^hief in thy esteem
and desire, for it is your treasure, and where your treasure is, there will
your heart be also, Marth. vi. 21. If it is not the things that are seen, but
the things that are not seen, which thy heart is in greatest care and concern
to abtain; if thou art driving a trade with heaven, and thy chief business lies
there; it is a sign thy treasure is there, for thy heart is there. But if thou
art of these, who wonder why so much ado about heaven and eternal life, as if
less might serve the turn: thou art like to have nothing ado with it at all.
Carnal men value themselves most on their treasures upon earth; with them, the
things that are not seen, are weighed down by the things that are seen, and no
losses do so much affect them as earthly losses: but the heirs of the crown of
glory will value themselves most on their treasures in heaven, and will not put
their private estate in the balance with their kingdom: nor will the loss of
the former go so near their hearts, as the thoughts of the loss of the latter.
Where these first fruits of heaven are to be found, the eternal weight of glory
will surely follow after; while the want of them must be admitted, according to
the word, to be an uncontestible evidence of an heir of wrath.

Secondly, Let the heirs of the kingdom behave themselves suitable to their
character and dignity. Live as having the faith and hope of this glorious
kingdom: let your conversation be in heaven, Philip. iii. 20. Let your souls
delight in communion with God while ye are on earth, since ye look for your
happiness in communion with him in heaven. Let your speech and actions savor
of heaven: and, in your manner of life, look like the country to which ye are
going; that it may be said of you, as of Gideon's brethren, Judges viii. 18.
Each one resembled the children of a king. Maintain a holy contempt of the
world, and of the things of the world. Although others, whose earthly things
are their best things, do set their hearts upon them; yet it becomes you to set
your feet on them, since your best things are above. This world is but the
country, through which lies your road to Immanuel's land; therefore pass
through it as pilgrims and strangers; and dip not into the encumbrances of it,
so as to retard you in your journey. It is unworthy of one born to a palace, to
set his heart on a cottage, to dwell there: and of one running for a prize of
gold, to go off his way, to gather the stones of the brook: but much more is it
unworthy of an heir of the kingdom of heaven, to be hid among the stuff of this
world, when he should be going on to rece^^^ his crown. The prize set before
you, challenges your outmost zeal activity and diligence; and holy courage,
resolution, and magnanimity, become those who are to inherit the crown. Ye
cannot come at it, without sighting your way to it, through difficulties from
without, and from within: but the kingdom before you is sufficient to balance
them all, though ye should be called to resist even unto blood. Prefer Christ's
cross before the world's crown; and wants in the way of duty before ease and
wealth in the way of sin; Choose rather to suffer affliction with the people of
God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. xi. 25. In a common
inn, strangers (perhaps) fare better than the children: but here lies the
difference, the children are to pay nothing for what they have got; but the
strangers get their bill and must pay completely for all they have had. Did we
consider the wicked's after-reckoning for all the smiles of common providence
they meet with in the world, we would not grudge them their good things here;
nor take it amiss that God keeps our best things last. Heaven will make up all
the saints losses, and all tears shall be wiped away from their eyes there.

It is worth observing, that there is such a variety of scripture notions of
heaven's happiness, as may suit every afflicted case of the saints. Are they
oppressed? The day comes, in which they shall have the dominion. Is their
honor laid in the dust? A throne to sit upon, a crown on their head, and a
scepter in their hand, will raise it up again. Are they reduced to poverty?
Heaven is a treasure. If they be forced to to quit their own habitations, yet
Christ's Father's house is ready for them. Are they driven to the wilderness?
There is a city prepared for them. Are they banished from their native country?
They shall inherit a better country. If they are deprived of public
ordinances, the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple there, whither
they are going; a temple, the doors of which none can shut: if their life be
full of bitterness, heaven is a paradise for pleasure. If they groan under the
remains of spiritual bondage, there is a glorious liberty abiding them. Do
their defiled garments make them ashamed? The day comes, in which their robes
shall be white, pure and spotless. The battle against flesh and blood,
principalities and powers, is indeed sore; but a glorious triumph is awaiting
them. If the ^il and labors of the Christian life be great, there is an
everlasting rest for them in heaven. Are they judged unworthy of society in the
world? they shall be admitted into the society of angels in heaven. Do they
complain of frequent interruption of their communion with God? There they shall
go no more out, but shall see his face for evermore. If they are in darkness
here, eternal light is there. If they grapple with death, there they shall have
everlasting life. And to sum up all in one word, He that overcomes shall
inherit all things, Rev. xxi. 7. He shall have peace and plenty, profit and
pleasue, every thing desirable; full satisfaction to his most enlarged desires
Let the expectants of heaven, then, lift up their heads with joy, gird up their
loins, and so run, as they may obtain; trampling on every thing that may hinder
them in the way to the kingdom. Let them never account any duty too hard, nor
any cross too heavy, nor any pains too much, so as they may obtain the crown of
glory.

Lastly, Let those who have no right to the kingdom of heaven, be stirred up to
seek it with all diligence. Now is the time, wherein the children of wrath may
become heirs of glory: and when the way to everlasting happiness is opened, it
is no time to sit still and loiter. Raise up your hearts toward the glory that
is to be revealed; and do not always ly along on this perishing earth. What can
all your worldly enjoyments avail you, while you have no solid ground to expect
heaven, after this life is gone? These riches and honors, profits and
pleasures, that must be buried with us, and cannot accompany us into another
world, are but a wretched portion, and will leave men comfortless at long run.
Ah! why are men so fond, in their lifetime to receive their good things! why
are they not rather in care, to secure an interest in the kingdom of heaven,
which would never be taken from them, but afford them a portion, to make them
happy through the ages of eternity! if you desire honor, there you may have
the highest honor, and which will last, when the world's honors are laid in
the dust; if riches, heaven will yield you a treasure; and, there are pleasures
for evermore. O! be not despisers of the pleasant land, neither judge
yourselves unworthy of eternal life: but marry the heir, and heaven shall be
your dowry; close with Christ, as he is offered to you in the gospel, and ye
shall inherit all things. Walk in the way of holiness, and it will lead you to
the kingdom. Fight against sin and Satan, and ye shall receive the crown.
Forsake the world, and the doors of heaven will be open to receive you.

HEAD VI. HELL.
MATTHEW. xxv. 41: Then shall he say also unto them on the left Hand, Depart from
me, ye cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.


WERE there no other place of eternal lodging but heaven, I should here have
closed my discourse of man's eternal state: but seeing in the other world,
there is a prison for the wicked, as well as a palace for the saints, we must
also enquire into that state of everlasting misery: the which the worst of men
may well bear with, without crying, Art thou come to torment us before the
time? Since there is yet access to fly from the wrath to come; and all that can
be said of it, comes short of what the damned will feel; for who knows the
power of God's anger?

The last thing our Lord did, before he left the earth, was, he lift up his
hands, and blessed his disciples, Luke xxiv. 50, 51. But the last thing he will
do, before he leave the throne, is to curse and condemn his enemies; as we
learn from the text, which contains the dreadful sentence, wherein the
everlasting misery of the wicked is wrapped up. In which three things may be
taken notice of First, The quality of the condemned, ye cursed. The Judge finds
the curse of the law upon them as transgressors, and sends them away with it,
from his presence, into hell, there to be fully execute upon them, 2 dly, The
punishment which they are adjudged to; and to which they were always bound
over, by virtue of the curse. And it is twofold, the punishment loss, in
separation from God and Christ, Depart from me: and the punishment of sense, in
most exquisite and extreme torments, Depart from me into fire. 3 dly, The
aggravation of their torments. (1.) They are ready for them, they are not to
expect a moment's respite. The fire is prepared, and ready to catch hold of
those who are thrown into it. (2.) They will have the society of devils in
their torments, being shut up with them in hell. They must depart into the same
fire prepared for Beelzebub the prince of devils, and his angels; namely, other
reprobate angels who fell with him, and became devils. It is said to be
prepared for them; because they sinned, and were condemned to hell, before man
sinned. This speaks further terror to the damned, that they must go into the
same torments, and place of torment with the devil and his angels. They
hearkened to his temptations, and they must partake in his torments: his works
they would do, and they must receive the wages, which is death. In this life
they joined with devil in enmity against God and Christ, and the way of
holiness; and in the other they must lodge with them. Thus all the goats shall
be shu^ (...) together; for that name is common to devils and wicked men, (...)
scripture. Lev. xvii. 7. Where the word rendered devils, properly signifies
hairy ones, or goats, in the shape of which creatures, devils delighted much to
appear to their worshippers (3.) The last aggravation of their torment is the
eternal duration thereof, they must depart into everlasting fire. This is it
that puts the cape-stone upon their misery, namely, that it shall never have an
end.

DOCTRINE. The wicked shall be shut up under the curse of God, in everlasting
Misery, with the Devils in Hell.
After having evinced that there shall be a resurrection of the body, and a
general judgment, I think it not needful to insist to prove the truth of future
punishments. The same conscience there is in men of a future judgment, bears
witness also of the truth of future punishment. (And that the punishment of the
damned shall not be annihilation, or a reducing them to nothing, will be clear
in the progress of our discourse.) In treating of this awful subject, I shall
inquire into these four things. (1.) The curse under which the damned shall be
shut up. (2) Their misery under that curse. (3.) Their society with devils in
this miserable state. (4.) The eternity of the whole.

I. As to the curse under which the damned shall be shut up in hell; it is the
terrible sentence of the law, by which they are bound over to the wrath of God,
as transgressors. This curse does not first seize them, when, standing before
the tribunal, they receive their sentence: but they were born under it, they
led their life under it in this world, they died under it, rose with it out of
their graves; and the Judge finding it upon them, sends them away with it, into
the pit; where it shall ly on them through all the ages of eternity. By nature
all men are under the curse; but it is removed from the elect, by virtue of
their union with Christ. It abides on the rest of sinful mankind, and by it
they are devoted to destruction, separated to evil, as one may describe the
curse from Deuteronomy. xxix. 21. And the Lord shall separate him unto evil. Thus
shall the damned, for ever, be persons devoted to destruction: separate and set
apart from among the rest of mankind, unto evil, as vessels of wrath, set up
for marks to the arrows of divine ^^^th; and made the common receptacle and
shore of vengeance.

This curse has its first fruits on earth, which are a pledge of the whole
lump that is to follow. And hence it is, that as temporal and external benefits
are bound up together, under the same expressions in the promise to the Lord's
people, as Isa xxxv. 10. And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to
Zion, etc. relating both to the return from Babylon, and to the saints going to
their eternal rest in heaven: even so temporal and eternal miseries, on the
enemies of God, are sometimes wrapped up under one and the same expression in the
threatening, as Isa. xxx. 33. For Tophet is ordained of old: yea, for the King
it is prepared, he has made it deep and large; the pile thereof is fire and
much wood, the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, does kindle it.
Which relates both to the temporal and eternal destruction of the Assyrians,
who fell by the hand of the angel before Jerusalem. See also Isa lxvi. 24. What
is that judicial blindness to which many are given up in whom the God of this
world has blinded their eyes, (2 Cor iv. 4.) but the first fruits of hell and
of the curse? Their sun is going down at noon day; their darkness increasing as
if it would not stop, till it issue in utter darkness. Many a lash, in the
dark, does conscience give the wicked, which the world does not hear of: and
what is that, but that the never-dying worm is already begun to gnaw them? And
there is not one of these, but they may call it Joseph, for the Lord shall add
another; or rather God, for a troup comes. These drops of wrath are terrible
forebodings of the full shower which is to follow. Sometimes they are given up
to their vile affections, that they have no more command over them, Romans i. 26.
So their lusts grow up more and more toward perfection, if I may so speak. As
in heaven grace comes to its perfection, so in hell sin arrives at its higest
pitch; and as sin is thus advancing upon the man, he is the nearer and the
liker to hell. There are three things that have a fearful aspect here. First,
When every thing that might do good to men's souls, is blasted to them; so that
their blessings are cursed, (Mal. ii. 2) sermons, prayers, admonitions, and
reproofs, which are powerful toward others, are quite inefficacious to them. 2
dly, When men go on sinning still, in the face of plain rebukes from the Lord,
in ordinances and providence: God meets them with rods in the way of their
sin, as it were striking them back; yet they rush forward. What can be more
like hell, where the Lord is always smiting, and the damned always sinning
against him? Lastly, When every thing in one's lot is turned into fuel to one's
lusts. Thus adversity and prosperity, poverty and wealth, the want of
ordinances and the enjoyment of them, do all but nourish the corruptions of
many. Their vicious stomachs corrupt whatsoever they receive, and all does but
increase noxious humors.

But the s^ harvest follows in that misery which they shall for ever ly under
in hell; that wrath, which, by virtue of the curse, shall come upon them to the
uttermost: the which is the curse fully executed. This black cloud opens upon
them, and the terrible thunderbolt strikes them, by that dreadful voice from
the throne, Depart from me, ye cursed, etc. Which will give the whole wicked
world a dismal view of what is in the bosom of the curse. It is, (1.) A voice
of extreme indignation and wrath, a furious rebuke from the Lion of the tribe
of Judah. His looks will be most terrible to them: his eyes will cast flames of
fire on them: and his (...) will pierce their hearts, like envenomed arrows.
When he will thus speak them out of his presence for ever, and by his word
(...) them away from before the throne: They will see how keenly wrath b^^^ in
his heart against them for their sins. (2.) It is a voice of extreme disdain
and contempt from the Lord. Time was, when they were pitied, besought to pity
themselves, and to be the Lord's; but they despised him, they would none of
him: but ^^w shall they be buried out of his sight, under everlasting contempt.
(3.) It is a voice of extreme hatred. Hereby the Lord shuts them out of his
bowels of love and mercy. Depart, ye cursed: q. d. I cannot endure to look at
you; there is not one purpose of good to you in mine heart; nor shall ye ever
hear one word mere of hope from me. Lastly, It is a voice of eternal rejection
from the Lord. He commands them to be gone, and so casts them off for ever.
Thus the doors of heaven are shut against them; the gul^ is fixed between them
and it, and they are driven to the pit^. Now should they cry with all possible
earnestness, Lord, Lord, open to us! they will hear nothing but depart, depart,
ye cursed. Thus shall the damned be shut up under the curse.

USE First, Let all these who, being yet in their natural state, are under the
curse, consider this, and flee to JESUS CHRIST be times, that they may be
delivered from it. How can ye sleep in that state, being wrapped up in the cursed
JESUS CHRIST is now saving unto you, Come, ye cursed; I will take the curse
from off you, and give you the blessing. The waters of the sanctuary are now
running, to heal the cursed ground; take heed to improve them for that end to
your own souls, and fear it as hell, to get (...) spiritual advantage thereby.
Remember that the ^airy places (which are neither sea, nor dry land, a fit
emblem of hypocr^tes) and the marshes (that neither breed fishes, nor bear
trees: but the waters of the sanctuary leave them as they find them, in their
b^rrenness) shall not be healed; (seeing they spurn the only remedy) they shall
be given to salt, (left under eternal barrenness, set up for the monuments of
the wrath of God, and concluded for ever under the curse). Ezekiel. xlvii. 11. 2
dly, Let all cursers consider this, whose mouths are filled with cursing
themselves and others. He who clothes himself with cursing, shall find the
curse come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones, (Psalm. cix.
18.) if repentance prevent it not. He shall get all his imprecations against
him fully answered, in that day wherein he stands before the tribunal of God:
and shall find the killing weight of the curse of God, which he makes light of
now.

II. I proceed to speak of the misery of the damned, under that curse a ^ty
which the tongues of men and angels cannot sufficiently express. God always
acts like himself; no favors can be equal to his and his wrath and terrors,
are without a parallel. As the saints in heaven are advanced to the highest
pitch of happiness, so the damned in hell arrive at the height of misery. Two
things here I shall soberly inquire into, the punishment of loss, and the
punishment of sense in hell. But since these also are such things as eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, we must (as Geographers do) leave a large void for the
unknown land, which the d^y will discover.

First, The punishment of loss, which the damned shall undergo, is separation
from the Lord, as we learn from the text, Depart from me, ye cursed. This will
be a stone upon their grave's mouth, as the talent of lead, Zech. v. 7, 8. that
will hold them down for ever. The, shall be eternally separated from God and
Christ. Christ is the way to the Father: but the way as to them, shall be
everlastingly blocked up, the bridge shall be drawn, and the great gulf fixed;
so shall they be shut up in a state of eternal separation from God the Father,
Son, and the holy Ghost. They will be locally separated from the Man Christ,
and shall never come into the seat of the blessed, where he appears in his
glory, but be cast out into utter darkness, Matthew. xxii. 13. They cannot indeed
be locally separated from God, they cannot be in a place where he is not, since
he is, and will be present everywhere: If I make my bed in hell, says the
Psalmist, "behold thou art there," Psalm. cxxxix 8. But they shall be miserable
beyond expression, in a relative separation from God. Though he will be present
in the very center of their souls, (if I may so express it) while they are
wrapped up in fiery flames, in utter darkness, it shall not only be to feed them
with the vinegar of his wrath, to entertain them with the emanations of his
revenging justice; but they shall never taste more of his goodness and bounty,
nor have the least glimpse of hope from him. They will see his heart to be
absolutely alienated from them, and that it cannot be toward them; but that
they are the party against whom the Lord will have an indignation for ever.
They shall be deprived of the glorious presence and enjoyment of God: they
shall have no part in the beatisick vision, nor see any thing in God toward
them, but one wave of wrath rolling at the back of another. This will bring
upon them overwhelming floods of sorrows for evermore. They shall never taste
of the rivers of pleasures the saints in heaven enjoy; but shall have an
everlasting winter, and a perpetual night, because the Sun of righteousness has
departed from them, and so they are left in utter darkness. So great as
heaven's happiness is, so great will their loss be; for they can have none of
it for ever.

This separation of the wicked from God will be, (1.) an involuntary
separation. Now they depart from him, they will not come to him, though they
are called, entreated, and obtested to come: but then they shall be driven away
from him, when they would gladly abide with him. Although the question, What is
thy beloved more than another beloved? is frequent now amongst the despisers of
the gospel, there will be no such question among all the damned crew; for then
they will see that man's happiness is only to be found in the enjoyment of God,
and that the loss of him is a loss that can never be balanced. (2) It will also
be a total and utter separation. Albeit the wicked are in this life separated
from God, yet there is a kind of intercourse betwixt them: he gives them many
good gifts, and they give him, at least, some good words: so that the peace is
not altogether hopeless. But then there shall be a total separation, the damned
being cast into utter darkness, where there will not be the least gleam of
light or favor from the Lord; the which will put an end unto all their fair
words to him. Lastly, It shall be a final separation: they will part with him,
never more to meet, being shut up under everlasting horror and despair. The
match betwixt Jesus Christ and unbelievers, which has so often been carried
forward, and put back again, shall then be broken up for ever: and never shall
one message of favor or good will go betwixt the parties any more.

This punishment of loss, in a total and final separation from God, is a misery
beyond what mortals can conceive, and which the dreadful experience of the
damned can only sufficiently unfold. But that we may have some conception of
the horror of it, let the following things be considered.

1 st, God is the chief good, and therefore to be separated from him, must be
the chief evil. Our native country, our relations, and our life, are good: and
therefore, to be deprived of them, we reckon a great evil: and the better any
thing is, so much the greater evil is the loss of it: wherefore God being the
chief good, and no good comparable to him, there can be no loss so great as the
loss of God. The full enjoyment of him is the highest pinnacle of happiness the
creature is capable of arriving at: to be fully and finally separated from him
must then be the lowest step of misery which the rational creature must be
reduced to. To be cast off by men, by good men, by the best of men, is heavy:
what must it then be, to be rejected of God, of goodness itself!

2 dly, God is the fountain of all goodness, from which all goodness flows unto
the creatures, and by which it is continued in them, and to them. Whatever
goodness or perfection, natural as well as moral, is in any creature, it is
from God, and depends upon him, as the light is from, and depends on the sun:
for every created being, as such, is a dependent one. Wherefore a total
separation from God, wherein all comfortable communication betwixt God and a
rational creature is absolutely blocked up, must of necessity bring along with
it a total eclipse of all light of comfort and ease whatsoever. If there is but
one window, or open place, in a house, and that be quite shut up; it is evident
there can be ^^thing but darkness in that house. Our Lord tells us, (Matthew.
xix. (...) is none good but one, that is God. Nothing good or comfortable is
originally from the creature: whatever good or comfortable thing one finds in
one's self, as health of body, peace of mind; whatever sweetness, rest,
pleasure, or delight, one finds in other creatures, as in meat, drink, a^ and
sciences; all these are but some faint rays of the divine perfections,
communicate from God unto the creature, and depending on a constant influence
from him, for their conversation, which failing they would immediately be gone;
for it is impossible that any created thing can be to us more or better than
what God make it to be. All the rivulets of comfort we drink of, within or
without ourselves, come from God as their spring head: the course of which
toward us being stopped, of necessity they must all dry up. So that when God
goes, all that is g^ and comfortable goes with him: all ease and quiet of body
or mind, Hos ix. 12. We also to them, when I depart from them When the wicked
are totally and finally separated from him, all that is comfortable in them, or
about them, returns to us fountain, as the light goes away with the sun, and
darkness succeeds in the room thereof Thus, in their separation from God, all
peace is removed far away from them, and pain in body and anguish of soul
succeed to (...) all joy goes, and unmixed sorrow settles in them: all quiet
and rest separate from them, and they are filled with horror and rage: hope
flees away, and despair seizes them, common operations of the Spirit, which
(...) restrain them, are withdrawn for ever, and sin comes to its ^^most
height. And thus we have a dismal view of the horrible spectacle of sin and
misery, which a creature proves, when totally separated from God, and left to
itself; and one may see this separation to be the very hell of hell.

Being separated from God, they are deprived of all good. The go^ things, which
they set their heart upon in this world, are beyond their reach there. The
covetous man cannot enjoy his wealth there, nor the ambitious man his honors,
nor the sensual m^n his pleasures, no (...) a drop of water to cool his tongue,
Luke xvi. 34, 35. No meat nor drink there to strengthen the faint; no sleep to
refresh the weary; and no music, nor pleasant company to comfort (...) cheer
up the sorrowful. And as for these good things they despised in the world, they
shall never more hear of them, nor see them. No offers of Christ there, no
pardons, no peace; no wells of salvation in the pit of destruction. In one
word, they shall be deprived of whatsoever might comfort them, being totally
and finally separated from God, the fountain of all goodness.

3 dly, Man naturally desires to be happy, being withal ^scio^ to himself that
he is not self-sufficient; and therefore has eve^ a desire of something,
without himself, to make him happy: and the soul being, by its natural make and
constitution, capable of enjoying God, and nothing else being commensurable to
its desires, it can never have true and solid rest, till it rest in the
enjoyment of God. This desire of happiness the rational creature can never law
^side, no not in hell. Now wh^le the wicked are on earth, they seek their
satisfaction in the creature; and when one fails, they go to another: thus they
put off their time in the world, deceiving their own souls, and luring them on
with vain hopes B^ in the other world, all comfort in the creatures having
failed together at once; and the shadows they are now pursuing, having all of
them evanished in a moment; they shall be ^^tally and finally separated from
God, and see they have thus lost him. So the doors of earth and heaven both are
shut against them at once. This will create them unspeakable anguish, while
they shall live under an eternal gnawing hunger after happiness, which they
certainly know shall never be in the least measure satisfied, all doors being
closed on them. Who then can imagine how this separation from God shall cut the
damned to the heart! How will they rore and rage under it, and how it will
sting them and gnaw them through the ages of eternity!

4 thly, The damned shall know that some are perfectly happy in the enjoyment
of that God, from whom they themselves are separate^ And this will aggravate
the sense of their loss, that they can never have any share with these happy
ones. Being separated from God, they are separated from the society of the
glorified saints and angels. They may see Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his
bosom, (Luke xvi. 23) but can never come into their company: being, as unclean
lepers, thrust out without the camp, and excommunicated from the presence of
the Lord, and of all his holy ones. It is the opinion of some, that every
person in heaven or hell, shall hear and see all that passes in either state.
Whatever is to be said of this, we have ground from the word to conclude, that
the damned shall have a very exquisite knowledge of the happiness of the saints
in heaven; for what else can be meant by the rich man in hell his s^^ing
Lazarus in Abraham's bosom? One thing is plain in this case, that their own
torments will give them such notions of the happiness of the saints, as a sick
man has of health, or a prisoner has of liberty. And as they cannot fail of
reflecting on the happiness of those in heaven more than they can attain to
contentment with their own lot: so every thought of that happiness will
aggravate their loss. It would be a mighty torment to a hungry man, to see
others liberally feasting, while he is so chained up, as he cannot have one
crumb to stay (...) gnawing appetite. To bring music and dancing before a man
laboring under extreme pains, would but increase his anguish; (...) the^ will
the songs of the blessed, in their enjoyment of God, make the damned rore under
their separation from him!

5 thly, They will remember that time was, when they might have been made
partakers of the blessed state of the facts, in their enjoyment of God: and
this will aggravate their sense of the loss. All may remember, there was once a
possibility of it; that sometime they were in the world, in some corners of
which the way of salvation was laid open to men's view; and may wish they had
gone round the wor^^. till they had found it out. Despisers of the gospel will
remember with bitterness, that Jesus Christ with all his benefits was offered
to them; that they were exhorted, entreated, and pressed to accept, but would
not; and that they were warned of the misery they feel, and obtested to flee
from the wrath to come, but they would not hearken. The gospel-offer slighted,
will make a hot hell; and the loss of an offered heaven will be a sinking
weight on the spirits of unbelievers in the pit. Some will remember that there
was a probability of their being eternally happy; that sometime they seemed to
stand fair for it, and were not far from the kingdom of God; that they had once
almost consented to the blessed bargain, the pen was in their hand (as it were)
to sign the marriage-contract betwixt Christ and their souls; but unhappily
they dropped it, and turned back from the Lord to their lusts again. And others
will remember that they thought themselves sure of heaven but, being blinded
with pride and self-conceit, they were above ordinances, and beyond
instruction, and would not examine their state, which was their ruin: but then
they shall in vain wish, they had reputed themselves the worst of the
congregation in which they lived; and curse the fond conceit they had of
themselves, and that others had of them too. Thus it will sting the damned,
that they might have escaped this loss.

Lastly, They will see the loss to be irrecoverable; that they must eternally
ly under it, never, never to be repaired. Might the damned, after millions of
ages in hell regain when they have lost, it would be some ground of hope: but
the prize is gone, and can never be recovered. And there are two things here,
which will pi^^ce them to the heart. (1.) That they never knew the worth of it,
till it was irrecoverably lost. Should a man give away an earthen pot full of
gold for a trifle, never knowing what was in it till it were quite gone from
him, and past recovery; how would this foolish action gall him, upon the
discovery of the riches in it! such a one's case may be a faint resemblance of
the case of despisers of the gospel, when in hell they lift up their eyes, and
behold that, to their torment* which they will not see now, to their salvation.
(2.) That they have lost it for loss and dung: sold their part of heaven, and
not in^^^hed themselves with the prize. They lost heaven for earthly profits
and pleasures, and now both are gone together from them. The drunkard's cups
are gone, the covetous man's gain, the voluptuous man's carnal delights, and
the sluggard's ease: nothing is left them to comfort them now. The happiness
they lost remains indeed, but they can have no part in it for ever.

USE. Sinners, be persuaded to come to God through Jesus Christ, uniting with
him through a Mediator: that ye may be preserved from this fearful separation
from him. O be afraid to live in a state of separation from God, lest that
which ye now make your choice, become your eternal punishment hereafter! Do not
reject communion with God, cast not off the communion of saints; for it will be
the misery of the damned to be driven out from that communion ^^ase to ^^d up
the wall of separation betwixt God and you, by continuing in your
sinful-courses: repent rather in time, and so pull it down; lest the cape-stone
be laid upon it, and it stand for ever between you and happiness. Tremble at
the thoughts of rejection and separation from God: By whomsoever men are
rejected on the earth, they ordinarily find some pity to them; but if ye be
thus separated from God, ye will find all doors shut against you. Ye will find
no pity from any in heaven: neither saints nor angels will pity them whom God
has utterly cast off: none will pity you in hell, where there is no love but
lothing; all being lothed of God, lothing him, and lothing one another. This is
a day of losses and fears. I show you a loss, ye would do well to fear in time;
be afraid lest you lose God; if ye do, a long eternity will be spent in roaring
out lamentations for this loss. O horrid stupidity! men are in a mighty care
and concern to prevent worldly losses: but they are in hazard of losing the
enjoyment of God for ever and ever, in hazard of losing heaven, the communion
of the blessed, and all good things for soul and body in another world: yet as
careless in that matter, as if they were incapable of thought. O! compare this
day with the day our text aims at. This day is heaven opened to them, who
hitherto have rejected Christ, and yet there is room, if they will come: but
that day the doors shall be shut. Now Christ is saying unto you, Come: then he
will say, Depart: seeing ye would not come, when ye were bidden. Now pity is
shown: the Lord pities you, his servants pity you, and tell you, that the pit
is before you, and cry to you, that ye do yourselves no harm; but then ye shall
have no pity from God nor man.

Secondly, The damned shall be punished in hell (with the punishment of sense)
they must depart from God into everlasting fire. I am not in a mind to dispute,
what kind of fire it is which they shall depart into, and be tormented by for
ever, whither a material fire, or not? Experience will more than satisfy the
curiosity of those who are disposed rather to dispute about it, than to seek
how to escape it. Neither will I meddle with that question. Where it is? It is
enough, that the worm which never dies, and the fire that is never quenched,
will be found somewhere by impenitent sinners But (1) I shall evince that,
whatever kind of fire it is; it is more vehement and terrible than any fire,
we, on earth, are acquainted with. (2) I shall condescend on some properties of
these fiery torments.

As to the 1 st, of these; burning is the most terrible punishment, and brings
the most exquisite pain and torment with it. By what reward could a man be
induced to hold but his hand in the flame of a candle for an hour? All
imaginary pleasures on earth would never prevail with the most voluptuous man,
to venture to lodge but one half hour in a burning fiery furnace; nor would all
the wealth in the world prevail with the most covetous to do it. Yet, on much
lower terms, do most men, in effect, expose themselves to everlasting fire in
hell, which is more vehement and terrible than any fire we on earth are
acquainted with; as will appear by the following considerations.

1. As in heaven grace being brought to its perfection, profit and pleasure do
also arrive at their height there; so sin being come to its height in hell, the
evil of punishment does also arrive at its perfection there. Wherefore, as the
joys in heaven are far greater than any joys which the saints obtain on earth,
so the punishments of hell must be greater than any earthly torments
whatsoever; not only in respect of the continuance of them, but also in respect
of vehemence and exquisiteness.

2. Why are the things of the other world represented to us, in an earthly
dress, in the word; but that the weakness of our capacities in such matters
(which the Lord is pleased to condescend unto) does require it; it being always
supposed, that these things of the other world are in their kind more perfect,
than that by which they are represented? When heaven is represented to us under
the notion of a city, with gates of pearl, and the street of gold; we look not
to find gold and pearls there, which are so mightily prized on earth, but
something more excellent than these finest and most precious things in the
world: when therefore we hear of hellfire, it is necessary we understand by it
something more vehement, piercing, and tormenting, than any fire ever seen by
our eyes, And here it is worth considering, that the torments of hell are held
forth under several other notions than that of fire simply: and the reason of
it is plain; namely, that hereby, what of horror is wanting in one notion of
hell, is supplied by another. Why is heaven's happiness represented under the
various notions of a treasure, a paradise, a feast, a rest, etc. but that there
is not one of these things sufficient to express it? Even so hell torments are
represented under the notion of fire: which the damned are cast into. A
dreadful representation indeed! yet not sufficient to express the misery of the
state of sinners in them. Wherefore we hear also of the second death, (Rev. xx.
6.) for the damned in hell shall be ever dying: of "the wine press of the wrath
of God," (chap. xiv. 19.) wherein they will be trodden in anger, trampled in
the Lord's fury, (Isa. lxiii. 3.) pressed, broken, and bruised, without end:
the worm that dies not, (Mark ix. 44.) which shall eternally gnaw them: a
bottomless pit, where they will be ever sinking, Rev. xx. 3. It is not simply
called a fire, but the lake of fire and brimstone, (ver. 19) a lake of fire
burning with brimstone, (chap xix 20) than which, one can imagine nothing more
dreadful. Yet, because fire gives light, and light (as Solomon observes,
Eccles. xi. 7) is sweet, there is no l^ght there, but darkness, utter darkness,
Matthew. xxv. 30. For they must have an everlasting night, since nothing can be
there, which is in any measure comfortable or refreshing.

3. Our fire cannot affect a spirit, but by way of sympathy with the body, to
which it is united; but hell fire will not only pierce into the bodies, but
directly into the souls of the damned; for it is prepared for the devil and his
angels, these wicked spirits, whom no fire on earth can hurt. Job complains
heavily under the chastise-men: of God's fatherly hand, saying, The arrows of
the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my spirit, Job vi.
4. But how will the spirits of the damned be pierced with the arrows of
revenging justice! how will they be drunk up with the poison of the curse on
these arrows! how vehement must that fire be that pierces directly into the
soul, and makes an everlasting burning in the spirit, the most lively and
tender part of a man, wherein wounds or pain are most intolerable!

Lastly, The preparation of this fire evinceth the inexpressible vehemence and
dreadfulness of it. The text calls it prepared fire, yea, the prepared fire, by
way of eminency. As the three children were not cast into an ordinary fire, but
a fire prepared on a particular design, which therefore was exceeding hot, the
furnace being heated seven times more than ordinary, Dan. ii. 19, 22. So the
damned shall find in hell a prepared fire, the like to which was never prepared
by human art; it is a fire of God's own preparing, the product of infinite
wisdom on a particular design, to demonstrate the most strict and severe divine
justice against sin; which may sufficiently evidence to us the unconceivable
exquisiteness thereof. God always acts in a peculiar way becoming his own
infinite greatness, whether for, or against the creature: and therefore as the
things he has prepared for them that love him, are great and good beyond
expression or conception; so one may conclude, that the things he has prepared
against those who hate him, are great and terrible beyond what men can either
say, or think of them. The pile of Tophet is fire and much wood, (the coals of
that fire are coals of juniper, a kind of wood, which set on fire burns most
fiercely, Psalm cxx. 4.) and the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone,
does kindle it, Isa. xxx. 33. Fire is more or less violent, according to the
matter of it, and the breath by which it is blown: what heart then can fully
conceive the horror of coals of juniper, blown up with the breath of the Lord?
Nay, God himself will be a consuming fire (Deuteronomy. iv. 24) to the damned;
intimately present, as a devouring fire, in their souls and bodies. It is a
fearful thing to fall into a fire, or to be shut up in a fiery furnace, on
earth: but the terror of these evanisheth, when one considers, how fearful it
is to fall into the hands of the living God, which is the lot of the damned;
for who shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who shall dwell with everlasting
burnings? Isa. xxxiii. 14.

At to the second point proposed, namely, the properties of the fiery torments
in hell.

1. They will be universal torments, every part of the creature being tormented
in that flame. When one is cast into a burning fiery furnace, the fire makes
its way into the very bowels, and leaves no member untouched; what part then
can have ease, when the damned swim in a lake of fire burning with brimstone?
There will their bodies be tormented, and scorched for ever. And as they
sinned, so shall they be tormented, in all the parts thereof; that they shall
have no sound side to turn them to: for what soundness or ease can be to any
part of that body, which being separated from God, and all refreshment from
him, is still in the pangs of the second death, ever dying, but never dead? But
as the s^^ was chief in sinning, it will be chief in suffering too, being
filled brimful of the wrath of a sin-revenging God. The d^mmed shall ever be
under deepest impressions of God's vindictive justice against them: and this
fire will melt their souls, within them, like wax. W^o knows the power of that
wrath which had such an effect on the Mediator, standing in the room of
sinners, Psalm. xxii. 14. My heart is like was, it is melted in the midst of my
bowels? Their minds shall be filled with the terrible apprehensions of God's
impeacable wrath: and whatever they can think upon, past, present, or to come,
will aggravate their torment and anguish. Their will shall be crossed in all
things for ever-more: as their will was ever contrary to the will of God's
precepts; so God, in his dealings with them, in the other world, shall have war
with then will for ever. What they would have, they shall not in the least
obtain; but what they would not shall be (...) upon them without remedy. Hence
no pleasant affection shall ever s^^^ng up in their hearts any more: their love
of complacency, joy, and delight, in any object whatsoever, shall be pluck up
by the root; and they will be filled with hatred, fury, and rage, against God,
themselves, and their fellow creatures, whether happy in heaven, or unferable
in hell, as they themselves are. They will be sunk in sorrow, r^^ked with
anxiety, filled with horror, galled to the heart with fretting and continually
darted with despair; which will make them weep, gnash their teeth, and
blaspheme for ever. Matthew. xxii. 13. B^^d him hand and foot, and take him away,
and cast him into utter-darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Rev. xvi. 21. And there fell upon men, a great ha^ out of heaven, every stone
about the weight of a talent: and men blasphemed God, because of the hail; for
the plague thereof was exceeding great Conscience will be a worm to g^^w and
prey upon them; remorse for their sins shall seize them, and torment them for
ever, and they shall not be able to shake it off, as sometimes they did; for
"in hell -- their worm d^ech not," Mark ix. 45, 46. Their memory will serve but
to aggravate their torment, and every new reflection will bring another pang of
anguish, Luke xvi. 25. "But Abraham said, ( viz. to the rich man in hell) S^^,
remember, that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things."

2. The torments in hell are manifold. Put the case, that a man were, at one
and the same time, under the violence of the gout, gravel, and whatsoever
diseases and pains have ever met together in one body; the torment of such a
one would be but light in comparison with the torments of the damned. For as in
hell there is an absence of all that is good and desirable, so there is the
confluence of all evils there; since all the effects of sin and of the curse
take their place in it, after the last judgment, Rev. xx. 14. "And death and
hell were cast into the lake of fire." There they will find a prison they can
never escape out of; a lake of fire, wherein they will be ever swimming and
burning; a part where they will never find a bottom. The worm that dies not,
shall (...) on them, as on bodies which are inferred: the f^ that is not
quenched, shall devour them, as dead bodies which are burned. Their eyes shall
be kept in blackness of darkness, without the (...) comfortable gleam of light:
their ears fi^led with the frigh (...) of the infernal crew. They shall taste
nothing but the vine^^ of God's wrath, the dregs of the cup of his fury. The
stench of the burning lake of brimstone will be the smell there; and they shall
feel extreme pains for evermore.

3. They will be most exquisite and vehement torments, causing weeping,
wailing, and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. xiii. 42. and xxii. 13. They are
represented to us under the notion of pangs in travail, which are very sharp
and exquisite. So says the rich man in hell, Luke xvi 24. I am tormented, (to
wit, as one in the pangs of childbearing) in this flame. Ah! dreadful pangs;
horrible travail, in which both soul and body are in pangs together; helpless
travail, hopeless and endless? the word used for hell, Matthew. v. 22. and in
diverse other places of the New Testament, properly de^^t^s the valley of
Hi^nom; the name being taken from the valley of the children of H^nnom, in
which was Tophet, (2 Kings xxiii 10.) where idolaters offered their children to
Mo^^ch This is said to have been a great b^ase (...), with arms like a man's:
the which being heated by fire within it, the child was set in the burning arms
of the (...); and, that the parents might not hear the shrieks of the child
burning to death, they beat drums in the time of the horrible sacrifice; when
the place had the name of Tophet. Thus the exquisiteness o^ the torments in
hell are pointed out to us. Some have endured grievous tortures on earth, with
a surprising obstinacy and u^dunt d^comage: but men's courage will fail them
there, when they fi^^ themselves fallen into the hands of the living God; and
no ou^ gate to be expected for ever. It is true there w^ degrees of torment in
hell: It shall be more tolerable, for Tire and Sidon, them for Chora^i^ and
Bethsai^a Matthew. xi. 21, 22 But the le^^ (...) of wrath there, will be
unsupportable; for how can the heart of the creature endure, or his hands be
strong, when God himself is a confuming fire to him? When the tares are bound
in bundles for the fire, there will be bundles of covetous persons, of
drunkards, profane swearers, unclean persons, formal hypocrites, unbelievers,
and despisers of the gospel, and the like: the several bundles being cast into
hellfire, some will burn more keenly than others, according as their sins have
been more heinous than these of others: a fiercer flame will seize the bundles
of the profane, than the bundle of unsanctified moralists; the furnace will be
hotter to those who sinned against light, than to these who lived in darkness,
Luke xii. 37, 38 That servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.
But he that knew not, and did comm^t things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten
with few stripes. But the sentence common to them all, (Matthew. xiii. 30.) Bind
them in bundles to burn them, speaks the greatest vehemence and exquisiteness
of the lowe^^ degree of torment in hell.

4. They will be uninterrupted; there is no intermission there; no case no not
for a moment. They shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever, R^v xx.
10. Few are so tossed in this world, but sometimes they get r^st; but the
damned shall get none; they took their rest in the time appointed of God for
labor. No storms are readily seen but there is some space between showers: but
no intermission in the storm that falls on the wicked in hell. There deep will
be calling unto deep, and the waves of wrath continually rolling over them.
There the heavens will be always black to them, and they shall have a perpetual
night, but no rest, Rev. xiv. 10. They have no rest day nor night.

5. They will be unpitied. The punishments inflicted on the greatest
malefactors on earth, do draw forth some compassion from them who behold them
in their torments: but the damned shall have none to pity them. God will not
pity them, but laugh at their calamity, Prove. i. 26. The blessed company in
heaven shall rejoice in the execution of God's righteous judgment, and sing
while the smoke rises up for ever, Rev. xix. 3. And again they said Allelujah:
and her smoke rose up for ever and ever. No compassion can be expected from the
devil and his angels, who delight in the ruin of the children of men, and are,
and will be for ever void of pity. Neither will one pity another there, where
every one is weeping and gnashing his teeth, under his own insupportable
anguish and pain. There natural affections will be extinguished; the parents
will not love their children, nor children their parents* the mother will not
pity the daughter in these ^^es, nor will the daughter pity the mother: the son
will show (...) ^^^ard to his father there, nor the servant to his master,
where ever one will be roaring under his own torment.

Lastly, To complete their misery, their torments shall be eternal, Rev. xiv.
11. And the smoke of their torment ascen^ed up for ever and ever. (...) what a
frightful case is this, to be tormented in the whole body and soul, and that
not with one kind of torment, but many; all of these most exquisite, and all
this without any intermission, and without pity from any! what heart can
conceive those things without horror? Nevertheless, if this most miserable case
were at length to have an end, that would afford some comfort: but the torments
of the damned will have no end; of the which more afterward.

USE. Learn from this, (1.) The evil of sin. It is a stream that will carry
down the sinner, till he be swallowed up in an occean of wrath. The pleasures
of sin are bought too dear, at the rate of everlasting burnings. What availed
the rich man's purple clothing and sumptuous fare, when, in hell, he was wrapped
up in purple flames, and could not have a drop of water to cool his tongue?
Alas! that men should indulge themselves in sin, which will be such bitterness
in the end; that they should drink so greedily of the poisonous cup, and hug
that serpent in their bosom, that will sting them to the heart, and gnaw out
their bowels at length! 2. What a God he is, with whom we have to do; what a
hatred he bears to sin, and how severely he punishes it. Know the Lord to be
most just, as well as most merciful; and think not that he is such an one as
you are: away with that fatal mistake ere it be too late, Psalm. l. 21, 22. Thou
thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thyself; but I will reprove
thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. Now consider this, ye that
forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver. The fire
prepared for the devil and his angels, as dark as it is, will serve to discover
God to be a severe Revenger of sin. Lastly, The absolute necessity of fleeing
to the Lord Jesus Christ by faith; the same necessity of repentance, and
holiness of heart and life. The avenger of blood is pursuing thee, O sinner!
haste and escape to the city of refuge. Wash now in the fountain of the
Mediator's blood, that you may not perish in the lake of fire. Open thy heart
to him, lest the pit close its mouth on thee. Leave thy sins, else they will
ruin thee: kill them, else they will be thy death for ever.

Let not the terror of hellfire put thee upon hardening thy heart more* as it
may do, if thou entertain that wicked thought, viz. There is no hope, Jer ii.
25. which, perhaps, is more rife among the hearers of the gospel, than many are
aware of. But there is hope for the worst of sinners* who will come unto Jesus
Christ. If there are no good qualification in thee (as, certainly, there can be
none in a natural, man, none in any man, but what are received from Christ in
him) know, that he has not suspended thy welcome on any good qualifications: do
thou take himself and his salvation, freely offered unto all, to whom the
gospel comes. Whosoe^^r w^ll, let him take of the water of life freely, Rev
xxii 17. Him that comes to me, I will in no ways cast out, John vi. 37. It is
true, thou art a sinful creature, and can not repent; thou art unholy, and
can ^ot make thyself holy: nay, thou have essayed to repent, to forsake sin,
and to be holy but still missed of repentance, reformation, and holiness; and
therefore, Thou sa^st, there is no hope. No, for I have loved strangers, and
after them will I go. Truly, no marvel, that the success has not answered thy
expectation, since thou have always began thy work amiss. But do thou, first of
all, honor God, by believing the testimony he has given of his Son, namely,
that eternal life is in him: and honor the Son of God by believing on him,
that is, embracing and falling in with the free offer of Christ and of his
salvation from sin and from wrath, made to thee in the gospel, trusting in him
confidently for righteousness to thy justification, and also for
sanctification; seeing of God he is made unto us both righteousness and
sanctification. 1 Cor. i. 30. Then, if thou had as much credit to give to the
word of God, as thou would allow to the word of an honest man offering thee a
gift, and saying, take it, and it is thine; thou may believe that God is thy
God, Christ is thine, his salvation is thine, thy sins are pardoned, thou had
strength in him for repentance and for holiness: for all these are made over to
thee in the free offer of the gospel. Believing on the Son of God, thou art
justified, the curse is removed. And while it lies upon thee, how is it
possible, thou should bring forth the fruits of holiness? But, the curse is
removed, that death, which seized on thee with the first Adam, (according to
the threatening, Genesis ii. 17.) is taken away. In consequence of which, thou
shall find the bands of wickedness (now holding thee fast in impenitency)
broken asunder, as the bands of that death: so as thou will be able to repent
indeed from the heart: thou shall find the spirit of life, on whose departure
that death ensued, returned to thy soul; so as thenceforth thou shall be
enabled to live unto righteousness. No man's case is so bad, but it may be
mended this way, in time, to be perfectly right in eternity; and no man's case
is so good, but another way being taken, it will be marred for time and
eternity too.

III. The damned shall have the society of devils in their miserable state in
hell: for they must depart into fire prepared for the devil and his angels. O
horrible company! O frightful association! who would choose to dwell in a palace
haunted by devils? To be confined to the most pleasant spot of earth, with the
devil and his infernal furies, would be a most terrible confinement. How would
men's hearts fail them, and their hair stand up, finding themselves environed
with the hellish crew, in that case! but (...) how much more terrible must it
be, to be cast with the devils into out fire, locked up with them in one
dungeon, shut up with them in one pit! to be closed up in a den of roaring
lions, girded about with serpents, surrounded with venomous asps, and to have
the bowels eaten out by vipers, all together, and at once, is a comparison too
low, to show the misery of the damned, shut up in hell with the devil and his
angels. They go about now as roaring lions, seeking whom they may devour: but
then shall they be confined in their dens with their (...), they shall be
filled to the brim with the wrath of God, and (...) the full torment, (Mat
viii. 29) which they tremble in expectation of, (James ii 19) being cast (...)
the fire prepared for them. How will these lions roar and tear^ how will these
serpents hiss! these dragons vomit out fire! what horrible anguish will seize
the damned, finding themselves in the lake of fire, with the devil who deceived
them; drawn hither with the silken cords of temptation, by these wicked
spirits; and bound with them in everlasting chains under darkness! Rev. xx. 10.
And the devil that deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone,
where the beast, and the false prophet are, and shall be tormented day and
night for ever.

O! that men would consider this in time, renounce the devil and his lusts, and
join themselves to the Lord in faith and holiness Why should men choose that
company in this world, and delight in that society, they would not desire to
associate with in the other world? Those who like not the company of the saints
on earth, will get none of it in eternity: but as godless company is their
delight now, they will afterward get enough of it; when they have an eternity
to pass in the roaring and blaspheming society of devils and reprobates in
hell. Let those who use to invocate the devil to take them, soberly consider,
that the company so often invited will be terrible at last, when come.

IV. And lastly, Let us consider the eternity of the whole, the everlasting
continuance of the miserable state of the damned in hell.

First, If I could, I should show what eternity is, I mean, the creature's
eternity. But who can measure the waters of the occean, or who can tell you the
days, years, and ages of eternity, which are infinitely more than the drops of
the occean? None can comprehend eternity, but the eternal God. Eternity is an
occean, whereof we will never see the shore; it is a deep, where we can find no
bottom; a labyrinth, from whence we cannot extricate ourselves, and where we
shall ever lose the door. There are two things one may say of it, (1.) It has a
beginning. God's eternity has no beginning, but the creature's eternity has.
Sometime there was no lake of fire; and those who have been there, for some
thousand of years, were once, in time, as we now are. But (2.) It shall never
have an end. The first who entered into the eternity of woe, is as far from the
end of it, as the last, who shall go thither, will be at his entry. They who
have launched out furthest into that occean, are as far from land, as they were
the first moment they went into it: and thousands of ages after this, they will
be as far from it as ever: Wherefore, eternity, which is before us, is a
duration that has a beginning, but no end. It is a beginning without a middle,
a beginning without an end. After millions of years past in it, still it is a
beginning. God's wrath in hell, will ever be the wrath to come. But there is no
middle in eternity. When millions of ages are past in eternity, what is past
bears no proportion of what is to come; no not so much as one drop of water,
falling from the tip of one's finger, bears to all the waters of the occean.
There is no end of it* while God is, it shall be. It is an entry without an
out-gate, a continual succession of ages, a glass always running, which shall
never run out.

Observe the continual succession of hours* days, months, and years, how one
still follow upon one another; and think of eternity, wherein there is a
continual succession without end When you go out in the night, and behold the
stars of heaven, how they cannot be numbered for multitude, think of the ages of
eternity; considering withal, there is a certain definite number of the stars,
but no number of the ages of eternity. When you see a water running, think how
vain a thing it would be, to sit down by it and wait till it should run out,
that you may pass over* look how n^w water still succeeds to that which passes
by you: and therein you will have an image of eternity, which is a river that
never dries up. They who wear rings, have an image of eternity on their
fingers; and they who handle the wheel have an emblem of eternity before them*
for to which part soever of the ring or wheel one looks, one will still see
another part beyond it; and on whatsoever moment of eternity you condescend,
there is still another beyond it. When you are abroad in the fields, and behold
the piles of the grass on the earth, which no man can reckon; think with
yourselves, that, were as many thousand of years to come, as there are piles of
grass on the ground, even those would have an end at length, but eternity will
have none. When you look to a mountain, imagine in your hearts, how long would
it be, ere that mountain should be removed, by a little bird coming but once
every thousand years, and c^rrying away but one grain of the dust thereof at
once; the mountain would at length be removed that way, and brought to an end;
but eternity will never end. Suppose this with respect to all the mountains of
the earth: nay, with respect to the whole globe of the earth; the grains of
dust, whereof the whole earth is made up, are not infinite, and therefore the
last grain would, at long run, come to be carried away, in the way supposed:
but when that slowest work would be brought to an end, eternity would be, in
effect but beginning.

These are some rude draughts of eternity; and now add misery and woe to this
eternity, what tongue can express it? What heart can conceive it? In what
balance can that misery and that woe be weighed?

Secondly, Let us t^ke a view of what is eternal in the state of the damned in
hell. Whatsoever is included in the fearful sentence, determining them eternal
state, is everlasting: therefore all the doleful ingredients of their
mi^erable state will be everlasting; they will never end. The text expressly
declares the fire, into which they must depart, to be everlasting fire And our
Lord elsewhere tells us, that in hell the fire shall never be qu^nched. (Mark
ix. 43.) with an eye to the valley of Hinnom, in which, besides the already
mentioned fire, for burning of the children to Molech, there was also another
fire burning continually, to consume the dead carcases, and filth of Jerusalem;
so the scripture representing hell fire by the fire of that valley, speaks it
not only to be most exquisite, but also everlasting. Seeing then the damned
must depart, as cursed ones, into everlasting fire, it is evidence that,

1 st, The damned themselves shall be eternal: they will have a being for ever,
and will never be substantially destroyed, or annihilated. To what end is the
fire eternal; if these who are cast into it, be not eternally in it! It is
plain, the everlasting continuance of the fire, is an aggravation of the misery
of the damned: but surely, if they be annihilated, or substantially destroyed,
it is all a case to them, whether the fire be everlasting, or not. Nay, but
they depart into everlasting fire, to be everlastingly punished in it; Matthew
xxv. 46. They shall go away into everlasting punishment. Thus the execution of
the sentence, is a certain discovery of the meaning of it. The worm, that dies
not, must have a subject to live in: they, who shall have no rest, day nor
night, (Rev. xiv. 11.) but shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever,
(chap. xx. 10) will certainly have a being for ever and ever, and not be
brought into a state of eternal rest in annihilation Destroyed indeed they
shall be: but their destruction will be an everlasting destruction, (2 Thessalonians. i
9.) a destruction of their well-being, but not of their being. What is
destroyed, is not therefore annihilated; Art thou come to destroy us? said the
devil unto Jesus Christ, Luke iv. 34. Howbeit the devils are afraid of torment,
not of annihilation, Matthew. viii. 29. Art thou come hither to torment us before
the time? The state of the damned is indeed a state of death: but such a death
it is, as is opposite only to a happy life; as is clear from other notions of
their state, which necessarily include an eternal existence, of which before.
As they, who are dead in sin, are dead to God and holiness, yet live to sin: so
dying in hell, they live, but separated from God, and his favor, in which life
lies, Psalm. xxx 5. They shall ever be under the pang of death; ever dying, but
never dead, or absolutely void of life. How desirable would such a death be to
them! but it will fly from them for ever. Could each one kill another there or
could they, with their own hands, rent themselves into lifeless pieces their
misery would quickly be at an end: but there they must live, who chosed death
and refused life; for there death lives, and the end ever begins.

2 dly, The curse shall fly upon them eternally, as the everlasting chain, to
hold them in the everlasting fire; a chain that shall never be loosed, being
fixed for ever about them, by the dreadful sentence of the eternal judgment.
This chain, which spurns the united force of devils held fast by it ^s too
strong to be broken by men, who being solemnly anathematized, and devoted to
destruction, can never be recovered to any other use.

3 dly, Their punishment shall be eternal; Matthew. xxv. 46. They shall go away
into everlasting punishment. They will be, for ever, separate from God and
Christ, and from the society of the holy angels and saints; between whom and
them an impassible gulf will be fixed, Luke xvi. 26. Between us and you, (says
Abraham, in the parable, to the rich man in hell) there is a great g^^f fixed,
so that they which would pass from hence to you, cannot: neither can they pass
to us, that would come from thence. They shall for ever, have the horrible
society of the devil and his angels. There will be no change of company for
evermore, in that region of darkness Their torment in the fire will be
everlasting: they must live for ever in it. Several authors both ancient and
modern, tell us of earthen flax, or Salamander's hair; that cloth made of it,
being cast into the fire, is so far from being burnt or consumed, that it is
only made clean thereby, as other things are by washing But, however that is,
it is certain, the damned shall be tormented for ever and ever in hell fire,
and not substantially destroyed, Rev xx. 10. And indeed nothing is annihilated
by fire, but only dissolved. Of what nature soever hellfire is, no question,
the same God who kept the bodies of the three children from burning in
Nebuchadnezzar's fiery furnace, can also keep the bodies of the damned from any
such dissolution by hellfire, as may infer privation of life.

Lastly, Their knowledge and sense of their misery shall be eternal, and they
shall assuredly know that it will be eternal. How desirable would it be in
them, to have their senses for ever locked up, and to lose the consciousness of
their own misery; as one may rationally suppose it to fare at length with some,
in the punishment of death inflicted on them on earth, and as it is with some
mad people in their miserable case! but that agrees not with the notion of
torment for ever and ever, nor the worm that dies not. Nay, they will ever
have a lively feeling of their misery, and strongest impressions of the wrath
of God against them. And that dreadful intimation of the eternity of their
punishment, made to them, by the Judge, in their sentence, will fix such
impressions of the eternity of their miserable state upon their minds, as they
will never be able to lay aside, but will continue with them evermore, to
complete their misery. This will fill them with everlasting despair, a most
tormenting passion, which will continually rent their hearts, as it were in a
thousand pieces. To see floods of wrath ever coming, and never to cease; to be
ever in torment, and withal to know there shall never, never, be a release,
will be the cape-stone put on the misery of the damned, If hope deferred,
makes the heart sick, (Prove xiii. 12.) how killing will be, hope rooted up,
slain outright, and buried for ever out of the creature's sight! this will fill
them with hatred and rage against God, their known irreconcilable enemy; and
under it, they will roar for ever like wild bulls in a net, and fill the pit
with blasphemies evermore.

Lastly, I might here show the reasonableness of the eternity of the punishment
of the damned; but having already spoke of it in vindicating the justice of
God, in his subjecting men in their natural state to eternal wrath, I only
remind you of three things, (1.) The infinite dignity of the party offended by
sin, requires an infinite punishment to be inflicted for the vindication of his
honor: since the demerit of sin rises according to the dignity and excellency
of the person against whom it is committed. The party offended is the great
God, the chief good: the offender, a vile worm; in respect of perfection
infinitely distant from God, to whom he is indebted for all that ever he had,
implying any good, or perfection whatsoever. This then requires an infinite
punishment to be inflicted on the sinner, the which, since it cannot* in him,
be infinite in value, must needs be infinite in duration, that is to say,
eternal. Sin is a kind of infinite evil, as it wrongs an infinite God; and the
gult and defilement thereof is never taken away, but endures for ever, unless
the Lord himself in mercy do remove it God, who is offended, is eternal, his
being never comes to an end, the sinful soul is immortal, and the man shall
live for ever: the sinner being without strength, (Romans v 6.) to expiate his
gult, can never put away the offense; therefore it ever remains, unless the
Lord do put it away himself, as in the elect, by his Son's blood. Wherefore the
party offended, the offender, and the offense, ever remaining, the punishment
cannot but be eternal (2.) The sinner would have continued the course of his
provocations against God, for ever without end, if God had not put a check to
it by death As long as they were capable to act against him, in this world,
they did it; and therefore justly he will act against them, while he is; that
is, for ever. God who judges of the will, intents, and inclinations of the
heart may justly do against sinners, in punishing, as they would have done
against him, in sinning. Lastly, (though I put not the stress of the matter
here, yet) it is just and reasonable the damned suffer eternally, since they
will sin eternally in hell, gnashing their teeth (Matthew viii. 12.) under their
pain, in rage, envy, and grudge, (compare Acts vii. 54. Psalm. cxii. 10. Luke
xiii. 28.) and blaspheming God there, (Rev. xvi. 21.) whither they are driven
away in their wickedness, Prove. xiv. 42. That the wicked be punished for their
wickedness, is just: and it is noways inconsistent with justice, that the being
of the creature be continued for ever: wherefore, it is just, that the damned,
continuing wicked eternally, do suffer eternally for their wickedness. The
misery, under which they sin, can neither free them from the debt of obedience,
nor excuse their sinning, and make it blameless. The creature, as a creature,
is bound unto obedience to his Creator, and no punishment, inflicted on him*
can free him from it, more than the malefactor's prisons, irons, whipping, and
the like, do set him at liberty, to commit anew the crimes for which he is
imprisoned, or whipped. Neither can the torments of the damned excuse or make
blameless their horrible sinning under them, more than exquisite pains,
inflicted upon men on earth, can excuse their murmuring, fretting, and
blaspheming against God under them: for it is not the wrath of God, but their
own wicked nature, that is the true cause of their sinning under it: and so the
holy Jesus bore the wrath of God, without so much as one unbecoming thought of
God, and far less any one unbecoming word.

USE I. Here is a measuring reed: O! that men would apply it. First, Apply it
to your time in this world, and you will find your time to be very short. A
prospect of much time to come, proves the ruin of many souls. Men will be
reckoning their time by years, (like that rich man, Luke xii. 19, 20) when it
may be, there are not many hours of it to run But reckon as you will, laying
your time to the measuring reed of eternity, you will see your age is as
nothing. What a small and inconsiderable point is sixty, eighty, or a hundred
years, in respect of eternity? Compared with eternity, there is a greater
disproportion, than between a hair's breadth and the circumference of the whole
earth. Why do we sleep then in such a short day, while we are in hazard of
losing rest through the long night of eternity? 2dly, Apply it to your
endeavors for salvation, and they will be found very scanty. When men are
pressed to diligence in their salvation-work, they are ready to say, "To what
purpose is this waste?" Alas! if it were to be judged by our diligence, what is
it that we have in view, as to the most part of us, no man could thereby
conjecture, that we have eternity in view. If we duly considered eternity, we
could not but conclude, that, to leave no means appointed of God unessayed,
till we get our salvation secured; to refuse rest or comfort in any thing, till
we are sheltered under the wings of the Mediator; to pursue our great interest
with the utmost vigor, to cut off lusts dear as right hands and right eyes, to
set our faces resolutely against all difficulties, and fight our way through
all the opposition made by the devil, the world, and the flesh; are, all of
them together, little enough for eternity.

USE II. Here is a balance of the sanctuary, by which one may understand the
lightness of what is falsely thought weighty; and the weight of some things, by
many reckoned to be very light.

FIRST, Some things seem very weighty, which weighed in this balance, will be
found very light. (1.) Weigh the world, and all that is in it* the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, and the whole will be found
light in the balance of eternity. Weigh herein all worldly profits, gains and
advantages; and you will quickly see, that a thousand worlds will not quit the
cost of the eternity of woe. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the
whole world, and lose his own soul? Matthew. xvi. 26. Weigh the pleasures of sin,
which are but for a season, with the fire that is everlasting, and you must
account yourselves fools and madmen, to run the hazard of the one for the
other. (2.) Weigh your afflictions in this balance, and you will find the
heaviest of them very right, in respect of the weight of eternal anguish.
Impatience under affliction, especially when worldly troubles do so ^itter men's
spirits, that they cannot relish the glad tidings of the gospel, speaks great
regardlessness of eternity. As a small and inconsiderable loss will be very
little at heart with him, who sees himself in hazard of losing his whole estate
so troubles in the world will appear but light to him, who has a lively view of
eternity. Such a one will stoop, and take up his cross, whatever it be,
thinking it enough to e^^ape eternal death. (3) Weigh the most difficult and
uneasy duties of religion here, and you will no more reckon the yoke of Christ
unsupportable. Repentance and bitter mourning for sin on earth, are very light
in comparison of eternal weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth in hell. To
wrestle with God in prayer, weeping and making supplication for the blessing in
time is far easier than to ly under the curse through all eternity.
Mor^^fication of the most beloved lust is a light thing in comparison with the
second death in hell LASTLY, Weigh your convictions in this balance O! how
heavy do these (...) upon many, till they get them shaken off! They are not
disposed to f^ll in (...) them, bu^ strive to get clear of them, a^ (...)
mig^^y burden. But the w^rm of an ill conscience, will neither die nor sl^ep in
hel^, though (...) it asleep (...) a time. And certainly it is easier to
entertain the sharpest convictions in this life, so as they may lead one to
Christ, than to have them fixed for ever in the conscience, while in hell one
is totally and finally separated from him.

SECONDLY, But on the other hand, (1.) Weigh sin in this balance; and, though
now it seems but a light thing to you, ye will find it a weight sufficient to
turn up an eternal weight of wrath upon you. Even idle words, vain thoughts,
and unprofitable actions, weighed in this balance, and considered as following
the sinner into eternity, will each of them be heavier than the sand of the
sea: time idly spent will make a weary eternity. Now is your seed-time;
thoughts, words and actions are the seed sown; eternity is the harvest: though
the seed now lies under the clod, unregarded by most men, even the least grain
shall spring up at length; and the fruit will be according to the seed, Gal.
vi. 8 For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption (i.
e. destruction;) but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap
life everlasting. (2.) Weigh in this balance your time, and opportunities of
grace and salvation, and you will find them very weighty. Precious time and
seasons of grace, sabbaths, communions, prayers, sermons, and the like, are by
many now adays made light of: but the day is coming, when one of these will be
reckoned more valuable than a thousand worlds, by those who now have the least
value for them. When they are gone for ever, and the loss cannot be retrieved;
these will see the worth of them, who will not now see it.

USE III. and LAST, Be warned and stirred up to flee from the wrath to come.
Mind eternity, and closely ply the work of your salvation. What are you doing*
while you are not so doing? Is heaven a fable, or hell a mere scarecrow? Must
we live eternally, and will we be at no more pains to escape everlasting
misery? Will faint wishes take the kingdom of heaven by force? And will such
drowsy endeavors, as most men satisfy themselves with, be accounted flying
from the wrath to come? Ye who have already fled to Christ, up, and be doing:
ye have begun the work; go on, loiter not, but work out your salvation with
fear and trembling, Philip. ii 12. Fear him which is able to destroy both body
and soul in hell, Matthew. x. 28. Remember, ye are not yet ascended into heaven:
ye are but in your middle state: The everlasting arms have drawn you out of the
gulf of wrath ye were plunged into, in your natural state; they are still
underneath you, that ye can never fall down into it again: nevertheless, ye
have not yet got up to the top of the rock; the deep below you is frightful;
look at it, and hasten your ascent. Ye who are yet in your natural state, lift
up your eyes, and take a view of the eternal state. Arise, ye profane persons,
ye ignorant ones, ye formal hypocrites, strangers to the power of godliness,
flee from the wrath to come. Let not the young adventure to delay a moment
longer, nor the old put off this work any more. Today if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts; lest he swear in his wrath, that ye shall never
enter into his rest. It is no time to linger in a state of sin, as in Sodom,
when fire and brimstone are coming down on it from the Lord. Take warning in
time: they who are in hell, are not troubled with such warnings; but are
enraged against themselves for that they slighted the warning, when they had it.

Consider, I pray you, (1.) How uneasy it is to ly one whole night or a soft
bed, in perfect health, when one very fain would have sleep, but cannot get it;
sleep being departed from him How often will one in that case wish for rest!
How full of tossings to and fro! But ah! how dreadful must it then be to ly in
sorrow, wrapped up in scorching flames through long eternity, in that place where
they have no rest day nor night! (2.) How terrib^^ would it be to live under
violent pains of the cholic or gravel, for forty or sixty years together,
without any intermission! Yet that is but a very small thing in comparison of
eternal separation from God, the worm that never d^e^, and the fire that is
never quenched. (3.) Eternity is an awful thought; O long, long, endless
eternity! But will not every moment, in eternity of woe, seem a month, and
every hour a year, in that most wretched and desperate condition? Hence ever
and ever, as it were a double eternity. The sick man in the night, tossing to
and fro on his bed, says, it will never be day, complains that his pain ever
continues, never, never abates. Are these petty time-eternities, which men form
to themselves, in their own imaginations, so very grievous? Alas! then how
grievous, how utterly unsupportable must real eternity of woe, and all manner
of miseries be! LASTLY, There will be space enough there, to reflect on all the
ills of one's heart and life, which one cannot get time to think of now; and to
see that all that was said of the impenitent sinner's hazard, was true, and
that the half was not told. There will be space enough in eternity to think on
delayed repentance, to rue one's follies, when it is too late; and in a state
past remedy, to speak forth their fruitless wishes: O that I had never been
born! That the womb had been my grave, and I had never seen the sun! O that I
had taken warning in time, and fled from his wrath, while the door of mercy was
standing open to me! O that I had never heard the gospel, that I had lived in
some corner of the world, where a Savior and the great salvation were not once
named! But all in vain. What is done cannot be undone; the opportunity is lost,
and can never be retrieved; time is gone, and cannot be recalled. Wherefore
improve time, while you have it, and do not wilfully ruin yourselves, by
stopping your ear to the gospel-call.

And now if ye would be saved from the wrath to come, and never go into this
place of torment, take no rest in your natural state; believe the sinfulness
and misery of it, and labor to get it out quickly, fleeing unto Jesus Christ
by faith. Sin in you is the seed of hell: and, if the guilt and reigning power
of it be not removed in time, they will bring you to the second death in
eternity. There is no way to get them removed, but by receiving of Christ, as
he is offered in the gospel, for justification and sanctification: and he is
now offered to you with all his salvation, Rev. xxii. 12.17. And behold. I come
quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work
shall be. And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that hears,
say, Come. And let him that is a-thrist. Come. And whosoever will, let him take
the water of life freely. Jesus Christ is the Mediator of peace, and the
Fountain of holiness: he it is who delivers us from the wrath to come. There
is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans viii 1. And the terrors of hell, as well as
the joys of heaven, are set before you, to stir you up to a cordial receiving
of him with all his salvation; and to determine you unto the way of faith and
holiness, in which alone you can escape the everlasting fire. May the Lord
himself make them effectual to that end.

Thus far of Man's ETERNAL STATE; the which, because it is eternal, admits no
succeeding one for ever.

FINIS.

