AN ACCOUNT OF THE PUTRID MURRINITISH PLAGUE, Lately broke out in the city of
PHILADELPHIA; With the CAUSES and SYMPTOMS.
ALSO, THE MANNER OF TREATING THE INFECTED, WITH AN INFALLIBLE CURE. HUMBLY
OFFERED TO THE PUBLIC,
By John Staneliff.
"Answer a fool according to its selly, lest he be wise in his own conceit."

SOLOMON. "I also will laugh at your calamity. I will mock when your fear
comes."

JEHOVAH.
THIS fatal, Soul-destroying, GOD-dishonouring disease, first made its
appearance in the garden of Eden. It was introduced by that infernal foe to GOD
and man, called the devil, the means by which the first man came by his death,
and that monster sin (...) God and the destruction of man. Satan succeeding so
well by means of this disease in the garden of Eden, has, from time to time,
attempted to spread the disorder in various parts of our earth, by sending his
emissaries with the infection, bound up in a bundle of articles called by them
Gospel Truths: but the truth is, they are Antinomian heresies, poisonous in
their nature, and pernicious to the souls of men. The enemy having lately sent
from the east a bundle of his wares to this city, I thought it my duty to alarm
my fellow-citizens of the danger they are in -- the plague having actually
broken out, -- some are already dead, and others in imminent danger. In order,
therefore, to preserve the sound from the infection, I shall show some causes
of the disorder, with the means of preventing it from becoming fatal; secondly,
the symptoms attending the disorder, and lastly, prescribe the remedy for such
in whom the disorder is not rooted -- I say in whom the disorder is not rooted;
for in all others, it is probable, means will prove ineffectual, as the
Scriptures say, God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a
lie, etc. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 11.

First, the Causes. This disorder is generally produced by an unwholesome
stagnated, putrid air, proceeding from the mouth of the deceivers, foretold by
that most eminent physician of infinite value, JEHOVAH JESUS, (who told his
disciples there should arise false prophets, who, if it were possible, would
deceive even the elect.) Hence it prevails in a furnace, situate in Second
between Walnut and Chesnut-streets, Philadelphia, also in the north eastern
parts of these states.

2d Cause. The perversion of the word of God by men, or rather preachers, of
corrupt minds, whose god is their belly, whose glory is their shame, and whose
damnnation slumbereth not.

3d. The dead (...) unsound professors taint^^ (...).

Self-confident persons are much in danger of being infected, and those of an
effeminate weakly habit, in a spiritual sense; but especially those good sort
of people who pretend to more charity than is commanded in the Scriptures, are
in imminent danger.

Advice to the sound -- Come not within scent of the smoke of the furnace. Keep
no company with infected persons except duty calls. Endeavor to keep your minds
clean and clear of Antinomian notions; for cleanliness is greatly conducive to
health, and to prevent disorders. Exercise also is an excellent antidote;
therefore, be much in prayer, and reading your Bible, walking in the good old
way of JEHOVAH'S commandments daily and hourly.

SYMPTOMS. The Murrinitish plague is generally preceded by a remarkable
weakness in the understanding, respecting the plain, simple truths of the
Scriptures; as appeared evidently in the case of Eve, when, for SURELY, she
takes LEST.

2d. Dimness of sight precedes this fatal disorder. The infected cannot see,
throughout the sacred volume, one text (among the many hundreds) that speaks
against their beloved system.

3d. The head of the infected swells amazingly; yea to an enormous size, so
that with truth it may be said, (according to their conceit of their knowledge)
that a boy of three days old has a bigger head than either that of Gog or
Magog, which stands in Guildhall, London, etc.

4th. The tongue also of the infected appears as if it was tipped with silver;
and, being smooth as oil, runs at an amazing rate, but presently grows
prodigious thick, and speaks great swelling words of vanity, crying, -- Peace,
Peace, where there is no peace; rejoicing that they are sufficiently wise to
prove, that the primeval cause of sin will at last be found to lay at the
threshold of Heaven; and consequently, that the whole race of fallen men must
be redeemed upon the principles of unsullied goodness. This is a fatal symptom,
and is a certain sign, that the person is given up to strong delusion.

5th. A delirium comes on, which ends in madness, and operates in the following
manner -- The infected, like another mad dog, runs howling about, trying to
bite every one he comes across, foaming at the mouth amazingly; they don't act
like the prophets dumb dogs, that cannot bark. No -- quite the reverse: they
yelp and howl in a tremendous manner, disturbing whole neighbourhoods, and
grieving the favorites of Heaven -- As says the Lord, With lies ye have made
the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad, and strengthened the
hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way by promising
him life, Ezekiel, xiii. 22. Frequent vomitings succeed their madness. I am not
physician enough to say it is the bile; but it is certainly bitterness that
they throw up in abundance: yet they have so far lost their taste, as to
conceit that this gall of theirs is sweet gospel truth. They roll the diabolic
preparation as a sweet morsel under their tongue. Woe unto their souls, for
they have sinned; they call evil good, and good evil; bitter sweet, and sweet
bitter. Horrid madness! At length they become gospel proof, as appears: for if
in pity to their souls, the servant of Emanuel, "knowing the terror of the
Lord, persuade" them of the necessity of a new or second birth, (like poor mad
things indeed) they cry Christ was born again. Or if we preach and teach the
necessity of repentance and faith, they madly answer, Christ repented, Christ
believed, etc. "O foolish people, and unwise! thus to wrest the Scriptures to
their own destruction;" but the Scriptures must be fulfilled. For says the
compassionate Savior, Thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and revealed them unto babes; even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy
sight. No wonder that modern orators and rhetoricians are puzzled at plain
gospel truths, when of old they were to the learned Jews a stumbling block, and
to the wise Greeks foolishness. But as the elect cannot be deceived, seeing the
foundation stands sure, we will rejoice, though the world be moved out of its
place.

The Murrinitish plague may be distinguished from the Winchestrian: inasmuch as
the Murrinites fallaciously profess Calvinism, and the Winchestrians
Armenianism: again, the Murrinites profess enmity to the devil, the
Winchestrians great friendship -- though it is a query, whether he (the devil)
used them one bit the better for that.

Winchestrian plagues may be converted into Murrinitish, by the party coming
too nigh the smoke of the furnace, when well heated. The duration of the
Murrinitish plague is extremely uncertain. I have heard of one of the infected
being extremely ill for several years, and in his mad fit bit several, and
grievously infected them; but toward the close of his life, it is said he was
perfectly cured. Some, it is to be feared, remain confirmed maniacs, 'till such
time as the flames of the tremendous volcano feelingly convince them, and bring
them to their senses to their eternal sorrow. The most favorable symptom is a
mild sweat, coming on in a few days, occasioned by fears arising in the mind,
lest the whole system should be fallacious, and they fall with their bottomless
superstructure into that place, where hope never comes; this, I say, is a
symptom that the disorder is not rooted. In such case there is ground to hope,
and it is rational to use proper means for their recovery; but if they foam at
the mouth, and endeavor to bite, and infect others, or if they rave
exceedingly, when the water of that stream, that makes glad the city of God, is
offered to them -- I say, if they maliciously try to spill the water, and
endeavor to bite the person offering it to them, it is a fatal symptom that
death is approaching. In such cases there is no physician in this country can
do them good, though there are several very eminent, as Mr. Baptist, Mr.
Presbyterian, Mr. Episcopalian, Mr. Independent, Mr. Whitefieldian, etc. etc.
These are very skilful men, and have all studied, and practiced with great
success under the physician of infinite value. But I say, though they may be
able to prescribe the antidote, yet it will not avail, unless applied by the
skilful hand of the famous, divinely glorious, ineffable physician, JESUS
CHRIST; and consequently can do them no good. But, as in some cases, good may
be done, I proceed.

Regimen. In the management of this disorder we ought to endeavor to
counteract the putrid tendency of the humors, by geatly promoting
perspiration, that is, if possible, to bring on a warm sweat, produced from the
consideration aforementioned.

2dly. It has been observed, that the Murrinitish plague is generally
occasioned by unwholesome air, and of course it must be greatly aggrevated by
it; care must therefore be taken, that no Murrinitish bellows be allowed in the
mad person's chamber; also I advise, that no infected person be left alone with
the diseased, lest in his mad fits he shut to the door, and blow the
Murrinitish bellows, and the putrid air stagnate, which will greatly increase
the malady; but rather let there be a frequent admission of fresh and wholesome
air conveyed by the means of a servant of the sanctuary, blowing through the
genuine silver trumpet of uncorrupted truth. The patient's head ought to be
frequently sprinkled with the ashes of Sodom and Gomorrah, if they can be
obtained, and his mind with ideas of everlasting fire; also pictures of the
damned ought to be placed round the room, and every strong scented herb that
can be got from Sinai's mount, laid in different parts of the house, and
smelled to by those that go near the patient. A small quantity of Jeremiah's
wormwood and gall ought frequently to be injected into his mind: this is a
great astringent, and should be mixed in all his food as well as drink. The
patient must have his head kept moderately cool, and as free as possible from
Antinomian notions. His food must be light, such as the milk of the word, and
not strong meat, for he will not be able to bear it: he may eat roasted apples,
provided they be taken from the apple tree of the gospel; and as to his drink,
I would recommend the juice of this excellent fruit above all others.

Lastly, Medicine. A vomit is absolutely necessary in the beginning of the
disorder; however, I would not recommend a dose of Tartar emetic, but rather
take three scruples of right reason, one grain of consideration, and a quarter
of an ounce of common sense, make them into a bolus, and force him to swallow
it, if possible, (though depend upon it, it will go much against him; and I
dare venture to say, if it can be got down, it will presently make him cast the
bile, or rather the diabolic bitterness from his stomach. As to blistering, I
would by no means recommend it; for if the patient comes to his senses, he will
be sufficiently sore, especially when he reflects on the great dishonor he has
done to religion. But the only sovereign remedy is in the chief physician's
hands, and solely at his disposal; the least grain of which, yea, if divided
into ten thousand parts, and one of those parts divided into ten thousand more,
ad infinitum, -- I say, if the smallest of these parts be received into the
patient's heart, it will not fail of making a perfect cure. This medicine is
given gratis to all who ask for it, by the proprietor, at the sign of the
Fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness. But as it is likely the patient
will be deterred from making application, by reason of a vain conceit, that he
already possesses a sufficient quantity, which the disease naturally inclines
him to) -- It will therefore evidence a generous mind in those, who are still
preserved from the pernicious infection, to make application to the good
physician on his behalf; and who knows but he may send by their hand, and make
them instrumental in delivering their perishing fellowmortal from that which is
infinitely worse than the plagues of Egypt, -- the Murrinitish system of
satanical divinity.

Perhaps some may ask, why so satirical? I answer, because Solomon has said,
Answer a fool according to his folly; and as it is evident these unhappy people
have done with both scripture and reason, as appears by their treating, with
the greatest contempt, the most solid, convincing arguments made use of by very
able ministers of the New Testament, -- I therefore thought it best for me to
follow Elijah's example; and, in this mode, bear testimony against this
pernicious error of the day. I expect to be censured by the Universal
Antinomians, as they are a people possessed of a more than ordinary degree of
charity, and sometimes take an odd way to show their love; but I defy them to
use me worse than their system does my master Jesus. For, brethren, be not
deceived; God is not mocked: what a man sows, that shall he also reap. There is
a day -- a dreadful day -- coming, that shall burn as an oven, and all the
proud (boasters) and all they that wickedly depart from the truth, shall be as
stubble, yea as fuel, on which that eternal fire will most surely kindle, and
which will never, never, never be extinguished.

It is, then, the infinitely blessed, the greatly injured, the awfully belied
majesty of Heaven, will prove to the overlasting shame of every enemy of truth,
that his throne is established in justice and judgment -- Then the besotted
Antinomian will be feelingly convinced, that his damnation lies at his own
door, and that the Lord tempts no man to sin, much less forces angels nor
man, by an irrevocable decree, to do that which his holy foul hates. James i.
xiii, xiv. Let no man say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God
cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man: but every man is
tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. Horrid thought! to
think or say, that God is the author of sin!

Oh! my soul come not near their dwelling! Lord; what is (...); half beast,
half devil; but he might with propriety have said, that the natural man is
whole devil, and spoke within the bounds of charity too. But I forbear. -- God
is judge himself, and will take vengeance on his enemies, and cut off those in
due time, that trouble his church. But the ransomed of the Lord shall he saved
with an everlasting salvation, to the praiso of his glorious grace, world
without end. Amen.

Sold by WILLIAM WOODHOUSE, in Front-street, next door to the Coffee-house,
PHILADELPHIA.


