(...) MEMOIRS Of some of the most INTERESTING EXPLOI^^ and SINGULAR
ADVENTURES, OF J. McALPINE A NATIVE HIGHLANDER From the time of his Emigration
from Scotland, to America 1773; During the long period of his faithful
attachment to, and hazardous attendance on the British army's under the command
of the Generals, Carleton and Burgoyne, in their several operations that he was
concerned in; till december 1779. To complain of his neglected services; and
humbly to request government for reparations of his losses in the royal cause.

Every circumstance related faithfully, and with all Delicacy, containing
nothing but indisputable FACTS that can be well Vouched, and are mostly known
to many Gentlemen of good Character, in both the Private and Military lines of
Life. Carefully arranged and published for the use of the Public at large.

To which is Added, A description of Botany Bay, Nova Scotia, and Canada.

Printed in the Year M, D, CCLXXXVIII.

TO MY EVER ESTEEMED FRIEND AND PATRON, LIEUT. GENERAL SIR GUY CARLETON: LATE
COMMANDER OF THE BRITISH FORCES IN CANADA.
HONORED SIR,
AS it is customary for authors to introduce their performance to the public,
under some respectable patronage, so do I now most cheerfully pay this small
tribute of my gratitude to you: whose unremitting services to Britain are too
well known here, to be recited, during the time of your being in the chief
command in Canada and other parts of North America; And your various
condescensions to me, in particular, while I had the honor of being under your
direction, and enjoying a share of your confidence and friendship at Crown
point, Canada and their environs, I never will nor can forget, or repay. -- I
say it without flattery, and from my knowledge of facts, that is to be
regre^ted as a national loss, that you were not continued in the suppreme
command in Canada, nay in conducting the whole operations of this unhappy
American war; from my intimate acquaintance with the people, I can heartily
aver that many thousand Britains, particularly Scots, and especially my
countrymen the brave Highlanders, would, with me, have wasted their strength,
exhausted their blood, and cheerfully died, sword in hand; under the command of
that ever meritorious General, Sir Guy Carleton Had the ministry been in the
field, to experience the troubles and dangers, you encountered and surmounted,
you never had been superceded: unhappy for our national cause: that you retired
from command, since which period, we have it to lament, that the British
interest seems to be too much absorded in indolence and inactivity. As you Sir,
best know of any man alive, the alacrity and perseverance, with which I always
contributed my poor but best services, and finally lost my all in the British
cause, I could not appeal to any other person, equally enabled, to do my loyal
behavior common justice; and I Am convinced more heartily disposed to give a
humane recommendation of me, to my good King and country, for removing the many
calamities I did and do suffer in common with some other loyal American
refugees, who have not been rewarded according to merit.

I am, with every sense of Gratitude and Esteem,

Honored SIR, Your much obliged and very humble Servant, JOHN M'CALPINE.

INTRODUCTION.
IT is for national use, and information to the public that John M'Alpine
author of the following details, has now published to the world, these genuine
and brief narratives and memoirs of some of his particular adventures, and
interesting manoeuvers, from the time of his first settlement, in America, anno
1773: and during the long and hazardous period, that he loyally and faithfully
attached himself avowedly to the British Army's in that country, where his
repeated good offices and attendance were often solicited and acknowledged by
several commanding officers and others, though his best services have been so
perfectly neglected. -- Containing the various narratives, and curious details
of his making family settlements, in the province of New York, America: His
repeated expulsions from different estates by the American revolters; The
hardships he underwent: Dangers he encountered; dissasters he contended with:
Difficulties he surmounted: Escapes he effected: Losses he sustained; Cruel
treatments that he and his family endured: Various hazardous good offices that
he occasionly undertook for his Country, and seasonably and happily performed
in the royal cause; particularly his essential services and military exploits,
while he was confidentialy employed by, and faithfully continued with the
British Army's, under the General Carleton, Burgoyne, Hamilton, Phillips,
Powell, and other officers: and his readily acknowledgeed valliant behavior in
the attack and engagement, at-Freemans's Farms in Seeptember 1777, where the
Rebels were defeated. His being finally captured in the service and carried
prisoner about three hundred miles through bad roads, winter storms, frost and
snows, first to Be^ington goal as a convict, in character of a Tory; thence
drove along the country confinement at Hertford: the usage given him there. His
exchange upon parole, by cartel; His arrival at New York The very unmerited
inatention, or rather neglect show^^ him there, by the Officers in highest
command, who ought to have patronized and supported him: The great injury's
done him in his then line of employment, both at New York and Long Island, by
sundry persons named, who should rather have protected and encouraged him;
Particularly the unremitting oppression he endured from Lieutenant Colonel
Clark, Barrack Master General, and his rapacious assistants in that department;
and especially his avaritious deputy Gilbert Wauch, formerly baker in
Edinburgh; the calamitous hardships and loses he long suffered by their
oppressive exertions; and his lawless and forceable expulsion from his land and
property on Loyd's neck Long Island, through their perfidious
misrepresentations and irregular efforts: and his many peaceable, though
ineffectual applications, to those in highest rank at New York, for obtaining
redress. And now he proposes to lay his unparalelled grievances, and deplorable
situation, before the Throne of our most Gracious Sovereign, the Ministry, all
good Patriots, and men of humanity, and in general before the Nation and World
at large. All exhibiting such a series of complicated difficulties, dangers and
losses to himself, and hazardous interesting services to his native Country and
our royal cause, as perhaps no other individual encountered, certainly no other
disengaged man, has accomplished in the course of the time he was entangled in
our present American contention (1773.)

GENUINE NARATIVES, etc.
IN the month of May 1773, I John M'Alpine, author of these narratives, left
Scotland with a view to settle in America, and in June thereafter arrived with
my family and effects at New York; where having remained for a short time with
a special friend, I was by him recommended to Colonel Reid as the most proper
person to take or purchase uncultivated land, of which kind he had considerable
lots, in the back ^ettlements of New York Province. Accordingly a bargain was
completed, by my purchasing six hundred acres of uncultivated land from him at
the rate of Ten Shillings currency per acre, the value payable in the course of
Seven Years. In consequence of that agreement, I moved up the country, and
settled upon Colonel Reid's estate, where I had not been above eight days,
resident when a party of the banditti (called Green Mountain Boys) came from
Hampshire in New England, and dispossessed me and my family; burning the
houses, miln, cropped, utensils etc. on pretense that, that particular tract of
ground was not within the limits of Colonel Reid's grant.

Notwithstanding this violent assault in my outset, I took every possible way
and method in my power, of continuing (though inconveniently) on the premises,
that season, in the flattering hope of being allowed to retain quiet
possession, till once the humor of these infatuated people (now growing
outrageous) would submit to the dictates of cool reason* and that I would have
time and opportunity to cultivate more acquaintance, perhaps intimacy with
them. But matters growing daily more critical with these turbulent neighbors,
I despaired of enjoying any peaceable or comfortable possession on that tract
of ground; and therefore I came to the resolution of removing that fall to a
more distant situation. This I accordingly perfected, and took up my winter
residence in the month of November following (1773) upon the tract or lot of
land, that belonged to Major Allan Campbell, near to Crownpoint. Here I
industriously persevered in improving the ground, and got about fifty acres of
it cultivated to advantage; having reduced that eligible spot from a barren
wilderness, covered with wood into a valuable little Farm, where by dint of
attention and perseverance, I lived very comfortably for about thirty months;
having suited myself with necessary houses, and other requisite accommodations.
In this sweet repose, I spent my time agreably with my family and servants,
prosecuting further improvements; when I was of a new interrupted in the month
of May 1776, by a party of thirty armmed American stragglers (under command of
a nominal Captain or leader) who rushed impetuously into my grounds, where I
was at work with my servant men, laboring the fields; and calling us villians,
robbers and interlopping Tory's, ordered us to surrender; and having struck me
with some severity, instantly made me prisoner, without giving any reason for
this assault, dragging us along in this violent manner, we were tossed
promiscuously into an open boat, upon the Lake, hard by; and there confined
under a Guard; until that party had assaulted and taken Crownpoint (a British
Fort) at four miles distant from my settlement.

This event happened soon after the enemy had taken possession of Ticonderoga;
and then only it was that I got intimation that the rebellious Americans had
revolted from their allegiance to Great Br^tain; or that they had committed
hostilities against the Mother Country. -- After being some time confined, I
catched an inviting occasion of conversing Colonel Warner, who commanded that
detachment, to know the real cause of apprehending me so rudely, and detaining
me captive, like a convict; He answered that there was no cause of criminalty
he knew of; nor any other reason for confining me; but the well grounded
persuasions of my being a determined friend to the British Legislature; and an
avowed enemy to their American independance; adding some persuasive hints for
regulating my conduct in future, perfectly agreeably to their maxims and
proceedure, if I wished for any peace or protection; and with this advice I was
dismissed being allowed to return home, where I joyfuly arrived that very night

I had not continued in quiet and contentment at home about two weeks, when a
riotious mob of neighboring settlers upon the New England grants, tumultuously
assembling, again attacked and made me prisoner; seizing and carrying away all
my arms and ammunition, except a small parcel that I found means to conceal
without, among the woods* and carrying me along in a very rough manner, under
an armed guard delivered me up, a captive to a Captain Barns, at Crown point
(who then commanded there,) declaring me to be a most obnoxious dangerous
person, and a professed enemy to the American United States, who should not
have any liberty among them* Under the load of these accusations, I was here
kept close prisoner for several days; when happily my old acquaintance Colonel
Hay of the American Army, came to Crown-point; and he being soon informed of
the repeated injurious treatment given me, and my present confinement in that
Fort; compassionately pitied my situation, gave orders for my conditional
release and liberty to return home and remain in quietness with my family; so
long as I behaved inoffencesively toward the American constitution and did not
appear in any opposition to their cause by any personal services, information
or any way whatever.

I had not been many days in the enjoyment of this indulgence when I was again
apprehended by another mob, similar to the former, headed by a Sergeant from
Captain Barns's party at Crown-point; to which place I was again hurried away,
Capt^^e, under a strong armed guard upon an accusation from that Banditti, that
I was employed in buying cattle for provision to the English army, then
advancing toward the American forces and back settlements; Peremptorily
demanding my immediate surrender and delivery of the arms and ammunition that I
lately concealed in the woods or fields; and all this, under certification of
my being without mercy, or delay, sent prisoner to Albany jail.

I was under no obligation to answer their accusations, and refused to comply
with the demand made for my arms and ammunition: but being at last entreated by
some friends, who feared my being thrown into prison, where I might possibly ly
long neglected, with great reluctance I agreed to part with my fire arms,
ammunition and favorite broad Sword; and upon this compliance I was permitted
to return home, once more; where I had not spent many days, when by an
indulging order from the foresaid Colonel Hay, all my weapons were returned me.

I remained at my habitation the rest of this season, under a great deal of
anxiety and disquiet; my family being in continual hazard of depradations; My
cattle frequently killed, and my effects daily plundered by American parties,
incessantly straggling round the country; we having no consolation, but our
hopes of the arrival and support of the British forces; which not appearing*
nor any notice of their motions, to our relief I, and some loyal neighbors
were in agonies and despair, and gave up all for lost. The season of military
exploits being nearly exhausted and the Winter fast approaching, I went to
Ticond-rago for some supplys especially Salt: and applied by supplication to
General Gates (then the commandent there) whose Aid-du-camp told me expressly,
that if I gave testimony of my being friendly to the cause of the United
American States now under agitation, I would be readily furnished with Salt or
any other article wanted by me: but otherwise, I could neither expect, or
obtain any supplies whatsoever from them. This peremptorly reply delivered
under so strict a qualification, by no means suiting my principles or
occasions. I departed silently, meaning to get home timeously that night.
During my stay at Ticonderoga, that day I took the opportunity of making some
enquiries and observations, that were of some use soon thereafter. There I fell
into company with Gillilan and Watson (two men of some property in my
neighborhood, on Lake Champlain) who were known to be disaffected to the royal
cause; we dined together, during which time some expressions escaped me, that
gave them offense, on the circumstances of times; which fully convinced them of
my being dutifully attached to my King and Country. They thereupon resolved and
privately determined to have me secured and sent to confinement. This
treacherous intention of these crafty men being accidentaly made known to my
acquaintance, and old friend, Mrs. Hay, (in whose house we were all then) she
with her usual goodness of heart, immediately gave me the hint privately,
urging my instant departure recolecting our conversation, and knowing the men I
had to do with, I gave peremptor compliance, to Mrs Hay's entreaties, and
decamped from Ticonderoga; in a small Skiff of my own, hurrying with all
possible dispatch homeward, but by contrary wind, and the length of the
navigation I did not reach my own house, till the following afternoon.

There, I was hardly refreshed, when a numerous scout^ng party of American
Riflemen came hurried into my house. on their way to Crown-point, and
entreating some refreshment; which with my usual hospitality I readily afforded
them, victuals and drink of my best, though I truly could not enjoy my usual
cheerfulness of temper so much were my spirits depressed, by the dismal
appearance of present contigencies.

Having no view of any support from our royal army, and as little prospect of
my own and family's escape, from the calamaties that threatened us, on all
hands; but kind providence soon removed all my gloomy apprehensions; for, early
next morning an enemy (...) passed my house, going express to Ticonderoga, for
a strong reinforcement of Ten thousand men, from the Americans assembled there,
to the immediate support and defense of Crown point, which would be soon
invested by the British troops under General Carleton, who had come by the
Lakes from Canada: had already attacked and defeated the American Naval
strength, upon Lake Champlain; and approached near Crownpoint in force.
Phrantick at such an unexpected, agreeable and seasonable piece of acceptable
news, I instantly took horse and rode away at full career to embrace my
friends: but in place of taking my way privately, through the woods and rough
grounds as I should have prudently done, I drove on impetuously and
incautiously, in high spirits along the beaten path to Crown point, and rushed
inconsiderably into the throng of the confused tumult of the people and
soldiers, where I was no sooner arrived than apprehended by the giddy multitude
all in uproar, with the general cry, of, sieze that damned rascal, the outlawed
and notorious Torry M'calpine; at that instant I had the help of twenty men to
pull and draw me from my horse, was marched along to the fort, and there
confined close all day, under a strong guard of well armed men, who incessantly
insulted me.

During my confinement in such odious quarters, I heard it whispered that
general orders had been issued to all the residenters in and about Crown-point
and its environs, to secure their effects, drive off their cattle, and remove
themselves, as all the Houses there, and round the country, were to be
instantly burned.

This alarming intelligence induced me in the most supplicating manner to
request my enlargement, and enquire the reason, why of all the men residing in
that neighborhood, I alone should be singled out a victim for total
destruction; kept in in closs confinement there, like a malifactor: and
seemingly to be debarred from the benefits of common humanity, was denied my
liberty on that occasion, to provide against the threatened total destruction
of my family and property, by this ^ntended instant conflagration of all that
district. -- Colonel Heartily, who commanded, stearnly answered with an emphasis
of wrath and indignation* Damn your blood, your friends are too near us; but
they shant get you: for you shall have the pleasure, or pain of accompanying
me, in my Batteaux, to Ticonderoga. To which I smoothly answered (though in
great agitation) That a Colonel in command, and a poor farmer, a prisoner,
would not suit so well, or comfortably, in the same boat. Instantanously,
consequ^nt to this discouraged conversation, there was an express general order
to drive off all the stock and cattle from these and adjacent grounds, to
Ticonderoga.

Fortunately for some of my poor neighbors, they drove their cattle
prudentially, into swamps and deep woods, by which means, and their being set
at some distance, these people saved their beasts: but unluckily my particular
stock were always distingui^^ed by carrying, or having four little bells on (as
my certain mark or method of finding out my own cattle in the thick woods) by
which means, my property was soon discovered and known, particularly singled
out, and carried off, without any regreat or compensation, but by the
sympathizing application and intercession of several American officers, my
former acquaintances I was at length dismissed, and allowed to go home with a
Sergeant to see and execute this barbarous design, although allowed to save my
most valuable effects, and look after the safety of a family, though my cattle
were lost; being still under charge of a Sergeant and party* who had peremptory
orders to burn my dwelling and other houses, that every night: such was there
inveterate resentment at me, on all occasions: but my own dwelling house and a
few other straggling houses were accidently saved, these partly through the
hurry, and confused flight of the terrified enemy, who only waited to give
Crown-point, itself, but a partial consummation.

Watching always for my opportunity of deserting from my guardian Sergeant and
his posse, I snatched the occasion, when it turned near night, of escaping
toward Crown-Point, where arriving safely, I fortunately found in my search,
an old canoe, lying neglected in a swamp, that had been somehow overlooked or
not discovered by the terrified Americans, in their very tumultuous flight.
This crazie machine, I got launched with the help of some boys who boldly came
to assist me, and who accompanied me in padling the hazardous tool for four
miles, in the dark lake, till I got up with General Carleton's fleet; here I
immediately went on board the Commodore, that vess^l his Excellency was into,
where making myself and my errand soon known, I was ready and politely
received, humanely treated, and kindly entertained by that most worthy of Men,
Lieut. General Carleton, being honored with his confidential conversation, I
made ample discoveries to him of all I knew, respecting the inhabitants and
state of this district of the back country, that he was now got into; and the
dispositions and attachments of the people immediately above Crown-point and
its environs: giving especially a minute information of their state, situation
and force at Ticonderoga, upon which I had made particular observations, at my
being so recently there, even so late as the proceeding Friday.

His Excellency was pleased to hear my detail with condescension; expressed his
approbation of my remarks intelligence, and behavior, saying audibly, that he
believed me so loyaly attached, faithful, and proper for purposes in
speculation, that he would not on any account, want me about his person and the
public service con^inually; and that he must have me engaged to attend him and
the army, in their operations wherever they moved or whatever they had to
undertake: it was then hinted to me that the army stood in need of some
provisions; that they believed I was a proper person to get supplies, if I
could venture on such an enterprise, to a man of my principles, this was
inducement enough; I therefore without hesitation offered my service on that or
my expedition, however hazardous, were I assisted by a proper party of such
officers and men as I judged expepedient: with whom I would not only scout the
contigious country, learn the situation of our enemies: but also might procure a
sufficient supply of live cattle for victualling our army, that had perfected
their journey and voyage, upon salt provisions allenarly.

His excellency cautioning me of the danger and fatigue necessarily attending
such manaeuvre's, and genteelly ^avouring me with his directions, he consented
to my having such a party as was proper and requisite, who upon the following
morning were accordingly selected; consisting of two hundred and sixty brave
fellows, under the command of the gallant officers, Captain Frazer of the
Rangers, and Captain Money of the Canadians; I going as confident conductor of
the expedition.

Thus we proceeded cheerfully through bad roads, swamps woods and rough
grounds, for the space of fifteen miles, and lay the residue of that
tempestuous, rainy night, upon our arms, within a short distance of our enemy's
lines, where we kept snug and undiscovered; I going close to and again among
our party, which I repeated several different times, beseeching our men to kept
quiet and private; and to be particularly careful to preserve their arms and
ammunition* safe and dry from all rain and injury, as all our success, escape,
and even our lives, depended on these judicious precautions: and I must do them
the justice to say here, that the whole detachment paid every attention to
their duty, and my earnest recommendations. -- In this dreary period of our
necessary inactive time and considering all circumstances, the commanding
officer's and I too, despaired of any great success from our journey; in fact
the matter was a little alarming, as we had not been able to preserve one
single musket in due order, nor all our ammunition quite dry, through the
severity of the rainy, inclement long night; at same time we lay close to the
quarters of about twenty thousand enemies

I indeed feared we were in a forlorn situation aed desperate circumstances,
which no doubt urged me the more to hold our people in cheerful humor, and to
preserve with spirit and resolution in the execution of our intended purposes.

So soon as day light appeared I conducted our Officers to an adjacent rising
ground, to explore the country round us, and reconnitre our enemies.

This prospect in our circustances, afforded us so intricate difficulties, that
Captain Fraser bravely offered to take the ^out of the most threatening danger,
rather than I should undertake that point of service, he fearing my
unexperience and knowing my natural warmth, this generous proposal I thankfully
rejected: so we agreed to divide our whole force, into three parties acting
distinct, or separately, under the two Captains and me, in alloted numbers; and
thus make some bold even desperate push, with mutual exertions, for obtaining
some prizes, Conce^ting, that we should have our rendezvous upon the very
ground and at the same spot we halted on the proceeding night. Thus we
proceeded, cheerfully and resolutely, in three separate bodies, and after each
party had closed to our enemies sentries surrounded and captured some parcels
of straggling cattle, we severally marched away, undisturbed and unmolested:
with our separately collected prizes, to our appointed ground of rendezvous,
and there joined again in one collected body, without a single man amissing.

The number of cattle we had collected, by no means gratifying my avidity, I
requested the commanding officers to grant me a party of chosen men, who would
readventure with me to scour the woods and grounds again, for more cattle. My
proposal being accepted, and our wet arms, left with the party who attended the
cattle we had in custody, thirty two brave volunteers, instantly turned out to
obey my orders; with whom I proceeded on the rout, I thought to be most
egligible, where we discovered and carried away thence, above thirty very fine
Bullocks, with which drift we joyfully pursued and seasonably overtook our
friends of the royal detachment, as they persevered on their long march
homeward.

Thus proceeding in one collected cheerful column; with eminent danger and the
utmost expedition reasonable, for Crown-Point, we arrived in safety and high
spirits that afternoon: possessed of one hundred and seven head of excellent
beef cattle (ten of which number, happened to be part of my own stock, that
were formerly plundered by, and now recovered from the rapacious Rebels.) And
presently turned into the whole drift, a seasonable supply, before General
Carleton, who attentively viewed them: publicly thanked me for my hazardous
projected plan of operations: and applauded all of us, that were concerned in
it is safe happy and successful execution: it was a good supply.

General Carleton with his usual and singular humanity and generosity, at this
time desired, that I would make up my own particular loss of cattle, out of
these now under our capture; but with thankful acknowledgement I replied, that
it never should be said of me, I had courted for or taken the valiant soldiers
hard earned prize, to indemnify my losses. That I truly considered myself well
paid in the mean time, by infelt satisfaction of rendering the King his cause
and army my best services, which I was ready to repeat on every occasion in my
power* but should my sovereign, or the commander in chief (suppose his
excellency) be pleased to grant me* some Rebels farm, at the conclusion of the
war, (then thought near to a period), would accept it, with gratitude. I must
her observe, much to the praise of G^neral Carleton and our officers of the
foresaid expedition, that in the number of cattle we collected in our range,
there were some beasts belonging to loyal inhabitants about Crown-point: these,
I was desired to call out and return to the former owners all gratis; which I
perf^^med, and they were so sensible of the tenderness shown them, they
privately collected a little money among them to gratify the soldiers who had
rescued their beasts* but the officers would not allow, nor the party accept of
the intended Benefaction; (...) was the regular and generous behavior of this
spir^^^d little army, under command of their gallant leader General Carleton,
and his officers of every denomination.

Crown-point having fallen to the British arms, and the season adapted to
military attachments, being exhausted too much for our troops procedure to
reduce Ticonderago, it was resolved by the commander in chief and his council
to return for the winter to Canada, by Lake Champlain. As soon as the movement
was determined on, his Excellency took so much care and notice of me and my
concerns, that a Sergeant and twelve men were ordered up to my house, for the
purpose of removing my family and effects, in safety; and carrying away
whatever was valuable and portable, intentionally, to transport all singly to
Canada, under convoy of the royal army. The general being justly apprehensive
of my meeting with the most severe retalliations from the exasperated Americans
for my spirited exertions to their detriment, during all the time of my
unalienable attachment to him, and the British Troops. I repeat it, that he
would not, on any consideration suffer me or my family to run the hazard of
staying in that quarter, behind the army, lest we should be hardly dealt with;
nor at same time would he think of wanting my personal attendance and services,
on his now concerted returning expedition. Agreeable to these friendly
precautions, my family and some part of my effects were brought on, and secured
as well as circumstances would admit of; but all my crops of wheat corn and
hay, utensils and other articles of estimation to me, were left behind; to the
mercy and resentment of the revengeful Americans, which they soon destroyed,
and carried away, totally; and have been ever since lost to me.

My dwelling house and other buildings were ^or most part destroyed; and the
remainder of these were for most part destroyed through some error or necessity
of our own troops, this did my property pay at that time, as on former
occasions for my true attachment, and unshaken loyalty to my King and his
cause; though I have been since that period, very much injured by parties of
the British troops.

Under the escort of General Carleton and his army, myself, family and
remaining effects, were brought to St. John's in Canada, where the attentive
General ordered such houses as pertained to the r^be^ Canadians, to be
appropriated to those loyalists who had joined him; and in that number I was
reckoned with some distinction; whilst I was in search of the proper house,
allotted me, some intoxicated soldiers took the audacious liberty of rummaging
my loaded batteaux's; where unluckily meeting with my money, they villainously
plundered, with some articles of value and among the rest they carried of
several pieces of silver, with some joannes's and half joannes's, that never
were recovered again.

From St John's I proceeded to Chamble^, with my Family and hired a house,
having the kings rations allowed us during the hard and unactive season, by ^he
humane General Carleton, who always evidenced the would not neglect the support
of those good hearted men, who had risqued and lost their all, by their loyal
adherance to their king and country; and more especially me, who had so
conspicuously, opposed the rebels and on all occasions stood firm in the royal
cause. As I had always declined b^ing invariably tied down to military command*
so as to interfere with my liberty, at pleasure; I remained here perfectly
unconnected with any public employment; and without having ever formerly got,
or now getting, one shilling of pay, although my own l^ttle money was quite
exhausted. I applied to some new acquired friends for supplies, who very
generously favored me with both (...) and credit, to trade a little upon: by
which means and my industrious application to business, I got supprisingly soon
into a lucrative branch of traffic, in the right mercantile line for that
climate; and had fully established myself upon a good footing, with the
flattering hope, next certainty of soon making myself quite easy in the world,
and gradually acquiring a tolerable fortune, with a fair character in life,
when in the extreme of my present prosperity and ease; and most unhappily in
respect of my private interest, General Burgoyne arrived with the army, and
making all necessary enquirie^, for the most intelligent persons, and such as
might be most useful in his enterprises; he was soon informed how meritorious
and interesting my former services had been, to General Carleton, and his army;
and that from my acquaintance with, and experience in that back part of the
country and Lake^ he was destined to: my accompanying him, and his tro^ps ^^ght
be of essential service to them, and the cause, (...) respects. Hereupon being
sent for by General (...) of the Ar^illery, who politely received me;
immediately an interesting conversation took place in the course of which, many
material qu^stions were put to me, confidentially, which I answered with so
much precision, that General Phillips thought my attending the army, in the
expedition, would be of the utmost ben^fit to the service, they were going
upon, and therefore he seriously asked me, if I would accompany them, or wanted
and would accept some military emp^oyment.

In answer, I thanked him for his condescensions and the proffer then made me,
which on some former occasion, would have been acc^pted; but being then
established in a good trade, that afforded me good returns: I was a^e^se to
drop my present business, in favor of any moderate appointment, in the
military line: much less would I engage in fixed military, or other subservient
life, upon an uncertain footing, or in too inferior a rank.

My inclination running chiefly upon a retired country life as soon as I could
attain it; and in due time to return to my favorite estate near Crown Point;
adding, that any indispensible emergency where my poor best offices could be of
use, I was so attatched (...) ^ing, and count^y, that I would make a temporary
sacrifice of my time and my person, to promote our national service: having
always a view of reward public or private suitable to my deserts, and
endeavour^, namely handsome pay to myself; and suitable provision made for
supporting my family in my absence; and finally securing me and my successors
in perpetual property of some valuable portion of crown lands. I hope the
candid world cannot blame me for mentioning such preliminaries, when they
impartially consider, that I had bestowed my time, hazarded my life, and lost
my all, serving my king and country, without ever receiving any pay or
compensation, from the beginning of my calamities, by the present American
contest* down to this moment of time, in April 1780.

But to return to the subject matter of my discourse with General Phillips.
Being taken into serious consideration for some few days, and being frequently
sent for, and pressingly urged by Mr Phillips in the name of General Burgoyne,
to connect myself entirely and immediateful to their army, so as to assure them
of my attendance in this expedition; declaring that all reasonable satisfaction
would be made for my time and services. Wearied out with solicitations: unable
to resist perpetual entreaties; and depending with the utmost confidence upon
the assurances of gratification, given me, by men of high rank and boasted
honor, I was finally over persuaded by these two Generals to consent to
relinquish my beneficial mercantile business, and accompany them and their army
to the southward.

Thus it remained for some little time, that I had no particular office,
employment, or department assigned me, until I was employed to conduct a number
of Officers horses through the woods and mountains from Canada to Crown-Point;
such a difficult ta^k, through so untrodden a path, would not be easily
undertaken by many men in the army, except myself; however, I did engage in
that ardous expedient, and having p^cked out sixteen men of the most active
pilots I kn^w in the country, I set out with my charge (taking along with me a
parcel of my own, the best set of hor^s^s in the hands of any private man in
Canada, which were afterward plundered from me by the rebels) and persevering
through innumerable seeming impossibiliti^s I accomplished that fatiguing,
dangerous, long expedition (of many days journeying the length of that plac^ on
Lake Champlain called Split Rock; where indee^ with unexpected safety, much
toiled, and want of an^ regular rest) having only the assistance of one small
pitiful canoe, to ferry the drove of horses over many interveening creeks.

At Split Rocks the horses were to be again b^^ted for ferrying over Lake
Champlain, and there I applied to Sir Francis Clark, Aid de Camp, to Gener^^
Burgoyne, for some boats or Batteaux, to transport the horses under my charge,
safely over; but this gentleman (though courteous to me on some former occasions)
poin^ blank refused me any assistance, in this matter, tellin^ me freely, that
my difficulties were not unobserved, no^ my success hitherto unadmired, which
had brought thos^ in consultation to a determined resolution of forcing (who
they saw would undertake any exploit) to try the new expedient of marching
those horses, round the Lak^ through woods, and over the mountains (however
hazardous) to ascertain the discovery and proof, if such ^ course of road was
practible, or could be at all effected, purely to avail the troops and service
of such a ma^aeuvre, (...) ever such a li^e should or might be attempted, on
any future emergency.

^^is alarming unexpected refusal putting me to al^ (...) and enquiries to get
my unavoidable design, effected, information was given me, that two batteaux a^
twelve miles distance, up O^ter creek, which had been ^^ing there quite
neglected, since employed some time (...), in carrying up prov^sions to Captain
Frazer^ Indians. I went di^ectly in search of these crazy batteaux, found, and
employed them, in ferrying my (...) with to^l and difficulty over the Lake; and
(...) I brought them, in unexpected safety to (...) lie point, opposite to the
Fort o^ Crown-Point, where our royal army had very properously arrived, and
severally encamped; in this situation, I renewed my earnest supplications for
the use of some batteaux, to carry the horses over that sound to Crown-Point
side, where I had engaged to deliver my charge; but to my great astonishment, I
again met with a positive refusal, through many batteaux, were at the time lying
quite idle.

Such rebuffs, in a matter of such indispensible duty, and ^^rvice, gave me an
unfavourable idea, of the management, upon that expedition; and impressed me
with apprehension, that more sacrifices would be made to wantonness than to
prudence* and sorry am I, the sequel confirmed it.

Overwhelmed with the dilemma, I was brought into (quite innocently, and
seemingly designedly), I came to the very desperate though unadvoidable
resolution of swimming my whole drift of horses, over the neck of water: in the
execution of which perilous method, four of the horses were unlickily ^ost by
drowning, in sight of the whole army, many of whom very much condemned the
dangerous expedient, that I was forced to take; and such of the Officers as
were my real friends, had occasion soon thereafter with much reason, to regret
that accident the more; that I was considered liable for the damage, so far as
to be obliged to replace two of the lost horses by giving a choice pair of my
own best horses, which pair I could have readily sold for forty eight pound
currency; yet never received the smallest part of payment, or other
compensation, nor know I where to apply for any redress, but from Government.

My having so judiciously conducted, and executed this hazardous expedition,
with these horses, induced the Generals Phillips and Burgoyne soon to send for
me, and having obeyed their hurried call, they again earnestly requested that I
should then take a special connection with the army, so far as to subject me to
military orders, entitle me to certain regular, handsome pay; especially as
they would that of all the men under their command; I allenarly, should return
incontinently to St. John's, Canada, to take charge of conducting up some of his
Majesty's horses, there wanted for immediate urgent service, adding as usual,
the most express assurances, and promises* of my being handsomely rewarded at
all events, for performing the business n^w in agitation; which they requested
I would go about. I answered them, with all diffidence, that I did not wish to
enter into any military duty; preferring rather that I should continue in my
present independence, and have perfect disposal of my time, for purposes of
bringing up my family from Canada, or my settling there, as I chose; so as I
night enjoy a quiet life, in peace, and be my own master.

Then were such entreaties, promises and persuasions poured upon me, that I
suffered all my objections to be overruled, and my difficulties were in some
measure then removed, by my getting an order instantly, from Colonel Carleton
to the acting Quarter master-General at St John's, to furnish me a batteaux and
hands, for the special purpose of carrying my family and effects to Crown
Point; in full confidence of these promises and considerations, and my
foolishly trusting to many stipulations that never were in any part performed,
I was then and there persuaded to receive orders, and immediately proceeded
with all dispatch to St John's, Canada, to take charge of, and bring up the
Kings horses now wanted; I set off and upon my arrival there, I received
written instructions (yet in my possession) dated St John's 5th July 1777, from
Nathaniel Dav Esquire commissary of horses, in which orders I am designed "John
M'Alpine, assistant commss^iary of horse"; which in all equity founds me a just
claim to the pay of ten shillings and sixpence sterling per day from at last
that period, till I was released on cartel at New York. By Mr Day's
instructions foresaid, I was then appointed to t^ke charge of two hundred of
his Majesty's horses, for the purpose of conducting them to the royal army at
Crown point, or Ticonderago. The horses being accordingly put under my care, I
observed at surveying them, that several were unfit for the present intended
service, according to my comprehensions and therefore, I peremptorly refused to
receive any horses that I deemed improper. But at same time I draughted and
received such cattle as I judged sound and suitable to the labor in view, and
these numbered only 195 head, in the whole, I was sensible that Major Hughs,
contractor for Horses had been shagreen'd, by turning so many unsound horses,
on his hands: but I made conscience of my duty, and the confidence put in me by
my employers: never putting my promised pay, douceurs, in comparison with my
own honor: and my hearty regard to our public service. Having mustered my
party of men drivers, and these 195 picked horses, I set out ordering necessary
batteaux to proceed with suitable provender and provisions* and fixing upon
certain appointed places of rendezvous, for our meeting in the evenings, to
refresh both men and cattle. In this manner did I pursue a most disagreeable
journey of many days, continued for above one hundred and fifty miles of
unbeaten roads, through mountains, woods and swamps, rivers brooks and lakes,
till I arrived in safety at Ticonderago, with the insignificant loss of one
horse only, which perished in the woods, through hurt fatigue, and sickness, in
course of so very troublesome and tedious an expedition. It was universally
acknowledged that such a successful march, under so many difficulties had never
been accomplished, in the course we traveled, nay the detachment that went in
a road nearly similiar, some little time before me, and with some such number
of horses, lost outright above thirty drove, besides many were hurt.

At Ticonderago I met with the Major Hughs, I had formerly offended, by
rejecting so many unsound horses at St. John's, who now approved of my fidelity
and conduct in the matter, and publicly declared, that I had successfully
accomplished a difficult piece of service, before then thought impracticable,
which had saved Government five hundred pound sterling, and deserved particular
notice and reward; at same time solicited my going into his own department,
and offered me ten-shillings and sixpence per day, during all the war, or our
^eaching Albany, which of them I preferred: and on that head he addressed
General Phillips, craving my liberty immediately, to which General Phillips
answered, that if I deserved from him, Major Hugh's or any other man
whatsoever; I must be equally valuable to them in Government service, which
could not dispense with my attendance in certain points, and therefore in place
of his parting with me on any account, I must certainly remain in my present
state of attendance on the army, subordinate to the private confidential orders
of the Generals, alleneraly. Should it not be a determined argument when all
the preceding circumstances recollectively considered, That since General
Phillips prevented my embracing Major Hughs particular service and pay, I have
consequently an undubitable claim to ten shillings and sixpence per day, since
the era of my being sent to Canada till some time in may 1778, when I was
detached from military employment; yes, I ought, and I hope will be allowed it
by Government; together with the full amount of my account of charge herewith
given in, for all my debursements, expenses and losses, incurred by and
consequent of my public services and unshaken loyalty, all yet unrewarded; and
I must with all due submission, observe to my readers, that however patriotism
may animate men to glorious achievements; it cannot be denied, emoluments will
ever influence the best actions of mankind; why then not allow me such
reprospective views, in common with the world at large.

Our royal army then marching away from Ticonderago, for lake George, our
people in hospital were in great want of fresh provisions.

In this season of difficulty, I was thought of, and applied to, requesting I
would undertake to go in search of some supply to these needy objects.

As usual I consented, and was detached with a party of fifty two men, up Olive
Creek, to the new England country, with written orders from General Philips to
purchase live cattle for provisions to our sick men and duly pay full value
therefore; In consequence I bought forty head of beef cattle with which I
returned, and deliveryd them as directed, to our commissary at Ticonderago: who
ungracefully refused to pay the value that I contracted for, until sufficient
evidence was given him, of the loyalty of the persons I had bargained with,
which I well knew could not be obtained, as to my own knowledge, many of them
were heartily disaffected in this dilemma my honor engaged for the people's
payment, their delegate at my heels to receive their money, and Mr Phi^lip's
special order to be produced for the purchasses I had made, I had no remedy,
but directly apply to General Hamilton (then commandant there) who immediately
accompanied me to the ungenerous commissaries office, ordering him at his peril
to pay me down instantly every penny I did engage for, conform to my account of
purchasses given in. The commissary was thus ordered to pay the value; but in
doing it he detained me so long unnecessarily, that I was entangled in a new
plague and much loss to myself.

For having that day* (4th August 1777) received General Hamilton's orders to
carry some number of our prisoners from Ticonderoga, to Crown-point, in order
to make hay there, for foraging the horses of our army; I accordingly entered
upon that discharge of duty with my usual alacrity; and collected a necessary
squad of our prisoners into a batteux prepared for our expedition, being
furnished with provisions suitable for our purpose, and putting some effects
an^ baggage of va^^e of my own, on board, every thing thus adjusted for our
voyage, I went about getting the value aforesaid of the cattle paid to the man
in waiting for it, in execution of which business I was so long detained by the
commissary that our prisoners finding thems^lf so snugly b^^ted, took the
opportunity of my (...) push of with (...) batteaux and make for (...) England
five of the L^ke, thus effecting their escape, possesed of our batteaux, stores
and thirty pounds worth of my property.

Disappointed in this manner of my hay workers etc. I again applied to General
Hamilton, who directed me on the same service formerly ordered, with
instructions to employ the people at Crown-Point and its environs to execute
the labor of hay making, at the current rate for such work, and pay their
wages. This trust, I attended and executed; drawing provisions and liquor from
the garrison stores for supplying our workers, and finally paying the laborers
wages out of my own pocket, amounting to the sum of thirteen pound eleven
shillings currency, of which sum I have never been reimbursed in any part* and
therefore include it in my charge against Government.

From Crown-Point I returned to Ticonderoga, where I was employed in
transporting provisions, by Batteaux, for our army, to lake George; which
necessary work being accomplished, I was then ordered by General Powell to
proceed directly to our army under General Burgoyne, who ha^ by that time
advanced to Fort Miller, upon still water, and att^nded others then I set of^
and at my arrival there* I fell in with Major Hugh's formerly mentioned, who
repeated the offers he had made me before; enjoining, my personal application
to the General, for being perfectly detached to the Majors proper department.
This was done, and after those in superior command had for some days digested
the matter, and thought that perhaps I might be more useful in the Major's
employ than with the army at large: General Phil^ips hinted, that it had been
concerted, to adjourn me (for one month only in the way of trial) to major
Hughs particular department and I was at liberty to accept his offers; which I
did, receiving his approbation, and my full pay according to his promise. As
soon as that months separate employment, was ended, I gave pointed attendance
upon the army, and obedience to my supperior's orders, in whatever way or
branch was recommended to me: Being alwa^^ ^etached upon the necessary duty of
forraging, and with scouting parties, particularly, for which special service,
I was thought to be always the most properly, adapted therefore was as
certainly appointed; because my acquaintance in that country, and my allowed
activity in expeditions, promised the greatest hopes of success. In this manner
I continued to be constantly employed, till the propitious 19th September 1777,
that the royal army successfully attacked the Americans at Freeman's farms,
where, and in which action, I have the vanity to say with some truth that my
conduct and behavior was taken as much notice of, as any private man in the
service; for which I am convinced I can get the testimony of several officers
of reputation then on the field, particularly from the gallant Captain Twiss,
who conducted as chief engineer, and will acknowledge that his endeavors was
much facilitated, by my allertly bringing up two cannon, where he ordered them,
and in the critical moment of his affecting a very desirous manouvre, in the
execution of which exploit, I was in danger, yet I relieved and brought off a
wounded soldier, and gave Captain Twiss my horse in the action.

From that day I continued with the army, rendering every service in my power,
and conforming my conduct to the commands laid upon me, night and day, till the
beginning of October thereafter, that I heard with jealousy and regreat,
General Burgoyne had employed a certain man from Still-water (named Jones, and
who was notoriously attached to the rebels formerly) to go as confidential
express on some very private message to Ticonderoga for a reward of five
hundred guineas, as was said. I must own this intelligence much disgusted me,
from a suspicion that my integrity and attachment were some how overlooked or
susp^cted; where the General had so far displayed his d^ffidence of me, as to
employ a rebel upon an important secret errand, th^^ I was deemed unworthy of
being entrusted with, the more especially that it was well known, I had all
along sacrificed my private interest, and very often (...) my life, to promote
our public service's of every kind committed to me. In short my feelings were
so smart, and my Delicacy so much hurt, that I determined to withdraw from
attendance, and retire to my old rural habitation, poor as it was; which I
mentioned to some officers of most intimate acquaintance, with loud complaint
of the injurious intreatment given me, by the commander in chief, which I could
not digest; and in this ^light of resentment, I applied to Sir Francis Clark
one of the Aid-de-camps for my pass homeward; in a few days Sir Francis gave me
a pass, but upon the express condition that I would faithfully return to the
army, as soon as my ^amily could be removed to Canady; or put under General
Powell's protection at Ticonderoga; which obligation I pointedly acquiesced in.

The following evening, an orderly Sergeant was sent me ordering my immediate
attendance upon General Burgoyne, which message I obeyed with the more alacrity
that I persuaded myself, now in the moment of my departure, was the acceptable
time of my receiving, if not full payment for my attendance upon the army* at
least some handsome consideration, or allowance for my long, faithful and
hazardous services, as I never yet received a shilling of pay or public money;
but how great was my disappointment when in place of any reward, or even bare
mention of it, I found a very cold indifferent reception from General Burgoyne,
who asked me, if I was seriously going to leave him at this critical time of
danger; when he had so much confidence in me, dependence upon my loyal
exertions, and every due sense of my essential service to the royal cause.

My answer gave him to know that I had come to the resolution of returning now
to my family, long distressed in my absence, and in the greatest need of my
best offices, nor could I see any inducement for my dangling longer about him;
as he had never give me any pay or gratifition for my trouble, loss and
attendance

That in place of finding him disposed to perform his promises to me I had
unexpectedly discovered, that he had apparently lost all faith and dependence,
on my honor and best endeavors; when he would employ a rebel or suspected
person, to go confidentially, upon the late private errand, or particular
message to Ticonderoga; a con^^dence that should of right be committed to my
often experienced, well proved integrity. Being so exceedingly affected with
that glaring instance of his disrespect for, and diffidence in me, I was
finally resolved to bid him then, farewell; for which I hoped he would excuse
me, and I was sure the world could not justly blame me. He passionately, then
turned upon me, saying vehemently, that I might depend on it, I had for ever
forfeited his recommendations, liberality, and friendship: and he had rather
that I had joined the rebels, than have deserted him in the present critical
juncture. I must own I was put into some agitation, by the tenor of our whole
conversation: and the disrespectful usage given me causelessly, which occasioned
my replying, in displeasure, That were I inclined to connect myself with the
rebel Americans, I had many favorable opportunities and interesting offers
before that day; and was quite certain, they would still give me a welcome
reception; but my principles were as loyal, and my heart as true to my gracious
sovereign and his cause, as any other men in the British service; withal I was
independent of General Burgoyne, and the rebels too, and could find myself
aggreable employment without serving either of them; nor would I for one day
longer; but in the present time I wished it were duly considered that had
jealously injured my health in running every hazard and taking constant
fatigues; had very much hurt my family by neglecting them; and quite ruined my
subject, by attending him so incessantly upon the public service; and trusting
to his promises never performed, without being ever favored with a penny of
pay, or the smallest compensation, for my time, trouble, or expense, and now I
hoped for some adequate consideration. Finding that my hints seemed not to be
understood; nor any regard to my complaints, I instantly withdrew both parties
much displeased, particularly me. That evening, I designed to take a public
farewell of my good friend Major Hughs, Captain Twiss, and other officers, my
distinguished wellwi^hers, who being made acquainted of my conversation with,
and the neglect shown me by General Burgoyne* they perfectly disapproved of the
usage given me, and were pleased to regret my parting with the army, insisting
strongly that I should not detach myself entirely from the service, but only
retire so far as Ticonderoga, and employ myself there in collecting every
species of forage, and forwarding every thing possible for the supplies of the
troops. Repeating all my grievances, I declared to my esteemed friends, that I
would decamp for good, let General Burgoyne find another when and where he best
could; and accordingly I set off from camp very late at night* and passed the
rivers twice by swimming my horse in the dark, for dispatch and secrecy, to
avoid being intercepted by the rebels.

By five o'clock next morning I got to Fort George, having road above thirty
four miles, in less than five hours; I here waited on the commanding officer,
and informed him of what had passed with Mr Burgoyne, and my intention now;
upon which he ordered a batteaux for conveying me to Diamond island, in the
possession of our troops, under command of Captain Arberry of the forty seventh
regiment; who also being made acquained with my grievances and resolutions; he
ordered me another batteaux to Ticonderoga. There I waited on General Powel,
giving him a full detail of all my maneauvers; which he tenderly expressed a
feeling concern at, and used all arguments to diswade me from withdrawing
entirely; but in place of leaving the service and then going home, I should
remain with himself, occasionaly employed in some duty, until I went upon the
very first special errand, back to general Burgoyne; which might make up all
matters, and he would take particula^ interest and pleasure, in getting all
justice done me.

Though I attended with the due regard to this good man's proposals, it then
occurred to me and I mentioned it to him, that should I be employed upon any
such confidential message, and have the misfortune of being made prisoner, on
such perilous occasions, the most violent severitie's from the rebels, might by
my fate: and perhaps General Burgoyne's resentment might lead him to the cruel
conjecture, of my having designedly thrown myself in the enemy's power. In
short, I disavowed any confidence in Mr Burgoyne's sentiments, friendships, or
operations: and thanking Mr. Powell for his overtures, I set off homeward that
day.

I had been only a few days consoling my family at home, when one express, and
then a second came with the utmost hurry and confusion to my house, requesting
my immediate attendance on General Powell at Ticonderago, for every thing was
lost, sure enough I repaired to him, with all speed, and there unhappily
learned, that General Burgoyne and fine little army had been fatally made
prisoners, at Saratoga.

I cannot pretend to say, professionally there was any misconduct in that
disaster: but to speak (...) opinions I had not too sanguine hopes of their
procedure, surrounded by numerous enemy's in one extensive dissafected contry,
very little known to our adventures; who had not the support they expected, nor
the encouragement they were entitled to, and what in fact they merited: at same
time, I was always afraid that over much trust was put in men, who misled, or
berayed our people, while our commanders distrusted and despised their loyal
adherents and substantial friends.

Being thus got again to Ticonderoga, in General Pow^ll's confidence, he told
me, that on these trying occasions, my best offices, attention, and essential
services, were more requisite than ever: and that without my incessant
exertions he despaired, that he o^ his party could expect the necessary
operations, of transporting boats, provisions, stores and others from lake
Georg: seeing our army's horses and carriages had been all recen^ly dispersed
and destroyed by our enemies; I replied with de^erence That I had all along
heartily complained with and happily executed all the orders I was honored
with by my superior, and upon this occasion I would cheerfully contribute my
outmost power of exertion for his Majesty's service, and the salvation of his
property: but at this crisis, I was sensible of interveening difficulties, that
seemed unsurmountable in spite of my outmost application, yet I would adventure
my life upon the success, though I would wish to be excused from undertaking
matters, that had the appearance of impossibilities. General Powell, always
pleasant, that though now in great perplexity and seeming despair, persevering in
intreatys, I laid aside all view to my own interest and concerns at home,
sacrificing these and my personal safety to his Majesty's important urgent
services; and resolutely set about performing them; which by unwearied
attention and perseverance, I got effected (in full) much sooner then my most
flattering hopes, suggested: though attended with the unremmitting personal
fatigues: in the expedition of which operations I contributed seventy days work
of my own yoke, man servant four oxen, chains, and other requisites, for which
Mr. Powell was to have paid a Dollar per day. That I now charge to Government,
because I received no compensation then, through our hurry and confusion: and
my own captivity, immediately consequent, prevented my ever meeting Mr. Powell
to have his promise implemented. It would be ungenerous not to mention here,
that in performing the complicated operations of this troublesome service, I
was much assisted by the unwearied endeavors of worthy Captain Twiss; who
being relieved from Albany, seemed rejoiced to find me here, employed upon so
trying an occasion* and contributed more than fell to one officers share, in
the work of the time. By the cheerful active perseverance of all our united
efforts, we perfected the conveyance of all our stores etc. from lake George to
Ticonderoga, where our troops were incessantly busied, under one attentive
commander, in preparations to evacuate, that fortress, and return to Canada.

In these circumstances (...) from the approaching American army, I must do
(...) justice to acknowledge, that (...) my particular interest, as to order
(...) eff^cts should be taken due care of, and (...) to Canada, under escort of
our (...) be left of my property, b^ my (...) public service* would
unqu^stionable (...), when charged for: and that (...) of seeing every thing
compleat^d at (...) the last man to depart from that post, (...) which
obligations I came under, and actually perfected, though not yet paid for it.

In faithful compliance with my promises to General Powell, and in strict
obedience to his confidential orders to me, at our parting: I patiently waited
to have every necessary operation completed. in the manner he ^irected, at
Ticonderoga; which being effectually performed, I then set off with our last
party, of about sixty men, to carry the Kings remaining horses, through the
woods and mountains to Canada; having my servants and the poor remains of my
cattle stock, in the cava^cade; and my family, with the residue of my portable
eff^cts and furniture, sent in company with our provisions and forage, in our
batteaux.

In this manner I pro^eeded for some days, unmolested, toward Canada; and
having surmounted the greatest part of the difficulties, occasioned by woods
and mountains, etc. in one unfrequented course of road* perhaps never attempted
but by native Indians. I got all sat to that tract of land, called Gillilan's
Patent, where I considered myself out of all danger of pursuit or surprise; but
then and there, were I and (...) party, overtaken quite unarmed, and captured
by a detachment of fifty chosen, well armed men from the (...), who had found
means of crossing (...) their pursuit) and approached us the more (...): having
instantaniously manned (...) and captured our batteaux making us all prisoners,
(...) all our provisions and provender, and my remaining stores, cattle,
effects of furnitur^, clothing, etc, of every denomination. In this ^o^^orn
condition* we were all carri^^ back to a certain place called the Red House
within nine miles of my former habitation: and there they divided among them,
every particular of cattle, horses, effects etc. (my part of that capture,
being the residue of all my worldly subject, and of considerable value)
with-leaving me ought, but the clothes that were on me, and my wife^s back; and
my child of only four years of age. The unhuman plunderers having completed
this cruel sce^e, they allowed the Canadians of my party to return home* and to
carry along with them, my wife and child giving the whole company, only the
scanty allowance of two days provision, to support them all, in a long
expe^ition of six day's navigation, in that very late inclement season of the
year; my natural feelings were easier conceived than expressed on this
melancholy occasion, stripped of every article of consideration; but the
cl^athing t^^n upon me, and deprived of my disconsolate wife, and only
surviving child, perhaps never to meet again, as indeed we did not, for a long
time thereafter.

In this wretched pli^h^, was I and my miserable little loyal party hurried and
dragged along, to be thrown into some dungeon (as was ^^reatened) att^nded by a
strong armed g^ard, who unp^tied, impetuously drove us like beasts, through
f^ost and snow, poorly fed, and as ill lodg^d (...) of money* friends, or
acquaintance; nor would these wretches allow me to ride one of my own horses*
of which they captured then, eight of the best in that country, with four fine
oxen, all my cows youn^ cattle, other stock, and valuable effects to some
consi^^rable amount, as will appear in my annexed account ther^of.

W^ were informed, we had three hundred miles to travel through (...) this
disconsulate way, to the Goal of Hartford: the first hundred miles of which
tormenting journey we finished, by arriving at Bennington, where I was some
days confined in the guard house, kept, at very scrimp allowance, without bed
or bedding, or any ease of rest, but what I could get in my big coat, and torn
boots: stretched in a plank of wood, that just exalted me high enough to escape
the reach of unumerable tribes of vermin that paraded, the floor of that
offensive stye; my poor party being thrown into the common goal like
malifacto^s. With some sort of insultting form, I was here brought before a
kind of couns^l* who after examining and there threatening me, made offers of my
release, with restitution of all my property in land, cattle and other effects;
with some tor^e's farm, in perpetuity, If I would now at last heartily join in
their favorite cause, and renounce my allegiance; reminding me, that they were
no strangers to the mischiefs M'Alpine had done them, and the active part I had
all along taken against their independ^nce* by my services to the Torry army's,
in respect of prov^sions, informations etc. etc. all which conjoined
mi^deameanors had rendered me obnoxious, and liable to punishment, even death:
or through their innate clemency, my life would be spared and I permitted to
see New York, upon cart^l, I was not to hope for a General Carleton* there to
patronise me, as he did heretofore: which last prediction, I found fatally true
in the event Hav^ng resolutely withstood all their repeated threa^s and
solicitations to seduce me from my allegiance, I was turned out with great
indignation, and desired to prepare for a long march to Hartford prison, hell
or somewhere. Accordingly I was fitting myself for bidding an eternal farewell
to Bennington, and encouraging my disconsolate party (most of them Scots
Highlanders) who nobly resisted every temptation thrown in their way, to desert
me and the Royal cause, no^withstanding they were half naked, and barefooted,
traveling on snow and ice; at the very time of leaving Bennington, I was much
nonplussed by the misbehaviour of one American half Dutchman of my pa^ty, who
(averse to trade the snow, if he could save his feet) took occasion of then
kidnaping an American officers horse, just equipt for journey an^ rode away
full speed, over the country: of him I heard no more. Upon ^y ^oming to the
town e^d* I opened the door of a house, enquiring i^ I could get a horse to
h^^e for some miles, to overtak^ t^ party: no sooner I appeared an^ spoke, than
I was know^ ^o be an enemy, and was roughly answ^red by a (...) virago "turn
out of my house (...) captai^ son of a B -- h; your man stole ^^ur cap^ain's
horse (...) get out ye ^orry" Thus rebuffed, I was gla^ to ^^ddle along, after
my party and their guard* whom, I soon overtook attended with a (...) mobb,
insulting them; who insulted me, with asking s^eeringly, "torry captain will
you sell your drove of cannibals," meaning my poor fellow prisoners, half clad
half dead, and in a truly tatterdemal^ion condition.

Prosecuting this woeful journey, we at the end of many ^ays reached Hartford*
where my poor loyal party (called torrys at all hands) were thrown into common
go^l; but I was admitted to some liberty, on my parole* purely through the
influence of the officer who commanded our marching guard. Next day I happily
met with my old acquaintance, Captain Money of the 9th Regiment, who was
formerly quarter master in Burgoyne's army, but now a prisoner here. He, being
no stranger to both my services and sufferings in the royal cause, generously
^pared me a little money, which with some benefactions from loyalists at
Hartford, enabled me to live in some de^ency.

Captain Money persevering in repeated acts of friendship, which I shall always
remmember gratefully, strenously ^a^phe^ to the r^bel commissary for pri^^ners,
informing him. I was of some esteem with certain peop^^* and if ^wrd^ ha^ my
friend at New York, whom he wished to be literated, preferably, upon an equal
exchan^^* ^ow was his time o^ eff^ctin^ it: by granting me one month parole to
New York for bringing an exchange to (...). I think it was about the middle of
December, that this pass was given me; when being furnished with some kind of
recommendation from Cap. Money, to Lord Radon (who befriended me) to Colonel
Sherrif etc. I set out for New York (full of hopes) and in my way picked up a
neglected grenadier, a cliver young fellow, whose exigences I believe had put
him under difficulties: him I refreshed out of my pittance and brought along to
the city of New York. Here I met with, and applied to, several acquainted
officers, who well knew some merit in my long, and much neglected services to
the public; reasonably guessed at my poverty; and were informed now, of the
manner in which my liberty was so far obtained. To their praise be it here
acknowledged, that many of these gentlemen's pockets were open to my necessary
calls, as often as delicacy allowed; and they so assiduously exerted their
applications to General Clinton (then commandant at New Y^^k) after removing
some objections, I obtained an order of ^xchange just two days before the time
of my parole would be expired. My arrival and exchange at New York, being thus
effected, I detatched every consideration of further connections with, the
British service, or ever entering into permanent military orders; if any field
of action, in private life, should occurr to me, with any tempting
inducement's. And I con^^ude my campaigning etc. with observing that I have
narrated these adventures, with unviolated honor and truth: and that every
particular of my public orders, and exertions relative thereto, could have been
authentically documented and produced in support of my complicated details, had
not my most material papers (in common with my other effects) been so
repeatedly seized and abstracted by the Americans, when they unluckily had me
in their clutc^es Indeed some of my authoritys have been recovered, more are
yet expected, and all will be cheerfully submttted to examination.

My liberty from all confinement, of every kind, being thus happily
accomplished, at New York? and the season of the year not affording the
occcasion of any ship to Canada (where I very much desired to go, in quest of
my wife, and only child, whom I had not seen of a very long time) I remained
some months at New York, quite disengaged from all business, public or private.
In the course of which period, I made some approaches toward my being more
known; but found no inviting hopes from the General, that would induce me to
use some freedoms, I occasionally stood in need of, therefore I avoided the
imputation of being thought too troublesome.

My little cash being exhausted, I was put under the disagreeable necessity of
addressing some particular friends for immediate supplies; but humane as they
were, I was ashamed of repeating these applications thoroughly weary of an
unactive life. I finally resolved to push into some Business or employment, and
with that intention I communicated my purpose (with friendly freedom, to my
very good acquaintance, Captain Anstruther of the 26th regiment, who commanded
at Crown point, when I first went to it, anno 1773. With his accustomed
generosity, he instantly assured me, of all the interest in his power, (fairly
indeed exhibited by his former unwearied applications for my exchange). By this
worthy man, I was introduced to the acquaintance of Colonel Clark, barrack
master General, who promised me his friendship* when an opportunity offered.
But no vacant birth being then in view, Colonel Clark recommended me to Francis
Green Esquire from Boston, then agent upon the estate of Henry Loyd Esquire on long
Island, who was in agitation of a contract with Colonel Clark, for furnishing
fuel from that estate, to supply the troops in barrack at New York.

I was admitted to all the intimacy could be reasonably exp^cted so soon, by
this Mr. Green, who on all occasions was pleased to put confidence in me; and
sensibly felt my calamities: by the injurys he had experienced, in course of
the present contention for American independence^ and with a heart full of
gratitude I pay Mr. Green, the thankful tribute of acknowledging that he has
all along continued in the same warm disposition toward me: invariable in his
friendships, and unremmitting in his virtuous kind offices.

In consequence of Mr Green's uncommon offices, and singular attachment to me,
I was greatly encouraged to adventure a further connection with him;
accordingly I entered into three separate contracts of agreement, dated the the
24th April 1st June, and 26th November, all in the year 1778. for a certain
farm, with all its produce, upon long Island: conform to the conditions
specially narrated, in these several articles of agreement, yet extant in my
hands, to which reference is here made for particulars, being the more
especially attached to that indentical portion of land, that the most express
protections had been granted by Generals How, and Clinton, to that estate, and
its relatives; which were considered the most ample ever issued for any
American loyalist's property.

To that estate upon long island, I removed and lived in the family way a most
contented, quiet and easiy life for several months, turning every produce to
outmost advantage, in so close a vicinity to the good market of New York; and
having no interruption to my local happiness, but the alarms I might be
occasionally under of some rebel depradations, from the opposite shore of
Connecticut. My esteemed friend Francis Green esquire. having this said
constituents authority and interests always in his view, persisted in the
scheme of supplying Colonel Clark, upon contract, with any quantity of fuel,
or firewood, might be thought requisite for the troops in Barracks at New York:
and having confidentially intimated his purpose to me, I approved the plan, and
directly set on and continued a number of hands in constant employ, cutting and
preparing that fuel to serve the Barrack consumptions; which I was bound to
deliver free at New York, at the fixed price of four pounds currency per cord,
in terms of an accomplished contract. At which rate I could, and would to
furnish any quantity of fuel, that the trops could possibly need, or should
consume, while in Barracks; which I am positively certain would by a saving to
Government of several thousand pounds annually; which are wantonly, or through
ignorance of circumstances, unnecessarily thrown away to jobbers, or Government
contractors in the army.

This declared fact, in the misconduct of that particular (I mean the Barrack)
department, I can with ease make perfectly evident, if I am called upon, as I
earnestly desire I may be, to support this assertion, now heartily disclosed
for our national advantage: and I anxiously desire that my explanation may be
taken openly before the house of commons* to make them and the nation sensible
of the material difference betwixt the extravagant price charged in sterling
money by army contractors, for Barrack fuel, and the small allowance these
last men made us of only four pound currency at per cord at New York; yet I at
same time admit, that this value or price is so equal to both parties, that if
I am honored with the employment of furnishing our troops with fuel, in
New^York Barracks, (for any such similiar situation* in America) upon
Government account, and receiving quick and regular payments; I will instantly
undertake the supply, to an extent, at four pound the cord of such wood, and
find gentlemen of unexceptionable character and good fortune, who will directly
engage, by contract, for my due performance, not only in the necessary supplies
of next winter 1780, but as many subsequent seasons as this unhappy war
continues; or our troops remain in America, under any other appointment of the
British legislature so much hinted, for public savings in this time of our
need, I return to my story respecting the firewood.

In consequnce of Mr Green's scheme of supply to Colonel Clark one thousand
measured cords of fuel were sent by me to New York; but when it was received
there, by the Barrack master's department, in my absence, they fell on sinister
means (though plausible) of reducing that cargo, to only eight hundred cords of
their cart measurement; which defalcation, being so large and glaring, that
some imposition or deceit must be intended and effected; Mr. Green was very
justly alarmed wrote me of the unaccountable inlake in that cargo; and
requested my explanation of the difference in contents; or any plausible reason
for it.

Here I thought a ^aring pu^h had been made at my honor by some person in the
dark as might be said; for being recommended, as an honest man, by my good
friend Colonel Clark, and by him to my patron Mr. Green, I considered my
reputation much engaged or attacked by this perplexity, and was determined at
all events to clear my character of any least participation in irregularity's.
With that resolution, I went to New York to wait on Mr. Green, and arrived
there at the very time, another of my wood vessels was discharging her cargo.
The master of that wood vessel was immediately complained loudly of the
impositions used by the barrack department, at receiving the fuel occasioned
by the iniquitous largeness of their carts; which in their contents, and the
unfair method of cramming in the wood, at stowing very far exceeded the allowed
measurement or contents of city regulation.

I soon comprehended what the man meant; but to obtain a thorough knowledge of
these circumstances of deception, I took the occasion offered, while the
carters stopped work, to take dinner, to measure out a full statute cord of
wood, upon the wharf: in the presence of several masters of vessels (then along
side) whom I called to be witnesses to my regular procedure: and then ordered,
that measured cord of wood, to be thrown down the wharf, carelessly as if tossed
fairly out of my vessel: upon this wharf I remained, by the wood, to see how
these Barrack carters would then load their carriages, and my experiment would
answer the intention; I knowing well, that the statute cord should exactly
correspond with four statu^^ cart loads; whereas in the unjust manner, these
Barrack jobbing carters, were directed by Colonel Clark's people to fill up,
cram, and load their carts (and actually did load) they forced stowed, and
packed, the regular statute cord of wood, into three carts only, and still
called for more fuel, to heap out and make up such loads as they were desired
to take on.

Here the cloven foot at once appeared, and thus they injuriously overloaded a
full fourth part, above statute measure, which was a certain conviction to me,
and all the spectators of the manner and cause that the two hundred cords of
fuel had been lost, in the former cargo, villainously swallowed up, and not
accounted for as it justly ought.

I instantly stopped the carts, called for Skippers, and masters of coal yards,
and sent for some of Colonel Clark's assistants and servants, to inform them of
what had passed, both as the proven measurement and fraudulent discovery
certifying to them publicly, that I would never deliver to them more fuel in
that barrack department; nor have any thing to do with people of such deceitful
methods, and injurious p^inciples. And by this discovery was the seed of their
resentment sown against me and continued.

Mr Green was soon informed of this open detection, and ^s easily convinced of
its certainty; yet from a hearty desire to promote the public utility, he still
offered to contract with Colonel Clark, for any quantity of fuel he required,
delivered at the various landing or shipping places were on the state of Loyd's
neck, in Long Island; if Mr Clark would appoint any inspector to superintend
the measurements: but he positively would no further engage for any more
deliverys of cargoes, at New York wharfs.

This equitable proposal was rejected by Colonel Clark and his deputies, who in
that open and fair way could not amass gain enough, much less could they buy
commissions by fraudulent practices; therefore they rejected Mr Green's upright
proffer, and renounced the contract; Colonel Clark having thus broke up dealing
by advice of his deputies I dare say, Mr Green betook himself to the expedient
of selling the wood of Mr. Loyd's estate, to private purchasers; but still with
his restriction, that a preference of sale, should be always, given Colonel
Clark, upon equal terms, for supplying the troops; and to this special
obligation all the purchasers frankly occurred, of which number I was a
principal one.

In virtue of these transactions, I and some other purchasers or contractors;
set about selling and preparing the fuel wood; but we had no sooner got some
quantity in readiness for market* than some of Colonel Clark's mirmedons, laid
hold on it, and forcibly discharging our people, at their peril to remove any
part of it, from the premises, and thus at once put a stop to all the contracts
Mr. Green had made, all on the false pretense, that the whole fuel was wanted
for barrack use; which was well known not to be the real cause.

To support the fact of this incontestable assertion, I affirm, and can prove,
that for the space of eight months from the time they forcibly interrupted my
particular work, and down to the middle of December last (1779) Mr. Clark's men
had not cut one single cord of wood, that I contracted for, though they
uniformally interrupted me, and took the work, out of my hands: for which
identical bargain, I would have paid the proprietor one thousand pound: which
sum he has been deprived of since, as I am of considerable profits that would
result theref^om, at the stated price. If it should be objected here, that
there was not sufficiency of wood upon my neighboring rebel estates, to supply
our troops in the Barracks: I deny the allegation, and can freely make oath,
that I publicly offered, and would cheerfully have paid two thousand pound for
one year's liberty of the woods and lands of these two identical Rebel estates,
that Colonel Clark got, some how, into his clutches; and which I am confident
has put several thousands of pounds slump, gratis, into the pockets of Clark
and his deputy's; as many thousands have got futully, which they have bilked
the public of; and happy will I be, if called upon, regularly, to make my
assertion, good: because my open averment of these circumstances, is with the,
avowed intention of making the horrid fraudulent practices of the Barrack
department (in the matter of fuel for the troops) known to the whole world;
and particularly doing justice to our injured nation.

This unprecedented interruption from Colonel Clark and his demigoggs put a
perfect stop to all our wood, transactions upon a loyal estate; under repeated
protections; but very particularly hurt my interest, who had set a number of
good hands to work, cut a large quantity of wood, and bought six teems for my
own employ: which in view of doing business in due season I had kept through
the long winter, at some considerable expense.

These all, being then thrown idle, I offered their service's to Colonel
Clark's men, at the common rate hire of the country; but in addition to my
distresses, they rejected all concern with me, my people or cattle, though at
same time they enlarged their gains, by impressing poor people's teems, and
taking their own services too, at very insignificant rates, in the name of
Government service. Being soon after, in want of drivers, through their under
payments, the consequence was, they affected little or no teem work, the chief
part of summer, and of course the garrison had only a few days fuel in store
at the fall of the year; and without, the city was so ill provided, that for
their general supply I ordered up some vessels loads, of wood and fuel to
New York.

Two of these wood loaded vessels, were overtaken and captured in the sound or
passage, by some Connecticut rebel plunderers, after they had nearly approached
to New York, where I was; upon my hearing of these disastrous captures I
directly went in quest of, and bought two small guns, of two pounds sho^; the
one of which I had placed in the stern of my boat, upon a a slide carriage, on
the plateform, the other I got fixed on the clutch of a tree, and two wagon
wheels to it: and having then given a call, to a few brave, confident, lo^al
refugee's, and informed them of my intention, I asked, if they would boldly
venture on such an expedition. They answering affirmatively, about fifty,
resolute fine fellows instantly turned out volunteers; and away we set that
night, convoyed over the sound by a wood sloop, of four gun's, and attended by
several whale boats to land our men, when necessary. Proceeding about six miles
in this manner, we approached the opposite shore, and by day break landed at
Greenwitch in Connecticut, with only thirty three of our party, leaving behind
the rest of our men to guard our boats, and secure our retreat, should we be
repulsed.

Having reco^noitred and paraded the shore and country, for the distance of
full three miles round our landing place, we met with very insignificant
opposition, by this time I became quite weary, walking and running about from
one eminence to another, in taking proper observations, (a duty that became
very necessary and was incumbent on me particularly, as I acted as sole
commandant,) which induced me to lay hands on the very first horse fell in my
way; and putting the strap of my cartouch box, in the brutes mouth, in
directing bridle I rode about, bare backed, giving my most judicious orders,
until we approached a Rebel posse or guard, who seemed disposed to interrupt
us; those, we instantly attacked with spirit, and soon broke and dispersed the
main body; making eight of their number, prisoners; one of whom I peremptorily
ordered away to fetch me a saddle and bridle, which he soon performed. We then
marched boldly, to surround and capture some horses and cattle, that appeared
in view, at a little distance, about some habitations. At this little village,
some greedy men of my party (in imitation of the enemy marroders) discovered an
unworthy disposition to mean p^undering and depradations and shamefully went
the length of taking clothing etc. from some defenseless females (in
contradiction to my express orders) which I peremptorily caused them restore,
in full; commanding only to capture all the fighting men, arms, ammunition,
cattle and horses that came in our power. Soon thereafter, we fell in with, and
attacked a second Rebel party, whom we soon beat off the field, and captured
thirteen men (one of whom was a villianous deluding priest) with several stand
of good arms, some ammunition, and above one thousand pounds worth of fine
cattle and horses, which they guarded. This good prize we carried, toward the
shore, where our body of reserve, and boats lay in waiting; but in our long
march downwards, we were attacked violently, by a stronger body of Rebels, whom
we desperately encountered, and after a smart engagement we drove them clear off
the field, with a sensible loss that they never attempted to give us any
further interruption, in our carrying every article, to our place of
destination. So that we proceeded without meeting any strange face, except some
women that followed us, with a lamentable cry of compassion, to each of whom I
gave a milk cow to nourish their children. Being arrived at the Beach, my first
essay was to survey my party and know how the men stood out, so much firing, I
was much surprised to find that all my my brave fellows had escaped quite
unhurt, and could not enough admire the favorable hand of providence, toward
myself, that acting as commanding officer, and constantly running and riding to
and again, in all these encounters and skirmishes, surrounded with bullets
innumerable, flying round me yet was never touched.

Having now obtained the shore, with our prize of men prisoners arms,
ammunition, cattle, and horses; we ^et instantly about shipping the whole,
which was a tedious, difficult, dangerous operation, as we were circumstanced;
for having only whale boats, to transport the cattle, on board our large
vessel, we were under the unavoidable necessity, of swimming and ^owing them
away in drifts or parcels, for a considerable distance, till we reached the
large vessel, adapted for taking them on board.

It may be presumed that this method of conveyance, must take up a great deal
of time (as in fact it did) and gave the enemy opportunity of assembling from
all quarters, in numbers, to attempt a rescue of some part at least of their
cattle. They judiciously, improved the occasion of our very confused
employment; and how soon they thought themselves strong enough for the asault,
they impetuously made one attack, about three-hundred men strong well armed, in
full hopes of defeating and destroying us. In the first rencounter, they found
us too firm to be daunted or broke; so that in place of giving way to their
very superior number (being above three hundred men to fifty only) we drove the
cowardly Dogs, fairly beyond gun shot of our stationed ground, to which they
never approached so nigh, as to interrupt our maneauvers, in taking of our
prizes, so that we carried them wholly, safe on board without any other injury,
than one of my men being shot through* the arm* a wound of no great detriment to
him and ou^ cause.

Our expedition being now so far accomplished, we set off, huzzaing, and got
all safe to our own opposite shore, of long island; and in triumph landed all
our prizes, amidst the acclamations of our friends there, who as well as the
multitude upon the Connecticut side had been spectators, to our operations; but
never thought, that so pitiful an handful of men (though resolute) could
oppose, much less vanquish* such numbers of dastardly Rebels; and carry away
our captures too, without losing a man of our party, and but only one man
wounded.

Our prisoners, headed by their priest, we sent off to New York jail, to ly
there till exchanged for an equal number of poor worthy royalists, might be
suffering innocently, perhaps rotting in American dungeons. I then ^anged for
our division our Bestial prizes of every denomination and disposed of them,
equally among the brave fellows of my deserving detachment, who had valliantly
risked their lives, in transacting one of the boldest enterprises that had been
attempted, since the first commencement of our war with the Americans: an
exploit which the multitude loudly applauded, and said no other than that
desperate highland man, mad John M'Alpine, would have attempted or executed it.

Many such maneauvres would be planned, and could be executed by me and many
other bold, resolute, well meaning loyalists in America: were we only
encouraged and allowed (though not assisted) to make due reprisals, on our
unrelenting enemies; and unquestionably, we of that quarter of the world, who
have suffered most and lost our all, in the present contention for
independence; are and must be the fittest people, for such hazardous exploits
as this: and under proper conductors would seldom fail of success; but by some
fatallity and distinction, the most deserving men are much discouraged, and
disrespectfully treated; while the unactive poltrons are in estimation, through
interest or connection, to the perpetual detriment of our national cause, and
injury to the best of kings. -- But to return to my fuel narration.

During the transactions of this private adventure, a false report had been
industriously propagated by the Barrack department, and their minions, of the
prevailing scarcity of fuel for the troops, in garrison, which occasioned a
general intimation from the commander in chief, ordering all persons
immediately cut down and bring in their firewood to New York, else it would be
taken from them gratis. This forced public order, gave the long wished for,
much agitated opportunity to one Mr Gilbert Wauch (formerly of the city of
Edinburgh,) now the favorite deputy of Colonel Clark barrack master; of taking
up all the fuel, he could get his rapacious clutches on, no doubt at the
easiest rates, (if any price at all) which indulgent orders, they captured,
consequent to this. Wauch improved so effectually to his own private emolument,
that he was soon enabled to assume the rank of a pretended gentleman officer,
and paid two thousand pounds for a company, in the 57th regiment, if memory
serves me, nor will this remark seem unnacountable, when it is known, as now,
that the fuel is taken for a price next to nothing, though Government is
charged at an extravagant rate: and had the people not been oppressed, or had
they been punctually paid, by the Barrack department, the stated prices allowed
by the commander in chief: they would readily and cheerfully furnish all the
fuel was wanted for supplying both the army and city, at the moderate rate of
four pound currency per cord, for doing which, I and others would and will
engage, at same time this honest method of procedure, would have entirely
prevented the General's forced severe order; which undoubtedly was occasioned,
by the oppressive maneauvres and continual bad payment of the Barrack
department in further execution of their insocial schemes: this same
adventerous Gilbert Wauch sent me a letter in June 1779, informing me, that he
had Colonel Clark's Directions to intimate to me formally, that I was strictly
prohibited from further pasturing any horses, cows or other cattle on the
estate of Mr Loyd on Long Island, then under lease to me, nor any authority
increase my stock above the then number, as my whole land and pasture were
wanted for the convenience of the Barrack department. Perhaps on any occasion
such an inconsisten^ demand would seem laughable, but at present was
ridiculously presumptive, as I resided by lease upon part of Mr Loyd's estate,
that stood under strict protection and that I was notoriously known, to be a
proven loyal subject, who suffered uncommon hardships, and had lost my a^l, in
the present calamities.

Besides, I was (...) under the General's late proclamation, of safety and
encouragement to all loyal subjects, for raising vegetables and other produce
for the use of the troops; which certifyed to all discouragers of industry, and
promoters of any turbulence that the contraveeners of orders would be condingly
punished. To avail myself of this protection and encouragement from the
General, I directly waited upon my superior, Mr Green* informing, the cause of
my then visit, and by his direction I next attended upon General Jone's then
commandant at New York, both preferring my complaint and producing Wauch's
letter me that had occasioned it, together with a copy of my answer to Wauch
relative thereto. One of the General's Aid-de-Camps, told me in presence of
some gentlemen then attending, that Wauch certainly did not know what he was
doing, for he was writing improperly, and acting without authority; for no
peaceable loyal subject or person, were to be discouraged or disturbed in
prosecuting industrious endeavors: nor would any man be put wantonly under
inconveniences, much less be excluded from local property, except where such
steps were absolutely necessary for the public service; and in such events,
full value would be paid, in compensation. I gave him to know that I was in the
invariable practice of offering every thing my land afforded, and could be
spared, even at an under value, to promote the utility: and intimated so much
in writing, to Colonel Clark: but my condescensions to that avaritious
department seemed to have no discreet effect: nor would any condition content
them but taking my whole gratis, and at once disable me from supporting myself
and family: which has been since evident. At parting from the General's
lodging, I met with Gilbert Wauch, and told him I had presented his curious
letter to me. With a kind of plausable grimace, he answered, that my return had
reach^d him, and he must own, I was rigorously dealt by; but he acted by
Colonel Clark's orders.

Some hours thereafter, I was sent for in a ^^rry to Colonel Clark's, where I
had no sooner come than I expatiated upon the many former injuries done me by
him and his assistants in his name, which was now meant to be enlarged with
more severity, by Wauch's, late notice to me in writing* adding, that I knew no
cause given, for his avowed resentment against me, who had always studied his
interest, so far as consistent with my honor; of which he had recent instances
that he could not have so soon forgot. He stood convinced of all I advanced;
and positively disavowed any intention of encroachment upon my property, or
injuring my interest any how; in proof of all which he much pressed me to enter
without delay into his employment, Mr. Wauch, adding, "That this will insure
constant protection to you and your concerns" In answer I observed, that my
loyal long services and sufferings, had dearly bought my protection, in any
part of the British dominions, and I assured myself of its full enjoyment, and
as to the proposals of attaching myself to his particular employ, I would not
hesitate to accept the invitation, upon reasonable conditions, namely that I
must obtain the approbation of my ever good friend, Mr. Green; that the reward
of my services should be adequate to the measure of my employment: and that the
extent of my concern in their department, should be such as not to involve me
in acts of severity, fraud, oppressions or other irregularity that might hurt
my reputation, or be disagreeable to said Mr. Green, on whom I particularly
depended. Seeming to approve my remarks, and repeating assurances of
friendship* they off^red me a dollar per day.

Bad as times were, I told them such an offer was no temptation to me, with
which they seemed offended as much as I was, we parted equally displeased; and
from that moment they industriously and avowedly plotted my ruin, as follows
viz.

Colonel Clark commenced these new oppressions, by attempting to settle their
men as if duly billeted, upon my house; and this by force without authority,
not through the cause of necessity; but purely in malicious resentment, but I
awarded that designed blow, as two rebel houses fit for accommodating Clerk's
workmen, were then standing unoccupied in my neighborhood, to which they might
resort; which circumstance justified my making resistance, and I availed myself
of it.

They then applied for a warrant from General Jones, to billet their men,
regularly on me, in view of taking forcible possession in my house, buildings
forage and other ut^nsils, without consulting me; on which the General sent
orders to Colonel Ludlow our commandant, to advert that the public service was
not interrupted, through my perveseness, as Gilbert Wauch reported. Mr Ludlow
made me a polite visit. I being then indisposed, showed me the Generals order,
and looking round him, said it must have been obtained, improperly, yet in
compliance he behoved to examine thoroughly; which being done he declared, that
he could discover no waste in my possession* but found ^o much of it in the
other buildings, those waste, as would lodge more men than Clark and Wauch had
at work: the state of facts he genteely reported to General Jones, and
prevented Wauch's further encroachment, at that time. This second
disappointment, by no means allaying Wauch's malice but rather inflaming his
rancorous heart; and he well knowing I was valutudinary, else he durst not
appear so very bold, swaggering at my door; he came in his impudent vulgar
manner to my house, and without any authority, presumptously took violently
hold of my forage, and other utensils, my barn, and part of my dwelling house;
threatening my servants and forbidding them at their peril, to work any more to,
or for me; but vilely entising them to go into his employment; which some did
out of fear, and were never paid for their service; saying he would send me to
the provost, in New York, as soon as I go^ well: to which I replied he had not
power so to do, that I was too good a subject for the provost. In this
unprecedented inhumane manner did Colonel Clark by his barbarous deputy insult
my indisposition, violently seize, and forcibly keep possession for several
months, of the lands and others that I had under lease, and paying rent for,
without ever offering or giving me the least compensation: nor would they
accept my mild offers of communicating to them all the conveniences of my
whole subject upon these premises, at any rate reasonable, 'twixt honest men,
or by the apprizement of judicious people mutually chosen; to which fair
proffers, no man of good principles would have objected.

Under all the agitations, that my present indisposition and such tyrranical
encroachments must have given my feelings, I remained quiet and submissive to
the injurious treatment, they afflicted me with; on the one hand, being averse
in giving the General any avoidable trouble, and on the other hand was disposed
to use all mildness in preserving my temporary property, in both land and
produce; until implacable Wauch, extended his arbitrary severities, the length
of interrupting my servants, in manufacturing my hay, looking after my crop,
and carting off my apples; or in short doing any other requisite works of the
season upon my farm; nay not quite content with such a claim of injuries to my
perishing interest, which for want of health I could not give any personal
attendanc^ they outragiously proceeded at last to remove my ^ences, expose my
fruit land, throw open my enclosed grounds, turn their cattle and horses in
upon my reserved pasture: and almost totally trampled, eat, and ruined my whole
crops of wheat, corn, hay, grass and vegetables* of considerable value, so
effectually wreaking his vengeance, that the subjects of my rent and support
were not only lost, but next to being totally exhausted. So perfectly wasting
Mr Loyd's loyal estate that his agent Mr Green, regularly entered a formal
protest against Colonel Clark, and all his adherents, (particularly Bashaw
Wauch) for legal indemnification of the proprietors interest; but that
necessary step, not comprehending my claim for loss or damages, I fall to seek
my redress, for the depredations of these cormorants in some of the British
courts of justice, or from the British parliament, where I hope to be heard.

While immersed in these calamities, I was plagued with the additional
distress, of an unseasonable visit, at this time, from a rascally party of
plundering rebels, from Connecticut side of the sound, who coming over the
channel in the night time; surrounded my house, broke up, sized and destroyed
every thing came in their way, and then departed, with whatever was valuable,
or portable (...) carry off, captivating fourteen good working men, then in my
employ, whom they took away prisoners; and in that number was a very valuable
Negro, a thorough bred handy craf^sman, worth to any man one hundred pound
sterling, and for whom I would that day not have taken one hundred guineas of
gold.

Happily I myself escaped, by being deeply hid under hay in a certain concealed
part of an outer house, in the most private manner, by which precaution I
avoided their vigilance and resentment: which expedient I was often
necessitated to take for securing my person from surprise seeing I was so well
known to, hated, and dreaded by these Connecticut Rebels, that many stratagems
had been converted for my captivity; so that I seldom durst be two nights, at
an end, in the same bed or house.

Left in this dismal situation, between the unmanly ungenerous unprovoked vile
machinations, of my rapacious, malicious, and invidious countrymen on the one
hand! and the depradations of my mortal enemies, on the other. I was very much
nonplussed how to conduct myself: but recollecting that my most promising,
immediate relief, might be obtained from that misled veteran Colonel Clark, and
his avaritious tribe of deputies and assistants, I applied by petition to
General James Pattison in october last 1779 (he being then commandant of
New York) praying his excellency would attend to my grievances and grant
^eparation of the damages done me by Colonel Clark Barrack master General of
his department, as the same is particularly stated in my representation
relative there to, No. 6 yet in my custody for p^oduction. Assurances were then
given me by Captain Addi, aid de camp that due attention would be paid my
claiment representation, so far as having utmost justice done; and indeed I had
reason to believe that my ease had been taken under consideration, because, my
best of friends, Mr Green told me Colonel Clark had acknowledged to him there
was some money due me, in the payment of which, he Clark, was engaged, and
would do me justice.

Excited by this encouraging information, I soon attended at the Barrack
office, where Gilbert Wauch gave me to know, that he was going to wait on
Colonel Clark upon the settlement of my affairs, which he thought would be
finished by one o'clock that afternoon, when I might appear.

With patience I waited till the appointed hour of day had been very long
elapsed, and Wauch's fallacious promises were despaired of, in this dangling
manner did I dance three weeks attendance, about Colonel Clark, and his paultry
deputy, daily calling at the Barracks office, to no purpose; till weary of
paying any more court there, I addressed Captain Addie, who with regret told
me, that General Pattison had taken my petition and its grievances under
consideration; which he would willingly adjust by compromise: but the
authoritatively, could not regularly attempt to determine, by reason that
Colonel Clark complained upon, was at the head of his own proper department,
and of course, the commandant could not cognisce. But Captain Aiddie genteely
added, that by General Pattison's orders, he himself carried my petition to
Major Andrew, one of General Clinton's, aid de-camp, in view of having it
properly terminated: desiring me, in his name, to wait upon Major Andrew, for
knowing what had been done I soon repaired to Major Andrew, with this message
notifying my present difficulties, and the necessity of my going into England
soon, unless some Redress was given me at New York.

The Major attentively hearing me, at some length, desired I might wait on him
next morning at nine o'clock. Which hour being come, I duly attended, and to
make the sure of matters, I gave in, a note in write repeating my grievances:
the many distresses consequent thereof: for reparative of which calamities, I
had been long giving effectual attendances, and now entreated that matters
might be finaly settled, before the commander in chief or his delegate. The
Major then, to my great disappointment, putting me off with cooly repeating my
former answer that Colonel Clark, being an acknowledged gentleman of rank in
the army; and a direct principal, at the head of his own proper department, he
only could and certainly would do me material justice, without any compulsion;
so recommended me to Colonel Clark's honor and integrity, for reparation in a
genteel manner, since no compulsitors could be used, in the case, besides, that
the commander in chief was so immersed in public business which engrossed his
utmost attention, that he had no time to bestow upon my private affairs: nor
could he detach himself* for holding any courts of enquiry then at New York.

This repulsed, I considered it fruitless to make any further application at
New York; seeing the men in highest ranks of military command in America, had
in effect refused to interpose in redressing the grievances, of, and clamant
injuries done an innocent, meritorious oppressed loyalist. Therefore despairing
of any reparation in that quarter of the world. I took my leave avowing openly
that I would ship myself for England, to lay my complaints and their
oppressions in America, before our Gracious Sovereign, his ministry, my honest
countrymen, and the nation at large, to evidence how injuriously and
barbarously the honest loyalists, our King's best friends, were treated and
often neglected by his Majesty's servants abroad.

Acordingly I prepared for the voyage, and taking my passage in one of the
fleet then getting ^eady to sail for England; and embarked the 23d December.
1779 on board the Houghton store ship, in the ordinance service, paying sixteen
guineas for my passage, and fifteen more for my stores. With thirty days
tempestous weather, we run it to Milford Haven in south Wales, whence I pushed
my way to London, in the flattering hopes of meeting my honorable and esteemed
acquaintances.

none of them had I the pleasure of seeing, viz, the Earl of Belcarras, Lords
Petersham and R^^^on, Generals Carleton, Phillips, Powell, Hamilton, Colonels
Austruther and Archibald Campbell, Captains Money Twiss, etc. whose good
offices I could safely depend on to direct me to the proper channel of
application, for having my grievances publicly known, and ample retribution
made for the losses I have sustained by my loyalty, and for the services I have
rendered my king and country, in the wilds of America.

If my country men are not deaf to the voice of humanity and gratitude, I
certainly have some claim to their attention in both these views of me, and I
am unquestionably the more encouraged to hope for their friendly
considerations: that since my arrival in Britain, I have learned, that many
people who never endured losses, hardships, and services, in any degree
comparable to my very severe trials, have been esteemed worthy of public notice
and rewards; and that many loyal American refugees, are at this juncture under
pensions, or receiving gratuities, for only practically losing their fortunes,
whereas unhappy I, have totally lost my all. Withal, there may be few, if any,
of these good men, who can say heartily, that they ever toiled, traveled and
fought in the Royal cause; as I have repeatedly, cheerfully, and am ready yet
to do, if called forth to action, if any quarter in the world, for the cause of
my King and native country.

Having in course of the preceding details, so frequently and repeatedly
mentioned, my connections with and employment in the military line; contigent
losses and debursements that unavoidably attended these services, I take the
liberty to condescend on the various particulars relative thereto; and
consequent thereof, which I annex in an account of precepts, bo^n for public
information, and with the declared intention of bringing them forth, in charge
against Government; in full confidence of suitable red^ess, by ordering me
immediate payment of my debursement for the public service; of my daily pay,
totally in arear: together with due compensation for all the damages I
incurred, and the losses I sustained, through my various connections with the
royal army, in America: and my loyal adherence to the interest of great
Britain; particularised as follows viz.

ACCOUNT John M'Alpine, against Government, for his daily pay; attendance on,
and service with the Royal Army in America; Horses furnished; and work
performed at Ticonderago.

To my time and services, (1776) attending General Carleton and his army, in
their various movements and operations, at and about the Lakes, Crownpoint, and
Canada in the year 1776, slumped at one hundred pound.

To my pay (1777) at the rate of ten shilling and sixpence per day, being the
same that Major Hugh^ while I attended him; and which Generals Burgoyne and
Philips bound themselves to pay me, charged from the first June 1797 that I
engaged with them, until the first day of May 1778. That after my liberation
from captivity, I was disjoined from military service inclusive two hundred and
seventy four days* at ten shillings and sixpence, is one hundred and thirty
seven Guineas sterling, or in American currency, two hundred and fifty five
pound fourteen shillings and eight pence.

To the value of two excellent horses furnished to Lord Petersham, upon the
service, in General Burgoyne's army in 1777, worth in currency forty eight
pound.

To wag^s paid out by me, to hay workers at Crown-point in 1777, making hay
there, for the army, by General Hamilton's order, thirteen pound eleven
shillings.

To seventy days work of my man servant, yoke, four Oxen, chains etc. employed
in various removes and carriages, at Ticonderoga, and its environs, by General
Powel's orders in 1777, charged at a Dollar per day, in currency twenty eight
pound.

Total pay debursements, horses and services, four hundred and forty five
pound, five shillings and eight pence.

Account of charge by John M'Alpine, on Government, for the damages he
incurred, and losses that he sustained, by destroying his houses, crop etc.
while he was attending the royal army in America.

To the value of houses, cattle, horses, corn, hay and other produce and
farming utensils, furniture and other effects destroyed, by the troops and
enemies, while I attended the service with General Carleton, at Canada the
lakes of Crown point in 1776. currency four hundred pound.

To value of clothing, furniture and other effects, gold joannas and other
pieces of money, plundered out of my Batteaux at St John's; when I was carried
to Canada to assist to remove, and further the service with General Carleton,
currency eight pound.

The value of my baggage and other effects carried off (1777) in the Batteaux
by our rebel prisoners when they escaped from Ticonderago, to New England side,
in place of going to Crown-Point to make hay, as ordered by General Hamilton,
currency thirty pound. Five hundred and ten pound.

General Powel having employed me at Ticonderaga, in serving the stores etc,
and engaged me to be the last man to leave that garrison; he becoming bound to
pay my damages: I fall to charge the loss sustained when I was then captured,
and made Prisoner viz.

To the value of my best eight horses, worth twenty guinea's in Canada,
inclusive one hundred and sixty eight pound. Currency two hundred and ninety
eight pound thirteen shillings and fourpence.

To ten horses of inferior quality valued at eight guinea's each, inclusive
eighty guineas. Currency one hundred and forty nine pound six shillings and
eightpence.

To ten head fine oxen, and breeding cattle, v^lued at one hundred pound.

To my whole clothing, furniture, and other effects one thousand pound.

To value of my crops of corn, hay, etc. farming and other utensils, and other
effects on my land, and lost one hundred and sixty pound.

Premium of a half joanna each lost by capture of thirty officers horses, going
on hire to Canada, and captured with me, when intercepted by the rebels on the
lake, going from Ticonderago, inclusive upon the whole loss of fifty five pound
sterling, is in currencie ninety seven pound ten shillings. One thousand eight
hundred and five pound ten shillings.

Total of these losses two thousand three hundred fifteen pound ten shillings.

Account John M'Alpine, against Government for his losses at Loyd's Neck upon
Long Island when plundered by the Connecticut rebels, 1779 as mentioned in his
memoirs.

To the value of a handy crafts-man, fine Negroe well worth one hundred
guineas, rated in currency at one hundred and eighty six pound thirteen
shillings and fourpence.

To two vessels, loaded with wood, then carried off one hundred and twenty
pound.

To a small boat well worth thirty five pound.

To furniture broke and carried away forty pound.

Total losses at Long Island, three hundred and eighty one pound thirteen
shillings and fourpence

Abstract account of the charge made by John M'Alpine against the British
Government for pay, debursements and losses in America.

To daily pay, debursements, and services while connected with the British
army's, under Generals Carleton Burgoyne, Hamilton and Powel in 1779 and 1777
per account four hundred and forty five pound five shillings and eight pence.

To amount of his losses, by rebel depradation etc, while he attended the
armies, under Generals Carleton Powel etc, in 1776 and 1777. which these
officers eng^g^d to be reimbursed, per account ^wo thousand three hundred and
fifteen pound ten shil^^ngs.

Total charge, by his connections with the armies, two thousand seven hundred
and sixty pound fifteen shillings and eight pence.

To amount of the loss he sustained by the Rebel depradations at Loyds Neck,
Long Island, as per account of particulars, 1779 three hundred and eighteen
pound, forty two pound nine shillings.

Total charge for occurrances in course of the American War, that he was
connected with the British service from 1775 to 1780, three thousand one
hundred and forty two pound nine shillings.

To my charge for the damages done by Colonel Clark, and his Barrack
department, upon my Farm, under lease, in Long Island, by taking my contract
wood for fuel to the troops, in Barracks; using and destroying my crops of all
kinds; possessing all my houses, forage, and utensils, for his works, abusing
my cattle etc. my lost business and time while idle, and seeking raparation at
New York, in vain, and my expenses of coming now to Britain, in expectation of
being reimbursed by Government, since all these contingent losses were incurred
as Mr Clark said, by accommodating the British Troops, and national service,
one thousand eight hundred and sixty six pound thirteen shillings and four
pence.

Total charge by John M'Alpine, against Government, five thousand and nine
pound two shillings and four pence.

A DESCRIPTION OF BOTANY BAY,
On the East side of NEW HOLLAND, in the Indian Seas, where Government are now
forming a Settlement for the reception of Male and Female Convicts, sentenced
by the Laws of this Country to transportation.

Set forth under the following Heads, viz Situation. Soil and Vegetation.
Animals, Birds, etc. Inhabitants. Habitations, Food, and Manners. Canoes and
Weapons. Remarks, etc. etc.

From Captain COOK's Voyage.

SITUATION.
THIS country is of greater extent than any other that does not bear the name
of Continent; it extends from the 11th to the 38th degree of south latitude;
and the length of the east and north-east coast, reduced to a straight line, is
27 degrees, which amounts to near 2000 miles; so that its square surface is
much larger than all Europe.

SOIL AND VEGETATION.
(...) the southward of latitude 33, the land is in general l^w and level;
f^^^her northward it is hilly, but in no part mountaneous; for the hills and
mountains make but a small part of the surface, compared with the plains and
valies. The rising grounds are chequered with woods and lawns, and in many
places the plains are covered with her bage, but loose sand and a barren soil,
most generally mark the aspect of the country. The vegetation to the northward
is less vigorous than to the southward; the trees being neither so tall, nor
the herbage so rich. The grass, though high, is thin, and the trees large, two
kinds only of which could be considered as good timber, are seldom less than
forty feet asunder. There are likewise trees covered with a soft bark, the same
that is used for calking of ships in the East Indies. There are three sorts of
Palm, and a Variety of plants to enrich the collection of a botanist, but very
few of the esculent kind.

ANIMALS, BIRDS, etc.
Of the quadrupeds, the most remarkable is, that called by the natives,
Kangazoo, which is as large as a sheep. The head, neck, and shoulders are
small, compared with the rest of the body, but the ears are large and stand
erect. The fore legs of a young one are only 18 inches. -- Its progress is by
successive leaps of a great length in an erect posture. The skin of this animal
is covered with a short furr of a dark mouse color, except the head and ears,
which resemble those of a hare. The tail is as long as the whole body, and
tapers toward the end. This animal, when dressed, is most excellent food.

Various species of dogs were seen -- also an animal of the Opossum kind, and,
and another resembling a pole-^at* called by the natives Quoll; the body of
which is white, and the back spotted with white. These were the only quadrupeds
to be seen on the coast (...) this extensive country.

The land birds are bats, which hold a middle rank between beasts and birds,
and are as large as a partridge. Parrots, paroquets, cockatoos, and other birds
of exquisite beauty pigeons which fly in numerous flocks; doves, herons,
bustards quails, crows, hawks, and eagles; pelicans of an enormous size, and
many sea fowls that are unknown in Europe.

Among the reptiles, are various kinds of snakes, centipeds, scorpions and
lizards. The insects are principally caterpillars, butterflies, musquitos, and
ants; some of these are quite black and construct their habitations on the
inside of branches of a tree, by taking out the pith, almost to the extremity
of the slightest twig, and yet those branches flourish as if they had remained
in their natural estate. If a person break a branch, he is immediately covered
with millions of animals, which inject their stings with incessant violence.

The sea furnishes the inabitants with a much more plentiful supply of food
than the land. The fish are of various sorts; but except the mullet and some of
the shellfish, none of them are known in Europe* most of them are palatable,
and some delicious. On the shoals and reefs are incredible numbers of the
finest green turtle in the universe; oysters of various kinds, cockles of a
prodigious size, lobsters and crabs. In the rivers and salt creeks there are
alligators.

INHABITANTS.
This country is very thinly inhabited. The men are of a middle size, and in
general clean limbed, nimble and active. -- Their skin is of a chocolate
color; but their features are far from being disagreeable, for their noses are
not flat, nor their lips thick; their teeth are white and even, and their hair
naturally long and black, though they all crop it short; their beards are bushy
and thick. Both sexes go naked, and seem to have no sense of decency in thus
discovering their bodies. Their principal ornament is a bone thrust through the
cartilage that divides the nostrils: as this bone is as thick as a man's
finger, and between 5 and 6 inches long, it reaches quite cross the face, and
stops up both nostrils, they so snufffle when they speak, as to be scarcely
intelligible to each other. They have also neck laces made of shell, bracelets
of small cord wound three or four times round the arm, and a string of plated
human hair round their waists; some of them have also gorgets of shells hanging
round the neck. They also paint their bodies white and red; the red is laid on
in broad patches upon the shoulders and breast, and the white in narrow stripes
drawn over the limbs, and broad ones over the body, not without some degree of
taste. The white was also laid on in small patches upon the face, and drawn in
a circle round each eye. They have holes in their e^rs, but they were not
observed to wear any ornament in them*

HABITATIONS, FOOD AND MANNERS,
Nothing like a town or village was to be seen in the whole country. The huts
at Botany Bay, where they are the best, are but just high enough for a man to
sit upright in, and will not admit of his being extended at length. They are
made of pliable twigs in the form of an oven, by sticking the two ends in the
ground, and then covering them with palm leaves, and broad pieces of bark. The
door is only a large hole at one end; yet in this miserable hut three or four
persons lie, coiled up with their heels to their head. Far to the northward,
where the climate is warmer, none of their huts are more than four feet deep,
and one side entirely open.

The only furniture belonging to their houses appears to be an oblong vessel
made of bark, by tying up the ends with a with, which being cut off serves for
a handle. These are used to fetch water. They have also a small bag, about the
size of a cabbage net, made somewhat in the manner of knitting, which the man
carries upon his back, by a string that passes over head. This contains a lump
or two of paint, some fish hooks of shells, and lines, a few points of darts,
and their usual ornaments, which includes the whole worldly treasure of the
richest among them.

These people have not the least idea of traffic, not could the English prevail
on them to exchange one thing for another. -- They set such a value on their
own ornaments, that they would not part with the least article for any thing
that could be offered them, however shewe^ and brilliant; and the same
indifference which prevented them bartering, kept them honest.

CANOES AND WEAPONS.
The canoes on the southern part of the coast, are formed of bark tied together
at both ends and kept open in the middle by small bows of wood; these will hold
three people; farther to the northward, the canoes are made of the trunk of a
tree (...), perhaps by fire they are 14 feet long, and (...) with an out
rigger, to prevent their oversetting, these will contain four people, and are
worked by long padles, that require both hands to be managed. -- How they fell
the trees of which those canoes are formed, is not known, the only tools found
among them were an ax, wretchedly made of stone some small pieces of the same
substance in the form of a wedge, a wooden mallet, and some shells and
fragments of coral.

Their weapons are spears or lances of different kinds, these they throw with
such good aim, as to be more sure of their mark than an European with a single
bullet; they also wear a shield or target of an oblong form, of about three
feet long, and about half that width, made of the bark of a tree.

CONCLUSION.
Capt. Cook's commentator, (Dr Hawkesworth) remarks in favor of the increase
of population which our globe is capable of, that New Holland, a country equal
to all Europe in magnitude, admirably well calculated by its situation, and no
less so by its soil, to afford subsistence, together with every social and
rational enjoyment, to many thousands of rational beings, which at present is
the solitary haunt of a few miserable savages, destitute of clothing, ill
provided with food, and whose lives are rendered supportable, merely by the
principle of happiness, with which the Creator has endowed all his creatures,
namely, a conciousness of existence.

The same writer observes from the present state of the world, it seems highly
probable, that the 19th century may be favorable to population beyond any
former period of time. It is, however, to he added, from the present
undertaking of Government to colonize a part of this extensive track and
civilize its inhabitants, that the 18th century gives dawn to the projected
population; and as under the reign of George III. America was lost to this
empire* it is some compensation to seek the acquisition of new territories.

NOVA SCOTIA.
This province, called Acadia by the French, is bounded on the N. by the river
St Lawrence; on the E. by the gulf of St Lawrence; on the S. by the Atlantic
ocean; and on the W. by Canada and New England; being 350 miles long and 250
broad. It had its name from Sr Wm Alexander, secretary to K. James I. who had
the first grant of land in it, and called it Nova Scotia. Its chief commodities
are furs and codfish; and its chief towns are Halifax, Annapolis, Causo, and St
John's -- Halifax the capital, stands upon Chebucto-bay, and i^ supposed to
contain 12,000 inhabitants.

To Judge of the climate of Nova Scotia by the latitude would lead any person
into the most egregious mistakes. It lies between 43 and 49 degrees. of N.
latitude, and between 60 and 67 W. longitude; and in the same latitude in
Europe we find some of the most pleasant countries in that quarter of the
world; but in Nova Scotia is very different. The winter lasts seven months, and
is of a severity dreadful to new comers. The deepest rivers are frozen over in
one night, so as to bear loaded wagons; the snow lies deeper than ten feet in
many places, and even upon level tracts it is sometimes six feet deep. The
inhabitants are shut up in their houses, and except, in towns, lead a miserable
life. They are almost in as torpid a state as the vegetables of the country:
much of the summer is spent in laying up fuel for the winter: brandy and rum
are there the greatest luxuries the people indulge themselves in.

Such a degree of cold is there felt as benumbs the very faculties of the mind,
and is nearly destructive of all industry. -- When this severe winter goes
away, a heat greater than is ever felt in Britain, comes all at once, for they
have no spring: the snow is instantly melted, and runs in torrents to the sea;
the ground is soon thawed, the trees are presently in the leaf, and the little
husbandry here practiced is then begun. But what is as bad as these extremes of
heat and cold, and tenders this country particularly unwholesome, are the
continual fogs: they last far into the summer. -- Such is the climate of Nova
Scotia* which is bad to excess, and would make one conclude, that is
unacqainted with these latitudes, that it would banish husbandry altogether;
but this is not the case.

The SOIL varies greatly: in many part it is thin and gravely on a bed of ro^^*
for many years this was what they endeavored (...) ^^ltivate, but the ill
success which attended their labors taught the inhabitants a change that has
proved very advantageous for them. They fixed in the salt marshes on the Bay of
Funda, which though it required a very great expense to drain them, yet the
fertility of the Soil repaid the farmer much better than other tracts easier
gained.

The Soil of these marshes is a white or blue clay, mellow and marly when
cultivated: if the water is well carried off, it will produce great crops,
being suitable to the heat of the summer. In September their corn is ripe. --
The woodlands, when cleaned, they plant with pease, potatoes, cabbages, etc.
the last of which is very useful to them, as they keep them below the snow
during the winter.

The game in this country is amazingly plenty, and from the general freedom of
sporting and fishing, they derive no small advantages to their families. It is
asserted, on good authority, that a boy of 12 years of age, with his gun, would
maintain ten or twelve of family the year round, pork and bread excepted. Two
boys have been known to catch (...) with twine snares. Six boys, in three
boats, shot in four days, 150 wild geese, and 400 black ducks. The eils are so
plenty in their little rivers, that they keep immense quantities of them for
their winter provision.

CANADA.
THIS province is bounded on the N. by New Britain; on the E. by Nova Scotia,
New England, and New York; on the S. by the Apalachian and Cherokee mountains:
and by the great lakes and unknown lands on the W. The chief productions are
furs and castor; and the principle cities are Quebec, Montreal, and Trios
Rivers -- Quebec, the capital of all Canada, is situate at, the confluence of
the Rivers St Lawrence and St Charlet about 320 miles from the sea. The number
of inhabitants are computed at 12 or 13,000.

The climate of Canada is much colder in the winter than Nova Scotia, which
perhaps is owing to its being at a greater distance from the sea: yet it is
greatly preferable: the air is clear and pure, and in general the inhabitants
enjoy as good health as any set of people in America. The productions of this
country plainly show it is superior to Nova Scotia, for here the inhabitants
have both pumpions and melons, apples and pears, in abundance; whereas in
Nova Scotia, though it cannot be said to be entirely without them, yet there
are but very few in comparison. To the South of Canada, about Montreal, the
climate is far more mild than at Quebec.

The north-west wind blows through winter with a severity scarcely credible: it
plainly comes through all walls that are not very thick, and with such
violence, that if a candle is held against a wall of a brick and an half thick
it will be instantly blown out: all the insides of such walls opposite to the
north-west are covered with snow. The walls of the houses must be of a very
great thickness, and at the same time well sheltered by woods and hills, for
people within not to feel the wind blow on them. This dreadful north-west wind
is felt all over the continent, even to Charleston in South Carolina. This wind
in Canada is more severe than in Nova Scotia; the snow is (...) from fogs,
which so much distre^^ the latter. Although the winter is (...), yet it is not
spent free of employment: wrapped up in their furs, winter expeditions are
undertaken, sawing (...) cutting lumber go on, though not with that alacrity
(...) the more southern colonies.

^he SOIL of Canada is of two sorts, the stoney and ^ure loam, are that free of
stones; both are cultivated, but the latter is by far the best; it is of a
black or reddish hue, and is without doubt as fine land as any in the world;
and were it in a climate more favorable, would yield as rich productions.
There are vast tracts of it in Canada, which would in many parts of Britain let
at 258 ^n acre, but here ly uncultivated, all the settlements and farms in this
country being only on the banks of rivers, principally on that of St Lawrence.
The cultivated country is only a narrow slip of land on each side the river,
scarce any when more than half a mile broad, ^nless i^ spreads on account of
other streams that fall into the principal one. In some places however, the
cultivated country is some miles broad, as about the Three towns.

The u^^ettled parts of this country, which includes all but ^he banks of the
river St Lawrence, is a forest, mostly filled with bi^ch, various sorts of
pines, oaks, etc. and many of these trees are of an amazing size. The soil of
these forests is the same with the cultivated fields, and and the same
variety. All that immense country, from the river St Lawrence to the south,
which is part of New England and Nova Scotia, has very few tracts in it which
are not capable of cultivation. It forms a square of 300 miles every way, which
is much larger than Great Britain. Cultivation would improve the soil, drive
away the fogs* and make the country much more inhabitable. But such
improvem^^^^ must be some centuries off; in the ^ean time it will remain an
hospitable desert like Nova Scotia.

Before the war the Exports of this country annually amounted to about 105,500
l.

FINIS.

