THE FRIEND OF YOUTH. TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH OF M. BERQUIN; COMPLETE IN TWO
VOLUMES. VOL. I.

NEWBURYPORT: PRINTED BY JOHN MYCALL, FOR THE PROPRIETOR OF THE BOSTON
BOOK-STORE, No 59, CORNHILL, BOSTON.

PREFACE.
To those who are acquainted with the merit of Mr. Berquin's first publication,
for the use of Children, which he justly entitled the CHILDREN'S FRIEND, it
will be unnecessary to advance any other circumstance in favor of the
following work, than that it is the production of the same Gentleman, by whom
that elegant and moral performance was given to the world. Being calculated for
the perusal of Children of a tender age, it naturally admitted a kind of Sequel
or Counterpart, for the instruction and entertainment of young persons, who are
rather past the period of childhood, and yet may be supposed incapable of
thinking for themselves. The following Sheets contain what has hitherto been
published entire by the Author, on this plan, under the title of THE FRIEND OF
YOUTH. It is necessary to be observed, that this work, in the original, came
out, as did the Children's Friend, in detached periodical pieces, and therefore
has not yet arrived at the ultimate point to which Mr. B. proposes to continue
it. Nevertheless, it was thought more advis^able, to gratify the impatience of
the public, with what is finished of in, than to wait the uncertain arrival of
the little which remains to be added.

In order to make amends far this deficiency, whatever it may be, the
Translator has joined the History of Little Grandison, (from which an extract
is previously given in the first volume) to the pieces which compose the Friend
of Youth. It was translated from the Dutch by Mr. B. who found it to possess
nearly the same spirit with his own works, and, therefore, judged it a proper
present for those readers to whom be had dedicated his pen. This Gentleman's
laudable industry, has led him to examine the productions of several modern
languages, and from them, to select such as appeared to answer the purpose
which he had in view. Among the rest, he has introduced, in the following
collection, a piece or two from the English, of which it will be sufficient to
observe, that they are here inserted in the language of the several originals
to which they belonged, as being obviously the most natural dress that they
could assume, and beyond comparison, the most satisfactory to an English
reader. No translation can be supposed capable of conveying the spirit and
freedom of the original: and this would be found particularly to be the case in
the latter of the pieces alluded to, The Narrative of a Shipwreck on the Island
of Cape-Breton, which opens the second volume. The subject of this narrative
being partly nautical, it would be sound to suffer considerably, and appear to
much less advantage, if delivered in any other style than the English, in which
it was first composed. Indeed, the absurdity of translating from a foreign
language, what would be read with infinitely more satisfaction as an original,
is so apparent, that it does not require any further comment.

If a critical inspection of this work should discover some of the pieces, in
their present form, to contain, now and then, a slight improbability, it will,
no doubt, be attributed to its real cause, the difference of national manners.
The effect of this circumstance is so important, that a small defect of
probability could not absolutely be avoided in some cases, without militating
against both the intent and moral of the Author, as well as deranging the whole
plot and conduct of many of his pieces. An imperfection, which will always be
found to subsist inherently in every performance like the following, where it
is proposed to adopt, for instance, French manners and actions to English
characters. A copyist in painting, would, probably, often find it a difficult
task to support the propriety of any particular action represented in a
picture, were he obliged to alter the costume of the figures exhibited in the
original. Thus, it may be presumed, the picture of an Augustan Triumph would
not so strongly impress the spectator with an idea of grandeur, were the
personages in the procession habited like Dutchmen: or, on the other hand, if a
company of Roman Senators were represented as busily engaged in the fantastical
chase of a Pantomime, the mummery of the action would no longer be preserved,
but must unavoidably be overclouded with a cast of solemnity unnatural to it.

Imaginary actions, therefore, when adapted to one particular national
character, are not easily transferable; or, whenever it is attempted to make
them so, either the action or the character, is liable to suffer a partial
disguise, and be seen, as it were, through a mist. In such a case, they will,
neither of them, affect the imagination of the reader with ^^^^^ively a force,
as when they appear with the advantage of their orginal congruity. But this
observation applies more conspicuously to Novels, where a single moral results
from a series of complicated actions interspersed, perhaps, with a variety of
episodes appending to the main story. I know not whether Gil Blas, the
Fortunate Villager, and a few other novels, may not be adduced as instances to
elucidate what has been above remarked: but in a work like the present,
consisting of short pieces, in which we quickly arrive at the moral, and find
it generally to constitute the most leading feature, it is not so difficult to
accommodate the manners and actions of each personage, to the general
uniformity of human life, and to divest them of that nationality which would be
more observable in narrative pieces of greater extent.

Upon the whole, it lies with the judicious reader to determine, whether any
considerable offenses against verisimilitude occur, in the following
collection. The Translator hopes he has reason to console himself in the
reflection, that he has used all possible diligence to avoid any such; and if,
notwithstanding his endeavors, the censure of criticism should fasten on a few
imperfections of this nature, quas aut incuria fudit,

Aut humana parum cavit Natura, he has only to shelter himself behind the
well-earned reputation of the Author, whose labors, so eminently beneficial to
youth in general, he has endeavored particularly to adapt to the improvement
of the rising generation in this country.

CONTENTS TO THE FIRST VOLUME.
THE Fickle Youth 9 Flattery 29 Whimsical Answer to an Italian Letter 39 The
Cavern in the Peak described 40 Ode on Domestic Happiness 47 The Peasant, his
Country's Benefactor 51 System of the World 68 Damon and Pythias 116 The Siege
of Colchester 130 The Lawsuit 164 Lost Time recovered 170 Jasper and Emilius
177 The Punishment of Pride 190 The Increase of Family 196 The Humorous
Engagement 203 Charles II. 209 Adventures of Charles II. in his Flight 308 The
Hat 319 Little Grandison 325
THE FRIEND OF YOUTH.
THE FICKLE YOUTH.
JACK WHIRLER was endowed, by nature, with a happy memory, a ripe
understanding, and a lively, active, and fruitful imagination. Fortune seemed
to ensure the accomplishment of every hope, that could be founded upon so
promising qualities, by allotting him parents, whose warmest wishes ever were,
to cultivate, in their son, that pregnancy of parts, which he had received from
the hands of nature. An extraordinary quickness of apprehension had advanced
him, considerably, in his tender studies, at an early period, and he was
already eager to unite the ornament of exterior accomplishments, to the more
solid acquirement of mental instruction.

It happened, that, on a visit to one of his young companions, he found him
engaged in drawing a Roman head, which, from the characteristic greatness of
the countenance, impressed him with the most lively sentiments of admiration.
As his friend advanced toward the finishing of his portrait, young Whirler felt
these sentiments grow in his mind with additional ardor. Some other pieces,
which the room afforded in the same style, completely inspired him with such an
enthusiasm as Raphael experienced on first taking the pencil in his hand.

He returned home at full speed, and, meeting his father on the stairs, he
threw his arms fondly round him, and requested him to go immediately, and
engage him a drawing master. His father, charmed with the earnestness that he
expressed, was easily induced to gratify this desire. They went, therefore,
together, to the most celebrated master in town; and Jack Whirler would have
been happy, could he have prevailed on him to give up all his other pupils, and
confine his instructions to him alone, from morning to night. As he could not
obtain this sacrifice, he insisted, however, that each lesson should continue,
at least, two hours every day. He had no conception, how any one could refrain
from devoting every moment of his life, to the cultivation of so divine an art.

His master was not to come until the next day. I will not tell you how many
faces he had sketched before night. His port-folio was already full of beads,
drawn in every possible variety of character, though you will certainly excuse
him, if they did not discover that correctness which is the result of lo^^
practice. There was, perhaps, a large eye, to match a small one, in the same
face; the nose was made, sometimes, to rise out from the middle of the
forehead, and the ear would come to hear the mouth, or the mouth to bite the
ear, across the whole breadth of the cheek: but, except these trifling faults,
his performance had all the correctness that could be reasonably expected.

He had, himself, prepared an enormous sheet of paper, the largest that was to
be had in town. This was soon found too small to contain the number of eyes,
ears, arms and legs, that he had sketched out under the direction of his
master. The hospitals of Greenwich and Chelsea, would here have met with
excellent patterns to replace all the lost members of those honest veterans who
inhabit them. His natural impatience was a little fretted by the tedious
sameness of those essays, to which, his first lessons were rigidly confined, in
order to steady his hand. As soon, therefore, as he was alone, he launched out
freely, beyond the bounds of this slow process, aspiring already in idea, to
the execution of complete and grand pictures. The garret-walls had been newly
white-washed; he formed the design of painting them with the history of Rome,
which he was just then reading at school; and, in effect, at the week's end,
there appeared drawn upon them, in charcoal, a comely succession of heads and
busts of tribunes and of consuls, with dictators a-foot, and emperors on
horseback; and I doubt not, that if the names had been placed under their
respective figures, in order to render them perfect resemblances, an ^^^quary
might have found means to bring forth a number of interesting and learned
remarks, touching this gallery.

He was proposing to himself to represent, in the same style of execution, the
progress of our history, down from the conquest, when he one day found his
whole work effaced by the servants, who pretended, that these Roman heroes upon
the wall only frightened the cats, but did not drive the mice away. This mishap
a little abated the ardor of his passion for drawing: his disappointment at
seeing himself still far behind his young friend, whom he had expected at his
first attempt to overtake, alienated still more his liking for the art. He
presently grew fearful of dirtying his fingers with the chalks, or, of making
gaps in his penknife, by cutting them. His master, who at first had so much
trouble to moderate his eagerness, now found it a more difficult task to
re-animate it. In vain, did he enumerate to him the wonderful effects of
painting; and the curious anecdotes that are found in the lives of the great
artists. He had introduced to him, a pupil of his, just returned from Rome; on
purpose to entertain him with an account of the superb paintings that he had
seen and studied in Italy. This young gentleman, in expressing his admiration
of those performances, made use of Italian words, either as being more ready,
or more significant; the founds were new to Jack Whirler's ears; and it struck
him in a moment, that to speak so melodious a language was a much finer thing,
than to draw heads; which, let them be ever so expressive, could not talk. He
ran immediately to communicate this reflection to his father, who, though
grieved to see him thus quit an agreeable accomplishment, of which he had
before been so passionately desirous, did not however choose to oppose this new
taste of his; and the next day, Jack Whirler had an Italian master, in the room
of his teacher in drawing.

I must do Jack the justice thus publicly to declare that his progress for the
first two or three days kept pace with his resolution. Every grammatical
difficulty gave way to the quickness of his comprehension. He grew fond to
enthusiasm of a language so full of sweetness and harmony; and was incessantly
talking it to the people of the family, without troubling his head whether they
could understand it. He addressed the cockmaid with Vostra Signoria, and called
the gardener Cor mio. The Italian translation of The Tragedy of Cato, written
by Mr. Addison, was translated into Italian by Salvini, and acted at Florence.
Cato became as familiar to him as the original. In examining his father's
library for authors in this language, he laid his hands by chance on a Spanish
Don Quixote. Don Quixote! the favorite of his earliest studies! Oh! what a
pleasure to be able to taste the droll proverbs of his honest 'squire, when
seasoned with all the humor of their native language! Cato's grave soliloquy
was not to be compared to the delectable sallies of Sancho; nor the little
senate of Utica, to the council chamger of the Baratarian governor. This
undertaking, however, required courage. Here he was to engage incessantly with
strange words, like the knight of the rueful village with windmills and flocks
of sheep. He came off, however, with at least as much honor as the knight in
this first campaign. But will you believe me? Before the hero of La Mancha had
sallied forth a second time in quest of adventures, Jack Whirler had quitted
the Spanish to learn French, which he soon gave up in order to study the
German. So that at the end of the year he was already a smatterer in four
living languages, but so imperfect was he in each, and jumbled them together in
his discourse after such a fashion, that he should have had an audience
composed of deputies from these different nations, to interpret one to the
other the unconnected scraps and phrases that each might happen to understand
in his conversation.

Dexterity in exercises of the body seems to lend both help and ornament to a
well cultivated mind, and the most extensive knowledge will not atone for
awkwardness, in the eyes of the fairer part of society. Jack Whirler had met
with a disagreeable proof of this, at a ball which was given by his papa on
some particular occasion. In the course of this, Jack, notwithstanding his
erudition, had put all the dancers out several times. He therefore resolved to
instruct himself in the principles of this agreeable art; but scarcely had he
begun the minuet steps, when his head ran upon the rigadoon, and nothing else.
What he most earnestly wished to learn in each lesson was exactly the part of
dancing that he should not be taught as yet. Always eager after what he did not
know, and dissatisfied with what he had learned, he could lay up nothing in his
memory with the least order. Thus he would sometimes figure in when he should
cross over, and shuffle when he should sink. He found no difficulty in dancing
the hays when the company set out with a cotillion, nor had he ever occasion
for a change of time in the music to start off himself in a Scotch reel, while
he left his partner moving a minuet.

All this, it may be supposed, produced no small confusion among the young
people his companions of the dance; in order therefore to reinstate himself in
the favor of the ladies, which he had lost by this absent and volatile
disposition, he set about learning music, that he might be able to accompany
either the voice or the harpsichord. But what instrument should he attempt
first? To take his word for it, there was nothing easier in the world than to
practice them all at once. However his father did not think proper to risk this
experiment, and gave him only the liberty of choosing his instrument. While he
was uncertain as to this point, the violin seemed a proper one to take in hand
by way of trial, and it was not till six months after, that he fixed his choice
decidedly on the flute, just as he began to attempt an open shake, and to bow
with tolerable steadiness.

In the mean time his father grew somewhat uneasy on observing this unsettled
and changeable disposition of his son, though a parent's fondness induced him
to attribute the fault to youth alone. With a view therefore to advance the
improvement of his understanding by observation and experience, he determined
to send him upon a tour to the continent. Jack Whirler desired no better than
to shift the scene. The narratives of travelers had always been a favorite
reading with him, and his imagination had a thousand times transported him to
the countries which they describe. A young friend of his, who was just returned
from France, gave him so favorable an account of the reception that he had
found in that country, and drew so pleasing a picture of the improved state of
arts and society there; described in so warm terms the engaging vivacity and
elegance of the ladies, with the frank and open politeness of the men; offered
him such flattering letters of recommendation to some of the nobility at Paris,
equally eminent for exalted talents and amiable qualities; in fine, the happy
effects already produced by the commercial union of the two nations, and the
prospect opened to both of enriching themselves by a free and reciprocal
interchange of their productions, and of preserving the repose of Europe by the
envied example of their happiness, as well as by the terror of their arms; all
these ideas, united in description, did so inflame his natural enthusiasm, that
he could not contain his desire of visiting that polite nation; nor was it
possible to moderate his joy, when the moment arrived that he was to set out,
under the direction of a preceptor, equally remarkable for his good sense and
attachment to the family of his pupil.

One should have viewed the extensive plains of Picardy, interspersed with the
agreeable landscape of distant hamlets, or sloping hills crowned with orchards
and hopyards in full bloom, to conceive the impression which this enchanting
sight produced on the mind of our young traveller. Even the rapidity of his
imagination could scarcely keep pace with the succession of striking objects
which his tour afforded. A continued rapture of admiration conducted him to the
gates of Paris, where it was still further heightened by a view of the superb
palaces and other magnificent buildings which adorn that capital. The first few
days after his arrival, he spent in viewing every quarter of it. The grandeur
of the public edifices, the innumerable concourse of inhabitants, the delicious
gardens which abound both in the city and its environs, the splendour and
elegance that shone in the dresses of the nobility, the sightly decorations of
their places of public resort, and the unbounded festivity that reigns in their
private and convivial circles; all these charms united, might be supposed, with
the addition of novelty, to produce sensations proportionable to the ardour and
susceptibility which young Whirler's imagination possessed.

So they did at first; but the impression, lively as it was, soon vanished. His
eager curiosity once satisfied, he felt this passion succeeded by languor and
satiety. His tutor perceived it, and proposed to him to visit some of the
provinces. Jack Whirler, in the height of his joy, could only answer him by
pressing entreaties to engage a post-chaise for that purpose against the next
day.

I shall not follow them in the whole of their excursion, for fear of growing
tiresome to my young reader; I will only stop with them a moment at Salency, a
town celebrated for the performance of a ceremony the most affecting and
singular, that perhaps the whole world can afford, in this age of degeneracy.
There the younger female inhabitants are early inspired with the love, and
encouraged in the practice of truth, probity, and innocence. She who is by
universal consent pronounced the most virtuous maiden of the village, receives
from the hands of its illustrious proprietor a crown of roses; which honor is
conferred once a year, on a day that is observed as a festival from the public
celebration of the custom; and this ornament, simple as it is, bath more
powerful and universal effect on the morals of the rising generation,
particularly the female part of the peasantry of Salency, than the most
labored or ostentatious panegyric, the warmest effusions of popular applause,
or in fine, than any other incentive whatsoever, upon those of their superior;
in rank and understanding. There virtue and merit are habitually revered, and
the acquisition of the rose garland, the reward of unblemished same and purity
of manners, is viewed with more honest and more justly founded emulation, than
trophies of military prowess, or the tinsel decoration and titles of a
statesman, can excite in the bosoms of the great.

Objects attractive and interesting surrounded Jack Whirler in every part of
his tour; he found every where a sufficient variety of matter both for
instruction and amusement; but it was the misfortune of his disposition never
to wish for anything but what was out of his reach, and never to think any
place agreeable, unless he were a hundred leagues distant from it. What most
employed his thoughts during this tour in France, was, (as he sometimes termed
it in a rapture) his d^^^ Italy. In the Louvre at Paris, he looked round for
the Roman Capital, or the Temple of the Sun, and was now sighing for the
shattered villages of Calabria in the midst of the vineyards of Champagne. His
tutor had tried all possible means to cure him of this restlessness, but soon
became apprehensive, left his endeavors to that purpose should only serve to
throw his pupil into a consumption, and therefore he seconded the request which
the latter had made to his father for permission to set out for this same
Italy, which he now longed to behold as much as ever the wandering Trojans did
in the days of yore.

Except in crossing the channel, all Jack Whirler's travels had hitherto been
upon dry land, and it was now two months since he had begun measuring the
post-roads of France. This was enough to put him out of humor with all
traveling unless by sea. His tutor conceived hopes of bringing him to a
reasonable disposition by agreeing to the experiment, and pretended to relish
it as much as he did. They embarked therefore at Marseilles, on board a vessel
bound to Leghorn.

Jack Whirler passed the first day entirely upon deck, where he could not help
admiring the waves of the sea, which were gently impelled by the wind, and
seemed to come in playful succession sporting round the ship's sides. The next
day he was still so clever in his own eyes for having had the courage to
undertake this expedition, that his self-complacent reflections on the subject
kept off the approaches of satiety. But the third day, both his agreeable
musing on the beauties of the sea, and his satisfaction in thinking so highly
of himself, quite forsook him. Nothing remained but the wearisome disgust that
he felt in the sameness of his voyage. He now longed to be on shore, all the
wishes of his heart were directed toward the land: but unfortunately it was
too far off to gratify his caprice. Nor did old ocean seem to use any
extraordinary haste in transporting him to the term of his wishes, so that he
was obliged to be patient, or rather (as his temper inclined him) to be out of
patience, until the ship's arrival at her port.

Happy power of imagination, which, through the sweet illusions of hope, steals
from us the remembrance of our troubles! Jack Whirler forgot all his at his
landing. He was now at length happily arrived in that famous country, the
storehouse of all the riches both of nature and art. After reposing himself two
days at Leghorn, he set out for Florence. He knew that the famous gallery of
paintings in that city made it the resort of travelers, many of whom, even
after continually viewing it for six months, found their curiosity still
unsatisfied, and remained in town in spite of their resolutions of departing
every day. This did not seem so strange to him at his first casting his eye
upon that superb collection of masterpieces. Perhaps he would even have
remained in the same mind until he had got to the end of the gallery, if it had
not been for the idea of St. Peter's at Rome, and the Vatican Library, that
just then struck him. These two edifices took up his thoughts the whole day,
and presented themselves in unbounded magnificence to his imagination. In order
to form a decisive estimate of their splendor and dimensions, he pressed his
tutor that same evening to set off for Rome. Never tell me of those tedious
travelers that pry without end, and take an age to examine any remarkable
object! Jack Whirler, in three days, had seen every thing that was curious in
the ancient capital of the world, and had even some of that time to spare,
which he employed in putting together his baggage for a trip to Naples, whither
he was already transported in idea. It was not however the particular beauties
of this latter place which excited his curiosity so strongly; he had lately, it
is true, passed through many magnificent cities, but all that he had hitherto
seen were above the surface of the earth, whereas Herculaneum and Pompeia were
buried in its bowels. Cities under ground were all that he now thought worth
his notice. The romantic fruitfulness of his imagination formed to him a
thousand pictures of the terrible event which had reduced them to that state.
He was surprised, on going down amongst their ruins, to find that he had fallen
in love with a heap of rubbish; for he saw nothing more at that time,
notwithstanding the many curious remains of antiquity that have been discovered
among them. Another would at least have found some consolation in admiring, at
Naples, one of the finest harbors in Europe, but Jack Whirler could not help
contrasting it with those of Amsterdam, Portsmouth, or Constantinople; which
appeared to him much finer, because they were at a distance. As to that burning
mountain which commands the town of Naples, and makes its situation awful, as
well as picturesque, by incessantly threatening to bury it in ashes and flames;
did not all travelers allow AEtna to be far before Vesuvius? Certainly; and
the dreadful effects of its last eruption conveyed to his mind every idea of
terror and admiration that a vulcano can excite. Thus in that dear country
which Jack Whirler had so earnestly desired to visit, there remained but one
single town, the sight of which could recompense the fatigues of his journey.
This was Venice, so singularly different from all the other cities, rising from
the middle of a huge morass, with her canals, her gondolas, and her five
hundred bridges. To arrive there, he must travel, it is true, the whole length
of Italy, but his imagination, as it was bold in smoothing every obstacle, so
it was clear-sighted in shortening every distance, and he only waited to have
his portmanteau packed up, that he might take the road toward Venice.

I am afraid, my young friends, that you have before now suspected his tutor to
have been too tamely complaisant, as you have seen him give way to all his
pupil's whims. I see that to justify him, I must here discover to you a family
secret, reposing at the same time the strictest confidence in your discretion.
During the whole of his tour, Jack Whirler had written home regularly to his
father, who remarked, that his letters always expressed a sort of disgust for
the place from which they were dated, while he seemed in raptures with that
which he was next to visit: thus it appeared that every country, though it
presented him at a distance with flattering prospects, never failed to send him
away tired and disappointed. These remarks, confirmed by those of his son's
tutor, which after what you have read, you may easily imagine were quite to the
same effect, gave him to understand, that his son was not of a temper or frame
of mind calculated to receive much improvement from traveling. However, he did
not choose, by hastily recalling him, to furnish him with a pretext for
complaining at a future period, that he had thereby lost the opportunity of
improvement. He barely recommended to the tutor not to oppose his son's
changeable whims, which would of themselves be sufficient to bring him home in
a short time. Thus Jack Whirler, after he had seen Venice, Turin, Switzerland
and Flanders, all at full speed, did now, in a fresh fit of inconstancy, wish
for no more than to return to his own fireside, even before the time which he
himself had stipulated.

A parent never forgets that name: you may imagine, therefore, what Mr. Whirler
felt at the return of his son. But why have I not here those transports of joy
to describe to you, which possess a father's heart, when a child, worthy of his
warmest affection, is restored to him after absence? Why can I not represent
them to you, clasped in each other's arms, speechless with joy, and mixing
their tears together; the father proud of the new accomplishments that he
observes in his son, and the latter happy to show them to advantage before the
eyes of a parent, as the properest return that he could make to his fatherly
affection and good wishes? How happy should I have been to lay before you so
touching a scene, even though it should lose by my description! You would at
least, as well as your parents, have observed in it, with pleasure, the artless
expression of those sentiments with which you feel yourselves mutually
affected. It was in Jack Whirler's power to have made us all thus happy, by a
better improvement of the attention that had been paid to his earlier years.
Nothing would have been wanting to his education, either as to learning or
accomplishments, if he could have had the resolution to conquer the
restlessness of his disposition, and confine himself to a more constant and
uniform course of application. Instead of that fickle taste which hurried him
from one study to another, wading through the difficulties that render the
beginning of each dry and disagreeable, and never taking time to enjoy the
satisfaction which a more advanced progress affords; instead of those delusions
of fancy, which dressed out distant objects in a flattering manner, only to
make those which were present, appear in more unfavorable colors; instead of
being perpetually disgusted and out of humor with the saint, unsatisfactory
ideas, which a close inspection afforded him, of objects that his imagination
had exaggerated while at a distance; what a fund of sincere pleasing ideas
might he have laid up for himself! Not to mention the delight which a youth of
spirit feels in outstripping the expectations of his family, how great would
have been his satisfaction in this important respect, that the first and
strongest principle of nature would have made his improvement the source of
happiness to his parents, in the most exquisite degree!

You have seen Jack Whirler, from his childhood equally fond of learning and
agreeable accomplishments, set out in pursuit of them with the most unbounded
eagerness, and thinking to carry every thing at the first attempt, struggle
gallantly with the most disheartening difficulties for a while, and then give
up the contest at the very moment when he was about to get the better of them.
In addition to his natural desire of knowledge, and the encouraging applause of
his parents, had he been endowed with a little more command over himself, he
might have acquired every thing that would add ornament as well as happiness to
his future life. His reason early matured by study, and his taste for agreeable
relaxations would have preserved his youth from that restlessness which
torments him, and from that wearisome disgust which he conceives to every
object that becomes once familiar to him. From his acquaintance with both the
principles and practice of the fine arts, he would have looked upon nothing
with indifference in the course of his travels. The view of those masterpieces
of art which foreign countries afford, while it gratified his curiosity, would
have improved his taste. His understanding would have been enlightened by the
variety of objects that met his view, his judgment corrected by studying their
differences and relations, his knowledge of the world enlarged by observing the
manners and characters of men in different countries. Strangers, flattered with
the desire which a youth of education testifies to visit their country,
conceive the most advantageous prejudice in his favor, and receive him with the
politest attention. Thus admitted into every distinguished circle, he might
have done honor to his name and country, by that manly frankness and sincerity
of manners which I would recommend to my young countrymen as the most essential
accompaniment to politeness, inasmuch as it certainly best conciliates
friendship, esteem, and respect. He would have returned home regretted by those
whom he had left, welcomed by his former friends, and doubly so by his parents,
to whom he would then have afforded the most reasonable ground of hope for his
future success in life.

How far was Jack Whirler from this happy situation, to which his circumstances
seemed so naturally to lead him! In all the towns through which he had
traveled at full speed, his conversation was chiefly with the landlords of the
hotels where he took a short repose after the fatigues of riding post. His
countrymen had little to promise themselves from the feeble stock of
information that he had collected; his father saw all his hopes disappointed;
and his friends -- but his fickleness was inconsistent with such a relation --
Jack Whirler had no friends. Unhappy youth! I pity him when I think, my dear
Horatio, that our friendship was formed at an age as tender; our friendship,
which has never since wavered a single moment, and which would now, as in the
first warmth of its commencement, lead us to unite our lives and fortunes, and
share them for the future equally and inseparably! Sweet moments of our youth!
when the same sentiments and inclinations drew our hearts together by every tie
that could bind them. How swiftly did the days glide away between our studies,
and the free intercourse of our sentiments! Every pleasure, every pain was felt
by both in common. Always together in town, together in the country; for eight
years we felt it necessary to our happiness to be so, and what tears did our
separation cost us! At this day, if we chance to wander to those charming walks
by the side of a pleasant rivulet, or up some romantic hill, where formerly,
with a Shakespeare, a Fenelon, or a Goldsmith in our hands, we so often enjoyed
at once the charms of friendship, of poetry, and of nature, how pleasing still
to find our mutual sentiments ever the same, and to repose in a firm confidence
that nothing but death can extinguish them in us.

O you, my young readers, who are witnesses to this effusion of my heart, if
you have a friend like mine, if you love him, and are beloved by him as I am,
you will pardon it. Besides, have I not a right of speaking to you concerning
whatever interests my feelings? Otherwise I should have assumed in vain, the
title under which I offer you this work. Whatever affects either you or me, can
never henceforward be indifferent to the other party. We are united by ties
that can never be broken on either side, without a gross want of gratitude. If
the care which I take in forming your hearts and understandings have any value
in your eyes, I on my side owe you my warmest acknowledgments. Thanks to you,
all nature looks gay and smiling round me; for my fancy places me in the midst
of your pleasing countenances, on which innocence, cheerfulness and candor, are
painted so expressively. It is from your own mouths that I catch those artless
sallies which make you smile, and those sentiments of tenderness and generosity
that cause your tears to flow, or impress your young breasts with an early
sense of honor. Would I could present you to my country, accomplished objects
of her warmest hopes!

As joys the thoughtful husbandman to view
His fields arrayed in Autumn's golden hue,
Or the green forest in luxuriant youth,
Rising by slow advance to ample growth;
So with glad hope the philosophic mind
Looks to the noble spring of human kind,
Sees the fair crop in thriving verdure rise,
By happy soil sustained and favoring skies.
And if the bright example of a throne,
Could like the sun improve wherever it shone,
Well might the pensive spec^list presage
The ripening promise of a virtuous age.
From folly's mildew, and the blights impure
Of pampered vice and luxury secure.
We have read of wicked men in the accounts of former times, and even of the
present; let us hope that the rising age will afford few instances of such.
Those wicked men had no FRIEND to conduct them to virtue, by the paths of
pleasure; you have one who makes this duty the whole happiness of his life.
Forget him not, therefore, but if you would honor him to the extent of his
wish, let your remembrance of him live in your virtues.

FLATTERY.
Lady Downright, Matilda her Daughter. Mat. O DEAR mama, kiss me for the good
news that I have to tell you.


Lady D. What is it, my dear?


Mat. I am just going to introduce to you the most agreeable acquaintance in
the world, Miss Sacharissa Bland, a sweet girl: she is to be here presently.


Lady D. Here? I imagined that to visit in this house, the person should be
first introduced to me.


Mat. Very true, mama, but I was so sure of your liking her company, that I
thought it no harm to dispense with ceremony for this time.


Lady D. Do you give the name of ceremony to your duty? This shows you as
heedless as usual: but the young Lady's behavior does not show that reserve or
discretion that I could wish in the person whom you desire to make your friend.
I think, she should have waited for my invitation:


Mat. Why, she was so impatient to pay you her respects -- You cannot think how
highly she speaks of you.


Lady D. How can she know me? I never saw her but once, and then by chance at a
third person's.


Mat. Well, that interview was enough to form her opinion of you. She has drawn
so favorable a picture of your good qualities, that I shall be always proud of
having such a mother.


Lady D. And no doubt, too, her skilful hand has drawn a fair portrait of your
accomplishments.


Mat. I don't know how it is, but you cannot imagine how many happy qualities
she discovered in me -- more than I myself was aware of.


Lady D. But which you are now clearly convinced belong to you.


Mat. Yes, it is so plain! so striking!


Lady D. I shall be apt to fear that she did not reckon diffidence among the
number of your happy qualities.


Mat. Perhaps you are joking, and yet she was almost tempted to chide me for
having too much. However, she agreed at the last, that diffidence was more
necessary to me than another, to disarm the envy of such as do not possess
equal accomplishments.


Lady D. Really I wish you joy of these fine discoveries.


Mat. Why mama she was so just in her panegyric upon you, that I am the more
apt to give her credit with regard to myself! Oh! she is a sweet girl!


Lady D. I don't wonder that you are so much taken with her.


Mat. How can one help loving her? She is of so amiable a temper, you never
hear a word from her lips but is perfectly obliging.


Lady D. Have you been often in her company?


Mat. Only twice, with the Miss Delmores, at their house. She has a great deal
of friendship for them, but they do not seem sufficiently to return it. Do you
think that the Miss Delmores possess much penetration? I have visited them
these four years, and in that time they have not been able to know me as
perfectly as Miss Bland in three days.


Lady D. What makes you imagine so?


Mat. Because they have sometimes taken upon them to find little defects in me,
which, however, I flatter myself do not belong to me. I should suppose them to
be something envious.


Lady D. It happens pretty often that I take the same liberties with you. Do
you imagine me also to be jealous of your merit?


Mat. Oh! that is quite different. You only speak to me out of friendship, and
for my good; But --


Lady D. Why cannot you suppose your friends to have the same motive? Without
being so strongly interested in your improvement as your own family, may they
not wish it nevertheless very affectionately, in order that you may be more
worthy a continuance of that intimacy which has subsisted between you from your
childhood? Besides, I know them sufficiently to be convinced, that in their
remarks and advice to you, they have always preserved the discretion of
friendship.


Mat. But then they chid me for such trifles.


Lady D. Your self-love is ingenious enough to impeach their delicacy; however,
I see for my part, stronger reason from their behavior, for your valuing their
attachment. I am persuaded that nobody in the world, next to your relations,
can be more worthy of a distinguished place in your friendship.


Mat. Oh! I am sure Miss Bland has already as much friendship for me as they
have. But I hear somebody coming up stairs. It is she! It is she! How happy I
am! Now you will see her.


Miss Bland. (approaching Lady Downright with an assumed air of respect.) Your
ladyship will pardon my taking the liberty of introducing myself thus abruptly;
but in all companies I have heard your estimable qualities mentioned so
handsomely, that I could not resist the desire I felt of paying you the tribute
of my respects. I am no longer surprised that Miss Downright is already possessed
of such splendid accomplishments.


Mat. (whispering her mother.) There, mama!


Lady D. Miss, your compliment is very pretty. It would have come indeed with
more weight from a person better qualified by age or intimacy, to form an
opinion of us; especially if she had had the delicacy to express it in any
other manner than bluntly to our faces.


Miss Bland. (a little disconcerted.) Who can suppress the sentiments which you
inspire even at first sight? Ah! had I so amiable a mother!


Lady D. Do you think, miss, that this wish testifies much respect to your
mother?


Miss Bland. Pardon me, madam, I cannot tell how to express my admiration of
your character. Look where I will, I find none that can be compared with your
ladyship: and, as to Miss Downright, what young lady of her age can dispute the
palm with her for wit, grace, or accomplishments! I am not apt to be blindly
partial even to those that I esteem; for instance, I have the greatest
friendship for the Miss Delmores, and wish to shut my eyes to all their faults,
but how awkward, stiff, and inanimate they are when compared to your daughter!


Lady D. You certainly forget that they are her friends, and that this
description of them cannot be agreeable to us, particularly as they by no means
deserve it. Besides, I hear that you have a thousand times complimented them on
their agreeable qualities, and that in the most pompous style.


Mat. Indeed so she has, mama; this change surprises me. It is no longer ago
than yesterday, that she said all manner of fine things to them.


Lady D. I see, that is no reason why the lady should treat them as favorably
behind their backs.


Miss Bland. One does not like to mention disagreeable truths. For my part, I
tell none their faults except my real friends.


Lady D. I do not know whether my daughter should think very highly of that
distinction; but I should be much afraid, were I in her place, of becoming the
subject of the same sort of confidence with some other of your real friends;
for, I suppose, you have a good many of that description.


Miss Bland. Bless me! what an opinion your ladyship entertains of me! I have
too sincere a love for Miss Downright.


Lady D. Well, ma'am, as you are so sincere, I must be also sincere with you on
my side; and assure you, that as I did not, nay, could not expect this visit, I
had set apart this evening for the purpose of conversing with my daughter, on
several important points of education. I see every reason not to delay a moment
longer what I have to say to her, concerning the danger of silly credulity, as
well as the meanness of servile flattery, and I should fear that such topics
might not be agreeable to you. When my daughter and I shall be so near
perfection as you are pleased to suppose, we will then receive your compliments
without scruple. I shall give you notice, ma'am, when that period arrives; and,
in the mean time, your most obedient.


Miss Bland. (retiring in confusion.) Your ladyship's humble servant.


Mat. Oh! mama, what a reception you have given her!


Lady D. Should I keep any measures with a person who comes to insult us in our
own house?


Mat. Insult us, mama?


Lady D. Is it not an insult to put a cheat upon us? And is it not putting a
gross cheat on us, to load us with compliments and praises the most false and
ridiculous possible? Do you think that she really takes you for a prodigy of
graces and accomplishments, as she did not blush to call you to your face? Did
not she speak in the same style to the Miss Delmores, and have not you heard
how she treated them? Did you not mark with what unnatural adulation she would
have complimented me at the expense of her own mother? I do not know how I
refrained from treating such an instance of meanness with all the contempt and
indignation that it merited.


Mat. A shocking character indeed!


Lady D. It is the character of all flatterers who dare to aim at governing
others, while their littleness and servility sink them to the lowest rank of
the human species.


Mat. How? Do you think that Miss Bland would have aimed at governing me?


Lady D. Your inexperience hindered you from seeing through her artifices,
coarse as they were. But while she insinuated herself into your favor, by
praising you at the expense of truth, what were her views? To gain an ascendant
over your understanding, by reducing you at length to the habitual necessity of
being flattered. That she might rule you with more absolute dominion, did she
not endeavor to alienate your friendship from two amiable young ladies, by
ridiculing them, or by hinting them to be secretly envious of these imaginary
perfections that she ascribed to you? Had she succeeded in thus intoxicating
your mind, who knows if she would not have attempted to sap the foundation of
all your duties, by representing my advice to you as harshness and reproach,
the anxiety of my affection for you, as a splenetick humor, and my authority
as tyranny. What would have then become of you, abandoned by your friends and
your parents?


Mat. (throwing herself into her mother's arms.) O my dearest mama, I see it
clearly, without you I should have been lost. From what a dangerous
acquaintance have you saved me!


Lady D. (embracing her tenderly.) Yes, my dear, we are now reunited for ever.
I perceived your surprise at seeing me treat Miss Bland with so much freedom
and seeming incivility, but you know that all my happiness is centered in you;
judge then of my feelings, when I saw it so near being embittered by her
seducing arts. You have as yet no idea of the unhappy condition of a woman who
is early spoiled by flattery. Coming into the world with pretensions that
nothing can justify, and an opinion of her own merit, in which nobody else
joins her, what mortifications must she experience! As to the homage that she
expected, the more her pride exacts it, the more she finds it withheld, and the
sneer of contempt supply its place. If, blinded as she is with self-opinion, a
transient ray of reflection should enlighten her for a moment, and show her the
true state of herself, what shame must she feel on finding herself destitute of
a claim to those qualities which she imagined herself to possess, and what
regret at having lost the opportunities of acquiring them! On what should she,
for the future, found her pretensions to public esteem, to the love of her
husband, or the respect of her family? To stifle the reproaches of her mind, as
well as the troublesome consciousness of her own want of merit, she can suffer
none about her, but despicable flatterers of the same stamp with those who
first corrupted her understanding; and, to crown her disgrace, while she
contemns them, she feels herself worthy of their contempt. Irritated by all
these mortifications, she is still further tortured at the sight of desert in
another, even in her own children. If she distinguishes any by her regard, it
is those whom she has tutored to a servile compliance with her folly; and thus
she is condemned to the crime of corrupting their veracity, in order to make
them worthy objects of her affection.


Mat. Dear madam, turn away this picture; it fills me with horror.


Lady D. Well then, in order to rest your imagination upon more agreeable
objects, picture to yourself a young woman adorned with that modesty which is
so graceful, and with that diffidence in her powers of pleasing, which gives
them their highest charm. Even the flatterers respect her, even the envious
receive her with a smile. By modestly yielding to her rivals all that they
assume, she takes the surest way to gain a superiority over them. She seems to
appear every day with a constant addition of good qualities, as the esteem
which she inspires puts people upon finding new graces in her character.
Assisted by the advice of her friends, which her diffidence induces her to
accept, she is beloved by them as the creature of their good wishes. The homage
addressed to her from all quarters, enhances her value in the eyes of her
husband, who therefore studies to become more worthy of her affection by his
constancy and attention. Her children, nourished by her virtues, look up to no
other pattern, and indeed the experience of her own success, will make her the
more proper to direct their education. She will be able to qualify them for the
happiness which she herself enjoys. More and more pleased every day with
herself, and with every thing that is round her, she will be happy in the prime
of life, and secure to herself, in a more advanced age, the grateful esteem of
her acquaintance, whose attachment her merit will have rendered both zealous
and sincere.


Mat. Dear madam, make me that happy woman. Henceforth I shall distrust the
most dexterous flattery; and if ever my self-love becomes blind, I will look up
to your prudence and affection to enlighten it.


WHIMSICAL ANSWER, etc. The author, Mr. Berquin, had asserted in conversation,
that it was possible to write a whole page in Italian, every sentence of which
should consist of words ending with the same letter. As a proof that this was
not so difficult as some thought it, he produced the above, in which he has
besides followed the order of the vowels. The whole being no more than a play
upon letters, which may amuse those who are conversant in the Italian language,
a (...) has been thought (...) necessary.
WHIMSICAL ANSWER to an ITALIAN LETTER, from MISS --.
LA vostra lettera, mia cara Carolinetta, arrivata dalla gioiosa Francia nella
pensosa Inghilterra, m'ha procurata una grandissima gioia colla ricordanza
della vostra amicizia;

E anche, perch serivete come Cicerone che scrisse delle ingegnose lettere,
benche, comparate all vostre, sarebbe possibile ch'arrossisse l'oratore
celebre delle differenze.

Tutti gli scritti di giovani spiriti pieni di sentimenti puri, di gentili
pensieri hanmi nei tempi tutti recati gratissimi piaceri.

Ho provato grandissimo gusto vedendo vostro progresso dovuto allo bravissimo
vostro maestro. Sono, saro, vivendo, morendo, morto, umilissimo vostro servo,
divotissimo vostro amico,

Turlututu A. E. I. O. U.

THE CAVERN IN THE PEAK
Described in the relation of a TRAVELLER.
I HAD left London behind me a hundred and seventy miles, and had crossed
several mountains and valleys, when at length I saw myself near the end of my
journey, being arrived in the wilds of Derbyshire.

The mountains which I had now to climb grew more steep and difficult; and
behind them I deserted others still higher, that were totally bate of trees,
and presented a surface of heath and greensward, so that at a pretty good
distance I could distinguish the flocks feeding upon their sides.

When I had reached the top of one of these mountains, I was all at once
surprised with the sight of a delightful valley below me, intersected with
rivulets, and surrounded on all sides with lofty hills. At the bottom of this
valley is situated the village of Castletown, consisting of a few indifferent
cottages, that seem to announce the poverty of their inhabitants.

A narrow road winding down the declivity of the mountain, conducted me to the
bottom of the valley, and so into the village, where having stopped a moment at
an inn to refresh myself, I took the road toward the Cavern of the Peak, being
guided to its entrance by a small stream that runs near it, after having passed
through the town.

I stopped now and then in order to indulge my eyes with a more leisurely view
of the singular object before me. Between two groves of the finest verdure, an
enormous rock, crowned with the ruins of an ancient castle, reared its ton to
the very clouds. At the foot of this opened a vast Cavern, which, when viewed
from without, while the beholder enjoys the light of noonday, presents to his
eyes a huge abyss of darkness.

A man soon appeared at the mouth of the Cave, who asked me if I chose to go
down. I followed him down an easy descent, the daylight, which came in at the
entrance, gradually losing itself in a sort of darkness visible, something like
the faint twilight of a November evening.

After we had advanced a few steps, I was much surprised to see on my right
hand, a subterraneous town under the immense vault of the rock. It happened to
be a holiday, and the inhabitants were enjoying a relaxation from their labors,
most of them sitting with their children before the doors of their cottages,
and amusing themselves. I guessed the nature of their usual employment to be
spinning, from the number of large wheels that were every where to be seen.

As we went farther in, the opening which still admitted the feeble light of
day, seemed to narrow more and more, and soon appeared (...) large hole in the
rock, while the rays (...) (...) as they were, gave a tinge to the smoke that
rose from those subterraneous cottages which we had left behind. The gloom,
however, thickened every step, till at length the vault of the rock, and the
darkness, both together, seemed to enclose all round.

My guide, who was before me, then opened the door of a small cabin cut in the
hollow of the rock, and an old woman, who lived in it, came out and furnished
us with lights. Each of us took one, and we continued our march, being obliged
however to stoop very low for a considerable length of way. But what was my
astonishment when, at the end of this close passage, I saw the Cavern widen
round me all at once, and the vault rise to a height which we could not
distinguish by the help of our lights. I passed in silence through the extent
of this cavity, like a benighted traveller that has lost his way, and arrived
at length on the side of a pretty broad stream, whose silent waters, when our
candles approached their surface, threw all round us a pale reflection of light,
that was still more full of horror than the darkness. A small boat was made
fast to the bank, and my guide, bidding me enter it, jumped into the water up
to his middle, and taking the rope of the boat over his shoulders, began to
drag it after him.

The still horror of this place resembled the silence of the grave. As I
advanced I saw the roof of the rock become gradually lower, like a dark cloud
descending toward the earth. My guide cried out to me to lie down on my back;
and I had scarcely been a moment in that posture, when I found myself under a
part of the vault so low, that stretched as I was at full length in the boat, I
could scarcely hold the candle upright by my side. While I was thus buried as
it were, I confess the stories of the river Styx, and of Charon's ferry-boat,
began to appear not quite so fabulous. I seemed as in a dream, going to land in
the gloomy regions of Erebus, condemned by an unusual destiny to carry my own
funeral torch. Fortunately this dreary vision did not last long, we soon
crossed the streights, and I landed alive and well on the opposite side.

The vault over our heads presented us once more in our walk with the same
irregular surface, sometimes rising to a prodigious height, and sometimes
sinking all at once as if to stop up our way. I perceived all round me a number
of plants and small animals petrified, and would willingly have examined them,
but I was obliged to decline the gratification of my curiosity, for fear of
burning out our candles.

A second piece of water appearing before us, I imagined that we were now
arrived at the end of our journey, as I saw no boat. This stream was not so
broad as the former; we could easily distinguish the opposite side. My
conductor took me upon his back, and carried me safe over.

A little farther we found a small current which ran parallel with our path.
Our ground here became moist and slippery, and our path so narrow that we could
hardly get one foot before the other. Yet, notwithstanding these and such
disagreeable obstacles, I followed with pleasure the course of the
subterraneous water. Every object that I could discover, in this empire of
darkness, appeared to me to carry with it something of the mavelous. My mind
was lost in a chaos of agreeable musings, when suddenly a murmur of distant
harmony struck my ear.

I stopped my guide, and asked him whence these sounds proceeded, which my
fancy (already in a romantic mood) represented to me so delightful? He answered
me that I would soon satisfy myself. Each step that I advanced, this murmur,
which at a distance was indistinct and confused, grew more articulate. I
presently distinguished a sort of pattering noise, like that made by drops of
rain. It was no more than a small water-fall, the stream of which separating as
it fell, came down in a thick shower; and the noise of this, prolonged from
echo to echo, through the silent vault, formed, by its mingled and gradual
reverberation, a succession of sounds full of harmony. I could already see
these drops sparkle like diamonds at the approach of our candles, but I did not
dare to go too near them, for fear of seeing our candles go out, and of being
reduced to grope our way back in the dark, perhaps unsuccessfully.

In the sides of the rock, at different places, I observed large openings,
which led probably to other caverns. I barely peeped into them, and was sorry
that my time would not permit me to explore them thoroughly. My guide, in order
to give me an agreeable surprise, bid me shut my eyes, and suffer him to lead
me. I gave him my candle, and holding him by the coat, followed him blindfold.
He stopped short, and when I opened my eyes, I found myself in an august
temple, the dome of which, irregularly suspended upon enormous pillars,
possessed all that awful beauty and magnificence, which is seen in the great
works of nature. I could not help falling on my knees to adore the majesty of
the Almighty, who seemed to have formed even this subterraneous spot, as a
temple where he might be fitly worshipped.

I quitted this contemplation with reluctance, in order to continue our
expedition, which was now drawing to a period. The faithful stream conducted us
to the extremity of the Cavern, where the rock bends down for the last time.
Its arch descends to the very waters, where it unites with them, and closes up
the passage so completely, that the most adventurous traveller cannot pass the
bounds which here set to his curiosity.

We now therefore turned back, and as I imagined, were to come out by the same
path by which we had penetrated thus far; but I very soon saw my guide turn off
to the left, by one of the lateral openings of the rock. He gave me notice that
I should find myself much fatigued in this new expedition, and must be
satisfied to creep for some length under a part of the rock which nearly
touches the ground. As he found me resolved to follow him, he advised me to
take good care of my candle.

We were obliged to creep on our hands and feet for a pretty long time, upon a
moist sand, the passage being sometimes so straight, that we could hardly
squeeze our bodies through. When I rose from this painful posture, I saw a
steep hill full before me, the top of which seemed to lose itself like a cloud,
among the hardly distinguishable extremities of the surrounding rock. The
ascent was so steep from its moisture, that I fell back at every step. My
guide, more active at this exercise, took me by the hand, and at length
succeeded in helping me to the top. I shuddered at sight of the depths which
surrounded me on all sides. He bid me sit down, and requested me to wait for
his return. Leaving me therefore in this solitude, he descended the hill pretty
rapidly, and was soon lost to my view. All at once I saw re-appear, not him,
but his light, which shone like a spark in an abyss of darkness.

After suffering me to enjoy this spectacle for a moment, my guide returned: I
went down with him to the same depth where I had before lost sight of him. He
now reascended the hill, and through an opening in the rock, he gave me a view
of his candle, while I removed mine. It was to me as if, in the darkest night,
I saw a single star twinkle in the narrow space between two dark clouds.

This part not offering any fresh objects to gratify my curiosity, we
re-entered our former creeping passage, in order to arrive once more on the
bank of the small stream which now conducted us back. I beheld the wild temple
again with the same impression of awe; I heard with the same pleasure, the
harmonious murmur of the cascade; but I repassed with less terror beneath the
vault which my fancy had before compared to a tomb. I considered myself as
Theseus returning victorious from his expedition to Hell: and how great was my
joy, when, after the venerable Sibyl had extinguished the remainder of our
candles, which we returned to her, I at length discovered the feeble gleam of
day! How I blessed it, after so long a confinement in darkness!

I now came cheerfully forward amidst a very picturesque distribution of light
and shade. At every step I saw the veil of darkness gradually unfold. As the
opening of the Cavern enlarged, it gave me an idea of Aurora, opening the
splendid portals of the dawn. I arrived in the light as in a new world, where
the sun now awaited me on the borders of the West, surrounded with clouds of
purple and gold, to contrast, as it were, by the grandeur of such a spectacle,
the gloomy objects which were still pictured in my memory.

ODE ON DOMESTIC HAPPINESS.
I. 1.
THRICE happy he who far from the world's noise,
From passions far, and their discordant sound,
His modest lot can wisely bound,
To follow calm Content and Peace's homely joys:
Waked by the breath of early morn,
Alert he hies and gay,
To hardy toil, by health upborne,
Or cares domestic that employ the day,
' Till ev'ning's welcome hour return,
And Hesper's kindly ray.
For him the works of nature smile,
The alternate seasons, as they roll,
With varied beauties glad his soul,
And pleasures ever new life's troubled scene beguile.
I. 2.
But happier far if these delicious cares
A justly cherished partner shares,
And love and honor over his days preside:
" O Rosalind, since first my gentle bride
" I hailed thee with the nuptial kiss,
" Of all possessions else the spoiler Time
" That dims the grace, or steals the prime,
" Has added to our bliss.
" In Pleasure's ever varying round,
" What genuine happiness is found,
" Unless the circle vibrates as it rolls,
" The concord of united souls?
II. 1.
" Never have my longing eyes a wish betrayed
" Which thy affection has not fondly crowned,
" Nor ever my breast a pleasure found,
" But has to thine alike its dulcet thrill conveyed;
" What grief can reach me in thy arms,
" Where love and peace reside,
" Who shield our calm retreat from harms,
" With placid wing, and promise at our side,
" And round our couch, in social charms,
" For ever to abide?
" They raise in us the tender strife,
" Who most shall please, who most shall love,
" And to sublimest bliss improve
" The sacred duties of connubial life.
II. 2.
" Hence glides the jocund year on lighter wing,
" Hence gayer blossoms deck the spring,
" Hence golden summer binds me richer "sheaves,
" And bowers more luscious mellow autumn "weaves;
" And when gray winter hides the plain,
" What pleasure, while our offspring gambol "round
" The hearth with crackling billets crowned,
" To eye the playful train!
" The vernal sweets of April fled,
" Let dark December beat our shed,
" Let drizzly tempests swell the brumal tide,
" -- It Is spring, if thou art by my side.
III. 1.
" And ye, dear pledges of our love, in whom
" Even now the feeds of generous worth I "trace,
" My fond presaging hopes embrace
" Your riper virtue's meed, the fair auspicious "doom;
" How did your sounds of earliest frame
" My ravished ears impel,
" When sweetly first I heard you aim
" In words to bid me as a father hail,
" And from each lip the tender name
" In lisping accents fell!
" Become, dear babes, what we presage,
" And as our wane of life draws near,
" Let your pure loves and filial cheer
" Warm the chill hours of our declining age.
III. 2.
" When homeward from the field, at close of "day,
" I measure slow my weary way,
" Forth bursting from our cot you hail my name,
" And joyful shouts my wished return proclaim;
" When round my path you sportive throng,
" Each emulous to share my first caress,
" And to our threshold fondly press
" My lingering steps along,
" What transports in our bosoms rise!
" What tears of joy bedew our eyes!
" What tend'rer still, and still sublimer bliss,
" Those tears to mingle in a kiss!"
At early dawn thus chaunted Colinet,
While softly stealing on his steps behind,
(Her bosom with two little loves beset)
To join the swain comes forth his Rosalind:
Waked by thy pleasing strain, I come, she cries,
With all thou love at once to glad thy eyes.
The enraptured swain, his arms around them flung,
Presses all three to his delighted breast;
Fain would he speak, but joy binds up his tongue --
Rest, happy swain! in speechless transport rest!
Enjoy a bliss by all earth's stores unbought!
Virtue, supreme of blessings from above,
Ennobles even the weaknesses of love,
And without virtue love itself were naught.
THE PEASANT, HIS COUNTRY'S BENEFACTOR.
MR. Stanley, tired with the noise and bustle of the town, had purchased a
small countryhouse, in which he promised to himself the enjoyment of rural
tranquillity, amidst the study of books and the exercise of benevolence. Being
naturally of a pensive turn, he was fond of solitude and the amusement of
walking, in which he occasionally indulged himself in all the quarters round
his new habitation. One day, his wandering steps led him to a small valley the
sight of which alone was sufficient highly to gratify his contemplative
inclination. Surrounded by high hills, the slopes of which presented an
agreeable variety of corn fields, groves and cottages, it seemed to be the
retreat of rural happiness. The stillness of this retired vale was only
interrupted by the murmuring found of a rivulet, which falling down a rock,
reflected from its broken waters all the colors of the rainbow, as the sun's
rays enlightened it at a certain elevation. Its froth expanded in white volumes
round the basin which it had hollowed out by its fall. The rivulet afterward
divided itself into several smaller ones which intersected the valley in many
directions, and freshened the verdure of the meadows by their beneficent
contributions of moisture.

Yet the most pleasing sensations of Mr. Stanley's breast were not occasioned
merely by the natural beauties of the spot. The whole extent of the valley was
covered with new cottages, each having its small farm annexed, with an orchard
and kitchen garden. These parcels of land were only separated by plain
gooseberry hedges, which seemed at once to indicate the value of the ground and
the mutual confidence of the inhabitants. Mr. Stanley rejoiced to see that no
single person had engrossed to himself the whole of this delicious plain. He
was pleased in the reflection that many families might there enjoy the sweets of
ease and tranquillity. While he in his own mind, congratulated the owner of the
land, who had a number of so happy tenants, he thought some praise was also due
to his beneficence, which had certainly, by its encouragement and assistance,
occasioned the rich specimen of cultivation that he admired. So wholly was he
rapt in meditation upon this interesting subject, that he had not observed the
gathering of thick dark clouds that was forming over his head. A shower of
rain, accompanied with lightning, soon obliged him to seek for shelter. He ran
therefore and knocked at the door of the first cottage, which was opened by a
woman far advanced in years, but whose countenance old age had made venerable.
She received him in a free and friendly manner. I am very glad, said she, that
our cottage happened to be the nearest to you, though, I am pretty sure, our
children would have received you kindly too. As the storm surprised you in the
middle of the plain, you could hardly miss of applying for shelter to some one
or other of our family. But I see, you are quite out of breath. Compose
yourself. I will make up a good fire for you, that you may dry yourself by it.

While she was laying on some wood, Mr. Stanley was looking about him very
attentively. He observed an appearance of plenty and regularity in the
disposition of the furniture, that pleased him very much. He had understood, by
the good woman's words, that a great part of the habitations of the plain was
occupied by her children. His curiosity was roused by the circumstance, and he
was preparing to ask a few questions in order to satisfy it, when he heard
somebody from the inner room say, "I hope, dame, you will make the gentleman
welcome." "Yes, yes, gaffer, answered she, never fear." -- "That is your
husband, then, that speaks to you," says Mr. Stanley. "Yes, Sir, he is within
there, in that room." -- "Will you give me leave to pay my respects to him?"
"And welcome, Sir; you will perhaps be glad to know each other; walk in." Mr.
Stanley entered, and perceived an old man lying in a bed, the covering of which
was remarkably neat. His head was bare; his locks, white as snow, fell down to
his shoulders; his countenance, which time had respected, was expressive of the
tranquillity and goodness of his soul; there was a smile upon his lips, and his
eyes sparkled with the fire and vivacity of youth. Mr. Stanley, attracted by an
exterior so prepossessing, approached him.

Mr. Stanley. What is the matter with you, my good man? are you sick?


Old Man. No, Sir, I thank heaven, I am not. But when one has seen fourscore
years, one can hardly count one's self well, though not under any actual
disorder. Yet it is not long since I have left off daily labor, and if it were
not for fear of grieving my children -- But they will not have me work any more.


Mr. Stanley. They are right. You must have purchased this repose pretty dearly.


Old Man. Though I say it, I think I have earned it sufficiently. How many
sheaves of corn have I tied up in the course of my life! How many have I
threshed out! I have wearied my poor body sadly, that is certain. Well, in the
midst of all these labors and fatigues, I have always carried a cheerful
countenance and a merry heart; and so I wish still to pass gently through the
small remainder of the days that I have to live.


Mr. Stanley. But after so stirring and laborious a life, how can you pass a
whole day in bed without being tired?


Old Man. Tired? In Faith, I have somewhat else to do than to be tired. It is
only my limbs that are out of (...); my head is still employed. The thoughts of
ten children, and fifty grand children and great grand children, will scarce
let my time hang heavy. There are not too many hours in the day to think of so
many people. Every one of them gives me an account of his business, and the
state of his family, and upon that I must go to work. I have always some of
them to marry, and I look twice before I match them. If they have all
prospered, they may thank me for (...). There is not a single one of them
settled in (...) ^orld, who did not take up my thoughts a year beforehand. I
have now three marriages to conclude, and I hope that the parties will live as
happily as their parents before them.


Mr. Stanley. Then you are satisfied with the situation of your family?


Old Man. O Sir! it makes me happy to speak of them. Dame, go fetch us a cup of
that old ale. It will help me to talk about our young ones.


Mr. Stanley. Have you many of them here?


Old Man. Only two grand-daughters. I could as soon quarter a regiment as lodge
them all. It was not my cabin, but my lands that I wished to enlarge. I thank
God, I have been able to give a pretty parcel of land to each of them, without
hu^^ing myself. There was a good deal of ground hereabouts that had been
impoverished; it was let to me at a low rent. I took care first to put it into
good heart again, and parcelled it off among my daughters for their portions.
It brings in money now.


Mr. Stanley. And in this great number of children has none ever caused you any
sorrow?


Old Man. Sometimes, by their sickness; but I have always been able to recover
them by regular diet and simples with which I am acquainted. In other respects
they have always made me happy.


Mr. Stanley. Apparently because you have always given them a good example.


Old Man. I dare take upon me to say so. When I was young, to be sure, I was
all alive, like other folks; I ran about to every wake and revel; but as soon
as I had once pronounced the solemn word I will, in church, I left off all
those youthful tricks. Happily my wife was handsome, good-natured and virtuous.
That keeps a man in awe. Besides, children began to come on apace. I was not
rich at the time, and it I had been sufficiently so for myself, I had affection
enough for my family, to wish them also a competency. I trained my children up
to work very young. I carried them to the fields as soon as they could walk.
The youngest I seated upon the plough, while the rest played round about us. My
daughters amused us with singing, while they spun at their wheel. In short, I
taught them all to work cheerfully for their bread, that they might eat it
happily.


Mr. Stanley. And do you see them sometimes?


Old Man. See them Sir? When I was lighter, I used to go my rounds among them
once a week, to see that every thing went on well in their families. Now, when
I cannot go out, it is their turn to visit me. Every Sunday after prayers, my
daughters, my grand-daughters, and my daughters-in-law, bring their children
here. It would be a good sight to see me in the middle of twenty women, dressed
in their Sunday clothes, and as fresh as roses. These all vie with each other
in their fondness to me; and their children have a certain family resemblance
that charms me. I have generally a dozen of them in my arms and playing about
me. Then there is such a buz, and a chatter, as would stun another person, but
it is music to my ears.


Mr. Stanley. I can easily imagine that it must be a delightful moment for you.


Old Man. And for them too, I flatter myself. I like to see cheerfulness all
round me. Behind my barn I have a grass plat on purpose for dancing. It is the
last spot of ground on which I ever worked. I open the ball with my dame, and
then every one falls a capering about us. They take care to play some of the
old fashioned country dances of my time. Methinks then the ground lifts me up,
and I bound as lightly as any of the young folks.


Mr. Stanley. Have you fiddlers then hereabouts?


Old Man. None that play for money. But my grandson Arthur can manage a fiddle
charmingly. The young rogue is only fifteen, and he plays on it so, as to set
the whole village in motion. Oh! if I had him here to show him to you! he is
the very model of me, except these wrinkles, and his rosy complexion, which I
have no longer in my cheeks. And indeed he is my Benjamin, the darling of my
heart. I can tell you so much, Sir, as you are a stranger, but I should not
wish that any of the family knew it.


Mr. Stanley. But the time must appear tedious to you when you have not these
amusements.


Old Man. If I have not those, I have others. Having never been from this part
of the country, I know it as well as I do my own cabin, and all the inhabitants
likewise. I have been at the birth of them all. They come to consult me about
laying down their grounds. They have only to bring me a basket of the earth of
each farm. I handle it, and taste it, and tell at once what sort of grain it
will produce best. If they are poor folks, I lend them seed, which they pay me
after the harvest; and I prevail upon those whom I have served, to lend them a
day's work, which is all the return that I ask for my services. I have seen the
time when every one worked only for himself, and would have thought that he
enriched himself by ruining his neighbor. I contrived, however, at length, to
persuade them, that the richer the country was, the richer each would be in
particular; that the fruits of the earth would sell better, and attract
manufacturing people to this quarter, by the plenty of them and their good
quality; and that, in order to effect this, they ought to assist each other.
According as the season is wet or dry, the crop of the low grounds is more or
less forward th^n that of the uplands. I prevail upon them to unite and begin
with the first ripe; thus the whole is got in at its just point of maturity. In
fact, you may enquire at the markets all round concerning our grain. The
factors strive which shall buy it up. Sometimes they come and take it in the
crop, and our corn has been sold before it was put into the ground; whereas if
there come ten bushels of bad corn from a parish, it is enough to give all the
rest a bad name.


Mr. Stanley. These reflections are simple, and yet it is seldom that they occur
to country people. How came you to make them?


Old Man. By degrees, from the experience of each year. Besides I must say, I
have been well assisted. Our vicar is a sensible man; I had made him as rich as
a dean, by the weddings, the christenings, and the tithes that I brought him.
He sometimes touched upon the good effects of my practice, in his sermons.
Besides, when our head landlord came down to reside here, he saw his lands
quite changed, they let for double the rent; upon which he showed me marks of
his regard. If there was any new experiment of agriculture, in your London
papers, they will come both of them to consult me. I made the experiment before
their eyes, and as soon as it succeeded, it was presently spread. Farmers
follow their old way, and despise any discoveries taken from books, but those
that I had approved, there was no contradicting. They put them in practice, and
found the good effects of them. Besides my doctrine is not very longwinded. I
deliver the whole of it in a few words. War with our lands, and peace with our
friends.


Mr. Stanley. At this rate, I imagine, you have not enriched the attorney, as
much as you have the vicar.


Old Man (smiling.) It is true, I have taken many a cause out of his worship's
hands. I should be as rich as a judge, if I had only taken a shilling for every
dispute that I have settled. There is always some little quarrel, in a country
village, upon one subject or another. They come to ask my advice. If one of the
parties be at a distance, they take me in a chaise cart, and convey me to the
spot. There upon hearing the merits of the cause, I endeavor to accommodate
matters satisfactorily. If they refuse to agree, I invite them to come to my
house against next day. I have some excellent old ale, that would soften hearts
of stone. They taste it, and as soon as it begins to have its effect upon my
disputants, I make them sensible that a law suit would cost them ten times more
than the thing in dispute; that they would lose their time, their money, their
rest, and the pleasure of being friends. I mention to them the example of
those, who, through not taking my advice, have impoverished themselves to make
lawyers rich. Before the first mug of ale is finished, they no longer look shy
on each other, and the second is scarce half emptied, before they would go
through fire to serve each other. Thus I give away my ale, but I get, in
return, pleasure and satisfaction in this life, and good hopes for that which
is to come.


Mr. Stanley. You must be regarded as a little king in this country.


Old Man. Why, Sir, I govern here upon my bed, as another upon his throne. But
I am not only loved, but feared also. Go nearer to that wall. Do you see there
names, with dates of the year, that I have cut with my knife? Some of them are
for good actions, but those that you see written backwards, are marks of
disgrace. As our head landlord and the vicar are so good as to come sometimes
and see me, and as all the village are constantly flocking to my cabin, this
register on the wall, has as much effect, as if the folk's names were put in
the newspapers. Your name written backwards up there, is a sort of public
infamy. Every body shuns you, even to the children. You must mend your manners,
or decamp. If you reform, well and good, I reverse your name; in the first
place, to remove the memory of your disgrace, and then to encourage you in good
behavior. Of twenty names, in all, that I have thus engraved backwards, there
remain but three which will serve as an example for a long time to come;
whereas a name written up there, straight forwards, is almost enough to make
one a gentleman, and to see a single letter turned backwards, would be as
dreadful us death to the party, so great is the advantage of a good reputation.


Mr. Stanley. I can conceive that this method, simple as it is, may be very
effectual, but what most surprises me, is, the use that you contrive to make of
your ale. It generally sets the villagers a quarrelling, but you make it the
minister of peace.


Old Man. I am much indebted to it for the advantages that I have enjoyed from
it in my old age. For these ten years past, it has renewed the strength of my
stomach, and warmed the blood in my veins. I never drank more of it than was
necessary to quench my thirst, and for that reason, I find it now more
wholesome. A glass of it is sufficient to give me fresh life, and always makes
me young again, for a couple of hours. I don't know whether you are grown dry
with hearing me, but I am a little so with speaking. I feel that a drop of it
would come very seasonably to me at this moment. But what is the matter with my
poor wife? how long she is in coming! Ah! there is a very good reason for it;
seventy-five years of age, are a pretty heavy load to carry. But hist! I think
I hear her.


Wife. Yes, gaffer, I am here.


Old Man. Come, dame, come, my dear Sukey, fill us out a glass. You smile, Sir;
but when the bottle is in hand, I always give her the name of her youth. I need
only look at her through my glass, and she appears to me as fresh as fifty
years ago. Sukey, your health; Sir, yours. (They drink) Well, how do you like
it?


Mr. Stanley. Excellent, upon my word. I have drunk more costly liquor, but
never with more pleasure.


Old Man. Because it is sound and genuine as the good will that gives it. But
how is this, Sukey, you spare it! Pshaw! there will always be enough of it for
us. Let me see it enliven you a little. We warmed it formerly, let it warm us
now. I feel it begin to make me young again; I feel myself as fond of you, as
when I first went a courting. If you are not married Sir, already, you
certainly will marry, if you take my advice, and then be so kind to your wife,
that you may always remember the wedding day with pleasure. It Is the way never
to feel yourself grow old. Ask Sukey. Speak, dame, do you remember our wedding?
How lovingly I clasped your hand before the altar! and what a look of kindness
you gave me! It touched my very heart; nay, the impression of it is there
still. To be sure (smiling) that is not so long ago yet. It is only a small
matter of sixty years.


Wife. Ah! they have passed away very soon. The best of our days are over, my
good man.


Old Man. Nay, are you not as happy as ever? Have not you ease and tranquillity,
and as good health as you can expect? Let us see, what have you to wish for? A
little more strength, perhaps. But heaven has strengthened us within, and given
us spirits to enjoy the happiness of a long life. When our bodily strength
decays, the grave will open gently to receive us.


Mr. Stanley. Why do you let melancholy thoughts intrude upon this moment of
pleasure?


Old Man. Oh! Sir, I do not fear death. Let him come when he will to knock at
my door, I will let him in, without being frightened. Do think that I have
forgot that we must all die? No; as we have begun, we must make an end.


Mr. Stanley. You have found means to make your life so happy! will you not be
sorry to quit it.


Old Man. I should be much more so, had I spent it ill, had I been idle, and a
libertine; if I had not done all the good that was in my power, or if I had
left a large family in a state of poverty or vice, through my fault. Instead of
such an afflicting retrospect, I look back on fourscore years of useful labor,
of lands improved, and friends assisted. I see my sons and grandsons well to
live, honest and laborious, united in friendship together, beloved and
respected by all the country. I leave my eldest son my cottage, he will fill my
place in it, and my duties. As head of the family, he will be for his brothers
and their children, what I have been for mine. It is sweet to carry this
comfort with me to the grave.


Mr. Stanley. But you will hear their sighs at parting with you. How grievous
must that separation be!


Old Man. I do believe they will be very sorry to lose me, but I shall endeavor
to comfort them. A peasant knows, better than any other, the law of nature and
the force of necessity. He sees, every day, old trees replaced by young ones.
He sees, every year, the winter devour the produce of the other seasons. I will
represent all this to my children, when they shall assemble round my death bed;
I will make them sensible that my Maker, after having given me a long and happy
old age, crowns all his blessings to me, by taking me from life, before it
becomes a burden by pains and infirmities. I will tell them that I only leave
them, to go and join my Heavenly Father, who holds forth his hand from above to
receive me, and that I will never cease to look down upon them with affection,
as long as their race continues upon the earth; I will repeat this to them with
my last breath, and certainly they will be comforted for my death, when I look
upon it myself as a happiness.


Mr. Stanley. Brave old man! whence have you this firmness?


Old Man. From a guiltless heart, supported and strengthened by heaven, that
heaven which I hope soon to inherit.


Mr. Stanley. You have no fears then as to futurity?


Old Man. As long as it was in my power to do ill, I had my fears; at present
my heart is capable of no other passion, but universal love. O Gracious Lord,
after so many blessings as thou have showered down upon my head, shall I dare
to ask thee for one more? Behold the companion whom thou have given me, to
share with me the pleasures and the cares of life: we have grown old together,
grant that we may die both at once. How should I be able to survive her? Could
my trembling hand have strength to close her eyelids? And again, what would
become of her, at so advanced an age, were she to lose me, and no longer hear
me answer to her plaintive call? Were she to be buried in the solitude of this
cottage as in a tomb? Permit not death to separate two persons whom nothing has
separated for fifty years. Grant us this request, O Lord, this last request. It
is the only one that thou have left us under the necessity of asking thee. We
wish not to prolong our term of life; dispose of us when thou will. Let us only
die hand in hand, and thus present ourselves before thee, to give an account of
our actions. As we have been united through life, let us not, we pray thee, be
separated at our latter end.


The old man, who had raised himself up in his bed, to address these words to
his Creator, fell back with fatigue as he finished them. Mr. Stanley was
terrified, and ran for his wife to assist him. She had fallen on her knees, in
a corner of the cottage, at the beginning of his prayer: her hands were still
listed up to heaven. He led her, trembling as she was with terror, to the old
man, who dispelled the apprehensions of both, by a smile, and by the liveliness
of his action, as he waved his hand to them. However, Mr. Stanley judged that
repose would be necessary to him, after an emotion so violent, for his age; he
therefore thanked these good people for their hospitality, and promised to come
again and see them, after a few days.

The storm which had forced him to seek shelter in the cottage, was now over.
Nature, coming forth from her gloomy dress, had once more assumed a radiant
cheerfulness. The sun, who was now near setting, seemed to shine with new
splendour. These objects brought back the thoughts of the old man to Mr.
Stanley's imagination. They represented his soul spotless and unsullied,
alternately yielding to impressions of tenderness and gaiety; and the strength
and fervor of his spirit just then blazing forth, when it was going to be
finally extinguished. He imagined to himself all that one single man, in the
most humble station, could do for the advantage of society. Fifty industrious
citizens given to the state. His active years employed in bringing up his
children to honest labor, and his old age dedicated to the maintenance of peace
and unanimity among his neighbors. With what freedom, thought Mr. Stanley, did
he speak to me of the good that he had done, and the confidence which he
reposes in the Supreme Being! what tranquillity of conscience! how happy a state
of assuredness! Who would not prefer the sound old age of this honest peasant,
the benefactor of his country, though allotted to a state of obscurity, proud
of his own esteem, and enjoying the truest honor, that of leaving behind him a
respectable memory, to the decrepitude of those great men who only use their
riches in scattering round them corruption and obloquy, who feel the public
contempt fall light upon them, habituated as they are to the contempt of their
own souls, and whom even the grave will not have power to rescue from infamy
and execration.

But why introduce these images, so afflicting to the virtuous, while there are
others so proper to inspire them with consolation and delight? While the
portrait of a Howard is at hand, that benevolent traveller who has already
several times gone over a great part of Europe, visiting the children of
captivity, and who, by his eloquent writings, and the authority of his virtues,
has procured more humane treatment to a race of men, often more unfortunate
than guilty! or of a Hutton, who crosses the seas at the age of sixty, and
without assuming any other character than that of minister of humanity, treats
with those of the state, concerning the exchange of prisoners of war, and
returns modestly to his own country, to assist those unfortunate persons of
whom he is the friend and supporter. Generous men! you need not my praise to
recompense your virtues. They find a reward worthy of them, in that very
sentiment which inspired them, and in the good that they have produced. More
need is, that I endeavor to consecrate them in the memory of tender youth, a
shrine suitable to their purity, and to preserve your name as long as I can
upon the earth. If the love and reverence of humanity can be kindled in the
souls of youth, let them owe it to the force and impression of your examples,
and to the noble desire of imitating them.

SYSTEM OF THE WORLD.
MRS. Crosby had retired, in the third year of her widowhood, to a small, but
commodious house, at some distance from London. Here she endeavored to amuse
the grief which she felt for the loss of her husband, by attending to the
education of a daughter whom she regarded as the only remaining pledge of their
mutual affection. She herself had been married very young, and her father, when
he made an advantageous bargain, as it is called, in the disposal of her hand,
imagined that the splendour of a large fortune, and a few shewy accomplishments,
would enable her to appear in the world with sufficient distinction. As he was
always involved in the hurry of business, or engaged in tumultuous dissipation,
he had never reflected, that, in a calmer state of life, his daughter would
have any more occasion, than himself, for those resources of the heart and
understanding, which arise from a proper cultivation of both, or that the
better choice he made of a husband for her, the more necessary these advantages
would be to her in order to gain his esteem, and preserve his attachment. These
considerations, obvious as they were, never once occurred to him, and of all
the cares that he felt for the happiness of his daughter, the most useful were,
those to which he least attended.

It was not long, before Mrs. Crosby felt and regretted this neglect,
particularly as she was now placed in the society of a man, distinguished for
delicacy of sentiment, and clearness of understanding, and who united a large
portion of knowledge, to a refined taste. While she sought therefore to supply
the deficiency of her own education, she resolved, above all things, to avoid
any such neglect in that of her daughter. The amusements of town had never
totally diverted her from this project, and the solitude in which she proposed
to pass her widowhood, afforded her there all the leisure necessary for putting
it in execution. She had already taken advantage of the first years of Emily's
childhood, to perfect herself in those things which she proposed one day or
other to teach her. Her application and force of memory, her quick and just
apprehension, so well fulfilled the views which her affection had suggested,
that she was now perfect mistress of ancient and modern history, geography and
the elements of mathematics, and had some general notions of astronomy and
natural philosophy. In order to be able by herself alone to instruct her
daughter, she had acquired her own knowledge, without any other aid, than good
books of introduction to those several sciences. Thus, while she sought for
herself the most pleasing and effectual mode of instruction, she studied
beforehand that which would be most proper for Emily's understanding, whose
acuteness and vivacity, from an infant, afforded the most favorable hopes; nor
did her subsequent improvement disappoint them. Emily, now scarcely thirteen,
had already, by her progress in learning, and her dutiful behavior, began to
reward the pains which her mother had taken in instructing her. Their hours
were spent in the purest enjoyment of mutual happiness. The company of a few
particular acquaintances in the neighborhood, and the visits which they
sometimes received from their friends in town, were the only interruptions to
their studies, the variety of which, together with the culture of flowers, and
the care of their singing-birds, served as a relaxation to them.

Whether it was to purge her daughter's heart of every sentiment of vanity, or
to rid her house of a load of visitors, Mrs. Crosby had thought proper to
conceal her fortune, and assumed as a pretext for her country retirement, the
necessity of retrieving her affairs, by strict economy. Thus, while she
avoided the tiresome details and useless expense of a great house, she had more
time to apply to her labors, and was better able to indulge her generosity by
the private benefactions which she so liberally dispensed. From the tranquillity
of so agreeable a life, the satisfaction of seeing her daughter equal her
hopes, and a good state of health acquired by exercise, temperance, and
regularity, she had contracted an unchangeable serenity of temper, and such a
sprightliness in conversation, as made her company highly delightful to little
Emily. The feelings of her young heart were wholly dedicated to her mamma, and
the memory o^ her father which Mrs. Crosby took care to keep up, by the example
of her own sorrow for his loss, and by the remembrance that she expressed of
his good qualities. Emily, brought up in all the freedom of ingenuous
innocence, had not a thought, that she needed to conceal from her affectionate
friend, and therefore had preserved that amiable simplicity, which is the
sweetest ^ornament of reason. As all her reflections had arisen from what she
heard in conversation with her mother, they were of a lively and animated turn,
such as the warmth of conversation generally produces, and she delivered her
thoughts with equal clearness and force, equal correctness and vivacity.

Mr. Glanville, brother to Mrs. Crosby, whom she loved affectionately, from a
child, was settled in London, where he held an honorable post under
government; and the duties of this, together with the study of natural science,
which he cultivated successfully, were his chief employments. Two daughters, as
yet under the first cares of their mother, and little George, now twelve years
old, made up his family. Amidst the corruption of a capital, his house was a
stranger to immorality. His son had never been far from his presence. Born with
a lively imagination, an ardent and fearless spirit, frankness, generosity and
resolution, George was mild, and at the same time susceptible of the most
impetuous emotions. He was even, at his age, strongly in love with glory, and
whatever was great. When he heard an instance of bravery and generosity
related, you would see his breast heave, and the fire sparkle in his eyes.
While Mr. Glanville conceived the best hopes, from such a disposition, he was
thoroughly sensible of the anxiety that it might cause him. However, his son's
tender affection for him, alleviated his fears. He had early accustomed himself
to manage him by kindness. A cold look would have filled George with terror; a
reproach would have been a severe punishment to him.

In consequence of a pressing invitation, which they both received from Emily's
hand, though dictated by her mamma, to spend a few days of the summer vacation
at her house, they arrived there, as it happened, the day before her birthday;
the addition of this company made it therefore a sort of festival, which Emily
adorned by her graces, and George animated by his vivacity. Mrs. Crosby repaid,
with tears of joy, the amiable attentions of these charming children; but this
happiness was still more increased, when she had an opportunity of discoursing
at freedom with her brother, of their projects and expectations concerning
their children. Dinner time, which assembled them and their young family, was a
new scene of delight. After a long separation, to find themselves once more
together, amidst all the beauties of nature, a fine country, and delightful
weather, and in the presence of objects so mutually interesting! to feel the
sweet emotions of parental tenderness, and all the mingled charities Milton.
of duty and affection! you would have but a faint idea of their happiness, if
you could suppose that these terms give an adequate description of it.

FIRST CONVERSATION.
THE fineness of the evening having invited them to walk out, they went all
together upon the terrace. The sun was going to set, he was just touching the
edge of the horizon. Mrs. Crosby, breaking off her discourse all at once, went
and seated herself on the end of a stone seat which fronted a large walk of the
garden. Mr. Glanville, thinking that his sister was taken ill, made haste to
follow her, and anxiously asked her what was the matter? Nothing at all,
answered she, smiling, but without moving her eyes, which were fixed upon the
setting sun. I will satisfy your surprise and curiosity in a moment, but first
let the sun disappear.

Mr. Glanville, and the children, looked at each other in silence, not daring
to interrupt her. Presently the sun was out of sight, and Mrs. Crosby then
rising with a cheerful air, I am satisfied, says she, every thing goes on well
in the universe. These words, and the hasty manner in which I quitted you just
now, must surprise you; I shall therefore explain. This is, you know, my
birthday. It seems as if every object in nature became this day unusually
interesting to me. I observe with more attention whatever passes, and every
thing affords me matter for reflection. This morning, as I walked in my
orchard, I endeavored to remark the changes that might have taken place in the
trees during the course of the last year. I saw that some began to lose their
youthful look, and others to succeed them in stature and vigor. The first
afforded me a serious lesson, but the latter comforted me with a pleasing type
of my own youth, renewed in my daughter.

Emily kissed her mother's hand, and heaved a sigh.

That remark, says Mr. Glanville, pleases me as much for its fortitude and
philosophy, as the sentiment which is connected with it, does by its
tenderness. But do your observations reach to the star of day? were you uneasy
to know if he had lost his force or his brightness?

Mrs. Crosby. No, brother, my thoughts do not extend so far. Last year, on this
same day, I was sitting all alone, on this same seat, and lost in an agreeable
musing. I was observing the sun set, and took notice that I lost sight of him,
exactly as he got behind yonder Elm. This incident struck me again just now all
at once. I wished to see if he would, on the same day of this year, set,
precisely in the same direction. I should never have thought the earth so
regular in her movement.


Mr. Glanville. Especially as she has traveled since that time, upwards of
630,000,000 of miles.


Mr. Crosby. The immensity of such a circuit increases my admiration still
more, at finding her so punctual.


Mr. Glanville. Why she might make you as flattering a compliment, since on the
same day of the year, and at the same instant, she finds you in the same spot
observing her.


Mrs. Crosby. Aye, but brother, let us not proudly dispute with her, the praise
of regularity. Be reason as haughty as she may, with her clue and her torch, a
blind planet will still go surer than she can.


Emily. Oh! if that be the case, here are the stars, uncle, that begin to
appear; and I am glad they are able to give our globe a good character, for if
we should be a little careless in our motions, the earth is not, and perhaps
the stars will take us, her inhabitants, to be, like her, very steady regular
folks.


Mr. Glanville. It is here, my dear Emily, that we should begin to establish
ourselves a good reputation, without troubling our heads with what the stars
may think of us. And after all, such a misconception would be of no service to
us; for the stars see as little of our earth, as they judge of her inhabitants.


George. What! while we have perhaps five hundred telescopes in the air to
observe them, they do not vouchsafe so much as to look at us?


Mrs. Crosby. Now trust your poets, that talk of extolling the praise of their
mistresses to the very stars.


Mr. Glanville. Without being more credulous than those ladies, why should you
be less indulgent? If the flattery of this fiction could ever turn their heads,
it has at least never offended them. It carries its own pardon with it, as it
arises from the poet's wish to see it realized.


George. But for all that, papa, it is hard to be so little noticed in the
universe.


Mr. Glanville. Do not be uneasy, my dear; Mars and the Moon have a pretty full
view of us.


Emily. And are they all the witnesses to our existence?


Mr. Glanville. Mercury and Venus, which are placed between us and the sun,
distinguish us, perhaps, if they are not dazzled by the vast light that
surrounds them; but as to Jupiter, Saturn, and the Georgium Sidus, I doubt
whether they know the least tittle about us.


George. And suppose they did, it is not by such planets as our own, that I
should care about being remarked.


Mrs. Crosby. Yes, I see George is among those ambitious ones, who disdain the
homage of their equals. To satisfy such as him, their fame must reach the
sovereign's notice, and that of foreign courts.


George. True, I should wish our globe to make a noise, even among the fixed
stars.


Mr. Glanville. Why my poor little friend, how do you suppose that they can
discern us, since, if the earth were to fill up the whole orbit of 630,000,000
miles that she describes in a year, she would swell to no more purpose than the
frog in the fable, and be but a point in the immensity of space.


George. Bless me! is it possible?


Mr. Glanville. I could prove it to you in a moment.


Emily. But however, uncle, if we were increased to the size that you mention,
we should be much larger than the sun. The stars see the sun, and they would be
much better able to see us, in that case.


Mr. Glanville. Hark ye, Emily, do you see that candle, which has just appeared
at some house, I take it, about two or three miles off?


Emily. Yes, certainly, uncle.


Mr. Glanville. The house is much larger than the candle, which throws its
light upon it; can you distinguish the house?


Emily. No, not in the least.


Mr. Glanville. You see, then, that a body, which is luminous in itself, can be
discerned at a great distance, while a much larger body, that only reflects the
light which it receives, is imperceptible to us.


Emily. That is true.


Mr. Glanville. Now reduce the earth to its real proportion: instead of being
large with respect to the sun, as the house is with respect to the candle, it
would be no more, in comparison, than a pin's head to a lighted torch. So you
may judge of the splendid figure that we make in the universe.


Emily. Ah! George, all our pretensions to the notice of the stars, are brought
very low.


Mrs. Crosby. I think I see one of our great folks in London, full of the idea
that all the whole kingdom have their eyes upon him. One might perhaps tell him
with truth, that he is known at Hackney, or even that his name has been
mentioned in Croydon, but that certainly his renown never reached as far as
Whitehaven.


Emily. Nay, I should be so much out of conceit with it, were I my cousin, that
I would even wish to hide myself from the moon.


Mr. Glanville. No, Emily; such sullenness might cost us dear.


Emily. Pray, how, uncle?


Mr. Glanville. Why if we were to hide ourselves from the moon the moon in
return would hide herself from us.


Emily. Oh! I should be sorry to lose her mild light.


Mrs. Crosby. I must confess, too, that I am partial to her. She seems, by her
modest and bashful air, to be formed for the sun of our sex.


Mr. Glanville. A happy idea enough! how many pretty whimsies might then be
explained by the variety of her phases, and the inequalities of her motion! You
see by this, my friend, that we have nothing to lose, and that the earth is
happy enough in receiving the light of the stars that surround her, without
vainly aspiring to be distinguished by them for her splendour.


George. It is a great pity, that we are not a little more luminous, for, you
must confess, papa, that we could not be placed to more advantage, to make a
shining figure.


Mr. Glanville. What induces you to think our position so advantageous?


George. Oh! it is plain; only look at the vault of the heavens. You see that
it is quite round above the earth, and that the stars are placed in it at equal
distances from us. We are just in the middle of the universe.


Mr. Glanville. My dear, do you remember the handsome prospect that you pointed
out to me here, this morning? the hill, the wood, those ruins of an old castle,
and the village-steeple that seemed to lose itself in the clouds?


George. Yes, papa, and that fine large walnut tree that we passed yesterday
evening, when I felt such an appetite for some of the walnuts. I was glad to
see it again, though at a distance, for it appeared to me, as I stood here, to
be just on the edge of the horizon.


Mr. Glanville. Your perspective is not quite exact; for you might see far
behind it that large gothic castle, that is falling to ruin; you know it is a
good way farther off; when we had passed it in the chaise, was it not a full
quarter of an hour before we reached the walnut-tree?


George. That is true, but one cannot judge exactly of distances which are so
remote. I should suppose the tree, I assure you, from this spot, to be in the
same circular line with the hill, the wood, the castle, and the
village-steeple; and our terrace here, to be in the center of the prospect. I
took particular notice.


Mr. Glanville. What do you talk of, child? how far do you count it, sister,
from hence to the village?


Mrs. Crosby. Almost nine miles, brother.


Mr. Glanville. And to the hill?


Mrs. Crosby. Full six.


Mr. Glanville. And to the wood?


Mrs. Crosby. Only a mile and a half; I frequently walk to it, and with ease.


Mr. Glanville. Now I guess, by the time of our coming, that the castle is
about two miles and a quarter from this place, and the walnut-tree about half
that distance, at most. But how do you compute? those objects, some so far off,
and some so near, to be in the same circular sweep from this point! all those
inequalities, both of distance and surface, to form a round and regular
horizon! and our terrace to be exactly in the center of all that! May it not be
the same, George, with respect to the seemingly regular arch of the heavens,
and those stars that appear to be fixed in the same concave surface? and, in
short, with respect to us who think ourselves to be in the center of this
beautiful sphere?


George. I cannot deny it, papa; if my sight deceives me at a small distance,
it very well may, where the space is so immense. But that we are not in the
middle spot under the heavens, I can hardly give up. I would have wagered, that
there are not two inches more on one side than the other.


Mr. Glanville. Let us try that. Before we sat down to dinner, you know, we
went to see the clergyman of the parish.


George. Oh, he is a very good man! he gave me a fine pear.


Mr. Glanville. That must prove him to be an honest man. However, we do not
talk of his orchard now, but of his garret. You remember how much he praised
the prospect that is to be seen from the window of it; you know, we went up;
well?


George. Yes, and his garret window is not higher than the level of this
terrace.


Mr. Glanville. What! is not there a wider prospect from it than from this spot?


George. No, indeed, papa, it is exactly the same. I remarked the same objects
quite at the edge of the horizon, as here.


Mr. Glanville. What, was his house the center of the view?


George. Yes, papa.


Mr. Glanville. Then you were not in the center here. A circle has not two
centres.


George. But then we are not far from the clergyman's house.


Mr. Glanville. Full two hundred yards.


George. But that is nothing to the distance of the objects which we viewed.


Mr. Glanville. It follows then, that when, from two different points, we
imagine distant objects to retain still the same distance, these points cannot
be very far asunder. In short, it is as if they were only one point: Is not
that the case, George?


George. Exactly, papa; you have just hit my meaning; I like your way of
explaining it.


Mr. Glanville. So, there is something to encourage me; well then, let us go a
little further. You know, I suppose, as well as Emily, that the earth moves in
an orbit round the sun. I will draw it here upon the ground. Do you see? it is
a sort of oval, called an ellipse, as you have been told. There, it is
finished. You can see it pretty well by the light of the moon, which is just
rising. I will put down my hat within the orbit for the sun.


George. A fine sun, truly! all black! stop, stop, (runs hastily toward the
house.)


Mr. Glanville. Where are you going, George?


George (without stopping.) I shall be back in an instant.


Emily. What does the mad creature mean?


Mr. Glanville. Let us wait till he returns, before we past judgment on him.


George. (returning in few minutes, with a servant carrying a torch.) Have I
made you wait? There, John, put the torch in the place of this hat. I think,
papa, that makes a better sun than yours; you would have caught cold in looking
at the other. Pray put on your hat, papa, for fear of the dew.


Mr. Glanville. I thank you, my dear, for your amiable attention. This torch
will serve us too, for another purpose. Stay here, John. Come, children, will
you march round the sun, that you may know your orbit? (Emily and George walk
round.) Mighty well. Now, John, take the torch again, and run to the further
end of the walk; there hold it, that we may see it.


John. (going.) Yes, Sir.


Emily. What are you going to do, uncle?


Mr. Glanville. You shall see. Is John at his post?


George. There; he holds us the torch now. Oh! how little he is grown.


Mr. Glanville. I am glad that you have remarked that. Come hither, to this end
of the orbit.


George. Yes, but they have taken away our sun.


Mr. Glanville. He is of no use to us at present, we will suppose him to be
set. It must be night, before we can see the stars; the torch shall be one.
Look well at it first, to be sure of its size and distance.


George. Well, I have remarked it.


Mr. Glanville. Come, now begin to march slowly along the circular line of the
orbit, with your eye still on the torch, that stands for a star. Move forward,
do you see the star become larger or nearer?


George. No, papa, it seems to be still the same, and in the same spot.


Mr. Glanville. Then go farther still, as far as the opposite part of the orbit
to that from which you sat out. There, stop; well, how is the star?


George. It has not changed.


Mr. Glanville. How! does not it appear larger or nearer? and yet you have
moved toward it!


George. Yes, a good deal. But it is perhaps sixty yards off, and I am only
come nearer to it, by the length of the diameter of this orbit, which is about
six feet.


Mr. Glanville. These six feet are nothing, then, compared to the distance of
the torch; and you may think, it would be still less, if the torch were to be
removed farther off; for instance, three miles, till it appeared no bigger than
a spark.


George. Nay, then the whole orbit would be no more than a point, quite
imperceptible. Let us try a larger scale, papa.


Mr. Glanville. Come, then, to satisfy you; take a diameter of two hundred
millions of miles, which is that of the real orbit of the earth, and instead of
the torch, your imaginary star, take a real one.


Emily. Aye, that will be something.


George. Yes, it is talking to the purpose. Come, then, begin.


Mr. Glanville. Softly, let us recollect ourselves a little. I remember, I told
you, when I just hit your meaning so well, that whenever from two different
points, one imagines distant objects to preserve still the same distance, those
two points must be supposed not very far asunder; and in short, it is just as
if they both made but one.


George. Yes, that was it, word for word.


Mr. Glanville. Now do not forget what you said just now, that our little orbit
here, on the ground, would be no more than an imperceptible point, compared to
the distance of the torch, if it were so far removed as not to appear bigger
than a spark.


George. I remember it, papa; I said so.


Mr. Glanville. It is acknowledged, that the diameter of the earth's orbit, is
200,000,000 miles. The earth, therefore, at one extremity of this diameter,
sees the opposite star 200,000,000 miles nearer than at the other.


George. That is plain.


Mr. Glanville. Well, if the earth, from two points so different, and
notwithstanding the enormous distance by which she is nearer in one of them,
sees this star preserve still the same distance; if, notwithstanding the
immense bulk of this star, which I shall make appear to you by and by, she
never perceives it to be larger than a sparkling point, the two extremities of
the diameter of her orbit, for all the vast interval between them, may then be
imagined to coalesce in one point, and this immense orbit itself will appear as
no more than such a point, become imperceptible with respect to the infinite
distance which the star will preserve from her.


Emily. Well, my poor George, what have you to say, in reply?


Mr. Glanville. But if this immense orbit be no more than an imperceptible
point, compared to the distance of the star, what will the globe of the earth
be then, compared to this same distance, the earth being no more than a point,
as it were, in the immense space of her own orbit? Will this proud planet then
imagine, that the arch of the Heavens is built only to form a pavilion over
her, in which the stars are set at equal distances for ornament, and that she
is of consequence enough to occupy the middle place of the universe, in which
she is hardly so much as perceived?


George. We must be content; but I feel this littleness of ours very mortifying.


Mrs. Crosby. Well now, what mortifies me much more, is, that all the famous
philosophers of antiquity, would place our inconsiderable planet in the center
of the universe, and no where else. I see, that in the first age of wisdom, men
were still but a composition of pride and folly.


Mr. Glanville. Pythagoras had brought from Egypt and India, the foundest
notions of astronomy, which he extended no farther during his lifetime, than
the compass of the school that he had founded in Italy; his disciples, however,
carried them into Greece, after his death. By this great man, the sun was
placed in the center of our system, the planets moving round him in this order,
Mercury, Venus, the earth, with her moon, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. He did
mistake, it is true, as to their distances and magnitudes; but the geometry of
his age, was not sufficiently advanced, nor instruments brought to their
present perfection.


Mrs. Crosby. That accounts for his deficiency: however, he was still the
philosopher: and was his system followed?


Mr. Glanville. How could he succeed among people who were taught, by their men
of genius, that the earth was flat, like a table, and the heavens an arched
vault of hard solid matter, like the earth; or that the sun was a mass of fire,
somewhat larger than Peloponnesus; that comets were formed by the accidental
concourse of several wandering stars; that stars were only rocks or mountains
carried up by the revolution of the either, which had set them on fire; or, in
short, that the stars were lighted up at night to be put out in the morning,
while the sun, which they made a fiery cloud, was kindled in the morning, to go
out at night; and that there were several suns and moons to enlighten our
different climates? Now, if the star of day was, according to all these
notions, less than the earth, could it be expected that she would resign the
center of the universe to him?


Mrs. Crosby. This was reasoning indeed, worthy of the people, but hardly
deserved the name of philosophy.


Mr. Glanville. Ptolemy finding these opinions received in his time, and
building on the fallacious evidence of the senses, easily persuaded himself and
others, that the opinions of Pythagoras were only visionary, that the earth was
the center of all motion, both of the planets (the sun being reckoned among
them) and of the fixed stars, with his glass heavens, which he blew out at one
whiff. This system held its ground for more than fourteen centuries, patched up
every day with some additional absurdity, which its favorers adopted, in order
to defend themselves against the objections that pressed hardest upon them.


Mrs. Crosby. I think the centuries that you mentioned, come down pretty near
to our times.


Mr. Glanville. Well, it is but two hundred and forty years ago, that
Copernicus undeceived us: And even since that period, error has predominated in
the science, though under another form.


Mrs. Crosby. How was that, brother? for I would wish to know all the
absurdities that we have broached on this subject.


Mr. Glanville. Although Copernicus, while he restored the system of
Pythagoras, which I have just now explained to you, at the same time made use
of it to lay open the insurmountable difficulties of that which he overturned,
yet Tycho Brahe, the greatest astronomical observer, of his age, persisted to
support the earth in her claim to the post of honor.


Mrs. Crosby. This was then no more than Ptolemy's principles, revived.


Mr. Glanville. There was a difference. He did make all the planets now turn
about the earth, she had only the moon left her. The sun, taking the rest in
his train, moved round her in the course of a year; which, however, did not
hinder him, together with the whole assemblage of the stars, from repeating the
same mark of respect to her once in every twenty-four hours.


Mrs. Crosby. I do not see what is gained by this change. I think it still
ridiculous, that so many immense bodies should be obliged to run so fast round
us, who are so small.


Mr. Glanville. You have just hit upon the absurdity of the system. However, as
it is very ingenious in every other particular, and was fortified by the great
name of its founder, perhaps it would have still prevailed, unless Galileo,
with the assistance of the telescope, had confirmed the real order of the
universe, as discovered by Pythagoras and Copernicus; unless Kepler, by a
stroke of fortunate sagacity, had hit upon the laws which govern it; and unless
Newton, our countryman, had demonstrated them with all the force of genius and
truth.


Mrs. Crosby. Thank Heaven, the sun is fixed at last in his resting place, in
the center of our world! I can now, with safety of conscience, begin my reform.


Mr. Glanville. What, sister, have you some new plan to propose?


Mrs. Crosby. No, brother, I am very well satisfied with your arrangement; it
seems agreeable to the wisdom of nature. I am only out of humor with that
yellow-haired gentleman, Phoebus, who has deceived poor mortals so scurvily.


Mr. Glanville. And what moves your pretty rage against him?


Mrs. Crosby. How! for three thousand years here have we fed his coursers with
ambrosia, for which they have done nothing but puff over it, and grow fat in
his stables.


George. Yes, aunt, since he no longer drives the chariot of light, let us
discharge this lazy coachman, and sell off his stud.


Emily. I would not allow him so much as one horse chaise.


Mrs. Crosby. Nay, but if we deprive him of his name, what other shall we give
him?


Mr. Glanville. There is one more worthy of him; the greatest that is borne by
any of the worlds. Conquerors have given their names to the empires of the
earth; astronomers have divided our satellite Ricci^li, an Italian astronomer
has given to the principal sp^ts of the moon, the names of astronomers and
learned men, as Plato Aristotle, Archimedes, Pli^^, (...) Kepler, Galileo, etc.
among themselves; our countryman deserves a luminary to himself alone; the
whole sun, therefore, I would call NEWTON.


George. Oh! papa, when shall I be acquainted with the works of that great man?


Mrs. Crosby. If your admiration of him grows up with you, it will rise to
enthusiasm.


Mr. Glanville. I must confess, I felt that passion, in some degree, last year,
when I went to see his statue at Cambridge. Roubilliac, a French sculptor, has
represented him in an erect attitude, looking at the sun, and showing him, with
one hand, a prism, which he holds in the other to decompose his rays. While I
was lifted up in thought, to the vast height to which he has raised human
knowledge, I imagined Nature as she formed him, to address him thus. "Though
man has studied my laws for so many ages, he has still misconceived them; it is
time now to reveal them to him. Thou art born to publish them upon earth; go
then, renew astronomy, enlarge geometry, and lay the basis of natural
philosophy. I assign thee these sciences, at the same time, with the genius
that attends thy birth. Thou shall tell the extent of the universe, and the
simplicity of the order that governs it. Thou shall weigh the mass of those
immense bodies which I have scattered through it; thou shall point out their
form, determine their revolutions, and measure their distances; thou shall
reduce to precise calculation, even the inequalities of their movements. In the
midst of them, thou shall fix the sun, and shall say by what power he rules
them, and how he distributes to them light and activity. For thy reward, I will
place thee thyself, as a new luminary, in the midst of all the great men who
are to follow thee. Whilst thou give a rapid impulse to their genius, thou
shall make it incessantly tend toward thine own; and they shall move round
thee with respect, in order to receive light from thee. As for those who would
depart from it, like rebellious comets, that to shrink from the empire of the
sun, lose themselves for ages in the viewless depth of space, but which he
constantly brings back to the foot of his throne, so they, from the darkness of
their errors, shall be forced to return to thee, nor shall they shine in any
part of their course, even with transient light, save when at your approach,
they are enveloped in the splendour of your rays."

Here the servant came to inform Mrs. Crosby, that supper was served up. Emily
and George would have been glad it were kept back, that they might still listen
to Mr. Glanville. For their satisfaction, he was obliged to promise, that after
supper, he would take another turn in the garden, and that they should be of
the party.


SECOND CONVERSATION.
An agreeable cheerfulness reigned during the time of supper. Mr. Glanville and
his sister were delighted with the readiness of apprehension, and fondness for
instruction, which their children had discovered. They smiled, to observe the
dispatch that Emily and George made of their supper, who spoke not a word the
whole time, so eager were they to return to the terrace, and resume the subject
of their conversation. Our little philosophers had already finished their
repast, and began to fret upon their seats with impatience, which Mrs. Crosby,
who observed it, probably took a pleasure to prolong. Be that as it may, Emily,
in order to lose no time, began to joke upon George's romantic pride, in
wishing to be visible to the stars. George bore this pleasantry with a good
grace, until he saw his father and aunt (whom he had been watching for some
time) finish their supper; then turning short to Emily, "cousin," said he, loud
enough to draw the general attention, "I was reading the other day a story
which, I dare say, my papa knows, and your mamma too, but which, I dare say,
you do not. I will tell it to you. Mahomet had once a mind to give his army a
proof of the power which he exercised over nature, and promised to perform a
very great miracle in their presence. This was no less than to make a pretty
high mountain move and come to him, from a considerable distance. One fine
morning, therefore, he assembles all his soldiers, who already gave their great
prophet credit for the performance of something prodigious, and placing himself
at their head, he orders the mountain to approach. The mountain turns a deaf
ear to his word of command. Mahomet is surprised. He calls it a second time,
with a voice more terrible than at first. The mountain, as you may imagine, did
not stir the more for this summons. How is this! cried the impostor, with an
air of inspiration, the mountain will not walk to us) Well then, my friends,
let us walk to the mountain. -- I have no more ill nature in me, than Mahomet;
if the stars do not see us, why then, cousin, let us go see the stars.

At these words he rose briskly from table, and bounced toward the door,
leaving Emily a good deal surprised at this conclusion. Mr. Glanville and Mrs.
Crosby smiled at his ready turn, and followed him into the garden.

It was a most beautiful clear night; not a cloud intercepted the sight of the
sky. The moon which had now begun to appear above the horizon, suffered those
stars which she had just before obscured, to resume their luster, as she
gradually withdrew from them. The children had often admired the grandeur of
this sight, but now, when their curiosity upon the subject was going to be
satisfied, they beheld it with additional rapture. The bright star of Sirius
was the first that attracted George's notice. He wished to know its name; and
when he had heard it, I like Sirius, papa, cried he, for it is the largest of
any of the stars.

Emily. I like it too, for being the brightest.


Mr. Glanville. Perhaps, my dear children, it is in fact, no larger nor
brighter than the rest, but then it is nearer the earth. If it were brought to
the distance of the sun, it would undoubtedly appear at large as he does.
Indeed, if we consider that it is 200,000 times farther off, we must be
astonished that it is so visible.


George. You talk very easy about it, papa; 200,000 times farther off than the
sun! How can any body tell that?


Mr. Glanville. I will not deny that all the attempts of astronomers to measure
the magnitudes of stars, and by means of them their distances, have been
ineffectual. But this very impossibility is sufficient to prove, at least, that
the distance is prodigious; for the magnitudes of the planets have been
determined with sufficient accuracy, even the most distant ones, and among the
rest, this handsome planet, Jupiter.


George. Hah! is that Jupiter? and yet, papa, Sirius appears larger to the
naked eye. If they have been able to measure the size of Jupiter, why can they
not that of Sirius?


Mr. Glanville. Before I answer you, pray look from this spot at the taper that
you see burning in the back parlor, as the window stands open; do not you
observe a circle of light round it, that makes it appear larger?


George. Yes, papa, it is very true.


Emily. Just like the sun, which appears larger by the whole crown of rays that
encircles it.


Mr. Glanville. Well, then, the stars being luminous of themselves, like the
sun and the taper, have also that same irradiation, which makes them appear
much larger than they otherwise would; insomuch, that their apparent bulk is
supposed to be magnified nine hundred times, by this cause.


George. Oho!


Mr. Glanville. Now tell me: When the moon is in the full, and, consequently,
shines brightest, have you ever remarked the same radiance round her?


Emily. No, never; her light is bounded by the circle that forms her face.


George. One may remark the same in Jupiter.


Mr. Glanville. Whence should this difference arise?


George. I suppose, as Jupiter and the moon only reflect a borrowed light, this
light cannot have the same force of motion as when it comes from bodies that
shine of themselves.


Mr. Glanville. Surprizingly well explained: and thus it is, that Jupiter's
disk does not appear magnified; and small as his distance shows him,
astronomers have instruments of sufficient precision to measure him. But the
stars, with that dazzling radiance that surrounds them. --


George. Could not means be found to strip them of it, so as to see them in
their real bulk?


Mr. Glanville. It is exactly the effect which a telescope produces, by uniting
and concentrating all their rays into a point. But then that point is so small;
and the more perfect the telescope is, the more this point, while it grows
brighter, becomes also smaller, until, at last, it eludes all measure.


Mrs. Crosby. Well, but how have they been able to compare the sun's distance
with those of the stars?


Mr. Glanville. By a very ingenious method. The magnitude and distance of the
sun is known from the surest reasoning. They have also calculated, both how
much he should be diminished, or how far removed, to bring him down to the size
of Sirius. From these calculations, we necessarily infer the prodigious
distance of this star, which is, nevertheless, the nearest to us of any. Most
astronomers even judge this distance to be more considerable, because it is to
be doubted, whether the best telescope can totally divest a star of its
superfluous light, and make it preserve, to our view, the size which it should,
at that distance.


George. Oh! since the stars are so far off, I can easily believe, as we have
been told, that they are real suns. If they possessed only a borrowed light,
how could their rays reach, even to us, with such a lively brightness, after
having passed through immense space?


Mr. Glanville. Very well, my boy, your observation is quite just. It has been
demonstrated, that the light of a star might be diminished many millions of
times, by removing it farther from our sight, and yet it should still appear no
fainter than a piece of white paper by moonlight.


George. If some of the stars, then, appear so small, it is because they are
still farther from us than Sirius.


Mr. Glanville. Perhaps there is as great an interval of space between them, as
even between Sirius and the sun.


George. (surprised.) Oh, Papa!


Emily. And yet they seem placed one beside the other. Nay, there are some that
one would take to be double.


Mr. Glanville. I can answer you both at once by a single example, that is
familiar to you. No doubt you have sometimes remarked, from
Blackfriar's-bridge, of an evening, the lamps on London Bridge, and those of
Fleet-market. You know the lamps are of the same size in general?


George. I suppose so.


Mr. Glanville. Well, have not you observed that those of Fleet-market, which
were the nearest, appeared with a livelier and stronger light than those of
London Bridge?


George. Yes, I think I have.


Mr. Glanville. Now, suppose that between any two of the latter, you saw one of
the same size at Tower-stairs, which, consequently, would be about twice as far
off. You remember what we said before supper, that objects, at a certain degree
of remoteness, appear equally distant from the eye, though they may be much
farther off some than others.


George. Yes, we have not forgot it.


Mr. Glanville. You understand then, my dear, that the lamp at the
Tower-stairs, would appear ranged in the same circular line with those of
London Bridge, and that you can judge it to be farther off no otherwise than by
the smallness of its flame, and the weakness of its rays.


Emily. You are right, uncle; this agrees exactly with the large and small
stars. I understand how, very well, that one may be at a great distance behind
the other, and, for all that, appear to us in the same line, but some larger
and brighter, others smaller, and of dimmer light. Do you comprehend that,
George?


George. (with an air of importance.) Yes, I think I do, and I have a
comparison too, which, though I say it, is ten million times better than my
papa's


Emily. That is modest enough.


George. And so it is; for it will serve for our whole globe, while his stands
good only for a little way down the river. But there is a reason why mine is
best: I do not take it from the earth.


Emily. Nay, that would be too low for so lofty a genius as yours. But is this
celestial comparison within our comprehension?


George. I will try and bring it down to your level. Those stars that are about
Jupiter, would not one suppose them as near to us as he is himself? If the moon
was now on the same side, would not one think Jupiter as near as the moon? And
if there was a cloud in the neighborhood of the moon, would not one think her
also as near to us as the cloud? The cloud, the moon, Jupiter, and the stars,
would then appear all in the same arch, as it were. Now, do you know, cousin,
that their distances are very different?


Emily. Yes; so well, that I can tell you too, that the very largest cloud
would not be visible at the distance of the moon, that the moon would not be
visible at the distance of Jupiter, and that Jupiter would be still less
visible at the distance of the stars.


Mr. Glanville. This is well, my little friends. I like this repartee. Luckily,
those last words of Emily, bring us back to what we were just now mentioning,
that the stars must needs shine with their own light, and that this light must
needs be very strong, to reach us from a distance at which Jupiter would have
ceased one thousand times to be visible.


George. Yes, I see; I have no doubt about it now; they are real suns.


Mr. Glanville. That is my opinion too; but do you suppose these suns to be
made for the earth?


Emily. Of what service could they be to her? If we depended upon them to ripen
the corn, it would be long before the country folks could sing harvest home.


George. They have nothing that can be of use to us, but their dim light. And
even the moon from behind a cloud, hardly gives a hundred times more.


Mr. Glanville. Besides, you know, there are some stars which cannot be
discerned, without a telescope; and those we may set down as useless, in every
respect. In the same manner, therefore, if these suns were made for us, they
would certainly have been placed as near to the earth as our own sun is.


George. Oh! thank ye, papa, we have enough already in one. Besides, then, my
little cousin's fine lily complexion would be so tanned. The brownest filber in
our nut-grove would then be fair to my poor Emily.


Emily. And those fine young gentlemen that I have somewhere seen with a
parasol, in bright weather, how many hands, and how many large round hats
should they have to shade themselves on every side.


Mr. Glanville. But if all these suns, at their present distance, can neither
give us heat nor light, if when placed nearer to us, they would only serve,
according to your silly notions, to tan the complexion of the ladies, or
incommode the pretty jassmines of the day; and, according to my more serious
fears, to scorch the earth up in a moment: if, with the good leave of some
philosophers, they are not made merely to amuse and gratify our sights, are we
to suppose them scattered with such magnificent profusion through the universe,
for no purpose whatsoever?


Emily. That is exactly what puzzles me.


George. Let us consider this a little; since the sun is intended to furnish
light and heat to the planets, why then, if the stars are suns, they must also
have planets which they warm and enlighten.


Mr. Glanville. This is something like philosophy.


George. (a^^^ly.) Do you see that, cousin? But, papa, must we allow planets to
all these suns?


Mr. Glanville. If such be the destination of each of them in particular, you
are sensible that it must be the business of them all in general.


George. Certainly. What should we do with them, if they were good for nothing?
It would be the same as if government should order fires to be made in a hard
winter, and forbid people to approach them.


Mr. Glanville. Or lamps to be placed in a street where nobody must pass, and
only to make a distant illumination for those in the neighborhood.


George. Come, papa, things must be done in order. No sun without planets, but
upon condition, however, that there be no planets without a sun.


Mr. Glanville. Do not be uneasy, my dear, if the wisdom of the Creator has not
made a single sun useless. --


Emily. Yes, I understand; his goodness will not leave a single planet unhappy.
Now I am easy.


George. So am I. I see that every thing is well disposed. Our sun has planets
which move round him, whilst, at the same time, they have their satellites
moving round them. Well, if my friend Sirius is a sun, he has planets,
accompanied by their satellites, moving round him, and every other sun will
have the same.


Emily. I shall not ask you why we see the suns, and not the planets. I
remember the house and the candle still.


George. Your memory is very convenient to me. Now I am revenged a little: if
we are invisible to them, we will not do them the honor to look at them. Very
well, Gentlemen, do not take off your hats, I have no bow to make you.


Mr. Glanville. I did not think that you stood so much upon ceremony.


Emily. (curtsying.) Oh, I shall not grudge a curtsy, or so.


George. What are you doing, cousin? they should make us the first, for having
settled them so well.


Mr. Glanville. Right. It required some imagination on our parts to conceive,
hat these suns, which seem to us to be so near each other, are, nevertheless,
prodigiously distant one from the other. Their worlds must not be crowded. You
can imagine what space is required for the extensive movements of a solar
system.


George. We can easily judge of (...) by our own.


Mr. Glanville. It is the best comparison possible. But can you conceive its
extent? Does not the idea terrify you?


George. Me, papa? Oh, no. Since you have told me of the infinite distance of
the stars, I am no more afraid to go to the farthe^ part of empire of the sun,
than Captain Cook, after his voyage round the world, would have been to go in a
sailing-boat up to Richmond.


Mr. Glanville. I fear Emily would not travel so boldly.


George. Oh, my cousin is too fond of the earth, to trust herself far off in
the skies.


Emily. Aye, cousin? Have not I read, as well as you, that the Georgium Sidus
is one thousand nine hundred and fifty millions of miles from the sun? It Is
true, indeed, it is the outermost.


George. Ah! you are but a poor traveller, cousin, if you halt there. I can
show you farther afield.


Emily. How so, pray, Sir?


George. Have not Jupiter and Saturn attendant planets or moons, which reflect
to them the borrowed light of the sun, and so assist his feeble rays to
illuminate them? The Georgium Sidus is a good deal farther off than any of
them; it is therefore likely, that he also has satellites, which we do not know
yet, and, perhaps, more of them: And when the outermost of these satellites is
beyond its planet, is it not much farther removed from us? I think, for once, I
am at the extremity of our system.


Mr. Glanville. Alas, my dear friend, I am sorry to cut short your triumph, but
you are very far from it, still.


George. What do you see then, beyond my present station?


Mr. Glanville. Other planets, perhaps, unknown to us. But we will speak only
of what has been discovered.


George. Come, then, pray let us see.


Mr. Glanville. Have you forgot the comets, which are several ages revolving
round the sun?


George. Indeed, I had quite forgot them.


Mr. Glanville. I will not mention that of 1769, the period of whose revolution
has been fixed at about five hundred years, nor yet that of 1680, which is
supposed to be five hundred and seventy-five years in performing its orbit. We
will only speak of the comet that was first observed in 1264, re-appeared in
1556, and is expected again in 1848, whose periodical time is, consequently,
two hundred and ninety-two years.


George. And enough too, in conscience.


Mr. Glanville. From the point where it is nearest to the sun in each of these
revolutions, let us suppose it to set off on its journey of near three
centuries, and let us divide its period equally, one half for its departure,
and the other for its return. Here, you see, is near a century and a half that
this comet takes up in moving away from the sun.


George. Oh, it is plain, since the Georgium Sidus is only eighty-two years in
performing its orbit, the difference must be great.


Mr. Glanville. More still than you think; for the comets do not move like the
planets in an ellipse that differs little from a perfect circle, by which means
they would be always nearly at an equal distance from the sun* They describe an
ellipse excessively oblong, and so increase their distance continually, until
they arrive at that point of their orbit from which the sun forces them to
return by the opposite side; but when arrived at this so distant point, where,
nevertheless, they yield to the force by which the sun continually attracts
them, they must be still a good deal farther from the suns of the neighboring
systems, otherwise the nearest one would force them to enter within its
dominions: at this distance, therefore, which our comet takes nearly a century
and a half to measure, it must still leave beyond it, an immense space
unoccupied, by way of frontier between its own and the nearest system to it on
that side. Apply this calculation to the other-worlds, and conceive, if you
can, how immense each of them must be!


Mrs. Crosby. But do you think them all, brother, as large as ours?


Mr. Glanville. Recollect your philosophy a little, sister. What pretensions
can man have to suppose the empire of his sun the most extensive, while he
inhabits himself but one of the smallest provinces of it? The reasoning of his
pride is particular enough: as long as he thought all the heavenly bodies
formed for him alone, he sought, from age to age, to enlarge them: now when
astronomy demonstrates that they have another use, he aims at contracting their
extent.


Mrs. Crosby. I can oppose nothing to your argument; but this immensity dazzles
me, and, perhaps, you are going to confound me still more. What do you suppose
to be the number of the stars?


Mr. Glanville. The most minute and accurate observations have enumerated
something more than three thousand in our hemisphere, and ten thousand in the
southern.


Mrs. Crosby. Heavens! Thirteen thousand suns! Thirteen thousand worlds in the
universe!


Mr. Glanville. And then the stars, which can scarcely be distinguished with a
telescope! Those which that instrument would enable us to discover, were it
still further improved! The thousands which form those little clouds that you
can see with the naked eye, and which are therefore called nebulous stars; and
those others, forming clouds, which cannot be seen, without an instrument! The
millions that are contained in the milky way! the very idea of their number is
sufficient to terrify the imagination. At the sight of a high mountain, a man
feels himself particularly affected: he shudders, when he reflects on the vast
extent of the earth: the ocean and its unfathomable depths, make his blood run
cold; and yet what is this whole globe, compared to the burning mass of the
sun, which is one million four hundred thousand times larger? and the space
occupied by this luminary, immense as it is, what will it be found, on
comparison with that space in which the bodies move, that are subject to its
action? But while he makes the planets, surrounded by their satellites, move
round him, what would you say, if he, as well as other suns, followed like him,
by their retinue, moved round some other body still more powerful than all of
them at once.


Mrs. Crosby. What, brother, our sun and those of all the other worlds, to be
no more than planets wandering through the skies! I fear your imagination is
the only thing that moves, of all this system?


Mr. Glanville. And what would you say if this conjecture, advanced by Halley,
and supported by Mr. Lambert, one of the greatest geometricians of this age,
was become the opinion of the most distinguished astronomers at present, such
as Mess. Bailly and Delalande, and that wise, profound, and religious observer
of nature, Mr. Bonnet of Geneva?


Mrs. Crosby. Such great names are certainly enough to dazzle me: but on what
foundation is this opinion built?


Mr. Glanville. The motion of the sun round its axis would alone be sufficient
to render i^ probable. Nature has impressed this motion on all bodies which
move in an orbit round another more powerful, that governs them; thus the
satellites turn on their axes, while they encircle their proper planets, and
the planets, while they encircle the sun. Would Nature, ever uniform and
consistent in its law, have given the sun this vertiginous motion, if he had no
other? All the planets, at the same time that they go round him, move thus, in
order to receive his warmth successively in all their parts. Now, since he is
endowed with this same movement, may we not suppose him to have the other also,
and to be carried round a central power, still superior to himself?


Mrs. Crosby. These conjectures appear natural enough, and, at the same time,
important enough to make me wish them supported by some observation.


Mr. Glanville. Well then, to satisfy you: the motion of three of the largest
stars, Sirius, Arcturus and Aldebaran, is acknowledged; it is well known that
Arcturus moves, every year, two hundred and seventy millions of miles toward
the south: so prodigious is the distance even of those stars which are nearest
to the earth, that their change of place is scarcely perceptible after several
years: judge if other stars, infinitely farther distant, may not have a
movement full as considerable, though not perceptible to us, until after whole
centuries of observation.


Mrs. Crosby. Since the moving of those great stars is so certain, I have
nothing to offer against your conjecture: nay, I can very well imagine,
according to your idea, that the smallest may move, without visibly changing
place, till after a long period of time, an account of their inconceivable
distance: but is it not sufficient, in order to satisfy you of the immensity of
the universe, that certain stars move in an orbit, of whose extent, even the
imagination cannot form to itself an idea? Why will you still disturb the
repose of others?


Mr. Glanville. I should otherwise impeach Nature. You have been obliged to
acknowledge, that if the stars are all suns, and if one of these suns has a
planetary system, which he governs, it is agreeable to the wisdom of Nature
that all the rest should perform the same functions. Now would it not be a
strange inconsistence to give motion to some stars, whilst others, destined to
the same purposes, remain immovable? But take care, sister; that repose, which
you would be weak enough to allow these latter, must be their inevitable
destruction.


Mrs. Crosby. You terrify me. brother.


Mr. Glanville. In the midst of all these suns, absolutely immovable, let us
suppose but one in motion; like a conqueror that marches through his own
dominions in good order, while he advances to foreign devastation, so he moves
peaceably within the bounds of his own empire; but when once he reaches the
frontiers of the neighboring system, behold him, as he proceeds through it,
swallow up all the planets belonging to it in his mass of fire; and, perhaps,
attack, on his immovable throne, this very fun whom he has just despoiled:
from that moment the balance of the universal machine is overturned. How shall
those systems, which were poised by the equality of their forces, resist the
usurper, strengthened with the addition of an invaded world, and pushed forward
in his course with a new impetuosity? As a fire attracts the light straw, he
sees those worlds, which border on his passage, rush in crowds into the vortex
of his flames: thus he moves on, consuming as he goes, and becomes the
wandering firebrand of general conflagration to the universe.


Mrs. Crosby. Oh! I beseech you, set those suns in motion again, which my folly
would have made to stand still, our own especially; let us not spare his going;
let him flee from the terrible disaster to which I exposed him. I am afraid,
his activity will be retarded by the weight of his vast retinue.


Mr. Glanville. Make yourself easy, sister; his strength is proportioned to the
mass of bodies that he draws after him. The earth, only sixty times larger than
the moon, can yet sway her course; Saturn carries his ring and his Satellites
along with him; nor is Jupiter ever forsaken by his. If these planets, by their
governing mass, compel the bodies in their train to accompany them as they
revolve round the sun, certainly the sun, with a mass of matter vastly more
considerable than all the comets, planets and their Satellites together, will
be able to take them all with him at once, round whatever luminary it is that
governs him.


Mrs. Crosby. So then the master of so many slaves is himself only a slave in
his turn.


Mr. Glanville. Whatever motion you allow him, it must necessarily be round a
superior body, the center of his orbit, as he is the center of the orbits of
all the bodies that are subject to his sway. This is a law which Nature
invariably follows in the system of the universe. Comets, whose motions,
according to our ideas, are the most irregular, are subject to it in their
greatest excentricities; while they run almost in a straight line to the
extremity of their ellipse, they are continually describing their appointed
orbit round the sun.


Mrs. Crosby. What then! for every sun, should a superior body be created round
which he must move?


Mr. Glanville. Nature has more resources. Several planets, with their
satellites, move round the same sun; several suns, with their planets, may move
round a superior body; several superior bodies, with their suns, may move round
other bodies still superior to them. This gradation of systems of superior
bodies continually increasing in bulk, and decreasing in number, may terminate
in the central body of the whole universe, on which, no doubt, reposes the
throne of the Supreme Being, who, with one look, beholds the whole of his
admirable work.


Mrs. Crosby. But with this inconceivable multiplicity of movements and orbits,
how will you prevent disorder?


Mr. Glanville. As an admiral who commands a large fleet, formed for instance
into three squadrons, each squadron consisting of several men of war, a
prodigious number of frigates, and an infinity of merchantmen; suppose him to
command a general naval review; to order the three next in command to sail
round him in a large circle, with their flags flying; each of these to give the
same order to the men of war in his squadron; each man of war to a number of
frigates, each frigate to several merchantmen, and each merchantman to its
boat. They would take up, indeed, a vast space to perform these evolutions with
freedom, and to execute them with rigorous precision. It would, no doubt,
appear complicated enough to the outermost vessels: they would see nothing but
a number of confused and irregular motions among all these floating bodies. Yet
you see that it is extremely simple; the admiral would have occasion for only
one order, one signal; the boats would only have to sail at different distances
round each of the merchantmen to which they belonged, while several merchantmen
would move round each frigate, several frigates round each man of war, the men
of war round the commanders of squadrons; and lastly, these round these admiral.


Mrs. Crosby. This comparison sets before my eyes the whole system of the
universe. But how is it possible to conceive this gradation of bodies, one more
powerful than another, of which the enormous bulk of the sun would make but the
extreme term?


Mr. Glanville. Has not your imagination already made a bolder effort, in
rising even to the immensity of the sun himself, which is now established
beyond dispute? This luminary, which the ancients thought to be less than the
moon, and infinitely smaller than the earth, could make more than fourteen
hundred thousand globes like the earth, and more than eighty millions of moons.
What progression of magnitude can now stop your imagination? If each new
discovery of error enlightens the understanding of man; if each new instance of
weakness and imperfection that he discover^ in his organs, enlarges his genius,
why should he fear to give a nobler scope to his genius and understanding?
Before the use of the microscope, did not he suppose animated nature to
terminate at the smallest insect that his eyes allowed him to discern? Now how
many millions of creatures does he discover still more minute? A drop of
prepared water, the transparence of which seems not the least altered, exhibits
to him a sea swarming with whales: a piece of moldy fruit presents to his view
a mountain covered with forests, (like the Apennine to us) and towering to the
clouds. He sees those small animals, of which he was far from suspecting even
the existence, devour others still smaller; he sees them provided with organs
suitable to all their wants, loaded with thousands of eggs ready to burst into
life, which are to keep up the prodigious population of the species. If at this
fight, he lets drop the microscope with surprise, let him take up the
telescope, and discover for the first time in the skies, an innumerable crowd
of unknown stars, beyond which lie an infinitely greater number, that he never
will discover. On what side will he now be hardy enough to limit the creation?
If to the Eternal Being time is without end, why should space and matter have
bounds for the Almighty? Is the one less worthy of his glory than the other?
The ages which our calculation can comprize, are, perhaps, to the duration of
eternity, no more than the space occupied by the millions of worlds, that we
can distinguish, are to the extent of infinity.


Mrs. Crosby. Oh, brother, what a sublime idea you give me of the Supreme Being!


Mr. Glanville. You have hitherto only admired his power in the number and
greatness of those prodigious bodies that fill the universe. But what wisdom,
much more worthy of admiration, has he shown in the equipoise in which they
are kept up by the eternal concord of their movements! Cast your eyes first
upon our solar system; beside the seven planets, and their satellites, which
move through it in unchangeable order; behold upwards of sixty comets in the
whole, revolve in it, whose dark excursions are traced: what an infinitely
greater number still that we have never discovered. Geometry demonstrates, that
from the form of their orbits, a million of these bodies could move round the
sun, without incommoding each other's course. Rise now upon the wings of
thought, traverse all those worlds in which the same harmony reigns throughout;
go prostrate yourself at the foot of the Creator's throne, and behold from
thence the march of universal nature. What a spectacle opens to your eyes!
Those stars, which to us here below, appear but immovable lights, you behold
in all their splendour, like suns moving in silence, with all their planetary
train, round more powerful suns, who carry them also round suns still more
glorious. What just proportions between these heavenly provinces, empires and
worlds! what majesty of domination, and even of dependence! how all these
intermingle without confusion! What then shall be the invisible chain
sufficiently strong to connect all the parts of an infinite whole? The great
Newton has discovered it to us. It is one single principle of mutual attraction
which the Supreme Being has implanted in all bodies. This, combined with the
impulse which they received on coming from his creative hand, and regulated by
the proportion of magnitudes and distances, is the universal agent of nature.
This tends to reunite what the projectile motion would separate. These two
forces perpetually acting, balance each other and preserve among the worlds,
that order which was established since the creation. Each body, nay, each
system, attracts all the rest, as it is attracted by them. A general
reciprocity of attraction unites them, while it keeps them separate, and acts
as a prop to their orbits, without breaking in upon them. The suns which
enlighten them, receive their reflected rays, that not an atom of light be
dissipated in vain through the immensity of space. It seems as if the Almighty
would have traced, in this same law, the greatest principle of human morality;
"Mortals, assist each other with your lights, and with your powers tend one
toward the other, without departing from the sphere in which my providence has
placed you. This order is established as much for your happiness, as for the
support of the universe."

The two children had not suffered a single word to escape them during the
latter part of this conversation: but they were not silent from absence, it was
from the impression of surprise with which they had been struck, and the
attention that they had paid to the magnificent picture which was presented to
them. Mr. Glanville, nevertheless, feared, left part of his discourse might
have been lost to their apprehension, as he had not given them time to reflect
on it: and therefore, as soon as he rose the next morning, he wrote down from
memory, the two conversations of the preceding evening. Emily and George read
them over several times in the course of the day. Mr. Glanville promised to
give them, in an evening walk, every explanation that they could desire on the
subject of attraction, while he explained, at the same time, the motion of the
earth round the sun, and that of the moon round the earth.


DAMON AND PYTHIAS. A DRAMA IN ONE ACT.
CHARACTERS.
DIONYSIUS, Tyrant of Syracuse. GELON, his Favorite. ARGUS, Captain of his
Guards. PALINURUS, a Pilot. DAMON, a Citizen of Syracuse. PYTHIAS, a Citizen of
Corinth. GUARDS.
SCENE, An inner Apartment in the Palace.

SCENE I.
Dionysius, Gelon, Argus. Dionysius. WHOM have I ordered for execution today?
Let me see; (opens his t^^lets.) Oh, it is today that Pythias promised to
return from Corinth to undergo his sentence.


Gelon. And does your majesty think that he will return?


Dionysius. His return would surprise me, I must confess. And yet that friend
of his, Damon, who offered to die in his stead, if he should not return --


Argus. I have just been down in his dungeon. He entreats your majesty to grant
him a moment's audience this morning.


Dionysius. I suppose to sue far pardon; but my justice will not be tamely
trifled with. If Pythias does not return this very day --


Gelon. The traitor! He would only, said he, take a farewell view of his
country, and a last embrace of his wife and children; but, in the space of time
that you vouchsafed to grant him, he might have made a voyage ^^ice as far as
to Corinth, and back again. I did suspect some treachery. Perhaps he is gone to
hire assassins against your royal person! O best of kings, must I ever tremble
for your safety! An unaccountable terror hangs over me. Damon has certainly
conspired with him to attack you by surprise, and it is upon some dangerous
design that he solicits to speak with your majesty.


Dionysius. You make me shudder. I will not see him. Attend my return here,
Gelon; I am going to visit my women; and Argus, do you take care that my guards
be vigilant. (He goes out by a private door. Argus going out at the other side,
is stopped by Gelon.)


SCENE II.
Gelon, Argus. Gelon. Hark ye, Argus.


Argus. What are your lordship's commands?


Gelon. Let the palace-door be shut today, to all but Palinurus. Beware of
suffering any person to enter, that may endanger the king's life, under
pretense of imploring his mercy in favor of Damon.


Argus. Alas! who would be so hardy as to intercede for the wretch!


Gelon. He is unworthy of pity.


Argus. Ah! my Lord, let me at least be permitted to lament his destiny.


Gelon. Beware of expressing such sentiments. I see, you partake in the
infatuation of the credulous populace. Damon is no more than an impostor, who
hoped to deceive the king by an affected heroism, and to save the life of his
friend.


Argus. You will admit, at least, that he exposed his own, very generously, at
the same time.


Gelon. Do not you see that he could take no other course, fearing, as he did,
that Pythias, overcome by the torture, should discover him to be an accomplice
in his treason.


Argus. But Pythias himself has not been convicted.


Gelon. His crime is a secret, lodged in my breast. The interest of the State
forbids it to be divulged to the people* Go, and let my orders be performed^. I
repeat them to you in the name of the king himself. Remember that your life
shall answer for your obedience.


SCENE III.
Gelon. Fortune, I thank thee; this day will thou deliver me from the last
Syracusan, whose virtues could eclipse my greatness. He has of himself brought
about his destruction. My design was but to get rid of the rich Corinthian
Pythias, in order to enrich myself with the spoils of his fortune, and now have
I a lucky opportunity of being revenged of Damon's pride. He shall find the
consequence of despising the favorite of a tyrant. And for thee, Dionysius, I
know to what sentiments I owe thy generosity. In vain thou talkest to me of
friendship; thou loadest me with kindnesses, only to encourage me in being the
instrument of thy barbarity, to which thou would also sacrifice me in my
turn. But no, I shall find means to prevent thee. Exalt my fortune but a little
higher, I will cast thee into that pit which thou art already meditating to
prepare for me. (Perceiving a man, who advances with signs of fear.) What do I
see?

SCENE IV.
Gelon, Palinurus. Gelon. Is it you, Palinurus?


Palinurus. Yes, my Lord.


Gelon. (eagerly.) Well.


Palinurus. Are we alone?


Gelon. You may speak, without fear. Dionysius has just now retired.


Palinurus. I am but this moment landed, and have with all secrecy hastened
hither to give you myself an account of the success of your orders.


Gelon. Satisfy my impatience: have you performed them?


Palinurus. You have nothing to fear from Pythias: he is no more.


Gelon. I am alive again. You could never bring me these happy tidings more
seasonably. But haste; acquaint me with all the circumstances.


Palinurus. I had set sail, having in charge from Dionysius, to convey Pythias
to Corinth, and from you, to prevent his ever arriving there. The third night
after our departure from Syracuse, there arose a violent tempest, which enabled
me to put my design in execution.


Gelon. How? Proceed.


Palinurus. By the flashes of the lightning, I perceived Pythias on his knees,
at the ship's side, with his hands lifted up toward heaven. "Immortal Gods,
cried he, it is not for my own life that I supplicate you, but for that of my
friend. Let me live to return, and break those chains with which his friendship
for me has loaded him. I resign you then my life, when I have saved his. Would
you, by my destruction, cause the generous Damon to fall a victim to his
virtue? Ye know, who read the hearts of men, that ye have not a more noble
image of yourselves upon earth." "Thy lips, answered I, insult the gods, in
daring to compare a mortal to them -- thus they punish thy impiety;" and I
struck him with a dreadful blow that plunged him to the bottom of the devouring
deep.


Gelon. O dear Palinurus! none could have been a more happy instrument of my
vengeance. Damon's possessions shall, after his death, be the reward of your
fidelity. I hear a door open. The king comes. Remember to tell him that Pythias
refused to come with you.


SCENE V.
Dionysius, Gelon, Palinurus, Guards. Dionysius. What means this audacious
stranger? Seize him.


Gelon. Let my sovereign vouchsafe to suspend his orders. It is the pilot
Palinurus, to whom your majesty's wisdom confided the charge of conducting
Pythias to Corinth.


Dionysius. How! has he brought him back too?


Palinurus. No, Sire. As soon as he found himself landed in his native country,
he told me that it was unnecessary to wait for him, and that I might return to
Syracuse alone. This is all the message that he has given me for Damon.


Dionysius. You may deliver it to him yourself. Let him come before me, as I
have now no favor to grant him. Go; (to one of the guards) tell Argus to bring
him hither.


Gelon. Your majesty sees how just my suspicions of Pythias were.


Dionysius. There needed no more to prove him worthy of death.


Gelon. By an action of the most horrible perfidy, he leaves his best friend to
die in his stead. Does not this afford the strongest presumption of his treason
to your majesty? Take my advice, this moment deliver up to death the accomplice
of his guilt. He deserves it well for having disappointed your just revenge.


Dionysius. It is not my intention to retard his punishment.


Gelon. Why then would you lose the precious time, in listening to him?


Dionysius. No; it is my pleasure. His confidence in friendship seemed an
insult to my power. I shall rejoice to confound him.


Gelon. Here he is.


SCENE VI.
Dionysius, Gelon, Palinurus, Damon, (in chains) Guards. Dionysius. Well,
Damon; this is the day on which Pythias should have returned.


Damon. Alas! I tremble still. It is not past.


Dionysius. Why do you not pray to the gods to lengthen it?


Damon. What say thou, Dionysius? Thou art not capable of conceiving either
my fears or my wishes. Ah! if the night was come! if heaven would keep back my
friend's vessel from the harbor until tomorrow! if it would permit me to save
his life by sacrificing mine for him!


Dionysius. You may take that rare satisfaction very soon.


Damon. O Dionysius, thou fillest me with joy. I dreaded the virtue of Pythias
more than I dread thy executioners.


Dionysius. Banish your alarms. Pythias will never come back. Palinurus is come
to inform you of the matter.


Palinurus. I can assure you from himself, that it will be to no purpose to
wait for his return.


Damon, (with vehemence.) Peace, vile slanderer; if thou had told me that his
wife, his children, all his fellow-citizens, were earnest to detain him, and
demanded to come in his stead, I could for a moment have believed such a
forgery; but Pythias never used the language imputed to him by thy effrontery.


Dionysius. Strange infatuation!


Damon. Pythias will return this very day, if he has not ceased to breathe the
vital air. But no, he still lives; heaven will not permit the most virtuous of
mortals to perish, while I can redeem his life.


Dionysius. What, do you refuse to believe so positive a testimony?


Damon. I believe much more firmly in the innocence of my friend. Now,
Dionysius, it rests with you to perform your promise.


Dionysius. What have I promised you?


Damon. To do no ill to Pythias, if he returns after my death.


Dionysius. Blockhead! Do thou not see, then, that the wretch betrays thee?
At this very moment, when thou tremblest for him alone, his heart beats with
joy at having deceived thee.


Damon. No, it is of your friends that such treachery is to be suspected. I
know mine better. Would to heaven I could rely as securely on your faith as on
his.


Gelon. What unheard of insolence!


Dionysius. His death shall soon atone for it.


Damon. I am more impatient than thou art to hasten it. I wait only a word from
thy mouth: Swear once more to spare Pythias at his return.


Dionysius. Why do you urge so useless a promise? The knave has taken too good
care of himself to have any occasion for it.


Damon. Affront not virtue, Dionysius; it is the grossest impiety to distrust
it.


Dionysius. Does it belong to you to defend virtue, when you are going to fall
a victim to treachery?


Damon. Even to my last breath, virtue shall receive my homage.


Dionysius. I pity your blind fanaticism.


Damon. But it is not your virtue that I implore, I claim your justice. Put me
to death, but swear to spare Pythias. Let me carry with me to my tomb the hope
of saving him.


Dionysius. Since you require only a superfluous oath, I give it to you: If
Pythias returns after your death, I swear that he shall live.


Damon. (raising his hands to heaven.) Immortal gods, receive this oath from
his lips, and if ever he meditates a violation of it, let all your thunders
compel him to perform it. (To Dionysius.) Tyrant, I am satisfied; one innocent
victim I have snatched from thy barbarity. I now lay another at thy feet:
(falls down before him.) Let me supplicate you for a favor which may be
granted, without difficulty.


Dionysius. Speak.


Damon. Let me be led this instant to execution. I must certainly be guilty in
your eyes, since I dare to defy your indignation.


Dionysius. You shall be satisfied. Drag him to the scaffold. (The guards seize
Damon.) Argus, assemble all my guards to keep the populace in order. Let the
first man be punished with death who shall dare even to murmur.


Damon, (as he is led off.) I bless you, mighty gods, that I have saved my
friend.


SCENE VII.
Dionysius, Gelon, Palinurus. Dionysius, (after a short silence.) Is Damon
insensible? Is he the most generous of men? If he had asked mercy for himself,
I think, I could have been inclined to grant it to him.


Gelon. O best of kings! Never did a criminal dare to defy you so audaciously;
and is your heart still moved for him? But in this case your majesty's clemency
might bring on the most fatal consequences. The stubborn Syracusans would not
fail to think it weakness, and would only become the more insolent.


Dionysius. Yes, I am satisfied, this rigorous example is necessary to my
security. Rebellious people! whoever would rule you, must exhaust your blood,
and load you with indignities.


Gelon. The guilt of Pythias occasioned Daman's crime; therefore he deserves a
double death.


Dionysius. Gelon, I thank thy zeal. Continue to find out new victims to my
power. Fresh marks of my favor shall reward you. And do you, Palinurus, haste
to acquaint the people with the treachery of Pythias, and particularly with
Damon's crime. I will not have him receive a single mark of pity. (Palinurus
going out, starts back with surprise.)


SCENE VIII.
Dionysius, Gelon, Palinurus, Argus, Damon and Pythias, (both in chains.)
Guards. Dionysius. What do I see?


Gelon, (aside.) Ah! traitor Palinurus!


Argus. As I conducted Damon to execution, according to your majesty's order,
this stranger came running toward me, out of breath. "Stop, cried he; strike
off my friend's chains. Damon is no longer your hostage; Pythias himself is
here, and he alone must die." They threw themselves into each other's arms, and
pressed forward with emulation toward the scaffold, as if they were going to
dispute a throne. I thought it my duty, on this unexpected incident, to bring
them both before your majesty.


Dionysius, (with extreme astonishment.) Is this possible? May I believe my
eyes?


Damon. My fears were well grounded. Ah! Dionysius, why did not you order my
execution an hour sooner?


Pythias. Do you think, then, that I could have survived your death, if I had
thus occasioned it? if I had thus become your murderer, my dearest friend?
Blessed be the gods, who at length seconded my impatience. O Damon, let me
embrace thee for the last time. (They embrace affectionately.)


Damon. Faithful, but cruel friend! Dionysius, grant Pythias his life, or let
us die together.


Pythias. Tyrant, you are surprised at seeing me again. My miraculous
preservation forces you to believe in those gods which your heart would fain
annihilate. When you caused me to be plunged into the sea, you did not foresee
that a friendly wave would cast me upon some rocks which were near at hand.


Damon. What then! you have not seen your country! you have not embraced your
wife and children!


Pythias. Could I think of tasting that pleasure, when the least delay would be
fatal to you?


Damon. Wretch that I am^ then I have not served you in any respect.


Pythias. Alas! was it not your intention to procure me, at the hazard of your
life, that satisfaction which fortune has envied me? What did I not suffer
under this reflection! Exposed on desert rocks, standing up night and day upon
the highest part of them, to have the farther view of a ship's approach, I no
longer directed my wishes toward Corinth, but incessantly called upon
Syracuse, Syracuse!


Damon. You knew well, that, even expiring I should have been convinced of your
sincerity.


Pythias. And I should have betrayed that generous confidence. Some god,
touched with my sorrow, vouchsafed to send me a light bark, which I beheld
himself defend against the rage of the waves. At length, when I was made easy
with regard to your fate, on beholding this shore, with what joy did I hail it!
I am now in your hands, Dionysius; deliver my friend, and then arm, when you
will, your executioners -- or my assassin there, (Pointing to Palinurus.)


Dionysius. What do I hear, Palinurus? Declare the truth instantly, or the
cruellest of torments shall tear it from you.


Palinurus. I only obeyed your majesty's favorite. Gelon had ordered me to
throw Pythias into the sea in the nightime.


Pythias. Ah! Gelon; I pardon the crimes which you forged against me, in order
to seize upon my fortune. I pardon your attempt upon my life. But what had my
friend done, that you should so cruelly involve him in my destruction?


Dionysius. Answer, villain.


Gelon. (in the deepest consternation.) Does your majesty doubt that my
attention to your safety --


Dionysius. Be silent. Pythias was innocent, and you knew it. Friendship
between guilty souls, never rises to this degree of heroism. Noble friends be
free, and you wretches go and receive your death. Argus, lead them both to
execution.


Pythias. Stop, Dionysius; you have just now felt how glorious it is to be just
--


Damon. Learn the happiness of being generous.


Dionysius. What manner of men are ye, who kneel to me for your murderers? But
no, they must die; it is the only thing that I can refuse to so much virtue.
Go, Gelon; seek a friend who will sacrifice himself for you. On this condition
alone, I pardon you.


Damon and Pythias. Ah! prince! --


Dionysius. It is in vain. If I have already shed so much innocent blood, I
will not let the guilty escape. Bas^ traitor! I have read his inmost thoughts.
Heavens! am I then condemned never to find a faithful heart? From you, alone,
incomparable men, I expect to find that happiness. Permit me to hope that I
shall one day be the third in your friendship.


THE SIEGE OF COLCHESTER. A DRAMA IN ONE ACT.
CHARACTERS.
LORD FAIRFAX, General of the Parliament Army. LORD CAPEL, Governor of
Colchester. EDMOND, Fairfax's Son. ARTHUR, Capel's Son. COLONEL MORGAN, Friend
of Fairfax. COLONEL KINGSTON, Friend of Capel. SURRY, a Captain under Fairfax.
GUARDS and SOLDIERS.

SCENE Fairfax's tent before the walls of Colchester.
THE civil war in England under Charles I. being, as it were, re-kindled, after
a short cessation, the parliament, by resolving to present no more addresses to
that unfortunate prince, then a prisoner in the Isle of Wight, filled the
hearts of all honest men with indignation. Scotland, Wales, some towns in the
North, part of the county of Surry, and even seventeen men of war in the
parliament's pay, declared for the king. There were some risings also in his
favor in the counties of Essex and Kent, which were supported by the zeal of
the Earl of Surry, Lord Capel, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle. Against
these Sir Thomas Fairfax was sent with a pretty numerous army. That able
General found no difficulty in defeating a few troops newly raised, and ill
disciplined. He gained a complete victory over them at Maidstone in Kent; and
pursuing their scattered remains, he obliged both them and the royalists in
Essex to shut themselves up in the town of Colchester, which he hastened
immediately to invest.

The siege of Colchester is one of the most remarkable events of that
unfortunate period, on account of the obstinate defense made by the besieged.
It lasted from the 18th of June, to the end of August, 1648. The walls and
fortifications of the town, said to have been built by the Romans, and
remarkable for that strength and solidity which their works usually display,
still exhibit dreadful marks of the fury of the siege. The greatest part of the
churches in particular were half demolished by the batteries of the parliament
army; but the besieged, notwithstanding the violent assaults of their
adversaries, notwithstanding the extremities to which they were reduced for
want of provision, insomuch that they had nothing left for subsistence, but the
horses of the garrison, continued to make brisk sallies, and defied all the
force of the besiegers, in the uncertain expectation of relief from some
quarter or other.

At this period commences the action of the following drama, in which the
principal object is, to delineate in its proper strength, the resolute and
generous character of Lord Capel, which was invariably displayed in every
circumstance of his life and death. Such a character, it is presumed, will not
be found uninteresting to the mind of a young reader; and in order to represent
it to the fullest advantage, at the end of the drama, are subjoined some
interesting particulars concerning the death of that virtuous nobleman.

It remains, however, to be observed, that the fact upon which the drama
principally turns, is by no means advanced as authentic. Neither Lord
Clarendon, or any other writer of that age, takes the least notice of it. Nor
has Hume, or such modern historians, as from their aversion to the republican
party, it might be supposed would not let slip such an incident, made any
mention of the circumstance. It depends, therefore, entirely upon the credit of
Monsieur Raguenet, who in his life of Cromwell relates it at large, with many
particulars, which at least give it the appearance of probability.

THE SIEGE OF COLCHESTER. SCENE I.
Fairfax, Morgan. Fairfax, (reading a paper which he has just received from
Morgan.) Is it possible that last night's attack should have cost us so many
brave soldiers?


Morgan. Yes, general, eight hundred men; and, to say the truth, the flower of
our troops.


Fairfax. It would be a satisfaction, if we had purchased some advantage by
this loss: but after so many assaults, Colchester resists our arms as
obstinately as at first. The late example of Oxford swells the hearts of the
townsmen; and that obstinate Capel --


Morgan. He alone is a surer defense to the town, that all its ramparts. In
vain shall we attack them, as long as he determines to hold out.


Fairfax. He will not defy me much longer.


Morgan. How, Sir Thomas?


Fairfax. If I cannot overcome his resistance, his son shall.


Morgan. His son?


Fairfax. Yes, Morgan; young Arthur shall open me the gates of Colchester this
very day. For this purpose I have sent for him and my own son from London, and
I am just now informed of their arrival.


Morgan. Here comes Surry, returned from Colchester.


SCENE II.
Fairfax, Morgan, Surry. Fairfax. Well, Surry, is the truce accepted? Does Lord
Capel agree to the interview that I have proposed to him?


Surry. Yes, General; hostilities are suspended for six hours, and this very
morning Lord Capel is to come to your tent.


Fairfax. I suppose to display his triumph to my face. How did he receive you?


Surry. With an air of cool unruffled firmness. Resolution is painted in his
countenance.


Fairfax. That this proud royalist should alone stand immovable, while even
the genius of Britain trembles with dismay! No; he shall soon be shaken. I will
assail him in his tenderest part. Surry, call hither my son. (Surry goes out.)


SCENE III.
Fairfax, Morgan. Morgan. Shall I take the liberty, Sir Thomas, to ask what is
your design? I cannot so much as conjecture what it is.


Fairfax. Perhaps not; but I shall inform you. Last night I received
intelligence that the Duke of Hamilton, with a numerous army, supported by Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, who follows him, is coming to relieve Colchester. In order
to prevent him, if possible, I ventured last night upon a third assault, of
which you have seen the success. But stratagem shall put me in possession of
what I could not seize by force.


Morgan. How can young Arthur assist you in this scheme?


Fairfax. I will represent to him in the most lively colors, the danger that
threatens his father. They shall see each other here. Arthur, trembling for a
life so dear to him, will prevail on him to surrender.


Morgan. Do you think so, General?


Fairfax. I hope so. A man whom the whole universe in arms could not conquer,
has often been overpowered by a single tear.


Morgan. Capel feels, it is true, the affection of a father, but he is also
endowed with the firmness of a hero.


Fairfax. If the most powerful energy of nature cannot bend him -- But I see my
son; I would speak with him alone. Go you, Colonel, and join young Arthur, and
leave nothing untried to bring him to my purpose.


SCENE IV.
Fairfax, Edmond. Fairfax. Come to my arms, my dear boy.


Edmond, (embracing him.) O father! how happy am I that the duties of war have
not entirely removed me from your thoughts.


Fairfax. Your joy will be much greater, when you know my motive for calling
you down hither.


Edmond. I am ready to obey your orders.


Fairfax. Your heart will approve them, if it is actuated by the sentiments of
friendship.


Edmond. You make me impatiently desire to hear them.


Fairfax. It is in your power to save young Arthur from the greatest misfortune
that he has to fear.


Edmond. How! Dear father, I conjure you let us not lose a moment.


Fairfax. My Lord Capel, by a blind obstinacy, is going to plunge himself into
ruin. I esteem him for his courage, and therefore cannot help lamenting his
misfortune. Particularly I can by no means be indifferent to the lot of his
son, since he is your friend. Let us save them both from inevitable destruction.


Edmond. What are the means? how gladly will I embrace them, if they are within
my power!


Fairfax. I am to have an interview with his lordship this morning. I will
indulge him with the satisfaction of seeing and embracing his son; but when I
represent to him the calamities into which his obstinate rashness will
inevitably draw him, I should wish Arthur to enforce my remonstrances with his
own entreaties and solicitations.


Edmond. Ah, father! I fear --


Fairfax. What? that they would have no effect? Ah, child! nature has given
children more power over their fathers, than the laws have given to fathers
over their children.


Edmond. I know Arthur well; he is too dutiful a son to attempt dissuading his
father from what he thinks his duty.


Fairfax. When necessity obliges him to do so, it is the strongest proof that
he can give him of his respect and affection.


Edmond. He will never think so.


Fairfax. His interest requires that he should be convinced of it. Are not you
his friend?


Edmond. O Sir, can you ask that? Next to my parents, I love him best upon
earth. At this very moment, when our fathers are opposed in arms, I would lay
down my life to save his.


Fairfax. Far from condemning this ardor, I admire it; it shows me that my
son's heart is capable of the noblest efforts of generosity. Such sentiments
make us worthy of the godlike blessing of friendship. You would die for your
friend; then surely you will save him. If his fortune and his life are dear to
you, support me in my design. Go to him, and bring him hither; I will join my
persuasions to yours.


Edmond. I obey. (aside.) Heavens! what can I say to him? (goes out.)


SCENE V.
(Fairfax remains alone for some time in a pensive attitude. Surry enters to
him.) Surry. Sir Thomas --


Fairfax. Surry, I just now intended to send for you; I am going to have some
conversation with Arthur and my son; in the mean time, go you immediately, and
give orders to Colonel Morgan, that the troops be in readiness to form, at a
moment's notice.


Surry, (surprised.) I beg pardon for my freedom, Sir Thomas; but this order I
confess surprises me.


Fairfax. I understand you, but you have no occasion to be uneasy. Fairfax may,
according to the usage of war, attack his enemy by surprise, but he will never
violate his word. The truce that you have negociated, we shall observe with
scrupulous fidelity; I only intend, while I am exhorting proud Capel to
surrender, that his eyes shall be struck with the sudden appearance of a
courageous and well appointed army. Their dazzling array will perhaps impress
him with a little dread, notwithstanding his obstinacy.


Surry. But, Sir --


Fairfax, (with a tone of authority.) Go; do not delay a moment.


SCENE VI.
Fairfax, Edmond, Arthur, (who salutes Fairfax respectfully as he enters.)
Fairfax, (taking him by the hand.) I am rejoiced to see you, my dear Arthur. I
know your friendship for my son, and that circumstance interests me in every
thing that concerns you. I will give you a proof of it today, by bringing you
to your father.


Arthur. How, Sir? will you send me into Colchester to fight by his side?


Fairfax. I am not surprised at this martial ardor in the son of the gallant
Capel; but in the present state of things, it could only lead you to misfortune.


Arthur. Do you call it a misfortune to die with my father, fighting for my
sovereign?


Fairfax. Then you love your father more than life itself?


Arthur. Your own son, Sir Thomas, will answer that question for me.


Fairfax. Well then, without parting with life, you may preserve it to your
father, or more properly restore it to him.


Arthur. Ah! tell me what can I do for him?


Fairfax. It is impossible that the town can hold out long; we must certainly
take it in a few days, and instead of the laurels which now crown Lord Capel's
head, he can expect nothing but the executioner's axe.


Arthur. I conceive your generous design; you would have the enemies of my
father take his son's head, instead of his own. To die for my father, and for
my king at the same time! Glorious destiny! (throwing himself at his feet.) How
shall I thank you for having thought me worthy of it!


Edmond, (aside.) Generous delusion! how will it mortify him to be undeceived.


Fairfax, (raising and embracing Arthur.) My young friend, you force me to
esteem you as highly as I do the gallant nobleman to whom you owe your birth.
But do you think me cruel enough to demand such a sacrifice?


Arthur. What do you require of me, then?


Fairfax. An effort less fatal to both. In a few minutes you will see your
father here; join your persuasions to mine, and let us prevail on him to
surrender a place which all the bravery in the world cannot defend much longer.


Arthur. What I, Sir?


Fairfax. Represent to him the dreadful danger of being proscribed by the
parliament: the disgrace of perishing by the executioner; the grief of his
distracted widow; the poignant affliction of his son; the confiscation of your
estates. Describe to him the irretrievable calamities into which his cruel
obstinacy must plunge you all.


Arthur. Sir Thomas, you were kind enough to express just now some esteem for
me; was that expression of esteem sincere?


Fairfax. Do you doubt it?


Arthur. Give me leave then to deserve it, and to look upon your proposal, as
intended merely to put my virtue to the proof.


Fairfax. You will prove your virtue sufficiently, by snatching your father
from the hor^^rs of a cruel death. When he sees you at his feet, trembling for
the destiny that threatens him, can he resist your supplicating love?


Arthur. If I was capable of that unbecoming weakness, my father is too wise to
be swayed by the tears of such a child as me.


Fairfax. If he is wise, he will be sensible that they are shed for his
preservation.


Arthur. Put yourself in his place, Sir Thomas: If you were trusted with the
defense of a town, would you give it up, on the solicitation of your son?


Fairfax. (embarrassed.) Ask my Edmond what power his solicitations have over
me. Ungrateful! It is his attachment to you that makes me also tremblingly
anxious for every thing which concerns his friend. Your father, too, knows what
nature is; he will not be deaf to her call.


Arthur. He is deaf to every call, but that of his duty, which will teach him
what he should do, much better than I can.


Fairfax. Remember that you hold his life in your hands.


Arthur. You will pardon me, Sir; it is neither in my hands, nor in yours.


Fairfax. Then you will destroy him?


Arthur. Even if it were in my power to save him, my blood should be the
sacrifice, not my honor.


Fairfax. I know that blood well, by its invincible pride. Hear me, Arthur; I
allow you but a moment to form your resolution. I shall return presently, to
ask you for the last time, if your would rather see your father upon a
scaffold, than in the road to fortune. Edmond, remain you with him, and try if
your affection can have more influence over him, than my pity.


Arthur. Your pity, Sir? Really it is very generous. I did not solicit it.
(Fairfax gives him an angry look, and goes out, without answering him.)


SCENE VII.
Edmond, Arthur. (They look at each other for some time, without speaking.)
Arthur. Well, Edmond; what is your intention? To serve your father, will you
persuade me to betray mine?


Edmond. We know each other pretty well. No: you as little suppose me capable
of such an intention, as I you of suspecting me to entertain it.


Arthur. Be, for a moment, equally indifferent to friendship and nature. If you
were, Arthur, what would you do?


Edmond. I would ennoble the name, as you do, by exerting the same firmness and
constancy. I should not be the first to persuade my father to a base action.


Arthur. If these were not your sentiments, I should hold you unworthy of my
friendship. -- Alas! I know not whether you will any longer esteem it.


Edmond. Whence comes this injurious surmise, Arthur? How have I deserved it?


Arthur. Pardon me, Edmond; I am not afraid of you. But who knows if your
father --


Edmond. Ah! suffer me to believe that he values your merit as I do; suffer me
to esteem the author of my being.


Arthur. If he should forbid you to love me?


Edmond. Do you think, then, that I could obey him? Have I not always regarded
you as a brother? And can these ties of amity be broken, when every
circumstance of our lives on the contrary tends to strengthen them? My father,
with all the authority which that name gives, could not dissolve them.


Arthur. There was a time when I also was beloved by him. He took pleasure in
seeing us grow up together, companions in play and amusements. How often has he
made us promise to live in strict unity, as he was with his dear Capel! Yet you
see with what fury he now pursues him. Not satisfied with his ruin alone, he
would cover him with eternal infamy.


Edmond. If he should so far forget himself, Heaven pardon me the thought, I
should forget, I fear, that I am his son.


Arthur. Must a name, so dear, be the cause to us of so much sorrow and
affliction! Why cannot I think, without terror, of him who gave me life? Alas!
I know it too well; the town cannot hold out much longer, and the gallant Capel
is too proud to surrender. If he does not die, overpowered by his enemies, if
he falls into their hands alive, what will be his lot? The more courage and
magnanimity he shall have shown during the siege, the more will their revenge
endeavor to dishonor him, and one of the worthiest men of this country will
suffer as a criminal. His enemies are too implacable to forgive him; and that
head which their weapons could not reach, they will lay under the vile axe of
an executioner.


Edmond, (vehemently.) No; he shall not perish. There is one who will deliver
him.


Arthur. Who is he?


Edmond. I.


Arthur. You, my dear Edmond? Alas! whither does friendship lead you astray?
Its wishes are unavailing.


Edmond. It is more powerful than you imagine. But time presses, we can
deliberate no longer. Do you promise to perform whatever I enjoin you?


Arthur. All that honor will permit me.


Edmond. Will your honor, do you think, disallow any thing that I shall propose?


Arthur. Well, you have only to speak, and I obey.


Edmond. Come then, follow me; our two horses are still beside the tent. Let us
fly to France: I put myself into your hands, to be as a hostage to Capel,
against the attempts of Fairfax.


Arthur. What, take you from your father?


Edmond. He has not scrupled to do so by you.


Arthur. Then I shall never be guilty of an action that I blame in another.


Edmond. But this would hinder him from committing it. In the name of our
friendship, I conjure you, my dear Arthur, for my father's sake, for my own,
save me from endless remorse; save me from the anguish of seeing him made
unhappy, by it.


Arthur. Do you wish me, then, to bear it?


Edmond. You will have nothing to reproach yourself with. My father himself,
after his first transport of passion is over, will bless you from his heart,
for having saved his honor.


Arthur. What would thou have me do? Never, Edmond, never.


Edmond, (seizing his hand.) Come, I Will hear you no more; you shall go along
with me. Let us set off this moment. (Fairfax appears, followed by (...)
soldiers.)


SCENE VIII.
Fairfax, Arthur, Edmond, Soldiers. Fairfax. Ho^ guards! seize them both.


Arthur. Heavens! my dear Edmond!


Fairfax. ((...)) Ungrateful son! is it thus that you perform my orders?


Edmond. Did I promise it?


Arthur. (falling at his feet.) Ah! Sir Thomas! if honor is dear to you,
reproach him not for disobeying you, or only punish him in me. It was in
compliment to his friendship for me, that he would have withdrawn himself from
your power.


Edmond. No, father; believe him not; his generosity would deceive you: the
design was mine, though he takes the blame to himself. I had not even, I
confess, persuaded him to assent to it. You have no discretion over him,
whereas I belong to you. My liberty, my life is yours; I yield them up to your
resentment. If it falls on me alone, you shall never hear me murmur.


Fairfax. Be silent; I know whom I am to punish. Let them be guarded here in my
tent, apart from each other.


Arthur. Ah! suffer me at least to share my friend's confinement.


Edmond, (to the guards.) No; you shall never tear him from my arms.


Fairfax, (to the guards.) Obey your orders. (The guards separate them, and
lead them off, in spite of their resistance.)


SCENE IX.
Fairfax, (after a long silence, during which he appears greatly agitated.)
Shall I then see my designs baffled through my own child? His insolent
resistance only confirms me in my resolution. Capel, you shall find one as
obstinate as yourself. I will prepare you a sight that shall make your
stubbornness bend before my face. As, through your son, Edmond has dared to
despise my power, so Arthur shall avenge me on yourself.


SCENE X.
Fairfax, Surry. Surry. Sir, I have obeyed your orders; yet, if I were
permitted to represent to you --


Fairfax. It would be out of season; I do not desire it.


Surry. A friend of Lord Capel is without, and would speak with you.


Fairfax. Let him come in. (Surry goes out, and returns with Kingston.)


SCENE XI.
Fairfax, Surry, Kingston. Kingston. General, the Governor of Colchester
requests to know, by me, if he can have the honor of a conference.


Fairfax. I shall always be ready to receive him. I hasten to give some orders,
that our conversation may not be interrupted. Surry, I charge you to receive
Lord Capel with the first honors of my tent; as soon as his lordship arrives,
let me be informed of it. I shall be with Colonel Morgan. (Fairfax and Kingston
go out.)


SCENE XII.
Surry, (alone.) What design is he meditating? His looks are clouded with an
angry gloom. Even his son's tears could not soften him. Does he intend to
sacrifice young Arthur to his revenge? I shudder at the thought. Fairfax is
generous, but the enthusiasm that universally predominates over men's reason,
in these times of trouble and distraction, has already produced so many
attrocious acts however, he shall not make me the partner of any such; nor if
he wishes to engage me in a base action, will I disguise to him my opinion of
its infamy. Yes, I will save him, in spite of himself, from every thing that
can tarnish his glory.

SCENE XIII.
Capel, Kingston, Surry. Kingston. This is his tent, my Lord.


Surry, (approaching Capel respectfully.) Brave defender of Colchester! allow
me to pay my humblest tribute of respect to so heroic a character --


Capel. I thank you, Sir, but rather wish to decline all marks of honor; it is
not for me to receive them, while my Sovereign is in chains. Where is General
Fairfax?


Surry. I hasten to inform him of the arrival of his noble enemy.


SCENE XIV.
Capel, Kingston. Kingston. I think it my duty to observe to your lordship,
that every thing here appears strangely suspicious to me.


Capel, (calmly.) As how, my friend? Do not imagine vain terrors.


Kingston. Those terrors will not appear so vain, if you reflect but a moment.
Fairfax knew from me the moment of your arrival. Why not stop and receive you
himself? Why go out immediately, under pretense of giving orders? And, in
short, why was all his camp under arms as you passed?


Capel. What do you think to infer from these circumstances?


Kingston. May they not indicate some secret treachery?


Capel. Kingston, I fear nothing. The laws of war are sacred in all nations.
The most ambitious conqueror, the sternest man of blood, respects them in
dealing with others, that others may treat him with reciprocal attention.


Kingston. He who takes up arms against his king, may well violate his word to
subjects.


Capel. He would not choose me for the object of his perfidy.


Kingston. But, my lord --


Capel. No, I know Fairfax: I have too high an opinion of his character, to
suppose him capable of a base action. Republican enthusiasm may have perverted
his understanding, without demeaning his sentiments: though party-differences
now keep us disunited, we were formerly intimate friends. I know, he would
still pride himself in my esteem, and it is not before my eyes that he will
deviate from the ways of honor.


Kingston. I hope, my Lord, it may be so; but here he comes. (Capel advances
toward Fairfax, with a steady countenance.)


SCENE XV.
Fairfax, Capel, Kingston, Surry. Capel. I cannot give you a greater mark of my
confidence, Sir Thomas, than by coming into your tent with only a single friend.


Fairfax. Since you think him worthy of this title, he may be present at our
interview.


Capel. Were he an enemy, I would not shrink from his testimony. Sir, I am
prepared to hear you.


Fairfax. I have to offer your lordship, from the parliament, every advantage
that consists with the very high estimation which they bear for your virtues.


Capel. If they merit any reward, it is from mine and the parliament's
sovereign that I must receive it.


Fairfax. What can a prince, without dominions, do for you?


Capel. I should, perhaps, be less zealous in support of his interests, if mine
depended on them; but I am prouder to serve him, as long as my loyalty expects
no recompense.


Fairfax. This is the sentiment of a great soul: but you see, a revolution in
the government is inevitable. Is it in your power to prevent it? What do you
intend to oppose against a victorious party?


Capel. My duty, which commands me to be faithful to an unfortunate prince.


Fairfax. You have already done whatever can be expected from a man of honor.


Capel. No, not yet, while it is still in my power to serve him.


Fairfax. And how do you expect to do it? the walls of your town are but so
many heaps of ruins: your men are reduced to the last extremity, for provisions.


Capel. They have ammunition still, and courage to make use of it.


Fairfax. They cannot fail in courage, while under your command; but, without
force, of what service will it be to them? Colchester, though defended by your
arm, must very soon surrender.


Capel. Did it tell you so in last night's attack?


Fairfax. If not today, it must tomorrow: but tomorrow the parliament will
proscribe you, as an enemy to the commonwealth; whereas, today, they offer
you, through me, the title of duke, and the government of a garrison. (Capel
turns away, and hides his face with his hands.)


Fairfax. Why do you turn away from me?


Capel. Left you should see me blush both for you and for my country.


Fairfax. Be calm, my Lord, and consider my offer, coolly.


Capel. Is it to be the only object of our conference?


Fairfax. It is of importance enough to be so, since your safety depends on it.


Capel. (going.) Farewell, Sir Thomas.


Fairfax, (aside) Why must I be obliged to constrain myself? (takes him by the
hand.) Stop a moment longer. Take my advice, banish the blind prejudice of
monarchical slavery. Will you sacrifice to them the honors that are ready to be
heaped upon you and your family?


Capel. O noble Englishmen! how are you fallen from your ancient glory! Your
honors are sold for the vile price of disloyalty:


Fairfax. It is your country that freely offers you those honors.


Capel. My country! Suppress that sacred name, if you can only blaspheme it.


Fairfax. Do you dare to appeal to your country, you who serve under her
oppressor? But your arm is henceforth too weak to throw chains over victorious
freedom. The throne totters to its base; another day, and it will be levelled
to the ground.


Capel. Then I will bury myself under its ruins.


Fairfax. The parliament will drag you forth alive, and condemn you to an
ignominious death.


Capel. Should I avoid this, by accepting a life of infamy?


Fairfax. What else, then, will your life be, when England, freed from a
disgraceful yoke, will pronounce your name with horror; when your wife,
involved in your dishonor, will execrate the hour that joined her to you; when
your son, pursuing you to the very scaffold, with cries of despair, will
reproach you for leaving him to perish in indigence and contempt?


Capel. Audaciousness beyond example! Is it you, traitorous subject, that would
terrify me, by disgraces which are due only to your rebellion? No, no, I shall
have the good wishes of all honest men: my wife and my children will bless my
memory: heaven will be a protector to my widow, and a father to my children.


Fairfax. I can bear no more, vile slave of despotism. Since you are not moved
by a regard to your own life, tremble for one more dear to you. (he calls.)
Morgan!


SCENE XVI.
(A curtain rises and discovers Arthur in chains, and two soldiers beside him,
holding each a dagger to his breast. Behind them stands Morgan.) Capel.
Heavens! What do I see? (Falls into Kingston's arms.


Fairfax. Do you know him?


Capel, (raising himself with indignation.) My son in your power! Ah, dastard,
not by force of arms.


Fairfax. Surrender, and I restore him to you. There is no other way left. Do
you wish to save his life?


Capel. Yes, traitor, by your death, (laying his hand hastily upon his sword.)


Morgan. If you stir, my Lord, you and your son are ruined.


Arthur. Father, let nothing stop your arm. Avenge yourself. Your son is not
afraid to die.


Capel, (sheathing his sword, which he had half drawn.) Barbarian! I say
nothing of our former friendship; it subsists no more, since your treasonous
revolt; I ask no favor from you: but what has this innocent victim done?


Fairfax. He has defied me, but a few minutes ago, with as much haughtiness as
his father.


Capel. You shall hear him again defy your threats, and your executioners. O,
my beloved Arthur, why am I not permitted to embrace you for so well deserving
my affection!


Kingston, (to Fairfax.) How, Sir Thomas, would you sully your renown for ever,
by the murder of a child?


Fairfax. It is his cruel father who devotes him to death, not I. He has only
to blame his savage obstinacy. Let him surrender to me a town which he cannot
defend, and I give him up his son, otherwise he must die, to strike a terror
into those cowardly slaves, who would turn their backs on freedom, when she
rears her standard.


Capel, (to Arthur, with earnestness.) My son, let this, then, be your motto;
"God and your prince."


Surry, (aside.) I will not suffer this detestable sacrifice to be made, if it
costs me my life. (goes out.)


SCENE XVII.
Fairfax, Capel, Arthur, Morgan, Kingston, soldiers. (Capel and Arthur look at
each other affectionately, and with open arms. Capel. Arthur, my dear Arthur,
what shall I say to your disconsolate mother?


Kingston. Ah, my Lord, will you suffer him then to be thus massacred?


Capel. What would you do, Kingston? Would you shake my resolution, when you
should strengthen it? It is sufficient to contend against nature.


Fairfax. You have but a few minutes, my Lord Capel.


Capel. Then why prolong my anguish? Suffer me to depart; I would not expire
before your eyes.


Morgan. Arthur, have you nothing to say to your father?


Arthur, (with firmness.) Nothing. He knows what passes in my breast.


Morgan, (to the soldiers.) Be ready at the signal.


Capel. Farewell, my son. Once more, 'God and your prince.' I only survive you
a little while, to revenge your death. (turns to go.)


Fairfax, (aside.) Inflexible virtue, which I am forced to admire in spite of
myself! (aloud.) But what do I see?


SCENE XVIII.
Fairfax, Capel, Edmond, Arthur, Morgan, Kingston, Surry, soldiers. Edmund,
(entering precipitately, and throwing his arms round Arthur.) O Arthur, my
friend, you shall not die, without me.


Fairfax. What are you doing, my son?


Edmond. Call me no more by a name which I detest. Satiate your barbarity. You
have another victim more.


Fairfax. Insolent! who has brought you hither?


Surry. It was I, Sir Thomas: I forced his place of confinement, and boast of
the action.


Edmond, (to Fairfax.) You alone are destitute of pity, (to the soldiers,) but
I ask none from you: haste to strike. Why do you tremble?


Arthur, (endeavoring to disengage himself from Edmond.) Let me go, my dear
friend, why should you make death more painful to me?


Edmond. I shall not quit you: I will not survive my friend, when I have lost
him who should be my father.


Capel, (to Fairfax.) You would rob me of my son: I have my revenge, as you are
renounced by your own.


Edmond. Let me hold you still close to my heart, my dear Arthur. I will die by
the same blow.


Capel. You see, then, Fairfax, nothing remains but that you strike the blow
yourself.


Fairfax. Enough, Capel, I am conquered: Edmond, take off your friend's chains,
and restore him to his father. My hands are not worthy to touch that young
hero. (Morgan and the two soldiers retire.)


Arthur. Dearest Edmond, to you, then, I owe my life!


Edmond. O my friend! (He takes off his chains, and leads him to Capel, who
embraces them both.)


Arthur. My dear father!


Edmond. My noble friend!


Capel, (looking with fondness at each of them alternately.) Give me, both of
you, the same name, my dear children: you are now both equally dear to me.


Edmond, (seeing his father in tears, quits Lord Capel's arms, and throws
himself at the feet of Fairfax.) I now find my father again. Ah, do not rob me
of those tears: be witness, Lord Capel, Arthur, Surry, my father weeps.


Fairfax, (raising him.) My dearest Edmond, I will never forget that you have
saved me from a disgraceful action, (presenting him to Arthur.) Continue to
love each other and may your virtuous friendship be destined to flourish in
happier times than your fathers have seen. (To Capel.) My Lord, you are free to
return into the town: my admiration accompanies you. Would to heaven, that I
were also worthy of your esteem.


Arthur, (To Capel, taking his hand.) O father, let us never part again. I will
go and fight by your side.


Capel. You have done enough for your cause; your name alone will be the
firmest support of Colchester. What soldier, who shall hear of your courage and
resolution, will ever be so base as to speak of surrendering!


Arthur. Let my actions give proof of that courage. I must go with you.


Capel. No, my boy. Alas! that cannot be: Farewell; it is, perhaps, the last
time that I shall ever embrace you. My duty is to go and face death, for my
country; yours is to live, that you may one day serve it better, in the full
maturity of life, than you can at present. (To Fairfax.) After what has passed,
Fairfax, I have nothing to fear on your part, therefore I leave my son to your
care, satisfied as I am that you will send him back to his mother, and, in the
mean time, I haste to wait your coming on the breach.


SEQUEL.
Cromwell, who was sent by General Fairfax to oppose the Duke of Hamilton and
Sir Marmaduke Langdale, having defeated those two generals successively, and
taken the duke prisoner, and the Earl of Holland having also been defeated, and
made prisoner, by another detachment of the parliament-army; the inhabitants of
Colchester, who only held out, in hopes of being relieved, saw themselves, at
length, reduced to the necessity of capitulating: they deputed persons to
Fairfax, to treat of the surrender of the town upon honorable terms; but he,
provoked at the obstinacy of their defense, offered them no other than to
surrender at discretion. Upon receiving this answer, the besieged spent two
days more in consultation: the first resolution taken by the officers, was, to
force their way through the enemy's camp, sword in hand; but the few horses,
which their hunger had spared, were found too weak for this attempt: on the
other hand, the soldiers, exhausted with fatigue, were unable to sustain
another assault; so that they were obliged, at length, to open the gates to
Fairfax, and to submit to the conditions that he should think proper to impose
on them.

He suffered the soldiers to depart, but without arms or baggage; but the
officers he ordered to be confined in the town hall, and a list of their names
to be sent to him. Ireton, whom Cromwell, in his absence, had left as a spy
upon the unsuspecting general, chose out of this lift such as were more
particularly his enemies, in order that they might be put to death. Sir Charles
Lucas, therefore, Sir G. Lisle, and Sir Barnard Gascoyne, were brought before
the council of war, where Fairfax declared to them, that for a punishment of
their obstinate resistance, and a warning example to all others who should be
inclined to imitate it, they were sentenced to die, that very day, at the foot
of the castle-walls.

When this sentence was communicated to the other prisoners, Lord Capel
prevailed upon an officer of the guard which was over them, to deliver to the
council of war a letter signed by the principal officers, entreating them to
revoke their cruel sentence, or else to extend it to all the prisoners, who
blushed to see themselves excepted from it. This generous request had no other
effect, than to hasten the execution of their unfortunate companions.

Sir Charles Lucas, who was the first officer shot, gave the signal to his
murderers to fire, with as much coolness as he would have delivered the word of
command to his own men. Lisle, seeing him fall, ran to him, and embraced his
dead body, and then rising, looked with a stern air upon the soldiers by whom
he was to be shot, and ordered them to come nearer. One of them answered him,
that they were near enough, and that they should not miss him. My friends,
replied he, smiling, I have been nearer to you, and yet you have missed me.

Sir B. Gascoyne, or Guasconi, a Florentine gentleman, was spared by the
council of war, under the apprehension left the Grand Duke of Tuscany, informed
of such a violation of the laws of war, should retort upon the English who
might be found in his dominions.

After the execution of Lisle and Lucas, General Fairfax, accompanied by G.
Ireton, went to the town hall to see the prisoners. In addressing himself to
the Earl of Norwich and Lord Capel, he endeavored, with a soothing civility, to
excuse the rigor which military justice had exacted from him. But Lord Capel,
who looked upon Ireton as the sole instigator of this barbarity, loaded him
with the bitterest reproaches, which, however, the latter very soon found an
opportunity of revenging.

The parliament having ordered the Lords Norwich and Capel to be confined in
Windsor Castle, they found the Duke of Hamilton there before them, with whom
they had the melancholy satisfaction of deploring their misfortunes in common.
They were soon, however, removed to the Tower, there to await the destiny which
parliament should think proper to allot to them.

About a month after King Charles I. was beheaded, another high court of
justice was formed for the trial of these three noblemen, as also of the Earl
of Holland and Sir John Owen, who had taken an active part in Wales, in favor
of the king, and killed, with his own hand, a sheriff of the opposite party.

Lord Capel appeared with the greatest firmness and dignity in the presence of
his judges, and refused to acknowledge their authority; alleging, that as a
soldier and a prisoner of war, he was not amenable to the civil law. Upon which
Bradshaw, who was president of the court, answered him with unfeeling
insolence, by alluding to their form of proceeding against the king, "that they
had tried a much better man than his lordship." After some debates, in which
Ireton broke out with all the violence and fury of his natural disposition,
sentence was passed upon Lord Capel and the other prisoners. They were all
condemned to lose their heads; upon which it is said, that Sir John Owen made
the judges a low bow, and thanked them for the high honor which they conferred
on him, in ordering him, who was but a poor Welsh gentleman, to lose his head
in company with noblemen of so considerable rank; adding, that his greatest
fear had been, lest the common hangman should have terminated his destiny. The
prisoners were allowed but three days to set their affairs in order, and to
prepare for death.

Lady Capel employed this short space in drawing up a petition to be laid
before parliament; when read, it was very strongly supported by several
members, who spoke in the highest terms of Lord Capel's many and eminent
virtues. Even Cromwell praised his lordship so highly, and professed so much
respect and friendship for him, that every one expected him to be inclined in
his favor, when he added, in a hypocritical canting tone, that his zeal for the
public cause got the better of all his private affections; that he knew Lord
Capel to be the last man in England who would abandon the royal party; that his
inflexibility of principle, his experience and valor, the number and attachment
of his friends, made him the most formidable enemy that parliament had; that as
long as he lived, let him be reduced to whatsoever condition he might, they
would find him always a thorn in their sides; and he concluded with protesting,
that his conscience, and the interests of the commonwealth, imposed it on him
as a duty to give his vote against the petition.

The implacable Ireton vented his hatred and animosity with less disguise: he
vehemently maintained, in the house of commons, the sentence which he had
procured to be passed in the high court of justice. Though there was not a
single person who knew Lord Capel's character, but entertained the highest
esteem and veneration for him, and very few who had any subject of personal
quarrel against him, yet Cromwell and Ireton thus appearing his declared
enemies, the justice due to his virtues, and the compassion which his
misfortunes inspired, were put to silence by the terror of those two names, and
his fate was given up to their revenge.

Of the number condemned, the Earl of Norwich and Sir John Owen received a
pardon. The former having presented a petition to parliament, the house divided
upon it, and the numbers on both sides were found to be equal; the Speaker,
therefore, whose vote was to determine the earl's destiny, having formerly been
under obligations to him, was induced, from a motive of gratitude, to save his
life.

Sir John Owen was so indifferent about his, that he had not so much as thought
of petitioning. Ireton whimsically made this very negligence a plea in his
favor, when he moved the house to spare his life. He thought, perhaps, by this
exception, to offer a fresh insult to the three noblemen, and to make their
death more grating, by showing them a private person saved from the rigor of
his sentence, without ever petitioning, while their applications were so
contemptuously rejected.

A scaffold was therefore erected under the windows of the parliament house.
After the Duke of Hamilton and the Earl of Holland had suffered, Lord Capel was
called: he walked down Westminster Hall with a serene countenance and a firm
step, saluting his acquaintances with dignity. Dr. Morley, his friend, who had
not quitted him, from the moment of his condemnation, was solicitous to
accompany him now, that he might receive his last commands: but he was stopped
by the soldiers, at the foot of the scaffold. My lord took leave of him,
embraced him affectionately, thanked him for all his attentions, and would not
suffer him to go any further, lest he should be exposed to the brutality of the
guards. Advancing then toward the edge of the scaffold, he looked round him
with a placid countenance, and asked whether the other lords had spoken to the
people uncovered, and being answered in the affirmative, he gave his hat to one
of the attendants to hold; then, with a clear bold voice, he declared that he
came to lose his life for an action which he could never repent of; that having
been brought up in principles of attachment to the constitution of his country,
loyalty to his sovereign, and fidelity to his religion, he had never violated
any of these principles; that he was now condemned to die, contrary to all the
laws of the realm, and that, nevertheless, he submitted to this unjust sentence.

He then enlarged upon the praises of that king whom they had recently
murdered, and besought heaven not to avenge this crime on the deluded nation.
He concluded, with earnestly exhorting them to acknowledge the son of Charles
as their rightful sovereign. Lastly, after a short and fervent prayer, he
stretched his neck to the fatal blow, which deprived England of the most
virtuous citizen that she had left her.

THE LAWSUIT.
FARMER BLUNT, when he died, left two sons, the one named Roger, the other
Humphrey. His death put them in possession of farms sufficiently advantageous
to afford them a decent competency. Very little was wanting to their happiness.
Alas! then, why could they not live in that harmony and good understandstanding
which Nature designed should subsist between brothers, when she formed them of
the same blood?

Among the possessions left by their father, was a very fine orchard, which he
had cultivated in his life time with particular care. As it bore, most years, a
prodigious quantity of apples, remarkable for making the best cider, it
appeared to both the brothers a very desirable lot; but, unfortunately, in the
partition of their father's lands made by his will, the property of this was
left undetermined.

Each, therefore, claimed the possession of it, and obstinately persisted in
supporting that claim. They no longer spoke to each other in amicable terms; on
the contrary, their mutual obstinacy degenerated on both sides into a confirmed
hatred. You are not an honest man, said Roger, for claiming what is my
property, and you do not deserve to be master of so good a piece of ground.
Humphrey, in a rage, would answer, it well becomes you to talk so, lazy fellow
as you are: Have you not always made my father unhappy, by your drunkenness?
What would become of those trees, in your idle hands? In two or three years the
orchard would not be worth sixpence.

The curate of the village being informed of their quarrel, went to them, and
expostulated with them in the most friendly manner. What are you doing, my
friends? said he; wherefore are you weary of living happily together? Shall
this orchard be the means of disuniting you? Why not rather join your industry
to improve it, and afterward divide the produce?

I do not intend any such thing, said one, I will have it all to myself. We
shall see that, replied the other, I think I shall have it.

Well, then, said the clergyman, let the most reasonable of you resign his
claim, upon receiving a suitable consideration from the other.

With all my heart, cried they, both at once, let my brother give it up to me.
I have most right to it, said the eldest. It belongs to my farm, said the
youngest. -- Oh, I am resolved to have it, now I have once taken it in my head.
-- You may take it out again, if you will; I would sooner give you my right
hand.

Since you are both so obstinate, said the curate, and cannot agree together,
will you leave the decision of the matter to fortune, and dispose of it by lot?
No, I will risk nothing, said Hodge. Nor I, neither, said Numps. Last of all,
the gentleman proposed to them to sell the orchard, and divide the money; but
this proposal also was equally rejected on both sides.

I see, said the worthy clergyman, nothing can overcome your obstinacy: you
will soon find the miserable effects of mutual hatred in hearts, which were
intended by nature to be dear to each other.

The brothers did not trouble themselves about this prophecy, but each of them
went to the man of law whom he thought most capable of setting off his claim to
advantage. Thus began a lawsuit, which seemed easy enough to be decided, but
was kept on foot, nevertheless, for five whole years; the counsel on both sides
being veterans in the business. If one party put in a plea, the other
intercepted it with a demurrer. It was, every term, fresh writs, declarations,
and rejoinders. The orchard all this while, we may suppose, was not so well
cultivated as in the time of honest Farmer Blunt: those fine apple trees were
neglected, and did not produce near their usual quantity. Horses and pigs were
suffered to break in and damage them; Humphrey, who had the orchard in his
hands, being too much taken up with his lawsuit to attend to the culture of it.

They were both married to very amiable women, and had many children, in whom
they would have been perfectly happy, had their minds been more at ease.

Each of their wives would sometimes accost them thus: My dear husband, why are
you so uneasy? We have every thing that our hearts can wish; Have we not? You
are in very good health, so am I. Our little family goes on charmingly; then we
have an excellent farm; and, you know, it is your own fault if you do not make
money by it. Why will you not choose to be happy? Each of them would mutter
between his teeth, and answer, How can I be happy, while I have such a
good-for-nothing brother? His injustice and obstinacy are poison to my
happiness.

When, at their return from the field, they saw their children running joyfully
toward them, they would cry out to them, before they came near, What do you
want with me? Get away. I am not in a humor, now, to mind your tricks; I am
too angry: and if the poor children strove to soften them, by their innocent
fondness, they would push them away harshly, and sometimes give them very
violent blows.

At table, nothing could please them, because their hearts were filled with
gall; and, in bed, it was out of their power to sleep, because they were
eternally thinking how to hurt each other.

Perhaps you may suppose that I have now told the worst. Alas! no. From
ill will they were carried to slander and calumny: each strove how to blacken
the character of his brother the most. If Numps happened to be in company with
other farmers, he would strive to persuade them that Hodge was a very bad man,
who labored to ruin him first, and would then go to law with every man in the
parish. And as Hodge, for his part, was not backward in saying much the same of
Humphrey, the end of it was, that people believed them both: so that, in short,
they were shunned by every body, as dangerous persons; and there was not one of
their neighbors who did not wish to see the village fairly rid of them.

After five years of jarring and brawling at law, judgment was given; and he
who gained the cause, saw himself obliged, very soon, to sell not only the
orchard, but the greater part of his farms, to pay the expenses of the suit.

I leave you to guess how the loser came off. In fact, the confusion of them
both may more easily be imagined than described.

Well, said Numps, we have both of us deserved this. It was in our own power to
have avoided it. We might still have had our farms and our money. Instead of
all the trouble that we have each caused the other, we should have made one
another, as well as our own families, happy, and have gained the friendship and
esteem of our neighbors.

See, said Hodge, all this we have lost by our folly. Ah! if things were to
begin again!

Marry, said Numps, let us be wiser for the future. Come, brother, here is my
hand, I will never be your enemy as long as I live.

Nor I yours, replied Hodge, taking his hand. So saying, they both shed tears,
and the bitterness of hatred departed from their hearts.

They very soon found themselves much easier in living upon friendly terms with
each other; but the ill effects of their former perverseness they were destined
to feel for a long time. They saw their orchard, which had been the possession
of their family for some generations, turn to good account in the hands of
strangers, while the little that remained to them of their own farms took some
time to recover from the ill-management of five years. Besides, derision was
swift to pursue them in the village, while confidence and amity returned to
them with a slow pace. The alacrity of their advocates, in receiving the fee,
had thinned their purses, while fatigue, fretting, and large draughts of
unwholesome law, impaired their health. Even their children did not now salute
them with the free unconstrained affection which appears in the children of the
virtuous and the benevolent. And their wives -- Alas! it was some time before
they could view their husbands with the tenderness of former years.

LOST TIME RECOVERED.
LORENZO'S parents were so much engaged in the way of business, that they found
it impossible to superintend his education themselves. They had heard of a
remarkably good school, where a number of young persons had been bred, who were
distinguished for their improvement in learning, and for the principles of
honor which they had imbibed. Though it was upwards of a hundred miles from
his house, yet Lorenzo's father sent him thither, recommending him, in the
strongest terms, to the master. This gentleman, who regarded each of his pupils
as his own son, spared no pains to correct his faults, to encourage him to
study, and to implant sentiments of honor and generosity in his young breast.
The persons also, whom he had chosen to assist him in these labors, exerted
their utmost to promote the same laudable purposes.

Yet these endeavors, so affectionately undertaken in his favor, were not so
successful as might naturally be hoped: Lorenzo was of a restless, inconstant
disposition, and would forget the sensible advice which was given him, even at
the very moment that he received it. In the hours allotted to study, he suffered
his thoughts to wander in such a manner, as not to possess the smallest
attention for the lessons of his masters. All his occupations were sacrificed
to the most frivolous amusements; and he showed the same negligence in the care
of his person and his books. His clothes were always in disorder; and,
notwithstanding his agreeable face and figure, one could not approach him,
without feeling a certain distaste arise, on seeing so much slovenliness.

It is easy to conceive how prejudicial this inattention was to his advancement
in learning. All his class-fellows left him far behind. There was not one, even
to the smallest, who came to the school long after him, who did not look upon
him with contempt, as they were, every day, outstripping him. Whenever any
strangers of condition visited the house, he was always sent out of the way,
left his shabbiness and wild appearance should disgrace his companions. He
never appeared in the public yearly examinations that were held in the school:
his ignorance would have been considered as a reproach to the establishment.

All these humiliating circumstances made no impression on him: still he
continued in the same levity, the same dissipation, the same negligence. His
teachers beheld him with a sort of inward regret; and their zeal for his
improvement grew, every day, cooler and cooler. They would often say to each
other, Poor Lorenzo! how unhappy he will make himself! What will his parents
say, when they see him return home so full of ill habits, and so deficient in
learning?

Two whole years had thus slipped away, without the least profit to his
education, when, at the end of that time, he received a parcel, sealed with
black: he opened it, and read the following letter:

My dear Son,
YOU have no longer a father. Heaven has deprived us of our protector and our
friend: there now remains but you upon earth, who can afford comfort to my
sorrow, by showing your actions and your sentiments to be worthy of my
affection; but if you were to deceive my expectations, if (...) must renounce
the pleasing hopes of seeing the virtues of him, whom I have lost, revive one
day in your breast, I should have nothing left, but to die in despair. I send
you your father's picture, and conjure you to carry it always about you. Look
at it often, and endeavor to become as worthy a man as he was. I will let you
continue at school the remaining part of this year, that you may have so much
more time to accomplish yourself, both in mind and person. Consider that you
hold my destiny in your hands, and that you alone can now afford a moment's
happiness to your

Affectionate MOTHER.


Lorenzo's giddiness had not suppressed the feelings of nature in him; and this
letter awakened them effectually. He burst into tears, wrung his hands, and, in
a voice, broken with sobs, he cries, Ah! my father, my father; have I then lost
you for ever! Taking the portrait, he presses it to his heart and his lips, and
apostrophizes it with these words: O dear author of my being, you have expended
so much for my instruction, and I have not profited from it! You were so worthy
a man, and I -- No, I do not deserve to be called your son.

He spent the whole day in these bitter reflections. At night he went to bed,
but in vain he turned himself to and fro: sleep visited him not. His
imagination represented before his eyes, the form of his father, who, in an
angry and terrible voice, thus rebuked him: unworthy boy, I have sacrificed my
repose and my life, to make you happy, and you bring dishonor on my name, by
your misconduct. His thoughts would then turn on his mother, and on the
distress that he must occasion to her, instead of the consolation which she
expected to receive from his return. What will be her distress, said he, when I
shall appear before her, and have none but the most mortifying testimonies of
my inattention to show her, from my instructors! Instead of having cause to be
proud of the education that she has given me, I shall force her to blush: she
will wish to love me, and I shall deserve but her hatred. O my dear parent! I
shall, perhaps, be the cause of her death. Oh, that I had profited better by
the instructions that have been lavished upon me! Oh that I could recover the
precious time that I have lost!

Thus did he torment himself the whole night, and bathe his bed with his tears.
As soon as it was light, he rose in haste, intending to begin an immediate and
persevering application to his studies; but meeting the head master, as he
descended to the school, he fell on his knees before him, and, O Sir, said he,
you see here the most unfortunate child upon earth. I have not attended to your
words. I have learned nothing of what I should now know perfectly. Have
compassion on me; I would not wish to make my mother die of grief.

The master was sensibly touched with this address: he raised Lorenzo, and
embraced him. My dear child, said he, since you see your fault, you may still
repair it. You perceive how dreadfully mortifying it is to have cause for
self-reproach. Before you had a clear sense of your folly, you were barely
blameable; but a continuance of it would be criminal in you now. Two whole
years you have entirely lost: you have but another for the finishing of your
studies. Judge how you must exert yourself. However, be not discouraged: there
is nothing that cannot be accomplished with assiduity and perseverance. Begin,
this very moment: it shall not be the fault of my zeal, if you are not very
soon as well satisfied with yourself as you now have reason to be otherwise.

Lorenzo could thank him no otherwise, than by taking his hand, and pressing it
to his lips. He than ran immediately to his form, and began to study his
lesson, and continued to do the same every day following. His masters,
astonished at such persevering diligence, sat immediately about cultivating his
natural parts, with more care and attention than they had ever used before. His
companions, who had conceived a mean opinion of him, were soon obliged to
change it, for esteem. Encouraged by all these fortunate circumstances, Lorenzo
every day redoubled his ardour and vigilance. He was no longer that giddy child
who neglected every duty, to indulge himself in silly, trifling amusements.
Order and cleanliness succeeded to his former slovenly manner; and his teachers
were now obliged to force him away from his studies, in order to make him enjoy
some relaxation. He would, sometimes, indeed, find himself insensibly relapsing
toward his old habits, but he needed only to cast an eye upon his father's
picture, to strengthen him afresh in hi^ ^^^dable resolution.

The year which his mother had allowed him for the finishing of his studies,
was drawing near a period: it seemed to glide away very rapidly, as he filled
up every moment of his time, and therefore found it hardly sufficient for the
subjects of his application.

At length the hour of departure arrived. The change wrought in his character,
had attached his companions to him so affectionately, that the thoughts of
parting with him gave them extreme concern. His masters were grieved to see a
youth depart, who now began to do credit to their instructions; and he was
grieved no less at leaving his masters, whose prudent advice had so well
supported him in his resolution: the head master, in particular, who began to
felicitate himself on Lorenzo's progress, as his own proper work, was
inconsolable; and his concern appeared very strongly expressed, in a letter
which he wrote to Lorenzo's mother, rendering her the most advantageous account
possible, of her son's behavior.

During the whole journey, Lorenzo's emotions of hope, joy, and expectation,
kept him tremblingly alive. His heart throbbed with the idea of re-visiting the
scenes of his infancy; nor did he now dread so much to show himself before his
mother, because he was conscious, that for a twelvemonth past, he had neglected
nothing that could tend to his improvement. Yet he could not help saying to
himself, now and then, Fool that I was! Could I not have done the same thing
three ^ears ago? I should be, at this day, much farther advanced in learning.
How many things, of which I am now ignorant, might I not have learned in that
interval! Alas, I might have spared myself many sorrowful and mortifying
reflections.

His mother had come a part of the way to meet him. With what joy did she
behold her dear son once more! The head master's letters had before informed
her of his happy reformation: he now brought one from him, the contents of
which were still more flattering. A mother only wishes for new reasons, to love
her son with redoubled fondness. Those reasons she found in the idea that
Lorenzo had reformed his conduct, only out of affection for her; and, with a
mother's eye, she looked presagingly forward to the happiness of his future
life.

Lorenzo did not disappoint these hopes. After dedicating a few days to the
visits of his relations and friends, he returned, with fresh ardor, to a life
of application. The habit of being always employed, gave strength to his
understanding, so that he soon acquired every information necessary, to qualify
him for putting himself at the head of his family affairs. The management of
them was too laborious for a tender woman, already much depressed by her grief;
and her son's activity, diligence and skill, soon brought them into a
flourishing state. A wealthy establishment, which he formed soon after, and the
good order with which he conducted it, placed him in a situation, sufficiently
at ease, to enable him to undertake, himself, the education of his numerous
children. He endeavored, above all things, to make them thoroughly perceive the
inestimable value of time; and to caution them, by his own experience, against
ever exposing themselves to the unpleasant regret of having illy employed it.

JASPER AND EMILIUS.
MR. MEANWELL, who had been long absent from his native country, on account of
a considerable employment that he held in the East Indies, was at length
returned to his family, in order to enjoy, in their peaceful society, the ample
fruits of his labors. He had but one son, about fourteen years of age, in whom
his fondest hopes were centered. It was in order to secure to this son the
advantages of a splendid fortune, that he had devoted his life to business of
the most laborious nature, far from his country and his friends. His views, in
this respect, had been gratified beyond the extent of his wishes. He returned,
loaded with wealth; but, alas! he very soon perceived how much better the time
which he had spent in acquiring it, would have been employed, in personal
attention to his son's improvement, and how much more likely such an attention
would have been, to ensure him happiness, than all his riches.

Mrs. Meanwell, who was as w^^k in understanding as in constitution, had put
young Jasper under the care of a family-tutor, who, in order to keep his
employment, had only studied to gratify the child's whims, and impose on the
blind fondness of a mother, who idolized her son. Intoxicated with the flattery
of all about him, Jasper had insensibly grown hardened in all the ill-habits
that he had been suffered to contract from his infancy. His tutor, whose
ignorance, though tolerably profound, scarce equalled his meanness, frequently
gave him to understand, that with the treasures which he was one day to
possess, he had no occasion to impair his health by a close application to
study; and that Fortune, by the care which she had taken of him, had too
favorably distinguished him from the rest of mankind, to subject him to the
same labors. These perfidious insinuations accorded so well with the natural
weakness and presumption of his pupil, that they effected the complete
corruption of his heart and his understanding; Jasper was therefore become a
confirmed liar, slothful, insensible to the affections of his fellow creatures,
and so disgustingly conceited, as to look down upon all who were his inferiors
in fortune, as if they were no, better than beasts of the field. Of all the
stories with which the tutor amused his idleness, he listened only to those
that afforded examples of pride and effrontery. Instances of courage, greatness
of soul, and humanity, made no impression upon him; nor were his eyes ever
moistened with those delicious tears which the recital of a virtuous action
draws from the eyes of those who possess true generosity.

This odious character was not long concealed from Mr. Meanwell's observation.
What a fatal discovery for an affectionate father, who, returning from the
farthest parts of the earth, with the hopes of one day finding, in his son, the
comfort and glory of his old age, saw him already possessed of every quality
that (...) unpromising and disgraceful. His first care was, to dismiss the
contemptible person, who had been made his instructor. Notwithstanding the
bodily infirmities which already began to attack him, he resolved to take upon
himself alone, the charge of remedying the faulty education of his son. He
imagined, however, that he should succeed better in this undertaking, if he
placed near him a child of a good disposition, and nearly his own age, whose
behavior might inspire him with a noble emulation. The choice of such a
companion, he thought, should not be left to chance. For several weeks he
sought ineffectually for such an one, but happening one day to be riding in the
country, and earnestly meditating upon his project, he perceived, at the
entrance of a village, a number of young boys at play: one of them was
possessed of so happy a physiognomy, that, at the first fight, Mr. Meanwell was
captivated with him. He approached him, asked him a few questions, in a mild
tone of voice, and received answers so replete with candor and simplicity, that
they effectually confirmed in his mind the good opinion which the youth's
countenance had excited. He learned from him, that he was the eldest of six
children, that his father was the apothecary of the village, and barely able to
maintain him and the rest of his family in the most limited mediocrity. These
particulars having given Mr. Meanwell some hopes, he begged the boy, whose name
was Emilius, to conduct him to his father. He found him to be a sensible man,
and one whose abilities, in a more enlarged ^^here, might have procured him the
highest estimation. But, moderate in his desires, he preferred the tranquillity
of a retired country life, to the noisy bustle of the capital, and contented
himself with the happiness of doing good to his poor neighbors, and of
fulfilling the duty of a parent, to his numerous children. His wife, who was
still young, had adopted his views, and prudence seemed to divide, with
happiness, the government of his family. Mr. Meanwell, after having, for some
time, discoursed with them concerning their children, in order the better to
understand the principles which they had followed in their education, soon
perceived them to be such as corresponded with his own ideas. In the fullness
of his joy, he took the apothecary by the hand, and imparted to him the design
that he had in view, with respect to his son, assuring him, that he would bring
him up as his own, and that from that day forward he would take upon him the
care of his fortune. The well-known integrity of Mr. Meanwell, and the
reputation of his wealth and interest, would have induced parents, who were
less affectionate, or more ambitious, to accept his offers, without hesitation:
but the parents of Emilius found a difficulty in parting with a son, who formed
their principal happiness; and the boy himself was no less averse to the
proposal, than they were. However, the more objections they raised to the
scheme, the more Mr. Meanwell, actuated by fresh sentiments of esteem, adhered
to it. In short, he redoubled his solicitations so powerfully, that he, at
length, shook their resolution. The frequent opportunities which would offer of
seeing their son, and the hope that his advancement might, one day, contribute
to that of his brothers and sisters, induced them, at length, to yield their
consent; and Mr. Meanwell took his leave, filled with the most perfect and
heartfelt satisfaction.

Three days were demanded by the parents of Emilius, to prepare him for
appearing in town; at the end of that time, Mr. Meanwell appeared at their
door. I will not attempt to describe to you the grief occasioned by the
departure of a child, so dearly loved by his family. Emilius, who had had the
courage to restrain his tears in the presence of his mother, for fear of
increasing her sorrow, was no sooner seated in the carriage, than he let fall a
flood of tears. Mr. Meanwell did not seek, at first, to interrupt them,
otherwise than by silent caresses; but when the first gush of sorrow was over,
he took Emilius by the hand, and, kissing him, My boy, said he, be not
afflicted; you see in me a second father, who will cherish you with as much
affection as the parent whom nature has given you. Be honest, courteous, and
diligent, and nothing shall ever be wanting to your happiness.

Emilius was something eased by these marks of tenderness and affection. Then
you shall be my other father, said he, pressing Mr. Meanwell's hand between
his, and I will make myself worthy of your friendship and regard.

Mr. Meanwell introduced Emilius into his house, upon the footing of a son, and
ordered all his servants to treat him with the same respect; and his mild and
sensible manner, soon gained him the affection of all that approached him.
Jasper was the only person of the family, who could not behold him, without an
emotion of envy. He soon perceived that the presence of this rival laid him
under the necessity of altering his behavior, and of becoming more diligent in
his studies. Not being able to find in his heart any just foundation for hating
Emilius, he thought that he might at least reasonably despise him, as the soon
of a poor country apothecary. Dreading, however, his father's displeasure, he
was obliged to keep these thoughts to himself, and therefore disguised them
under the mask of friendship. Emilius, who could not suspect in others a
falsehood to which his own heart was a stranger, grew tenderly attached to him;
he endeavored to assist him in all his exertions, and to facilitate the
labors of his study; at the same time, he put up with his pride and
capriciousness, as one usually winks at the defects of a beloved friend.

He had already been accustomed, under the immediate direction of his father,
to exert his powers of apprehension, so that he met with nothing, in the course
of his study, that was capable of damping his ardour. Endowed with a lively
penetration, and a powerful memory, and, especially, animated with the desire
of meriting the applause and encouragement of Mr. Meanwell, he made so rapid a
progress, that his masters could scarcely believe it possible. He improved
himself no less successfully in the exercises of the body; thus his manners
became graceful, at the same time that his understanding was enlightened, and
his heart expanded with sentiments of honor and generosity. Mr. Meanwell beheld
him every day, with renewed affection; and even strangers were seldom twice in
his company, without feeling a secret prepossession in his favor. Polite,
without affectation, attentive, without servility, cheerful, without
thoughtlessness, he enlivened, by his presence, the joy and happiness of the
whole family. In the midst of these flattering circumstances, Emilius, far from
suffering the illusions of vanity to steal upon him, became only the more
modest. Although he could not be insensible to his own superiority over Jasper,
he would have been contented to call it in question, and still better pleased
to have hid it from the observation of others, for fear of mortifying his
friend. He was the first to defend him, or to make him appear to advantage^.
Ah! said he to himself, if my friend had not been so beneficent to me, and so
powerfully assisted me in every laudable acquirement, 'spite of the
affectionate cares of my father, I should still be far from knowing even what
little I know. Other children, in my situation, would, perhaps, have profited
better from the opportunities indulged me by Providence. Jasper himself would,
perhaps, have surpassed me, had he been in my situation, and I in his. He can
do without learning, better than I can; the absolute necessity of acquiring it,
has done every thing for me.

Eight years passed on thus, during which, Emilius made himself master of every
accomplishment that is conferred by the most liberal education. Time and place
would fail me, were I desirous to particularize to you the various mental
acquirements with which he had stored his understanding. As to Jasper, it would
be a still longer task, to enumerate all those which he had not. His natural
self-sufficiency had persuaded him, that with a few terms of science, which was
all that remained to him from his studies, he was a match for some of the
ablest masters. His disposition, in the mean time, was, at bottom, very little
altered; the fear of his father had, indeed, a little restrained his vicious
impetuosities, but, in return, it had bestowed on him hypocrisy, as a
convenient mask to conceal them.

Mr. Meanwell, whose penetrating eye observed them, even through this veil,
would have fallen a victim to the chagrin which he felt on this mortifying
discovery, if the good behavior of Emilius had not afforded him a pleasing
consolation. Nevertheless, when Jasper had reached his twentieth year, the
apprehensions that he formed to himself of his son's future impropriety of
conduct, overbalanced every other consideration. While his heart was torn with
these cruel reflections, he was seized with a violent disorder, which carried
him off in a few days, in spite of the affectionate cares and ardent wishes
that Emilius testified for his recovery, even to the fatal moment which
separated them for ever.

Jasper, freed as he now was from the curb which formerly restrained his
passions, had scarcely paid the last offices to his father, before he began to
show forth his natural disposition. Ungrateful to the memory of an excellent
father, in the person whom he had adopted as a second son, and forgetting the
obligations that he himself bore to the same youth, he furiously shut his doors
upon him, and flew down to his paternal ^eat in the country, there to make
himself amends for his former constraint, by indulging a life of savage tumult
and unbridled licentiousness.

How different were the emotions which impelled the heart of Emilius, who was
now returned to the mediocrity of his father's house! he grieved, indeed, but
not on account of his change of condition. Mr. Meanwell had made him a handsome
provision for life; but his interest gave him very little concern; it was the
loss of his generous benefactor that he felt most sensibly: the recent loss of
that friend who had taken care of his youth, whom he was accustomed to look
upon as a father, and in whom he had found all the affections of one. The
sorrow occasioned by this loss, brought on a sickness, which had nearly sent
him after the friend whom he mourned. In the most violent fits of his delirium,
he pronounced only the name of Mr. Meanwell. He even called his father by this
name, whenever he sat by his bed, as the disorder deprived him of all knowledge
of his relations. They were long apprehensive for his life: in effect, he owed
his recovery to the vows and indefatigable cares of a family, who all seemed
only to exist in him.

After devoting a few months to the satisfaction which his friends enjoyed in
seeing his health re-established, and in admiring his virtues and
accomplishments, Emilius returned to the capital, intending to enter upon one
of the learned professions, and, in the mean time, resuming his studies with
more eagerness and advantage than ever. He had gained the friendship and esteem
of many persons of quality, during his residence at the house of Mr. Meanwell,
who now united all their interest to procure him an advantageous establishment.
The duke of --, having just finished his studies, was about to make the tour of
Europe, and Emilius was recommended to his family, as a proper person to
accompany him. Though he appeared very young, for such an office, he,
nevertheless, impressed them so favorably, with respect to his character and
conduct, that he was judged to be as trusty and intelligent a governor as they
could send with the young nobleman. In the course of this tour, he found
numberless opportunities of enlarging and applying the knowledge that he had
acquired from study. His sprightly wit and engaging manners, made him a
favorite at every court which his pupil visited. There were even some foreign
princes, who distinguished him in a very flattering manner, and wished to
attach him to their service; but his engagements to the young duke's family,
made him decline every offer, however splendid. He was not long, without
receiving the reward of his fidelity. He had scarce conducted his pupil home to
his native country, when a nobleman of the same family, being appointed
ambassador to one of the foreign courts, chose him for his secretary. During a
long illness of the ambassador, Emilius managed the principal business of the
embassy, which he performed with so much ability, that, upon the minister's
recommendation, he was entrusted with a very delicate negotiation, in which he
had the honor, as well as satisfaction, of rendering his country a service of
the most important nature.

Jasper, in the mean time, had met with very different fortune: we left him in
the country, upon his estate, harassing his game and his tenants. This way of
life gave the finishing stroke to his manners; that is to say, it rendered them
those of a brute, and his understanding seemed degraded to the grossest degree
of rusticity. A quarrel with a neighboring country gentleman, in which his
paltry behavior covered him with shame and mortification, forced him to quit
his country residence, and to come up again to London: but even thither his
infamy pursued him; and being aggravated with the additional impeachment of
fraud, became a subject of the most public notoriety.

Jasper now found himself excluded from all genteel company, where his father's
name had formerly procured him a welcome. Unable to find a resource, either in
study or reflection, he suffered himself to be carried away by the torrent of
vicious example; and gaming soon suggested to him the design of selling his
estate, and afterward furnished him with opportunities of dissipating his
money, while intemperance and debauch, at the same time, made rapid havoc with
his constitution. In order to elude his creditors, whose importunities now
became pressing, he determined to transport himself to the continent, and, by a
singular accident, arrived in the very same town where Emilius resided, and
where, for his many amiable and respectable qualities, he enjoyed the universal
esteem of all parties.

The unhappy Jasper carried with him still his extravagant passion for play:
fortune seemed at first to favor him in this new scene; and his expensive
manner of living procured him credit. But it was not long, before his affairs
fell into confusion; and his creditors, finding that he had treated them with
the grossest impositions, sent him to prison, upon his not being able to
satisfy their demands. The rumor of such a disgrace happening to one of his
countrymen, soon occasioned Emilius to come to the knowledge of his name.
"Heavens!" cried he, "is the son of my dearest benefactor in a prison?" for he
immediately forgot Jasper's ungenerous behavior toward him. He flew,
therefore, to the dungeon where he was confined. But, alas! in what a dreadful
condition did he find him! Pale, disfigured, pining in distress, wasted by
pain, harrowed by remorse, and a prey to all the convulsions of rage and
despair. He strikes off his chains, snatches him from this mansion of horror,
carries him to his own house, and there treats him with the most affectionate
care and attention. He would have sacrificed all his fortune to restore him to
life, and to be the author of his happiness. But heaven had already dealt the
avenging blow. Jasper survived this event but a few days. Emilius was grieved
at his death, as much as if he had lost the most affectionate friend. He was
inconsolable, that fate had put it out of his power to render to the son of his
benefactor the kindnesses which he had received from the father. This
reflection depressed his spirits a considerable time. Images of gloomy sadness
were ever before his eyes, and haunted him, even in his most collected hours of
business; but the alacrity with which he attended to his duty, and the command
which he was accustomed to exercise over himself, restored him at length to his
usual serenity of mind; and he continued to perform the offices of his employ,
with a zeal and integrity, that soon advanced him to the exalted station in
which we see him at this day.

THE PUNISHMENT OF PRIDE.
RUPERT, the son of an honest laborer, had early testified a strong inclination
for the profession of arms. He was continually exercising with his spade, and
had scraped acquaintance with every game-keeper in the neighborhood, in order
that he might have an opportunity of handling their fowling-pieces. At the age
of eighteen, he enlisted as a soldier; and being (through the good care which
his father had taken of his education) a tolerable proficient in writing and
figures, he was very soon made corporal, and, after that, sergeant.

At the commencement of the war, his regiment going abroad, he behaved himself
so remarkably well, the first ca^paign, as to obtain a pair of colors. He had
been sent upon several hazardous expeditions, in which he showed himself to be
equally intelligent and brave; and it was remarked, to his praise, that a
soldier had never turned his back, while under his command.

The general, who had been a witness to his bravery, in many engagements, now
promoted him to the command of a company, in order to raise the emulation of
his troops, by the example of Rupert's good fortune. And, some campaigns after,
a very splendid action, that he performed in a battle in which most of the
elder captains were killed, was the occasion of his being elevated to the post
of major.

Honorable mention had frequently been made of his name in the public papers;
and his brothers were often gratified by their neighbors, with the recital of
actions considerably to his praise. It may easily be imagined how proud they
were of being so nearly related to him. Whenever they spoke of him, they shed
tears of joy. Their affection to him seemed to entitle them to a share in his
reputation; and they wished for the happy moment of his safe return, that they
might embrace a brother who did so much honor to his kindred.

With all these good qualities, however, Rupert possessed one which was very
odious; his words and actions were marked with the most insupportable
arrogance. There was no man in the world (to take his word for it) so sensible,
or so intrepid as himself. He spoke of his own valiant deeds, as a flattering
courtier would of those of a sovereign prince, before his face. He arrogated to
himself more glory from them, than was justly due to him; and seemed insensible
to the merit of the other officers, whenever they acquitted themselves with as
much gallantry as himself.

At the conclusion of the war, his regiment returning home, was sent into
country quarters, and (as it happened) by a route that led very near his own
native village. As soon as ever his brothers were apprized of this
circumstance, they went off to meet him on the road, accompanied by a few
friends, and arrived in a neighboring town, just as the division which he
commanded of the regiment had entered, and was forming in the marketplace.

My dear Rupert, said the elder brother, how happy I am to see thee, and how
happy would our aged father be, were he alive this day! Heaven be praised that
we behold you safe returned from the dangers of war. For my part, I never felt
myself so happy in my life as at this moment. Saying these words, he held out
his hand, inviting Rupert to a similar demonstration of fraternal amity. But
the major, swelling with shame and indignation, to see a man, in a frize coat,
call him brother, rejected his proffered salutation. You had better go home,
said he, my friend. I have not time to talk to you at present. How! cried the
younger brother, do not you know me neither? Look well at me: I am your brother
George. You used to be very fond of me. It was from you that I learned to plow,
when I was a boy.

The major now foamed with rage and despite, and having no other means to be
rid of his unwelcome relations, he caused his soldiers to make a sudden
movement or evolution, which obliged the surrounding populace, and, among the
rest, his brothers, to fall back, and retire from the spot of ground where he
stood.

The two peasants, who had promised themselves so much joy and happiness in
meeting with a brother that had been absent from them so many years, returned
home, full of grief and resentment. They were scarce able to credit their
senses, that such had been their indifferent reception with one whom,
notwithstanding his unnatural pride, they found themselves ready still to love
as a brother.

The soldiers who were present at this disgusting scene, did not, it is true,
express their sentiments of it aloud, but they said to each other, in whispers,
A man must have a very bad heart indeed, to be ashamed of his relations. Does
our major think it a disgrace to be the same as we are? He ought, much rather,
to be proud of having made his way, in the army, by merit, than to put on the
airs of a man of family.

Rupert had not a soul formed for thinking so nobly: instead of remembering
that he had once been a private soldier, he thought, by his assumed loftiness,
to make his former comrades forget it. He treated them, therefore, with the
last degree of contempt; but he appeared, in their eyes, much more worthy of
this passion. His preferment, which before had given them so much satisfaction,
now only served to mortify them. They obeyed his orders, but with reluctance;
and every soldier in the regiment, wished him fairly out of it.

One day, when the corpse to which he belonged, was passing in review before a
general, this officer made some remarks on the maneuvers performed by the
major, with his division, to which the latter replied in terms of the most
pointed disrespect. His supercilious deportment had, already, more than once,
offended his generals. This fresh breach of military subordination, underwent
the severest animadversion; for, as it was too public and gross to be passed
over in silence, it became the subject of a general-court-martial, the decision
of which completed his ruin; for, even here, he expressed himself in language
so unguardedly personal against his prosecutor, and persisted, with such
inflexible haughtiness, in refusing to make a submission, that he was sentenced
to be cashiered, to the universal joy of his regiment.

Reduced, by this stroke, to his original poverty, he was obliged to embrace
the alternative, either of struggling with indigence and necessity, or of
employing means for his subsistence, which, before, he would have spurned, as
unworthy of his rank and consequence. He had a small farm (if a piece of ground
might be so called, that was scarcely large enough for a cabbage-garden)
situated close by his native village. As (by his father's will) he had not the
power of selling it, in the life time of his brothers, he had let it to one of
them upon his entering the army, but always thought the rent of it, though
accumulating, an object of so small importance, particularly after he was made
an officer, that he had, since that time, in his own mind, almost wholly
renounced the property of it, as he had the memory of his origin, and the
relationship of the person who was his tenant. He now found himself, however,
under the necessity of deriving, from this patch of ground, the means of his
immediate subsistence, by making application to his brother for the rent
arising from it. For this purpose, a journey to the place of his nativity was,
if not indispensable, at least highly expedient; and then it was when the
peasants and villagers, his former acquaintances, saw him come down among them,
stripped of his plumes, and reduced to the same state of harmless obscurity
with themselves, that they repaid him his former insolence, with usury.
However, as he courted the friendship of none, in return none offered him their
society. Thus he saw himself deprived of one of the greatest blessings that
human life can afford, particularly to those who are under the pressure of
adversity.

If the other inhabitants of the village were offended at Rupert's unnatural
pride, his brothers had, certainly, the first cause to resent it, having been
the more immediate objects of his insult. Perhaps, therefore, you fear, lest
they should, in their turn, have slighted him. "We know you not," would have
been a just answer to all his applications and advances toward reconciliation:
but, fortunately for him, the brothers possessed that real greatness of spirit
which he wanted. They sought no other satisfaction, than that of conferring
kindnesses on him. For this purpose, the renter of his little farm, not only
restored it to him in good condition, together with the revenues thence
accruing, but concerted with the other brother, the means of settling him
comfortably, on a moderate farm, if he chose to embrace that way of life. This,
as they were thriving, responsible persons, they found no great difficulty to
effect; and Rupert returned once more to the happy occupation, from which
ambitious and chimerical dreams of glory, had formerly seduced him. But he was,
by no means, happy in his condition. Every day, as he went about those labors,
which he had so long disdained, the thoughts of his former elevated hopes and
expectations, continually haunted him. How did he suffer, under the mortifying
thought, that he owed almost his present existence, to those, whom he, on the
contrary, might, comparatively speaking, have made rich men. Accursed pride! he
would say, to what a pitiable degree have thou humbled me!

This cutting reflection filled his hours with bitterness; and he died, in a
short time, devoured with chagrin, leaving a melancholy example to those whom
the same intoxicating passion might tempt to despise the sound admonitions of
reason and modesty.

THE INCREASE OF FAMILY.
HONEST farmer Townsend was on a visit to his sister, who had been a few years
married, and lived at the distance of nine or ten miles from his habitation.
One evening, a little before supper, as he sat with her and her husband beside
their cottage door, and discoursed with them concerning family affairs, there
passed by a little girl about five years of age, and totally in rags. Townsend
remarked the miserable appearance of her whole person, and said to his sister,
"There is a poor little girl, very much to be pitied. Not one rag about her
seems to afford her a covering. It is a disgrace to your parish. Her father
must have very little industry, and her mother very little feeling."

Alas! answered his sister, she has no father nor mother, and there are two
other children, beside her, of the same family, who are equally wretched.
Through some dispute between two different parishes, (each asserting this
destitute family to belong to the other) the poor children wander up and down
the country, without house or home. They lie, at night, in barns, or under
hedges. When hunger becomes troublesome, they go and sit down before the doors
of cottages. If any body gives them a morsel of bread, they receive it with
joy; but they never ask any thing. Their father, who was a man of spirit,
though reduced by sickness, to the m^st deplorable state of poverty, forbad
them, with his dying lips, to beg.

This recital affected the honest farmer very much. It is shocking, said he,
that any poor creatures should be so neglected by the rest of their species: I
will take them, added he, under my care, since nobody here wishes to be charged
with them. His sister, and her husband, thought it their duty to dissuade him,
as strongly as possible, from this undertaking. They told him, that he had
children of his own, that he knew nothing about these, that they were, for
three months past, accustomed to a lazy vagabond life, and that it was a matter
of doubt, whether they would ever turn to good. Then, brother, consider, added
they, what an addition of trouble they will cause to your wife, and what a
burden they will be in your family.

Townsend was not one of those weak men, who suffer themselves to be diverted
from the performance of a laudable design, by a few difficulties accompanying
it. He was not very solicitous to hear all their objections, and still less to
answer them.

He rose, therefore, from his seat, in order to retire to rest: but his scheme
of benevolence, in favor of the orphans, kept him long awake, by exciting, in
his mind, reflections of a tenderer cast than usual; and the moisture of
generous compassion was still upon his eyelids, when they closed in sleep for
the night.

The next morning early, he sent for the eldest girl, who was about twelve
years of age. I was given, said he, to understand, yesterday, that your father
and mother are dead, and I see, by your dress, that they have not left you any
great matters of fortune.

The little girl. No, indeed, we are poor enough.


Townsend. Have you no relations, who would take you home?


The little girl. Yes, we have some, but they are too poor, as well as
ourselves.


Townsend. Well, would you go with me, and be my child?


The little girl. Ah! if you would take me.


Townsend. Come, then, that is settled: but I am going home on horseback, and
could not take you all three together. It was the youngest sister that I saw
first: I will begin with her. Bring the child to me. Let us be acquainted
together.

The youngest girl soon came. She had a countenance so mild, and gained so much
upon the farmer, by her little fond caresses, that he looked upon himself
already as her father. He took her up, therefore, before him, on his horse; and
when they arrived at the farm-house, his wife asked him whose child that was.
It is yours, Maria, answered he, and began withal to relate to her, how, the
day before, he had seen the little child, and been informed of her wretched and
friendless situation; how he had compassion on her, and took her home with him,
in order to support her as one of his own children.

During all this relation, the little girl crept close to the farmer's skirt,
and shed tears without ceasing. Maria, who was as compassionate as her husband,
sympathized with the little orphan; she took her up in her lap, and endeavored
to soothe her with these words: "Since my husband has promised to be your
father, I will be your mother too. Come then, my dear child, do not cry any
more."


Townsend. But, wife, there are two others besides, who are equally worthy of
our compassion, the brother and sister of this little one.


Maria. Ah! my dear, I see what you mean. Well, we must send for them.

The next day, the farmer put the horse to his chaise-cart, and went for the
other two orphans.

Go, said his wife, embracing him at his departure, go, my dear; and that
Being, who sends us these children, will not fail to send us, also, bread for
their nourishment.

Mr. Justice Garboil, however, thought otherwise. He had been landlord to the
father of these unfortunate little ones, and was well appri^ed of their
distress. Hearing the farmer had taken them home to his house, he dispatched
his clerk to him, with a peremptory injunction to send the children to their
own settlement, (which, it has been observed before, was in litigation) or, in
failure thereof, to give security to his own parish, that they should never
become chargeable to it.

Farmer Townsend was filled with indignation on receiving such a message. If
this, cried he, be his worship's humanity, I would rather be the child of
misery, for an age, than accept the condition of that overswoln bashaw, during
his most self-complacent hour. Let me know, however, what bail is required; I
am ready. Poor innocents! the more I see oppression endeavor to tread you
down, the dearer you become to me, and the more I feel myself interested to
protect you.

After the farmer had satisfied every demand of Justice Garboil, he returned to
his house, and now, said he, surely these children are mine. Nobody will
question my being a father to them, by one title or other.

You are anxious, no doubt, my young friends, to know what became of these
children, in the sequel. Luckily, I can inform you, by relating to you a
conversation between Farmer Townsend and a person who happened to be traveling
in that part of the country, some years afterward.

All the little family were at play together, one evening, before the farmer's
door, while Maria was getting their supper ready. He himself was in the midst
of them, partaking of their sport and festivity. The traveller happened to pass
by, just at the time, and stopped to gaze on this specimen of rural happiness.

Are all these children yours, neighbor? said he to the farmer.

Yes, Sir, answered Townsend: I have ten of them alive; seven that Providence
bestowed on me, and three that I have purchased.

Purchased? said the traveller, much surprised.

Why, Sir, it was, in some sense, a purchase, replied the farmer, and, upon
this, told him the whole story, adding, as he concluded it, thank heaven,
neither my wife nor I have, at any time, repented of the action. It was the
best bargain that ever I made in my life.


The traveller. There must be no small expense in the maintenance of such a
family.


Townsend. It seems, at first view, a difficult matter to find bread for them
all, without an estate; for any one can easily spend the fruits of his own
labor: and, unless you were to make a trial, you would scarcely think it
possible to be done. I owe, perhaps, to this difficulty, the good management
which has ever kept me above want; but when a man is sober, laborious and
circumspect, he will always have a trifling superfluity for the unfortunate.


The traveller. And your children are not jealous of these strangers?


Townsend. Strangers? There are none here. We are all one family promiscuously.
There is no strife, but which will be the most loving and affectionate. I give
you leave to guess which are my children by birth; at times I can hardly
distinguish them myself.


The traveller. But I do not see the elder of the girls among them.


Townsend. No, I dare say not, for she has other business in hand; she must
look after her own household.


The traveller. Is she married, then?


Townsend. Yes, that she is. She fell into the nets of a fisherman, one that
hauls them to some account, I promise you, and makes a good livelihood by his
trade. It is true, I furnished him pretty plentifully with stock.


The traveller. What, did you give her a portion, then?


Townsend. That' must be done, to get a daughter off your hands. Look you at
his boats and fishing-tackle, if they are not the compleatest on this coast.


The traveller. Still you have no occasion to have done that. She was nothing
to you.


Townsend. No? She made me happier than any of ^^y own has been able to make me
as yet, on account of their age. She has a young daughter already, who calls me
grandfather. -- That sounds so droll!

Farmer Townsend then entertained the traveller with the happiness and
satisfaction that he enjoyed, in the improvement of the other two orphans.

The youngest girl, says he, is big enough already, to assist my wife in the
business of the house. As to the boy, there is not his fellow in the country,
for tending a flock. Ah! if you knew how fond they all are of me, and how much
I love them in return!

His heart was softened at this recital of his own, and a tear of benevolence
moistened his eye. He wiped it away, however, immediately, and said, with an
ironical smile, Ah! Justice Garboil, Justice Garboil, you might have had all
this happiness, if your heart could have known a duty beyond the letter of the
law. You forced me to give bail; but you little thought it was to ensure to me,
for life, a happiness to which you have ever been a stranger.


THE HUMOUROUS ENGAGEMENT. This story is taken from the history of Sandford and
Merton, and the following piece from a Dutch novel, in a series of letters.

TOMMY Merton, the son of a gentleman of fortune, and Harry Sandford, the son
of an honest farmer, were both under the care and instruction of Mr. Barlow, a
country clergyman. Harry, in one of his walks with Mr. Barlow, had saved a
young chicken from the claws of a kite. He had taken the greatest care possible
of its little wounds, and fed it every day with his own hands. The little
animal was now perfectly recovered of the hurt it had received, and showed so
great a degree of affection to its protector, that it would run after him like
a dog, hop upon his shoulder, nestle in his bosom, and eat crumbs out of his
hand. Tommy was extremely surprised and pleased, to remark its tameness and
docility, and asked by what means it had been made so gentle. Harry told him he
had taken no particular pains about it, but that, as the poor little creature
had been sadly hurt, he had fed it every day till it was well, and that in
consequence of that kindness, it had conceived a great degree of affection
toward him. Indeed, said Tommy, that is very surprising, for I thought all
birds had flown away, whenever a man came near them, and that even the fowls
which are kept at home would never let you touch them.

Mr. Barlow. And what do you imagine is the reason of that?


Tommy. Because they are wild.


Mr. Barlow. And what is a fowl's being wild?


Tommy. When he will not let you come near him.


Mr. Barlow. Then a fowl is wild, because he will not let you come near him;
and will not let you come near him, because he is wild: this is saying nothing
more than, that when a fowl is wild, he will not let you approach him. But I
want to know what is the reason of his being wild?


Tommy. Indeed, Sir, I cannot tell, unless it is because they are naturally so.


Mr. Barlow. But if they were naturally so, this fowl could not be fond of
Harry.


Tommy. That is because he is so good to it.


Mr. Barlow. Very likely. Then it is not natural for an animal to run away from
a person that is good to him?


Tommy. No, Sir, I believe not.


Mr. Barlow. But when a person is not good to him, or endeavors to hurt him,
it is natural for an animal to run away from him; is it not?


Tommy. Yes.


Mr. Barlow. And then you say that he is wild; do you not?


Tommy. Yes, Sir.


Mr. Barlow. Why, then, it is probable that animals are only wild, because they
are afraid of being hurt, and that they only run away, from the fear of danger.
I believe you would do the same from a lion or a tiger.


Tommy. Indeed I would, Sir.


Mr. Barlow. And yet you do not call yourself a wild animal.


Tommy laughed heartily at this, and said, no. Therefore, said Mr. Barlow, if
you want to tame animals, you must be good to them, and treat them kindly, and
then they will no longer fear you, but come to you, and love you. Indeed, said
Harry, that is very true: for I knew a little boy that took a great fancy to a
snake that lived in his father's garden, and when he had his milk for
breakfast, he used to sit under a nut-tree and whistle, and the snake would
come to him, and eat out of his bowl.

Tommy. And did it not bite him?


Harry. No; he sometimes used to give it a pat with his spoon, if it ate too
fast; but it never hurt him.


Tommy was much pleased with this conversation, and being both good natured,
and desirous of making experiments, he determined to try his skill in taming
animals. Accordingly he took a large slice of bread in his hand, and went out
to seek some animal, that he might give it to. The first thing that he happened
to meet, was a sucking pig that had rambled from its mother, and was basking in
the sun: Tommy would not neglect the opportunity of showing his talents; he
therefore called Pig, pig, pig, come hither little pig! But the pig, who did
not exactly comprehend his intentions, only grunted, and ran away. You little
ungrateful thing, said Tommy, do you treat me in this manner, when I want to
feed you? If you do not know your friends, I must teach you. Saying this, he
sprung at the pig, and caught him by the hind leg, intending to have given him
the bread which he had in his hand; but the pig, who was not used to be treated
in that manner, began struggling and squeaking to that degree, that the sow,
who was within hearing, came running to the place, with all the rest of the
litter, at her heels. As Tommy did not know whether she would be pleased with
his civilities to her young one, or not, he thought it most prudent to let it
go; and the pig, endeavoring to escape as speedily as possible, unfortunately
ran between his legs, and threw him down. The place where the accident happened
was extremely wet; therefore Tommy, in falling, dirtied himself from head to
foot, and the sow, who came up at that instant, passed over him, as he
attempted to rise, and rolled him back again into the mire. Tommy, who was not
the coolest in his temper, was extremely provoked at this ungrateful return for
his intended kindness; and losing all patience, he seized the sow by the hind
leg, and began pummelling her with all his might, as she attempted to escape.
The sow, as may be imagined, did not relish such treatment, but endeavored
with all her force to escape; but Tommy keeping his hold, and continuing his
discipline, she struggled with such violence, as to drag him several yards,
squeaking in the most lamentable manner, in which she was joined by the whole
litter of pigs. During the heat of the contest, a large flock of geese happened
to be crossing the road, into the midst of which the affrighted sow ran
headlong, dragging the enraged Tommy at her heels. The goslings retreated with
the greatest precipitation, joining their mournful cackling to the general
noise; but a gander, of more than common size and courage, resenting the
unprovoked attack which had been made upon his family, flew at Tommy's hinder
parts, and gave him several severe strokes with his bill. Tommy, whose courage
had hitherto been unconquerable, being thus unexpectedly attacked by a new
enemy, was obliged to yield to fortune; and not knowing the precise extent of
his danger, he not only suffered the sow to escape, but joined his
vociferations to the general scream. This alarmed Mr. Barlow, who, coming up to
the place, found his pupil in the most woeful plight, daubed from head to foot,
with his face and hands as black as those of any chimney-sweeper. He enquired
what was the matter, and Tommy, as soon he had recovered breath enough to
speak, answered in this manner; Sir, this is all owing to what you told me
about taming animals. I wanted to make them tame and gentle and to love me, and
you see the consequences. Indeed, said Mr. Barlow, I see you have been very
ill-treated, but I hope you are not hurt; and if it is owing to any thing I
have said, I shall feel the more concern. No, said Tommy, I cannot say that I
am much hurt. Why then, said Mr. Barlow, you had better go and wash yourself;
and when you are clean, we will talk over the affair. When Tommy had returned,
Mr. Barlow asked him how the accident had happened, and when he had heard ^he
story, he said I am very sorry for your misfortune, but I do not perceive that
I was the cause of it, for I do not remember that I ever advised you to catch
pigs by the hinder legs.

Tommy. No, Sir; but you told me that feeding animals was the way to make them
love me, and so I wanted to feed the pig.


Mr. Barlow. But it was not my fault that you attempted it in a wrong manner.
The animal did not know your intentions, and therefore when you seized him in
so violent a manner, he naturally attempted to escape, and his mother hearing
his cries, very naturally came to his assistance. All that happened, was owing
to your ^^experience; before you meddle with any animal, you should make
yourself perfectly acquainted with its nature and disposition. Had you observed
this rule, you would never have attempted to catch the pig by the hinder leg,
in order to tame it; and it is very lucky that you did not make the experiment
upon a larger animal.


CHARLES II. A DRAMA IN FIVE ACTS.
From the German of Mr. STEPHANIE, but with considerable deviations from the
Original, in the two last Acts.
CHARACTERS.
CHARLES II. Earl of DERBY. Lord WYNDHAM. Lady MARY, his mother. Lady WYNDHAM,
his wife. HENRY, his son. ELIZABETH, his daughter.
of the Parliament Army CROMWELL, genesis LUKE, captain

sold'rs PEMBEL, TALGOL

Servants to Lord Wyndham. POPE, THOMAS, JAMES,

PREFACE.
THE part which James I. king of England, took, in the dispute between the
bishops and the Presbyterians, had so violently enraged the latter, that after
his death, they took the advantage of some arbitrary measures in the government
of his son and successor, Charles I. to excite the whole nation to open revolt.
The intent of the Presbyterians was, to annihilate Episcopacy, and to lessen
the royal prerogative: but the Independents, a new sect which had sprung up
from the former, aimed at the total abolition of royalty, and the establishment
of a commonwealth in its stead. Cromwell, who had made both parties equally
subservient to his ambitious views, declared, at last, in favor of the
independents. After having filled the parliament and the army with persons
devoted to his fortune, or the dupes of his hypocrisy, he procured a formal
sentence of death to be passed against his sovereign. The Presbyterians, though
they saw themselves plainly outwitted by his cunning, did not dare to rise up
against the power which he had usurped. Those of Scotland had more courage;
they called over the eldest son of Charles I. from France, whither he had fled
for refuge, and they received him as their king, though under the most severe
restrictions. Cromwell, however, soon marched into Scotland, and defea^ed them
in the famous battle of Dunbar, September 3, 1650.

Hostilities, which were suspended during the winter, began afresh the year
following. Charles II. whom the Scots had proclaimed king, was,
notwithstanding, so disgusted at the state of subjection and restraint to which
they would have reduced him, that he took the resolution of quitting Scotland,
whither Cromwell was come to pursue him, and of entering England with an army
of fourteen thousand men, in hopes of seeing it augmented by the English
Presbyterians, and the secret friends of the royal cause. But Cromwell did not
give him time to receive these additions of strength: he followed him by forced
marches, overtook him with a superior army, and entirely routed the Scottish
troops. After having fought bravely to the very last, Charles, with difficulty,
escaped off the field of battle, accompanied by fifty men. The distresses to
which he was reduced after his defeat, obliged him to conceal himself under the
meanest disguises, in order to escape from the soldiers, whom Cromwell had sent
out, every where, in search of him; the instances of fidelity that he received
from the Earl of Derby, the companion of his flight, from Colonel Wyndham In
the Drama he is called Lord Wyndham.
and his servants, who kept him concealed, notwithstanding the severe penalties
denounced by the parliament; the fanaticism of the parties which then
distracted England, and the deplorable state of the nation in general; during
this season of tumult, present a multitude of interesting situations, and
instructive scenes, to which the author has endeavored to give connection in
the following drama, at the same time, that he has studied to preserve
historical truth in the leading actions of the piece.

CHARLES II. A DRAMA. ACT. I.
SCENE I. A Forest, before Daylight.
Charles dressed as a peasant, is hid among the boughs of an oak. Lord Derby,
disguised in the same manner, comes out from the middle of a thicket, and
advances toward the king. Lord Derby. It is too soon to quit your retreat, as
yet. The parliament soldiers continue to scour all quarters of the forest. We
are liable, at every step, to fall into their hands.


Charles. Derby, I find myself endowed with sufficient courage to struggle with
the chagrin that preys upon my mind, but my body is totally broken down with
pain and fatigue. I have already passed twenty hours in this deplorable
situation. I cannot possibly support it any longer.


Derby. Sire, I conjure you, put up with these inconveniences, which cannot be
of long duration, rather than fall into the hands of your enemies. They would
be implacable. Our misfortune, by intoxicating them with success, has only
whetted their barbarity. The weight of it would fall on you. But I hope we
shall soon find a retreat more commodious, and less dangerous than this.


Charles. It cannot be long before the sun will appear. If you thought darkness
so little favorable to our safety, surely the light of the day will be much
more against us. How shall I be able to hold out till night, in my present
situation? The mind arms herself in vain, with all her force, if the body has
lost what should sustain her.


Derby. I feel, with double weight, the pains that you suffer, and would lay
down my life to exempt you from them; but fate controuls our wishes. Its laws
are immutable, and true courage is, to obey them. I would sacrifice myself for
your preservation: nevertheless, shall I confess to your majesty? It would give
me less regret to lose you here before my eyes, than to see you fall into the
hands of rebels, and adorn their insolent triumph. I hear soldiers coming. Hide
yourself from their sight. When they are past, I will return and keep you
company again. (He goes into the thicket.


Charles. Well, faithful Derby, I will follow thy advice. I will bear up my
load of pain and hardship, though I were at last to fall dead at the foot of
this tree. (He hides himself among the branches.


SCENE II.
Talgol, Pembel. Talgol. Should not we do better to rest ourselves here till
daylight?


Pembel. Why here? We shall be much more at our case, before a table, at some
inn.


Talgol. You may try the experiment, if you will. Every body is fast asleep
yet. Instead of going to lose my time in knocking at doors, I will stretch
myself down here. (He lies down under the oak in which the king is concealed.


Pembel. From the top of this tree you may see the day ready to break between
yon hills. Do not you hear the cocks crow, to summon the husbandman to his
early toil? We shall find all the houses just opening. Come, rife; let us go.


Talgol. What I have once resolved, I am sure to perform.


Pembel. I might say as much, and then we must separate. I change my resolves
no more than you: my beard shows it. Until Charles Stuart shall fall into my
hands, I have sworn that the razor shall never touch it. You see how long it is
grown already.


Talgol. It is easier to bear the inconvenience of a beard, than of weariness
and fatigue.


Pembel. Are you not ashamed to be weary in a pursuit that may make your
fortune.


Talgol. I would not desire a fortune at this price.


Pembel. The thing is, thou art not sufficiently enlightened. But I can prove
to thee, that it were impious for saints to faint in the execution of heaven's
commands, for the sake of a little weariness.


Talgol. Heaven has not commanded me. I have not sworn by my beard to take
Charles Stuart. And if I may ask, what right have you over him?


Pembel. A right, founded on the good old cause: Shall the ungodly have
dominion over saints? We were strayed from the paths of righteousness, and
heaven, in its wrath, sent us a tyrant, armed with a rod of iron. Now that we
are sanctified, power is given us to break the rod with which we have been so
long chastised.


Talgol. Still I say; it is wicked to reject the kings, who were allotted to us
from above.


Pembel. The Lord will have no king, but himself, to govern his people. No
sight is more pleasing to him, than that of the army at prayers. That is what
has carried the good old cause so far.


Talgol. Much too far. Had we stopped at the abolishing of popery and
episcopacy, it had been well. I took up arms myself to attain these ends; and
with this view also we called you to our assistance; but you have managed so as
to get the power all into your own hands, and now you exercise it according to
your errors. You have put your king to death. That will cost you dear.


Pembel. If you were only to hear Cromwell, he would teach you what to think on
the subject. These are his words: "When I would have spoken for the
re-establishment of the king, I felt my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth.
A plain indication that heaven had hardened his heart, and rejected him." But
answer me yourself; Was this king worthy to govern us? Did he not attack us
first?


Talgol. Yes, certainly, he would have enthralled our consciences to his own
imaginations.


Pembel. Who was the first that rose up to oppose his designs? Was it not you?


Talgol. Our arms were not aimed at him, but at his wicked counselors.


Pembel. They were the same as himself, and he as they. To let them do the
evil, was it not the same if he did it himself?


Talgol. True, he was blameable for it.


Pembel. And what was your object?


Talgol. Liberty of conscience.


Pembel. Did he grant it to you?


Talgol. No.


Pembel. Would you ever have obtained it, if the parliament had not supported
you?


Talgol. Never, I allow.


Pembel. And is not the parliament the voice of the nation?


Talgol. Certainly, inasmuch as it represents the nation.


Pembel. It is the parliament, therefore, that is the nation, that we must
obey, especially when we are so well paid for it.


Talgol. Your arguments begin to appear something weightier than before.


Pembel. See how thou were blinded. The Lord was desirous to punish a tyrant,
and chose you first to begin his vengeance. Other instruments were wanting for
the consummation thereof, and we came to put the last hand to this great work.
Do we not act then in concert with you? and is not the good old cause our's as
well as yours? Ought we then to bear with one of the ungodly, that would have
bruised us to pieces; us who are the children of the Lord?


Talgol. I begin to see clearly.


Pembel. Have patience, the light will come down upon thee still more. When
delivered from our first tyrant, why did we go, with swords in our hands, to
Worcester? Was it not to hinder his son from overturning the foundation that we
had laid for the security of our consciences and our liberties? Has not heaven
approved our actions, by the glorious victory that we have gained? Stuart came
against us with a numerous army. Did we not make him flee, like the chaff
before the wind? When the Lord speaks, are we to resist his voice?


Talgol. Thou art right. He has clearly manifested his will.


Pembel. He requires that our consciences be pure: Stuart would defile them
with his errors; and shall we cease to pursue him with vengeance?


Talgol. Heaven forbid. The son is not yet sufficiently washed from the
impieties of his father, to rule over us, the elect. We should seize him
wherever we can find him, lest, otherwise, we ourselves disobey the Lord.


Pembel. Perhaps we should have had, before this time, the good fortune to take
him, if your heart, by its doubts and waverings, had not offended heaven.
Others, less scrupulous, may have seized this happiness before us. Yes, we
shall certainly find Stuart in the custody of Cromwell.


Talgol. How! I should never pardon myself, were I to see him taken by any
other hands than our's. The cock crows again. It is a good omen. Let us go and
search every quarter of the country for our victim. I no longer feel myself
fatigued.


Pembel, (in a canting tone.) If heaven had not given me patience and inward
light, your understanding would have still been in darkness. (They go out.)


SCENE III.
Charles. Perfidious Cromwell, this is your manner of acting! It is not
sufficient to arm against me ambition, by the allurements of power, audacious
violence, by the charms of wild licentiousness, and avarice, by the incitements
of rapine? Your base emissaries would arm against me ignorance and
superstition, by the workings of enthusiasm. Your impious hypocrisy would make
heaven itself instrumental in stifling the last remainder of virtue in men's
consciences. I complained of my own sufferings and distresses; I should lament
over the fate of my people. They do not see the chains which your murderous
hand is forging for them. I lose but my crown, and perhaps my life, whereas
they lose liberty, peace, virtue and honor.


SCENE IV.
(The sun is on the point of rising.) Charles, Pope. Pope, (dressed in livery;
he stops under the oak, and looks at the rising sun.) A new day begins.
Gracious Lord, hear me. May our sovereign escape this day also from his
persecutors. Vouchsafe to take him under thy protection, and to watch over his
life. There are faithful subjects enough who wish for his restoration, but few
who dare to take up arms in his favor. Thou alone remainest, O Lord, of all
who could assist him. Show forth thy power; restore to our sovereign his crown,
and to us peace and lawful government.


Charles. I can reckon, at least, one faithful subject. I will see him, and
speak to him. (He puts the leaves and branches aside, and shows himself.)


Pope, (turning his head every way to listen.) I think I hear a voice. (Going.)


Charles, (coming down from the tree.) Stop a moment, my friend, I beseech you.


Pope, (with a look of suspicion.) What do you make the^e?


Charles, (going toward (...)) You seem to me to be an honest man --


Pope. So I am; what then?


Charles. I have a favor to request of you.


Pope. In the first place, who are you?


Charles. I am one who escaped after the battle of Worcester. I have passed the
night on this tree, to escape from the parliament soldiers, because I am of the
opposite party. I perceive, by your fervent prayer just now, that you are of
the same party, and therefore it is that I have taken the liberty to address
you.


Pope. If what you say be true, you have nothing to fear from me. But what
would you have me do for you?


Charles. I see, you wear a livery. Who is your master?


Pope. Lord Wyndham, who lives in this neighborhood.


Charles. I have heard people speak of him.


Pope. Well, I hope. It is true, what I call well, would make him criminal in
the eyes of many. But still I must do him justice.


Charles. I recollect, this nobleman lived retired from all party.


Pope. True, but do you know for what reason? He served, with his family, in
the army of the deceased king. At the battle of Naseby, he lost his eldest son,
the hopes of his family. After the overthrow of the royal army, and the taking
of the king, he came down here to the country, to mourn in silence, for the
cruel fate of his master. He swore never to return to London, before the people
should submit to the son of their lawful sovereign. And he adheres strictly to
his word; since that unfortunate battle, he has never quitted his house.


Charles, (aside.) Heaven be praised. I find an asylum at length.


Pope. Now tell me what is your intention?


Charles. Let me request you to conduct me to my Lord. He will compassionate my
distresses; and certainly he will not refuse me shelter for a few days in his
house.


Pope. I am going thither immediately. I have walked all night with dispatches
from him, on business of importance. I would cheerfully take you with me, if I
were sure that you were of the right side; for, otherwise, it would be of no
use for you to appear before him. You are astonished, perhaps, that I dare
speak my mind to you with so much freedom; but, in spite of all the tyranny of
the parliament, we are not afraid to give our thoughts vent. It is true, we are
too weak to stem the torrent of rebellion. Power may oblige us to be quiet, but
not to betray, or even to disguise our sentiments.


Charles. I am delighted to see you in this way of thinking. For these four and
twenty hours past, I have concealed myself in this tree, in order to escape the
pursuit of Cromwell's soldiers. I have shed tears of blood, for our loss of the
battle of Worcester. My heart is the king's; and whatever may be my fate, I
will never be seen to change.


Pope. Nor (...), nor my master neither. Ah! that unfortunate battle has
plunged us all in grief. What can have become of our young king! Oh heaven may
he still be alive, and escape from his enemies.


Charles. Have you heard any thing of him?


Pope. Nothing, unless that he wanders through the country, with a small number
of friends. Who knows whether he has not fallen, this last night, into the
hands of the parliament party? But no, I hope that my prayers may have
preserved him.


Charles. My brave friend, he would be happy to testify his gratitude to you,
for so faithful an attachment.


Pope. Alas! perhaps he is not able to provide for his own immediate
necessities. He is, no doubt, much more distressed than I am. It should be my
part to assist him with the little that I possess.


Charles, (sighing,) Ah! such generosity cannot fail, sooner or later, to meet
with the reward that it deserves.


Pope. What do you talk of reward? Let England only receive her king, and I am
paid, to the fullest of my wishes. But if you will come with me, it is time to
set off. I should be at home now.


Charles, (holding him by the hand.) My friend! stop but a moment. (He makes a
signal.)


Pope, (surprised.) What are you doing? I fear you are a traitor. Well, I will
not deny what I have said. I have neither wife nor children: and my single
person is not of such consequence, that I should make myself uneasy about it;
besides, it is but too great an honor for me, to perish by the same axe which
has beheaded the king, and so many great noblemen. Let your crew come on. I
have no reason to blush, for I have only spoken the truth.


Charles. No, my friend; you judge wrong of me: I am calling one of the
companions of my flight, who lies hid in yonder thicket. We lay the most
implicit confidence in you. I could only wish to see every Englishman have so
noble a way of thinking as yours is.


SCENE V.
Charles, Derby, Pope. Derby, (startled.) What do I see?


Charles. There is no danger. I am going to follow this worthy man. He serves
Lord Wyndham, whose dwelling is hard by.


Derby. Lord Wyndham? Are we so near to his seat?


Pope. It is but an hour's walk from hence.


Charles. Do you see any danger in asking him for shelter?


Derby. None at all. My lord is a faithful friend to the royal cause.


Pope. Yes, by my faith, is he, and whoever is of a different way of thinking,
ought not to come into his house. We pray, every day, for the safety of the
prince. I do not know if my lord prays with more earnestness for his only son.
Nay, when I attended him at the battle of Naseby, and the corpse of his eldest
son, all covered with blood, was brought before him, his tears, I believe, were
shed as much for the king's defeat, as for his own loss.


Charles, (aside to Derby.) Shall we go to his house, then?


Derby, (aside to Charles.) Yes, if I might advise your majesty.


Pope, (overhearing.) Majesty? -- Heavens! I believe it is the king himself.
Yes, my heart assures me that it is. (Falls at his feet.) Your majesty will
pardon me for having spoken so rudely. But how should I imagine that a king of
England was concealed in this dress? I shall be pardoned, however, by your
majesty, since, without making yourself known, you discovered my inmost
thoughts. What can I say more? I have not power to speak, I am so transported
with joy. What a happiness for so poor a man as I am, that the sovereign of
three kingdoms should command my services!


Charles. What are you doing, my friend? Your ardour transports you, I am not
what you say.


Pope. Oh! yes, you are, in the sight of heaven and earth. Why should you
disguise yourself? Your countenance discovers you. -- And I, that dared to call
you a traitor! I am as much in the right now, as I was deceived before. Only
let your majesty lay your hand upon my heart. Would it beat with so much
violence, if I was not in the presence of my king?


Charles. Rise, my friend, your mistake may cause our ruin.


Derby. Would the king be without a retinue?


Pope. He should not. But, alas! the villain Cromwell has left him none.
However, he needs no retinue to be still my king. I beseech you, tell me that
you are so. You do not deign to answer me. I see, you both fear to trust me:
and yet I dare to appeal to your majesty; after what you have heard from my own
mouth, can you refuse me your confidence? If there is, in all my veins, a drop
of disloyal blood, let it overflow my heart, and choke the springs of life.


Charles. I am persuaded you are an honest man, and therefore I do not wish to
deceive you.


Pope. Well, my liege, it is enough. Men do not follow a guide whom they
distrust. This road leads to my lord Wyndham's. Go thither without me: but
first, here are my pistols; take them, and shoot me through the head. I dare
not answer for myself, since you have suspicions of my honesty. (Charles makes
signs to Lord Derby, for his advice, who signifies his approbation.)


Charles, (to Pope.) You deserve to know me. I am the unfortunate king of
Scotland.


Pope, (vehemently.) And of England too, and Ireland; I Will maintain it. Your
majesty has as much right to one as the other.


Charles. You see our danger; make haste to bring us to a place of safety.
Conduct us to Lord Wyndham's; but I conjure you, tell nobody who I am, not even
your master.


Pope. Sire, I am but a poor peasant, yet I know that the request of a king is
a sacred injunction to a faithful subject; and I would not lose that name,
especially today, for the whole world.


Charles. You possess the most important secret of the State, but, I believe,
you are capable of treasuring it up faithfully in your breast.


Pope. Ah! Sire, I would face the most dreadful torments, to deserve your
praise.


Charles. Derby, my legs have not strength enough to carry me as far as our
horses.


Pope, (eagerly.) Where are they? Where are they?


Derby. Down among those thickets. I will go for them.


Pope. No, no; we are too near the road here; we may be surprised. Let me carry
your majesty to them. Then we shall have the forest all the way home.


Charles. I would not give you this trouble, if I could stand.


Pope, (taking him in his arms.) Come, my Liege, (as he goes along.) Show me a
man of more importance than myself. The greatest secret of the state in my
breast, and the fate of the three kingdoms upon my shoulders. (They go out.)


ACT II.
SCENE I. A room in Lord Windham's Castle.
Windham sitting at a table, thoughtful and melancholy. Henry, his son, enters
and salutes him. Windham does not observe him, but continues still buried in
profound meditation. Henry. Father, I conjure you, banish this melancholy that
oppresses you.


Windham, (looking at him with an air of dejection.) My son, the battle is
lost; that battle on which our last hopes were rested. Nor is it known what is
become of the king. I tremble to think that he may have sunk under his
misfortunes. Then who could stop the fury of the rebels, or oppose their
designs. And do you bid me not to mourn for the fate of my country?


Henry. Your grief is just, but it endangers your life. What would become of
your wife and your children, if they were so unfortunate as to lose you in
these turbulent times.


Wyndham. Death would, perhaps, be the most desirable thing for us all. You see
what is our situation. All the valuable remains that time had spared, of an
ancient nobility, have perished under tortures, or languish in proscription and
exile. Adventurers, more despicable for their vices than their obscurity,
occupy the seats of our peers in parliament. Instead of our brave generals, we
see ignorant tradesmen fill the first posts of the army. Fanaticism, of the
most abominable nature, reigns in the place of religion. Frantic preachers, of
a thousand sects, drown the voice of the regular ministers of the gospel.
Hypocrisy, under the appearance of piety, gives a loose to the most scandalous
excesses; she justifies her crimes by the most atrocious blasphemies, which she
ascribes to the Supreme Being. The true friends of this country are persecuted;
and infamy is seated on the throne of justice. Can life be of any value, while
it is confined to view such horrid sights as these?


Henry. No, father, it would be intolerable, were these evils to continue for
ever. But why should we suffer our courage to be cast down? Who knows? --


Windham. On what foundation can we build a hope? The royal army is dispersed.
If the prince were even living, where would he find forces to retrieve his
fortune? His friends, disheartened by a long series of overthrows, far from
daring to resist the torrent of rebellion, are, perhaps, destined, by their
ruin, to augment the general devastation. Our last resource is only the
swelling of this tyranny to its height. That period approaches; and the people
of this nation, finding themselves oppressed by a heavier yoke than they ever
yet experienced, will arm themselves with all their native resolution, to shake
it off. But how many troubles and disorders will bring about that happy
revolution! I shall not live long enough to be a witness to it: but, my son, if
thou shall survive me, remain for ever steady in the principles which I have
taught thee. Never espouse the cause of a despotic parliament: it will become
the most dreadful scourge that ever oppressed this nation. Remain rather
inactive (it will be the most prudent conduct) until the people, recovered from
their fatal errors, be constrained to wish for the government, which they have
just now abolished.


Henry. I swear, under your hand, that these sacred instructions shall never
depart from my heart and m^mory.


SCENE II.
Wyndham, Henry, Pope. Pope. My lord, her ladyship, your sister, is much
better, but she earnestly desires to see her mother today. Colonel Lane
presents his respects. He is going to embark


Wyndham. For what country?


Pope. For France, my lord. I saw them send his baggage aboard; for the ship is
to sail tomorrow, by break of day.


Wyndham, (sighing.) One brave citizen more banished from his country! The
commonwealth will soon behold its soundest members scattered far, far away.
Have you learned nothing of the king's destiny?


Pope. He is still alive, my lord. He wanders about this part of the country,
accompanied by a faithful friend.


Wyndham. Reduced to hide himself in his own dominions! What a lamentable
situation! But heaven be praised that he still lives. Run immediately, and
carry this news to my mother.


Pope. I have brought hither two persons, who escaped from the battle of
Worcester, and request shelter in your house for a few days.


Wyndham. Let them come in. (Pope goes out.)


SCENE III.
Wyndham, Henry. Henry. What, father, will you receive these strangers, without
knowing them? Suppose they were enemies, in disguise!


Wyndham. And what then, my dear child? What harm can they do to us? Bear
witness, that we are faithful to our king. All England knows it. I have never
denied my principles, which are dearer to me than my life.


SCENE IV.
Charles, Derby, Wyndham, Henry, Pope. Wyndham. Good Morrow, friends. I
understand that you desire to take shelter in my house.


Charles. Yes, my lord, we are come, with confidence, to throw ourselves under
your lordship's protection.


Wyndham. I am ready to receive you, when I know who you are.


Charles. Some of the king's most zealous friends. Your lordship knows, I
suppose, that the royal army was defeated, three days ago: we were separated
from his company. The dread of falling into the hands of rebels, forced us to
put on this disguise. We beg your lordship to allow us a safeguard, until the
roads are more clear, that we may return.


Pope, (aside to Wyndham, after he had placed arm chairs for them.) My lord,
they are fatigued.


Wyndham. Sit down and rest yourselves. I am willing to believe your bare word.
Indeed, what view could you have in calling yourselves of another party? The
parliament has conquered the king, but not the hearts of his faithful subjects:
I profess myself one of that number. If you are only come to be spies on me, or
to sound my principles, you see, I avow them; your commission is fulfilled. If
you were to stay longer, you would learn no more. However, I give you the
protection that you demand, and if you are what you say, I give it with
pleasure.


Charles. My lord, receive our thanks, and believe us to be incapable of
imposing on you. We belonged to the Scottish army.


Wyndham. In that case, I rejoice that I can be of service to persons of worth.
Command my house: but first (in a pathetic voice) make haste to inform me
whatever you know of the king.


Charles. After the unfortunate battle, he left Worcester about six o'clock in
the evening, accompanied by a body of fifty men. He galloped twenty-six miles,
without halting; after which, he thought it most advisable to separate from
his escort, and, with the Earl of Derby, alone, in his company, he threw
himself into the adjacent forest. Since then, nothing particular has happened
to him.


Wyndham. Let heaven's protection attend all his steps. My heart is relieved
from a heavy anxiety. He has, at least, escaped the first danger. We were
ignorant, whether he had escaped alive from the field of battle, (wiping his
eyes.) Happy Derby! Heaven has trusted to your hands, the pledge of England's
happiness; preserve this sacred deposit for us, even at the hazard of your
life. You have ever been steady to your duty; let your conduct still be worthy
of your former virtue.


Derby, (with vehemence.) It will, my lord, it will. I know him sufficiently to
swear for him.


Wyndham, (looking earnestly at Derby.) My friend, your features are not quite
unknown to me.


Derby. I must be greatly altered, Wyndham, if you do not know me again.


Wyndham. What, can it be Lord Derby himself?


Derby. The same.


Wyndham. (embracing him.) Brave Derby! (perceiving Derby to look anxiously at
the king, he turns his eyes toward him, and cries, with an emotion of
surprise,) Shall I believe my eyes?


Derby. They are as true as your heart is. Here you see my sacred deposit. I
consign it to your charge.


Wyndham, (seizing the king's hand, and kissing it, with transport.) Ah! Sire!
how happy am I! Receive, in these tears, the first testimony of my principles.
I see heaven declares itself in your favor, since it has made choice of me to
receive you.


Charles. My lord, I know your loyalty well; I therefore resign myself to you,
without scruple.


Wyndham. Then I will not go about to offer your majesty unnecessary
assurances. This is my only son. I have brought him up in my own principles. He
burns already with impatience, to shed his blood in his sovereign's cause.


Harry. Yes, Sire, I have often, in my own mind, vowed to do so. With joy I now
renew that vow, upon your majesty's hand.


Charles. I accept your services, against a happier time.


Wyndham. Will your majesty permit me to present to you the rest of a family,
who are entirely devoted to your interest?


Charles. You excite a strong desire in me, of knowing your lordship's family;
I was going to ask you the favor of being introduced to them.


Wyndham, (to Pope.) Make haste; call my mother, my wife, and my daughter; let
them come hither immediately: but I forbid you to mention to them what you have
just now heard.


Pope. My lord, I knew every thing, and yet I kept it secret, even from your
lordship. Judge if I can do the same with others.


SCENE V.
Charles, Derby, Wyndham, Henry. Wyndham. We have not let a single day pass,
without addressing to heaven the most ardent prayers for your majesty's safety.
They have, no doubt, been heard. You deign to trust yourself to my faith; by so
doing, you honor my zeal with the most flattering recompense.


Charles. And I, on the other hand, look on this generous avowal, as a
mitigation of my misfortunes. Had it not been for you, I was not even sure of
finding a shelter.


Wyndham. Why has not fate placed the same force in our hands, that we feel
invigorate our souls? Your destiny would soon be decided. But, alas! I have
nothing to offer you, but ineffectual vows, and a weak, unarmed family. While
our wishes would be to replace your majesty on the throne of your fathers, at
the cost of our blood, our power goes no farther than to offer you an obscure
retreat.


Charles. And that is all that we have to desire, at present. We have been
borne away by a torrent of ill success. It is violent and impetuous, but in
time it spends its force. The blood of my subjects is too dear to permit me to
oppose the invincible sway of fortune, with an ineffectual resistance. Let us,
at the same time, avoid the dictates of a blind despair, and rest, armed in our
courage alone. The time will come, when we shall be able to make use of it with
more prudence and dignity.


SCENE VI.
Charles, Derby, Wyndham, Henry, Lady Mary, Lady Wyndham, Elizabeth, Pope. Lady
Mary. Son, what was the so pressing occasion of your sending for us?


Wyndham, (presenting his family to the king.) This is my mother; this is my
wife; this young person is my daughter: they have all the same sentiments with
myself. I have the honor to present so your majesty some of your most faithful
subjects.


Lady Mary. What do I hear? His Majesty?


Lady Wyndham and Elizabeth. O heaven!


Wyndham, (with tears in his eyes.) Yes, your king.


Lady Mary, (falling at his feet.) Ah! Sire, do you still live? -- My children,
it is still our sovereign, though in this dress. Follow my example, Receive him
as a king. Fall at his feet, and swear fealty, respect, and allegiance to him.


Wyndham. Your majesty will pardon me: the excess of my joy had made me forget
my first duty. (He falls at his feet, as do Lady Wyndham, Elizabeth and Henry.)


Charles, Rise, my friends. These marks of honor are very little suitable to
my situation. I am very far from my throne. (He raises Lady Mary: the others
rise.) Lord Wyndham, is this all your family?


Wyndham. Yes, Sire: I could wish it more numerous, that I might offer you a
greater number of devoted servants.


Charles, (placing himself between Lady Mary and Lady Wyndham, and taking each
of them by the hand.) My lord, and his son, have promised me their services;
but I will be under your particular protection. The joy which appears in your
eyes, persuades me that I shall not have much trouble to obtain it.


Lady Mary. We should be happy, were it in our power to show our attachment to
your majesty's crown, in circumstances less discouraging. I have lost, in the
defense of your cause, three sons and a grandson; but their death never made me
blush, as they received it in the performance of their duty. You see here all
that remains of our family, except a daughter that I have still living. There
is none of us to whom life is more dear, than your honor. We all burn with
zealous emulation to serve you. Your misfortunes, and those of your father,
embittered my old age. It seems as if heaven would relax of its severity, by
placing before my eyes, the object of my most tender anxiety, and by giving me
the means of preserving his life. Ah! Sire, what a happy compensation!


Charles, (pressing her hand between his.) I am not surprised to behold such
noble virtues in a family which does honor to you; but I admire that you
yourself should have still preserved such constancy and resolution, and that my
ill success, which has made my very best friends fall off, has not abated the
firmness of your courage.


Wyndham. Sire, we inherit these principles from our ancestors. A few days
before his death, my father sent for me, and in a voice, which, even from its
weakness, was heard the more attentively, he spoke to us thus: "My children,
England has seen, during the last three reigns, a succession of peaceful and
happy years; but I see now rising, on every side, clouds that forebode the most
violent storms. Prepare to encounter them. They will shake the whole realm to
its center. But stand ye firm, in the midst of the tempest. Continue to love
your country; be faithful to your sovereign, and never forsake the crown,
though you see it hang on a bush." These words made so powerful an impression
upon our minds, that all the tumultuous revolutions, which have since taken
place in the commonwealth, have not been able to efface them.


Charles. Lord Wyndham, you are worthy of the virtuous inheritance which your
father has left you.


Lady Wyndham. My husband would have lost my esteem, if he had not cultivated
that inheritance for his children.


Henry. And I will count it my glory to transmit it to mine.


Elizabeth. Sire, I am, as yet, nothing on the theater of this world; but,
after the example of my parents, I feel myself capable of undertaking every
thing for your service.


Charles. Respectable family! what transporting happiness do I experience in
the midst of you! After having suffered so much from ingratitude and perfidy,
my heart breathes here at liberty, while I receive these affectionate proofs of
your attachment.


Derby. At present, my friends, it is time to consult the security of the king.
Prudence forbids us to prolong our stay here. The whole country is full of
parliament soldiers. I know not whether there be so much as a single corner in
the three kingdoms, that can afford us a secure retreat, in the present general
ferment of people's minds. The business is, therefore, to consult means for
quitting England, by the least dangerous way.


Charles. My design is to embark for France, in the first vessel that I can
find. Lord Wyndham, you know the country, and can easily favor this design.


Wyndham. Chance seems to have disposed every thing for its succeeding. A
servant, whom I had sent to my sister at Shoreham, informed me, that a vessel
is to set sail from thence tomorrow, at daybreak, for Normandy. Colonel Lane,
a zealous friend to your majesty's cause, takes advantage of this opportunity,
to escape from the pursuit of Cromwell's people.


Derby. And the opportunity seems pretty favorable.


Charles. I am ready to embrace it, provided we can go to the harbor, without
any danger.


Wyndham. That shall be my care. I have trusty persons to accompany you.


Derby. Our horses have had severe duty. We shall have occasion for them
tonight. Will your lordship order care to be taken of them?


Wyndham. Pope, go and look after them. Provide every thing for them that is
necessary.


Pope. My lord, I obey you.


SCENE VII.
Charles, Derby, Wyndham, Lady Mary, Lady Wyndham, Elizabeth, Henry. Wyndham.
We must use the most delicate precautions, in order to remove the slightest
cause of suspicion. Your majesty knows, I presume, that our infamous parliament
has promised a reward to those who should apprehend your person; and have
threatened, with the most severe punishment, all such as shall harbor or
conceal you. I will answer for my domestics; they are equally above fear and
corruption; but we are surrounded by a fanatical populace, against whom we must
be upon our guard.


Lady Mary. You need only keep yourself concealed during the day, and set off
in the dusk of the evening, in order to be at the harbor before daybreak.


Charles. This plan agrees perfectly with my present occasions. It will be a
real kindness to me, as well as Lord Derby, to be permitted to refresh
ourselves, after our fatigues, with a pretty long sleep: and thus too, we shall
be able to elude all inquisitive eyes.


Lady Windham. Would not your majesty rather choose first to recruit your
strength with some nourishment?


Charles. I confess to your ladyship, that drowsiness gets the better of
hunger: rest is the most immediately necessary to us at present.


Lady Wyndham. I will give orders, that your majesty may retire, when you
please. Elizabeth, come with me.


SCENE VIII.
Charles, Derby, Wyndham, Lady Mary, Henry. Wyndham. A thought strikes me. My
sister has invited my mother to go and see her this evening.


Lady Mary. Son, let me have the honor of settling our plan for the king's
safety, as I shall that of putting it in execution. I will set out at
nightfall; and our sacred guests may, under favor of the darkness, accompany
us in some disguise, without the least danger.


Charles. My safety will be still more dear to me, since I shall owe it to you.


Wyndham In the mean time, I will send a message to my sister, and desire her
to engage a passage with the captain of the ship, for two other gentlemen, and
to request him not to set sail, until they arrive.


Derby. A good thought, my lord, and beg of Colonel Lane, to take the charge of
seeing proper accommodations prepared for us, but without mentioning our names.


Wyndham. Henry, tell James to get himself ready to set off immediately for my
sister's.


Henry. Yes, father, I will let him know your orders.


Lady Mary. Your majesty will permit me also to go and make the necessary
preparations for our departure.


SCENE IX.
Charles, Derby, Wyndham. Wyndham. I hope that with these precautions, your
majesty will escape the first fury of the tempest.


Charles. I must own, I draw a favorable presage from the appearance of our
plan. But, my friends, now we are alone, sit down each beside me. Let us devote
a few minutes to the examination of my circumstances: suppose me arrived in
France, without accident, what resources remain to me for the future? The cold
reception that I met with at Paris, two years ago, do not allow me to expect
mighty succors from that kingdom.


Derby. France is scarcely recovered from the confusion of her own civil wars.
Policy forbids her to arm in your cause: but the descendants of the brave Henry
IV. cannot fail of being generous. The laws of hospitality, at least, will be
sacred in favor of your person; and that is the only object of our concern at
present.


Wyndham. The wounds of this distracted country, can only be closed by the
hands of well-affected and judicious citizens. Time, alone, will finally heal
them. Leave to us the charge of preparing the way for this event, and of
forwarding its accomplishment.


Charles. I resign myself to your zeal; but I shudder to think of the insults
and persecutions that you will, perhaps, be obliged to undergo. When I landed,
last year, in Scotland, the first object that struck my view, was the bleeding
head of gallant Montrose, whose only crime was, his inviolable fidelity. This
appalling sight, pursues me even in my dreams: it afflicts me more than my own
dangers. How much precious blood may the re-establishment of my fortune still
cost me! Even yourselves, whose loyalty I can never sufficiently reward, who
knows whether even you may not fall melancholy victims to the undertaking?
There wanted but this cutting thought, to make my calamities complete.


Derby. Such sentiments as these, on your majesty's part, would be sufficient
to repay us for the sacrifice of our lives. The duty of the nobility, is, to
support the rights of your crown, and their chiefest honor, to defy all the
dangers to which this great undertaking may expose them.


Wyndham. Yes, Sire, there is nothing but I dare expect from our endeavors, if
your fortitude only seconds them. The present violent crisis of affairs cannot
last long. The soundest part of the nation sigh for that tranquillity which they
enjoyed under your father and grandfather. The people, loaded with taxes,
imposed on them for the maintenance of a murderous soldiery, will soon rise
against exactions that become every day more tyrannical. Discord is ready to
break out between the parliament and the army. Cromwell, who underhand foments
it, will, some time or other, throw off the mask all at once, and by
discovering his ambitious schemes, will exasperate even ^is own party. Become
the object of general execration, he will endeavor to suppress it, by violence
and terror; but a people still shaken from the impulse of a long and vehement
concussion, do not submit in silence to the yoke. The tyrant's life will be
passed in continual alarms. Impaired by the excesses of his youth, tormented by
his crimes, and harrassed by remorse, he will soon finish his days, without
establishing his usurped power; and for the completion of his views, will leave
none behind him, but two sons, who must soon bend under the weight of their
adventitious fortune, because not endowed with their father's daring genius.
Then it will be that the nobility, free at length to exert their voice, and to
support it with their arms, will make the nation acknowledge you as their
sovereign, a sovereign worthy of ruling them, after having matured his virtues
in the school of adversity.


Charles. Sage Wyndham, I accept your prophecy with joy.


Wyndham. As a faithful subject to your majesty, I thought it my duty to lay
before you the prospect of these hopes, in order both to testify our zeal, and
to support your courage. But I should, also, on the other hand, think myself a
betrayer of the constitution, if I did not lay before your majesty, what the
people have a right to expect from you. While I detest the attrocious crime
committed on the person of your father, I must presume, with the laudable
freedom of an Englishman, to say, that he frequently violated our privileges,
in order to give the greater stretch to his prerogative, and that a prince
ought to be the first to respect the laws of his country.


Charles. The misfortunes, and the faults of his reign, will afford me a
striking lesson all my life time. But, Wyndham, you know whether they should be
attributed to him: his temper breathed indulgence and humanity: his last
sentiments testify his courage and greatness of soul. Heaven grant that I may
resemble him in these virtues. I know no reproach with which his memory can be
lo^ded, save that of having placed his confidence in persons unworthy of it,
and who abused it, both to his people's prejudice, and his own. The choice of
true friends is difficult, even in private life. Is it easier for a prince to
distinguish wise ministers, in the midst of so many courtiers, who are
interested to impose on him by assumed good qualities? The more he loves his
people, the less can he suspect those who are round him, of being strangers to
the same sentiments. The misfortune of my father, and which many kings have
suffered in common with him, was, to have lived long in prosperity. I shall
have the advantage of him, in the salutary experience of misfortune. Perhaps,
at no other price, will heaven give me the instruction that can enable me to
govern wisely. I shall not think that I have paid for it too dear, if I can
render it conducive to the happiness of the nation; and if I can make England
forget, under a reign of justice and of peace, the troubles which have so long
distracted her. I will take, for my pattern, that Henry, whose name will be for
ever dear to the French, and whom we ourselves are forced to revere. I go into
his country, to collect the remembrance of all his virtues. Firm, like him, in
adversity, I will imitate his clemency, when I mount the throne. These are my
engagements with my people; and do you, whom I look upon, at this moment, as
representing my people, receive the oath, which I make to respect and defend
its rights, until my dying day.


Wyndham. Yes, Sire, with pleasure we receive this sacred vow. Your own
happiness depends on it, as much as that of the nation.


Derby. And mine shall be to consecrate every hour of my life, to the purpose
of enabling you to accomplish it.


SCENE X.
Charles, Derby, Wyndham, Lady Wyndham. Lady Wyndham. Sire, every thing is
prepared for your retiring to rest.


Charles. Your ladyship could not, at this moment, bring me more agreeable
news. My body is so weighed down with lassitude and sleepiness, that I feel it
sink under its own weight. My dear Lord Derby, I would ask your assistance; I
have scarcely strength to stand. (Lady Wyndham and Derby support him.) My Lord,
I hope, when I rise, that you will find my spirits firmer, and my senses less
heavy than at present.


Wyndham. Our hearts will watch round your majesty.


Charles. I go, then, to repose, with as much security, as if I had a numerous
guard at my gate. (Lady Wyndham and Derby conduct him out. Wyndham following
them, stops, on seeing James and Pope enter.)


SCENE XI.
Wyndham, James, Pope. James. My lord, I am ready to set off.


Wyndham. Hark ye, James, I am going to charge you with a very important
commission. I would not trust you with it, did I not know you to be a man of
probity and honor. In your whole life, you never will be able to acquire so
much glory, as on this occasion. It is the most signal proof that you can give
of your prudence and loyalty.


James. My lord, with respect to loyalty, I will yield to no man in England; as
to prudence, I hope that your lordship shall have no reason to repent making
choice of me.


Wyndham. Well, take my own horse, and ride, in all haste, to my sister's. You
will tell her that my mother will go to her house this evening. At the instant
of your arrival, she must engage two places in the vessel which sets sail
tomorrow for Normandy. They are for two persons whom all our family most highly
regard. You will find Colonel Lane at my sister's; conjure him, from me, to
take this trouble upon himself, and not to suffer the captain to weigh anchor,
until my two passengers are aboard. It is a favor that I request of him by our
former friendship. I would give you a letter for him, if I were not afraid of
your being stopped by the parliament soldiers, in which case, the letter would
discover our project.


James. My lord, I will speak to as good effect as any writing.


Wyndham. If any one ask you whence you come, or whither you are going, take
care not to appear confused, but have your answer beforehand.


James. It is ready. Your sister is sick. I am sent by you to learn how she is.
I will even tell her to feign herself worse than she is, to her own people, and
I will do the same here in the village, that her mother may have a sufficient
pretext for setting off at night, to see her.


Wyndham. But that you may be there in time, stop no where on the road.


James. Your lordship shall be satisfied with my conduct in every respect.


Wyndham. That you may understand why I speak to you in so earnest a manner,
know that the king's safety is the object of your commission.


James, (kissing the skirt of his coat.) I will thank your lordship, to my
dying day, for thinking me worthy to perform it.


Wyndham. None but souls that are alive to honor, can know the value of
confidence. Hasten to execute your charge, and may heaven watch over your
expedition.


SCENE XII.
James, Pope. James going out, is stopped by Pope. Pope. James, it is the king!


James, (overjoyed.) Do you think I did not hear?


Pope. (gravely.) I tell you it is the king.


James. Well?


Pope. I have brought him safe into the house; do you take care that he may
come out as safely.


James. Have I ever been behind you, upon any occasion?


Pope. On this, I hope, you may surpass me.


James. It will not be the fault of my zeal.


Pope. Think of the glory that awaits us, when it will be said, over the whole
world, Pope and James, in the service of Lord Wyndham, had it in their power to
dispose of the king's life, and they ^aved him. Though but poor servants, they
thought and acted as nobly as their master.


James. Comrade, my name, I Will warrant, shall not be blackened in history.


Pope, (shaking him by the hand.) We will both be written in letters of gold.


ACT III.
SCENE I.
Pope, Thomas. Thomas. I have just been listening at the king's chamber door.
He is sound asleep. I assure you, comrade, since I know him to be in safety, my
heart is at ease, just as if I were come out from a long imprisonment. Our
prayers must have risen up to heaven.


Pope. I do believe that those of honest men will be heard, before those of
hypocrites.


Thomas. And yet I shall tremble, until the king be fairly landed on French
ground. If these cursed rebels were to seize his person, they would show him no
more mercy than they did his father.


Pope. My hair stands on end at the thought. Heaven preserve us from so great a
misfortune!


Thomas. I think heaven must declare on our side. We merely with right to take
place, and religion to be maintained; whereas these new sects outrage the
Almighty, by their pride. Last year, before the battle of Dunbar, did not the
Scottish army look upon itself as an army of saints? Were not their ministers
heard saying aloud, to the Supreme Being, that if he did not save them from
their enemies, they would no longer own him for their Lord? Infatuated men! as
if it had been in their power to make to themselves another!


Pope. By that pride they were undone. I am not sorry for it. They did not
serve the prince's cause sincerely: He had thrown himself into their arms, and
they treated him as a prisoner. They removed him from the army, because they
saw that he gained the affections of the soldiery, by his valor. They also
sent home five thousand brave fellows, whom they thought too strongly attached
to his interest. They wished to have the glory of subduing Cromwell, all to
themselves. They had reduced him to extremity. It was all over with him, if
they had continued upon the heights, as their general would have had them: but
their headstrong ministers said, that they had wrestled with the Lord, in
their prayers, that they had forced him to grant them the victory, and to
deliver the enemy into their hands. They came down, therefore, like madmen,
into the plain, and were beaten. They deserved it, for their blindness. They
talked of discoursing with the Lord, in the same manner as of a familiar
conversation with a friend. If they had been victorious, perhaps, they would
not have treated the king any better than Cromwell himself would have done.


Thomas. I like much better to see his majesty in our house, than in their camp.


SCENE II.
Wyndham, (...) Thomas. Wyndham. Thomas, mount your horse; cross the forest,
and go post yourself upon the hill. Take care that you suffer none of the
parliament soldiers to approach us, without informing me. As soon as you see
any of them come this way, gallop down hither as fast as possible, to acquaint
me.


Thomas. It is enough, my Lord. I thank you for being so good as to employ me.


SCENE III.
Wyndham, Pope. Wyndham. Thomas is an honest lad. One can see, on his
countenance, the joy that he feels for the king's safety.


Pope. My countenance must be very deceitful too, my lord, if you do not read
the same sentiments in it.


Wyndham. Oh! I am not uneasy on your account. You are the first that gave
proof of your loyalty. But what is the matter? You seem thoughtful.


Pope. My lord, I recollect, this moment, that the blacksmith, to whom I gave
the king's horse to shoe, looked at it with great attention. If he should
suspect any thing, and spread an alarm?


Wyndham. Why need we create to ourselves, imaginary terrors? One cannot guess
at the sight of a horse, who his master is. However, we must neglect nothing:
go and keep watch before the gate, and have an eye upon every thing that may
happen without there.


Pope. Should I deny that we have strangers?


Wyndham. No, certainly, since they were seen to alight here. To deny them,
would raise suspicion. We must only all agree to say, that they came from
Dorchester.


Pope. It is hard to have occasion for a lie, in order to avoid harm, and to
fulfill one's duty. (He goes out.)


SCENE IV.
Wyndham. With so true hearts about us, I think we may defy the most vigilant
enquiry. How happy am I, in the present circumstance, that I always found means
to have honest people about me! Had I been less particular in the choice of my
servants, I should have lost the glory of saving my sovereign's life. The bare
thought of having contributed to his preservation, lifts me above myself.
Audacious rebels! overturn our ancient constitution, trample upon law and
honor, glut yourselves with the blood of your fellow-citizens! This vain
shadow of liberty that you pursue, draws you on, by licentiousness, to slavery.
You will soon be obliged to invite him to the throne, with all your vows, whom
you now so furiously proscribe. The whole nation will bless those who defended
him from your blind phrenzy. That benediction will reach me and my remotest
posterity. The precious blood that you have shed, will disturb your conscience,
while I, in the decline of my life, shall behold futurity with a tranquil and
contented eye. I shall have fulfilled my several duties to my God, my king, my
country, and my family.


SCENE V.
Wyndham, Lady Wyndham. Wyndham. Well, my dear, is not this a signal mark of
heaven's favor, that we are entrusted with the destiny of the king?


Lady Wyndham. Ah, my lord, if we could conduct him in triumph to London!


Wyndham. This wish, worthy of the greatness of your soul, is beyond our feeble
power. It is sufficient for us, if we can send Charles over in safety to
France, until the rage of a frantic people be appeased. This people must first
feel the oppressive yoke that they have imposed upon themselves. The
performance of no steady purpose can be expected from their principles, until
they have undergone this proof.


Lady Wyndham. If it be so, our hopes are very far removed. In the present
universal anarchy, pride makes the evils of it to be supported, because every
one hopes to partake in the government.


Wyndham. True; but we soon see pride basely yield to interest. The English
complained under their last king, of the oppression of ship money and the
star chamber. Taxes are infinitely heavier at present, under the arbitrary
administration of parliament: immense sums have been consumed for the levy of
troops whose pay is extravagant. It will be necessary to keep these armies up
for a long time, in order to become formidable to honest citizens, as well as
to foreign enemies. It is the nation that supports these additional expenses,
at the same time that its manufactures languish, and its commerce is
interrupted. Discontents will break out every where, at once. Those whom
fortune has left in their original obscurity, inflamed with envy, on seeing
people of their own class raised above them, will rather wish the sovereign
power replaced in the hands of those whose rank and birth more naturally
qualify them for it. We shall soon see that Cromwell and the parliament have
overturned royal authority, in order first to divide it between them, and
afterward to quarrel for it. Open violence and secret persecution will be
exerted to repress the murmurs of discontent: then the people at large will be
sensible that tyranny never rose to more shocking excesses of oppression and
audacity, than when they were amused with the vain hope of liberty.


SCENE VI.
Wyndham, Lady Mary, Lady Wyndham. Lady Mary. Dear son, I tremble with anxiety
and perturbation. A crowd of country people and strangers are gathered before
the house. I am afraid they have discovered the king's retreat.


Wyndham. Do not be uneasy, madam. You know, in these troublesome times, the
people quit their work, and assemble in the high roads to talk of the news. The
most uncertain rumor is sufficient to put them in motion. Has any one heard
any thing of their discourse?


Lady Mary. Nothing troublesome as yet; they content themselves with gazing
stupidly at the walls; but they shake their heads, with a mysterious look, as
if they suspected something extraordinary to be going on here.


Wyndham. Had they the least suspicions, they would have forced an entrance,
before this. The blind populace indulges every sort of caprice. They chose to
assemble here today, rather than any where else.


Lady Wyndham. But, my dear, may not somebody have betrayed us?


Wyndham. The treason could have come but from our own people, and to them
suspicion would be injurious. They are all as much devoted to their sovereign,
as we are ourselves.


Lady Mary. Oh! my son, if we should be so unfortunate as to render this
retreat more fatal to the king than even the dangers of his flight, it would be
the last wound that grief would give my old age.


Wyndham. No, my dear mother, spare yourself these groundless fears. A few
hours more, and the king is safe. At the close of the evening you must set out
with him. It is known that for some days past my sister's health has been out
of order. I have reported today that she desired earnestly to see you. Your
visit is natural enough to avoid all suspicion; and I hope that, under the care
of Providence, you will arrive safe at Shoreham.


SCENE VII.
Charles, Derby, Wyndham, Lady Mary, Lady Wyndham, Henry, Elizabeth. Charles.
My lord, I have recovered my strength. Thanks to your care, I never tasted the
sweets of repose more to my satisfaction. On my waking, I found your son
sentinel at my door; I thank him for his attention. (Henry kisses his hand.) We
are nearly of the same age. I shall never forget my kind guard, as long as I
live; and will recompense, in your son, my Lord Wyndham, the hospitality that
you have shown me, if I should not be so happy as to find you alive at my
return.


Wyndham. My son has only performed his duty to your majesty.


Charles. A duty rendered to me in my present circumstances, has all the merit
of an actual kindness, and in this light I view it.


Henry. Sire, I am happy to have begun, near your sacred person, the
apprenticeship of my future profession in life.


Lady Wyndham, (seeing Pope approach with a napkin upon his shoulder.) Our
eagerness to express our sentiments of attachment to your majesty, makes us
forget that you have a pressing call to satisfy. Would your majesty choose that
we should order up what is prepared?


Charles. Your ladyship always anticipates my wishes.


Pope Every thing is ready. (He lays a table, with two covers. Henry is going
to set the things in order.)


Pope, (taking hold of his arm.) I beg your pardon, young master, but every one
to his service. I would not yield you mine, today, for all your fortune.


Elizabeth, (running to take a bottle of wine, and a tumbler Sire, my brother
had the honor to be your captain of the guard, give me leave to be your
cup bearer.


(smiling.) Charles, You will treat me, then, like Jupiter on Mount Olympus?


Wyndham. All our wishes, at present, would be to form a court less unworthy of
your majesty.


Charles. Fortune, in the height of her favor, can never afford me any on which
my eyes will dwell with so lively a satisfaction, as now, on this company.
Amidst the pomp of a throne, the homage that I receive, is the offering of
ambition or interest; here, poor and forsaken, I owe it to sentiments of
personal regard. (He looks at them by turns, with his eyes bathed in tears, yet
endeavoring to conceal them.) Come, my Lord Derby, let us taste the only
peaceful refreshment that we have enjoyed these three days. (As they are going
to sit down, Thomas enters hastily, with wildness in his looks.)


SCENE VIII.
Charles, Derby, Wyndham, Lady Mary, Lady Wyndham, Henry, Elizabeth, Pope,
Thomas. Thomas. Ware! Ware! Captain Luke is coming straight toward the house,
with two soldiers. I have barely been able to got before them. They are at my
heels.


Lady Mary and Lady Wyndham. Oh! Heavens!


Elizabeth. We are undone. Mercy on us!


Henry. There are but three: we can stand our ground against them.


Derby, (vehemently.) Lord Wyndham, save the king; first of all, let him
retire. We will receive their attack here, in order to favor his retreat.


Wyndham. No, Lord Derby, do not quit his majesty a moment. Henry, conduct them
by the secret door.


Henry. Yes, Sire, trust yourself with me; while I have a drop of blood
remaining, they shall not take you out of my hands.


Wyndham. Elizabeth, do you follow them also, with your mother.


SCENE IX.
Wyndham, Lady Mary, Pope, Thomas. Wyndham. Mother, I conjure you, beware of
betraying yourself, by any marks of trouble or agitation. Perhaps chance alone
brings them here. Let us sit down to table, to anticipate their curiosity as to
the meaning of these two covers. I hear them in the court yard. Thomas, run to
meet them, and conduct them hither, directly, to me.


Thomas. Enough, my lord.


SCENE X.
Wyndham, Lady Mary, Pope. Wyndham. And, Pope, you will take care that nobody
goes out, so that we may be able to assemble all our forces, upon occasion.
Take care to have two horses ready at the little door of the park.


Pope. I fly to perform your orders.


Wyndham. No, stop; remain here a moment: I will give you a sign when it will
be time.


SCENE XI.
Wyndham, Lady Mary, Pope, Thomas, Captain Luke, Pembel, Talgol. Captain Luke.
Heaven enlighten you, profane ones! Night has overtaken us on our road. We
come to take up our lodging here for the night, I and these two brave soldiers,
who support the good old cause.


Wyndham. All the apartments of the house are taken up by my own family. I have
not room to receive you.


Luke. I tell you, nevertheless, in the parliament's name, that you must lodge
us.


Wyndham. You are men of war, and hardened to fatigue. If you can put up with
narrow quarters, I can lodge you.


Luke. We are men of war, and our swords will open us a suitable place. For
whom is this table prepared?


Lady Mary. For my son and me. We were absent at dinner time.


Luke. And so were we, in faith; just the sam^ luck; so bring us three covers
more: we will dine together.


Wyndham. Take this table to yourselves; for fear of incommoding you, we will
go and eat somewhere else.


Luke. With all my heart: we are the masters here: we do not stand upon
ceremony with strangers. (To Thomas.) One cover more, and then bring up the
dinner.


Lady Mary, (to Thomas, who seems at a loss.) Do as you are ordered.


Wyndham, (to Pope.) Stay and wait upon them; then come to me. (He goes out
with Lady Mary.)


SCENE XII.
Luke, Pembel, Talgol, Pope. Luke. Come, children of grace, let us sit down to
table.


Pembel. Let us do honor to the good old cause. (Thomas brings a third cover.


Talgol, (taking it.) Give me this: I will be of the party! (They sit down to
table, and begin to eat with extraordinary voraciousness.)


Luke, (speaking to Pope, with his mouth full.) Well, my lad, what news?


Pope. You ought to know the knews better than I. There are so many reports,
who the deuce can come at the truth? Is ^t fact, that the king is taken?
(looking at him earnestly)


Luke. He is not, since I have not been able to take him. For three days past,
I have beat about all the country. He would not have escaped me. He must have
been left dead upon the field of battle.


Pope. How say you?


Luke. How say I? Some wine here. (To Thomas, handing him an empty dish.) Go
and bring us something else.


Pope, (aside as he brings some bottles.) Heaven be praised! they do not know
that he is here.


Pembel. This news confounds you, rogue.


Luke. Go, ring his knell: but I advise you to do it so gently, that the
parliament may not hear it, or else I will ring yours.


Pembel. What should comfort you is, that your king is not alone in the other
world. He will find the half of his army there. We have dispatched his most
faithful servants to wait upon him.


Luke. Blockheads! some of them took it into their heads, to ask me quarter:
but, with my sword, I cut the word in two in their throats.


Thomas, (bringing another dish.) Here is all that is ready in the house.


Luke. It will do: only bring us wine. Do You hear?


Pembel, (to Pope.) What are you about there, shaking your head? It seems as if
you did not wish us well.


Luke. Lay us six bottles here upon the table, and go above your business,
until we call you. (The wine is brought up.)


Pope, (aside as he goes out.) These fellows do honor to the parliament.


SCENE XIII.
Luke, Pembel, Talgol. Pembel, (to Talgol.) What say thou, comrade? How do
thou find thyself now thou art illuminated?


Luke. See if any thing be wanting to the children of the Lord. All that is
found in the land, belongs, of right, to us.


Talgol. I did not think that the elect had been permitted to eat meat in the
dwellings of the profane.


Luke. That is because you do not yet understand our principles. They command
us to take possession of every good thing possible, at the expense of the
children of darkness. Now, certainly, nothing can better fulfill this object,
than to intercept their meat, as it were, before it reaches their mouths, and
to eat in their stead.


Talgol. Very well explained.


Luke. When will you know the infinite advantages which the elect enjoy?
Whatever engagements we enter into with the ungodly, though even confirmed with
an oath, are, and of right ought to be, null, the moment they turn to our
prejudice. In conformity to this principle, you see what our conduct was before
Pendennis-castle. Did we not receive the express order of the Lord, to slay the
besieged with the edge of the sword, notwithstanding the articles of
capitulation?


Pembel. The business is only to understand well the fundamental points of our
doctrine. We are the friends of heaven, and every thing ought to be in our
favor against its enemies. It would be insulting heaven to refuse the gifts
that it vouchsafes us; and all our actions are lawful and sanctified, because
we act only from the succor of its grace. Was it not heaven that inspired even
our women, with a zeal quite divine, for the good old cause? Have we not seen
those of the highest distinction, strip themselves, with alacrity, of their
most precious jewels; and the very servants bring us the amount of their wages,
in order to raise troops for the glory of heaven, and to force all England to
walk in the ways of salvation? Do we not, every day, hear the Lord declare to
us his sacred will in his revelations?


Talgol. And yet the Scots said the same at Dunbar; and prophesied, that if
they came down from their hills, they would beat Cromwell.


Pembel. True; but Cromwell had also his revelations, which told him, that he
should beat the Scots if they came down from the hills. The prayers of the two
parties, were, an appeal to the judgment of the Lord, who declared by the
victory, that party which he judged most worthy to prosper, as he has lately
testified again by new blessings.


Luke. Come, enough of this: let us drink, my friends. (They drink.)


Pembel. Captain, shall we go now, and see if they have taken proper care of
our horses?


Luke. Yes, my lad, and then we will go and examine every corner of this house,
to see whether it contains any thing that may suit the favorites of the Lord.


ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Pope and Thomas (entering together, and clearing the table in a hurry.)
Thomas. It seems as if these knaves came on purpose to eat up the king's dinner.


Pope. Do not be uneasy; the king has had his part. I reserved the best for him.


Thomas. Yes, but while they were here feasting at their ease, he was obliged
to snatch a hasty repast in the midst of terror and apprehension.


Pope. I that exulted so much in the thought of waiting upon his majesty, to
see myself, on the contrary, obliged to wait upon his greatest enemies!


Thomas. I was in the mind, twenty times, to knock my bottle at their heads,
when they asked for drink.


Pope. And I followed them, while they rummaged the house all over. I assure
you, if they had come to the private chamber, where the king was, I had my
pistols ready, and should have blown their brains out.


Thomas. It is happy for us, that they are so certain of his death: but with
what an exulting tone did they speak of it! I never saw insolence equal to
theirs.


Pope. And the captain too had a better stock of it than the others.


Thomas. That is because he remembers his former honorable station. Would you
believe that I have seen him a butcher's boy in Bristol?


Pope. Then I do not wonder that he carries such a cutting slashing look with
him.


Thomas. And his friend there, Mr. Pembel, the taylor's apprentice, who was
first the spiritual guide of his wandering neighbors, and then one of
Cromwell's preaching soldiers. I would lay a wager that he has perverted more
by his cursed tongue, than ever he has killed with his sword.


Pope. Do you know the third?


Thomas. No; but, by his smoke-dried appearance, I should take him to be one of
those miserable kettle-menders, that travel the country under the name of
tinkers. The party must have picked him up on the high roads.


Pope. Yes, they shot him flying, that is plain; and a noble acquisition he is
to them, no doubt.


SCENE II.
Lady Mary, Wyndham, Pope, Thomas. Wyndham. Well, Pope, where are the soldiers?


Pope. I believe, my lord, they are all fast asleep by this time. I carried
four bottles of wine into their chamber, which they emptied as they were going
to bed. I Will warrant, my lady will be at Shoreham, before they awake.


Wyndham. We must take the advantage, then, of this precious moment. Let every
thing be prepared, in the greatest silence, for my mother's departure.


Lady Mary. Thomas, go, and give a look to my equipage, and hasten the getting
of them ready. Henry is now making the king put on the disguise necessary for
his attending me. When all things are prepared, you will come and let us know.


Thomas. Madam, I obey.


SCENE III.
Lady Mary, Wyndham, Pope. Pope. My lord, shall I accompany the king?


Wyndham. No; I will have my son to be one of the party, and the fewer they
are, the less suspicions they will create.


Pope. But if, by any untoward accident, there should be a necessity for
defending him, can you arm too many for his safeguard? I think now, I might go
a little way before, on the road, to reconnoitre, without seeming to belong to
my lady's carriage.


Wyndham. That charge I will give to Thomas.


Pope, (sorrowfully.) To Thomas, my lord? Do you doubt my courage or fidelity?


Wyndham. No, Pope, I believe them both to be proof; but I have occasion for
your prudent management here, both to deceive the soldiers who are in the
house, and the country people in the village, in case of any unforeseen
accident.


Lady Mary. Be assured, if any important business required dexterity or
address, you should be the first person chosen to conduct it. I give you my
word you should.


Pope. This assurance comforts me a little; yet I must say, I would rather
attend the king, and save his life, or die with him.


Wyndham. It is sufficient; I know your principles: but time presses. Go and
see if his majesty be ready, and tell my son he may bring him here with safety.


Pope, (going out.) Yes, my lord.


SCENE IV.
Lady Mary, Wyndham. Lady Mary. I am charmed with Henry's behavior to the
king. His respect is fervent, without having any thing of servility. His words
are tempered with affection, deference, and generosity. He comforts the prince;
he animates him; he swears to serve him at the expense of his life. We may
discover, already; in his youth, the good sense and firmness of more advanced
experience.


Wyndham. My son will be indebted to you for his virtues. By presenting us,
constantly, with the example of my father's great qualities, you impress your
children with the desire of emulating them.


Lady Mary. These are tempestuous times, and will afford frequent opportunities
of putting them in practice. I would fain believe, that in a season of trial,
your son will prove himself not unworthy of his name.


Wyndham. O, Madam! how proud you make me by that hope! That I owe you my life,
is nothing; I owe to you the honor of all those in whom I live and exist.


SCENE V.
Charles, Derby, Lady Mary, Wyndham, Henry. Charles. Lord Wyndham, do you know
these clothes? (He draws aside the cloak in which he is wrapped up, and shows
the suit of livery under it.)


Wyndham. Oh! how afflicting to see my prince reduced to this dreadful
necessity!


Lady Mary, (looking down.) I dare not direct my looks to your majesty, left I
should give you offense.


Charles, (with dignity.) No, Madam, be under no uneasiness, you will not see
me blush: this is not the first time that Chance has condemned me to strange
metamorphoses. Forced as I was a few days ago to ply the axe as a woodcutter in
the forest, why should I be astonished at this new disguise? It is but another
instance of the inconstancy of Fortune. The more she loads me with insults, the
more pride I take in despising them. I wish even to rise above her, above
myself, from the low estate to which she reduces me. A king, in this dress,
receives an important lesson from Providence to transmit to other sovereigns.


Derby, (returning aside, and listing up his eyes to heaven.) O, Sir!


Charles, Lord Derby, in these garments you see nothing but what is abject; I
can look upon it as the apparel of triumph. The diadem upon my forehead could
not, perhaps, impress my enemies with respect, whereas, in the livery of
servitude, it is my glory that I reign in the faithful hearts of my subjects.
(Derby and the rest throw themselves at the king's feet.)


Wyndham. You see us ready to sacrifice ourselves for your majesty.


Charles, (with transport.) This is homage that raises me far higher than the
thrones of the earth: but rise, my friends; your place is not at my feet, but
by my side. My lord, I have seen virtues in your house which do not always
accompany a crown, and which eclipse its splendour. If my love for my people and
the laws of honor did not make it my duty to support my crown, this peaceful
retreat, and the enjoyment of your friendship, would be the utmost bound of my
ambition.


Lady Mary. For pity's sake, Sire, do not express such sentiments; they will
make our sorrows too bitter.


Wyndham. Alas! such is our situation: though the sight of your majesty fills
me with the liveliest joy, yet I am reduced to the necessity of wishing you
soon to be at a distance from my view.


Charles. My presence, my lord, has occasioned disorder and confusion in your
house; but I swear that I will never forget the danger to which I expose you
nor the generous firmness with which you brave it.


Wyndham. Ah, Sir! animated as we are with a deep concern for the interests of
our country, whatever personally regards us alone is but a very feeble
consideration. It is neither my own safety nor that of my family that disturbs
me; yours occupies my whole thoughts. Fortune has put it out of our power to be
useful to our country: but your majesty may still make her happy.


Charles. While I labor to obtain that great object, I shall ever recollect
that you have furnished me with the means. If I arrive at the accomplishment of
it, you shall not ask the commonwealth for your reward; I will charge myself
with acquitting the national gratitude.


Wyndham. Let me see my country happy, and I shall be sufficiently rewarded:
but, alas! my strength, exhausted by long services, hardly allows me that hope:
I leave it, however, as a bequest to my son, together with the inheritance of
my principles. Permit me, Sire, to recommend this my only remaining son, to
your notice. I ask nothing for him, but that your majesty would employ him
usefully in the service of his country. I dare answer for him, that he will
neither disgrace your choice, nor impair the honor of his ancestors.


Charles. My lord, I will give you my word, as a pledge of my regard for him;
and if ever I should be unfortunate enough to forget it, (he takes Henry by the
hand,) brave son of my benefactor, come boldly before my throne, and say, "I am
Wyndham;" my heart will quickly tell me what my duty is.


SCENE VI.
Charles, Derby, Lady Mary, Wyndham, Elizabeth, Henry, Pope, Thomas. Pope and
Thomas, (as they enter.) My lord, all is ready for his majesty's departure.


Derby. There is not a moment to be lost.


Lady Mary, (lifting up her hands toward heaven.) O God, the defender of kings,
deign to take us under thy protection. (Wyndham appears buried in thought.)


Charles, (approaching him.) Lord Wyndham, you have not a word for me.


Wyndham. Sire, I would I could conceal from you, the perturbation which my
heart feels at this moment.


Charles. And I would I could express to you the workings of mine. I came into
your house a fugitive; you have treated me as a king; now I depart your friend.
(Wyndham going to throw himself at his feet, is restrained by Charles, who
opens his arms to him.) What are you doing? I will receive no homage from a
friend. Let him embrace me. (He embraces him with transport.) Fate, my lord,
will not be so cruel as to deprive me of the happiness of seeing you again.
(Wyndham, unable to answer him, takes his hand, kisses it, and bathes it with
his tears. Charles looks at him affectionately. Pope, in the mean time,
approaches, to kiss the skirt of the king's cloak, who, perceiving him, gives
him his hand to kiss, and says,) I owe to you the preservation of my life.
Honor alone can repay such services, and I offer you no other reward: but
watch carefully over the safety of your excellent masters; that will be a
kindness to me, and such a one as I shall repay, if ever I come again to this
country, with a handsome fortune. (Approaching Lady Mary, and offering her his
hand.) Madam, I am your ladyship's most obedient. (Henry embraces his father.)


Wyndham, (with fervor.) My son, I confide to you the sacred person of your
king. You are answerable to me for his safety. Dare, if it be necessary, to die
in his defense.


Henry, (with vivacity) I pledge my life to that end, in the presence of heaven
and you.


SCENE VII.
Lady Mary, Lady Wyndham, Charles, Derby, Wyndham, Elizabeth, Henry, Pope,
Thomas. Lady Wyndham, (entering in a fright, and followed by Elizabeth.) Ah,
stop, Sire! Mother, you conduct his majesty to destruction.


Lady Mary. My dear child, what is the cause of this consternation?


Lady Wyndham. All is lost!


Charles. How! I beseech your ladyship to explain.


Lady Wyndham. How shall I find strength to tell you?


Wyndham. Endeavor to collect yourself, my dear. For heaven's sake relieve us
from the anxiety that you have occasioned us.


Lady Wyndham. (out of breath.) The smith -- who shod the king's horse -- stole
in hither privately -- He went up to the room where the soldiers lay -- and
awaked them -- he told them that the king was in the house -- I saw him go out,
in order to raise the country people -- while the soldiers are dressing
themselves, to come here and seize his majesty.


Charles, (with firmness.) I must yield to fate; but not without losing every
drop of my blood first.


Derby. Ah! if I can save your life at the expense of mine! What have we to
fear, while our swords are still left us?


Wyndham. No, brave veteran, resistance would be ineffectual. The whole village
is, perhaps, already up in arms. Let not your majesty yield to the dictates of
a blind despair. I beseech you, my dear Lord Derby, conduct the king again into
his secret apartment, and do not leave his person a moment. If we must come to
open force, I will go and join you with my son, and we will all fight together
till our last breath. (He leads them toward a private staircase.) Thomas, run
and pull up the drawbridge, to hinder the populace from entering. (Thomas goes
out.) And you, my son, I fear the heat and vivacity of your youth; retire with
Pope, into the next room. I forbid you to come out, without my orders.


Henry, (with warmth.) What, Father --


Wyndham. I hear the soldiers coming. (Henry springs forward to meet them.
Wyndham holds him back, casts a severe look at him, and says, with an
authoritative voice,) Obey. (Henry goes, with Pope, into the next chamber.)


Wyndham, (to Lady Mary.) O, Mother, it is now that I have occasion to be
supported by your courage! (He turns toward Lady Wyndham and Elizabeth.) My
love, you will pardon me, and you, my dear child, if I expose you to the view
of an insolent soldiery: but, in such a danger, I cannot think of suffering you
out of my sight.


SCENE VIII.
Lady Mary, Lady Wyndham, Elizabeth, Wyndham, Luke, Pembel, Talgol. The
soldiers rush into the room. Luke, (with a voice like thunder.) Where are they?
Where are they?


Wyndham, (calmly.) Whom do you seek?


Luke. Stuart, and the companion of his flight.


Wyndham. Stuart? I know none of that name but the king of England, and it is
always pronounced, before me, with respect.


Luke. We have no king. I ask for Charles Stuart.


Pembel. He is here, in your house; do not think to conceal him, or it will
cost you your life.


Wyndham. I should despise my life, if I thought it were at your mercy.


Luke. Fewer words, and answer me. Where are the two men who came here this
morning?


Pembel. The smith, who shod their horses, observed their shoes to have been
made in the north. Other circumstances prove that one of them is king of
Scotland.


Lady Mary. Have you ever seen him? Would you know him?


Luke. No; but what does that signify? Cromwell will soon know him.


Wyndham, (aside to Lady Mary.) Do you hear him, mother? Oh, if --


Lady Mary, (aside to Wyndham.) Son, I understand your generous wishes.


Luke, (interrupting them.) Come; an end of your discourses: let those two
strangers be given up to us this moment. (He draws his sword, and holds it over
Wyndham's head.) Let them be given up to us, or you are a dead man.


Lady Wyndham, (throwing herself between the captain and Wyndham.) What would
you do, Barbarian?


Lady Mary. Stop, Stop, I will bring them to you.


Luke, (lowering his sword) Make haste, my lady, if you tremble for his life.


SCENE IX.
Wyndham, Lady Wyndham, Elizabeth, Luke, Pembel, Talgol. Lady Wyndham,
(terrified -- aside to Elizabeth.) What can be my mother's design?


Elizabeth. I dare not even conjecture. (They throw themselves into each
other's arms.)


Luke. My lord, are you ignorant of the penalties denounced by parliament,
against such as should presume to shelter Charles Stuart from their power?


Wyndham. Are you ignorant of the infamy that redounds to such as violate the
rights of hospitality?


Luke. You are a rebel to the law of the land.


Wyndham. I know no law that supersedes that of honor.


Luke. How can honor bind you to protect an outlaw, a declared enemy of his
country?


Wyndham. The enemy of his country, in my estimation, is he who overturns the
government, and takes from the people their lawful sovereign. Even if the
blindness of my understanding had drawn me into those abominable principles,
which you profess, had Charles come to seek shelter in my house, from his
enemies, I should have thought it my duty to respect his misfortunes. Judge if
I was capable of betraying him, while I look upon him as my sovereign, and his
person as sacred. Violence may tear him from my arms, but even the sight of a
scaffold, prepared for my execution, could not make me betray him basely.


Luke. You acknowledge, then, that Charles Stuart is one of the two men who are
going to be brought to us?


Wyndham. When they are in your presence, you will know it from their own
mouths, if they choose to tell you.


Luke. They must confess, or this steel shall do me right, if they refuse.


Wyndham. Do you dare to say so? Imagine not that I will suffer you to exercise
your rage with impunity. This castle, for three hundred years, has been the
residence of honor. You shall not defile it by an execrable murder. Dread the
consequence of driving me to despair. You see a soldier who is less weakened by
age than by the fatigue of war, and who, to punish you, could find the vigor
of his youth again, upon occasion.


SCENE X.
Lady Mary, Wyndham, Lady Wyndham, Elizabeth, Luke, Pembel, Talgol. Luke, (to
Lady Mary, who enters.) Where are my prisoners?


Lady Mary. They follow. Before I deliver them into your hands, I think it
necessary to declare to you how much I detest the action which you force me to
commit: I am sensible that it is an outrage to humanity; but my first duty is
to preserve the life which is most valuable. If I had been free to ransom it
with mine, I should not have hesitated upon the choice of the victim. The eye
of heaven sees my in most heart, and will call you to an account for the blood
which I expose to your fury. (Holding her hands to them suppliantly.) But if
you are still sensible to the voice of nature, reject not my earnest entreaties
in behalf of these unfortunate men. I have promised that you will respect their
distress.


Luke. We are too long listening to empty lamentations. Where are they?


SCENE XI.
Lady Mary, Wyndham, Lady Wyndham, Elizabeth, Luke, Talgol, Pembel, Henry,
Pope. Henry, (advancing boldly, wrapped up, as is Pope, in a large cloak.) I
will not wait your coming to seek me.


Lady Wyndham, (knowing Henry's voice.) Heaven! what do I hear? My son? (She
falls in a swoon into Elizabeth's arms, who takes her to a seat.)


Wyndham, (eagerly endeavoring to assist her -- aside to Elizabeth.) Take care
not to betray us. (Luke, Pembel, and Talgol, look at Henry for a while, with a
mixture of surprise and irresolution.)


Luke, (going up to him.) Who are you?


Henry, (boldly.) Have you the insolence to think that I would deign to answer
you?


Luke, (peremptorily.) I ask you, who are you?


Henry. By what right do you dare to question me?


Luke. In the name of the parliament, whose orders I bear.


Henry. What! shall I acknowledge a parliament that is governed by a rebel?


Luke. General Cromwell will find means to oblige you. He is only ten miles
off. You must speak in his presence.


Henry. Then you will have but one word from my lips. Lead me to him.


Pembel. Let us make haste, before the country people assemble, and come,
perhaps, to dispute our prize with us.


Luke. Come along. (He makes a motion, as if to lay hold on Henry.)


Henry, (with an air of authority, makes signs to him to desist.) One moment.
(To Wyndham.) My lord, I hoped to have been, one day, useful to my country. If
my death can save to her the blood of one more valuable, I devote myself,
without reluctance, nay, with joy: mean time, let me pay to your lordship, as
well as to this lady, the tribute of my gratitude, for your sentiments in my
behalf, and particularly for the high opinion that you have expressed for my
courage. (Wyndham and Lady Mary endeavor to stifle their grief. Henry looks
round for his mother, and sees her in a swoon. He takes her hand, and kisses
it.) To what a situation does the excessive tenderness of her feelings reduce
her! Must I be forced to abandon her, while she is thus? My Lord -- Madam --
and you, Elizabeth, I conjure you, in the name of all that is sacred, apply
your tenderest cares to recover and console her. Speak to her often of me:
describe to her the violence that I do myself, in parting from her at this
moment. I could not answer for my resolution, if I only saw her tears, or heard
her sighs for a moment. (He rises, presses tenderly the hand of Elizabeth,
utters a heavy sigh, while he casts his eyes, for the last time, on his mother;
then, all at once, drawing his hat down over his eyes, and muffling up his face
in his cloak, for fear of being known by the country people, in passing through
the village, he walks off very fast, making signs to the soldiers to follow
him.)


Luke, (accompanying him with his sword drawn.) Come along, my lads.


Pembel, (to Pope, who also muffles himself up in his cloak.) March. Our
general will soon know who you are.


Pope. I am not afraid to tell it aloud to yourselves: a faithful servant of
the king, and one who would glory to die for him.


SCENE XII.
Lady Mary, Wyndham, Lady Wyndham, Elizabeth. Wyndham. At length, I have full
liberty to indulge my grief. O, mother, what a sacrifice!


Lady Mary. To me it is the most grievous, whom Fortune obliged to prepare and
conduct the victims.


Wyndham, (bending over Lady Mary.) Look up, my dearest life. Alas, what do I
say! Should I wish to see you out of this peaceful swoon? Ah! that it would
change to a long and deep sleep! Wounded as my heart is with my own griefs, how
shall I be able to bear your distraction?


Lady Wyndham, (recovering herself by degrees -- with a feeble voice.) My son!


Wyndham. In vain you call the beloved youth. Hard fate! that we should be
condemned to lose him, at the very moment when he shows himself most worthy of
our love.


Lady Wyndham, (collecting her spirits -- with more strength of voice.) My son!
(looking all round.) Where is he? (rising hastily.) What have you made of my
son? (Wyndham is quite dejected, and not able to answer.)


Lady Mary, (making a violent effort to constrain her feelings.) A hero, the
honor of our name; the savior of our king; the pledge of his country's safety.


Lady Wyndham, (in a frantic voice.) Barbarians! have you sacrificed him, then?


Wyndham. Would you see me dishonored by a base act of treason, and give up
the sacred head of majesty to an executioner? Were you reduced to choose between
a husband who should owe his life to his infamy, and a son who should die for
glory, speak what would be your choice?


Lady Wyndham. How can I answer you? But, my son!


Wyndham. He was mine also. Escaped alone from the ruins of a numerous family,
I flattered myself that he would raise it to its former luster. Indeed, from
his earliest youth, he afforded the most auspicious hopes; and, in one moment,
he has now gone far beyond them. With so many claims to my affection, can you
think that he is indifferent to me, or that his loss would create in me less
poignant grief than in you? Pity my sorrows, therefore, in your turn. You think
me insensible, because I would comfort you. Ah! why cannot I lay bare my heart
before you? You would see it harrowed up with tortures inexpressible. What
shall I say to you? Such a soul as yours is not to be deluded by unreal
consolations; but some sources of comfort are yet open. See your son, already
full of virtues, acquire immortal glory in the flower of his age, by saving his
prince and his country. Let your affection dwell a moment upon these noble
thoughts. If we are to lose our son, there is this well-founded hope left,
which Cromwell's ferocious cruelty will not render vain, that we shall all be
included in the same proscription with him.


Lady Wyndham. I accept, with pleasure, this dreadful hope. What should I do
with life, were I to survive my son? (with more vivacity.) But where is he? I
will see him. Bring him back to me, that I may, at least, receive his last
embrace.


Wyndham. With difficulty he tore himself from your arms, fearing the excess of
your tenderness.


Lady Wyndham. He knew it not, if he only saw me in a state of insensibility.
That might be caused by a woman's terror at the sight of boisterous soldiers.
He should have been witness to a mother's despair. Has he seen the burning
tears flow from my eyes? Clasped to his mother's breast, has he felt the
throbbings of her heart? Must he die, without knowing how dear he is to me? No,
cruel as ye are, suffer me to follow him. I will go; I will rush into the crowd
of his guards and executioners. I will embrace him a thousand times. I will
expire on his breast. (She rushes forward, distracted -- Wyndham holds her,
while stretching forth her arms, and clasping her hands together, she cries
with an impassioned voice,) My son! my son! (At this moment, Charles enters
with Derby. He stops short in silent surprise. Wyndham perceiving him,
approaches. Lady Wyndham endeavors to contain the transports of her grief, in
the king's presence; and, to avoid his sight, she leans upon Elizabeth's
breast.)


SCENE XIII.
Charles, Derby, Lady Mary, Wyndham, Lady Wyndham, Elizabeth. Charles. Lord
Wyndham, what has been the matter? I hear tumultuous voices repeat on every
side, with reiterated clamor, "The king is taken." The soldiers are dragging
off two men. I followed them, with my eyes, a long way into the country, and
saw them followed by a shouting populace, and attended with a thousand lights.
I come down, I find you all in the deepest consternation, I see your lady
drowned in tears, and avoiding my looks. What is this mystery? I dread to
unravel it.


Wyndham. Have you not heard the cries of this disconsolate mother?


Charles. How! Is your son --


Wyndham. He had sworn to save your life, at the expense of his own. He now
fulfils his vow.


Charles. And you believe that I will suffer him to die, in my stead? No, no; I
should think myself unworthy of so noble fidelity, were I to permit this
sacrifice. Dry up your tears, madam, I will soon restore to you a son so worthy
of your sorrows.


Wyndham. The attempt would be vain. Will blood-thirsty Cromwell be terrified
at the number of his victims? It is past with my son, and you would perish,
without saving him.


Charles. Then, at least, I will die with him.


Wyndham. No, Sire; you shall not die. Your life is no longer at your own
disposal; it belongs to me, who have purchased it at the price of my blood. I
presume to assert my claims upon it, conjointly with those of the nation.


Charles. What can you exact of me?


Wyndham. The accomplishment of our great design. Its execution is now become
favorable. The false report, which has already filled the village, and will
soon be spread through the whole country, ensures you a free retreat. Make
haste to depart. The delay of an instant may be fatal to you. The Tiger,
disappointed in his first gray, will come hither, by the traces of my Henry's
blood, to seek for a second. Be you out of his reach, before his fury awakes.


Derby. Then, Lord Wyndham, withdraw along with us from Cromwell's vengeance.
Bring your mother, your wife, and your daughter, together with the most
valuable of your effects, and follow our destiny.


Wyndham. I thought, Lord Derby, that you had known me better. Shall I give up
my own son to the sword of the executioner, and withdraw my own head from it?


Charles. Save, at least, what remains to you of an unfortunate family. Make
haste to lodge them in a place of safety.


Lady Mary. How, Sire! I abandon my son?


Lady Wyndham. Mine they have torn from me, but they shall not tear me from my
husband.


Wyndham. You see, death has no terrors for us: half of my family has perished
in your father's defense; the remainder will not hesitate to perish for your
safety.


Charles. No, I do not accept this sanguinary offering. What a lot pursues me!
Heaven gives kings, to make nations happy, whereas I am sent to bring
destruction on my people. My life is a ground of discord to my subjects. I see
some prostitute their conscience and their honor to the purpose of procuring
my death, others, in my defense, sacrifice their too generous blood. It is my
blood, it is my blood that the furies demand. Deliver me from this detested
life; I hate it, I abhor it.


Wyndham. For that very reason it is the highest courage to support it. Heaven,
while it seconds my design, has pointed out to us our several duties; yours
to live, our's to die. Suffer us to fulfill this glorious destiny. If, on the
scaffold, I learn that you are safe, I shall die happy.


Charles. And shall I live happy, even upon a throne, to which the sacrifice of
your life must smooth my way?


Wyndham. What is your happiness or mine? it is the happiness of a whole
people, that should occupy your thoughts. Led astray by the violence of their
passions, but ever ready, from an innate love of rectitude, to return to the
ways of justice and honor, they must be indebted to you alone for such a
reformation: they will soon come and supplicate your return. Whenever that
happens, grant their desire; return, not as a conqueror, but as a father: my
blood, then, will not cry out to you for vengeance, but for mercy, liberty, and
love.


Charles. This ungrateful people, who proscribe me! are they all worth, in my
estimation, a single citizen like you? Under a doubtful hope of returning,
should I suffer such noble victims to perish? No, Wyndham, I have said it; I
will not accept an offering of devoted blood, while I can ransom it with my
own. By what right would you force me to receive it?


Wyndham. By what right, Sire? You make me forget the duty of a subject, and
assume the authority over you which my age gives me, and if I must add, my
services. When I gave you an asylum here, at the risk of my fortune and life,
the honor of saving you was a sufficient recompense; but when I sacrifice my
son for your preservation, with what price can you repay me? And would you
snatch from me even the fruits of this sacrifice, and oblige me to grieve that
I ever consented to it? No, Sire, you are a king; I was a father. For your
sake, I am no longer one: restore to me, therefore, in your person, the son
whom I had brought up to fulfill the hopes of his country. You ask me, by what
right? You have given me a right, which I will exact in all its rigor. Depart.


Charles. Generous, but cruel, Wyndham --


Wyndham. I hear no more. Depart, and by saving yourself, save the nation.
Follow us, mother; and you, my lord Derby, help me to force the king away. (He
turns toward Lady Wyndham.) My dearest, excuse me, I go to taste the last joy
remaining to me on earth, that of saving my country, and I will return to your
arms, to indulge our grief to its just excess. (With Derby's help, he forces
off the king. Lady Mary follows them. Elizabeth leads Lady Wyndham to her
apartment.)


ACT V.
SCENE I.
Wyndham. What a dreadful night have I passed! Alas! I shall have none but such
for the short time that I am still to drag the burden of life! Trembling for my
king, my country, and my son, what remains to fill up the measure of my
calamities? Were I even permitted to bear them singly! O, beloved wife, your
despair afflicts me more than my own sorrows. Now clasping me in your arms, now
pushing me from you, with horror, spent with weeping, convulsed with sobs,
passing by turns, from the frenzy of grief, to a calm still more dreadful, and
from a mournful silence, to shrieks of anguish, how often, in this long night,
has my heart been torn with the sight of your sufferings! Sleep, at length,
steals upon her eyelids, and gives me a moment of freedom to indulge my griefs
alone. O, my son! my son! never did a vice, in you, draw tears from your
parents' eyes; were you, then, destined to show forth so much virtue, only to
make us completely wretched! (He sheds a flood of tears, hiding his face, at
the same time, with his hands.)


SCENE II.
Wyndham, James. James, (looking at him with affectionate compassion, and not
during to interrupt him.) Could I expect to find him thus plunged in grief? Is
this the reward of his virtues? (He approaches, and calls him, with a trembling
voice.) My lord!


Wyndham, (starts suddenly from his musing, s^es who it is, and speaks with
eagerness.) Ha! well, what news do you bring me? Have they a ship read^ for the
king?


James. Yes, my lord; when I came away, Colonel Lane had one ready to set sail
the moment of the king's arrival.


Wyndham, (his countenance brightening up through his tears.) Thank heaven, I
feel, at least one part of my anxiety lightened.


James. I do not know whether your lordship has any grounds for rejoicing.


Wyndham. Say thou?


James. As I returned, I did not meet my lady's carriage, until I was three
miles from the harbor.


Wyndham. Well?


James. But when I came farther on the road, I saw soldiers scouring the
country, on every side, with fresh orders from Cromwell.


Wyndham. Then he is undeceived already as to his victim? Heavens! if they were
to seize the king!


James. I apprehend, they directed their pursuit toward the seaside, perhaps
toward Shoreham.


Wyndham. Then I am plunged, again, into the most cruel alarms!


James. Her ladyship charged me to inform you, that she would dispatch Thomas
to you, or else come herself, as soon as the king was aboard the vessel.


Wyndham. Let them haste, then, to relieve me from this dreadful state of
uncertainty. Go, leave me, I pray you, if you have nothing more to communicate
to me.


James. Your lordship will pardon me, but I cannot thus leave you to yourself:
I am only grieved that I was obliged to be away. I should not have let you
sacrifice my young master. I would have taken his place -- happy in preserving
to you a son worthy of so much love and esteem. How happy did I return in
having fully performed my message! The hope of finding your lordship, pleased
with the good news that I brought back, did so rejoice me. Ah! my lord, how was
I shocked, on learning what had passed in my absence! and now, when I see you
in grief, you, my lord, who are so mild and gentle a master, I know not how I
shall support it.


Wyndham. For pity's sake, my good friend, do not aggravate the evils that I
endure.


James, (kissing his hand.) My master! my excellent master!


Wyndham. I thank you for your affection, but this proof of it only afflicts me
more. Why do you speak to me of myself? I would be entirely taken up with my
son, and nothing else. (James goes out, lifting up his hands toward heaven, and
looking sorrowfully at Wyndham.


SCENE III.
Wyndham. Just at this time, every morning, my son, my dear son, came to ask my
blessing. With what joy did I press him to my heart! Instead of receiving these
embraces from the tenderest of fathers, perhaps he lies now under the menaces
of the savage Cromwell, surrounded by executioners, and the axe lifted over his
head. Perhaps, this moment, he expires beneath the stroke. O, heaven! that I
should lose all, my country, my son, my whole family, and yet cannot die.


SCENE IV.
Wyndham, Lady Wyndham, Elizabeth. Lady Wyndham, (enters with dishevelled hair
and tottering steps, supported by Elizabeth. She cries with a voice so feeble,
as to be scarce heard.) Wyndham!


Wyndham, (turning, perceives her.) Heavens! what perturbation in her senses!
What wildness in her eyes!


Lady Wyndham, (with haggard looks.) Where am I? Is it yet day? I have not seen
Henry. He did not come to salute me this morning. My dear son! and yet he knows
that his affection makes the happiness of my life. (She looks steadfastly at
Wyndham.) Ah! I see him? (smiling.) he is in his father's arms -- Let him come
hither also, and embrace me. (She holds out her arms.) He does not come! He
loves me not! (She turns, and fixing her eyes upon Wyndham.) Barbarian! a
poniard in your hand! What has he done, that you should stab him? Ah! I will
defend him against you. (Endeavors to break away -- Elizabeth holds her.) They
load me with chains, to deprive you of my assistance. (She starts and
shudders.) Whence comes this blood that I see flow in streams? Is it mine, or
my son's? (She falls back into Elizabeth's arms.)


Wyndham. This last stroke only was wanting to complete my misery. (To
Elizabeth.) I had just left her so composed!


Elizabeth. This was her condition immediately upon her awaking.


Wyndham. What shall I say to her? I have not even a hope remaining to beguile
her sorrows. (Leaning over her, and taking her hand.) Sophia, my dearest Sophia!


Lady Wyndham, (in a languishing voice.) Sophia is no more. She was the mother
of Henry, but she has lost him. (Wyndham appears stupefied with grief. A moment
of silence, during which nothing is heard, but the sobs of Elizabeth.)


SCENE V.
Lady Wyndham, Wyndham, Elizabeth, James. James, (running in, with wildness in
his countenance.) My lord, the whole courtyard is full of soldiers, and
Cromwell himself is coming.


Lady Wyndham, (exerting herself.) Cromwell? Who is this Cromwell? Another of
my son's murderers. (She faints.)


Wyndham, (Having given her some assistance.) Elizabeth, take your mother away.
(Elizabeth leads Lady Wyndham out.) Let not the barbarian feast his eyes with
this sight. Heaven! give me strength to overcome my grief, that I may confound
and strike him dumb. (He resumes his spirits, and waits Cromwell's entering.)


SCENE VI.
Cromwell, Wyndham. Cromwell, My lord, you see me here filled with a holy
indignation. That you should seek to deceive me, by delivering your son up to
me, instead of Charles Stuart, is not what give^ me offense, but your betraying
the commonwealth, and attempting to laugh the commands of heaven to scorn, such
an excess of audacious impiety I know not how to pardon.


Wyndham. Is it none in thee, Cromwell, to set thyself up for the avenger of
heaven and the commonwealth?


Cromwell. I know that man is nothing in the eyes of the supreme Being; but
know that he may serve as an instrument to signalize his Maker's power.


Wyndham. It was, no doubt, to signalize that power, that heaven chose you from
the midst of riot and debauchery, loaded with debts and infamy, and stained
with more crimes than ever took root in the heart of the most abandoned villain.


Cromwell. Heaven beheld my weaknesses, but the love that I bore my country
overbalanced them.


Wyndham. Country? that name in your mouth is like the name of virtue,
pronounced in hell.


Cromwell. The nation treats me with more justice; the people are sensible that
I have restored them to their former greatness.


Wyndham. What, by degrading their minds to the level of hypocrisy and
fanaticism? By exposing them to their neighbors on account of the furious
inveteracy with which they pursue their own destruction; and to the execration
of the whole world, on account of the detestable murder of their king? You have
restored them to their greatness, while you make them the tool of your
ambition? Had you only forced them to suffer basely the indignities with which
they have been loaded by you, would it not have been debasing them
sufficiently? How long shall they be the dupe of your imposture? Why can they
not see you in your true colors, not as I see you, for the infinite depth of
your villainy hides half your crimes from the eyes of your neighbors, but such
as you would see yourself, could the affrightning gleam of remorse penetrate to
the bottom of your black heart.


Cromwell. Slavery always dared thus to calumniate the noble efforts of
courage. Must I, to please you, have left a generous people groaning under the
yoke of tyranny?


Wyndham. To describe the horror with which that tyranny inspires me, it is
sufficient that I cannot express how much I abhor you. Yes, monster, do you
think that I have not marked your ambition, stealing, with perfidious silence,
to a throne? I am not the slave of kings: I ever detested their attempts upon
our liberty. What curses then do I not owe your parliament and you, the two
most cruel oppressors of the people? Under what sceptred tyrant have they shed
more tears or more blood? Ferocious manners, frantic errors, vindictive
proscriptions, licentiousness, massacres and depredations, these blessings your
republican knaves have given to an infatuated populace, by way of liberty,
while they crush them under a load of taxes, and punish their least murmur as
rebellion. This monstrous chaos is the work of your gloomy policy: I have seen
you lurk among the independents; unable to lead the sect by the force of your
eloquence, you have agitated them by the ravings of a distempered imagination:
you wrapped yourself in the veil of religion, to amuse the ambition of your
rivals: you urged on all parties to the usurpation of arbitrary power, that you
might reach it, by treading in their steps, and then dispossess them of it,
with the audacious violence natural to your disposition. Left supreme, and
without a rival, confounding beneath your feet both arms and laws, you now
plague the nation with storms of anarchy, that it may fall exhausted before
your despotic power. Now tell me of greatness and liberty.


Cromwell. Carnal man! it belongs to thee truly to judge the kingdom of the
saints, and to fathom the inscrutable decrees of Providence!


Wyndham. Go, carry these canting declamations to your inspired soldiers. Go
fall into trances and see visions, and shed hypocritical tears before your
parliament: they are well worthy to be condemned to the disgrace of applauding
them.


Cromwell. I weep for the blindness of thy heart; it is incurable, and cannot
receive light from me. Nothing but heaven can illuminate thee, if ever thou
shall deserve that grace. Deliver me now up Charles Stuart; the same heaven
demands him from thee by my lips.


Wyndham. Since thou art made the instrument through which heaven's will is
declared, it is, no doubt, revealed to thee where thou shall find thy victim.


Cromwell. It is revealed to me that I should seek for him in thy castle, and
all through the country.


Wyndham. Well, why do thou hesitate to follow inspirations that are so clear?


Cromwell. My soldiers are doing so at this moment, while thou think me busy
in answering thy vain discourses.


Wyndham. Wait then in silence for the event of their search.


Cromwell. Consider that your life is at stake.


Wyndham. I have put that of my son in your hands, do you think tremble for my
own?


Cromwell. You shall perish with your son and you shall see your whole family
perish with you. They have all been guilty of rebellion, through you, and
through you they shall all suffer the punishment due to it.


Wyndham. We are all impatient to meet it and to defy your vengeance. I have
satisfied mine upon you, by forcing you to esteem me as much as I despise you.
See, Cromwell, the difference between guilt and honor. By dint of violence and
intrigues, you may find a parliament base enough to bestow the sovereignty on
you: but, clothed with a power to which nothing invites you, except the charms
of the guilt that it must cost you, it will soon become burdensome, when you
find no new crimes to commit. There will remain to you but the terrors of a
conscience alarmed by premature old age. Your children will curse you, and the
guilty throne which you leave them to (...); whereas I shall die blessed by my
family which I sacrifice to the cause of virtue.


Cromwell. Your name, as that of a traitor, shall be made infamous.


Wyndham. It cannot, even by passing through your infamous mouth; and if that
does not tarnish my name, judge if any thing can: but it will receive its
greatest splendour from my punishment: it will load yours with eternal
disgrace, while they descend together to the remotest posterity. Nay, I expect
from my death a still more glorious effect. Numerous alliances unite me to the
first peers of this realm. They will not look on unconcerned, while the same
blood which fills their veins, is shed under the axe of the executioner. There
never can arise, in the three kingdoms, a monster equal to thee; but I honor
my country too much, to suppose that it has not citizens left, who surpass me
in virtue. When they see a whole family perish with heroism, in performance of
their duty, a generous emulation will seize their noble souls. The striking off
of my head will be a signal to them to rally, from all quarters. I already see
them rushing on you: haste then to complete a murder which may deliver me from
the sight of your crimes, and will arm so many avengers of them. Come yourself
and prepare my scaffold. I will go before you. (As he is going out, he
perceives Lady Mary, who approaches hastily.


SCENE VII.
Cromwell, Lady Mary, Wyndham. Wyndham. Is it you, my dear mother? I see joy
sparkle in your eyes! What news of the king?


Lady Mary. (with an exclamation of joy.) He is saved.


Wyndham, (transported with delight.) What do I hear?


Lady Mary. Yes, my son, the ship which carried him, disappeared from my view,
before I left the harbor: a favorable wind blew all the while. It must have
conveyed him, by this time, to the coast of France.


Wyndham (lifting up his arms to heaven.) Just heaven! thou crownest all my
wishes at once: thou savest the king through my means: thou renderest my life
and my death equally useful to my country! Well, Cromwell, you are struck with
surprise. Where are now all the hopes with which your holy inspirations puffed
up the pride of your soldiers? Was Charles to have been your prisoner? Tremble,
villain. He goes to prepare chains for you. From the opposite coasts of the
ocean his name will come to animate all good Englishmen, and to freeze you with
terror. What transport will it be to me, in my last moments, to see all your
schemes baffled!


Cromwell, (with a smile of contempt.) Wyndham, you know me not: you shall see
whether I suffer my fortune to depend upon events, or the opinion of men. (Goes
toward the door, and makes a sign to the soldiers to come forward.)


SCENE VIII.
Cromwell, Lady Mary, Wyndham, Soldiers. At a distance Henry is seen stretching
his arms forth to Wyndham, and endeavoring to spring toward him, but held by
Luke, Pembel, and Talgol. Cromwell, (to the soldiers.) Come in, brave defenders
of the good old cause; come and rejoice with me: you see in Wyndham the
deliverer of his country.


The soldiers, (astonished.) In Wyndham?


Cromwell. Yes, my friends: the parliament had promised a reward to such as
should deliver Charles Stuart into their hands. The generous Wyndham could have
earned this reward, but he disdained it. He had seen me, before, send the
tyrant's younger brother The Duke of Gloucester, the youngest son of Charles I.
Cromwell sent him over to Holland, after the beheading of his father.
over sea. He has done more, he has driven away the tyrant himself, to the end,
that none of the accursed family, may remain in the land of the saints.


Wyndham. How, Cromwell, do you presume to say --


Cromwell, (interrupting him.) Nay, fear not that I should disapprove your wise
policy: you meant to show Stuart's dearest friends, how unworthy he was of
their attachment. Trembling for his own safety alone, he abandons them to every
danger, and exposes them to our just revenge. Children of light, bless the
Lord. One tyrant executed by the avenging sword of the laws, and another sent
away from this sacred island, never to return, are pledges to secure the empire
of the saints, and the reign of liberty for ever.


Wyndham. What, knave! have thou the impudence to interpret my actions thus?


Cromwell. Silence, profane; thou feast not that heaven governs thy actions, in
spite of thyself. It manifests both its power and its favoring protection, to
the good old cause, by rendering thee the blind instrument of its decrees. Thou
have done service to the commonwealth. I am just, and therefore I restore thy
son to thee, as the reward of it. Let him be set free. (Henry is brought
forward, and whilst Wyndham indulges in silence the transports of his joy,
Cromwell says to his soldiers) Come, my friends, let us go and return thanks to
the Almighty. The price which the parliament had set on the head of Charles
Stuart, shall be distributed among you, since England is rid of him: I will
solicit also fresh bounties for you. It is proper, that the army of saints
should partake of the joy which the Lord himself feels on this day of
blessings. (He goes out with an air of triumph, and the soldiers follow him.)


SCENE IX.
Lady Mary, Wyndham, Henry. (While Henry embraces Lady Mary, Wyndham seeks
about for Cromwell, and not seeing him, he cries) The impostor! he escapes me,
before I have been able to unmask him. Henry. O, father, let us think of
nothing but the joy of seeing ourselves once more together, and the king saved
by our means.


Lady Mary. Will you pardon me the danger to which I exposed your life?


Henry, (with vivacity.) Pardon you? Ah, rather receive my warmest thanks. To
you I owe that I have preserved the honor of our name, fulfilled the most
sacred duty, and showed, perhaps, that I am not unworthy of -- But my mother --
my sister -- let me see them. I cannot contain my impatience.


Wyndham. Alas! your poor mother! she has paid dearly for the honor that you
have acquired: a burning fever, brought on by the agitation of her mind, has
troubled and discomposed her senses.


Henry. Heavens! what do I hear?


Wyndham. Be not uneasy; I hope your presence will soon restore her to
tranquillity, by filling her heart with joy.


Henry. Then let me fly to her.


Wyndham, (taking his hand.) No; stop: we must consult her weakness. I will go
and prepare her to receive you. But what do I see? Heavens! it is she herself.


SCENE X.
Lady Mary, Wyndham, Henry, Lady Wyndham, Elizabeth. Lady Wyndham, (struggling
violently to break away from Elizabeth.) It is in vain that you would hold me.
I must see this Cromwell. He must give me back my son.


Henry, (running to her.) Here he is! That very son whom you seek, is here.


Lady Wyndham, (stopping him at arm's length, and considering him with a look
of astonishment.) Whoever thou art, who representest my dear Henry, I conjure
thee, remain thus for ever before my eyes.


Henry, (embracing her.) No, rather press me to your bosom. It is I, your son,
that you hold in your arms.


Lady Wyndham, (tenderly.) Yes, these are his features, his looks; and thus my
dear son embraced me. Yet I dare not believe it; my disordered brain is so full
of delusive phantoms.


Henry. No, you are not deceived. Shall I be a stranger, then, in your eyes? O,
mother, my dear mother!


Lady Wyndham, (starting, with an emotion of joy.) Ah! I know thee by the dear
name which thy affection gives me. Why did thou not pronounce it before?


Henry. Well, then, I will repeat it to you a thousand and a thousand times. My
mother, my dearest mother, you see me restored to your love for ever.


Lady Wyndham. Is this really so? A healing balm composes and cools my veins.
O, my son, what have I suffered for thee!


Henry. All your sufferings were in my heart: but let us remember so many evils
only the better to enjoy our happiness. (He runs to Elizabeth, and embraces
her.) My dear sister, I have given you much concern and affliction. Ah! how I
feared, lest I should never see you again!


Elizabeth, (sighing.) I shall not be able to express my joy today: my heart
is too full.


Wyndham. My dear Sophia, I can now meet your sight, without apprehension.
Henry is covered with glory; and without losing our child, I have saved our
king.


Lady Wyndham. Since it is so, I pardon you. My son and you are dearer to me
than ever.


SCENE XI.
Lady Mary, Wyndham, Lady Wyndham, Elizabeth, Henry, Pope, James, Thomas. (Pope
enters, conducted in triumph, by James and Thomas: Henry, perceiving him, runs
and takes him by the hand, and leads him to Wyndham.) Henry. Father, I present
to you the generous companion of my sacrifice. (Pope, going to throw himself at
Wyndham's feet, Wyndham opens his arms to embrace him.) No, Pope, come to my
arms. You were willing to die with my son: henceforward you can be nothing else
than equal in my affection. (To James and Thomas.) And you, my friends, who
have shown us so much zeal and affection, you shall live with me for ever: we
will form, all together, a family of brothers and good citizens. Let us live to
love each other, and let us join our vows for the liberty of our country, while
we await an opportunity of shedding every drop of our blood, if necessary, for
the re-establishment of it.

The observation of dramatic unity in the foregoing piece, having rendered some
deviation from historical truth necessary, in the names of persons, the
situation of places, and the order of dates and events, lest we should lead our
young readers into an error, with respect to the circumstances of an action so
memorable, we have judged it expedient to subjoin an account of the flight of
Charles II. as history has transmitted it to us, together with the genuine
particulars which accompanied it.


ADVENTURES OF CHARLES II. IN HIS FLIGHT.
AFTER the battle of Worcester, the king left the field, accompanied by fifty
horsemen. He kept his escort together, during a flight of twenty-six miles, in
order to protect himself, either from the insults of the country people, or
against the detachments that Cromwell had sent out in pursuit of him. He then
thought proper to separate from them, and only retained about his person, the
Earl of Derby, and Lord Wilmot, with whom he arrived at the old monastery of
Witlade, the occupier of the lands on which the monastery stood, having
formerly given an asylum to the earl, after the defeat of his little army. This
farmer, whose name deserves to be handed down to posterity, was called
Penderel: he had four brothers, men of loyalty, like himself, who had another
small farm at Boscobel, in the neighborhood. He sent for them, and into their
hands, the king resigned his destiny. They cut off his hair, blackened his
face, and conducted him, in an old tattered disguise, to cut wood in the
forest. They made him lie in a little chapel, upon a straw bed, with a wretched
bolster. A woman, whom they were obliged to admit into the secret, brought him
milk, butter and eggs. The king was surprised at seeing her, and not knowing
whether the Penderels had trusted her without reserve, he asked her, in order
to assure himself, how she could think of being faithful to one of the king's
party. The woman answered, without explaining herself further, that she would
be faithful to the king as long as she lived. She uttered these words with such
an appearance of feeling, that Charles' apprehensions were perfectly quieted,
and he made a very hearty meal of the victuals which she had brought him,
necessity rendering it, perhaps, the most delicious that ever he made in his
life. Charles had scarcely left Witlade, before some of Cromwell's soldiers
alighted at the monastery, and searched it all through. Luckily a very abundant
shower of rain hindered them from leaving it, to scour the neighborhood; and
nothing disturbed the little repose, which excessive weariness, and violent
anxiety, suffered the king to enjoy in his dismal lodging.

Informed of this alarm, the next morning, as soon as he awoke, he resolved
immediately to go into Wales. He promised himself more security there, until he
should be able to make for London, whither he had sent Lord Wilmot, to wait his
coming. He sat out, therefore, at night, with one of the Penderels for his
guide. As they passed near a mill, the miller hearing them open a gate at the
end of the bridge that crossed his mill-race, sallied out hastily from his
mill, and demanded, with a threatening tone, where they were going, at such an
unseasonable hour. They continued endeavoring to open the gate, without
answering him. The miller ran toward them, crying out to them to stop, at
which summons Penderel abandoned the bridge, and rushed into the stream: the
king followed him, without hesitation, the noise that he made in the water
directing his steps, as the darkness prevented him from seeing his guide.
Luckily the same darkness, together with the miller's corpulence, hindered him
from overtaking them.

They arrived, quite wet, at the house of a countryman, named Wolf, an
acquaintance of Penderels. Wolf, after having concealed the king as well as he
could, went himself to the edge of the river, to prepare a passage for him; but
he found the whole bank so covered with soldiers, that he thought it his duty
to dissuade his guest from so dangerous an enterprise. Charles was obliged to
return to Boscobel, and from thence to the chapel, where he kept himself
concealed, while the Penderels examined the country, to discover whether there
were any of the parliament's troops in the neighborhood. One of them, as he
went his rounds, met a person, at the sight of whom the king was agreeably
surprised. His name was Careless, one of those brave warriors, who, in order to
let the king gain a larger distance from Worcester, had stemmed every effort of
the enemy for a considerable time, at the city gates. Careless was a native of
this part of the country, and knew the Penderels, who brought him home to their
house. The king having hurt his foot, came hither at night to have it dressed.
Careless knew him, and would not quit him afterward. He re-conducted him to
the forest before break of day, and made him climb into a large tree, where
they both remained concealed among the thick branches, for near four and twenty
hours. They saw several soldiers walk by at the foot of the tree, many of whom
expressed the most ardent desire of seizing the king. This tree received the
name of the royal oak, and has ever since been honored with the highest
veneration by the people of the country.

Nevertheless, a secret report had been spread, that Charles was somewhere
thereabout. One of the Penderels going into a neighboring village, found there
a number of soldiers very busily engaged in collecting every account possible
concerning the king. The officer, who commanded them, put many questions to
Penderel himself, and promised him a great reward if he would give information
where Charles lay concealed. Penderel did not swerve from his loyalty; but his
account of this circumstance, induced the king to take the resolution of
seeking another retreat.

The guide, whom he had sent with Lord Wilmot, to conduct him to London,
returning, informed the king, that his lordship, despairing to reach town,
through the crowds of soldiers, who filled all the roads, had stopped short at
the house of a gentleman of the royal party, named Witgrave, where he was in
safety. Charles conceived the design of going to him, and had the good fortune
to succeed, in spite of every danger that he was to encounter.

Charles, while he indulged the satisfaction that he felt on seeing Lord
Wilmot, had not time to deliberate with him on the course or measures which
would be most proper for them to take, when a party of soldiers appeared before
Mr. Witgrave's house, with an intention of searching it. Resistance would have
been unseasonable. Witgrave concealed his guests, and, at the same time, opened
his door with so much alacrity and unconcern, that his visitors were induced to
make but a very slight search. It was soon afterward understood, that a fresh
inspection had been made of Witlade monastery; and that the officer of the
party by whom it was searched, had several times held his pistol to Farmer
Penderel's breast, to oblige him to confess where the king was concealed.

The danger increasing every day, Charles dropped all thoughts of staying any
longer in England, and resolved to get as near the sea as he could, in order to
embark, with more speed and convenience, the first opportunity. Colonel Lane, a
zealous loyalist, who lived at Bentley, a place but a few miles distant,
promised to cooperate in effecting this purpose. The king had made his feet so
sore by walking in heavy boots, or great shoes, which had not been made for
him, that he was obliged to ride. He reached Bently, in company with Lord
Wilmot, and the four Penderels, who had always been so faithful to him. Colonel
Lane proposed to convey the king to Bristol, where they might hope to find some
vessel that would take him on board. This officer had a relation, called Mrs.
Norton, who lived about three miles from Bristol, and was then very far
advanced in her pregnancy. He obtained a passport (without which, it was
impossible to travel in those troublesome times) for his sister and a servant,
under pretense of visiting his relation in the neighborhood of Bristol. The
king, therefore, sat off on horseback, and rode behind Miss Lane's chaise,
passing for her servant. Lord Wilmot leading a brace of spaniels, coupled
together, and carrying a hawk upon his wrist, passed for a sporting country
gentleman of their acquaintance, who had met them on the road.

During this journey, which lasted but three days, the king met with several
adventures, most of them sufficient to inspire him with well-grounded terrors.
He had only traveled six miles, when his horse having dropped a shoe, he went
himself to the nearest blacksmith, to have him shod, as he chose to go through
with the character that he had assumed. While he stood by at the operation, the
smith asked him what news were going, and if the king was taken. Charles
answered, without changing countenance, that he had not heard any thing of it,
and that, in all likelihood, his majesty was gone back to Scotland. I do not
think so, replied the smith; I should rather suppose him to be concealed in
England. Wherever he is, I should wish to know his place of concealment. The
parliament has published a proclamation, offering a reward of 1000 l. sterling,
to whoever will discover him.

This disagreeable conversation being over, the party sat forward again, and
continued their route to near Evesham, where, as they were about to pass a
ford, they perceived, all at once, a number of horses standing, saddled, at the
other side of it. Charles was for going right on, but his company, less
resolute, prevailed upon him, at length, to turn off* They found themselves
still in the view of the soldiers, whom they had thought to avoid: but the
prince showed so good a countenance, and the whole cavalcade appeared so much
in nature, as a country family paying a visit in the neighborhood, that the
soldiers, who were, at that moment, busied in seeking him, and him only,
conceived not the smallest suspicion of him.

When they came to Mrs. Norton's, Miss Lane told her, that she had brought with
her a young man, whom she wished her to take into her service. He was the son,
she said, of a poor countryman, in her neighborhood, and had caught an ague
on* the road, for which reason, she requested that he might have a room to
himself. Charles retired to it, and did not stir out; but a servant of the
house, whose name was Pope, knew him, and, throwing himself at his feet, Is it
you, Sire? said he; I have seen your majesty when very young, and therefore was
not long recollecting you: if I can serve your majesty, put my zeal to the
test, and depend upon my fidelity. Charles was surprised and embarrassed at
this new adventure. He saw an equal risk in discovering himself to a stranger,
and in showing that he distrusted a man, who had it in his power to verify his
suspicions. In this dilemma, the apparent sincerity of the man, determined the
king to conceal nothing. The event proved that he was right. Pope rendered the
king great services, and contributed not a little to his safety, by pointing
out to him, as a safe retreat, the house of Colonel Wyndham, where, in effect,
he spent nineteen days, waiting until his friends should find an opportunity
for him to embark on board some ship.

This was not an easy matter, on account of the precautions taken against
receiving strangers. It was even dangerous to propose it, the captains of ships
suspecting every body, whom they did not know, to be the king, and dreading the
penalties denounced against such as should refuse to discover him. A report of
his death had prevailed some time, and would have contributed to render his
life serene, had it lasted longer. He learned this, from the ringing of bells,
and the public rejoicings that were made, on account of it, in the
neighborhood; but the report fell to the ground too soon, and did not, in the
least, diminish the difficulties which opposed his embarking, notwithstanding
all the pains that Colonel Wyndham took, in order to forward this object.

A merchant, of the name of Esden, had just conveyed Lord Barclay over sea,
whither he sled from the persecution of the parliament. Colonel Wyndham, who
knew this merchant, went directly to Lyme, where he lived; and entreated him to
perform the same kindness for a gentleman, a friend of his, who would desire to
take no more than one servant with him in the whole. Mr. Esden went with him to
the village of Carmouth, where he directed him to a master of a ship, with whom
he might make his agreement. It was fixed, that the captain should come the
next day but one, and receive his passengers aboard, at a solitary part of the
coast. The king was exact to the hour of his appointment, but no ship appeared.
They learned, afterward, that the preceding day, there had been a fair in
Lyme, at which the parliament's proclamation, against such as should harbor or
conceal the king, was read. The captain's wife being informed, by her husband,
that he was going to convey to France, certain persons, whom he did not name to
her, opposed his design very strongly; and, in order to hinder him completely
from effecting it, she locked him up in his room, while he was busy getting
ready some things necessary for the voyage.

Dreading, lest this incident should become public, Charles was obliged to quit
Colonel Wyndham's house, without well knowing where to face. He proceeded,
however, toward Dorchester, accompanied still by Wilmot, Colonel Wyndham, with
one of his servants, being their guides. Wilmot's horse losing a shoe, the
circumstance was very near occasioning the king's discovery. They had sent the
horse to be shod in a village where they had stopped, as night came on. The
blacksmith asked the hostler where his guests came from, who answering, that,
by their own account, they came from Exeter: they impose upon you, replied the
smith, with a countenance full of the important discovery, these shoes were
made down in the north. The hostler, from this observation, recollecting that
the four horsemen had ordered their horses to remain saddled, and had not
bespoke beds for themselves, he concluded, at first, that they were certainly
people of quality belonging to the king's army, which had been defeated near
Worcester; and afterward, that it might, very possibly, be the king himself.
Upon the strength of this conjecture, he went to the minister of the parish, a
violent parliamentarian, and communicated his suspicions to him. The minister
was, at that moment, engaged in prayer, and would not be interrupted. But the
noise of this adventure gaining ground, as the blacksmith, on his side, had not
failed to circulate it, the minister took fire, and went to a justice of the
peace. Immediately the whole town is up in arms, searching for the strangers,
and a party is sent off after them, by the read which they were seen to take.
The king could not possibly have escaped them, if, instead of keeping the main
road, he had not turned short, and made the best of his way, by cross roads, to
Salisbury.

We cannot sufficiently admire his continuing undiscovered during the remainder
of his wanderings. The whole country was full of troops, marching in every
direction; at every step he was surrounded by them. He no sooner stopped at an
inn, but the soldiers, officers, whole companies enter the place. Just as he
was going to step into a ship, which had been prepared for him at Southampton,
there came up a battalion of soldiers, ordered for Jersey, and took possession
of it before his face: at length, a friend contrived to procure him a small
bark at Shoreham, in Sussex, upon the application of a Mr. Mansell, a rich
merchant of that quarter. They met at night, in a house not far from the
harbor, and Charles waited on Sir John Wilmot at table, who had kept Mr.
Mansell to supper, and the captain of the bark, whose name was Tattershall.
Supper being over, they were preparing to go aboard; and the king expected now
to have no further risks to run, except those of the voyage, when the captain,
taking the opportunity of his being alone with Mr. Mansell, addressed him thus:
You have deceived me, said he, and your enterprizing spirit, might have cost me
my life. Mr. Mansell, who appeared ignorant of the matter himself, used every
effort to persuade him, that the idea was without foundation; and at length,
Sir John Wilmot, overhearing them, came in, and plied him so strongly with
money and promises, that he overcame his resistance. Captain Tattershall ran
home immediately; and asked his wife for linen and provisions. You are in a
great hurry, said she, why not wait till tomorrow; and as he continued
pressing her to make haste; Well, said she, I see it is for the king. God give
you success, and him too. The attempt is hazardous; but provided you save him,
I am satisfied to beg my own and my children's bread, all my life. Animated by
these words, Tattershall went to give the necessary orders, that his bark
should be in readiness to sail the next morning at five o'clock. It took up the
king at the appointed place; and his taking leave of his faithful friends, was
a very tender scene. Mr. Mansell, approaching him the last, took him by the
hand, and kissing it with fervor, I was willing, said he, to have been deceived
by your majesty: I pray God, that you may arrive in safety, at your port, and
return, very soon, in peace, to these your realms. Charles answered him,
smiling, that he would then remember a service which was done him with so good
a grace. The bark soon lost sight of the shore, and had so favorable a course
the whole day, that they anchored, the same night, at Fescamp, from whence the
king sat out for Paris, and arrived there October 30, 1651.

THE HAT.
A COUNTRYMAN came, one day, into a shop, in the city, and laying his hat on
the counter, begged the master of the shop, to lend him half a guinea upon it,
as a pledge. Do you take me for a madman, said the master of the shop? it is
against the law, and if it were not, that shabby hat is not worth twopence.
Such as it is, replied the countryman, I would not give it for five guineas,
and yet I have very urgent occasion for the sum that I ask. I sold my corn at
the market, a week ago, to a mealman, who was to pay me today; and I depended
upon having it to make up my rent, which has been so long due, that if it is
not paid tomorrow, as I promised it should, I expect to be distrained for it.
But the poor meal-man is almost broke, he has lately buried his only son, a
grown-up youth, and now, this last week, his wife died of grief, so that I
cannot be paid until next market day. As I often come into your shop, to buy
things, and you know me to be an honest man, I thought you would not make much
difficulty about lending me half a guinea: it is nothing in your pocket, but is
a great matter to me: at all hazards, there is my hat, to answer for the money,
and a better security than you think. The tradesman answered him only with a
sneer, and, turning upon his heel, attended to other persons who were in the
shop.

Sir George Liberal happened to be one of them: he had listened, with
attention, to the countryman's discourse, and was struck with the air of
honesty, that was apparent in his countenance. He approached him gently, and
putting half a guinea into his hand, Here is the money that you want, said he,
since you find people so loath to oblige you, I will be your friend, without a
pledge. With these words, he went out of the shop, eying the master of it with
much contempt; and his carriage was gone a good distance off, before the
countryman had recovered from the emotions of his joy and amazement.

About a month after, as ^ir George Liberal was going in his chariot, up the
Hay-market, he heard somebody call out, several times, to his coachman, to
stop, but to no purpose, for the coachman drove briskly on, without paying any
regard to him: at the same time, Sir George looking out, saw a man upon the
footway, running, with all speed, to overtake the carriage; he, therefore, drew
the string, to make the coachman stop. Immediately, the man springs to the
coach-door, crying, I beg your pardon, Sir -- I have run myself out of breath,
to overtake you; Did not you, Sir, about a month ago, put half a guinea into my
hand, in a shop in the city? -- Why, yes, I remember something of it -- Well,
Sir, here is the money, which I return you, with many thanks. You did not give
me time to thank you then, much less to ask your name and address; and the man
of the shop did not know you. I came to town, every week, with my own hay and
corn, in hopes that I might, some time or other, have the good fortune to meet
with you: luckily, I saw you as you passed up the street. I should never have
been happy, if I had not had the opportunity of paying my acknowledgments to
you; and may Heaven bestow upon you the recompense which your generosity
deserves. I am happy, said Sir George, in having obliged so honest a man as you
seem to be; but I confess to you, I did not expect to see the money returned
me. I intended it as a small present to you. -- That is more than I knew, Sir;
and besides, I make a conscience of not receiving money that I do not earn. I
had done nothing for you, and you had served me sufficiently, by lending me the
sum in question. Let me beg you, therefore, to receive it again. No, my good
friend, it belongs neither to you nor me, now: Do me the pleasure to buy
something with it for your children, and give it to them as a present from me.
Sir, your proceeding is very genteel, and it would be uncivil in me to refuse
your offer. Well, then, say no more, the matter is finished. But pray explain
one particular to me, which has not ceased to engage my curiosity, ever since I
saw you: How could you have the conscience to ask half a guinea on your hat,
which was scarcely worth a groat? Ah! Sir, it is worth every thing to me. How
so, pray? I will give you the history of it.

Some years since, my landlord's son, sliding on a pool in his father's
grounds, fell through the ice. I happened to be at work near the place, and
hearing some people cry out, who saw the child sink; I ran to the spot, and
throwing myself into the water with my clothes on, just as I was, I had the
good fortune to save the child, and to restore him alive to his father: my
landlord did not forget this service; he gave me a sung farm, in addition to
what little land I held under him before, which was not much more than a
cabbage-garden, supplied me with stock and utensils of husbandry, and in short
set me up completely in my small farm. But this was not all. As I had lost my
hat in the water, be placed his own upon my head, saying at the same time, that
he could have wished to place a crown upon it. You see, Sir, if I have not
reason to be fond of this hat. I never wear it in the country: every thing
there reminds me of my benefactor, though he has been dead some time. My
children, my wife, my cottage, my land, all seem to speak, as it were,
continually of him to my remembrance, But whenever I come to town* I always put
on this hat, that I may have something about me to put me in mind of him. I am
only sorry that it begins to grow old. You see, Sir, it is going; but as long
as a bit of it remains together, it shall be inestimable in my eyes.

Sir George felt great pleasure from this recital of the countryman, and taking
out his card, here, said he, farmer, take this, it contains my address, I am
obliged to quit you now, but shall be glad to see you at my house next Sunday
morning.

The countryman did not fail to come, at the time appointed: as soon as the
servant carried in his name, Sir George himself came out to receive him, and,
taking him by the hand, he said, my worthy friend, you have not, it is true,
saved me an only son, but you have, nevertheless, performed me a very
considerable service; you have taught me to love mankind better than I did
before, by proving to me, that there are still hearts replete with honesty and
gratitude. Since hats figure to such advantage on your head, here is one that I
wish you to accept as a present: I do not desire, however, that you should
leave off that of your benefactor; only when it is incapable of being worn
longer, I beg the reversion of your head for this; and every year, on this same
day, you will find a new one here to replace it.

This was no more than a genteel pretext, which Sir George's delicacy suggested
to him, in order to avoid hurting the countryman's pride: he knew, very well,
that we should endeavor not to humble those whom we oblige, but to raise them
in their own opinion. After having gained his heart by this first tie of
friendship, he acquired sufficient ascendancy over him, to assume the right of
conferring the most essential benefits on him and his family, and of repairing
the losses which they had sustained by unavoidable strokes of fortune. He had
finally the satisfaction of seeing them nearly as happy in their gratitude, as
he himself was in his generosity.

LITTLE GRANDISON. A Letter from WILLIAM D -- to his MOTHER.
O Dear mama! every body here is in the greatest consternation. Charles went
out early this morning, on horseback, attended by a servant, in order to pay a
visit to a friend five or six miles off and only think, he is not returned yet.
His father had desired him to be home before five o'clock, and it is now past
nine. Never before, did he disobey the commands of his parents. Something must
have happened to him. It is a very dark night, and a dreadful thick fog. Mr.
Grandison has just sent off a servant, to make enquiry about his son. How
impatiently do I expect his return!

Eleven o'clock.

What distress! The servant is returned from the house where Charles went to
spend the day. Charles had left it with his servant, before four o'clock. What
can have become of him? Can he have gone astray in the forest, or fallen from
his horse? Who can tell? Or have some villains robbed and murdered him? Good
heaven! Mrs. Grandison will die, with apprehension. Emily does nothing but
weep. Edward is like one distracted; he runs every moment up stairs, and into
the yard. Mr. Grandison endeavors to comfort his wife; but it is easy to see
that himself is in the deepest affliction. He has just sent out men on
horseback, different ways, to endeavor to find poor Charles. If it were not
for leaving his wife in her present distress; he would, before this time, have
hurried out in search of his son. Oh! that I had gone with my friend! I should,
at least, have shared all his dangers; but Mrs. Grandison insisted that I
should stay at home, on account of a slight cold. Perhaps, if I had entreated
her pressingly, she would have suffered me to go with him. I am quite unhappy.
I know not how I support my affliction. I can no longer hold the pen. I do not
see what I write.

One o'clock in the morning.

No Charles yet. Not a soul has gone to bed. Indeed, who could rest? The
servants wring their hands: Edward and Emily cry incessantly, O, brother!
brother! and this increases my unhappiness. I wish it were morning.

Half after six in the morning.

God be praised, mama, we have news of Charles. The servant, who was with him,
is just returned. No accident has happened to my friend. It is not his fault
that he caused us so much uneasiness: he staid out neither through carelessness
nor for pleasure. Far from deserving to be blamed, he is worthy of the highest
praise. Oh! when you shall hear his adventure! But Mr. Grandison absolutely
insists, that we all go and lie down for a few hours, to recover ourselves,
after the fatigues and anxiety of the night; and we must obey Farewell, mama,
until I awake. My first care shall be to write to you. I will rise two hours
the sooner, on purpose.

Nine o'clock.

I will now tell you the whole story, mama, from the account given us by the
servant. His young master and himself, had set out before four o'clock, as I
mentioned, in order to be at home by the time that Mr. Grandison had fixed for
their return. They had scarcely come the fourth part of the way, when it began,
all at once, to grow dark. There came on so thick a fog, that one could not
distinguish an object at the distance of two yards. Charles, who is naturally
courageous, did not make himself the least uneasy. They held on their way, at a
full trot, when suddenly they perceived, straight before them, a man, stretched
at his full length, on the road. What is here? cried Charles, stopping his
horse. I suppose, replied the servant, somebody that has taken a glass too
much. Let us go on, master.

No, said Charles, if it be a man in liquor, we must remove him, at least out
of the coach way, for fear that some carriage, passing by, should go over him,
in the dark. He had not said these words, before he was on the ground: but what
was his surprise, when approaching the unfortunate stranger, he perceived him
to be an old officer, in regimentals. He had a large wound in his head, from
which the blood flowed in abundance. Charles spoke to him, but he returned no
answer.

It is a dead man, cried the servant, who had also alighted.

No, no; he is still alive, said Charles. He is only in a swoon. Heavens! what
shall we do?

What can we do? replied the servant; we must go on; then we can call at the
first village, and send somebody to his assistance.

How unfeeling you are, John, cried Charles, with vivacity; before the persons
that we might be able to send, should arrive here, this poor gentleman would be
dead. See what a quantity of blood he has lost. Fasten our horses to these
trees. We must ourselves give him whatever assistance we can.

How, Sir? said John; sure you are not serious. It will be dark night
presently; and we shall never be able to find our way home, in this fog.

Charles. Well, then, we will stay here.


John. And what will master and mistress say? You may guess how uneasy they
will be.


Charles. Oh! that is very true. I never thought of that.

Charles was going to mount his horse again, but turning his eyes, which were
filled with tears, toward the officer, he felt himself held to the spot by a
secret power. No, unfortunate soldier, cried he, I will not leave you in this
deplorable situation. My parents cannot be angry with me for it. I will not
suffer a fellow creature to perish, without doing every thing in my power to
relieve him.

As he said these words, he took off his clothes in haste, and tore his
waistcoat in two pieces.


John. What are you doing there, master?


Charles. I must bind up his forehead, to stop the wounds.


John. But, Sir --


Charles. Do not say a word more, but come and assist me.

He then doubled his handkerchief in four folds, and bound the gentleman's head
with it, which was still bleeding plentifully, and taking one side of his
waistcoat, folded in length, he applied it to keep the bandage on fast, with
pins. Afterward, assisted by John, he lifted the unfortunate stranger out of
the high road, and carried him on the grass.

What shall we do now, Sir? said John.


Charles. You must gallop to the first village, and bring some people to convey
this poor gentleman to a farm house. I will pay them for their trouble, and, in
the mean time, I shall wait here for you.


John. Heaven forbid that I should do as you say. No, Master Charles, I will do
no such thing. What, leave you all alone in this solitary place? Your father
would never forgive me for it.


Charles. I take the whole upon myself, and I insist that you obey me.


John. Well, Sir, since you order me so positively, I have nothing more to say.
But remember at least --


Charles. I will remember every thing.

John sat off, therefore, as fast as his horse could gallop. A little farther
on the road, he found a cottage, in which were two men at work, making wicker
baskets, with several women and children. He opened the door, and, addressing
himself to the head of the family, he requested him to come, with his eldest
son, to the assistance of an old officer, who had fallen on the road, and was
weltering in his blood. They showed, at first, some unwillingness to go out, on
such a dark night, at the desire of a perfect stranger. But, at length,
persuaded by the entreaties of John, and by the sincerity that appeared in his
protestations, they went to fetch a sort of bier, and then accompanied him.

During all this time, Charles had not quitted the old gentleman's side, a
moment, and, by dint of care, had brought him to his senses again.

Shall I take the liberty, Sir, to ask your name, said he, as soon as he saw
him open his eyes, and by what accident you came to be in this condition?

My name is Arthur, replied the old man, in a weak, tremulous voice. I am major
in the -- regiment. I had come from my own house, intending to take a ride. My
horse stumbled on the road, hereabouts, and, in his fall, threw me over his
neck. My head struck against a stone. I endeavored to get up, but what with
pain, loss of blood, and the weakness of old age, I fainted away, and cannot
tell what happened to me from that moment. But you, amiable child, who so
feelingly compassionate my misfortune, is it you, that have dressed my wound,
and saved my life?


Charles. Yes, Sir, and I am happy to have had; it in my power to serve you. I
had a servant with me: him I have sent to the next village, to procure you
lodging, and assistance more effectual than mine.


The major. What, have you had the courage to stay by my side, in this lonely
place, notwithstanding the darkness of the night! Young as you are, you have
paid the most humane attention to me. What thanks do I owe you!


Charles. None, Sir. I have but done my duty, and shall count myself happy, if
I can be still farther useful to you.

This discourse was interrupted by the arrival of John, with the two men. They
placed the major on the bier, on which they had, previously, laid a good
mattrass: but, in spite of the pains that they took to convey him gently, the
shaking of the bier, as they walked along, revived the pain of his wound, so
that he fell again into a fainting fit.

Charles having given his horse to John to lead, walked in silence by the side
of the bier, and showed every sort of attention possible, to the wounded
person, in order to make him recover his spirits. When they came to the door of
the cottage, he made one of the countrymen mount his horse, and dispatched him,
with all speed, for a surgeon.

Nevertheless, John used the most earnest persuasions to induce his young
master to return home, and represented to him the terrors which his parents
must feel, on account of his stay.

What, said Charles, should I leave this old man to die in the hands of
strangers! You see, he is still insensible. I should have done nothing for him,
were I to leave him now. No, (...), I will spend the night by his side.


John. How, Master Charles! You do not say so?


Charles. My resolution is fixed. Do you hasten home to my father and mother;
tell them every thing that has happened, that they may not be uneasy on my
account. Tell them that I will wait their orders, here, tomorrow.


John. Really, Sir, it is what I cannot think of doing. My master would receive
me finely, if I were to return without you.

It must be so, for all that, replied Charles, in a firm tone of voice. Do not
lose time. It is night already.

It was in vain that John protested against what he called the imprudence of
his young master: he was obliged to go.

Charles was easier then, supposing that his parents would soon hear of him:
but there was another unlucky accident still destined to befall them; the fog
grew thicker and thicker, the night grew darker, and John, losing his way in a
wood through which he was to pass, and not knowing by what course he was to get
out of it, was obliged, after many ineffectual scampers, to seat himself at the
foot of a tree, and there to wait for daylight, leaving us, all the while, in
the most terrible alarm. The poor man was quite exhausted with cold and
weariness, when he came home this morning. Notwithstanding his hurry to come,
he was afraid to show himself, le^ he should be turned away. I cannot describe
to you his surprise, when, after finishing his story, he heard Mr. Grandison
cry out, How much ought I ^o bless heaven for having given me such a son! And
you, John, have done very well, to obey his orders in every respect. Here are
two guineas, to make you amends for your bad night. Go, refresh yourself, and
take a little sleep, that you may be able to go back to my son. I am not the
least angry with him for all the uneasiness that he has caused us. He did every
thing in his power to relieve us from it.

But how will my friend be grieved, when he learns from John what we ourselves
have suffered! John is set off already. I saw Mr. Grandison give him a purse of
money for his son, that he may have wherewithal to provide every thing
necessary. I am impatient now to know whether the poor major be alive or dead.
I hope soon to be able to give you some account of him. Farewell, dear mama,
continue to love me, and love also my friend Charles, for his courage, presence
of mind, and humanity.

Eleven o'clock.

At last, mama, Charles is returned. With what transport did I embrace him! He
appeared an angel in my eyes. Thanks to his care, the major is much better. His
hurt will soon be cured.

Charles arrived much sooner than we expected. Emily was the first who saw him!
She screamed out with joy and surprise, Charles! Charles! and ran precipitately
to meet him: they came in, kissing each other. Charles quitted her at the door,
to fly to his father. He threw himself at his feet, and did not rise from
thence, till he perceived his mother hold out her arms to embrace him. I will
relate to you, word for word, the discourse that passed between them. I shall
never forget it as long as I live.


Charles. Can you pardon me, my dear ^arents, for having caused you so much
uneasiness?


Mr. Grandison. Pardon you, my son? nay, rather let me embrace you a thousand
and a thousand times. You have performed your duty to a fellow creature,
without forgetting, at the same time, your duty to us. I thought it impossible
for me to love you more than I did. But how was I mistaken!


Charles. Your goodness overwhelms me, papa.


Mr. Grandison. Let us say no ^ore on the subject, my dear. How goes on your
patient?


Charles. He is much better at present, though a little weak still; but the
surgeon assured me, that his hurt was not the least dangerous.


Mrs. Grandison. Is he still in the cottage with those poor people? Will they
take good care of him?


Charles. Oh, mama, do not be uneasy; his son is with him. As soon as he told
me where he lived, I sent thither, express, to inform the family of his
misfortune. The eldest of his sons came immediately. What was my satisfaction,
when I saw the wounded father in the arms of him whom he held most dear!


Mr. Grandison. And will the major be able to (...) himself every thing that is
necessary?


Charles. Oh, yes, papa, he is very rich; and (...) is your purse, as you sent
it me. I had no occasion to make use of it.


Mr. Grandison. No matter; it is yours my dear.


Charles. Mine, papa?


Mr. Grandison. Yes, Charles, I give it to you as a token of my satisfaction: I
am sure you will not open it, unless for a good purpose. Continue to be, all
your lifetime, such as you have shown yourself today, and never let your heart
be hardened against the misfortunes of your fellow creatures.


Charles. Oh! papa, what can I say? I feared your reproaches, and you overwhelm
me with kindness.


Mrs. Grandison. But how did you like being in that dismal cabin?


Charles. I confess, mama, I did not much mind the place. I had nothing before
my eyes, but the poor old man, whom I was afraid of seeing die, every moment.


Mr. Grandison. Then you have not slept the whole night?


Charles. I made them lay some straw by the major's bed side; but my thoughts
of the uneasiness that you, my brother, my sister, and my friend, must suffer,
and my continual fears for the poor wounded gentleman, all together contributed
to banish sleep from my eyelids. Oh! if I could have thought that you would
have been a whole night, without knowing what was become of me, how would my
mind have been tortured! I should have come home, had been obliged to grope my
steps all the way in the dark.


Mrs. Grandison. Kiss me, my dear boy and again and again: but I will not (...)
myself in the pleasure of hearing you any (...)* It is full time for you to go
and take a (...).

We were obliged, therefore, to (...) and I accompanied him to his chamber.
(...) happy am I, said he, squeezing my hand, that my parents are pleased with
my conduct! Notwithstanding the satisfaction that I felt in serving the poor
major, I should never have enjoyed comfort, had I made them angry.

Dear, amiable friend, cried I, embracing him. It was all that I could say,
mama; my eyes were bathed in tears, my breast heaved with sobs; I could not
tear myself from his arms. Oh! how sweet are the pleasures of sensibility! and
what happiness it is to have a virtuous and affectionate friend!


END OF VOLUME FIRST.
THE FRIEND OF YOUTH. TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH OF M. BERQUIN; COMPLETE IN TWO
VOLUMES. VOL. II.

NEWBURYPORT: PRINTED BY JOHN MYCALL, FOR THE PROPRIETOR OF THE BOSTON
BOOKSTORE, No 59, CORNHILL, BOSTON.

CONTENTS TO THE SECOND VOLUME.
NARRATIVE of a Shipwreck 5 Letter from Julia Montague to Emily Beaumont 78
Later from Emily Beaumont to Julia Montague 81 The Honest Farmer 91 Anthony and
his Dog 194 The first Trial of Courage 205 Little Grandison 212 -- Part II. 269
THE FRIEND OF YOUTH.
NARRATIVE OF A SHIPWRECK.
ON the 17th of November, 1780, I embarked on board the St. Lawrence
brigantine, then lying in the basin of Quebec, and bound to New York, being
charged with dispatches from General Haldimand, commander in chief in that
province, to Sir Henry Clinton. The same day, on receiving our sailing orders,
we weighed anchor, and dropped down to the harbor called Patrick's Hole, in
the island of Orleans, in company with a schooner bound to the same port, on
board of which was an Ensign, Drummond, of the ^44th regiment, with duplicates
of General Haldimand's dispatches. In this place, we were detained six days by
a contrary wind: at the expiration of which time, the frost had sat in with
prodigious severity; and the ice was forming fast in all parts of the river.
Had the wind continued unfair for a few days longer, we should have been
entirely blocked up by it, and had happily escaped the calamities which
afterward befell us.

On the 24th, the wind being fair, we got under way, and proceeded down the
river St. Lawrence, as far as the Brandy-Pots; islands so called, about forty
leagues from Quebec. At this place; the wind veered about to the northeast,
which obliged us again to anchor. The weather continued intensely cold; and the
vessel being leaky, made so much water, as to render it necessary to keep one
pump continually going. A change of wind soon after enabled us to proceed on
our voyage, and to make the island of Anticoste, which is at the mouth of the
river St. Lawrence; when the wind coming round again to the eastward, we were
obliged to beat off and on, between this island and Cape Roziere for four days;
our vessel at the same time increasing her leaks to such a degree, that we were
under the necessity of rigging the other pump, and of keeping them both
constantly at work. Being now in a higher latitude, the severity of the cold
had increased in proportion, and the ice began to form so fast about the ship,
as to alarm us exceedingly, lest we should be entirely surrounded by it; which
we only prevented, by cutting and breaking vast quantities of the ice from her
sides. To this task, with that of keeping the pumps at work, the crew, together
with the passengers, were scarcely equal; only nineteen persons being on board,
of whom six were passengers, and the remainder very indifferent seamen. As for
the master, from whom, in the present emergency we might have expected some
degree of exertion, instead of attending to his duty, and the preservation of
his ship, he remained continually in a state of intoxication in his cabin.

On the 29th the wind came round to the north-west, and we proceeded down the
gulf of St. Lawrence, with two feet water in the ship's hold. The wind kept
gradually increasing till the 1st of December, when it blew a perfect gale from
the north-west quarter; and the ship's crew being now almost overcome with cold
and fatigue, seeing no prospect of gaining upon the leak, the water having
already increased to four feet in the hold, nor a possibility of making any
port, they came to the resolution of working no longer at the pumps; which was
unanimously agreed to, by all the foremast-men. They accordingly left off
working, and declared themselves quite indifferent about their fate; preferring
the alternative, of going to the bottom together with the vessel, to that of
suffering such severe and incessant labor in so desperate a situation. Their
fatigues, it must be confessed, from the 17th of November had been excessive:
and though hope might still remain, yet our present circumstances were such, as
to exclude at least all probability of saving the vessel. However, by the force
of persuasion and promises, together with the timely distribution of a pint of
wine per man, which I had fortunately brought on board, they were diverted from
this desperate resolution; but with great reluctance, saying, with some truth,
as we afterward experienced, and with more than they themselves were aware of,
that whether the vessel filled or not, was a matter of no consequence. This
delay, though not exceeding a quarter of an hour, had increased the depth of
water another foot; but the men added to their exertions, being encouraged by
the wine, which was issued to them every half-hour, succeeded so far, as to
reduce the water in the space of two hours, to less than three feet. The*
captain still remained in his cabin.

During the 2d and 3d of December, the gale seemed to increase rather than
diminish. The ice formed so thick on the ship's sides, as to impede her way
very much through the water; which furnished us with a new labor, that of
cutting it off, as fast as it formed, with saws and axes. The leak continued to
gain ground. The schooner that was in company, far from being able to afford us
any assistance, was in as leaky a condition as our own vessel, having struck
upon some rocks at the island of Coudres, through the ignorance or neglect of
her pilot. A heavy snow beginning to fall, it was with the utmost difficulty we
could get sight of each other, though at no great distance, and, in order not
to part company, fired every half-hour. The schooner, at length, made no answer
to our guns; whence, we concluded, she had foundered; nor were we wrong in our
supposition. There were sixteen persons on board, every one of whom perished.

On the following day the gale increased prodigiously, and the sea began to run
high, with a heavy fall of snow, so as to prevent our seeing twenty yards
ahead of the vessel. The men being excessively fatigued, the water had risen
to its usual quantity, of between four and five feet. The mate, whom I have not
yet taken notice of, an intelligent young man, and well acquainted with his
profession, judged, from the distance we had run, that we could not now be far
from the Magdalen Islands, which lie about midway in the gulf of St. Lawrence.
These islands are nothing more than a cluster of rocks, some appearing above,
and others hidden under the water, and have been fatal to many vessels. Seamen
wish often to make them in fine weather, as they serve to take a new departure
from; but in foggy or blowing weather they, as studiously avoid them. The
mate's conjecture was but too well founded; for in less than two hours, we
heard the sea breaking upon the rocks; and soon after discovered the principal
island, called the Deadman, close under our lee; the point of which, it was
with the greatest difficulty that we weathered. Having happily cleared the main
island, we were still far from thinking ourselves secure; for being unable, on
account of the heavy fall of snow, to see many yards ahead of the vessel, and,
being in the midst of the small islands, there appeared very little probability
that we should pass clear of them all in the same manner. Not being able to
distinguish any one, in time to avoid it, we were obliged to leave the vessel
to the direction of Providence, and fortunately, I might say almost
miraculously, ran through them all, without damage. The anxiety and
perturbation of mind that the crew and passengers were in, while in the midst
of these rocks, may be easily conceived: and now, that the danger was over, it
turned out to be a fortunate occurrence for us; for, by this time, the sailors
being ready to sink under the accumulated distresses of cold and fatigue, and
depressed by the little hopes they had of saving the vessel, had nearly
determined, a second time, to quit the pumps; and leave the vessel to her fate:
when acquiring fresh spirits from the danger we had escaped, and, as the vulgar
are generally inclined to superstition, attributing what was perhaps accident
alone, to the immediate interposition of Providence, they agreed to continue
their efforts a little longer; toward which, they were likewise not a little
encouraged, by the wine which I distributed to them occasionally.

During the night, the gale continuing, and the sea running very high, we were
apprehensive of being what seamen call pooped, or having the stern or poop of
the vessel beaten in by the waves; which happened in fact as we apprehended:
for about five in the morning of the 5th, a large wave broke on the ship's
quarter, which stove in our dead-lights, filled the cabin, and washed the
master out of his bed, where he had remained ever since the commencement of the
gale. This accident, was attended with worse consequences than we at first
imagined; for we soon discovered, from the increase of the leaks, that the
stern-post had been started by the impulse of the sea. Having nothing in the
after-hold, no other resource was left but that of attempting to stop the leaks
with beef, which we cut into small pieces for that purpose: but this expedient
we soon found ineffectual, and the water continued to gain on us faster than
ever. The sailors finding all their labors fruitless, and the leak, which was
constantly increasing before, now rendered by our late misfortune entirely
irreparable, abandoned themselves totally to despair; and again refused to work
at the pumps any longer. They had not however long remained inactive, before we
contrived once more to persuade them, to make another effort to clear the
vessel; when, to our great surprise and consternation, we found the pumps so
hard frozen, that it was impossible to move them.

All endeavors now to keep the ship clear were ineffectual, so that in a very
short time she filled to the water's edge. Having no longer, as we imagined,
the smallest foundation for hope, we resigned ourselves, with as much fortitude
as possible, to our fate, which we expected every moment, to be that of going
to the bottom. Notwithstanding, when the vessel was quite full, we observed she
was very little deeper in the water than before; and, then recollecting a
circumstance, which the trouble and confusion we had been in had almost
obliterated, namely, that we had a quantity of lumber on board, immediately
accounted for the phenomenon of her not sinking beyond a certain depth in the
water; and began to recall hopes of saving our lives, at least, if we could but
prevent her from oversetting, till we could make the island of St. John's, or
some other islands in the gulf. Having no guns on deck, (and not much lumber)
to render the ship top-heavy, we contrived to prevent her from oversetting, by
steering directly before the wind; though not without some difficulty, as, from
the little way she made through the water, the waves frequently washed clear
over the decks. Besides taking care to keep the vessel steady, we used every
precaution, to secure our boat from being washed overboard, the loss of which
would, in our present circumstances, be a dreadful misfortune. The cabin, being
raised above the level of the main deck, was tolerably clear of water, and
afforded us some little shelter from the severity of the weather. Thither we
retired, leaving only one man upon deck to govern the helm, who was fastened by
a rope, to prevent his being carried away by the waves, which, at times made a
free passage over us.

The gale still continued, without remission, the snow falling so thick, at the
same time, as to prevent our seeing to the mast-head. We knew, from the
distance we had run, that we could not be far from land. The captain imagined,
from our course, during the night, and since the ship filled in the morning,
that we must be near the island of St. John's, which lies between the Magdalen
islands, and the Gut of Canso. This gave us hopes of saving our lives, in case
we could run ashore on some sandy part of it, till they were dashed, by the
further information we had from he captain, that the north-east side of the
island, was nothing but a continued reef of rocks, from one end to the other,
and that there was but one harbor where ships could put in, which he
recollected, was on the opposite side of the island. In a few hours after, we
observed the waves grew shorter and break higher, which is always found to be
the case on approaching the shore; and likewise, a number of gulls and ducks
flying about, a further sign we could not be far distant from it.

We now concluded that we were about to run upon the rocks, which, the captain
informed us, skirted the north-east side of the island, and on approaching the
land, labored under greater dread and apprehension, than amidst all the
dangers we had before experienced, the idea of being cast upon those tremendous
rocks, being more terrifying than that of being buried, as our companions were,
in the bosom of the ocean. The ship had still made considerable way through the
water, though full, and with no other sail set, but a close-reefed
fore-top-sail, which was the only one we could display; and the canvass being
new, it had hitherto stood the gale. The captain proposed bringing the ship
too, to keep her off the land; which I opposed, as well as the mate, urging the
probability that, we should overset her in the attempt; and that moreover,
should we be able to effect it, she must, after all, drive ashore, as in her
present state, it was impossible to make any way to windward. Our opinion,
however, was rejected, and an attempt was made to brace about the fore-yard;
but it was found impracticable, the ropes and blocks being covered with ice. We
were, therefore, obliged to let it remain as before; and the water having
suddenly changed its color, we expected the ship to strike every instant.
Small as our expectations were of saving our lives, I thought it incumbent on
me, to take every precaution to save the dispatches I was charged with, and
therefore ordered my servant to open my trunks, and collect all the letters
they contained, which I put into a handkerchief, and fastened about my waist.
He, at the same time, offered me the money he found in them, to the amount of
one hundred and eighty guineas, which I desired him to dispose of as he thought
proper, thinking it, in the present emergency, rather an encumbrance, than a
matter worthy of preservation. My servant, however, thought otherwise, and took
care to secure the cash, which was, afterward, of more service to us, than at
that time I could possibly have imagined.

The weather continued thick, as usual, till about one o'clock, when suddenly
clearing up, we discovered the land, at about three leagues distance. This
sight gave us no small satisfaction, taking it, at first, to be the island of
St. John's, which, being inhabited by several French and English families, we
might have expected some assistance from them; but, on a nearer view, found,
from the plans we had on board, that it had not the least appearance of that
island, there being no such mountains and precipices laid down, as we
discovered. On drawing nigher, we observed the sea break high, and have a very
dismal appearance, about three miles from the land. As it was necessary for us
to pass through those breakers, ere we could gain the shore, we expected that
our fate would be determined there; but, contrary to our expectations, there
was a considerable depth of water, so that we went over the reef without
touching, though not without shipping many heavy seas, which, had not the
vessel's timbers been strong, and her loading light, must infallibly have
dashed her to pieces. The land now began to have a dreadful appearance,
seeming, at the distance we were off, to be high and rocky; but, on approaching
within a mile of it, we had the pleasure of descrying a fine sandy beach, and a
bold shore. The sea ran high, but not to such a degree as on the reef we had
already passed. As we advanced, the water continued to have a depth beyond our
most sanguine wishes, so as to allow us to come within fifty or sixty yards of
the beach before we struck. Now was the time for every man's apprehensions to
be on the rack, as we might expect, on touching the shore, that the ship would
go to pieces. At length she grounded, with a violent concussion. On the first
stroke the mainmast went out of the step, and on the second, the foremast;
but neither of them fell over the side, the deal boards in the hold being
stowed so close together that the masts had no room to play below; at the same
time the rudder was unshipped, with such violence, as to be near killing one of
the sailors. As soon as the ship had grounded, the sea began to beat over her
in every part, each wave lifting her four or five feet nearer the shore. In a
short space of time the stern was beat in by the sea; and then, having no
shelter in the cabin, we were obliged to go upon deck, and hang by the shrouds,
lest we should be washed overboard. In this uncomfortable situation we
remained, till the vessel was beat so high by the waves, that we could venture
to walk upon deck. We now perceived that the ship's keel was broken, which we
imagined would occasion her to go to pieces: this, however, did not happen for
the present; which I can only attribute to the boards in the hold being so
interwoven with each other, and frozen together by the ice, as to give a degree
of solidity to the vessel.

Our first care now was to get out the boat; which was not be accomplished,
without difficulty, on account of the quantity of ice that was in and about it,
and our reduction in number of effective hands by the intoxication of several
of the crew, who had thought that the most effectual method of getting rid of
the apprehensions they labored under. Our vessel had, from the violence of the
waves dashing against her, broached too, with her broadside to the wind, so
that afforded some shelter for the boat to the leeward. Having, with much
labor, cleared the boat of ice, and prepared her for launching, I ordered some
liquor to be distributed to those who were yet sober, and then asked, if any
were willing to embark with me in the boat, and make the attempt to gain the
shore. The sea running so high, that it appeared scarcely possible for the boat
to live in it for a minute, very few were willing to make an experiment so full
of risk; so that all who offered themselves, were, the mate and two sailors,
together with my servant, and a boy, who was a passenger on board. What gave us
the greatest embarrassment in this undertaking, was, the surf which broke over
us every moment, and the intenseness of the cold, which froze every drop of
water immediately, so as to cover our clothes with a sheet of ice. At length we
got the boat into the water, and having thrown into it an axe and a saw, I
leaped in, followed by my servant and the mate. The boy followed us, but not
springing far enough, fell into the water: he did not, however, sink
immediately; and we contrived to drag him into the boat, but not without
difficulty; our fingers being so benumbed with the cold, that we had scarcely
the power of using them: and this accident was, in the issue, by the chill it
gave him. of fatal consequence to the unfortunate youth. The two sailors, who
had agreed to go with us, next leaped into the boat; and all the rest seemed
ready, notwithstanding their former hesitation, to follow the example, when I
found it necessary to shove her off from the ship's side; for, being very
small, she certainly would have sunk, had so many persons crowded in together.
The ship was lying about forty yards from the shore; but, before we got
halfway to it, we were overtaken by a wave that almost filled the boat, and
the next drove us on the dry sand.

To find ourselves once more safe upon the land, gave us no small satisfaction,
though in so destitute a state: the joy at having escaped those dangers, which
so long had been the chief objects of our dread, made us, for a few moments,
forget that we were snatched from them, merely to be exposed to others more
inevitable; that we had escaped one species of death, probably to undergo
another, more lingering and painful. What most affected us, was, the distress
of our companions, whom we had left on board, whose lamentations, and cries for
help, we could hear very distinctly. But it was impossible for us, however
anxious, to afford them any assistance. Our boat being beat high upon the sand,
could now be of no use, either to us or to them, while the sea was running to
such a degree, that it was not in the power of a human being to relieve them.

The night was now approaching, and we had not long remained in this situation,
ere we found ourselves getting stiff with cold; and the gale continuing as
severe as ever, we were obliged to made, with extreme difficulty, up to our
waists in snow, to the shelter of a thick wood, about two hundred and fifty
yards from the beach. This afforded some relief from the piercing north-west
wind; yet a fire was still wanting, to warm our frozen limbs, and we had not
wherewithal to kindle one. We had, indeed, taken the precaution to put a
tinder-box in the boat, but the water had rendered it totally useless.
Freezing, as we stood, there was nothing to be done, but to keep the blood in
motion by exercise: I, therefore, recommended it to the men, to move about,
being better acquainted with the nature of cold climates, and that of frost,
than any of my companions. My advice was strictly adhered to, for about half an
hour, when the young passenger, whom I have already mentioned, being overcome
with the severity of the weather, threw himself down, in order to sleep; for
extreme cold always occasions a sleepy sensation, that is not easily to be
resisted. I used my utmost endeavors, both by persuasion and force, to rouse
him, and make him stand on his legs, but all to no purpose; so I was obliged to
let him pursue his inclination. After walking about for half an hour longer,
during which time, I felt such a strong desire to sleep, that I should have
lain down myself, had I not been aware of the fatal consequences attending it,
I went to the place where the boy lay, and, putting my hand on his face, and
finding it quite cold, I observed to the mate, who was close by, that I
believed he was dead. To which the youth answered, immediately, that he was not
yet dead, but would be so very shortly; and requested I would write, if I
survived, to his father, at New York, and inform him of the circumstances of
his son's misfortune. In about ten minutes, we found that he had expired, and,
as I imagined, without any pain whatever, at least without any acute sensation
of it. These trivial matters would be unworthy of notice, but as they serve to
show the effect of intense cold on the human body, and to prove, that freezing
to death, is not always attended with so much pain as is commonly supposed.

The death of the boy could not deter the rest of my fellow sufferers from
giving way to this drowsy sensation; and three of them lay down, in spite of my
repeated exhortations to the contrary. Finding it impossible to keep them on
their legs, I broke a branch, and, desiring the mate to do the same, our
employment, during the remainder of the night, was to prevent them from
sleeping, by beating them continually with the branches. This was an exercise
useful to ourselves, at the same time that it preserved the lives of our
companions. The daylight, which we looked for with such anxious expectation,
at length appeared, when I desired the men to pull down their stockings, and
let me examine their legs, as they observed they had no feeling in them. As
soon as I cast my eyes on them, I perceived, very clearly, that they were
frozen, at least, half way up; and desired they would immediately rub them with
snow, which they did for a considerable time, but to little purpose; for it was
impossible to restore them to their feeling.

I then went with the mate, down to the beach, to see if we could discover any
traces of the ship, and our companions, whom we had left on board, and, to our
great surprise and satisfaction, found she had not yet gone to pieces, though
the wind continued with unabated severity. My first study, now, was, how to get
them ashore, our own safety, as well as their's, depending on it. I was almost
stiff with cold, but found feeling in every part, and was therefore certain I
could not be frozen. What seemed greatly to facilitate the undertaking, was,
that the vessel had, by this time, beat much nigher the shore, so that the
distance was but very small at low water. It was high flood, when we arrived on
the beach; we were therefore obliged to wait till the tide was out, when we
advised the people on board, to fasten a rope to the jib-boom, by which they
might swing themselves, one by one, toward the shore. They accordingly adopted
this expedient, and, by watching the motion of the sea, and seizing the
opportunity of swinging themselves, as the waves retired, they all got safe on
the land, except a carpenter, who was a passenger in the vessel. He did not
think proper to venture, in this manner, or was unable, having, the night
before, made rather too free with the bottle. We were happy, however, to get so
many of them on shore, every one of whom, a few hours before, we concluded must
have perished.

The captain had, fortunately, before he left the ship, put some materials for
striking a light, in his pocket. We therefore went to work in cutting wood, and
gathering the branches that lay scattered upon the ground, of which we made a
fire, with all possible expedition, and were happy, for some time, in hovering
about it, and warming our benumbed limbs. Considering the extreme cold we had
endured for such a length of time, no luxury could be equal to that of the
fire; but this gratification was, like many others, to several of my
companions, followed by the most excruciating pain, as soon as their frozen
parts began to thaw. Several of those who had remained all night in the vessel,
as well as those who came ashore with me in the boat, had been frozen in
different parts of their members. The distress that was now painted in the
faces of these unfortunate men, from the tortures they underwent, was beyond
expression: this I knew would be the case, before I heard them complain; but,
as there was no remedy, did not think it necessary to give them any intimation
of it.

When we came to examine into our numbers, I observed that a Captain Green, a
passenger, was missing; and was informed, that he had fallen asleep on board
the vessel, and had been frozen to death. We were rather uneasy about the man
who still remained on board, yet had some hopes of saving his life, in case the
ship did not go to pieces, at the return of low water: but it being too
difficult to undertake in the night, we were under the necessity of waiting
till the following day. This night we passed a little better than the last;
yet, notwithstanding we had a good fire, we found extreme inconveniency from
the total want of covering, as well as from hunger, a new misery, that we had
hitherto been unacquainted with. Besides which, the greatest part of our number
were in the most wretched state imaginable, from the sores occasioned by the
frost.

The next morning, as many of us as were able, went to the beach, to contrive
some means to extricate the carpenter, whose voice we heard on board the
vessel. The sea still running with the same violence as before, we could not
put out the boat to his assistance, and were, therefore, obliged to wait the
return of low water, when we persuaded him to come on shore in the same manner
as the others had done; but this he accomplished with much difficulty, being
very weak, and frozen in different parts of his limbs. We still remained
without any kind of provisions, and began to be reduced in strength, for want
of nourishment.

The 7th and 8th, the gale continued as boisterous as ever; and, in the night,
between the 8th and 9th of December, the ship went to pieces, from the stern to
the mainmast, from the extreme violence with which the sea broke against her.
By this part of her going to pieces, we obtained some provisions, which washed
on shore, viz. some pieces of salt beef, likewise some fresh meat, that hung
over the stern, and a quantity of onions, that the captain had on board for
sale. This relief was very seasonable, it being now the fourth day since we had
eaten any kind of provision whatever. Having no utensils, we dressed our meat
in the best manner we could, and made what we thought a most delicious repast.
The sense of hunger being assuaged, we set to work in collecting all the
provisions we could find scattered upon the beach, being apprehensive that we
should not soon get a supply from any other quarter. This done, our next care
was to get ourselves under cover, and form some kind of shelter from the
piercing blast. This task was not an easy one, so many of our company being
unable to move, and of the remainder, none but the mate and myself capable of
any active exertion, being all more or less bitten by the frost; and our number
reduced to seventeen, by the loss of two persons, as already mentioned. A
quantity of deals had floated on shore from the wreck: of these we carried
about two hundred and fifty into the wood, and by ten at night completed a kind
of house, about twenty feet long and ten wide; which was constructed in the
following manner. We cut two poles of the abovementioned length, and, having no
nails, tied them at a proper height on the outside of two trees, at the
distance of twenty feet from each other: the interval between the poles, which
was equal to the breadth of the trees, served for the smoke of our fire to go
through; the fire itself being laid in an oblong position, extending itself
nearly the whole length of the house. Against these cross poles we placed
boards with a slope of about sixty degrees toward the ground, which
constituted the two principal sides. The two other sides were composed of
boards placed perpendicular, the trunks of the trees being taken in, and
forming part of each side, on one of these sides, that looked toward the
south-east, we left a vacancy for the entrance.

This business being over, we examined the quantity of provisions we had
collected, and had the satisfaction to find that we had in store, between two
and three hundred pounds of salt beef, and a considerable stock of onions. As
to bread, we had none; for, when the vessel went to pieces, the casks were
stove, and the bread lost. Economy and good management, were now highly
necessary, to make our little stock last as long as possible, it being quite
uncertain when we could get any relief; and, in consequence, it was determined,
that each man, whether sick or well, should be confined to a quarter of a pound
of beef, and four onions per day, as long as the latter should last. This
wretched allowance, but just enough to keep a man from starving, was the utmost
we thought it prudent to afford ourselves, lest we should be in an uninhabited
country; for as yet, we were rather uncertain on what coast we were cast away;
though afterward, on comparing circumstances, we concluded it must be on the
island of Cape Breton.

On the 1^th of December, being the sixth day after we landed, the gale abated,
and gave us an opportunity to launch our boat, and get on board what remained
of the vessel. Three of us accordingly embarked, having, with much labor,
launched the boat, and cleared her of the sand and ice. As soon as we got on
board the wreck, we went to work at opening the hatches, and having but one
axe, and the cables being frozen over them in a solid lump of ice, it took the
whole day to accomplish it. The next day, the weather being still moderate, we
went again on board, and having cleared away the remainder of the cable, we cut
up part of the deck, in order to make room to get out two casks of onions, with
a small barrel of beef, containing about one hundred and twenty pounds, and
three barrels of apples, shipped by a Jewish merchant, of Quebec. We like wise
found a quarter cask of potatoes, a bottle of oil, which proved very
serviceable to the men's sores, another axe, a large iron pot, two
camp-kettles, and about twelve pounds of tallow candles. With much difficulty
we got this great supply on shore. On the 13th, we made it our business to get
our provisions stowed away in a corner of the hut, when, on opening the
apple-casks, we found their contents, to our great surprise, converted into
bottles of Canadian balsam, a more valuable commodity, to be sure, than apples,
but what we could gladly have exchanged, in our present situation, for
something more friendly to the stomach than to the constitution. This
disappointment, as may be supposed, extorted a few hearty good wishes toward
the Jew; yet we found, afterward, some use for his Canadian balsam, though
somewhat different from what he intended it should be applied to.

The considerable supply we got from on board the wreck, enabled us the next
day to add four onions to our daily allowance. We went on board once more on
the 14th, and cut as much of the sails as possible from the bowsprit, with part
of which we covered our hut, and made it tolerably warm and comfortable,
notwithstanding the severity of the weather. By this time the sores of the men,
who had been frost-bitten, began to mortify, and caused their toes, fingers,
and other parts of the limbs affected, to rot off, their anguish being at the
same time almost intolerable. The carpenter, who came on shore after the
others, had lost the greatest part of his feet, and on the 14th, at night,
became delirious, in which unhappy state he continued, till death released him
the following day from his miserable existence. We covered him with snow and
branches of trees, having neither spade nor pickaxe to dig a grave for him; nor
would it have been possible, if we had been provided with them, the ground
being in this climate so hard frozen during the winter, as to be almost
impenetrable. Three days after, our second mate died in the same manner, having
been delirious some hours before he expired. We felt but very little concern at
the death of our companions, either on their account or our own: for, in the
first place, we considered it rather a happiness than a misfortune, to be
deprived of life, in our present wretched situation, and, in the second,
because there became the fewer mouths to consume our little stock of
provisions: indeed, had not some paid the debt of nature, we should in the end
have been reduced to the shocking necessity of killing and devouring one
another. Though not yet reduced to this necessity, our condition was so
miserable, that it seemed scarcely possible for any new distress to make a
sensible addition to it. Besides the prospect of perishing, through want, in
that desolate place, and the pain arising from a perpetual sense of hunger and
cold, the agony that the greatest part were in, from the sores occasioned by
the frost, was beyond expression, while their groans were almost equally
distressing to the remainder -- but what affected me more than all our other
miseries, was, the quantity of vermin, proceeding from the men's sores, and
continually increasing, which infested us in every part, and rendered us
disgusting even to ourselves. Several, however, who had been but slightly
frozen, recovered in a short time, with the loss of a few toes and fingers; no
one having entirely escaped the frost, but myself. On the 20th another sailor
died, after having been, like the others, some time in a delirium, and was
buried, or rather covered, in the same manner. Our number was now reduced to
fourteen persons; yet we did not think it prudent to increase the allowance of
provisions, but still kept it at the rate originally fixed on, of a quarter of
a pound of beef per diem.

The mate and I had frequently gone out together, since we were shipwrecked, to
try if we could discover any traces of inhabitants, but, hitherto, without
success. About a fortnight after we had fixed ourselves in the hut, we took the
opportunity of a fine day to walk ten or twelve miles up a river, upon the ice,
where we observed many tracks of moose-deer and other animals, some of which we
might have killed, had we been provided with arms and ammunition. In our
progress up the river we discovered several trees cut on one side, as we
imagined, by an axe, which gave us reason to think there might he Indians near
at hand. On going up to the place, we could plainly perceive, that there had
been some there lately, by their wigwam, which still remained with some fresh
bark about it. We likewise found the skin of a moose-deer hanging across a
pole. We traveled a good way further, in hopes of making some more discoveries
of this nature, but to no purpose. It gave us, nevertheless, some satisfaction
to find, that we were in a place where inhabitants had been lately, as it was
probable they might again return there. In case this should happen, I cut a
long pole, and stuck it in the ice, upon the river; then with my knife, which I
always took care to preserve, as it was the only one among us, cut a piece of
bark from a birch tree, and forming it into the shape of a hand, with the
forefinger extended, and pointing toward our hut, fixed it on the top of the
pole, and took away the moose-skin, in order that they might perceive that some
persons had been on the spot since they left it, and the route they had taken
on their return. We then pursued the way to our habitation, and communicated
this agreeable information to our companions, who were not yet able to move
about: trifling as the hopes were, which we could in reason derive from this
discovery, yet it gave them considerable satisfaction. Twenty days being
elapsed since our shipwreck, and our provisions being very much reduced, I
began to entertain a suspicion, that there was some foul play during my absence
at different times from the hut, in search of inhabitants. I was therefore
determined to find out the truth, if possible, by keeping a constant watch at
night; by which means I at length discovered, that the depredators were no
other than the captain and two sailors, who had consumed no less than seventy
pounds, besides a quantity of onions, in so short a space of time. To prevent
such unfair practices for the future, the mate and I never went out together,
one of us constantly remaining in the hut.

We continued in a state of suspense, from our last discovery, for some days,
when giving up, at length, all hopes of seeing any Indians or inhabitants in
this place, having provisions only for six weeks longer, and a few of our men,
together with the captain, being recovered, I proposed leaving our habitation,
with as many as could work in the boat, in search of inhabitants. This proposal
was unanimously assented to; but when we came to think how it was to be put in
execution, a new difficulty started itself, namely, that of repairing the boat,
which had been beat in such a manner by the sea upon the beach, that every seam
was open. We first attempted to stop them with dry oakum, but soon found that
it would not answer the intended purpose, and having saved no pitch from on
board the wreck, we began to despair of the possibility of repairing them. I,
at length, thought of making a kind of succedaneum for pitch, of the Canadian
balsam, which, as I before mentioned, had been shipped f^r apples, and had been
by us brought on shore under that deception. We accordingly went to work in
making the experiment, and boiled a quantity of the balsam in the iron kettle
we had saved, and frequently taking it off the fire to cool, we soon brought it
to a proper consistence. A sufficient quantity of it being prepared, we turned
up the boat, and having cleaned her bottom, gave her a coat of the balsam,
which effectually stopped up all crevices for the present. This done, we got a
small sail rigged to a mast, which shipped and unshipped occasionally; and then
pitched upon the persons who were to go with me in the boat.

By the 1st of January, with much difficulty and fatigue, we got our boat in
tolerable condition, so that she could swim, without making much water;
likewise our mast and sail rigged, in case we should happen to get a fair wind,
which we could not often expect on this coast, at the present season of the
year; for, during the winter months, it blows almost constantly from west to
north-west, which is immediately on the land. We could not expect, therefore,
to have much occasion for our sail; nevertheless, it might sometimes be
serviceable, and afford some relief to the rowers. We had agreed to take six in
the boat, viz. the captain and mate, two sailors, myself and servant: of the
others, none were so far recovered as to be judged equal to the fatigues we
might expect in this expedition. Our shoes being all nearly worn out, my
employment, during the whole of the next day, was, to make a kind of mowkisins,
or Indian shoes, of canvass. My needle was nothing more than the handle of a
pewter spoon, which I had fashioned, as well as I could, for the purpose, and
the same canvass supplied me with thread. As soon as I had made twelve pair,
which was two for each man in our party, we divided the provisions that
remained, into fourteen equal parts, which amounted only to a quarter of a
pound of beef per day, for six weeks; those who were to stay behind, sharing as
much as we who were to go in the boat, notwithstanding the great fatigue which
we had every reason to expect. Every necessary preliminary being adjusted, we
proposed setting off the next day; but the wind blowing fresh at north-west,
were obliged to remain where we were, till the fourth. By this time, the ice,
floating in prodigious quantities on the coast, and in some places collecting,
and blocking up the bays, rendered our undertaking extremely hazardous; yet we
thought it more advisable, to face any danger, and to encounter any hardship,
than to remain in our present situation, with a certainty of starving.

In the afternoon of the 4th, the wind moderating, we got our provisions, and
whatever little matters might be of service to us, into the boat; and, having
taken leave of our companions, sat off on our expedition. Having got about
eight miles from the place of our shipwreck, the wind began to increase, and
blow very hard at southeast, which was immediately off the shore. The boat, as
well as the oars, being none of the best, we were on the point of being blown
out to sea, but by dint of rowing, made shift to get into a deep bay, about a
mile ahead, where we thought we might pass the night with safety. Having got
every thing on shore, we hauled our boat up as high as our strength would
permit, so as to prevent the sea from doing her any more damage. This done, we
set to work in lighting our fire, and cutting our wood for the night: we
likewise cut some pine-branches, the smaller of which served us to lie on, and
the larger, in the form of a wigwam, to shelter us from the inclemency of the
weather.

The place we had landed on, was a fine sandy beach, with little or no snow on
it. Having observed some small pieces of wood cast on shore by the tide, that
had formerly been cut with an axe, and a number of long poles scattered along
the edge of the bank, which had likewise been cut in the same manner, I thought
it likely there might be some inhabitants near at hand; and proposed, as soon
as we had taken a little refreshment, to go along the beach to a high point of
land, at about two miles distance, which was clear of wood, and appeared to be
cultivated; thinking from thence we might make some useful discoveries. I
accordingly sat out, soon after, with two of the men; and, before we had
proceeded a mile, saw the remains of a shallop, or Newfoundland fishing-boat,
almost covered with sand, which seemed to have been set on fire. This gave us
hopes of discovering something else to our satisfaction, and we proceeded, as
fast as we could, to the point of land. Having gained the top of it, we
descried, to our inexpressible joy, a few houses, about half a mile distant,
toward which we directed our course, having no doubt but that we should now
meet with some relief; but, on coming up to them, found they were only the
remains of some old storehouses, which had been built there for the curing of
cod-fish; and, to all appearance, had been abandoned some years before.

This was a mortifying disappointment to us. We determined, however, to make
the most of our discovery; and, observing a number of old casks lying about, in
different parts, we searched them, as well as the houses, very minutely, in
hopes of finding some provisions; but to no purpose. As we walked along the
point, we gathered about a quart of cranberries, some of which we are,
preserving the remainder for our companions. Having reconnoitred every part of
this point, without any further success, we returned to our boat, and
communicating the discoveries we made to our companions, gave them their share
of the berries we had gathered. Even these discoveries gave us much
satisfaction, as they tended to confirm our hopes of finding some inhabitants
in the course of our voyage along the coast.

In the mean time, the wind came round to the north-west, and blew with such
violence, as to prevent us from proceeding on our voyage. It continued so for
two days, when, happening to get up in the middle of the night, I was
astonished on observing, while the wind continued blowing as hard as ever, that
the sea was entirely without agitation. I immediately awoke the mate, to inform
him of this extraordinary phoenomenon: and going down to the beach together to
know the cause, we found the sea all covered with ice, nothing but a large
sheet of it being to be seen for leagues around. This was an alarming
circumstance, as it seemed to preclude all possibility of proceeding any
farther, and might give us cause even to regret having left our habitations;
for, though we were so near, it was impossible to return by land, besides other
impediments, on account of the depth of snow, which was impassable, unless with
snow-shoes.

The wind continued to blow from the same quarter for two days longer; and at
length, on the 9th, it became perfectly calm. Next morning the wind came round
to the south-east, which was directly off the land, and in a short time blew
extremely hard, so that by four o'clock in the afternoon, there was not a piece
of ice to be seen along the coast, the whole of it being blown out to sea. This
was a very pleasing sight to us, as it gave us a prospect of being extricated
from our present dreary situation. However, the violence of the wind prevented
us from moving till the 11th of January, when the weather being moderate, and a
fine light breeze blowing along the coast, we launched our boat with much
difficulty, being greatly reduced in strength, for want of a due degree of
nourishment. Having got round the clear point of the land, we hoisted our sail
and put before the wind.

The weather being very moderate, and little or no sea running, we made
tolerable way, and had not proceeded far, before we descried an extremely high
point, about seven leagues ahead, with a continued precipice along the coast,
so that it was impossible for us to land on any part of it, before we came to
that headland. This made it very dangerous to attempt the passage; for if the
wind should happen to come round to the northwest, we must infallibly have
perished among the rocks. But danger was no longer an object to be considered
by us; so we got out two oars, not being able to use any more, as the boat had
been so much damaged, that two men were constantly employed in keeping her
clear of water, and, with the assistance of a fair wind, made the point about
eleven o'clock at night; but finding no place that we could possibly land on,
we were obliged to keep along the coast till two in the morning, when the wind
increasing, and a stony beach appearing, on which we should not have thought it
expedient to land, had the wind been moderate, we were obliged to put ashore,
and immediately got our provisions out of the boat. The beach was of some
height from the surface of the water, the sea having beat the gravel up into a
kind of bank; which rendered it impossible for us to haul our boat up. We were
therefore obliged to leave her to the mercy of the sea.

The place where we landed, was a beach of about four hundred yards in length,
bounded at the distance of about fifty yards from the water's edge, by a
precipice of at least one hundred feet in height, which enclosed it on all
sides. If the wind should come round to the north-west, we knew that we should
be entirely deprived of shelter, yet, as it blew too fresh for us to attempt
putting to sea again, we were obliged to remain there, notwithstanding these
inconveniences.

On the 13th the wind came round to the north-west, and blowing very hard, the
sea beat with such violence against the shore, as to drive our boat twenty
yards higher than she was, and to beat several holes in her bottom. Now was the
time for us to feel all the miseries of our present situation; for, being
surrounded by precipices, which prevented us from sheltering ourselves in the
woods, and having so little covering, and no firing, but what we collected from
some pieces of timber, which floated accidentally upon the shore, we could but
just keep ourselves from absolute freezing. The same weather continued for
eight days, with a prodigious fall of snow, a circumstance that added to our
other inconveniences. At length, on the 21st, the weather became more moderate,
and the snow ceased, having in the course of this last week, fallen to the
depth of three feet, perpendicular. This gave us an opportunity of cooking our
provisions, which we had done but once, since our landing. Even this was a
great loss to us, as the water that the meat was boiled in, afforded us almost
as much nourishment, as the meat itself.

Next day we contrived, with much labor, to turn our boat half way over, in
order to examine the damage she had received, which we found considerable; the
coat of balsam being entirely rubbed off, and several holes made in her bottom.
We expected the ice would go to sea, as it had done once before, whenever the
wind should come round to the southward; and therefore thought, if we could but
get our boat repaired, that we might still have some chance of meeting with
inhabitants. But the great difficulty was, how to repair it; for we had no
pitch or balsam left, and but little dry oakum, which was of no service to us,
without the former. After trying various methods, we at last gave it up as a
thing entirely impracticable, and began to turn our thoughts toward some other
means, of getting out of this bleak and barren place, to search for relief, in
an uninhabited country.

Though it was impossible for us, to climb the precipice, by which we were
encompassed, yet, if we were determined to abandon our boat, we imagined, that
we might easily get into the woods, by walking along shore upon the ice, which
still covered the sea, and had strength sufficient to bear any weight. In fact,
the mate and I, proposed walking a few miles on it, in order to make the
experiment. We accordingly sat out, and had not proceeded far, before we came
to the entrance of a river, and a fine sandy beach, where, had our good fortune
directed us to land, we might have lived more comfortably, and have preserved
our boat. But what was to be done now, that we could get into the woods? We
could not think of walking across them, in search of a cultivated country:
besides, that we should be entirely ignorant, how to direct our course; the
depth of snow, which had, by this time, increased to six feet, in the wood,
rendered it impossible for us to travel, without snow-shoes. After consulting
together, we at last came to a resolution, of taking, the next day, what
provisions we had, upon our backs, and coasting along the ice, till we could
discover some inhabitants; expecting, from its present appearance of strength,
that it would remain for some time longer: and the wind having drifted the
greatest part of the snow off it, we computed that we should be able to walk
about ten miles a day, even in our present weak and reduced condition.

This being fully resolved, we were to set out the morning of the 24th; but on
the night preceding it, the wind came round to the southeast, and blew hard,
attended with snow and rain; so that in the morning, as I already apprehended
would be the case, that whole sheet of ice, which the night before looked so
firm, was demolished, or driven out to sea. Thus were all our schemes
frustrated -- neither ice to walk on, nor boat to carry us through the water;
not even a possibility of moving from this place, where we were embayed, and
surrounded by insurmountable precipices. Thus circumstanced, we were again
obliged to turn our thoughts toward some scheme for repairing our boat: upon
that our only hope depended. We had plenty of oakum to stop up the holes and
seams, but nothing to substitute in the room of pitch, to prevent the water
from penetrating. I at length thought of a plan, which I imagined might have
the wished-for effect, namely, that of throwing water over the oakum, and
letting it freeze into a cake of ice. As soon as day appeared, I resolved to
put this scheme to the test, and having cleared the boat of snow and gravel,
immediately went to work. The men in general made light of my undertaking, and
assisted, with much reluctance, thinking that they were throwing away their
labor. However, I soon convinced them to the contrary* for, by four o'clock in
the afternoon, by continually throwing water over the oakum, we froze up every
seam and hole, in such a manner, that not a drop of water could enter, as long
as the weather continued freezing, as at present.

On the 27th of January, the weather being moderate, and a light breeze
directly off the shore, we got our boat very carefully launched, and sat off
early in the morning from this ill-omened bay. We had the pleasure to observe
that the boat made little or no water, so that we were enabled to keep our four
oars continually at work. As we advanced along the coast, we found it still
bordered by nothing but barren precipices, with every four or five miles
perhaps a small sandy beach.

The weather continued very moderate all the day of the 27th, so that, by six
o'clock in the evening, we computed that we had rowed about twelve miles from
where we departed in the morning. This indeed would be but an indifferent day's
work for people in health and vigor, but a great deal for those in our
circumstances; not only being extremely weakened and reduced, but the boat
itself being very heavy and unwieldy, from the quantity of ice in it. We put
ashore about six o'clock, upon a small sandy beach, and, by placing oars under
our boat, dragged her carefully some yards from the water, so that she lay very
safe, while the wind continued as it then was. We next cut some branches, and
having made a fire, sheltered ourselves, as well as possible, in the wood. Our
tinder being nearly consumed, I was obliged to furnish a fresh supply, by
cutting away the back part of my shirt, which I had worn ever since we left the
ship.

A shower of rain, the next day, unfortunately melted all the ice off our boat:
we were, therefore, prevented from going any farther, till a return of the
frost, and had the mortification to lose the benefit of a fine day, in the
course of which, we might have proceeded, with a good boat, several leagues
more on our journey. What made the matter worse, was, that our provisions were
now reduced to two pounds and a half of beef for each man. On the morning of
the 29th, the mate having wandered a little distance from our fire, returned in
haste to inform me, that he had discovered a partridge perched on the bough of
a tree, which he thought I might possibly devise some method of catching. I
immediately went to the place where he had seen it, and found it in the same
situation as before. Observing that the bird was very tame, and not above
fourteen feet from the ground, I cut down a long pole, and taking part of the
rope-yarn that fastened my canvass shoes, made a running loop of it, and fixed
it to the end of the pole; then walking softly under the tree, and lifting the
pole gently up, I fixed the loop about the partridge's neck, and giving it a
sudden jerk, closed the loop, and secured the bird. The mate, as well as
myself, as soon as I had caught it, laughed very heartily, for the first time
that either of us had any inclination to smile since our shipwreck. We then
went toward the fire with our prize, and boiled it in some melted snow,
together with a little salt water, to give the broth a relish: having divided
it, when dressed, into six equal parts, and cast lots for the choice of each,
we sat down to what we found a delicious meal; the only one, excepting the
quart of cranberries, for which we were indebted to chance, or providence,
since we had been cast upon the island.

On the afternoon of the 29th, it began to freeze hard, when we took the
advantage of the frost, to stop the boat's leaks, as before; and the wind still
continuing moderate, we launched her, as soon as that business was completed,
and put to sea. The day being almost spent, before we sat off, we could not
make above seven miles, to a sandy beach and thick wood, which seemed to afford
a tolerable shelter. In this place we passed the night; and the next day, the
weather being still favorable, we launched our boat betimes in the morning, in
order to get, before night, as far as possible on our journey; but we had not
proceeded above six miles, before the wind freshening up from the south-east,
obliged us to put ashore, and haul up our boat.

A heavy fall of rain, which continued the whole day, rendered our situation
extremely uncomfortable, and melted again the icy caulking of the boat. We were
therefore to console ourselves, as well as we could, in the certainty of
remaining here till the return of the frost, and mean while, proposed to
reconnoitre, as far as our reduced state would allow us, into the country. In
this, however, we were prevented by the quantity of snow which still lay on the
ground, and was not yet sufficiently frozen, to bear our weight, without
rackets, or snow-shoes. Toward the spring of the year, in these cold climates,
they may, for the most part, be dispensed with, when the snow has become more
condensed by its own weight, the influence of the sun, and the rains, which
began to fall at this season. The frost then returning, after the thaw, forms a
kind of incrustation on the surface, that will bear a man's weight, without
sinking. Had this season been arrived, we should have abandoned our crazy boat,
and, taking the little provision we still possessed, have made an attempt to
discover inhabitants, by a march into the heart of the country; perhaps it was
fortunate we could not attempt it, as in all probability, we should have
perished in the woods.

Not having it in our power to wander toward any other part, we walked along
the shore as far as we were able, and saw nothing that could attract our
notice, but some stumps of trees, from which the trunks might have been cut
some years before: from this circumstance, we could collect no very sanguine
hope of being near an inhabited country. Soon after, the wind coming round to
the north-west, and bringing the frost along with it, we were once more enabled
to repair our boat, and to prepare for launching it, as soon as the wind should
abate its violence. This happening, in some degree, on the 1st of February, we
immediately embarked, and pursued our coasting voyage; but the severity of the
cold having formed a quantity of ice, it was with extreme labor that we
contrived to get five miles before night, one of our party being employed in
breaking the ice with a pole, and clearing it from the bows of the boat.

The following day, the wind blowing fresh from the north-west quarter,
prevented us again from proceeding any farther, till the 3d, when, coming round
to the west, which is directly along the shore, and the most favorable that
could blow for us, we were enabled to embark, and pursue our voyage. Our boat,
notwithstanding all our diligence in caulking, made now so much water, that we
were obliged to keep one man constantly at work in baling it out with a
camp-kettle. The wind, however, was as fair as we could wish, and being neither
too slack nor too violent, we, for some time, went at the rate of four miles an
hour, with the assistance of our oars; but soon after, the wind increasing, we
laid in our oars, and ran under our sail alone, at the rate of about five miles
an hour.

After having run above sixteen miles, we discovered an exceeding high land,
about six leagues distant, with several other mountains and large bays between
us; and, it being yet early in the day, a fine wind, and no great sea, we were
in hopes, if the wind should not increase too much, that we should be able to
reach it before night. As we proceeded along the coast, we found it in every
part high and rocky; which made us very uneasy, lest the wind should rise,
before we could make the head-land. About two o'clock in the afternoon, when we
supposed we were within three leagues of it, we discovered an island about
twenty miles from the main; and, on comparing circumstances, we concluded that
the island must be that of St. Paul, and the high land, the north point of Cape
Breton. The prodigious height of the land, led us into an erroneous computation
of its distance; for, notwithstanding we had supposed that we were within three
leagues of it, when we first discovered the island of St. Paul, we found,
before we reached it, that we had run near five leagues.

It was almost dark by the time we reached the North Cape; where, finding no
place to land, we were obliged to double the Cape, and continue our journey.
The wind now began to freshen, and we had a heavy sea from the northeast to
encounter, as soon as we came opposite to the Cape. After having doubled it,
our course lay in a very different direction from what it had been in the
morning; so that we were obliged to strike our sail, and take to the oars. The
wind, at the same time, blew so hard off the high lands, that it was with the
utmost difficulty we could keep along the coast: had we not been assisted by a
heavy swell, that came from the northeast, we must certainly have been blown
out to sea.

Finding no place to land during the night, we continued rowing as close as we
could to the rocks, till about five in the morning; when, hearing the sea run
on the shore very long and heavy, we imagined that we must be off a sandy
beach. We accordingly rowed toward the land, and, at the distance of fifty
yards, for it was yet dark, were able to discern a beach at least four miles in
length. It was not, however, a convenient place for us to put in, on account of
the surf, and a long and heavy sea that rolled on it; yet being so much
fatigued with rowing, that we were incapable of proceeding any farther, we were
obliged to attempt a landing. This we effected with more ease than we looked
for, and suffered no other inconvenience, but that of having our boat nearly
filled with water on the beach. Having landed, our first care was to haul up
the boat, that she might meet with no further damage from the sea. We then got
into the woods, which lay close to the shore; and, as I had taken the
precaution to put our tinder-box in my bosom, before we landed, to preserve it
from the water, we contrived to kindle a fire; a refreshment we had much
occasion for, having got wet in landing, and being in so weak and reduced a
condition, that it was with the greatest difficulty we could keep ourselves
awake for a few minutes, when before the fire; so that we were under the
necessity of watching in turn, lest, all being asleep together, the fire should
go out, and we should be frozen to death. Having now time to consider every
circumstance, and finding, as soon as daylight appeared, that the land still
continued to have an opposite bearing to that on the other side of the point,
we had no doubt remaining, but that we were upon the north cape of the island
of Breton, which, together with Cape Roy, on the island of Newfoundland, marks
the entrance of the gulf of St. Lawrence.

Our provisions were now entirely consumed, and having not the most distant
prospect of getting any more, we were ready to abandon ourselves to despair. As
we were certain of being on an inhabited island, we might have flattered
ourselves with the hopes of getting relief, by persevering in our dilatory
progress, had we wherewithal to provide for our immediate subsistence. Having
weighed the necessity of the case, and the misery of perishing by hunger, I was
of opinion, as well as the mate, that it would be most advisable to sacrifice
one, for the preservation of the rest; and that the most proper method would
be, by casting lots, which should be the unfortunate victim. But this shocking,
though prudent, resolution, we agreed to put off to the last extremity.

We had not been able to secure our boat so effectually, but that the sea had
beat her higher up on the beach, and filled her with sand. We were obliged,
therefore, to set two of the men to work in clearing her, and afterward in
stopping the leaks, as already described; while the remainder of our party was
detached by different routes along the shore, to see if they could find any
kind of provision. The mate and myself traveled along the sandy beach, till we
were prevented from going any farther, by an inlet of water, when we were a
good deal surprised, to observe the tide ebb and flow every ten minutes. We
were not, however, at present, in a disposition to pay much regard to this or
any other extraordinary appearance of nature; and seeing a great quantity of
oyster-shells lying upon the shore, we searched them diligently, in hopes of
finding some that were full; but without success. This again made us curse our
destiny, that we should have been cast away on so barren and miserable a
country, and in such an unlucky time of the year, when we were not only
deprived of the relief we might have got, at any other season, from the natural
productions of the earth, but when even the animals, inhabitants of both
elements, had retired to their holes and hiding places, to shield themselves
from the intense cold which prevails during the winter, in this inhospitable
climate.

We still continued our search, notwithstanding the ill success we had hitherto
experienced, and contrived, at length, to gather about two quarts of hips, or
wild rose-buds, by throwing up the snow, and searching in different parts of
the bank. Having, with this sorry food, allayed, in some degree, the keen sense
of hunger, and the wind having become somewhat more moderate, we got into our
boat, and pushed off, the day being already drawing toward a conclusion. Our
progress was, however, soon impeded by the quantity of ice that floated upon
the water; which obliged us to put ashore on another part of the same beach. In
landing, I had the misfortune to let the tinder-box fall from my bosom into the
water, by which means we were unable to kindle a fire; and being exceedingly
wet, as was generally the case, when we landed, we were, in this place, in a
most uncomfortable situation, and suffered much from the cold. We therefore,
thought it best to get into our boat again as fast as possible, and return to
the spot from whence we came, in hopes of finding some fire still remaining.

It was with the greatest difficulty we got back, being the whole way under the
necessity of breaking through the ice, which had, by this time, formed almost
into a solid sheet. We were very anxious, lest our fire should meanwhile, have
gone out, and thought it a lucky circumstance, we had not been able to go any
farther from it. On our arrival at the place, we had the satisfaction to find,
it was not totally extinguished: had this been the case, we must have perished
in the course of the night. The fire being repaired, I cut up the remainder of
my shirt to make some more tinder; and, as the damage it got had nearly proved
fatal to us, was resolved to be more particular in my care of it for the future.

On the 8th of February, the wind came round to the south-west, which cleared
off the ice, and enabled us to leave this place by ten o'clock in the morning.
As we proceeded along the shore, we found it was not quite so rocky as it had
been on the other side of the north cape. We were therefore able to land this
night, without difficulty, within a large rock, by which we were sheltered from
the wind and sea. We were here very comfortably situated, in every respect,
except our want of provisions. The next day, the weather continuing moderate,
we had again proceeded about eight miles on our journey, when the wind
beginning to blow so hard as to raise a considerable swell, we were obliged to
steer to the snore; and in landing, had the misfortune to lose two of our oars,
which were washed overboard by the surf.

On the following day, the wind lulled; and we immediately took the advantage
of it, to put to sea. We had now but two oars remaining; which being
double-manned, we contrived to get about six miles before night. This was a
very hard day's work, considering our present weak condition; for, having been
a length of time without tasting any kind of nourishment, we were so much
reduced in strength, that when we got on shore, we could scarcely walk for
fifty yards together.

The weather being unfavourable on the 11th, we were under the necessity of
remaining the whole day in the same resting place; and, having leisure to
search about the shore, we were fortunate enough to find a few rose-buds, which
we esteemed at present a great delicacy. Had we not met with this supply, it
would have been absolutely requisite to put our beforementioned scheme into
execution. We thought ourselves extremely unlucky, in not having found, in the
course of our wanderings, so much as the body of any dead animal: nor, except
the partridge, did we see any live one, that we had the smallest chance of
capturing. At different times, we had hopes of catching some of the others that
we frequently saw on the ice, particularly on the small rivers and inlets: but
we never found them at any distance from the holes, which they continually kept
open, to give themselves a free passage in and out of the water. We likewise
discovered, at different times, some beaver's houses; but could not ensnare any
of the animals.

On the 12th, the wind became moderate, and we proceeded, once more, on our
journey. The coast seemed to diminish in height as we passed along it, which
made us hope we were now approaching the cultivated part of the island. Next
day the weather got milder, with a fall of rain: so that it was with difficulty
we could get our boat to swim, the ice thawing gradually off the bottom. This
obliged us to put ashore long before night; and when we had landed, and made a
fire, we found no other immediate want but that of provisions, having consumed
all the hips or rose-buds that we had gathered at our last landing-place.

Having reconnoitred, very carefully, all around, and searched in every part
under the snow, we were not able to procure ourselves even that miserable
sustenance. Being now driven to the last extremity, we were obliged to
sacrifice our prospect of traveling any farther, to the immediate preservation
of our lives. About a dozen tallow candles remained, which we had hitherto
employed in stopping the leaks of our boat, as fast as she sprung one in any
particular place. Of these we divided a small part among us; which gave us some
relief for the present. The two following days we coasted for a few miles,
searching for a place where we could meet with some hips; but our search proved
ineffectual. This was the only kind of food we could now expect; and had we
discovered any place that abounded with them, it was our intention to draw up
the boat there, and remain till they were consumed.

We began now to be fully sensible of our desperate situation, and to expect
that our fate would be that of perishing with hunger. Notwithstanding that idea
was horrid enough, yet, what gave me the most uneasiness, was, that my friends
would probably forever remain uninformed of our wretched catastrophe. It may
appear to those, who have not been in similar circumstances, that this would
take up but a small part of one's reflection, in comparison with the dread of
such a death; yet, however it might have been with the rest of my companions,
it was that idea that chiefly preyed upon my spirits. In order to prevent it,
as far as possible, I took every occasion of cutting out my name on the bark of
the largest trees. The fatigue of cutting it, as well as the preservation of my
knife, which I observed before, was the only one among us, would not allow me
to be more particular. But on the walls of the storehouses, which we had
discovered in the beginning of our progress, I wrote a short account of our
disasters in English and French, and requested, if any person should fall in
with it, that they would transmit it to my father at Quebec.

On the 17th, we made another division of a part of the tallow candles that yet
remained; and on the following day, the wind being favorable, we proceeded
about five miles: where, finding a flat country, and a sandy beach, that
extended for a considerable way, and being so much debilitated, that we knew it
would be impossible for us to go much farther, we put on shore, with a
determined resolution to perish on this place, unless some unforeseen accident
should bring us relief. To attempt drawing up our boat, would, in our present
weak condition, be a vain undertaking, so we were obliged to leave her, exposed
to the mercy of the sea. All that we could preserve was our axe, a saw, and the
sail of the boat, which we generally made use of as ^^covering.

As soon as we landed, we made it our business to clear away the snow from a
particular spot in the entrance of the wood, where we intended to remain; and
having cut some small branches of pine to lie upon, together with some larger
to serve for a shelter, which we stuck into the bank of snow that surrounded
us, we made our fire. This done, we all went in search of hips, and had the
good fortune to find about a pint of them, which, boiled up with a couple of
tallow candles, afforded us a tolerable meal.

The next day we passed without any kind of provisions, and being apprehensive
that our little remaining strength would soon desert us, we employed ourselves
in cutting and piling as much wood as we were able, to supply the fire. Mean
while, the waves had beat our boat so high upon the beach, as to be quite dry
as soon as the wind subsided, and to deprive us of the power of putting to sea
again: had we been disposed to do it: for our strength was by no means equal to
the task of moving her a single foot.

We again employed the whole day of the 19th in search of hips; but it was not
attended with any success. Our tallow candles were, therefore, the only
resource we had left, and by this time they became reduced to two. We found
ourselves so much weakened the following day, that we could make no further use
of our axe, and were under the necessity of creeping about in our turns, to
gather for our fire the rotten branches of trees, that lay scattered upon the
ground. As we had not a proper quantity of fuel, the fire that we kept up was
but just sufficient to preserve us from freezing: for, though the season was so
far advanced toward the spring, yet, excepting some particular days, the
weather was as cold as in the month of December.

Having now no more than two tallow candles remaining, and finding no longer a
possibility of gathering any hips, being too weak even to search for them, we
thought it likely that we might derive some degree of nourishment from the
kelp-weed, of which there was a quantity lying upon the shore. We accordingly
collected a little of it, and with melted snow boiled it for a few hours in a
kettle; but, at the conclusion, found it very little tenderer than at first. We
then melted one of our tallow candles in the liquor, and having supped it up,
and eat a quantity of the weed, our appetite became somewhat satiated: but in
about two hours time, we were all affected with a very uneasy sensation, and
were soon after seized with a fit of vomiting, without being able to bring the
offending matter entirely off the stomach. This fit of vomiting having
continued for about four hours, we found ourselves tolerably easy, but, at the
same time, exceedingly exhausted.

On the 22d we made use of some more kelp-weed and our last tallow candle. It
still operated in the same manner, but not to so violent a degree as it had
done before. The next day the wind blew very moderate from the north-west, and
brought a severe frost along with it. We had now an opportunity to repair our
boat; and, if our strength had been sufficient to launch into the water, we
should have changed our resolution, and have quitted the place. We made,
indeed, a faint attempt to launch the boat; but, on finding that we could not
move her an inch from where she lay upon the shore, we were obliged to give
over the design. Our candles being all consumed, we were under the necessity of
boiling the kelp-weed, without the mixture of tallow, which, however nauseous
at any other time, afforded us, then, not only some kind of nourishment, but
even an exquisite relish.

Having, for three days, tasted no other food but the kelp-weed, we began to
swell to an alarming degree. This we were at a loss whether to attribute to the
kelp-weed, or to the cold (for we were not able to keep a sufficient fire):
however, I thought then, and do still believe, that it proceeded from the
former; for, notwithstanding we had often before been exposed to the utmost
severity of the frost, and sometimes without any shelter whatever, yet we had
never found ourselves affected with this extraordinary symptom; but, on the
contrary, were as much reduced in bulk as we were in strength: whereas in a few
days, the swelling had increased to such a degree all over our bodies, that,
notwithstanding the little flesh we had upon our bones, we could sink our
fingers two inches deep on the skin; the impression of which remained visible
for above an hour after. Hunger, nevertheless, still obliged us to make use of
the kelp-weed. I have never since consulted with any naturalist or physician
about the extraordinary effects of this weed; yet doubt not but they may be
accounted for from natural causes.

We passed a few days more in the same manner; at the expiration of which, we
were so much swollen, as to be almost deprived of our sight, and so reduced in
strength, that it was with the utmost difficulty we could keep our fire in by
crawling about in turn, and breaking the rotten branches that lay scattered
upon the snow. The time was now arrived, when I thought it highly expedient to
put the plan beforementioned into execution; but, on feeling the pulse of my
companions, found, that some of them were rather averse to the proposal; the
desire of life still prevailing above every other sentiment, notwithstanding
the wretched condition they were in, and the impossibility even of preserving
it by any other method.

I thought it an extraordinary instance of infatuation, that men should prefer
the certainty of a lingering and miserable death, to the distant chance of one
more immediate and less painful. However, on consulting with the mate, what was
to be done, I found, that, though they objected to the proposal of casting lots
which should be the victim, yet, all concurred, in the necessity of some one
being sacrificed for the preservation of the rest. The only question was, how
it should be determined; when, by a kind of reasoning more agreeable to the
dictates of self-love than of justice, it was agreed on, that, as the captain
was now so exceedingly reduced, as to be evidently the first who would sink
under our present complicated misery; as he had been the person to whom we
considered ourselves, in some measure, indebted for all our misfortunes; and
further, as he had, ever since our shipwreck, been the most remiss in his
exertions toward the general good, he was, undoubtedly, the person who should
be the first sacrificed.

I must confess, that I thought, at that time, there was some color of truth
in this conclusion: yet, I was not a little shocked at the captain's intended
fate, although I had more reason than any one else to be incensed against him,
not only on account of his neglect of duty, and his mal-practices at the ^ut in
purloining our provisions, but for another reason likewise. After our
shipwreck, I had discovered, by some papers, which had been washed on shore,
that, though the captain's pretended destination was to New York, yet his real
one was to the West Indies, if he could possibly effect it Thus would he have
baffled General Haldimand's intentions, in sending me with dispatches, that
might be of the first consequence to this country; and not only have
disappointed, but also have defrauded me of the money which I paid him for my
passage.

The determination now made, was kept secret from the captain; and it would
have been impossible for us to live many days longer, without putting it into
execution, had we not happily met with relief from a quarter whence we little
expected it. On the 28th of February, as we were all lying about our fire, we
thought that we heard the sound of human voices in the woods; and soon after
discovered two Indians, with guns in their hands, who did not seem yet to have
perceived us. This sight gave us fresh strength and spirits: so, getting up, we
advanced toward them with the greatest eagerness imaginable.

As soon as we were perceived by the Indians, they started back, and seemed
fixed for a few moments to the ground with surprise and horror. This, indeed,
is not to be wondered at, when it is considered, that, besides the amazement
they must naturally have felt, on suddenly meeting with white men in this
uninhabited part of the island, our appearance itself, was enough to alarm the
most intrepid: our clothes being almost entirely burnt off, so that we were
bare in several parts of our bodies, our limbs swollen to a prodigious bulk,
our eyes, from the same cause, almost invisible, and our hair in a confused and
dishevelled state about our heads and shoulders, particularly of those who wore
it long; for we had not been able to comb it since our shipwreck. As we
advanced toward the Indians, some of us wept, while others laughed through joy.
Being a little recovered from their surprise, they did not show much
inclination to accost us, till I got up to one of them, and took him by the
hand; when he shook it for some time very heartily; the usual mode of
salutation among the Indians.

They began, at length, to show marks of compassion at our distressed
appearance; and I imagine, their shyness at first proceeded from the repugnance
which it naturally inspired: for, these Indians being converted to
Christianity, I will not attribute it to a motive so contrary to that doctrine,
as the idea of the trouble they might expect, without any compensation, in
relieving us. They then walked with us to our fire, and, sitting down by it
together, one of them, who could speak a little broken French, desired we would
inform him whence we came, and the particulars of the accident that brought us
there. I accordingly gave him as concise an account as possible, of the
disasters and fatigues we had undergone: during the relation, he seemed to be
very much affected at our sufferings.

Having finished my narration, I asked the Indian, if he could furnish us with
any kind of provisions: to which he answered in the affirmative. Observing that
we had very little fire, he suddenly started up, and took our axe in his hand;
when, looking at it, and laughing heartily, I suppose at the badness of it, he
threw it down again, and taking his tomahawk from his side, which is a small
hatchet that the Indians always carry about them, he went, and, in a short
time, cut a quantity of wood, which he brought, and threw upon our fire. This
done, he took up his gun, and, without saying a word, went off with his
companion.

This would have been a very alarming circumstance to persons ignorant of the
Indian manners; but I was so well acquainted with the humor of these people,
who seldom speak when there is not an absolute occasion for it, that I doubted
not, but they were gone for some provisions, and that we should see them again
very shortly. Notwithstanding the length of time we had been without
nourishment, I must confess, that I felt but little inclination to eat: the
fire which the Indian had made, was the greatest refreshment to us, as we had
been many days without a good one.

After about three days had elapsed, during which interval, some of our party
were not without anxiety, lest the Indians should never return, we perceived
them coming round a point, at a small distance, in a bark canoe. Being arrived,
and landed upon the beach, they took out of their canoe some smoked venison,
and a bladder of seal oil; which they brought up to our fireplace: having put
some of the meat into our kettle, they boiled it in melted snow; and then gave
each of us a very small quantity of it, together with some oil. I knew very
well their reason for being so sparing of their meat; for, eating a quantity of
gross food in our present state, might be attended with the most fatal
consequences. It gave me no small pleasure to find that the Indians were so
careful of us.

This light repast being ended, the Indians desired three of us to embark in
their canoe, that being all she could carry at a time, and proceed from this
place to their hut, which lay five miles farther by water, and about a mile
from the shore, in the middle of the woods. We were received at the sea side by
three other Indians, and about twelve or fourteen women and children, who had
been there waiting our arrival. Having landed from the canoe, we were conducted
by these last to their habitation in the wood, which consisted of three huts or
wigwams, there being that number of families among them: meanwhile, the same
two Indians who had brought us, went back in their canoe for the three
remaining men of our party. On arriving at the but, we were treated, with the
greatest humanity by these people; they gave us some broth to sup, but would
not suffer us to eat meat, or any kind of substantial food whatever.

The two Indians being come back with our companions, and having all received a
tolerable refreshment I was desired, at the request of a very old woman, who
appeared to be mistress or mother of the families present, to give them an
account of our transactions since the day of our shipwreck. I accordingly gave
a more particular account, than I had done before in French to the Indian, whom
I have already mentioned; and he explained it in his own language to the other
Indians. In the course of my relation, I could perceive that the old woman was
exceedingly affected, at certain parts of it; which gave me much satisfaction,
as I thence derived hopes, that they would continue, to treat us with the same
humanity. As soon as I had done speaking. the old woman rose up, and after
supplying us with some more broth, desired the interpreter to explain to us,
the shipwreck of the famous French partisan St. Luc Lacorne, on his passage
from Canada to France.

He informed me, that this gentleman, of whose shipwreck I had already heard
something, was cast away directly upon the North-Cape; that a great number of
persons, perished on the occasion, amongst whom, were two of Mr. St. Luc's
children, who were drowned in his arms, as he was attempting to carry them on
shore. He likewise informed me, that after his having remained five days there,
and suffered much from cold and hunger, he himself had relieved him, and
conducted him to Louisbourg; for which service, he said, Mr. St. Luc was
indebted to him thirty pounds, which he promised to remit from Halifax, but had
never performed it. Whether this part of the Indian's story be true or not, it
is impossible for me to determine: the gentleman himself, is best acquainted
with it. But this I am certain of, that the poor Indians must have earned the
money very dearly, in conducting him so far, at the season of the year in which
the journey was performed.

These people did every thing in their power, to reduce the swelling from our
limbs; which they at length accomplished, after much difficulty. Having
provided for our own immediate wants, our thoughts recurred to those
unfortunate men, whom we had left by the wreck. We were under much anxiety for
them, lest by this time they might have perished with hunger. However, in case
they should be still alive, I was determined, no means should be omitted for
their preservation; and, having described to the Indians the part of the island
we were cast away upon, asked them, if it was possible to go to their relief?

From the description I gave the Indians of the situation of the river, and of
a small island that lay nearly opposite, they said, that they knew the place
perfectly well; that it was above one hundred miles distant, through very
difficult paths, over rivers and mountains; and that, if they undertook the
journey, they must expect some compensation for their trouble. This indeed was
but reasonable: for it could not be expected, that the Indians should leave
their hunting, by which alone they subsisted their wives and families, to
undergo a fatigue of that kind through pure benevolence: and as to their
account of the distance, I could easily give credit to it, as I knew we had
come above one hundred and fifty miles by water. I then informed them, for the
first time, for in fact it did not occur to me before, that I had some money,
and that, if it would be any object to them, I would pay them for their
trouble. They seemed much pleased when I told them that I had money, and
desired me to let them look at it. Then taking the purse from my servant, I
showed them the hundred and eighty guineas that it contained; and observing an
eagerness in their countenances at the sight of the coin, which I had little
expected among Indians, and that the women, in particular, seemed to have taken
a strong fancy to it, I presented them with a guinea each; for which they
expressed their satisfaction, by laughing, the only method among the savages of
displaying every sentiment of that nature.

However, I was determined, at all events, to save the people, if any of them
remained alive, though the Indians should be ever so exorbitant in their
demands; and made an agreement with them, at last, that they should set off the
next day, which was the second of March, and that they should receive
twenty-five guineas at their departure, and the same sum on their return. This
being adjusted, they immediately went to work in making a proper number of
mawkisins and snow-shoes, for themselves and for the men; and three of them
went off the next morning, having received the sum of money agreed for.

After these people knew that I had money, my situation among them was not near
so comfortable as before; for they became as mercenary as they had hitherto
been charitable, and exacted above ten times the value, for every little
necessary they furnished for myself and the rest of my companions. Besides
which, I was under constant apprehension, lest they should be incited, by this
extraordinary passion for money, to plunder us, and leave us in the same
destitute condition in which they found us. The only circumstance, on which I
founded my hope of better treatment from them, was their religion: for, as I
mentioned before, they were Christians, and rigid Catholics, having been
converted by the French, before we got possession of the island. But, perhaps,
it was this very circumstance of their communication with Christians, that had
inspired them with that vehement love of money. They showed, indeed, every mark
of attachment to their faith, being very assiduous at their devotions both
night and morning; and frequently gave us cause to wish they had not been quite
so devout, by disturbing us with their psalm-singing the whole night. I was
very much afraid, at times, if they had learnt that tenet of their sect, of
keeping no faith with heretics, that their profession of Christianity would be
of little service to us. My servant, being an Irish Catholic, they were
exceedingly fond of him, and heaped their favors upon him very profusely. He
joined them, for the most part, in their roaring, for I cannot, with propriety,
call it singing, and in their prayers; though he did not understand a word of
either. Indeed, I question much whether they themselves understood them, for
they were the most confused jargon I ever heard, compounded of their own and
the French language, with the mixture of a few broken Latin phrases, which they
had picked up from their converters, the Jesuits.

These insular savages bore, in general, an exact resemblance, in their persons
and manners, to those on the continent of America. The principal points in
which they differed were, in having their hair long, which is peculiar to the
women alone among the continental Indians, and in wearing caps and breeches.
Their language was very different from that of those nations, or tribes, which
I was acquainted with; though I doubt not but it might have a resemblance to
some other upon the continent. I found afterward, when we got into a part of
the island where it was to be had, that they had the same strong propensity to
spirituous liquor, so universal among the Indians.

It was some time before we had recovered any degree of strength, or could
digest any substantial food: The only kind we could get from the Indians, was
the flesh of moose-deer, and seal oil; on which they subsist entirely, during
the time of hunting. Notwithstanding that we found ourselves, after our late
miseries, pretty comfortably situated among those savages, yet I was anxious to
get away, on account of the dispatches I was charged with, which I thought
might be of the utmost consequence to his majesty's service; particularly, as I
knew that the duplicates were lost. I continued, however, in so weak a
condition, that it was impossible for me to move for some time; and found, as
well as my fellow sufferers, that such a shock to the constitution, was not
easily to be repaired.

After being absent near a fortnight, the Indians arrived with three men, who
were the only survivors of the eight, who had been left behind at the hut. They
were in a very reduced and miserable condition, and informed me, on enquiring
the particulars of their transactions from the time we left them, that, after
having consumed all the beef, they lived, for some days, on the skin of the
moose-deer, which we had left entire, not thinking it worth while to make a
partition of it. This being consumed, three of them died, in a few days, of
hunger, and the others, were under the necessity of subsisting on the flesh of
the dead men, till they were relieved by the Indians. One of the remaining five
was so imprudently ravenous, when the Indians came to their assistance, as to
eat such a quantity of meat, that he expired in a few hours, in the greatest
agonies imaginable; and another, soon after, shot himself, accidentally, with
one of the Indian's guns. Thus was our number, which originally consisted of
nineteen persons, reduced to nine; and I rather wonder, how so many persons
could, for the space of three months, go through such complicated distresses,
from excessive cold, fatigue, and hunger.

We all remained another fortnight among the Indians, during which, I was
obliged to pay, as before, a most exorbitant price for our diet, and for every
necessary that we were provided with. By this time, my health being somewhat
re-established, and my money, at the same time, very much reduced, I was
resolved to postpone my own convenience, to the good of the service, and ^o
proceed, as fast as possible, with General Haldimand's dispatches, though it
was now the most unfavourable season of the year for traveling. I therefore
made an agreement with the Indians, to conduct me to Halifax; for which I was
to pay them forty-five pounds, and to furnish them with provisions, and all
necessaries, at every inhabited place, on our way.

It was settled, that I should depart on the 2d of April, with two Indians, for
Halifax, accompanied by Mr. Winslow, a young gentleman who had been a passenger
on board the vessel, and was one of the three survivors at the hut, together
with my own servant. The Indians were to conduct the remainder of our party, to
a settlement on Spanish river, about fifty miles distant, where they were to
remain till the spring, when an opportunity might offer for them to get by sea
to Halifax. Previously to parting, I gave the captain cash for a bill on his
owner at New York, to provide for the immediate subsistence of himself and the
sailors; which bill was afterward protested by the owner, on the pretense,
that the ship being lost, neither master nor crew were entitled to any wages.

We accordingly sat off on the day appointed, each carrying four pair of Indian
shoes, or mawkisins, a pair of snow-shoes, and provisions for fifteen days. The
same day, we got to a place called, by the English, Broad-Oar, where we were
detained, the following day, by a snowstorm. On the 4th, we again proceeded
through the woods about five leagues; and, on the 5th, arrived at a place named
Broad-Deck, which lies at the entrance of a very fine salt water lake, called
Lake St. Peter. This lake communicates, by a narrow inlet, with the sea, from
which it is distant about sixteen leagues. At this place, we met with two
families of Indians, who were hunting there, and purchased of them a
bark-canoe, for five pounds; the Indians having informed me, that some parts of
this great lake are never frozen, and that it was requisite to have a canoe to
pass over those places; and as we were to travel over the ice in other parts of
it, I was obliged to purchase two Indian sleighs, in which we were to place the
canoe, and drag it after us.

Having remained two days in this place, and provided ourselves with a few
other necessary articles, we proceeded on the 7th, for a few miles along the
lake; but the ice being bad, we were soon obliged to take to the wood. A thaw
coming on soon after, with rain, made the snow, which lay to the depth of six
feet in the woods, so soft and heavy, that we could travel no longer on our
snow-shoes, the snow sticking to them in large quantities. We were therefore
obliged to make a fire, and remain here; and the thaw continuing for the space
of four days, made us very apprehensive lest the ice should give way
altogether: for the spring was now too far advanced, to travel any longer upon
the snow, unless during a frost. We should then have been under the necessity
of waiting till the ice was entirely cleared off the lake; which would have
taken at least a fortnight or three weeks from the time of its breaking up; in
which case, we might have been reduced to a condition, equally distressed, with
that we had been in after our shipwreck, except that we were provided with arms
and ammunition.

However, the frost returned on the 12th, and the next day we sat off, and
traveled about six leagues; sometimes on floating pieces of ice, and at
others, in our canoe, where the lake was open. On the 14th, our provisions
being nearly exhausted, I proposed going in search of some game, as the country
abounded with deer: for the Indians, in general, never think of providing for
the next day's wants, but eat on, without reflection, whilst they have a morsel
of food remaining. I accordingly went with one of the Indians into the woods.
We had not been three hours on the hunt, before we discovered a very fine
moose-deer; and the Indian shot him in about an hour after. We skinned this
animal, which weighed about six hundred pounds, loaded ourselves with some of
the best parts of its flesh, as well as the blood, which the Indian took care
to collect, putting it in the bladder of the beast: and returned to our canoe.
We then sent the other Indian, Mr. Winslow, and my servant, for some more of
the meat, of which they brought about an hundred pounds.

Being now well stocked with provisions, we had no reason to apprehend that we
should want, in case a return of mild weather should render it impossible for
us to travel either upon the lake or in the woods. On the 15th, we sat out very
early in the morning, and pursued our journey about six leagues, in the same
manner as before. The greatest inconvenience that we felt, was the want of
bread, which the Indians of this country never make use of whilst they are
hunting; and being now much wearied with traveling, our strength having been
greatly exhausted by our past fatigues, we agreed to make a halt for a day or
two, in the woods. What renders the traveling through the woods, in these cold
climates, more tolerable than might be supposed during the winter season, is
the number of pine-trees, and other ever-greens, which are interspersed in
different parts; the branches of which serve, not only to lie upon, but also as
a shelter from the severity of the weather. We chose a spot abounding with
these trees; and it is almost inconceivable, in how short a time the Indians
made us a comfortable habitation of the boughs, called in their language, a
wigwam. Their method of constructing them is as follows; having chosen the spot
for their fire, they first clear off the snow, throwing it up into a bank in a
circular form, leaving a vacant space, or passage, to leeward: and it is to be
observed, that the more snow there is on the ground the better, as it makes the
best part of the shelter. They then cut branches of pines, of a proper length,
and placing the thicker ends of them in the bank of snow, bend and interweave
them toward the top. These branches are crossed by others, and interwoven with
smaller ones, in such a manner, as to afford a sufficient shelter from the
wind, and from the fal^ing snow. The fire is made in the middle of the wigwam,
and the smoke of it goes out by the passage to leeward. The wigwams thus made,
are very comfortable, even in the coldest weather, and are proof against any
thing but a heavy rain; beside which, a change of wind is the only
inconvenience they are liable to.

We proceeded again on our journey, on the 18th, and, during that and the
following day, traveled several miles, without meeting with any thing
remarkable. I had now leisure to observe the beauties of this lake, which was
one of the finest I ever saw in America; though at this season of the year, it
could not appear to the best advantage. As far as I could judge, it is about
twenty leagues in length from north to south, and eight wide from east to west.
A number of small islands are scattered about in different parts of it, and
give it somewhat the appearance of the lake of Killarny, and other fresh water
lakes in Ireland. These islands have never been settled on: yet appear to be
very fruitful, and must be a most delightful residence in summer, except for
the want of fresh water; which, perhaps, may be the reason they have never been
inhabited. Had the lake been properly frozen, we might have saved ourselves the
trouble of traveling several leagues, by crossing over from point to point,
and from one island to another: but, this not being the case, we were obliged
to travel round the greatest part of the bays on one side of it.

On the 20th, we arrived at a place called St. Peter's, where there are four or
five French and English families settled. I was here received very politely,
and entertained at the house of a Mr. Cavanaugh, a merchant, who was so good as
to take my draught for two hundred pounds upon my father, though I was a
perfect stranger to him. To this harbor vessels of the greatest burden can
come with safety, and a considerable fishery was formerly carried on here,
till, on the breaking out of the present war, the American privateers put a
stop to it. The force of these privateers, even taken collectively, is but
trifling; and it is much to be regretted, that government cannot spare a vessel
or two of force, to cruize about here, and protect the fisheries; which,
together with some other branches of trade, might be carried on with as much
vigor, and much more benefit, than before the war. This Mr. Cavanaugh, but a
short time before I arrived, was plundered, to the amount of three thousand
pounds, by two privateers from Boston; who came in at their leisure, and took
what they wanted out of his stores. These American privateers have likewise
driven all the settlers away from Louisburg, who had also subsisted by the
fishery; and it is somewhat remarkable, that this place, which was, during the
two last wars, such a bone of contention between us and the French, has not, at
the present moment, so much as a single inhabitant.

I should have taken a shallop or fishing-boat from this place, and gone to
Halifax by sea, but that there was almost a certainty of being taken by some
privateer along the coast. This lake, St. Peter, is but half a mile from the
ocean; to which, we were to carry our canoe through the woods, and to proceed,
by water, to the gut of Canceau. While the French were in possession of the
island, they had formed a design of cutting through this narrow neck of land,
and opening a communication on that side, between the ocean and the lake, in
order to bring in their large ships of war, to lie during the winter, in the
lake of St. Peter; for there is a sufficient depth of water in the harbor of
St. Peter, for the largest ships of the line to ride in, though there is not
water enough in the inlet, by which the lake communicates with the ocean, to
enable them to pass up to the harbor.

After stocking ourselves, therefore, with as much provisions, and other
necessaries, as we had occasion for, we sat off, on the 22d, in our bark canoe,
and arrived the same day at a place called by the French, Grand Grave; where
there is a family or two of that nation. The wind blowing hard, we were obliged
to remain here all night; and, on the 23d, proceeded along the coast to a
settlement called Discousse, where we were detained another day, by some
floating ice.

On the 25th, we got to a place called Narrashoc; where we were as hospitably
entertained as we had been at St. Peter's. I here exchanged the remains of my
regimental coat, for a brown suit of clothes, intending to pass for the master
of the ship, in case I should happen to be taken by any of the American
privateers at Canceau; and as the inhabitants of this place gave me to
understand, that the people of Canceau were very much disaffected to
government, I took every precaution to disguise the appearance of an officer.

We proceeded in our canoe, on the 26th, to the point of Isle-Madame; intending
to cross the great passage of Canceau. This passage is called the Gut of
Canceau, from an Acadian settlement of that name on the continent; and
separates the Island of Cape-Breton from Acadia, or, as it is now called by the
English, Nova Scotia. The island of Madame lies in the middle of the Gut, but
rather nearer to Cape-Breton than to the main; and the passage to this island
is called the Small, that from the Island to Canceau, the Great Passage. On
making the point of Isle-Madame, we found that there was still a great quantity
of floating ice in the Great Passage, and, not thinking it prudent to venture
in our frail vessel among it, we returned to Narrashoc, in order to procure a
small sloop or vessel that could resist the ice.

Having accordingly provided one, we embarked our little canoe in it, and, on
the 27th, the wind being as favorable as we could wish, got across the
passage, which is eight leagues, in three hours. The men, who navigated the
vessel to the other side, were very apprehensive of some American privateers
lying in the harbor of Canceau, having seen several is the bay two days
before. Upon this intelligence, I gave my dispatches and papers to one of the
Indians, knowing well, that they never attempt to search or plunder any of
these people. We were, however, so fortunate, as to see no privateers on
entering the harbor.

On landing at Canceau, I went to the house of a Mr. Rust, who is the principal
man at this place, and acts as a justice of the peace under government for
which he receives about 100 l. per annum. The inhabitants on the other side, as
well as the people who brought us over, having informed me, that this gentleman
always supplied the New-England-cruizers with every necessary that his stores
could afford; I was determined, to be very cautious in every thing I said, in
his presence. Having paid the person who brought us over the gut, and thanked
him for his private intelligence, I was conducted to the house of this Mr.
Rust, to whom I passed myself for the captain of the ship. He asked me a number
of questions, the tendency of which I could easily perceive; and therefore,
gave him as evasive answers as possible. I found that he had a brother-in-law,
who was a first-lieutenant on board a sixteen-gun-brig, belonging to Boston,
which had gone out of the harbor of Canceau the day before.

We remained in this place till three o'clock the next morning, when, being
apprehensive of treachery, on the part of our pretended friends; we sat off,
without any intimation of it to Mr. Rust. Prom this gentleman I had purchased a
piece of sa^^ pork, and about eight pounds of biscuit, which he said was as
much as he could spare, and for which, I was obliged to pay him at least thrice
its value. We were now to proceed in our canoe, along the coast to Halifax, and
had reason to fear that we should be again distressed for provisions. However,
we were so lucky as to find, as we coasted along, plenty of lobsters and other
fish, which the Indians caught with prodigious dexterity, killing the flat fish
with a pointed pole, and the lobsters with a cloven one. We were ten days going
from Canceau to Halifax: during which interval, we did not meet with any
settlement, and saw nothing worth mentioning, except a number of picaroons on
various parts of the coast.

The Indians remained, for a few days, at Halifax; when, having received the
balance due to them, they took their departure for the island. I was obliged to
continue here for two months longer, till an opportunity served for a passage
in the Royal-Oak, to New York; where I delivered my dispatches (in a very
ragged condition) to Sir Henry Clinton.

The rest of my fellow sufferers in the shipwreck, soon after arrived at
Halifax, in a shallop from Spanish-River. The captain, conscious of the
reception he would meet with, did not think proper to go to his owner at
New York, to give an account of the loss of his vessel; but took his passage in
a ship from Halifax to London, and now serves as a pilot on the Thames. The
mate was, on account of his good conduct during the whole of our transactions,
appointed, by a gentleman in Halifax, to the command of a ship bound to the
West Indies.

JULIA MONTAGUE TO EMILY BEAUMONT.
MY DEAR EMILY,
HAVE you then forgotten your promise to come down to the country, and spend a
few days with me in the beginning of spring? Perhaps the fine folks in town, do
not suppose that the spring is come yet. I can account for their mistake.
Nothing but the sun can convince them of its approach; and they keep themselves
so mewed up in their apartments, that they think very little of consulting him.
As for us, we enjoy his kindly beams already. The country, which was so dull
for some months, has reassumed all its charms. The trees, have shaken off
winter's squalid dress; to put on, once more, the livery of the spring. The
birds, returning in crowds, form the most agreeable concerts; while they hide
their nests under the thick foliage of the groves. What can you be doing in
town? Were you to pass the whole day at your window, breathing the fresh air,
would you suppose that you enjoyed the spring? Cast your eyes round you, what
do you see? A sky clouded with smoke, dirty streets; in short, the same objects
that you have seen all the winter. The house-tops, it is true, are no longer
covered with snow and icicles, but your dun tiles, even with this advantage,
afford no very brilliant prospect. Do you see, as I do, the sun's rising beams
deck the fresh leaf with purple and gold; do you see the dew-drops shine like
pearls, before his warmth dries them up; do you see him, when he emerges from
behind the hill, inundate the vast horizon with a torrent of light? I suppose
your town idlers, who have stuck so long to their fire-sides, begin to trust
themselves, at length, to the park, though they still shudder with the cold
that they have felt; but look at them attentively, you will find that one
winter has made them old. Here, on the contrary, every thing seems to have
grown young again. The brooks have purged their muddy waters; the meadows are
enamelled with new flowers; the pale primrose adorns every bank; and even the
prickly hawthorn, prepares to dress itself in the blossoms of May, in order to
soften its rugged aspect. How pleasing, after the dull silence that reigned
through all nature, to hear the bleating of the flocks, that are seen climbing
up the green slopes; and the clamorous joy of the children and youth, who come
out to enjoy their accustomed sports in the fields. Our house is built upon an
eminence, exposed to the earliest beams of the sun. I might, if I chose,
receive his morning visits in my chamber; but I like better to rise with the
dawn, and pay him my respects in (...) upon the top of the hill; and thither I
repair in the evening also, to take my leave of him.

These, my dear Emily, are some of the pleasures that the country affords; but,
I feel the want of a friend to enjoy them with me. Make haste, therefore, and
come down. Do not suppose, that whatever time you spend here, will be lost to
your improvement: I learn here a thousand things, of which I am ashamed that I
have hitherto been ignorant. Our little accomplishments too, I am very sure,
will not contract rust in this air. The sweet songs of the nightingale will
remind us of cultivating our voices more attentively. The little lambs, that
bound and frisk round their mothers, will give us an example of ease, grace,
and agility; while the landscape, varying before us at every step, will invite
us, to exercise our pencils, and vie with the coloring of nature: such rivals
as these, may, perhaps, humble our vanity, but they take no pride to
themselves, from our inferiority; and therefore, we can forgive their excelling
us. Try to prevail upon your mama to come down along with you: we expect you
both, with the most earnest impatience. Adieu, my dear Emily. The moment, that
I can suppose my letter to have reached you, I will go and post myself at the
end of our avenue, to wait your coming. You will do wrong, to let me moan there
long, like the turtle for its absent mate. Once more, adieu. Believe me
unalterable in the friendship which I have vowed to maintain for you, while I
remain.

JULIA MONTAGUE.

EMILY BEAUMONT TO JULIA MONTAGUE.
I HAVE not forgotten the promise that you mention, my dear Julia, and if I
have not performed it, I am pretty sure, when you hear the reason, you will not
think me deserving of your reproaches. I chose rather to appear deserving of
them, than to wound your tender breast with my sorrows. These I can now impart
to you, as they are at present totally dissipated. You know how tenderly I love
my worthy mother. Well, my dear friend, I have been upon the point of losing
her for ever; and shudder still at the thoughts of my danger. Since the death
of my papa, her health had been constantly on the decline; but I flattered
myself, that the amusements of the country, your mama's agreeable company,
(...) the pleasure of seeing me happy in your (...) might in some measure
divert her grief, and contribute to the recovery of her health. It (...) this
hope, that made me talk last winter, in ^^ch high spirits, of the pleasures
that we were to enjoy in the spring. The first approaches of this charming
season revived in my mind the most delicious ideas. I was busy, the other day,
preparing for our jaunt; and mama, with her usual good nature, seeing my
impatience, was as earnest on her part, where, as she was packing up her
things, a bundle of letters of my father's, which she has always preserved,
fell into her hands. It was late in the evening; she therefore sent me to bed,
that she might peruse them more at her ease. I have since learned that she was
reading them the whole night. They must have agitated her spirits most
powerfully; for, in the morning, a fever appeared on her in all its violence,
and reduced her in two days to the last extremity. Judge what I must have
suffered in seeing her delirious the whole time, and hearing her pronounce my
papa's dear name with a voice scarcely audible. I trembled, every moment, lest
I should lose her as well as him. What would have become of me, deprived of
that dear mother, who seems to care for life on no other account than that of
her affection for me? I had ever been sensible of her fondness, but at that
moment how much did I feel my love and gratitude increase! Although her
situation rendered her unconscious of my care and tenderness, yet, I exerted
myself in the melancholy office, as much, as if she had repaid me by her
fondest caresses. My father, whose image was so strongly painted in my
remembrance, seemed to thank me for her. I never left her bedside a single
moment, and I have now the pleasure to see her recover perceptibly. I cannot
express to you, what new sentiments this revolution in my mother's health has
given birth to, in my breast. The names of mother and daughter, sound in my
ears with a sweetness, that I never found in them before. Whatever reminds me
of the tender ties of nature, excites in my soul more melting emotions than I
have ever hitherto experienced. Of this I had a proof yesterday, which I shall
long remember.

Mama took me, to spend a day out of town, at Lady D -- 's, who had testified
the strongest concern for her, during her illness. I had always heard this lady
mentioned, with expressions of respect and affection, but my age's levity had
hindered me, from making remarks upon her character with any attention. I now
resolved, however, to study it observantly. We found her at our arrival, in a
company of near twenty visitors; some of whom, were united to her, by the ties
of friendship, others, common acquaintances, who had occasionally, matters of
business to transact with her husband. Her countenance, which was constantly
brightened with a smile of candor and good nature, encouraged even strangers to
be at their ease, in her company. I admired, with what ease she could address
all by turns, in the very style which their several circumstances made the
properest, forgetting no person in so numerous a company, and yet, in the midst
of all these various attentions, overlooking her young family with the care of
a mother, though she did not appear in the least engaged with them. In the
evening, when the company was retired, mama yielded to the request of her
friend, who pressingly entreated her, to prolong the pleasure that she enjoyed,
in being once more in her society. Lady D -- had just received agreeable news,
from two of her sons, who were on their travels. Her husband was returned the
same day, from a short journey into the country. These two circumstances, threw
her into a most delicious frame of mind; and her happiness, was equally painted
in the smile that hung upon her lips, and in the sweet drops that bedewed her
eyes. It seemed, as if her soul, replete with love, feared to contract her joy
within herself, and would therefore diffuse it upon all around, to make them
partners in her happiness. The impression was so pleasing, that you could not
avoid cherishing it, as your own proper sensation. Her feelings had the same
effect, as a fine evening, in which, nature, takes pleasure to breathe into
every bosom, the sweets that she dispenses. A light and lively cheerfulness,
quickly succeeded to this tender mood, and from that air of nobleness, that
character of dignity and good sense, which was to her so natural, and which she
had supported, to so much advantage, in the general conversation of the
afternoon, I saw her with the same grace, descend to the most playful good
humor, and the most intimate familiarity. Mama was touched with the
affectionate part, that she took concerning the happy return of her health; I
confess, I myself was touched with the flattering instances of friendship, that
I received from her lips; but I know not how, she found the secret of making
her own pleasure, become still more sensibly interesting to us. Sometimes, by
caresses, she would encourage her daughter, to display before her father, the
accomplishments, which she had acquired in his absence: sometimes by
ingeniously irritating her, as it were, she would elicit from her daughter's
vivacity a thousand strokes of native wit and delicacy. Amiable artifice of
maternal tenderness, that endeavourest to adorn children, in all their graces,
before the eyes of a delighted father, in order to render him, in his turn,
more dear to his children, by the increase of his affection! How well did
thou become that pure, ingenuous soul, which was so much a stranger to artifice
of every other kind!

The rest of the evening, was spent in a variety of little amusements, and I
entered into the spirit of them more, I think, than I should have done, in any
other house, because they generally appear, to be no other than expedients, to
beguile the wearisome time away, whereas the cheerfulness, spirit and
cordiality, with which they are seasoned by Lady D --, renders them real and
genuine pleasures. At length, however, the moment of our departure arrived, and
I confess to you, not without costing me a very lively regret. We had hardly
been seated in the carriage, when, dearest mama, cried (...), throwing my arms
round her neck, how much do I thank you, for having made me a witness, to the
happiness of that respectable family! I know, I shall love you still more for
it, than ever I have. You see, my Emily, answered she, pressing me tenderly to
her bosom, how much the sweets of nature and of friendship, excel all other
pleasures. My heart felt the same impression, and ever does, when I am in the
company of my worthy friend. I never leave her, but I find myself more inclined
to practice my duty, and better instructed by her example, in the means of
succeeding. Ah, mama, how delightful are those duties, and how easy do they
appear, from the manner in which Lady D -- performs them. I think, to be in her
company one single day, would be a sufficient inducement to any woman upon
earth, to seek the same happiness. You are right, my dear, such is the charm of
true virtue, that at sight of her, all ingenuous souls feel the most willing
inclination, to follow her example. But many are soon disheartened by some
difficulties, which wear a formidable aspect, and this merely for want of a
sufficient steadiness of principle. Lady D --, had the courage, to form her
principles in her earliest youth, and never to swerve from them, during the
rest of her life. With all the pleasing qualities and accomplishments, that
were capable of making her shine in the world; a fortune, sufficient to supply
even thoughtless dissipation; and, in spite of the examples which she might
have pleaded in her excuse, she was early sensible that her own esteem, that of
her husband, her family, and her friends, were of more solid value to such a
mind as here is. All her thoughts, all her actions, have been directed by this
virtuous determination. Her efforts became every day easier to her, and the
success of them was the beginning of her reward. The more she has tasted the
happiness of this reward, the more lively dread she has felt of losing it, were
she to deviate a single moment from her plan of rectitude. Hence her courage
has never been daunted at any difficulty. All her children have been brought up
at her own breast. They have never been sick, but her embrace consoled them.
She formed their earliest ideas, their earliest sentiments; she has incessantly
watched over the minutest particulars of their education; and even at this day,
their happiness is her only solicitude: to that, her generous affection would
sacrifice the dearest considerations of her own happiness; and, from the calm,
in which so many subjects of inward satisfaction sustain her mind, in the midst
of all its activity, proceeds that air of serenity and cheerfulness, that
candid ingenuous manner, which gains your esteem at the first look. Being,
therefore, always certain of meeting with good will and respect from others, as
she finds nothing in herself unworthy of these sentiments, she needs only to
pursue the natural bent of her disposition, in order to be sure of pleasing:
and to these means of pleasing, with which nature has endowed her, she has
united all those that are in the gift of reason, cultivated by reflection,
reading and experience. It seems, as if nothing were beyond the reach of her
faculties, in the same manner as there is nothing which her feelings do not
interest. Her conversation is as touching as instructive. One would say, that
all her ideas pass by her heart, and there clothe themselves in the expression
of the most noble and delicate sentiment. An unalterable equality of temper, an
amiableness ever new, bind her husband's affections to her in the sweetest
captivity, nor ever allow him to wish for other relaxation from his cares, than
he finds in her company. In effect, what sight can he find, when from home,
capable of engaging him so much as his own house; when he sees his friends,
fatigued amid the bustling scenes of the world, come to this asylum of peace
and honor, to seek the pleasure which those scenes could not afford them? The
air of frankness and becoming liberty that you find in this house, disposes all
hearts to become susceptible of generous sentiments, and still farther to open
themselves with the most unreserved confidence. You are there safe both against
others and yourself, as in a temple, where every thing inspires the respect and
love of a beneficent Deity, whom we should dread to offend even in our most
secret thoughts. Instead of the jealousies and claims of precedence which raise
discord among other women, those whom she has chosen for her acquaintance, only
feel, in her presence, the desire of meriting her esteem daily more and more;
and this, being equally the business of all, attaches them to each other by new
ties, and leads them to offer her their united tribute of gratitude and
friendship: thus every thing conspires, to afford her the sublimest happiness
that a soul, endowed with sensibility, can taste. Happy as a wife, happy as a
mother, happy as a friend, all around her forms an empire, as it were, the
subjects of which resign their hearts to her governance, that she may fill them
with virtuous sentiment and emulation of her noble qualities.

Notwithstanding the vivacity with which my mother delivered me this portrait
of Lady D --, it made so powerful an impression on me, that I have found it
again this morning, quite fresh in my memory. I hasten to send it to you,
requesting you, at the same time, to show it to your mother. I confess to you,
I should be happy to see it in the hands of all honest people. Nay, I think, we
owe this public homage to virtue, that we should paint the pleasures which it
bestows, both in order to encourage those who practice it, and to invite others
to do so by the hopes of the same happiness. The only person from whom I should
wish to conceal it, is, my Lady D -- herself, and that for fear of offending
her modesty; if, after all, this very quality would permit her to discover her
own resemblance in the picture. Her friends alone would be struck with the
likeness, and would thank me for having given them back the image of those
sentiments which they all entertain of her in their hearts. Honest people, in
general, would applaud me for having showed by a living pattern, that virtue is
not a stranger upon earth: that it may be allied to the most amiable character,
and enjoy the purest bliss that the condition of humanity is capable of tasting.

Let us, my dear friend, who have the happiness to find the same principles in
our parents, profit by this new example, and be still further animated to tread
in their steps. We are in that happy age of life, when our instructions and
occupations are so many amusements; when our first duty, is, to follow^^ he
pleasing bent of gratitude and tender affection to those who gave us birth; and
whose only ambition is to adorn us by virtues and accomplishments. To these
sentiments let us join those of the friendship which unites us: it began in our
infancy; we shall shortly renew it in the country, and (...) the most smiling
season of the year. All these circumstances should add a force and a delicacy
to it, which may extend both its duration and its happiness to our whole lives.
It has taught you to share the pain that I have felt, from our separation; let
it also teach you to partake of the joy which my heart alone would not be
sufficient to contain, that of going next week to receive your embrace.

EMILY BEAUMONT.

THE HONEST FARMER. A DRAMA, in FIVE ACTS.
The subject of this Piece is taken from De Eerlyke Landman. See the Nieu^ve
Spectatoriaale Schouwburg, a Collection of Miscellaneous Pieces in Dutch,
printed at Amsterdam, 1782, without the Author's Name.

CHARACTERS.
Squire PARKS. Farmer THOROWGOOD, his Tenant. MARTHA, the Farmer's wife.
VALENTINE, their supposed Son. their Children. GEORGE, JENNY, LUCY,
STEWARD to Squire Parks. Neighbors of Thorowgood. HUMPHRIES, HEARTY, MEADOWS,

SCENE I.
SCENE. The Farmer's House.
(Martha standing by a table, cutting two slices of bread and butter.) AFTER
having labored so hard during the best part of our lives, thus at last to fall
into poverty! To what purpose is it, that we have never ceased our cares and
pains for a single moment, in order to breed up our children with credit? If
they were but of an age to earn their own bread, it would be something! My dear
children, it is not for myself, it is for you that I shed tears; in losing our
cattle we have lost our all. What remains, is far from being sufficient to pay
our landlord. What is to become of us? if my good husband did not support my
sinking courage, I should die with grief. But how worthy a character he is!
What a man! How tranquil, in the midst of our misfortunes! Were I not sure,
that affection makes him conceal the greatest part of his troubles, from the
fear of afflicting me, I should believe he were insensible to them. "Why do
thou weep, Martha, he often says, when I can no longer restrain my tears? We
have had a loss, it is true; but who knows what Providence has in store for us!
I, for my part, make that my dependence." Alas, though never rich himself, he
was always a friend to the unfortunate. How many families in this village has
he saved from misery, by his advice and assistance! There is not a better man
on earth; and I still possess what many women want in the midst of riches, a
worthy husband, and children, whose good dispositions fill our hearts with joy.
Whilst I think on these blessings, I feel that Providence watches over us, and
my griefs become lighter. Take courage then, Martha, enough is left to console
thee in thy affliction. (She advances to the door, and calls) Jenny, Jenny.

SCENE II.
Martha, Jenny. Jenny. Did you call?


Martha. Here, my child, take thy breakfast.


Jenny. Oh, my dear mother, you have given me above half; I cannot eat all this.


Martha. No; look at it, it is no more than thy ordinary portion: you are not
ill, I hope.


Jenny. Not at all; but I have not so good an appetite as usual.


Martha. What is it you tell me? how long is it since you have been thus
dainty! Come, come, eat your breakfast like a good girl. Will you take this
piece of bread?


Jenny, (taking the bread and breaking it in two.) It is too much, I assure
you; half of it is sufficient for me. (She gives the other half to her mother.)
Here, keep this for Lucy.


Martha. What, has she given you the measure of her appetite, pray?


Jenny. This is enough for her; I know, she will not ask for more.


Martha. You seem to think you know your sister wondrous well; but I answer for
it, Lucy can eat her own share as well as you: here is a piece that I have
prepared for her.


Jenny. No, no; she will keep that for the evening, and then she will give me
half in her turn: leave us alone, we have settled the matter between us.


Martha. What means all this? I am curious to know.


Jenny. Why do you ask me? it is a secret between us two: I beg, dear mother,
that you will not seem as if you perceived any thing of the matter.


Martha. Nay, now you increase my curiosity, and I must absolutely know the
bottom of this.


Jenny. Well then, since you command it, I will tell you all: Yesterday
evening, we overheard my father say to you, since we have suffered the loss of
our cattle, we must submit to the will of heaven, and try to turn this
misfortune into a blessing; we must be the more diligent and industrious, and
strive with all possible economy, to support our family. You replied with an
embrace, that you would be the first to set the example. I made a sign to my
sister to retire; we embraced each other also; whatever you had engaged to do
for us, we agreed together, in return, to do for you.


Martha. My dear children, you take too large a share in our troubles; they are
not suited to your age; fear nothing; heaven will have care of you. Oh, my
child, you have made me feel the happiness of being a mother. What earthly good
can equal the joy which this instance of your tender duty has given me! But be
comforted. I have reserved the remainder of this for you, and you may, at least
today, eat your bread as usual: it is necessary that you should get strength,
in order to earn something for us when you grow older. Will you not be glad to
labor for your father and mother?


Jenny. Ah, glad indeed! that I shall; but we can begin now: our hands, it is
true, are small, but we will work the longer for that, and all that we earn, we
will give to my father to purchase more cattle. Then we will rear poultry, and
sell our eggs; and this money, all this money, we will gladly bring to you,
dear mother. (Seeing the tears in her mother's eyes.) Oh, do not weep, I
beseech you; you make my heart sink.


Martha. Be satisfied; if I weep, it is for joy: but it is time that thou
should breakfast. There are many things to do in the house; and I would have
thy father find every thing in order, at his return.


Jenny. Is he gone into the field, with my brothers?


Martha. No, he took a walk down to the hall: he wanted to speak with our
landlord.


Jenny. Oh, so much the better. My father always came home in good spirits from
him: he is an excellent man, that Mr. Parks, is he not?


Martha. Yes, my dear, hitherto he has been very good to us: pray heaven he may
continue to be so now we have occasion for it. But since our great losses, we
are no longer in a condition to pay our rent; and often, those who have shown
us the greatest kindness, whilst we owed them nothing, look upon us with a very
different eye, when they think they are in danger of losing by us.


Jenny. Our landlord, I am sure, is not a man of this sort.


Martha. I hope he is not, child, or we shall be much to be pitied.


Jenny. I long for my father's return, to hear the good news. Will he be back
this morning?


Martha. He went out at sunrise, and I expect him back every minute.


Jenny, (resting her hand on the table.) Then before I breakfast, I will go and
draw some beer to refresh him; he will be glad of a draught after his walk.


Martha. No, no, eat your bread; I will take care of that myself.


Jenny. You asked me, just now, whether I would work for my father and mother,
and now you prevent my doing so.


Martha. Do as you will, then; I will not deprive you of this pleasure: your
father, I know, will repay you, with his caresses.


Jenny. And I do not know which of us is the best pleased, when I deserve them;
and I will do my best to do so.


SCENE III.
Martha alone. My dear children, heaven is my witness, it is chiefly on your
account that I dread poverty, and yet it is from you that I receive the
greatest comfort. How much more ought I to love you, since you are the only
blessing that is left me. Had I never been unfortunate, I should never have had
those proofs of your affection. Perhaps also you will assist me in conquering
my grief, whilst I am only striving to hide it from you. No, I will not
interrupt, by my murmurings, the innocent gaiety of your tender age. (She runs
to the cradle, takes out the infant, and presses it in her arms, looking at it
with tenderness.) It is to thee alone that I will utter my complaints; to thee
who art as yet insensible to the sorrows of thy parents. I may shed tears in
thy presence without fearing to afflict thee. Happy infant, I weep for thy lot,
whilst thou answerest me with a smile.

SCENE IV.
Martha, Jenny. Jenny, (coming in just as Martha has the child in her arms.)
Give it to me, mother, that I may kiss it. My little friend, when you are as
able as I am, you shall work for your father and mother too. Oh, you shall see
what care I will take of this little baby, that it may become strong and
robust. But stay, we are busy at present; you must go sleep a little. (She puts
it back into the cradle, whilst the mother looks affectionately at them both.)
Mother, I have just brought the beer; will you lend me the key of the cupboard,
that I may fetch some clean linen, and a waistcoat, for my father: I know he
will return overcome with heat and fatigue.


Martha. Aye, and if he has any good news, he will not care how much he
fatigues himself, in order to hasten to us with it.


Jenny, (shutting the cupboard, and laying the linen on a chair.) I know it;
and then he would, without resting, go to the field: he never loses a moment.


Martha. This is a good lesson for us; you, for example, would do well to
hasten your breakfast, and go to school; as soon as you have asked your
father's blessing.


Jenny. To school! Oh, no, I shall not go there now.


Martha. What do you say, Jenny? do you not mean to learn to read and write?
No, no, my child, I hope, however we may be reduced, to be always able to
afford you this instruction, though I should be forced to stint myself in
common necessaries for it.


Jenny. But there will be no occasion for any more expense on that account.
Does not my brother Valentine read as fluently as our schoolmaster at his desk?
and he will be master to Lucy and me: he told me so this morning. Sister, said
he, you know that I am allowed half an hour's rest after dinner, before I
return to work; well then, if you will, during that time, begin a lesson with
me, I will finish it when I come home in the evening. You have nothing to do
but to apply diligently, and I Will answer for it, you will soon be the best
scholar in the village. Let us begin today, and you shall see.


Martha. Now was this Valentine's own thought?


Jenny. Yes, his own indeed, mother; it would never have come in^^ my head. It
is I, said he, who have cost my parents the most, being the eldest; had they
spent less on me, they would have had the money ^or you, my sisters: I ought
therefore to give you (...) the instruction that I have received, now that our
father cannot afford it you.


Martha. Alas, could we have known, at the time that we were providing masters
for him, that he would one day have wanted necessaries! He has cost us
something, it is true, in his education, but I do not regret it. The money has
been well laid out. Valentine is grateful, and does his best to give us proofs
of it.


SCENE V.
Martha, Jenny, Lucy. Lucy, (jumping.) Here he is, here he is.


Martha. Who, Lucy?


Lucy. My father; he is just come.


SCENE VI.
Thorowgood, Martha, Jenny, Lucy. Martha, (running to meet him with open arms.)
Ah, my dear friend.


Jenny, (taking his hand.) My dear father.


Lucy. How glad I am to see you.


Thorowgood. Good morning to you, my dear; good morning to you, children.


Martha. Are not you sadly tired with your walk?


Thorowgood. No, I feel myself quite nimble; but my poor Martha, you look
sorrowful; I ^ee, you have been weeping.


Martha. It is true, but do not be uneasy at that, for they were tears of
pleasure, at having such dutiful children. If you did but know, how much
satisfaction they have given me this morning, on your account!


Thorowgood. These are sweet words to me: there is not a greater happiness,
when we do our own duty, than to see it done by those who belong to us. As I
went to the Squire's this morning, my heart filled with your idea; now I return
home, and find my wife and children wholly engrossed by mine. What comfort is
this!


Martha. Will you take any thing? will you change your dress? Jenny has
provided every thing for you.


Thorowgood. No, I thank you, there is no occasion. The thought of it alone, is
sufficient refreshment to me. (Kissing Jenny.)


Martha. Well, you have seen our landlord; how did he receive you?


Thorowgood. As I expected: he has a feeling and good heart. He is a man,
Martha, of the highest honor and humanity.


Martha. Indeed! Did he compassionate our misfortunes? Tell me all.


Thorowgood. As soon as he was informed of my arrival, without making me wait a
moment, he came out to me, and took me into his best parlour.


Jenny. Into his best parlour!


Thorowgood. Yes, Jenny: he was drinking coffee with his lady, and they ordered
a ham on the same table for me; and madam was so good as to cut me a slice.


Jenny. What, madam herself?


Thorowgood. Yes, indeed, with her own hands, and in so obliging a manner.


Martha. Oh the dear lady!


Thorowgood. They would not let me speak about business, till I had finished my
breakfast.


Martha. How charming is this! and then --


Thorowgood. Well then, my good Thorowgood, said Mr. Parks, what news? Very
bad, answered I: I have lost all my cattle, in the space of eight days; by a
disease, brought on by the drought of the season. I am ruined, and I am come to
inform you of it, that you may be at liberty to let your farm to another
tenant. I come also to offer you all that I have left in the world: it is a
great trouble to me, that I have not sufficient to satisfy you; but I promise,
on the word of an honest man, to labor night and day, till I can do so. I
shall eat of the bread of bitterness till I have paid my debt, to the utmost
farthing.


Martha. Oh, certainly, we will do it readily. What did Mr. Parks say to this?


Thorowgood. I was already acquainted with your losses, honest Thorowgood, said
he, and am heartily sorry for them. I pity you also, said madam, with her sweet
voice: I pity you with all my heart.


Martha. The worthy couple! how good they are.


Thorowgood. I do not come here, said I, to excite compassion, I have no
occasion for it, as I am able to work. My great concern is, that I cannot
acquit myself of my debts to you: I own, I feel for my wife and my young
family: I, who would have shed my blood to preserve them from want! You who are
rich, and without children, know not what it is to see those suffer to whom we
have given life. Ah, if you had such children as I have; if you loved them with
all your soul, and were beloved by them as I am! In saying this, grief made me
hide my face; and when I lifted up my eyes again, I saw Mr. Parks was no longer
looking at me: he had turned toward his wife; their eyes were filled with
tears, and fixed on each other. Pity was not the only sentiment which then
affected them; I plainly saw, that something, which more nearly concerned
themselves, occupied their minds.


Martha. And did you not ask them what it was?


Thorowgood. I had not the courage; but as I continued to talk of my children,
Mr. Parks strove to change the discourse. I perceived clearly that some private
affliction was the cause of this; and therefore, hastened to quit the subject.
and began talking about my corn, and reckoning, how much it would yield toward
paying my rent.


Martha. And pray was not Mr. Parks very angry, when he found it fall so short
of that sum?


Thorowgood. Quite the contrary; he bid me not despair. Go home to your wife,
said the good gentleman, I will order my horse, and be with you presently, when
we will settle every thing. I have always looked upon you as an honest man,
therefore I will do nothing in this business, without your concurrence.


Martha. Is this possible? How much do we owe him?


Thorowgood. Four hundred and fifty pounds.


Martha. Alas, alas, how shall we be ever able to pay this money?


Thorowgood. It is true; and yet had we saved our cattle, and our crops had
answered this year, we should have had enough and something over.


Martha. But as it is, what will become of us?


Thorowgood. Why all that we can do now, is to collect together our
houshold-goods and farming-utensils, and sell them, to pay our landlord: we
will keep nothing but what is on our backs: we can then show ourselves before
him with a clear conscience. This is the only course that we can take to avoid
misery. (Somebody knocks softly at the door.)


Jenny, (going to the door.) I think I heard a knock at the door. Yes, I see
some one (She comes back, and speaks in a low voice.) It is Mr. Pinch.


Thorowgood. Mr. Pinch! What does he want with me, I wonder: we have never had
any quarrel.


Martha. I shudder with fear. We are undone, my dear Thorowgood. We shall be
taken to jail. I know the steward; some mischief is sure to happen, wherever he
interferes.


Thorowgood. Compose yourself, wife; we have nothing no fear. Take away the
children, and leave me alone with him.


Martha. What do you mean? I must stay with you.


Thorowgood. No, no, leave us together; knave as he is, I am not afraid of him.
You only vex me by staying: go, I beg of you.


Martha. Since you insist upon it, I must obey. (She retires, taking Jenny and
Lucy in her hand. The steward meets them by the way, and bows: the little girls
appear frightened, and cling to their mother as she goes out.)


SCENE VII.
Steward, Thorowgood. Steward. Thorowgood, did not I see you on the road to the
Squire's just now?


Thorowgood. Very likely: in fact, I am just returned from thence. I have been
with my landlord, to give up to him the state of my affairs.


Steward. What! without consulting me, have you settled matters together?


Thorowgood. No, not yet:


Steward. So much the better. I am come to offer my services, and to put you in
a method to defend yourself against him.


Thorowgood. Against him! Pray was it not Mr. Parks who gave you the place that
you hold? Do not you serve him?


Steward. I allow it; therefore I should not choose to be seen openly in this
business; my design is to support you secretly. I can recommend to you a lawyer
of this town, by whose means you shall be the gainer, where you expect to lose:
you understand me? He is one of those we call a shrewd knavish fellow: trust to
him, he will settle the business for you: he is my friend.


Thorowgood. A knavish fellow, and your friend: I should have guessed so. Only
see the force of sympathy.


Steward. You must not take things so literally; I mean that he is a man
capable of bringing you safe out of your embarrassments, and the present
juncture is very favorable to you; this year having proved ruinous to the
farmers in many places, will easily account for your becoming bankrupt.


Thorowgood. I shall have nothing to do with your plan, Sir, but shall pay my
landlord my full debt, whenever fortune enables me.


Steward. You despise the law, then, though it offers you its assistance.


Thorowgood. No, I do not despise it, but I think a man's conscience should be
his just law; and if I make a bargain, which is not contrary to that, I think
honor obliges me to stand to it; even though the law might discharge me from
it.


Steward. Take my word for it, neither your honor or conscience will suffer in
this business: it is not your fault that you have had those losses.


Thorowgood. How do you know that? perhaps I was to blame, to purchase so many
cattle at once; had I bought but half, my loss would not have been so great,
and I should have had money enough left to pay my rent.


Steward. And be it your fault, or not, the the thing is done now. And are you
aware of what you expose yourself to, when you leave all to the discretion of
Mr. Parks? Why he has it in his power to throw you into prison.


Thorowgood. And if he has that power, why should I seek to take it from him?
and if he means to treat me with humanity, why rob him of that pleasure?


Steward. Well, suppose he should not prove rigorous; he is a mortal, you know;
and his heirs may not be so tractable; whereas, if you follow my advice, you
may secure yourself from accidents, and procure a final acquittance of the debt.


Thorowgood. What! can your lawyer make my landlord believe that he is paid,
before he has received his just due?


Steward. No, but after having made himself acquainted with your affairs, he
can settle them much to your advantage, and put some money in your pocket,
besides; you understand me?


Thorowgood. I do not want his assistance for this; I can make the matter as
clear to my landlord, myself; he knows, very well, the misfortunes which have
reduced me. I cannot now pass for a man of property.


Steward. Very true, but one ought always to do things by rule. Now, this
lawyer, whom I recommend, is one of the best in the country in managing a
business of this sort: besides, I mean, myself to lend you every assistance in
my power.


Thorowgood. I cannot imagine what may be your motive for acting in this
manner, so much against the Squire's interest; unless it is, because, he
appears willing to settle my affairs, without consulting you, and so deprive
you of the perquisites of your office.


Steward. What perquisites?


Thorowgood. Come, come, we know how most stewards make their fortunes. You all
love to fish in troubled waters.


Steward. Nay, you talk at random. I only mean to be your friend in this. Put
your affairs into my hands, and those of my friend; we will settle them, I Will
answer for it.


Thorowgood. I do not doubt it. And so, Mr. Pinch, you think I will let you, to
whom I owe nothing, have the fingering of my money, in order to defraud my
landlord, to whom I owe so much; besides the many obligations that I have to
him, for his constant goodness to me!


Steward. Why, you will not be the less his debtor for this; all your effects
are not sufficient to clear your account with him. Now, if you take my advice,
you may preserve a part, and all that you earn hereafter, will be your own.


Thorowgood. I cannot see the thing in this light: I am determined to give up
all that I have to my landlord; and whatever I can save hereafter, I will lay
by, to pay the remainder of my debt to him.


Steward. Is it your design then, to exhaust your strength by labor, without
reaping the profit? Do you mean to pass your whole life in working for others?


Thorowgood, (with emotion.) You do not know the pleasure which a man has, in
being satisfied with himself. With what tears of joy shall I, from time to
time, carry to Mr. Parks the fruits of my industry! What happiness shall I
experience, in having it in my power to prove my gratitude, and to convince him
that he was not deceived when he took me for an honest man; and that, when I
lost my little fortune, I did not lose my probity also!


Steward. Ah, Thorowgood, Thorowgood, I see, you do not know your own interest.


Thorowgood. You mean that I do not promote yours. Do you think that I am to
be made thus the dupe to your avarice? You want to draw me into a knavish act,
in order to reap the profit of it yourself. Why do you not go to my landlord,
and offer him your services against me! It is because you know he has too much
goodness, to seek my ruin; and yet you thought that I might be ungrateful
enough to deprive him of his just due. No, Mr. Pinch, you may, if you please,
forget your obligations to him; for my part, I shall remember mine as long as I
live. I have had no occasion for you hitherto, and I think I shall be able to
do without you, in future. Go then, and seek clients elsewhere, for your
roguish friends.


Steward. What, do you dare to abuse me! Do you know that I can, soon or late,
make you feel my vengeance?


Thorowgood. You ought rather to dread mine, if I were to lay your secret
practices open to Mr. Parks.


Steward. Oh, good Thorowgood, let me entreat you --


Thorowgood. Be gone for a poltroon, as you are: I am as incapable of using my
advantage over you, as of taking your advice. (Steward retires in confusion.)


SCENE VIII.
Thorowgood. These are the men who ought to promote peace in the country, and
they often seek to sow divisions. It is such as these who are the ruin of the
peasants, by plunging them into lawsuits. Instead of acting as a mediator
between the rich and poor, their only aim is to estrange them from each other.
Where is the gentleman who would not have a pleasure in treating his tenant
with humanity, if he did but know that in return, he was regarded as a friend
and father? Oh, Mr. Parks, be you such to me! it is more than my own destiny
that I give into your hands; it is that of my wife and children also.


End of the first Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Thorowgood, Martha. Thorowgood. No, I tell you, Martha, we have nothing to
fear from the Steward; I can assure you, he is more afraid of me, at this very
instant, than ever I shall be of him.


Martha. Well, I believe you would not deceive me, unless it be to quiet my
uneasiness.


Thorowgood. Be satisfied then; I have some good news for you. I thought that
Humphries had lost all his cattle, as well as I; but upon casting my eye over
our garden, I saw on the other side of the hedge, four fine cows grazing in the
meadow below.


Martha. But what then?


Thorowgood. You must know there is a bargain between us, which gives me a
right to two of those beasts.


Martha. How is that?


Thorowgood. I will tell you: when the disease first broke out among our
cattle, I saw Humphries was quite cast down by it; as I had always hitherto
been more fortunate than he, I offered to do all in my power to serve him. He
thanked me in so affecting a manner, that I wished to give him some proof of my
good will, upon the spot. You must know, just before the disorder appeared, we
had made a joint purchase of twelve cows at a neighboring fair. It is true, I
advanced two-thirds of the money; but upon his consenting to graze them, for a
certain time on his farm, (which was an excellent bargain for him, in point of
money, as we settled it) I told him that, whatever of the herd should escape
the mortality, we would divide equally between us. At that time I had no reason
to think, that this arrangement would turn out in my favor; and now, though it
has, I should be far from taking advantage of it, if it regarded myself alone;
but I am no longer master of my own. I am obliged to give up all my remaining
property to my landlord. I should therefore think myself guilty of a theft, if
I did not, on this account, lay claim to every thing due to me.


Martha. And have you seen Humphries, since our losses?


Thorowgood. No, but I just now sent our son George through the garden gate,
after him. See, he is come back already.


SCENE II.
(Thorowgood, Martha, George.) Thorowgood. Well, son, what does Humphries say?


George. That he does not know what I am talking about, nor what you have to do
with his cows.


Thorowgood, (surprised.) You certainly must have made some mistake in your
message.


George. No, no, father; I told him the whole matter, clearly, as you ordered
me; and he understood me so well, that he repeated word for word to the
steward, who was with him on a visit: besides, he is coming to speak to you
himself.


Thorowgood. That is well; we shall settle matters at the first word. Humphries
knows as well as I do, what we promised each other.


Martha. Have you any written agreement between you?


Thorowgood. I do not want it, wife. Can one wish better security, than a man's
word? When that fails, there is an end of all integrity.


Martha. You imagine all the world like yourself: but ah, my good friend, when
interest is in the case --


Thorowgood. What do you mean? I will never believe my neighbor capable of
such villainy. I have always looked upon him as an honest man; but here he
comes. You will see every thing will be explained. (To George) You may return
to your work, George, I do not want you.


George. Very well, father.


SCENE III.
Thorowgood, Martha, Humphries. Thorowgood. I am glad you are come, Humphries;
I Will lay a wager George has made some confusion between us.


Humphries. Indeed I believe so; I was not able to comprehend a word of what he
said to me. He told me, that you had sent him to fetch my cows.


Thorowgood. No, I ordered him to demand mine of you.


Humphries. Your cows?


Thorowgood. Yes, those that I saw in the meadow. Have not you saved four?


Humphries. Without doubt. But how came they to be yours?


Thorowgood. Two of those belong to me. Did not we pass our words to each
other, to divide between us amicably, whatever should be left after the discase?


Humphries, (in confusion.) But, Thorowgood --


Thorowgood. No evasions, Humphries: tell me plainly; was not this agreed
between us?


Humphries. I cannot deny it, neighbor; but one says many things, that one
does not always stand to. Do but consider my situation; to have so fine a herd
of cattle as I had, and to save but four out of them!


Thorowgood. I am much more to be pitied, for being under the necessity of
asking them of you. When we made the bargain, which of us was most likely to be
the gainer by it? had not I the greatest number of cows? did not I agree to it,
out of kindness to you? and did not you yourself look upon it in that light?


Humphries. To be sure, neighbor; but after so great a loss --


Thorowgood. I see then the extent of your integrity. You are one of those
honest men, who can walk uprightly, as long as prosperity holds, but stumble at
the first step, if fortune change ever so little. I find, my wife knew you
better than I did; and I plainly see that we must not depend too much on the
rectitude of others.


Humphries. But Mr. Pinch assures me, that the law does not bind me to this
bargain.


Thorowgood. I have nothing farther to say to you, if you consult the chicane
of the law, before your conscience. I was once your friend, and that restrains
me from publicly exposing your dishonesty. Go, I give you up your cattle; I
should never have claimed them for myself alone, it was on Mr. Parks' account;
but I must work a year the longer for him: you may go; I acquit you of your
promise.


Humphries, (in a despairing accent.) Ah, Thorowgood, you stab me to the heart.


SCENE IV.
Thorowgood, Martha. Thorowgood, (hiding his face between his hands.) I could
never have expected this from a man, whom I looked upon as one of my best
friends.


Martha. Come, cheer up, my good man; it is now my turn to be the comforter.


Thorowgood. Ah, Martha, I can bear up against the losses of fortune, but not
against those of friendship.


Martha. Be comforted, we shall find friends, I will answer for it, more to be
depended on. See, here comes Robert, our rich neighbor. Perhaps he has
something to propose for our good.


SCENE V.
Thorowgood, Martha, Meadows. Meadows. Good Morrow, Thorowgood; well, how goes
it?


Thorowgood. Bad enough, truly, neighbor; you know, I suppose, that I am
ruined.


Meadows. Yes, I have just been told of it; and this is the reason why I am
come to see you.


Thorowgood. I am now worth nothing.


Meadows. How so? have you not a fine field of wheat, of which you may make
many a good pound? If you mean to sell it, I am your man. I will buy it as it
is, and pay the money down; what say you?


Thorowgood. If you have a mind to it, so much the better; my landlord will be
here this morning, and you may settle the matter with him. I will not interfere
in your bargain.


Meadows. I have nothing to do with Mr. Parks; the wheat is yours.


Thorowgood. It did, indeed, belong to me a few days ago, but it is not mine
now.


Meadows, (with surprise.) How! have you sold it to him, then?


Thorowgood. No, but since my losses, being no longer in a condition to pay, I
have given him up, all that I possess.


Meadows. Are you mad, Thorowgood? why you have the law on your side: till your
grain is made over to your landlord by some security, it belongs to you, and
you may do what you please with it. Come, come, you have lost too much already:
ask Martha what she thinks of the matter.


Martha. Why, I think that we ought, in the first place, to pay our debts, at
any rate: if we have lost our cattle, our landlord has not gained by it; the
loss, therefore, is our affair, not his.


Meadows. But you must not carry this so far as to deprive yourself of bread.
You ought to keep something in reserve, to be above want.


Thorowgood, (looking severely at him.) What, at the expense of our good
landlord?


Meadows. But he is so rich! When you have given up all to him, it will be no
more in his pocket than a crown piece would be to you.


Thorowgood. Why I believe he could do without it; but that is no reason that I
should take it from him


Martha. But do not you know what a generous and compassionate man he is?


Thorowgood. For that very reason I ought to be the more fair in my dealings
with him.


Martha. What! would you have us use him ill, because he treats others well?


Thorowgood. Fie, fie, neighbor, it would be infamous.


Meadows. Come, come, do not be so stiff; take my advice: it depends all on the
manner in which we see things. There is no doubt but your landlord would do you
a kindness: but to make that matter sure, do one to yourself. Do you want to be
one among the number of poor, that he relieves?


Thorowgood. He will not have that pleasure long, if all his tenants take your
advice.


Meadows. You are an obstinate man, and I lose my time in talking to you. I
have but one word more to say: Will you sell me your wheat; yes, or no?


Thorowgood, (with a smile of contempt.) Ha, I understand now what you would be
at, and why you interest yourself so much in my affairs. Hark ye, you are a
rich fellow, and this would be a convenient bargain to you; but I have a better
scheme than this to propose to you.


Meadows. Now you speak reason; let us hear.


Thorowgood. I expect my landlord here every minute: he always carries about
him a well furnished purse, a gold watch, and some rings of value. Suppose you
and I wait for him at the corner of the grove, and rob him of them; it would be
no bad adventure this.


Meadows, (starting back.) What do you mean, Thorowgood?


Thorowgood. Why, he is so rich, the loss to him will be no more than a crown
would be to us.


Meadows. Aye, but the gallows!


Thorowgood. Aye, that alone restrains you: but if I were to judge you,
Meadows, I would let you see, that you do not deserve it the less for what you
have just now proposed to me. I see no difference, for my part, between robbing
a man of his money, or robbing him of the fruits of his land.


Meadows. Oh, there is a great difference in the two cases.


Thorowgood. There may be so; but if you will reflect a little, I am of
opinion, you will think as I do.


Meadows. I do not desire it, indeed: there is little to be got by this way of
reasoning. Come, come, Thorowgood, consider your own interest a little better:
Your landlord will have great obligations to you, to be sure, when you have
reduced yourself to want, on his account. He will only despise you, and treat
you the worse for it.


Thorowgood. If his heart were like yours, I should have reason to fear this.


Meadows. And pray what harm have I done you? but you are an obstinate man. I
wish to preserve your family from want; it is you that are the hard-hearted
man, and will be guilty of all their sufferings, and perhaps their death. I
only desire to give you your own price for your wheat; that is, if you are
reasonable; and here is the money.


Thorowgood, (seizing him by the arm.) Meadows, I have lost, in eight days, all
that I am worth, and am reduced to the last farthing; but if ever I am guilty
of a dishonest action, even to supply my most urgent necessities, (pulling off
his hat,) may heaven strike me dead with its thunder.


Meadows, (with a smile of contempt.) Very well. No matter what becomes of your
wife and children; leave them to beg their bread, whilst you enjoy on your
dunghill, the pleasure of hearing yourself called the worthy Thorowgood, the
honest man.


Thorowgood. And that is what you will never hear said of yourself. Thou
wretch, thou have more money than thou know what to do with; and yet, in
your eagerness to amass more, you want to cheat others, and to make me a knave
like yourself. He takes him by the shoulders. Get out of my house this instant,
before I knock you down. Turns him out.


SCENE VI.
Martha, Thorowgood. Thorowgood. I never in my life saw a more impudent rogue.
He knows how much I abhor all sort of dishonesty, and yet he comes seriously to
propose a downright robbery to me: he would not have done this, when my affairs
were in a better state. Poverty is indeed terrible, when it exposes us to such
affronts as these. O Martha, never let us be shaken by the miseries of our
situation. The poorer we are, the more rigid must be our integrity.


Martha. Otherwise it will be thought that we were only respected for our
riches.


Thorowgood. This is my comfort in the midst of my troubles. Let us not attend,
Martha, to what others say, we have occasion only for ourselves. (A noise at
the door.) Who knocks? cannot I have a moment's peace?


SCENE VII.
Thorowgood, Martha, Hearty. Hearty. Good morrow, good folks.


Thorowgood, (going hastily up to him.) What do you want, farmer? are you come
to propose some piece of knavery to me?


Hearty, (calmly.) I, Thorowgood; did you ever hear any thing of that kind from
me?


Thorowgood, (throwing himself into his arms.) No, never, never; forgive me: it
was the remains of my indignation which transported me. Did you know what has
happened to me within this hour, you would excuse me for distrusting all
mankind. The servant of my landlord wants me to commit a fraud; my friend has
repaid my kindness with ingratitude; and the richest man in the village, would
barter my honesty for a trifling gain.


Hearty. Think no more of these wretches: if they choose to make a trade of
doing ill, you are too good, to disturb yourself about them. Hear me; I have
but two words to say: I know that it is not in your power to pay Squire Parks;
it is at present impossible for me to advance the sum that you want; but try to
obtain time of your landlord: I will be answerable for it: he shall have my
security.


Martha, (to Thorowgood, who seems immovable with surprise.) See, husband,
what goodness! (To Hearty.) O my dear neighbor, how came you by so saving a
thought for us?


Hearty. It was a very natural one: I said to myself, the kind-hearted
Thorowgood was always ready, to the utmost of his power, to give his assistance
to others; it would be hard indeed, if he should find no one in his turn to
assist him; and I therefore am come --


Martha, (apart.) It seems as if heaven had sent him to our succor.


Hearty. Why, Thorowgood, art thou dumb? (holding out his hand.)


Thorowgood, (seizing him by-the hand, and pressing it between his.) Ah, my
dear friend Hearty, I am not silent from insensibility. I feel your kindness at
the bottom of my heart, but I cannot accept it.


Hearty. And why not; it will not be useless to you. However well Mr. Parks may
be disposed toward you, he will be still better pleased when he has my security
for your debt.


Thorowgood. But who will be my security to you?


Hearty. Your own probity, industry, and ingenuity.


Thorowgood. And yet you see to what I am reduced; one bad year has ruined me:
a second of the same sort, may add your ruin to mine.


Hearty. No matter; I will run the risque.


Thorowgood. But I will not suffer it: it is enough that my family suffers by
me, without seeing my friends do so also. I should never more enjoy a moment's
peace. Every fog, every cloud, the least storm of wind would cast terror into
my heart.


Hearty, (with urgency.) My dear Thorowgood, if you did but know how much you
afflict me by your refusal! Will you then let me do nothing for you?


Thorowgood. You have done enough, in thus comforting my afflicted heart: it is
torn to pieces; but the tears which I now see in your eyes, are as balm to its
wounds. O, my good friend, though it is a sad thing to become an object of
pity, yet, there is a wide difference, between being pitied and being ill
spoken of. Thanks be to heaven, you will never have cause to regret having
known me. In whatever place we meet, I shall never have occasion to draw my hat
over my face, or turn aside my head, to avoid the shame of blushing in your
presence.


Hearty. The more you resist, the more my friendship increases; and you are so
cruel, you will not give me yours in return.


Thorowgood. Think well of it, I beseech you: I know your slender means. Should
I be your friend, were I to plunge you into difficulties, in order to draw
myself out of them? No, no, my good neighbor, I am as yet guilty of the ruin
of no one; and it shall never be said that I will become so. As long as I live
I will sleep with a clear conscience. It is this which converts the mat of
straw into a bed of down.


Hearty. I will press you no more: I feel that I am not worthy to put an end to
your troubles: Providence, no doubt, reserves that for itself. All I ask, is,
that you will depend on me next to Providence; and my hands, and my little
fortune, you shall always find at your service. Farewell.


(He goes out; Thorowgood conducts him to the door, pressing his hand.) SCENE
VIII.
Thorowgood, Martha. Thorowgood. I have a friend then, my dear Martha: I
rejoice, however, that he has left me. I might perhaps have yielded to his
entreaties, from the fear of afflicting him. We are delivered then from a great
temptation, but we must prevent his return. Come, my wife, we must act with
spirit; let us assemble together all our effects against Squire Parks' coming.
I would not have him think that we had deliberated for a moment in doing our
duty.


End of the second Act.
ACT III.
(Household furniture appears dispersed in different parts of the room, and a
heap of clothes and linen on a large table.) SCENE I.
Thorowgood, Martha. Thorowgood. Come, courage, Martha; keep up your spirits
till we have finished our business.


Martha. I believe, it is now all done.


Thorowgood. How! is this all that we have to give to our landlord? I never
wished so much to have our little stock of necessaries in good order about us,
as I do at the instant, that I am going to be deprived of them. Have you
searched in every corner?


Martha. Yes, my dear, I turned over every drawer in the cupboard.


Thorowgood, (taking breath.) I feel myself the lighter for all this; these
things were like a load on my heart, which almost stifled it.


Martha. You must be sadly fatigued; you had better take a draught of beer to
refresh you.


Thorowgood. Put some for us both into this cup. He takes a silver tankard off
the table.


Martha, (having filled it with beer.) What is the matter with you; your hand
trembles?


Thorowgood. Nothing at all; but it is so many years since this piece of plate
has been in our family.


Martha. It does not go out of it now, however, in a bad cause.


Thorowgood. My grandfather bequeathed it to his eldest grandson; but I, alas,
shall not be able to leave it to mine.


Martha. Your last blessing will be the more pure for this.


Thorowgood. Yes, I shall have that consolation. (After drinking, he shows the
tankard to his wife. See here, the first letter of your name, which I had
engraved with mine.


Martha. Well, my dear, this cipher is, no reproach to us; we ourselves have
been yet more united.


Thorowgood. And we will be so always, though this were the last time that we
should drink together. Here, my dear wife; (he gives the tankard to Martha, and
whilst she lifts it to her mouth with a sigh,) come, we must now put all these
things in order: let us begin with my wedding-suit. (He takes it off the table,
and displays it, looking at it attentively.) How happy I was, Martha, the first
time I put this on, when I took you to church! and how often has the sight of
it brought back to my mind agreeable remembrances! I never opened that cupboard
without looking at it, and I never looked at it, without thinking with
pleasure, on the day of our marriage: it gives me pleasure, now, for another
reason.


Martha. For what, my dear?


Thorowgood. For having preserved it so well, that it will help a little toward
paying our debts. ^ee, it is in very good condition yet. They do not wear these
great sleeves and large plaits now. They did not spare stuff at that time of
day; and I am glad of it: why here is almost enough to make two such as are
worn now.


Martha. Here is mine also; let us put them together; and I shall beg of our
landlord to let them both be sold at the same time: it would grieve me to have
them separated.


Thorowgood. Do not be superstitious; suppose they were, my dear, what then?
would our hearts be divided by that?


Martha. No, Thorowgood, I have no fear of that; it is not superstition, my
dear husband; it is a --; I don't know what to call it; but I should rather
they were to remain together.


Thorowgood. Come, come, make yourself easy; Mr. Parks will, I dare say,
indulge this little weakness of yours. (He lays his hand on a little bundle,
neatly wrapped in a linen cloth.) What bundle is this?


Martha. It is Valentine's: you know it is the linen and jewels which we found
with him in his cradle: look at them, they seem to be of great value.


Thorowgood, (perceiving that Martha begins to undo the bundle, stops her.)
Hold, Martha, we have no right to this; nor has our landlord any claim to it:
it belongs to Valentine: if he were our son, the case would be different; put
it back into the box: we will speak to Mr. Parks about it.


Martha. Provided he will take our words!


Thorowgood. I have no fear of that; he is just and sensible: and when I relate
the circumstance to him, he will be of our opinion.


SCENE II.
Thorowgood, Martha, Lucy. Lucy, (bringing in a bundle of clothes in her arms.)
Here, father, here are my Sunday-clothes, and these are Jenny's; shall I put
them on the table?


Thorowgood. Yes, child, by those of your father and mother.


Martha, (with tears in her eyes.) Oh, my poor children, how sorry I am for you!


Thorowgood. No, Martha, we ought to rejoice, not grieve for them, now. Should
we weep for their being good children? (embracing Lucy, tenderly.) Tell me
then, would you wish to keep these clothes?


Lucy. Certainly, if you could keep yours too; but since you are obliged to
give yours to our landlord, I will also do the same. Do not you owe him all you
have?


Thorowgood. All, my child.


Lucy. I am sure, I had rather always go in a ragged frock, than that people
should say, see how flaunting Lucy is dressed; but it is at other people's
expense.


Thorowgood. Right, my dear child; this is thinking as you ought: preserve
these sentiments, and you will never be unhappy; nor will your courage ever be
cast down.


Martha. Your father is in the right: never fear: we will work night and day,
before you and your sister shall want.


Lucy. And we, in our turns, will do our best that you shall not want.


Thorowgood. In thus assisting each other, I hope, we shall be able to bring
ourselves out of this unfortunate situation; but should we not, we shall at
least have nothing to reproach ourselves with: no man on earth will dare to
despise us, or look down upon you. When we are dead, they may tell you, it is
true, that your parents were poor, but never that they were dishonest. You need
not blush, when you shed tears over their graves. No one will push you back,
whilst they trample on them with indignation before your face.


Lucy. I will go and see, father, if I have forgotten nothing. When Jenny has
done, we shall have something else to bring you.


SCENE III.
Thorowgood, Martha. Thorowgood. Why, Martha, what still cast down? Shall our
children be more courageous than we! We possess all their love; but do not let
us lessen it, by giving them cause to esteem us less. They know that it is not
our bad conduct which has brought these misfortunes upon us; but if we suffer
ourselves to be overcome by a weak despair, we shall appear faulty to them.
Come, then, let us think no more of our troubles, than as they have given us
occasion to feel the comfort which our children have given us.


Martha. Yes, my dear, it is the sweetest that a mother can feel. Could I ever
have expected to see them so sensible and good, at so early an age?


Thorowgood. And why not, Martha? could I ever doubt that a woman like thee,
would not bring my children up as worthy as herself? They will be the staff of
our old age; when decrepit with years, we may rest assuredly upon them. -- But
I hear Valentine's voice: I have something to say to him. -- Martha, shall I
beg of thee to leave me alone with him a little?


Martha. Why do you ask it? am not I as much concerned as you in every thing
that regards him? Do you believe that he is less dear to me than to you?


Thorowgood. It is for this very reason, that I wish you to be away just now;
it is your tenderness for him, that I dread.


Martha. You make me tremble: what can this secret be? is it any misfortune
that has befallen him?


Thorowgood. No, my dear, on the contrary, it is concerning his good fortune
that I am now going to speak to him.


Martha. And are you afraid that I shall be witness to this?


Thorowgood. Well then, stay if you will; but you must promise me not to
contradict what I shall say: if you love him, and wish his good, you must
acquiesce in whatever I propose to him.


Martha. But why did not you before entrust me with your designs?


Thorowgood. Here he comes; you shall hear them in his presence.


SCENE IV.
Thorowgood, Martha, Valentine. Valentine. Good Morrow, father; I am come to
see if you are returned safe.


Thorowgood. Yes, son, as you see.


Valentine. And how were you received by the Squire?


Thorowgood. As well as I could wish: he is not one of those haughty and
unfeeling men, who will scarcely allow us poor people to be their fellow
creatures. He will come here presently: and you see what I have prepared to
give up to him toward my debt.


Valentine. What, do you mean to strip yourself in one moment of all that you
have earned by hard labor?


Thorowgood. This is not the greatest sacrifice that I must make today. I must
endure a loss which will go much nearer to my heart.


Valentine. What have you to lose more?


Thorowgood. Alas, it is thyself, Valentine; thee whom I have ever loved so
tenderly.


Valentine. Me, father!


Martha, (with emotion.) What do you say?


Thorowgood. Since the word has passed my lips, I repeat it: yes, my child, we
must part.


Valentine. But why do you drive me from your presence? have I given you any
cause of complaint?


Martha. Oh, never, never; you know it too, Thorowgood: no son was ever more
submissive, or more tender toward his parents.


Thorowgood. And I, Martha, am as ready as you to declare this. Yes, Valentine,
you have done for us a hundred times more than we had a right to expect. I love
you with all the tenderness of a real father; but, nevertheless, you know that
I am not yours. Had we continued in prosperity, you should have always been our
son, our dear son; all my other children believe you to be their brother. I
meant, after my death, that you should have shared with them the little
substance which you have daily helped me to increase. This hope was a comfort
to my heart, but it is destroyed: nothing now is left us, not even the distant
prospect of re-establishment.


Valentine. And is this the moment which you have chosen to cast me from among
the number of your children?


Thorowgood. Yes, I ought to do so: the ties of blood bind them to our lot,
whatever it be: if we suffer, they ought to suffer with us; but you, what right
have I to involve you in my distress? No, Valentine, I advise you as a friend;
and if it must be, I command you, as a father, to quit an unfortunate family.
It is time that you should do something for yourself; since it is no longer in
my power to give you a fortune, I rejoice that I have ^^ad you so well
instructed as to enable you to gain one.


Valentine. You must not remind me of these obligations, if you wish to have me
abandon you; I must first forget them myself: you saved my life in my infancy:
you have bread me up, and educated me, without expecting any recompense; and
you command me to be ungrateful for all these benefits.


Thorowgood. I have only acquitted myself to you as one man ought to another.
Should not I have been a monster, had I left you to perish?


Valentine. And yet you would have me prove myself one, by withdrawing from you
my assistance when you most want it.


Thorowgood. You know me, Valentine; you know that I should be ashamed to live
at the expense of another.


Valentine. My life then, to this moment, has been a very shameful one; have
not I hitherto subsisted by you alone?


Thorowgood. But have not you sufficiently repaid me by your labor?


Valentine. My hands, it is true, have repaid what your hands have done for me;
but my heart has not yet repaid your love. O my father, recall to your
remembrance the first days of my infancy, when I was as a stranger in your
family. How many times have you pressed me in your arms at your return from
hard-labour, which you had prolonged in order to support me. And you, my dear
mother, can you forget the many tender caresses that you have lavished on me,
at the very time when I was eating the bread of your children? You alone
received me, when abandoned by all the world; and shall I now abandon you? I
was your son to inherit your fortune, and shall I not be so to share your
poverty? Alas, how much you must have despised me before you could believe me
capable of this! (Martha attempts to speak, but her voice is stifled by her
sighs.)


Thorowgood. Despise you, Valentine! No, my son, I esteem you the more for
these sentiments: but I say again, it is time that you should think of doing
something for yourself.


Valentine. No, I think only of you: I will burden myself with your labors; I
will afflict myself with your griefs: my head, my hands, all that I have, all
that I am, I give you. I devote myself entirely to you: whether you go, or
remain, I will never quit you. You may fly me, but you shall not hinder my
following you. When you hear me groaning the whole night, stretched at the door
of your cottage, you will surely open it to me.


Thorowgood, Perhaps I may no longer have one.


Valentine. Then I will follow you to the wild common, or the bleak dreary
mountain: wherever you go I will be with you.


Martha, (to Thorowgood -- exclaiming with sobs.) You hear him, Thorowgood?


Valentine, (springing eagerly toward her.) Ah, I knew it well, my dear
mother; I knew that you would not drive me from your heart.


Thorowgood, (melting into tears.) Come to my arms, my son, my dear son; it is
I, now, who entreat thee never more to quit us.


Valentine. Never, never, my father: without relations, without friends, on
whom could my heart repose? I have no one on earth but you to love. I feel,
that you are a thousand times more dear to me since you have lost your all. I
have hitherto only given you the sweat of my brows, but my blood is ready to be
shed for you. O my father, since you no longer urge me to quit you, you must
press me the more closely in your arms.


SCENE V.
Thorowgood, Martha, Humphries. Humphries, (comes in at the close of the last
scene -- advances hastily to Thorowgood.) And I, Thorowgood, will thou repulse
me?


Thorowgood, (looking upon him with indignation.) What do thou here, wretch?
Is it not enough to have betrayed me? must you also disturb, by your presence,
the joy which this moment affords me?


Humphries, Do not oppress me more: I suffer already too cruelly by a bitter
repentance. You may either bring me back to the paths of honor, or expose me
as the most unworthy of men to the eyes of others as well as my own.


Thorowgood. What then would you have with me?


Humphries. Give me back your friendship. Think not, Thorowgood, that I was so
base as to renounce it for a paltry gain: but you know what losses I have
suffered. The fear of seeing my children want, had blinded me: but it was using
them very ill. I already feel that I shall love them less, after having been
guilty of so black an action. Deliver me from my shame: give me back my own
esteem, though at the price of my blood, give me back my friend.


Thorowgood. Ah, Humphries, how difficult is it to cure the wound which thou
have made! Nevertheless, I am touched with your speedy return to virtue, and
forget your offense.


Humphries. Make me forget it then myself, and receive that which was the cause
of it.


Thorowgood. What do you propose? shall I put a price on our reconciliation?
No, Humphries, keep what belongs to you, if you wish my friendship.


Humphries. I will not accept it if you refuse me: have you not advantages
enough over me without this? you have no other way of being generous to me. Do
not let me have before my eyes what will be a constant reproach to my heart.


Thorowgood. If it be so, I accept your offer; but you must promise me, that,
on the first return of good fortune, I shall be at liberty to satisfy myself in
my turn.


Humphries. I have no will but yours: from henceforward let our losses and
gains be in common between us.


Thorowgood. You have recovered my good opinion. (He takes his hand.) Come,
Martha, whatever misfortunes may happen to me in the course of this day, I
shall always find cause for consolation, since I have preserved a son, and
found a lost friend.


End of the third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Jenny. Jenny, (runs across the room to the door of the next apartment.) O
Father, O Mother! Come, come quickly.


SCENE II.
Jenny, Martha, Thorowgood. Martha, (first enters.) Well, what is the matter,
child? why do you make this outcry?


Jenny. There is a grand coach just now stopped at the door, with four
beautiful horses, and a number of fine folks all bedizened with lace, both
before and behind, and a gentleman in it. O mother, what a sweet countenance he
has! -- How do you do, my dear, he said to me smiling -- Where is your father
and mother? (To Thorowgood,) he wants to speak to you.


Thorowgood. (hastily.) Odd so, I Would lay my life, it is our landlord: I must run
to receive him. (He hurries out,)


SCENE III.
Martha, Jenny. Jenny, (looking sorrowfully.) What! this is the gentleman then,
to whom, as my father said, all that we have belongs.


Martha. Yes, my child, we owe him a great deal of money; and as we have not
half enough to discharge our debt, we are willing to do as much as we can, and
give him up all our remaining property.


Jenny. And what can he do with it? he has too fine a carriage to make use of
our cart, and he is too well dressed to wear such clothes as we have.


Martha. That is very true; but he will sell them and take the money; we have
no other way of paying, and even that will not be sufficient.


Jenny. Do you think that he will be so wicked as to treat us in such a cruel
manner! if you had seen how good-natured he looked upon me --


Martha. There is no wickedness in all that, Jenny; it is no more than justice.


Jenny. It is a sad thing, however -- let me take a last look at my
holiday-clothes. Could you have thought, Mother, last spring, when you gave me
this jacket and petticoat, that I should wear them only two or three times? It
was but last Sunday that I felt such pleasure at being so smartly dressed! and
you yourself, mother, were so happy to see it! (She takes her mother's hand on
perceiving her concern.) Come, don't grieve, I do not mind my fine clothes; we
worked to get them, and we will work to have others: but here is the gentleman
coming. I will go look for my sister in the garden.


SCENE IV.
(Martha in the front -- in the back part Mr. Parks, who is coming in with
Thorowgood, whilst Jenny is going out.) (When Jenny gets to the door, she meets
Mr. Parks: she curtsies slightly, making way at the same time, and then
proceeds.) Mr. Parks. Well, where are you going, my dear? are you afraid of me?


Jenny, (half turned toward him.) Oh no, Sir, no one can be afraid of you that
looks in your face: excuse me a moment, I shall be back directly.


SCENE V.
(Martha in the forepart, Mr. Parks and Thorowgood behind.) Mr. Parks, (to
Thorowgood.) What a sprightly countenance that little girl has.


Thorowgood. Aye, and her sister too, I Will warrant her; they are both of them
as lively girls as you would wish to see.


Mr. Parks, (seeing Martha approach, salutes her.) Ah! Martha, how goes it?


Martha. As the times are, Sir, but very so-so. I hope you are well, Sir?


Mr. Parks. Perfectly well, thank God. I have a thousand things to say from my
wife: do you know that she had a great inclination to come with me?


Thorowgood. And she would not have done amiss. Our country air is much better
than your close air in town. (Seeing Mr. Parks hold his hat in his hand.) But,
Sir, I hope you use no ceremony here: pray be covered. You are at home in your
tenant's house.


Mr. Parks, (smiles and shows him his silk hat only to be worn under the arm.)
You see, it would not go on my head: it is the custom to appear with such hats
as these in town upon some occasions.


Thorowgood. It is rightly said, what is the custom in town is not so in the
country. (Aside.) But it is odd enough to use hats that will not go on one's
head.


SCENE VI.
Mr. Parks, Thorowgood, Martha, and two Servants. First Servant, (who with the
other is carrying in a large covered basket.) Where will you have this laid,
Sir?


Mr. Perks. There, in the corner; that will do: desire the coachman to take the
horses to the best inn, and put up the carriage.


Second Servant. Have you any other orders to give the servants?


Mr. Parks. Tell them to order a good dinner for themselves; I mean to treat
them today; but let them avoid drinking to excess. I shall not return to town
before the evening; you must be ready at six.


Second Serve. Very well, Sir.


SCENE VII.
Mr. Parks, Thorowgood, Martha. Mr. Parks. You see. Thorowgood, we shall have
full time to talk together; but first, I should be glad to see all your family.
Where are your children?


Thorowgood. All at work; my sons in the field, and my daughters in the garden.
But will you come and look at your cornfieldsd?


Mr. Parks. Not now; in the evening, when the heat of the day is over.


Thorowgood. They look finely: there is to the value of a hundred pounds if
there be a shilling.


Mr. Parks. Well, so much the better. (He looks round the room.) But what does
all this mean? one would imagine that you were going to have an auction here.
Why all this linen and furniture piled up in this manner?


Thorowgood. It is because we expected your coming, Sir.


Mr. Parks. And what then?


Thorowgood. I told you this morning that we should not be able to pay our
rent; it is therefore our duty to give you up what we have, and you see it
collected here. With the sale of our furniture, clothes, and corn, we mean to
pay you as far as we can. Whatever may be deficient, we will endeavor to earn
by our labor, till we have paid to a farthing. I hope, Sir, you will at
present be satisfied with this on account, and have a little patience for the
rest.


Martha. As you have been always so indulgent to us -- and, indeed, it is not
by any fault of ours that we are in this distress.


Thorowgood. You know, as well as myself, Sir, that I had drained the marshes
in order to make them fit for pasture, and they were in a thriving way. All the
money that we had remaining last year, we laid out in cattle, in order to
fatten them for sale. Twenty head of good cattle was a little fortune which
promised fair to pay our rent, by sending a few of them off to market. A
drought came on; there was scarcely a blade of grass in my fields. I fed my
cattle with the straw of my bed, the thatch of my barn, and sometimes with the
vegetables that were for my family's use. When I wanted to get rid of them, I
could find no purchaser, owing to the scarcity of fodder. A murrain got among
them, and I lost them all; I owe nothing, however, to any body but to you, Sir.
Come and look at your grounds; you will see whether I have neglected to
cultivate them; you will see if my own labor, with that of my wife and
children, may not enable me one day to pay all my debts; I can, however, give
you no other security than my own word: but as I have always been punctual,
till now, in my engagements with you, I should hope that you would have some
reliance on my promise.


Mr. Parks. Yes, my friends, I do know you. Why should I not be content with
the promise of such honest worthy people as you are?


Thorowgood. I give you thanks, Sir; your kind words are still more pleasing
than your goodness itself. How seldom will a creditor give the character of an
honest man to the debtor by whom he has lost!


Mr. Parks. How seldom also does it happen, my friend Thorowgood, that a
creditor, can with truth say, that the debtor, by whom he has suffered, is
worthy of that appellation!


SCENE VIII.
Mr. Parks, Thorowgood, Martha. (Jenny, carrying with both hands, a large cage
with chickens, and Lucy with a basket of eggs in one hand, and holding up with
her other, the corners of her apron, in which are some handfuls of halfpence.)
(Jenny sets down the cage at the feet of Mr. Parks, and Lucy her basket also;
she then takes Thorowgood's bat, and pouring into it the money that she has in
her apron, presents it to Mr. Parks.) Lucy. Here, Sir, is all that we have; our
chickens, our eggs, and our money: we have nothing else in the world, have we
Jenny?


Jenny. No, indeed, Sir, nothing more.


Thorowgood, (looking at the hat over Mr. Parks' shoulder.) What so much money!
how came you by it?


Lucy. With my sister's chickens, my eggs, and flowers, which my mother sold
for us in town.


Jenny. These were our first savings as a beginning toward our support; but we
part with all, freely, for your sake.


Lucy. That we do with all our hearts.


Thorowgood, (with joy.) And I receive it with all my heart. No money ever gave
me so much pleasure! Come, Sir, this is so much paid. (To his children.) How
happy I am, my dear girls, to see that you have the same sentiments with your
father.


Martha. What then, is it from your own suggestions alone that you have alone
this?


Jenny. As my father himself is not able to pay, it is but right to help him
all in our power.


Mr. Parks. Oh, Thorowgood, what exquisite happiness you must feel under your
afflictions! The tenderness of your children is more than a compensation for
all your losses. (To Jenny and Lucy.) No, my dear girls, I will not strip you
of your first riches. Take back what you have so nobly offered me. I have no
accounts to settle but with your father.


Thorowgood. Give them their own way; they feel no concern in parting with
these things.


Mr. Parks. And do you feel none at seeing them lose their little fortune?


Thorowgood. How, Sir, there is nothing more natural and pleasing than to
receive assistance from our children. Were I as rich as a king all my
possessions should be theirs; when I have nothing, whatever they possess, is
mine. (To his children.) Will Not you be always glad to pay for us?


Jenny, (pressing both hands.) Ah, father, can you doubt it?


Lucy. I wish we had a hundred times more; we would give it all, with the same
pleasure.


Thorowgood. You hear what they say, Sir?


Mr. Parks. And I would not receive it were it a thousand times more
considerable. (To Lucy.) Here my dear good little girl, take back your
treasure, pray do. (He attempts to pour the money into Lucy's apron: she
declines it; at length, after many entreaties, she pretends to yield, and takes
the hat, but places it on the table, beside the rest of the effects, and says
to him, as she retires,) You will find it there with the other things.


Mr. Parks, (turning toward her.) What are you about? hold, hold.


Lucy. I will not even listen to you. Come, Jenny. (Both go off skipping and
dancing.)


SCENE IX.
Mr. Parks, Thorowgood, Martha. Thorowgood, (pushing the cage and basket under
the table.) I told you that they were shrewd lasses: they are not so easily
caught.


Mr. Parks. But what, Thorowgood, do you really mean to make them pay for you?


Thorowgood. Why not, Sir, it is very natural.


Mr. Parks. Methinks you are little acquainted with the manners of the town.


Thorowgood. It is enough for me to know that I act right: whether in town or
country no matter. Justice and duty are to me one and the same thing. Is not
this the practice where you live?


Mr. Parks. It is precisely the reverse on most occasions.


Thorowgood. Do you tell me so, Sir?


Mr. Parks. Yes, my friend, you are surprised, yet it is too true. When by
folly and extravagance, ambitious and destructive schemes, people have put it
out of their power to pay their debts, they transfer to their children the
property which they may have obtained from the credulity and confidence of
their creditors, and when the latter, apply for payment, the parents possess
nothing, and all that they seemed to have, is found in the hands of their
children, who will not part with it.


Thorowgood, (with indignation.) What abominable knavery!


Martha. It is horrible.


Thorowgood. And do the laws take no notice of these tricks?


Mr. Parks. Art and cunning find a way to silence them.


Thorowgood. Your laws are as corrupt as those who stifle their voice, if they
will not speak out on such occasions. Hear me, Sir; I am entirely ignorant of
law proceedings; but I would not hesitate, to say openly to that justice, who
would submit to such restriction -- Thou have no further business upon earth;
be gone, then, to hell, where the wicked shall at last meet with due
punishment. Were I the dupe of the father, I would go to the children, and ask
them, by what right, they retained the property, which ought to be restored to
me. If they should tell me, that they received it from their parents, my answer
would be, your parents could not bestow it on you; it belongs to me. I would
compel them, without mercy, to fell the bed from under them, in order to
satisfy me.


Mr. Parks. Matters are not carried on in that manner with us.


Thorowgood. I would have them carried on in my way: such fathers, and such
children, are no better than a knot of thieves.


Mr. Parks. The fathers are the most criminal.


Thorowgood. No, Sir, begging your pardon; the latter are still more so; the
former are knaves, but the others are monsters. When a stranger has relieved
us in our distress, are we not in duty bound, whilst we have a drop of generous
blood in our veins, to relieve him in turn, if he should want our assistance!
and children, who owe every thing to their parents, have cost them so much
anxiety, care and toil, shall they not act in the same manner? I shudder at the
bare thought of such a thing: were I to see my father incapable of paying what
he owed, though he had not left me a penny, I should still think myself bound
to fulfill all his engagements. I should consider it, as a duty of inheritance,
in me, to acquit his memory, and preserve the integrity of his name. Though I
were to live upon bread alone, to the last hour of my life, and be obliged to
work the flesh from my bones, I would endeavor to pay all his debts; and when
I had done so, I would go to his grave, and address him thus: Father, now rest
in peace, thou owe nothing.


Mr. Parks. Thou art a noble fellow, Thorowgood!


Thorowgood. Yes, Sir, I would do so. -- Gracious heaven! can we honor with
the name of children, those unnatural beings, who rather than deprive
themselves of some few comforts of life, would suffer their fathers to be
treated like knaves? Without being one of their unfortunate creditors, I could
curse such monsters of children.


SCENE X.
Mr. Parks, Thorowgood, Martha, Lucy. Lucy, (at the threshold of the door.)
Father, Humphries' cows are come; would you have them brought in?


Thorowgood. Do you consider what you say? I Will go and look at them: excuse me
for a moment, Sir. This matter concerns you; they are likewise your property. I
will tell you presently how I came by them, (as be retires.) Thanks be to
heaven, blessings are flowing in on all sides today. (Goes out with Lucy, who
would not venture in for fear Mr. Parks should press her to take back her
money.)


SCENE XI.
Mr. Parks, Martha. Mr. Parks. Your husband really astonishes me, Martha. I was
very sensible, indeed, that he was full of honor and probity; but to find him
possess such elevated sentiments in the very depth of distress, is what I must
own I did not expect.


Martha. I have always seen him behave in the same manner, Sir, as you do now:
in all transactions, his first object is, to find out the side of justice; and
when he has found it, he adheres to it, and will support it with all, and
against all, beginning with himself. However, he is no more than what he ought
to be.


Mr. Parks. True, but then in the situation to which he is reduced, not to
hesitate a moment!


Martha. Oh, Sir, you know but little of him; he would see us all without a
morsel of bread, rather than have the least cause of reproach to himself; and
that without appearing any way disturbed. He is never cast down; he is less the
sport of fortune, than his fortune is of him.


Mr. Parks. You must love him dearly, Martha.


Martha. Love him! Ah, Sir, can you doubt it? What would have become of me, but
for the comfort that he affords me? I am always happy when I see him with a
cheerful countenance. I cannot imagine I have any wants as long as heaven
vouchsafes to preserve him to me. He is indeed my all upon earth.


SCENE XII.
Mr. Parks, Thorowgood, Martha. Thorowgood. I give you joy, Sir; two of the
finest cows in the whole country! Oh let me alone. I will go tomorrow, yes, I
will go myself to market. They will fetch ten pounds apiece, the least penny.
They shall not go for a farthing less, not to a prince. You may reckon upon so
much: this will reduce our account so much. We will settle it if you please. My
debts hand like a mountain on my shoulders. I long to be eased of the heavy
burden.


Mr. Parks. I wish it as much as you can, my friend.


Thorowgood. You know what I remain in your debt for the rest of my rent?


Mr. Parks, (looking steadfastly at him.) Yes, but first of all, Thorowgood, are
you really in earnest in this proposal, that I should take your furniture,
clothes, corn, cows, and all that you possess?


Thorowgood. Sir, I am always in earnest in matters of business.


Mr. Parks. Have you reflected seriously upon it? Do you consider that all your
property is at stake?


Thorowgood. My property! it is no longer mine, it is yours. Hear me, Sir; you
know perfectly well that I would not attempt to act a generous part to you, at
the expense of my family. I give you up nothing, but what belongs to you. Rest
assured that I would not offer it to you, if I thought I could retain it with a
safe conscience. It would become me, truly, to make you presents! You would
laugh at me. To cut the matter short, I cannot pay you the debt in ready money:
I resign therefore all my possessions, without injury to your remaining claim,
which I will pay, that I will, you may depend; you shall be next in
consideration after the immediate necessaries of life are supplied.


Mr.Parks, (coolly.) Very well; but it would be dreadful to strip you entirely.
Choose out among all these effects what you value most. I flatter myself you
will not refuse a trifling present of friendship from me.


Thorowgood. When you talk so, it would ill become me to decline such a favor.
(He approaches the table, and takes a spade and rake.) Here then, I will retain
these instruments of my business; with these, together with industry and
resolution, we may always find means to relieve our distress.


Mr. Parks. What, do you take nothing more?


Thorowgood. No, Sir, these are sufficient. If heaven will assist me, I shall
not despair of supporting my wife and children with credit, and of laying up,
by degrees, sufficient to pay you.


Mr. Parks. Very well; now is your turn, Martha. I will have no jealousy: you
must take something, as well as your husband. Choose what you will.


Martha. What, must I too? you are too good, indeed, Sir.


Mr. Parks. No compliments. Come, what do you choose?


Martha. Well then, since you are willing to give me some of your property;
(She runs to the bottom of the room, and drawing a curtain.) I beg it as a
favor, Sir, that you will let me take the cradle of the infant that I have at
the breast.


Mr.Parks, (surprised.) What, was it included in the things that you were
giving up? Would you have deprived your infant of a cradle?


Martha, (coming forward.) Would he not always have found one in my arms?


Mr. Parks. And could you once think that I would have accepted it?


Thorowgood. I have already told you, Sir, that children should pay for their
parents. When the one suffers, what pretense can the others have to refuse
sharing in the affliction? There is nothing, that I am not ready to do for my
children; but, at the same time, there is nothing that I do not expect from
them in return. My blood is theirs, as their blood is mine.


Mr. Parks. What a man! how unshaken in his principles! (Aside.) What you have
taken, I give you: it is yours. Now you surrender the remainder to me, your
household goods, your clothes, corn, and the cattle that you have newly
acquired? Do you transfer all right and property in them, to me?


Thorowgood, (firmly.) We do, Sir.


Martha. And without any regret.


Thorowgood. Rather say, with the greatest pleasure.


Martha, (drawing her purse out, and offering it to Mr. Parks.) Receive
likewise all the money that we have.


Mr. Parks, (takes it, and throws it on the table.)
Thorowgood. Will Not you reckon it? There are five and twenty pounds.


Mr. Parks. Your word is sufficient; so you make me absolute master of all: and
you are satisfied that I shall dispose of it as I please, without any
opposition from you?


Thorowgood. As it is now your property, we have no more title or claim to it
than to your lands. We should be strange sort of folks indeed, to assume the
liberty of controuling you, in any respect, as to the disposal of it.


Mr. Parks. Consider well the conditions that you are laying on yourself. It is
not my intention to extort this agreement from you; but once the matter is so
settled --


Thorowgood. Oh! be not afraid that I shall attempt to recall my words. No,
Sir, we are already too sensible of your kindness in allowing us time: dispose
of all things as you think proper. We shall only beg of heaven that all may
prosper in your hands.


Mr. Parks. Now we understand one another: then I acknowledge in turn that I
have no further claim upon you, being satisfied for all that you might be
indebted to me, in consideration of your having surrendered up these effects.


Thorowgood, (with impatience.) But no, Sir, you would lose considerably; this
will not amount to one half of your debt. Such a parcel of trumpery and rags
for a hundred and fifty pounds!


Mr. Parks. But it is my pleasure to take them at that rate. Am not I at
liberty to do this as I think proper?


Thorowgood. I have nothing to say as to that yet, I think it would be better
to have them appraised, in order to know exactly what they are worth.


Mr. Parks. Peace, friend; they have a value in my eyes which no person on
earth could possibly estimate. They are the fruits of the toil, and frugality
of an honest and worthy family. When I reflect how many drops of sweat they
must have cost you, I think them of value enough to make me the amplest
satisfaction. Now, my good friends, you owe me nothing.


Thorowgood, (taking off his hat.) Good Sir, how shall I thank you? (then
turning about, he throws his arms round Martha's neck, and fondly embraces
her.) Heaven be praised, my dear, we are no longer in debt.


Martha. O matchless goodness, how shall we be ever able to show our gratitude
for so much generosity!


Thorowgood. With our hearts, Martha; and there we have funds to discharge our
obligations. (be advances toward Mr. Parks.) Will you now be so good as to tell
me where we shall carry all these things, and when you will be pleased to have
the keys delivered up.


Mr. Parks. I will tell you, provided you will forbear to interrupt me. (He
takes both their hands, and addressing them with joy sparkling in his eyes,) My
good friends, I am rich; and my parents taught me, from my infant years, to do
good to the virtuous and worthy; but I never, till this day, so fully
experienced the exquisite delight of benevolent actions. My worthy Thorowgood,
(squeezing his hand.) thy behavior has filled me with esteem and admiration:
all that thou have made over to me to discharge they debts, I restore to thee
in turn to acquit myself of a duty which thy misfortunes and integrity claim
from me.


Martha, (looking up to heaven.) What then, shall I no longer be apprehensive
of seeing my children in distress? O thou worthy, thou bounteous landlord! (She
kisses his hand with emotion.)


Thorowgood, (confounded almost to stupefaction.) I can scarcely believe what I
have just now heard. No, Sir, it is impossible; and though these words may have
escaped you in the enthusiastic emotions of your goodness, shall I be base
enough to avail myself of them? No, no, I never will consent.


Mr. Parks. Softly, softly, Thorowgood, you just now admitted that I-was
absolute master of your property, and perfectly at liberty to dispose of it
agreeable to my own fancy; and would you now deprive me of these rights?


Thorowgood, (throwing himself at his feet.) Ah, Sir, you have seduced me into
this, but why should I complain? Shall I receive bread from heaven, and refuse
it from you, whom it has sent as a tutelary angel, to relieve us in our
distresses? Yes, I will become worthy of thy bounty, by receiving it, as it is
offered, with a soul full of joy and sensibility: but furnish me also with
proper expressions to thank you, (shedding a flood of tears.) I am afraid of
not appearing sufficiently grateful, for your favors.


Mr. Parks, (raising him.) Be comforted, Thorowgood, I see what is now passing
at the bottom of your heart, perhaps, better than yourself, and am fully
satisfied. Martha, call your children: I know with what tenderness they love
you; I would fain let them see, that I can love you also.


Martha, (springing to the door.) Jenny, Lucy, come; make haste; run as fast as
your legs can carry you.


Jenny, Lucy, (from without.) Here, here we are, mother.


SCENE XIII.
Mr. Parks, Thorowgood, Martha, Jenny, Lucy. Martha. Come, my dear children,
look round about you; all that you see there, you know we had given up to this
gentleman, our landlord: well then, you must know that he has given it up to us
back again; he will neither take our money, our corn, nor our cows: he acquits
us of our whole debt, for nothing.


Lucy, (goes and takes up the hat, and presents it to Mr. Parks.) And will you
not then take our money?


Mr. Parks. No, my dear children, the alacrity which you have shown in
assisting your parents, has taught me, how worthy you all are to be relieved,
in your afflictions: take back, then, all that you have given for them, but,
make that use of it, to which your tenderness first prompted you. For example,
Lucy; as your father has lost his cattle, would you not be glad to employ what
you have saved, in buying others for him?


Lucy, (with a dejected look.) I am far short of having enough for that.


Mr. Parks. But supposing that you had enough, would you be well pleased to
make such a present?


Lucy. Ah, Sir, I should leap for joy.


Mr. Parks. I should be curious to see how you and Jenny would behave on such
an occasion. Thorowgood, as you understand these matters better than your
daughters, I commission you to go tomorrow, to market for them, and buy for
each of them, six young heifers, the best that you can find. The money will be
ready to pay for them at my house: it is a little present which I make your
children, that they may have the pleasure, of making you one in turn.


Martha. Ah, dear Sir! when will you have done heaping favors upon us? Come,
my children, and join with me in thanking our generous benefactor. (Martha,
Jenny, and Lucy, throw themselves at Mr. Parks' feet, and kiss his hands,
weeping for joy, whilst Thorowgood, motionless and silent, looks at him with
profound astonishment.)


Mr. Parks, (turning aside, to conceal his tears.) Rise, Martha; rise, my good
girls.


Thorowgood. Sir, I knew you very well to be a man of humanity, and a worthy
man; but I was not sufficiently acquainted with all your virtues; and I am
really at a loss how to behave to you. (To Martha.) O my beloved wife, oh that
we could but comprise in one word, one single word, all that our hearts now
feel. (Turning eagerly to Mr. Parks.) Sir, I will offer my prayers day and
night to heaven, not for you, no: one of your actions is beyond a thousand of
my prayers; but, that there may appear now and then upon earth, a few men like
you, to preserve wretchedness from despair. (He takes Jenny and Lucy to the
windows.) Don't you see, my children, that hill yonder, from the top of which,
there is a view of the city where our benefactor resides; we go up it, every
Sunday, in our way to church: well then, we never will ascend it, without
looking out for his place of abode, pouring out our blessing upon it, and
praying to heaven for him, his wife, and all that belongs to him, before we go
to pray for ourselves. Will you remember this?


Jenny. O father, do you think that I can ever forget it?


Lucy. We will begin, as soon as we leave home.


Thorowgood. Yes, Sir, every day and every minute; in the fields, or in our
cottage, wheresoever we are, our first thoughts shall be devoted to you: we
shall not be sensible of a moment of our existence, without reflecting that we
enjoy it through your goodness, without being ready to lay it down for you at
all times. You may, when you please, demand our blood; it is yours. Ah, why
can I not at this moment pour every drop of mine into your veins, if it would
but double the years of your life!


Mr. Parks. Be happy, Thorowgood, continue the blessing of your wife, and bring
up your children to think as you do. I will visit you sometimes, to enjoy this
pleasing sight, and I am sure, I shall be the better for it. But now all our
business is over, do you know that I expect a dinner from you?


Thorowgood, (joyfully taking him by the hand.) Better and better still; this
is a new treat.


Martha, (with looks of perplexity and confusion.) But, my dear, what can we
offer the good gentleman?


Thorowgood, (in a free manner) Such as we have, Martha: I know him: a bit of
dry bread will give him more satisfaction, than if he had unexpectedly found a
large joint of roast-beef at our table.


Martha. But still --


Mr. Parks, (with a smile.) Make yourself easy, Martha, (pointing to the basket
which the servants had brought,) you will find in that enough to regale us; but
let us go together, and take a walk in your garden; we all have occasion for a
little fresh air to recruit our spirits. (He goes out, leading Jenny and Lucy
by the hand, while Thorowgood and Martha follow him, lifting up their eyes to
heaven.)


End of the fourth Act.
ACT V.
(A room in Thorowgood's cottage: in the middle of which is seen a large table,
very decently laid with a clean cloth, plates, knives, etc. On one side, is the
basket which Mr. Parks' servants brought: Martha has just opened it.)
SCENE I.
(Martha, Lucy, Jenny.) Martha, (taking out of the basket a large piece of cold
meat, and laying it on the table, whilst the children, standing round it with
pleasure in their looks, seem eagerly to examine every thing, licking their
lips.) What a noble piece of meat! Our landlord, I see, has not been sparing of
his provisions.


Lucy, (to Jenny.) There, sister, look what a huge hump backed-pye! Oh, I dare
say, it is very nice.


Jenny, (to her mother, whilst she is carrying the pie to lay on the table.)
Mother, do you know what is in it?


Martha. No, my dear, the town-folks have many things, that we know nothing of
in the country.


Lucy. Oh, our landlord must be a very worthy good man, to give us back all our
things, buy us cows, and bring us such nice victuals besides: Jenny, we must
hatch our eggs, and carry him the chickens.


Jenny. Oh, I do so long to do it; I wish they were plump and great chickens
now: I could do any thing for him, I love him so.


Lucy. I will go and make him a nosegay of our finest flowers.


Martha. That is right; and you, Jenny, you must help to set things to-rights
in the house. Go and out some slices of bread: do it properly; and when you
have done, bring it in; I want our landlord to see, that you know something of
the management of a house.


Jenny. Yes, mother. (Goes out with Lucy.)


SCENE II.
Martha, (shuts the basket, pushes it into a corner, and approaches the table.)
Let me see; nothing I think is wanting; the napkins and plates -- now I must
set the chairs. (She places chairs round the table.) Now every thing is ready,
he may come as soon as he pleases.


SCENE III.
Mr. Parks, Thorowgood, Martha. Thorowgood. (looking with astonishment at the
table, and clapping his hands.) How is this, Sir! what have you been doing? I
believe that you imagined, you had kings to entertain: what a noble piece of
beef; and again (pointing to the pie) what a glorious treat is here! it looks
very tempting.


Mr. Parks. It is a pie which my wife has sent you.


Martha. Is it possible that madam should think of us?


Thorowgood. Oh, I readily believe it; she treated me in the kindest manner
this morning: I would lay any wager, that next to my wife, she is the best
woman in the world. Odso, Martha, let the month of January but come, and we
shall have our turn. Look at this woman, Sir; I defy you to find her equal at
managing a wheel. (Clapping her on the shoulder.) When winter comes, she shall,
during the long evenings, spin for yourself and your lady, and make you a piece
of cloth the finest you ever saw, I will warrant it.


Martha. What a pleasure shall I have! I will not lose a moment.


Mr. Parks. I am much obliged to you, my friends, but it is unnecessary; Martha
has enough to do to mind her children; and it would be --


Thorowgood. Hold, Sir, not a word more will I hear; we have suffered you long
enough to have your own way; it is but just that we should have our will, for
once, at least. Would you prevent us from being grateful? that would be
depriving us of all the pleasure of our lives, and you are too good to desire
that: come, let us sit down. (He takes a chair, and seats himself.) There is
your place, Sir; come, Martha, take yours also.


Mr. Parks, (sitting down.) Do not you wait for your children? they must sit
down with us. I wish to have the pleasure of dining with the worthiest family
that I know.


Thorowgood. And we shall not be behind-hand with you, Sir; we shall also be
able to say, that we have had at our table the most compassionate and generous
man upon earth, which is preferable to dining with kings, who have not such
sentiments. (To Martha.) Is not Valentine yet returned from the fields?


Martha. No, my dear, nor George.


Thorowgood. And the girls, what are they about?


Martha. You will find presently that they have not been trifling. See, here
comes Jenny.


SCENE IV.
Mr. Parks, Thorowgood, Martha, Jenny. (Jenny is carrying in a wooden dish,
with slices of bread and butter on it.) Thorowgood. Oh, oh, the bread, that is
right; come hither, child; (he takes two pieces of bread, lays one before Mr.
Parks, the other before Martha.) Though our's be houshold-bread, it is,
however, well tasted: you have what is lighter in town, but this is more
strengthening for working people: luckily it is still quite fresh. But how is
this, Martha? you have forgotten something material. (He smiles, while he
presses her hand.) It is not your fault, my dear; on such a day as this, our
hearts are so taken up with joy and pleasure, that we cannot think of every
thing.


Martha, (running her eyes over the table.) Something wanting, you say, what is
it, pray?


Thorowgood. Something to drink, wife; would you entertain Mr. Parks with a
horse-feast? that would be strange indeed.


Martha. What was I thinking of? I sat it to cool.


Thorowgood. Run; make haste: our cider is somewhat rough, Sir; it cuts the
throat, but it is sound.


Martha. What do you mean? the gentleman has brought some wine.


Mr. Parks. Yes, my friend, and I must own that I think my liquor a little
better than yours.


Thorowgood. You have brought wine, too! How, Sir, had you not done enough,
without that? This is too much: what, bring us wine too!


Mr. Parks. Oh, it is not for you, only; I mean to drink a part myself. This
day, is to us all a day of pleasure; and good wine is an excellent associate
with joy and festivity.


Thorowgood. Indeed I had formerly some excellent wine always by me, which I
kept for my father. When I happened to meet with good markets in town, my first
business was, to go and buy half a dozen bottles of the best that I could get,
be the price what it would: I did not drink it myself: I gave it to my wife to
keep for those days when my father came to see us, and then I entertained him
well. Do you remember, Martha, how happy the good old man used to be? My
children, he would say, this wine strengthens and chears me; but your
affection, which makes you deny yourselves comforts for my sake, strengthens
and rejoices my heart still more. He was sometimes so much affected, that the
tears flowed down his cheeks. You cannot conceive how exquisite the wine tasted
to me, whilst I had my father drinking by my side. (Jenny comes in with two
bottles.)


Mr. Parks. I hope you will not find this amiss, neither.


Thorowgood. Ah, Sir, your kindness is sufficient to make it delicious.


SCENE V.
Mr. Parks, Thorowgood, Martha, Jenny and Lucy. Lucy, carrying a huge nosegay
of roses, honeysuckles and jasmine, approaches Mr. Parks, curtsies to him, and
says,) Will you permit me, Sir, to fix this in your button-hole? Mr. Parks. I
am much obliged to you, my dear Lucy, (he kisses her.) but it is as big as
yourself. I would lay a wager that you have left none for your father and
mother. Come, I must divide it; I shall receive nothing for myself alone,
today: there, Martha; there, Thorowgood; here is for you, Jenny; and Lucy,
here is for you, (sharing the flowers.)


Thorowgood. This is like a wedding day, every one his nose-gay.


Jenny. One would take Mr. Parks for the bridegroom; he gives the dinner and
the flowers.


Thorowgood. Well said; my Jenny is in her gay mood.


Mr. Parks. This sprightly remark shall be worth a wedding-gown to her on the
day of her marriage.


Thorowgood. So, Sir, we have nothing to do but to sit with our arms across,
and leave you to do every thing; her wedding-gown, she must earn herself.


Lucy. But, father, suppose I should earn mine first?


Thorowgood. Do you hear the little baggage! Upon my word, it becomes such a
little girl as you to have such notions in your head: but come, come, let us
think of nothing but dinner; let us be merry and gay.


Mr. Parks. Let us wait till your son's return. I will not dine, until the
whole flock be round me.


Martha. What a pity it is, Sir, that you have no children; you seem so fond of
them.


Mr. Parks. Ah, Martha, you make my heart bleed anew! Heaven had blessed me
with a on, but --


Martha. An only son? and is he dead? what a terrible affliction!


Mr. Parks. I know not if he be dead, but he is so to me.


Thorowgood. Perhaps he is in some foreign country, and you do nor hear from
him. (Seeing Mr. Parks drop a tear, he presses his hand.) Do not afflict
yourself, my dear Sir, pray do not; if he be still alive, you will certainly
see him again. What shall you soften the sorrows of the wretched, and yet be
wretched yourself? No, no, heaven is too just: you see how it treats me, for
only having done my duty; and you, who rise so far above it, can it forsake
you? Impossible. Come, come, be cheerful; let us not lose a moment of this
glorious and joyful day.


Mr. Parks, (wiping his eyes.) Yes, my dear Thorowgood, I should reproach
myself, if I embittered thy joys.


Thorowgood. You owe me this attention: it would be spoiling your own work. But
why are my boys so slow in returning, today? (He rises from table, and looks
out at the window.) I will see whether they are coming. Oh, I see George. (He
beckons to him to make haste.)


Martha. What, George, all alone! does not Valentine come? he should know that
it is dinner time. I beg a thousand pardons, Sir, for making you wait.


Mr. Parks. All in good time, Martha; I am not impatient in such pleasing
company: an hour sooner or later will make no difference. The days are long;
and, provided I get home before it is dark, my wife will not be under any
anxiety.


Martha. Here is George, however.


SCENE VI.
Mr. Parks, Thorowgood, Martha, Jenny, Lucy, George. (George takes off his hat,
and bows, on seeing Mr. Parks.) Thorowgood, (running to take him by the hand.)
Come, my son, look upon that good man. Next to heaven and thy parents, it is to
him that thou will owe the greatest obligations, during life. Consider him
attentively: it is our worthy landlord, to whom we were to have given up all
that we possessed upon earth, and who has now given it back to us.


Martha. And who likewise gives to your sisters a fine flock. Every day of your
life, my son, you must bless him in your heart: we shall set you the example as
long as we live; and you shall continue that duty when we shall be no more.
Will you not? Will you promise me to perform this faithfully?


George. How is it possible to neglect it, when the gentleman has been so good
to us? but my father said yesterday, that we should quit the farm. Are we now
to continue in it?


Thorowgood. Yes, for ever, my dear boy, for ever. I hope in God to see my
great-grandchildren born in it.


George, (running in transports to Martha.) Oh! my dear mother, it is for your
sake, that I am most rejoiced: I may now tell it you; this whole night past, I
have done nothing but weeped on your account.


Mr. Parks. And why so, my good boy?


George, (taking Mr. Parks by the hand, and leading him to the window.) Come,
Sir, and I will tell you the reason: do you see, near yonder hedge, an old
apple tree that has scarcely any leaves on it? My mother was saying, this
spring, that she was very sorry that the frost had injured it so much, for she
had never eat so good apples as it bore, in her life, and that the tree was
likely to die; the next morning, before she was up, my brother and I went to
pick out the most flourishing buds we could see, in order to engraft them on
other trees in the orchard, that in case the old tree should perish, my mother
might still have some good apples: had we left the farm, it would have been a
sad thing; somebody else would have come into it, and in time, have eaten of
the fruit, which we had engrafted.


Mr. Parks. Nothing could be easier, than for you to have taken them with you,
and then nobody would have been benefited by your labor.


George. Why should I do so? that would have been no advantage; and though it
were, I know very well, that we ought not to seek an advantage to ourselves,
that would be a prejudice to our fellow creatures: on the contrary, I should
have wished them, to gather good fruit from our trees.


Mr. Parks. But did you not just now say, that it would be a sad thing, if
others, should eat the fruit which you had engrafted?


George. Undoubtedly it would be a sad thing to me, that my mother should be
deprived of it; for though I wish good apples to others, I had much rather my
mother should have them.


Mr. Parks, (taking him by the hand.) Thou art a good boy. (Seeing Martha
impatient to embrace him.) My dear Thorowgood, I am every hour more and more
enamoured of your children: the only contest between you seems to be, who shall
love the other best.


Thorowgood. There is nothing like love and harmony in families. When my father
and mother were living, all my study, night and day, was, how I should please
them best. I would have carried them on my shoulders in their old age. I am
amply rewarded: I see by experience, whatever we do for our parents, is
returned by our children.


Martha, (to George.) But where is Valentine? Why is he not with you?


George. He will not come to dinner.


Thorowgood. But why so?


George. He has taken it into his head to finish his weeding, before night: I
pressed him to come home with me, promising to assist him as much as I could in
the afternoon, but he would not listen to me. I have bread enough left, he
said, showing me the half of his breakfast; I shall dine upon this.


Thorowgood, (with some emotion.) Excellent lad! because I have not been in the
fields today, he wants to do my work. He saw us bending under the pressure of
misfortune, and he would fain support us, by his frugality and industry.
George, go back, pray, and tell him, that we command him to return, and that we
shall not eat any thing till he comes. (Turning to Mr. Parks.) Ah, Sir, did you
but know him, you would love him as much as we do.


Jenny. Father, shall I go along with my sister and George, to fetch him?


Lucy. I will engage, we will soon make him come.


Thorowgood. Go then, but do not loiter by the way.


Lucy. Never fear; we will run all the way.


SCENE VII.
Mr. Parks, Thorowgood, Martha. Mr. Parks. Thorowgood, you have no idea of the
emotion that I feel this day, I see plainly; that children are the choicest
blessings of heaven.


Thorowgood. Yes, when they are like ours; then indeed they are real blessings;
and parents enjoy in them, a treasure inestimable. Oh, Sir, you cannot imagine
how much the calamities of life are lessened, when our children assist us in
supporting them, (clapping Mr. Parks on the shoulder.) Only cheer up your
heart, Sir: in whatever part of the world your son may be, I firmly believe,
that he will make your latter-days the happiest of your life.


Mr. Parks. Ah, were he but still alive, and of the happy disposition of your
children! But why should I flatter myself with any such vain hopes? No, I have
no longer any son to comfort me, in the decline of life. Happy Thorowgood, you
may grow old; you will enjoy the delight, of seeing yourself revive in the five
children, to whom you have given birth.


Thorowgood. Five children did you say, Sir? No; pardon me, only four. (He
reckons them on his fingers.) The little one that is asleep behind the curtain,
Lucy, George, and Jenny; these are all I have.


Mr. Parks. And the boy, who is in the fields.


Thorowgood. He is not my son, though I love him as much, as if he were so, and
I have done for him, all that I could have done for a child of my own; and the
worthy lad is deserving of all my tenderness: he loves us as much as if we had
given him birth, and he works for our support, as if he were the eldest of my
little family.


Mr. Parks. And where is his family?


Thorowgood. That, we are as much strangers to, as you are; we saved his life
when he was an infant, in the cradle: my wife suckled him, and he has always
lived with us. He must not have been of common origin: he had round his neck, a
coral, adorned with gold and jewels; and the linen he had on, was of the finest
kind.


Mr. Parks. You preserved his life, you are ignorant of his family, and he is
not of vulgar race! Ah, my dear Thorowgood, quickly tell me, how he fell into
your hands.


Thorowgood. It is a melancholy story: we then lived in the north of England; I
rented a little farm there, on the banks of a river; it was an excellent
situation, and the land yielded abundantly; no thanks to the care of the former
tenant, though --


Mr. Parks. Pass over these circumstances, pray, and only tell me all that
relates to Valentine; that alone, inflames my curiosity.


Thorowgood. Well, Sir, to come to the point at once: you must know, that one
night we were roused from our sleep, by the water's rushing into our house on
all sides; we had hardly time to get upon the roof, to wait for relief there;
in the morning, a boat came to our assistance: the whole country was under
water; the river was covered with the ruins of houses and furniture, carried
away by the force of the current. I was endeavoring to comfort my wife, who
lamented the loss of our cottage, but still more that of her son, who was
stifled in the water before we awoke; in the mean time, I suddenly perceived a
cradle, tossed about in the flood, which was running rapidly, and threatening
every moment to swallow it up. I could not bear the fight: I threw off my
clothes, and, regardless of danger, I plunged into the river, swimming with all
my might toward the cradle. I was driven back several times, and almost
exhausted with fatigue; but the cries of the child, which I heard as I
approached, inspired me with fresh spirits and vigor: in short, after much
difficulty and danger, I got up to it, and brought it to the bank, a good way
lower down. My wife followed me, creeping, more dead than alive, along the side
of the river. I presented the infant to her, which continued crying, until she
gave it the breast. Poor Martha fancied that she had recovered her lost child.
We then made all possible enquiries to see if we could discover the parents,
but we never could get any information: our affliction at length ceased; we
continued to look upon him as our own son. I have related the whole story to
the boy himself, a hundred time: I concealed it, indeed, from my own children,
to let them enjoy the pleasure of thinking him their brother, and to avoid all
occasion of jealousy. I have had him instructed like the rest. He does his
work, as well, as I can myself. He talks as if he were reading out of a book;
and he can read and write as well as our schoolmaster.


Mr. Parks. And how long, pray, may it be since this happened?


Thorowgood. About fifteen years and a few months, as well as I can remember.
But hold, I can tell you to a minute, for I had a memorial drawn up by the
magistrate of the place, signed by the rector, and attested by the people, who
were witnesses of the event. When I quitted the country, I took care to carry
it with me. Go fetch it, Martha.


Martha. It is here in this little box, with the clothes and coral, which
Valentine then had: we have kept them carefully, and put them by, this morning;
because, if you, Sir, had sold our effects, it would not have been just, that
what belonged to the boy, should have gone with them.


Thorowgood. Fetch them quickly, my dear.


Martha, (running to fetch the parcel, and giving it to Thorowgood.) There, my
dear.


Thorowgood, (opening it.) See, Sir.


Mr. Parks, (examines the coral, then the mark on the linen, and afterward
exclaims in transport.) It is he; it is he himself! Oh! gracious God, have thou
then restored my boy!


Thorowgood, (in profound astonishment.) What say you -- What, our Valentine
your son! Oh! my dear, my worthy Sir! I see your whole frame is agitated. (He
takes his hand, and supports him.) A chair, a chair, wife, quickly; he is ready
to fall.


Martha, (running to and fro.) I know not what I am about; I am quite beside
myself. How surprised will our dear boy be! (At length she fetches a chair;
Thorowgood makes Mr. Parks sit down, still holding his hand.)


Mr. Parks. Oh! day for ever blessed! to find my son, my long lost son again!
What will be the joy, the transports of my wife? It is now we shall begin to
live. Oh! lead me, Thorowgood, lead me to him. For heaven's sake let me see my
boy, and press him to a father's breast.


Thorowgood. No, Sir, no, with your leave. Joy and surprise would kill my poor
Valentine. He will be here presently. Step into this room until I have prepared
him; he will be the better able to meet you, and you will be more composed.


Martha, (looking out at the window.) Here he comes, with his spade on his
shoulder: look how fast he walks.


Mr. Parks, (running to the window.) He comes, he comes; how my heart beats:
let me fly to receive him.


Thorowgood, (stopping him.) No, Sir, that would be of no service to either of
you; and this time, you must let me have my way. (He puts Mr. Parks into the
next room, who follows him reluctantly, his eyes still turned to the window.)


SCENE VIII.
Martha, alone. This event, will, perhaps, make me an object of pity. Valentine
is now become a great man. Who knows if he will have any farther regard for us,
or whether he will not blush to look on us? (shedding some tears.) Oh! if such
a thing were to happen, I should never feel comfort more. I have brought him up
with such care and tenderness! I love him so dearly: he was like one of my own
children.

SCENE IX.
Thorowgood, Martha. Thorowgood, (to Mr. Parks, whom he leaves in the other
room.) Stay, stay here; I will let you know when it is time that you should
appear. (Seeing Martha in tears.) But why thus, my dear woman; why in tears?


Martha. Ah, my dear, it is through joy and sorrow both, that I weep.


Thorowgood. How are you able to reconcile that?


Martha. I am overjoyed that Valentine and his parents have at length found
each other; but he will be lost to us, and this afflicts me. Oh if he should
ever forget us!


Thorowgood. What an abominable notion you have gotten in your head! Forget us,
wife! no more than we can forget him. I see plainly, you know but little of him
yet.


SCENE X.
Thorowgood, Martha, Valentine, George, Jenny, Lucy. Valentine, (with
eagerness.) O my dear father and mother, what transports of joy I feel. (He
lays down his spade, and runs to embrace them.) Jenny and Lucy have been
telling me what the landlord has done for us. Where is the worthy gentleman?
let me kiss his hand, and thank him for all his goodness.


SCENE XI.
Mr. Parks, Thorowgood, Martha, Valentine, George, Jenny, Lucy. Mr. Parks,
(rushing in, and running to clasp Valentine round the neck.) Here, here, my
son! Yes, you are my own son! My own flesh and blood! My love, my life, my all.


Thorowgood. Do not be alarmed, Valentine; it is so; it is true: he is your
father.


Valentine, (in deep amazement, surveys with an astonished eye, Mr. Parks,
Thorowgood, and Martha by turns: he fain would speak, but his tongue refuses
its office.)


Martha. Yes, my dear boy, all has now been cleared up; this gentleman, for
fifteen years, has bewailed your loss, and now we shall weep to lose you.


Valentine, (almost breathless.) I your son! You my father! (He breaks from
those that are round him, throws himself at his father's knees, clasps them,
and imprints a thousand kisses on his hands. Mr. Parks clasps his son round the
neck, and reclines his head upon him: they remain awhile in this posture,
silent and drowned in tears.)


Mr. Parks, (raising his head a little.) All-gracious almighty God! what
returns shall I make thee for thy goodness?


Valentine. I have poured out supplications to heaven a thousand times, that I
might learn to whom I was indebted for life; and I have received it from you,
who have now restored life by your benignant goodness, to those who preserved
mine. What powerful motives are these to increase filial piety, and to
stimulate all my efforts, that I may merit your tenderness by the most zealous
duty and affection.


Mr. Parks. My heart already tells me how worthy thou art of my love. Yes, my
son, my dear, my only son, this heart has been always full of thee. But thy
mother! what transport will she not feel, at sight of thee!


Valentine. Ah, lead me to her, I entreat you. How I long to throw myself at
her feet, and clasp her in my arms!


Mr. Parks. Come then, my son, I reproach myself, for every moment that I delay
her happiness. Let us run; let us fly.


Thorowgood, (stopping them, and holding both by the hand.) Consider what you
are about: will you break the good lady's heart by excess of joy? No, no, it
shall not be so; first, let us drink a glass of wine to strengthen our minds
and bodies, otherwise, we shall all be wrong; I will then go, and break the
matter, distantly, to madam, and prepare her, for the interview with her son.
Ah, Valentine, how happy you will be to know her!


Valentine. I shall see her then today, after having so long dreaded that I
should never have that comfort! It is impossible to express the tenderness that
I already feel for her.


Martha. And, Valentine, will you always love me?


Valentine. Will I love you! I will always call you mother as well as her. If
she brought me into life, did not you cherish it, with the milk of your bosom,
after my second father had preserved it? What must have become of me, but for
you both? Your kindness to me, has been greater, than I shall ever be able to
repay.


Mr. Parks. Say not so, my child. Ah! though it were to cost me half of my
fortune, I am resolved that these worthy people --


Thorowgood, (hastily interrupting him.) I will not suffer you to say another
word on this subject: your friendship, with that of my lady and Valentine, will
be our best reward. I defy you, with all your riches, to give us any thing
equal to that. But why do we longer delay sitting down to table? Come, let
Valentine sit here, beside his father. -- Yes, I understand you; Martha shall
be near you; the good creature loves you so tenderly! (Seeing Martha drying her
eyes with her apron.) Come wife, don't be foolish. Why those tears? we are not
lost to one another; were he a worthless lad, then indeed he would be lost to
us, and we should have reason to lament him.


Valentine, (looking tenderly at Mr. Parks.) You see then, father, have I not
reason to love them? (He lays hold of Martha's hand; who can no longer restrain
her tears, and hides her face, whilst Valentine is caressing her with endearing
fondness.)


Thorowgood. Well, shall we have an end of this? the one is as great a fool as
the other. Come, Martha, to divert you a little, seat the children, and bring
us some glasses. Whilst Martha is engaged, he returns to Mr. Parks.) I told
you, Sir, just now, that virtue never failed of a reward; here you see a proof
of it. You had scarcely performed a good action, before you were instantly
recompensed for it. You gave us property, that was no longer ours, and we have
given you an only son, whom you had considered as lost. (He gets up, and
addressing himself to George, Jenny, and Lucy, who during this whole scene
remain silent, with their eyes continually fixed on Mr. Parks, or Valentine.)
And you, my children, hence learn, never to despair of heaven, of yourselves.
When a flood, fifteen years ago swept away my cottage, Providence gave me at
the same time, the means of requiting one day the man who was destined to be my
benefactor. This day, when the effects of an unfavourable season seemed to
threaten me with hopeless destruction, it has, on the contrary, re-established
my little fortune. God makes use of every thing, to reward those who do their
duty. It is front two of the most dreadful scourges, that we have derived our
good fortune: let this be a lesson to you all your lives! When a man acts
right, though misfortune should persecute him, though the lightning should
flash round his head, and thunder shake every thing about him, so long as he
has no reproach to make to himself, he remains firm as a rock; (striking the
table) or if he falls for a moment, he rises up again with new vigor. -- A
glass of wine, Sir. (He takes up the bottle and fills round.) It is, th^^ we
may all drink your health.


Martha. With the utmost pleasure.


Thorowgood. Valentine, you alone can call him father with your lips; but we
all say the same in our hearts, as well as you. -- To your health, Sir.


Valentine. To your health, Sir.


Mr. Parks, (with tears in his eyes.) I thank you, my dear boy; I thank you
all, my children. How sweet is the name of father! (He drinks.) No wine ever
tasted so exquisitely to me.


Thorowgood, (gayly.) Nor to me, therefore I will replenish to you now,
Valentine. Hear what I say: though you are now become a great person, I will
never suffer you to be called by any other name in my cottage. By calling you
so, we shall be more sensible that you still dwell in our hearts.


Valentine. And wherever I go, if I shall meet you, I shall address you by the
name of father.


Thorowgood, (presses his hand; all drink to the health of Valentine.) But now
I think of it, Sir: we related to you in what manner we found your son, it is
now, your turn, to tell us, how you lost him.


Mr. Parks. Most willingly, my friend, as the recital can no longer distress
me: I had been married a year, when a war broke out, and I received orders to
proceed with my regiment to the West Indies: my wife, notwithstanding all
entreaties, would accompany me in that long and dangerous voyage, after giving
birth to this dear boy, the only one that we have left. I had an uncle, a
dignitary of the church, who lived near Durham; the infant was consigned to a
nurse in his neighborhood, that he might have an eye to him, and give us
information about him. I received no account the three first years of my
absence. Uneasy at so long a silence. I wrote to some friends in London: the
most zealous of them visited the place, whence he acquainted me, that soon
after my departure, a sudden inundation had ravaged the country, that my uncle,
had fallen a victim to his intrepid exertions, on that calamitous occasion:
that the house of the nurse, had been swept away by the flood, and that my son
perished with her; this dreadful news oppressed me with sorrow, and almost
broke my wife's heart. At my return to England, I was restrained from making
any researches, which appeared useless, lest my ill success should revive those
bitter sorrows which time had somewhat alleviated.


Thorowgood. What, for six years that I have been your tenant, and might have
put an end to your grief! I shall never forgive myself for having suffered you
to pine so long. I often told you of my happiness, why did you never mention
your sorrows to me?


Mr. Parks. Could I have thought, that you alone were capable of terminating
them! And besides, I must confess, that I endeavored all in my power to banish
these sad reflections from my mind. I was particularly fearful of reviving them
in the company of my wife. This very morning, when you wanted to talk about
your children, don't you recollect how cautiously I endeavored to turn the
conversation to other subjects?


Valentine, (throwing himself into his father's arms.) O my dear father, with
what boundless affection I shall ever love you, to obliterate the remembrance
of so many tears!


Mr. Parks, (embracing him.) Let us mention them no more, since their source is
at an end.


Thorowgood. Do not flatter yourself with that expectation, Sir; he will make
you shed tears as long as you live, but they will be tears of joy only. You are
far from knowing him yet sufficiently. When you have observed all his excellent
qualities, he will become a thousand times dearer to you. How happy it makes
me, to see you both so worthy of each other!


Mr. Parks. It is to your instructions, my worthy friends, that I am indebted
for his merit: it was under you, that he learned to relish sentiments of honor
and virtue. I have the comfort to find him, exactly such, as I would wish to
have formed him myself. Ah, how shall I be able to reward you as I ought?


Thorowgood. Reward us! Oh, that he has done a long time since; Valentine
himself, has taken care of that. Night and day he has labored all in his power
for our benefit. Do you imagine that without his care and toil, our fields
would have prospered as they have done?


Mr. Parks. You will have a heavy loss, then, in losing his assistance.


Martha. Alas, it is the satisfaction of his society that we shall have most
cause to regret.


Valentine. No, father, it is but right to tell you of what they perhaps would
conceal; left they might again interest your generosity of heart; all my
efforts were due to them, for their care and tenderness to me, in my infant
years, and I had no merit in working for them; but as industrious as they are,
my hands were necessary to them: if they lose my assistance, it is my duty to
make them a compensation; there is but one method: luckily, it depends on the
first favor I have to solicit at your hands, and you will not surely refuse
me, in this joyful and happy moment; will you, father?


Mr. Parks. No, my son; speak out: ask: there is nothing that you have not a
right to obtain.


Valentine. Well then, I entreat you to give them those lands for me, since I
am no longer to assist in cultivating them.


Thorowgood, (passionately.) What say thou, Valentine?


Mr. Parks. What does he say? Ah, what fills my heart with rapture, as it
proves to me that he is full of gratitude. Yes, my son, now am I certain of
soon possessing thy affection, since I see thee so sensible of the tenderness
that those worthy people had for you. Thorowgood, receive this farm from the
hands of our son. I will not rob him of the joy that he feels, in bestowing it
upon you. I will only add, for myself and my wife, the tenement that Humphries
occupies, which is yours, from this moment.


Thorowgood. Forbear, Sir, pray forbear; spare us; do not quite overwhelm us.
How shall we be ever capable of discharging our obligations? you will make us
ungrateful, in spite of ourselves.


Mr. Parks. Do not then begin to be so, by robbing me of the joy, with which I
receive the present which you have made me. Is not a son a thousand times more
valuable than the lands that I leave you? Speak; answer me. Would you give your
own for any such consideration?


Thorowgood. You have always the art to confound and silence me, therefore I
will leave you to act as you please: it would be criminal in us to combat your
kindness. (He turns to Martha.) This morning we were unable, my dear, to pay
half our debts, and now we overflow with riches. Oh! my children, I may now
die, without being anxious about you; and whilst I lose you, Valentine, I see
you provided with a father worthy of you! I am afraid my poor brains will be
turned, with excess of joy.


Mr. Parks. Come, Thorowgood, drink a glass of wine, to settle them.


Thorowgood. An excellent motion, and I will second it. (After filling the
glass round, he gets up, takes off his hat, and twirls it round his head,)
Come, wife, come children. (Seeing George, Lucy and Jenny afraid to take their
glasses.) Come, I say, this is a glass of gratitude; you must all drink it up.
Yes, Martha, notwithstanding all your nods and winks, they must do it.


Martha. But, my dear, I am afraid --


Thorowgood, (interrupting her.) So much the better, my dear; I wish them to
feel it in their heads, that they may always remember this great day. Let them
drink deeply to the health of our benefactor. When they shall hereafter reflect
on all that he has done for them, they will give him back, for every drop of
wine, a thousand tears of gratitude and tenderness. Excuse them, good Sir, they
are not yet of an age to comprehend the boundless extent of your favors; but
let them grow up: as long as they live, you shall be blessed by them and their
children.


Valentine. Yes, I dare answer for them: I know their excellent hearts. Oh! my
dear little sisters, and you my brother, I shall never forget your kindness to
me. (He embraces them.) Father, you will permit me to husband my pocket-money,
and save what I can to give them to settle in the world.


Mr. Parks. Gently, Sir; I pray don't offer to encroach on my privileges. I
just now engaged for Jenny's wedding-clothes.


Valentine. Well then, George and Lucy shall be my care. Don't you consent, my
dear mother? (Martha presses his hand, and answers only with tears.) Father
Thorowgood, will not you give your voice too?


Thorowgood. How could I deny you what seems to give you so much pleasure? yes,
I agree to it, for you, as much as for myself. I stipulate, however, one
condition, which I shall propose to Mr. Parks.


Mr. Parks. Let us hear what it is.


Thorowgood. You have often told me that you and my lady wished for a little
retreat in these parts, to pass the summer in. The neighboring land is to be
sold: you may buy it, and build a lodge in your own mind; by these means, we
shall have you near us for half the year. I would lay my life, that Valentine
would grow melancholy, if he were to be always cooped up in the city.


Mr. Parks. What say you to this, my son?


Valentine. I should be heartily glad of it, I must own; I like dearly the air
of the country.


Mr. Parks, (with a smile.) Be it so then. You see, Thorowgood, I am more ready
to comply with your desire than you were with mine.


Thorowgood. Because there is some difference; but I have not done: the ground
is extensive enough to allow good gardens. Look at me, Sir. You do not yet know
all that I am capable of doing: I was formerly a gardener, and have not yet
forgotten my old trade. I take upon myself, to lay out the garden in such a
manner, that people shall come far and near to view it as a curiosity.


George. I will undertake to dig the canals and trenches, to make the terrace,
and plant the trees of your walk.


Martha. And I and my girls will make the borders, and plant them with flowers.


Jenny. We will take the finest that we have in our own garden.


Lucy, (skipping about.) Oh, when shall we go to work?


Mr. Parks. What do you mean, my friends? I must then till your grounds, whilst
you are at work in my garden.


Thorowgood. I guessed that you would still be so unkind as to oppose me. Hear
me, Sir; we shall be more expeditious in our work; and besides, the best time
for working in your garden, is precisely the season when there is scarcely any
thing to be done in the fields. Though Valentine be now a person of
consequence, still, I hope that he will not refuse his assistance: his hands
are used to the management of the spade; and to work for you, will be the
greatest pleasure to him. Only let us have our own way: every one will work
cheerfully, and the whole will be finished, before you have time to think about
it. But here comes the worthy Humphries. What does he want? (He gets up, runs
and takes him by the hand.)


SCENE XII.
Mr. Parks, Thorowgood, Martha, Humphries, Valentine, George, Jenny, Lucy.
Humphries. I come to know, Thorowgood, whether you are pleased with your cows.


Thorowgood. Ah, my dear neighbor, I am much more so, that we can still be
friends: your return, completes my day's joy. Come and sit down with us. I will
seat you in the company of the best man upon earth.


Humphries, (advancing.) What do I see! our landlord here?


Mr. Parks, (with a smile.) No, Humphries, I am no longer any thing to you but
plain Mr. Parks; there is your present landlord, (pointing to Thorowgood.)


Humphries. What, is it so, Thorowgood?


Thorowgood. Yes, my friend, it is even so: but rich as I am, we shall not be
less familiar than we have been.


Humphries. I am at a loss to comprehend this.


Thorowgood. I believe you; it would puzzle many more. We rarely meet with a
man so generous as our landlord; but the short of the matter is, that I am now,
through his favor, the master of this farm, and of your tenement.


Mr. Parks. It is true; I have just now given him the entire property in it.


Humphries. Well, Thorowgood, I give you joy of your good fortune, with all my
heart: and I am neither envious nor jealous of it. I hope, that you will be as
good a landlord to me, as Mr. Parks has been.


Thorowgood. Ah, my friend, how happy am I, that I now have it in my power, to
acknowledge your honesty to me this morning! Consider what you would have
gained, by following the advice of a bad man; for two paltry cows, which you
might have retained, you would have lost a valuable friend: my little fortune
would have made you mad, with envy and rage. On seeing me the owner of your
tenement, you would have been in continual dread of being turned out by me,
through revenge. That idea would have imbittered your life; instead of that,
you have now, in me, a friend that will stand by you on all occasions. It will
give me the greatest pleasure to serve you. I can begin this moment. I return
you the two cows you sent me, and I hold you exempt from paying any rent for
two years. Humphries, struck with astonishment, cannot utter a word, and stares
at him open-mouthed.


Mr. Parks. I thought nothing could have increased the pleasure I felt in
conferring favors upon you; but the use you now make of them, enhances and
sweetens my joy beyond any thing that ever I experienced before. (He presses
his hand.)


Thorowgood. Ah, Sir, it would ill become me to profit by your favors, and not
benefit likewise by your example. It is you, that have enabled me to oblige my
neighbor; and I thank you for this additional pleasure.


Humphries, (recovering himself, and taking Thorowgood by the hand.) Ah, my
friend, how shall I become worthy of your kindness! nothing pains me so much,
as that I have it not in my power to show my gratitude.


Thorowgood. What do you say, Humphries? God preserve me from doing service to
others with the view of having it returned! To do good is a wonderful thing,
that carries along with it its best-reward.


Humphries. Heaven will bless you in your wife, your children, and all your
undertakings; and for my part, I shall never think of you but with eyes
overflowing with the tenderest tears. I already wish you happier than myself. I
am only jealous of one thing; it is of the honor that Mr. Parks has done you,
in dining with you. Hear me; I have a fat lamb that I was going to sell; it
shall now serve to renew our friendship. Mr. Parks, you Martha, and your
children, must all come and eat part of it tomorrow.


Thorowgood. I like the motion very well. What do you say, Sir?


Mr. Parks. I deny nothing this day.


Thorowgood. Nor I, truly. This has been a wonderful day, Humphries. My wife
and I are obliged to go this moment to town; but tomorrow shall tell you
wonders that will delight and surprise you, and that will show you more
clearly, that the virtue which remains unshaken in adversity, always receives
its reward.


ANTHONY AND HIS DOG.
ANTHONY was the son of a poor labourer, a very honest man, but so extremely
poor, that he scarcely possessed any thing in the world besides the few tools
of husbandry, with which he earned a miserable subsistence. His wife was lately
dead, after a lingering illness, which had been the ruin of his affairs. The
grief that he felt on this occasion, would have broken his heart, had he not
possessed the consolation of having still an only son, whom he loved
exceedingly, as the child was gentle and sincere, and in every respect endowed
with the most amiable and happy disposition.

Young Anthony was passing one day before the door of a gentleman's house, when
a servant perceiving him, called him into the courtyard, and asked him, if he
was disposed to earn sixpence. Yes, with all my heart, answered the poor child:
What must I do for that?

Servant. You must take one of our dogs, put a stone round his neck, and throw
him into the river.


Anthony. Poor thing! why do you want to kill him? Has he bit any body?


Servant. No, that is not the case: you shall see the reason presently.

So saying, he conducted Anthony into the stable, and showed him in a corner,
lying upon a wisp of straw a little dog that seemed just expiring: his hair was
all fallen off, and his whole body seemed to be covered with a horrible mange.


Anthony. Oh, the poor creature! He is in a very bad way indeed.


Servant. And for that reason, my Lady wishes to be rid of him: there are other
dogs in the house, and she is afraid that they may catch his disorder. If you
have a mind to earn your sixpence, you have only to take him and drown him. I
would not touch him myself for five pounds.


Anthony. But why throw him into the river? Perhaps he may be cured.


Servant. There is no likelihood that he will ever recover it. My lady's doctor
has given him over.


Anthony. Well, no matter, still one may try.


Servant. With all my heart: Do what you will with him, provided you rid us of
him.


Anthony. But shall I have the sixpence?


Servant. Ah! you mind the main chance, I see.


Anthony. I do not ask it for myself, but for the poor dog. If I was rich, I
could do without it, but I am far from it: I have not always bread enough for
myself, and he should not want while he is so ill.


Servant. Come, it is a bargain: here is your sixpence.


Anthony saw an old basket, that seemed to be thrown carelessly about the
stable, and asked the servant to let him have it: he laid the dog in it, upon a
wisp of straw, and hastened to his father, who was at work in a field at some
distance.

As he went, he turned his eyes now and then on the basket. The disgusting
appearance of his patient almost made him sick, but at the same time it excited
his pity. Poor little creature, said he, you must be in great pain. Ah! I wish
I may be so lucky, as to make you well: however, take my word for it, whether
you live or die, I shall never throw you into the river.

His first care was to buy a small hot roll, of which he moistened the soft
part, to make it the nicer; but all that the poor dog could do, was to lick it
with the tip of his tongue: however, this refreshment, small as it was, served
to keep up the strength of the sick animal, and the hopes of his little doctor.

Anthony's father was going to scold him, for not having come out sooner: but,
when he learnt what it was that had detained him, instead of being angry with
his son, he was delighted to see, that he had so compassionate a heart, and he
kissed him for his goodnature.

Near the field, where he was at work, there was a pleasant meadow; thither,
Anthony carried the little dog, shuddering with sickness, and laid him at the
foot of a tree, to bask in the sun. His disorder proceeded only from a
superabundance of humors, occasioned by the great quantity of food, with which
he had been usually stuffed. As soon as the sun had revived him a little, he
crawled about the meadow, searching by his smell, for those herbs, which
instinct pointed out to him, as proper for his cure: he had scarcely eaten
them, before they relieved him considerably. Anthony quitted his work for a
moment, to see how his dog went on: he was surprised, not to find him in the
place where he had sat him, and still more rejoiced, to see him upon his legs:
he took care to carry him to the same meadow, for eight or ten days
successively, at the end of which, the poor animal was completely recovered. He
had never had so good an appetite in his life, as then. Anthony's sixpence was
long since spent, in feeding him while sick, but now that he saw him
re-established in perfect health, he did not grudge to share his own bit of
bread with him. He had given him the name of Bonny, and perceived with
satisfaction, that Bonny grew handsomer every day. His eyes, before so dull and
languid, now sparkled with new life: his limbs recovered their usual
nimbleness, and very soon his coat became as sleek, and as soft as velvet, and
withal as white as the snow, when its virgin hue is heightened, by the dazzling
beams of the sun.

The lady, to whom he had originally belonged, did not fail to hear very soon
of his recovery and restored beauty: she sent her footman to offer Anthony two
guineas, if he would let her have him again. Oh! no, replied Anthony, to the
messenger; my lady would sentence him, to be thrown into the river again, if he
should happen to fall sick, but I will never forsake him. What are your two
guineas, in comparison to the pleasure that I have, in seeing him faithful and
affectionate to me? We are too fond of each other ever to part. Anthony was in
the right. He would not have given his dog for an empire, but in return, his
dog would not have quitted him, for the greatest monarch upon earth. He
constantly followed his master, or else frisked before him, performing a
thousand little gambols to amuse him. Whenever Anthony after helping his father
to dig, quitted his spade for a moment, and sat down under the hedge to take a
slight repast, he had only to make a signal, Bonny forgot all his own
pleasures, and ran to him full-speed: there standing upon his hinder legs, and
wagging his tail to express his joy, he took from Anthony's own lips, the half
of each bit of bread that he put into his mouth. Anthony, was often obliged to
put up with a thousand wants, but he was never a whit the sadder on that
account; his little fou^footed-friend continued to give him new amusement every
day, and kept him always in spirits.

Alas! he was soon to experience a great affliction. At the end of autumn, the
little boy sell dangerously ill: his father, laid out what money he had saved
from his earnings, in procuring his son the medicines, that were indispensably
necessary for his disorder. This sorrowful pittance was soon exhausted; he then
recollected the considerable sum which had been offered Anthony, by the lady,
for his dog: two guineas would be to him a treasure, in his present
circumstances. He resolved, therefore, to mention this proposal again to his
son, but scarcely had he heard it, before he cried out, never, never; and his
fever, redoubled the agitation, which so painful an idea excited in his mind.

In the mean time, his disorder grew worse, every day; violent fits of the
cholic came on in addition to his fever, and increased his pains considerably.
The anguish that he suffered, extorted the most piercing cries from him, and
occasioned him to twist his body, and roll himself upon his wretched mat, for
hours successively. On these occasions, his little dog would come, and crouch
close by him, and fix his eyes on him, with the most significant air of
compassion, as if he would have said, Ah! my dear master, I pity thee! Anthony,
on the other hand, would look at him with reciprocal tenderness; and when his
pains allowed him to speak, My dear Bonny, he would say, I must soon leave you:
Alas! I saved your life, and you, poor creature, can give me no relief. Saying
these words, he would shed a flood of tears, which Bonny would come and lick
off from his burning cheeks.

There lived a gentleman in the neighborhood, of the name of Dennison, who was
both very rich and very humane. This gentleman, hearing of the boy's sickness,
and the father's extreme poverty, came himself to visit them, in order, to
assure himself, of the truth of the accounts that he had heard concerning them,
and at the same time, to relieve their distress.

When this excellent gentleman came to the the labourer's cottage, little
Anthony was in a most violent fit of his disorder; his father sat close by him,
overwhelmed with grief. Hunger gave him no concern, though he had for several
days before, lived upon very slight nourishment, barely sufficient to keep him
alive. The sight of his son's sufferings, hindered him from attending to his
own. He endeavored to comfort him, by kind and soothing words, and with his
arm supported the child's drooping head, while the little dog standing over
him, moaned piteously, and strove by a thousand fond tricks, to catch a look
from his master.

Mr. Dennison stood some time at the cottage-door, contemplating this sad
picture. At length he advanced toward them, and was already at the foot of the
bed, before they perceived him, or even, before the dog turned to bark at his
approach; and when Anthony and his father, lifted up their astonished eyes,
they saw his swimming in tears.

My good friends, said Mr. Dennison, I am sorry to see you in this melancholy
situation: I am told, Anthony, that you are not able to furnish the expense of
supporting your son, as he should be, in his illness. That is only within these
two days, answered the father: till then, I have been able to give my child
bread, but now there is nothing left in this poor cabin, that I can part with
for his support, unless, I sell the wretched mattress, that he lies on.

At these words, little Anthony stretched out his trembling hand upon his dog,
and sighed heavily.

Poor child, said Mr. Dennison, do not be uneasy; I will take care of you.
Anthony, continued he, addressing himself to the father, your cabin is damp,
and it will do your son no good to remain here while he is ill. Will you trust
him with me? I will take him home with me, and have him cured. Trust him with
you, Sir? Yes, that I will, and thank you for your generosity. It restores both
of us to life again.

Mr. Dennison repeated his promise, and squeezing the little boy's hand
affectionately, he took his leave, and went home to give orders for Anthony's
reception. In half an hour after, came a stout footman, who, wrapping up little
Anthony in a good warm coverlet, carried him in his arms to Mr. Dennison's
house: his father followed him, with a countenance, in which, hope and joy
seemed faintly endeavoring to disperse the long settled traces of his
melancholy. As to the faithful Bonny, his countenance was fully expressive of
the most unequivocal satisfaction: he jumped along, with his head held up, and
his eyes constantly fixed on his young master, who, from time to time, opened
his covering a little, to have a look at him.

Thanks to the generosity of Mr. Dennison, and the care of an able physician,
little Anthony's illness was soon cured. During the whole time that he was
confined to his bed, his faithful Bonny kept him company: it was in vain that
they would invite him to take a turn in the fields, if it were only for the
sake of the air; he would not quit his master's chamber. All the ceremony that
he would vouchsafe even to Anthony's father, was, to attend him when he was
going away, as far as the first step of the stairs; then, all at once, he
wheeled about, and came scampering into the room, and making a thousand capers
round the boy's bed.

At the end of a fortnight, little Anthony was able to set out for his
father's. Mr. Dennison had given him new clothes from head to foot. Any one
else would have found it difficult to know him in his new finery, but the eyes
of Bonny were not to be deceived, and it may easily be supposed how great was
his joy, when he saw his master walk out to the fields, and could frisk and
gambol about him at his ease, once more.

The first word that old Anthony spoke, when his son came home, was the name of
Mr. Dennison. Oh! my dear child, said he, had it not been for that worthy man,
I should have lost you for ever: you see how happy he has made us: What shall
we do to prove our gratitude to him?

Oh! father, I have already thought of that, but I can talk no more upon the
subject at present; and, so saying, he turned away his face, to hide the tears
that gushed from his eyes.

He went to bed very early, yet sleep was a stranger to his eyelids; he did
nothing but toss about in his bed, and sigh heavily the whole night.

Next morning his father asked him what way he proposed to acquit his
obligation to Mr. Dennison: the poor boy had not power to answer him, but
pointed with his fingers to Bonny.

He immediately put his new clothes on, and went out, but it was visible, from
the inward struggles which this effort of resolution cost him, that his whole
stock of courage was exerted to put it in practice. Bonny accompanied him; he
had never been so playful as that day: he frisked about with such sportive
agility as to attract the looks of every passenger. Many envied little Anthony
the happiness of possessing so handsome a dog; but the more joy and vivacity he
showed, the more was Anthony dejected and melancholy. Ah! said he, you would
not be so full of spirits, if you knew that we were going to part for ever: I
chose rather to bear my illness, than sell you to procure myself medicines; I
would sooner have died: but now, I must give you up to another, unless I choose
to show myself ungrateful. Ah! my poor Bonny, my poor Bonny!

In the midst of these melancholy reflections, he found himself before Mr.
Dennison's house; he crossed the courtyard, and entering, requested admission
to that gentleman, who happened to be in the parlour. While he stood in the
hall, his heart throbbed so violently, that he was indebted to the accidental
delay of a few moments (owing to Mr. Dennison's being otherwise engaged) for
the recovery of his spirits. At length being called for, he took Bonny up in
his arms, and entered the parlour. Worthy Sir, cried he, at the same time
sobbing violently, I owe you my life: I have nothing that I can offer you in
return but my poor dog: here I have brought him, Sir: it is not without regret
that I give him to you; but you would make me still more unhappy by refusing to
accept him.

Mr. Dennison, had a heart such as all men should have, who wish their own
happiness, or that of their neighbors. The ingenuous discourse of the little
boy made him smile; but he was not the less struck with the greatness of the
sacrifice that he saw him prepared to make to his gratitude. He took him
therefore by the hand, and said, No, my dear Anthony, I will not refuse you; I
accept your present with all my heart, and esteem myself fully repaid for every
thing that I have done to serve you: but now that we are both quit, I make you
a present of Bonny; he is yours, in return for the satisfaction that your
gratitude affords me.

How, Sir -- cried the boy, who was unable to proceed.

Yes, my little friend, replied Mr. Dennison: but one thing I request of you,
and that is, not to insist any more in opposition to my desire: assure
yourself, I am better satisfied than you can possibly be, at having it in my
power to make you happy once more.

Anthony, who the minute before had been ready to swoon away through the
violence of his grief, was now, on the contrary, almost overpowered by his
excess of joy: he viewed his benefactor with an air of astonishment; he pressed
by turns, his dear Bonny and Mr. Dennison's hand, which was still in contact
with his. He wept, but his tears were those of joy and tenderness.

Mr. Dennison did not bound his kindness here. A place became vacant among his
domestics; he bestowed it upon old Anthony: as to his son, he had him carefully
educated, and gave him a good trade. Bonny lived happily in the family. Ah!
said Anthony to him, sometimes, when he fondled him, perhaps I owe all my
happiness to thee. He loved him continually more and more, and, when the
inhabitants of the village where he lived would speak, to this day, of two good
friends, the names of Anthony and his dog Bonny, are sure to be the first that
occur on the subject.

THE FIRST TRIAL OF COURAGE.
Mrs. Domville. I LONG much to know which of my children will show the most
courage today, when Mr. Enamel, the dentist, comes.


Gustavus. What, mama, is he to come today?


Mrs. Domville. I expect him.


Felicia. He that drew one of my papa's teeth the other day?


Mrs. Domville. Yes, my dear. He is a very skilful man. I have begged him to
come here this morning to examine your teeth.


Gustavus. My sister's, I suppose; for I hope he will not think of drawing any
teeth from me.


Felicia. Nor from me neither.


Mrs. Domville. Yet I am strongly of opinion, my little friends, that he will
be obliged to take one from each of you. You have a tooth, Felicia, that is
quite loose; and I have observed two of yours, Gustavus, jammed so close, that
one of them, the most forward of the two, must be drawn.


Gustavus. Oh! pray mama do not say so. I have not too many, I assure you.


Mrs. Domville. Mr. Enamel must decide that.


Felicia. But it will hurt me.


Mrs. Domville. Indeed, my dear, I am afraid it will: but you must not be
frightened; the operation is soon over: and even if it were painful, there is
an absolute necessity for performing it.


Felicia. I do not see any necessity, mama, for hurting me. I do not like that.


Mrs. Domville. I believe you, nobody likes it; but when we may gain a very
great advantage by suffering a slight pain that will soon be over, we should
act ridiculously not to submit to it, without hesitation.


Gustavus. Oh! for my part, I shall keep my mouth shut so close, that Mr.
Enamel will be pretty cunning, if he looks into it.


Mrs. Domville. I advise you, master, not to speak quite so confidently. You
will shut your mouth! a very sensible speech truly. Do you wish that I should
look upon you as a coward that cannot bear the slightest pain? I should be
ashamed, were I in your place, that a stranger should entertain such an opinion
of me.


Gustavus. So I should, mama, but --


Mrs. Domville. Hear me one word. Do you think, my dear, that it does not hurt
me to see you in pain! when you were so sick, do not you remember that I lost
all desire of sleep or food, and that I was more unhappy even than yourself?
you may suppose then, when you see me determined on making you submit to a
painful operation, that I have a very forcible reason for it. This is my
reason. I should be sorry, while my children were young, that their teeth
should grow irregularly, and so be obliged to be drawn at a time when they
would never have any others, to succeed them. This is a matter of some concern
to a mother who loves you, but I think it should be still more so to you, since
it touches you more nearly. The matter is no less than, whether you are to
have, all your life, a straggling and irregular set of teeth, or neat and well
ordered. Felicia, do you understand what I have been saying to your brother?


Felicia. Yes, mama; but will it hurt me much?


Mrs. Domville. I cannot tell you exactly how much it will hurt you: this I
know, that it is in your own power to make it much more supportable. Shall I
tell you how?


Felicia. Oh! yes, mama, pray do?


Mrs. Domville. It is, by not making an ineffectual resistance, but submitting
to the operation with a good grace: your brother talked of keeping his mouth
shut, if you should take it into your head to shut yours also, do you think
that Mr. Enamel would not find a way to open it? You may assure yourself
beforehand, that the more you would struggle, the more he would be obliged to
hurt you. If tears and complaints could lessen one's pain, though they are
marks of weakness, yet they would be excuseable; but when they are of no use in
the world, and may even contribute to make the pain worse, I think it is a
great disgrace, and the extreme of folly, to yield to such weaknesses.


Gustavus. Well, mama, how shall we manage?


Mrs. Domville. There is nothing more easy: I only ask you to sit quiet for a
minute, and the whole business will be over: you were by, the other day when
your father had a tooth drawn, did you hear him cry out?


Felicia. That is because my papa is twenty times stronger than we are.


Mrs. Domville. True; but on the other hand, his tooth held twenty times faster
to his jaw than yours do. A large full-grown oak is much more difficult to
root up than a young oak-plant.


Gustavus. What pleasure can this Mr. Enamel take in dismantling people's jaws?


Mrs. Domville. It is not a pleasure to him, it is his profession, and a very
useful profession too, since the intent of it is, to relieve us from very acute
pains.


Gustavus. But since he is paid for drawing people's teeth, the more he draws,
the more money he gains: what if he were to pluck all mine out one after
another?


Mrs. Domville. He would gain more by leaving you even those that are decayed;
for then you would be obliged to have frequent recourse to him, either to clean
them, or to keep them in order: whereas, with a little attention to them every
day, you will perhaps never have occasion that he should touch them again. Look
at mine, see if I have not contrived to preserve them without the help of a
dentist.


Felicia. Had you ever any drawn, when you were as little as I?


Mrs. Domville. Certainly. I had a mother who watched tenderly over every thing
that concerned me. She spoke to me as I speak to you now.


Felicia. Then you remember it: did you cry much?


Mrs. Domville. No, my dear, I can do myself the justice to say, that I did not.


Felicia. And how did you do to keep from crying?


Mrs. Domville. I was sensible that my crying would only serve to give my
mother uneasiness, to make me appear to the dentist a very cowardly little
girl, and to render me contemptible to myself.


Gustavus. Well, mama, I hope I shall not cry.


Mrs. Domville. I am persuaded, if you take up that resolution, you will be
able to persevere in it, by recollecting, that you are to be a man one day or
other.


Felicia. But I, that am only to be a woman?


Mrs. Domville. Women have no less occasion for courage in supporting pain:
nay, perhaps, the weakness of their frame requires to be strengthened with a
greater degree of patience and fortitude. In order to be sure of finding this
fortitude, when the greater evils of life occur, it is necessary to have it put
to the trial on occasions of smaller consequence. I have taken early care to
fortify you against the common accidents of life, such as bruises, or falls, or
strains. It is time to fortify yourself against more acute pains. After all, I
do not think, that on the present occasion you will suffer very much: your
teeth are not firmly enough rooted to require a very violent effort to dislodge
them. They are like a slender stalk of grass, that holds to the earth by very
slight roots, and can easily be drawn up without damaging them. I thought it
best to speak to you, without reserve, of the pain, whatever it may be, that
will attend the operation; that if you find it more severe than you expected,
you may have no right to accuse me of endeavoring to deceive you.


Felicia. Oh, mama, you know I always take your word.


Gustavus. No, mama will not deceive us: I am not afraid now.


Mrs. Domville. It gives me the highest pleasure, that I have inspired you with
confidence, and find you so tractable; for that reason I will not treat you
like those silly children, who are promised cakes or play-things for letting
themselves be eased of an useless tooth: I reserve for you a reward more worthy
of you and me. The most firm and courageous of you two, shall have the most
affectionate kiss.


Gustavus. You shall see, mama, I will deserve two.


Felicia. And you shall see, brother, I will deserve as many as you.


Gustavus. Well, we shall all see presently. Mr. Enamel may come now as soon as
he pleases.


LITTLE GRANDISON.
LETTER I. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
LONDON, APRIL 17.
YOU permit me to write to you, my dear mama. What a consolation is this to my
heart! Alas, I have much occasion for it, separated as I am from you.

Here am I, in London, and in perfect health; nevertheless, I am sad, very sad,
I assure you. You will, perhaps, call me a silly child, when I tell you that I
wept during our whole journey, whilst I thought on the last kiss that you gave
me when we parted. But come, I will no longer trouble you with these
complaints. I know how much you love me, why therefore should I afflict you?

What a fine city this is! and how populous! We have no town in Holland so
large by one-half. I find every thing in this place very agreeable; but I do
not find mama here. Ah, that spoils all.

You might well boast of your friend Mrs. Grandison. She is so good and so
gentle, that one must love her as soon as one sees her. She held forth her arms
to receive me at my arrival, just in the same manner as you do when you are
pleased with me; and then Mr. Grandison! I cannot express to you how amiable he
is. He shall be my model; and then I am sure, when I grow up, I shall be
esteemed by every one. My papa was, doubtless, such another; for you have often
told me how worthy a man he was. Ah, would I possessed such a parent now! how
happy I should be! I would then, like young Grandison, obey him in every thing:
my whole heart should be filled with love for him, though I would not love you
the less. But heaven has not permitted this. However it has left me a mother,
and so good a mother! -- Come then, I am not so much to be pitied; there are
few children so happy. Every day do I thank God for this blessing, and implore
him to preserve you to me: but, adieu, my dear mama; adieu, my little sister. I
enclose for you, in this letter, a thousand kisses, and as many affectionate
remembrances. Think of me sometimes. You are ever in my thoughts. Oh, when
shall I see you again! When shall I embrace you! How long will this year appear
to me! and how swiftly did time fly when we were together!

LETTER II. MRS. DANVERS TO HER SON.
AMSTERDAM, APRIL 28.
YOUR letter, my dear son, has given me the most lively pleasure. The
affliction which you manifest at our separation, proves to me that you have a
heart of sensibility. The child who can bear an absence from his mother without
concern, cannot love her: we must, nevertheless, listen to reason. We cannot
always live together; and to abandon ourselves without resistance to a
fruitless grief, is a weakness, at which we ought to blush; learn therefore
betimes to arm yourself with courage against the various events of life. The
most happy lot is chequered with innumerable troubles, which we must accustom
ourselves to bear from our earliest youth. Whenever you feel your spirits
dejected, because I am not with you, you have only to think of the pleasure
that we shall both have when we meet at the end of the year, and this thought
will afford you consolation: in the mean while we will write to each other as
often as possible. To write, is almost to speak. You see by this, the benefit
of those improvements, which your diligence has acquired. What would have
become of you now, had you neglected your studies! we should have been
separated, without being able to converse with each other.

You perceive Mr. Grandison is an estimable man, and wish to make him your
model! You delight me, my dear child. Such a choice is the beginning of virtue.
Yes, your father was such another man; and I am well assured that you know how
to render yourself worthy the name of his son; and this is the sweetest
consolation I have in my affliction for his loss.

Adieu, my dear William; embrace Mrs. Grandison for me. Give me a faithful
account of all your occupations, and all your pleasures; but always write to me
as if you were speaking: a letter ought to be natural, simple, and unstudied.
Your little sister regrets your absence: she enquires after you a hundred times
in the day; and complains that I am not so good a play-fellow to her as you
were.

LETTER III. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
LONDON, MAY 8.
A THOUSAND and a thousand thanks, my dear mama, for your goodness in writing
to me. I hastened to show your letter to Mrs. Grandison. What an excellent
mother you have, said she, after having read it? Yes, madam, answered I, she is
another Mrs. Grandison; upon which she embraced me. My dear little boy, added
she, since your mother has permitted you to write to her, and enjoins you to
give her an account of every particular which concerns you, you ought to omit
nothing. Tell her of your studies, and of your amusements; and recount to her
your conversations with my sons and my daughter: this will soften the pain of
your absence. But, madam, said I, mama has always strictly forbidden me to
speak of what passes in the family of another; she therefore only meant that I
should speak of myself. Well, well, answered she, I permit you to tell her
every thing that passes in our house. I have not a dearer friend in the world
than your mama. I should myself confide all my secrets with her; and I charge
you to do it for me. Oh, mama, how much pleasure does this permission give me!
How many things shall I have to tell you of my friend Charles! Yes, it is of
him that I wish most to speak. You know how he abounds in understanding, in
wit, in sentiment, in goodness: we are always together. I love him each day
more than the preceding. His brother Edward, who is older by two years, is by
no means so amiable; but the little Emily, their sister, Oh what a charming
young lady!

Mrs. Grandison is just going to write to you, mama: she has asked for my
letter to enclose in here is. I am sorry that I cannot chat longer with you:
methinks I should never be tired of writing to you. I find as much difficulty
in quitting my pen as I have pleasure in taking it up. Adieu, my dear mamma; be
careful of your health. Continue to me your wise lessons, and, perhaps, I shall
become as amiable as my friend Charles.

I tenderly embrace my little sister. I regret also that I have her not here to
play with me; and the more, as I find that she liked me so well for a
play-fellow.

LETTER IV. MRS. DANVERS TO HER SON.
AMSTERDAM, MAY 18.
I CONGRATULATE you, my dear son, on having such a friend as Charles. Some
persons of my acquaintance, who have seen him at his father's house, speak of
him as the most amiable of children. You see, from this, what we gain by good
conduct, and by fulfilling our duty: we are beloved and esteemed by all the
world. Edward, from infancy, has discovered something untractable and savage in
his character; but, my dear boy, take notice of his bad qualities only to avoid
them. Suffer not hatred to have a place in your heart. Edward is young; he may
correct his faults; and until that happy change arrives, he is worthy of the
most tender compassion.

It appears, from Mrs. Grandison's letter, that she has taken an affection for
you; this is an encouragement to you to do your best to merit the kind things
that she says of you. Should she ever have cause to reproach you, you must be
sensible how bitterly my heart would feel it. But no, my child, I know you too
well; you will never cease to be the well-beloved of your mother. Adieu, my
dear son.

LETTER V. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
LONDON, MAY 27.
CHARLES has written to you, my dear mamma; Charles has written to you. You
will find his letter enclosed in mine. What fine writing! how prettily he
expresses himself! But have patience: it shall not be my fault, if I do not
soon do as well. I am only twelve years old, and he is thirteen. This makes the
difference of a whole year, in which time, I hope to improve much. Nothing
would be wanting to complete my felicity, if you were but here, mamma, to see
how happy I am. All our studies are but so many different pleasures. We learn
drawing, dancing, and music; and we walk every day into the country, to acquire
the knowledge of plants. Mr. Bartlet, who is a very learned man, comes to see
us two or three times a-week; and we learn a great deal from his conversation.
I am every day more sensible what a sad thing it is to be ignorant: there is so
great an advantage in cultivating the mind! and we have only to make our
studies an amusement to us. Never fear; I shall not lose my time in this house:
I have too good an example in my friend Charles. An emulation reigns between
us, which does not lessen our friendship; but, on the contrary, we love each
other the better for it. But I must leave off writing, for I am called to
breakfast. Depart, then, my letter, and tell my dear mamma that I love her with
all my heart. Say that I embrace her a thousand and a thousand times. I have
only a little corner of paper left, to tell my little sister how much she
occupies my affection; but, no matter, the largest piece would not suffice for
that.

LETTER VI. CHARLES GRANDISON TO MRS. DANVERS.
LONDON, MAY 27.
WHAT obligations do I owe you, madam, for having sent us your son! You have
given me, by so doing, a friend for life. If you did but know how much he
delights in talking of you, and with what tenderness of affection he speaks! He
talks to me often also of his father. When he described his death to me, we
wept together: how happy, said he to me yesterday, are you, to have still a
father. How much is a poor child to be pitied, who is deprived of his! Alas, it
is to lose his dearest protection and best friend. How does it ever happen,
that there should be children in the world who disobey their parents, and give
them affliction by their vices! For my part, had I ever given my father the
least subject of complaint, I should never more have known a day of happiness.
But you have yet a mother, answered I. Yes, he replied, I have one who
cherishes me as tenderly as I love her. She has redoubled her cares for me
since the death of my father; can I therefore fail to feel for her a double
portion of respect and love? Why, am not I already grown up? I would partake
with her of her labors; I would assist her to support her griefs. So long as I
live, will I convince her, by my tenderness, that I am not unworthy of here is. I
was too much moved, to be able to make any answer: I could only embrace my
friend. Ah, madam, he who honors his parents so truly, must needs be a
faithful friend.

I cannot describe to you how diligent he is in all his studies. Mr. Bartlet is
astonished at the progress that he makes: you must not, however, suppose that
we are always serious. I assure you, we know very well how to amuse ourselves;
and pleasure never appears so agreeable to us, as after business. We run about
in the country, we play at cricket, and at all kinds of games which require
activity and address. Our lessons, our exercises, and our pleasures, have all
their stated hours; and I can assure you, they are well filled up.

I know not what you will think, madam, of the liberty that I have taken in
writing you so long a letter; but I flatter myself you will pardon it, since
the subject of it is so dear to you: I will not, however, encroach too far on
your complaisance. Vouchsafe, I entreat you, to excuse my prattle, in
consideration of my friendship for your son, as well as of the profound respect
with which I have the honor to be, madam,

Your very humble and obedient servant, CHARLES GRANDISON.

LETTER VII. MRS. DANVERS TO HER SON.
AMSTERDAM, JUNE 4.
ENCLOSED in this, I send an answer to the pretty letter which I have received
from your friend Charles. I am delighted with what he has related to me of your
sentiments toward me. Preserve them to me always, my son, and your mother will
be ever happy.

I have some melancholy news to tell you: you know young Vanberg; he is just
thrown into prison. A passion for play has been his destruction. He has almost
brought his parents to ruin. It is not long, since they paid a considerable sum
for him, on his promise that he would play no more: but he returned to it
again, and his losses are enormous. There is no way left for his parents to
extricate him out of his difficulties, but by depriving themselves of bread.
How unfortunate is this young man! You know how amiable he was, but for this
terrible passion to which he has given himself up. Every one pitied him at
first; but now he is despised by all. Oh, my son, place this example before
your eyes, as a preservative against so shocking an evil. Mrs. Grandison has
just written to me, and tells me, that you partake with her children, of those
studies which they are engaged in. With what bounty, has heaven supplied to you
the loss which you might have sustained, by your mother's want of means to give
you those acquirements suited to your birth. Be grateful to your benefactors,
and ever bear in mind the duty that you owe them of profiting by their bounty
which you can fulfill only by your application; lose not therefore one moment:
the past hour will never return to us. What pleasure shall I feel, when I
perceive the mind of my son adorned with useful knowledge! What charms shall I
then find in his conversation! This hope softens the bitterness of our
separation; let it serve also to support your resolution under it. Yes, my son,
I have already told you that heaven has not destined us to live always
together; but nothing will prevent us from loving each other, even should we be
separated by a still greater distance. Adieu, my child; fulfill your duties; but
without neglecting your amusements. It is your happiness only which can make
mine.

LETTER VIII. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
LONDON, JUNE 12.
WE are going into the country tomorrow, mamma. How I shall divert myself
there Charles has just been packing up a number of books to carry with us. Our
crayons are not forgotten. The whole country, as I am told, is one beautiful
landscape: we shall exert ourselves to delineate it on paper. Little Emily
carries her tambour with her, and intends to imitate with her needle, all the
prettiest flowers of the fields. Though she is not yet twelve years old, she is
ingenious to a wonder.

We are all three very glad to go into the country. Edward is the only one who
dislikes it. I pity him. I think it a bad sign, not to love the air of the
fields. I will send you word for word, a conversation which he had just now
with his brother and sister, at which I was present.

Emily. Do you know that our good friend, Mr. Bartlet is to go with us in the
country?


Charles. Yes; and I am very glad of it.


Edward. So am not I, for my part.


Charles. Why so, brother?


Edward. Because he is always finding fault with me.


Charles. Well, but then his reproofs will serve to amend you. For my part, I
think those who have the goodness to tell us of our faults, are our best
friends: I esteem them much above those persons who flatter us.

[Is not Charles in the right, mamma?]


Edward. I was in hopes, at least, that we should be for a while released from
this cursed Latin, but I find it is no such thing; and that we are to go on
every day with our exercises, just the same as in town.


Charles. I hope so, and I see nothing very difficult in it, while Mr. Bartlet
is with us: and besides that, he will instruct us in the knowledge of all the
different plants in the country; What a pleasure there will be --


Edward. A great pleasure, truly, to be groping all day with our noses in the
ground, like so many sheep after grass.


Charles. But, my dear Edward, you have not packed up your portmanteau yet?


Edward. I shall make one of the servants do it.


Emily. The servants are very busy today, brother.


Edward. Well, they must go to bed an hour the later then.


Emily. Oh fie! after they have been working hard all day, you would make them
lose an hour's sleep?


Edward. A great misfortune, to be sure.


Emily. You might spare it them, however, by putting up your things yourself:
it would, I think, be much better to employ your time so, than in teazing your
dog.


Edward. My dog is my own, I hope.


Emily. Yes, but the servants are not.


Edward. I have no occasion for your lessons, miss; pray keep them for yourself.

They were both growing warm, but Charles took each by the hand; Come, my
dears, said he, be friends; disputing between brothers and sisters, is the
greatest of e^^ls. Here, Edward, since you choose to stay here to amuse
yourself, give me your key, and I will pack up your things while the servants
dine.

What a good boy is Charles, said Emily: I love him with all my heart.

O mamma, what a difference there is between these two brothers! and what
amiable qualities are sweetness and complaisance! But adieu, I must leave off.
I will not fail to write to you as soon as we are got into the country. Why are
not you and my little sister of the party?


LETTER IX. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
JUNE 15.
HERE we are, my dear mamma. What a pretty country house! charming walks all
around us. The park is very extensive; and from my windows I see a landscape,
the extremities of which, are too distant for the eye to take in distinctly.
The gardens are laid out with a neatness which charms you at first sight.
Charles has one to himself, in which he is at liberty to sow and plant whatever
he pleases. He ran to it as soon as we arrived. And do you know what he has
done, mamma? It is impossible for any one to be more noble or generous. He has
given half a guinea to the gardener who took care of his garden during his
absence. It was not necessary, to be sure, for him to make this present, as his
father pays him handsomely: but the man has six small children. He is poor, and
Charles is beneficent; I think therefore he did right: but Edward, it seems,
thinks otherwise. I must relate to you their discourse on the subject. Edward
was by me: he saw the half-guinea in the gardener's hand. He ran up to his
brother.

Edward. Are you mad, Charles, to give so much money to this man? Does not my
father pay him for his labor?


Charles. True, brother; but see what care he has taken with my garden. He
deserves a little recompense: besides, the man is not rich, and he has a large
family. We surely ought to take pity on the distressed.


Edward. Very true; but there is at least no occasion to give him more than his
due.


Charles. Ah, brother, if our papa were to give us no more than our due, that
would be but a very little.


Edward. And will you venture to tell him what you have done?


Charles. Without doubt: I hope never to do any thing which I shall be afraid
to tell him.


Edward. You will have a good chiding, I promise you.


Charles. And I promise you, he will not chide me at all. I have often seen him
give money to the same gardener, when he has been pleased with his work.


Edward. My papa gives his own money, but what you give, does not belong to you.


Charles. Pardon me, brother; it was the fruits of my economy which I was
permitted to dispose of as I pleased; and I am sure I could not make a better
use of it.


Edward. As if it would not be better to have purchased some squibs and
crackers and have made a little fire-work to entertain mamma on our arrival.


Charles. The fireworks would have lasted but a moment; and after all, what
are they? a sound, and a blaze: besides, they often cause accidents. No, no, my
money will be laid out more usefully. The gardener will buy his children some
shoes with it; and the poor little ones will not be forced to run barefooted
among the stones and briars.


Edward, (with a sneer.) And what is it to us whether these children have shoes
or not? I do not see that it concerns us.


Charles. But it concerns them, brother, and that is sufficient. Heaven forbid
that we should only think of our own wants, and take no care about those of
others. Ah, dear brother, let us always pity the poor. They are our
fellow creatures.

Edward could not say a word in answer to this; but quitting us abruptly, began
tormenting a cat that he saw asleep on the grass, a little way from us.

What do you say to all this, mamma? I am ashamed for Edward, and I love
Charles more than ever. Mrs. Grandison, I am sure, will receive more pleasure
from the generosity of her son, than she could have had from all the fireworks
in the world. Oh, if ever I should be rich, I will take care not to shut up my
purse from the poor. It must be so great a pleasure to assist a man when he
wants it. Adieu, my dear mamma. I am called to take a walk. How impatiently do
I long for your letters: but when shall I have one from my little sister?


LETTER X. MRS. DANVERS TO HER SON.
AMSTERDAM, JUNE 20.
I AM charmed with your last letter, my dear son. You have good reason indeed
to prefer Charles' way of thinking to that of Edward. What pleasure must his
good heart have felt in the joy of the honest gardener! a pleasure which will
be renewed as often as he sees the shoes on the feet of the poor children. The
best way to merit riches is, to employ them for the happiness of others. Mrs.
Grandison has just sent me one of your drawings. I am charmed to see you so
much improved by the instructions that you have had. If fortune should prove
unfavourable to you, painting is an honorable profession, not beneath the son
of a colonel. It will, at least, be an amusing occupation, which, by preserving
you from idleness, will, at the same time, preserve you from those vices that
idleness leads to. A love for the fine arts is the best guard in youth against
the passions. The wish which you have so often expressed to receive some
letters from your sister, has put her upon many reflections. O mamma, said she
to me last night, what a pretty thing it is to know how to write! When you read
my brother's letters to me, it is just as if he were with us, as if he were
talking to us. Pray, dear mamma, let me soon have a writing-master, that I may
write to my brother; then it will be as if I were with him, as if I talked to
him. She pressed me so much, that I promised her a master next month. She threw
her arms round my neck; Ah, mamma, how learned I shall be! Yes, I will deserve
this favor. But what shall I do in return for it? Learn well, my child, said
I. But, mamma, to learn well is not for your benefit, but for mine. Then it is
for mine also, answered I; is not the happiness of my children the same as my
own? Ah, mamma, replied she, but when shall I do something which shall be for
you alone? Is not this pretty from a child of six years old? I took her in my
arms, and pressed her to my heart. I embrace you, my son, with the same
tenderness.

LETTER XI. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
JUNE 25.
AH! mamma, a great misfortune has happened to us. Edward has had the
misfortune to fall into the water. He is very ill, and so is Mrs. Grandison
also. We are all full of grief; but you will see that Edward suffers from his
own fault: he is very happy in having escaped. Had it not been for timely help,
he must certainly have been drowned. Yesterday, after dinner, not having
finished his morning task, Mr. Grandison ordered him to stay in his chamber to
finish it: but behold his disobedience! he came down, notwithstanding these
orders, and came after us: but I will relate the affair exactly to you as it
happened.

We had been gone out about a quarter of an hour, intending to regale ourselves
with some warm milk at a little farm-house not far off. We soon heard Edward,
who ran after us, out of breath; we stopped to wait for him, concluding that he
had obtained permission to be of our party: he joined us; and after having
walked a few paces together, we met a little boy wheeling a barrow, in which
there was a cask of vinegar. He was civilly turning out of our way, but by so
doing, he overturned the wheelbarrow, and the cask of vinegar fell to the
ground. The poor child was in sad perplexity, because he was not strong enough
to put it back into the barrow, and he saw no grown person at hand to assist
him. Charles, the good Charles, immediately ran up to him: Come William, come
Edward, cried he, we must help this good little boy; we may surely find
strength between us four to replace his cask. Oh yes, truly, said Edward, it
would become us mightily to employ ourselves in such an office. And why not?
said Charles: methinks it is never unbecoming to do a good action: but,
however, you may stand by if you please; you shall see that we three will do
it. We immediately went to work, and in an instant the barrow was set upright,
and the cask placed upon it, though Edward did nothing all the while, but sing,
and laugh at us. The little boy was overjoyed, and after thanking us, went his
way. Why Charles, said Edward, this is wonderful; it gives me pleasure to see
that you would make an excellent vinegar-merchant. Well brother, said Charles,
if I should be one, and should ever have the misfortune to let fall my cask, I
shall be very glad to find any one good-natured enough to assist me. Well, you
may laugh, said Edward, but what do you think papa would say, if he knew what
you had done? He would love his son the better for it, said Emily. Papa is
good-natured, and had he been in Charles' place, he would have done the same.
Fie, said Edward, I blush for you both; it is very pretty indeed for persons of
our condition to meddle with the affairs of common people! Oh, said Charles, if
they want us sometimes, we have much more occasion for them. We have assisted
this little boy, but who knows but his assistance may be one day necessary to
us?

You will see presently, mamma, that Charles was in the right.

We were scarcely got to the farm-house, when Edward proposed to us to go into
a little boat, which was there floating in a small pond. Emily and Charles
refused, saying, that their papa has expressly forbidden them. Pshaw, he will
know nothing of it, said Edward. But brother, answered Charles, we ought never
to do any thing which our papa should not know. Very well, said Edward, then I
will go and take a run in the meadow, for it is no diversion to me to be here.
We thought that this was his design: but would you believe it, mamma, instead
of going, as he had said, into the meadow, he made a turn round the house, and
then went into the boat: about half an hour after this, we heard one cry out
for help: we ran along with the farmer and his son; but what was our
consternation, when we saw the boat overturned, and the unfortunate Edward
hidden under the water. A little boy was dragging him by the skirt of his coat,
but had not strength to get him out of the water: it was he who cried for help.
The farmer immediately plunged into the water, and got them both out; but
Edward was without sense or motion. Emily cried most pitifully. As for my part,
I was so struck, that I could not speak. Charles was the only one who preserved
presence of mind: he immediately gave orders to have his brother carried into
the farmer's house, in order to recover him from his swoon. He then begged his
sister to compose herself. I will go back to my papa, in order to prevent his
being told abruptly of this unhappy accident. In the mean while take care of my
brother.

Do not you admire these wise and tender precautions, mamma?

But what were the agitations of his parents when they heard his recital! Mrs.
Grandison fainted: Mr. Grandison, after having given her the necessary
assistance, ran to his son. They had just carried him into the house: every one
thought him dead. In spite of all his firmness, Mr. Grandison could not forbear
shedding tears. Oh! how well does a good father love his children? he forgets
all their faults, when he sees them in danger. After much pains, Edward was at
length brought to himself: but he is still in bed in a high fever. Thus has he
been punished for his disobedience; he has been at the point of losing his own
life, and of being the death of his parents. This will serve as a lesson to me,
to be always docile and submissive. Adieu, my dear mamma, you shall soon hear
from me again. How many things have I to say to my little sister, on the
affecting scene she had with you, but I will reserve them for our
correspondence.

LETTER XII. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
JULY 2.
MRS. Grandison is much better: Edward is nearly recovered, and I hope that
this adventure will render him more wise in future. I told you in my last
letter, of a little boy who saved Edward, by holding the skirt of his coat, but
I forgot to tell you, that it was the little vinegar-carrier, whom we had just
assisted in replacing his cask on the barrow. Charles said very right, when he
observed, that we know not what occasion we may have for the assistance of
others. It must have been all over with Edward, if we had not chanced to assist
this little boy; for had we left him in the road with his wheelbarrow
overturned, he would not have been in the way to have seen the accident which
happened afterward to Edward, nor to have thrown himself into the water to
support him, whilst he called out for assistance. But I must relate to you a
conversation which we had on the subject, yesterday, after dinner, whilst we
were with Mr. Grandison in the sick-chamber of Edward.

You are very good, said Edward, to come and bear me company.

Charles. Would not you do the same for us, brother, if we were ill?


Edward. But perhaps William would rather go and take a walk.


William. No, I assure you, Edward. It is pleasure enough for me to see that
you get better.


Emily. Especially when we think how near we were to lose you.


Edward. That is very true, had it not been for that brave little boy, it would
have been all over with me.


Mr. Grandison. I am very glad to hear you make this reflection, my dear: you
now see, as Charles observed to you, that we cannot foresee how soon we may
have occasion for the very person who seems to stand most in need of us.


Edward. You are right, papa, and I feel much regret in not having assisted
this little boy, who was afterward to do me so great a piece of service.


Mr. Grandison. I am well satisfied, my child, that you are convinced you were
wrong: you have only now to bear in mind your deliverer, and it may one day be
your turn to render him a benefit. Till that time arrives, you may in some sort
acquit yourself toward him, by assisting all those whom you see in distress.
You may also draw this very useful lesson from your misfortune, never to
despise those who are beneath us in rank. What would a young gentleman have
done for you, had he been in the place of our little vinegar-carrier? He would,
no doubt, have contented himself with calling out for help, without giving you
any himself; and for fear of wetting his foot in the pond, he would have
suffered you to perish before his eyes. Our little boy, on the contrary, more
courageous and more compassionate, boldly threw himself into the water after
you, at the hazard of his own life. You had a few moments before, refused him a
little service, which would have cost you but a slight effort; and
notwithstanding your unkindness to him, he was not afraid to risk his own life
to save yours. You have never yet, and perhaps never may know another action
which equals this. Tender parents, a brother, a sister, a friend, all owe to
this poor boy a beloved object which they were on the point of losing: society
owes to him one of its children, who may one day be of use to it. Let us take
care then not to despise our fellow creatures, in whatever rank fortune may
have placed them, since little people may sometimes be of greater use to us
than great ones.

My eyes were filled with tears, my dear mamma, during this discourse of Mr.
Grandison: I felt all he said, at the bottom of my heart. Oh! yes, I have often
had occasion to observe, that the lower class of people are by much the most
helpful when any accident makes their assistance needful: and those cannot be
bad, who are thus disposed to succor their brethren.

Adieu, my dear mamma, we are to dine tomorrow with Mr. Grandison's sister: it
is several miles from hence. I am obliged to leave off. We must go to bed early
tonight, in order to be up betimes in the morning. Edward cannot go with us,
for which he is so sorry, that I really pity him: here again is another
punishment for his fault. I will give you an account of our visit. Write to me,
pray, my dear mamma; at least till my little sister is able to be your
secretary.


LETTER XIII. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
JULY 5.
WE have had a great deal of pleasure, my dear mamma, at lord and lady
Campley's. I wish you could have seen how well my friend Charles behaved in the
midst of a numerous company. Another young boy, about his age, was there also:
what a difference between Charles and him! the latter stiff and affected,
perpetually bowing and admiring his clothes, at the same time so aukwardly
bashful, that he could not look any one in the face. Charles, on the contrary,
has a noble and modest assurance, together with the greatest ease and civility.
He listens to others with attention, and speaks but little; but what he says is
full of grace and justness, and every one hears him with pleasure. He
distinguishes, to a nicety, what is due to every one in company. Respectful
toward his superiors either in rank or age, polite to his equals, and affable
to his inferiors. He pays the most delicate attention to all, without appearing
ceremonious. I will give you an instance of this. We went to take a walk in the
garden, a young lady of the company had forgotten her hat; she soon found the
sun very troublesome. Charles quickly observed this, and before she could
return back to the house for her hat, she perceived Charles bringing it to her:
he asked her leave to put it on her head himself, which he did with all
imaginable politeness: yes, I assure you, he is like a grown man, in company.
After dinner he played a very difficult piece on the harpsichord, and received
the applauses of all. Oh! if I were but as amiable as he is, how happy should I
be! were it only that I should give you more pleasure, mamma. The two daughters
of lady Campley are very well brought up. The eldest, whose name is Charlotte,
sings admirably: Emily loves her tenderly; they have engaged to write to each
other.

But I must not forget to tell you of what happened to us on our return. Mr.
and Mrs. Grandison, with Emily and a lady who accompanied them, went in the
first carriage: Mr. Bartlet, Charles, and I, in the second: we had scarcely
gone two miles, before we saw a poor old man at the foot of a tree. Charles
made the coachman stop, and turning to Mr. Bartlet, said, look, I pray you,
Sir, at this old man: he appears to be blind, and there is no one near him:
What will become of the poor wretch? Will you permit me to go and ask him a few
questions? With all my heart, my dear, answered the worthy Mr. Bartlet. Charles
immediately alighted from the carriage, and ran to the poor man. Who are you,
friend, said he; and how came you to be alone in this solitary place? -- Alas!
answered the blind man, I live above two miles from hence: I went out this
morning to ask charity in a village somewhere hereabouts, I don't know on which
side: and my guide, a very naughty boy, refused to lead me home again, because
I had not gathered money enough in the day to pay him as I used. I have no
other hope but in Heaven, who perhaps, will send some one to my relief. But,
said Charles, it is just sunset, and it will soon be night, and what will
become of you here? I must perish then in misery, answered the blind man: No,
replied Charles, I will be that person whom heaven has sent to your relief. Oh!
Mr. Bartlet, said he, coming back to us, do not deny me the delight of saving a
miserable poor old blind man, who is on the point of perishing if we do not
take pity on him. Night approaches; What will become of this poor creature if
nobody assists him? He lives but two miles off, what hinders our taking him in
our carriage? Yes, Charles, said Mr. Bartlet, follow the dictates of your
generous heart. Charles had no sooner received this answer, than he took the
old man by the hand, and put him into the coach. Any other besides my friend
might perhaps have felt some false shame in riding by the side of a poor man in
tattered clothes, but he, on the contrary, seemed to think himself honored by
it. We had no occasion to go far out of our road to put this poor man into his
cottage. I saw Charles slip some money into his hand as he went out of the
carriage, and we parted after receiving from him a thousand blessings. On our
return home, every body bestowed praises on this act of humanity. But, said
Emily, this man, with his long beard and his rags, must have an odd figure in a
chariot. Ah! sister, said Charles, I had so much pleasure in giving relief to a
distressed creature, that I did not think about his accoutrement. Mr. Grandison
could not refrain his tears: he held out his arms to his son, who threw himself
into them; whilst he tenderly pressed him to his heart. Oh! mamma, my eyes were
filled during this affecting scene. This chariot, will ever appear to me like a
triumphal car to my friend.

LETTER XIV. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
JULY 12.
I THANK you, my dear mamma, for your kind letter: it is a long time since you
have written to me; I feared that you were displeased with me. Do you know what
I do? I always carry the last letter that I receive from you in my bosom, that
I may have it at hand to read over again the good lessons which you always give
me, and I seem to myself the better every time I read it.

Yesterday was Mrs. Grandison's birthday; Charles rose very early; he was much
longer at his devotions that day than usual; he was praying, no doubt, for his
dear mamma, as I do for you on your birthday. He appeared to us dressed in a
new suit; you would have been charmed with his fine air: but before I proceed,
I must go back a little in my narrative.

It is near a month since Edward and Charles had each of them a new
summer-suit, which they had chosen themselves. Edward put on his the first day,
but Charles continued to wear his old one, which was still however very neat.
His father asked him the reason of this; he answered, that he reserved his best
dress for a visit of ceremony. Do not you perceive, mamma, that this visit of
ceremony is that which he is to pay his mother this morning. How amiable is
Charles! and what a fine turn of thought there is in every thing he does. Emily
had already knocked at our door, and was waiting for us impatiently. We went
down together, and found Mr. and Mrs. Grandison at breakfast in the saloon.
Charles was the first who congratulated his mother on her birthday: he knelt
before her, and respectfully kissed her hand. Oh! if I could but recollect all
that he said! but I was too much moved to remember the words. Emily followed,
and wished her mother joy in the most pleasing and graceful terms. Mrs.
Grandison pressed her two children to her bosom, kissing them with tenderness.
Their father then embraced them, whilst I made my compliments in the best
manner I could: they were at least sincere, for I truly love my worthy
benefactors. Edward came in just after: I know he loves his mamma: Who, indeed,
does not love her? but yet his manners do not please me like those of Charles.
The one does every thing in a more agreeable way than the other. Mrs. Grandison
made every one of us a present. Emily received a pretty pair of bracelets,
Charles and Edward had each a watch. Would you believe it, since yesterday
only, Edward's is already out of order! as for me, my dear mamma, I have a fine
microscope: this is of more value to me than all the toys in the world. Oh! the
good Mr. Grandison! how have I merited this gift?

In the evening we had a large company from all the neighboring houses:
Charles did the honors of the table like a grown man. He carved the meat, he
filled the glasses, he served the ladies; in a word, he acquitted himself of
this employment to admiration. Here is a very long letter, mamma, but I am
talking of my friend, and to you: no wonder then, that I know not when to
conclude; and I cannot do it now, without sending a tender embrace to my
sister, which she shall give back to you.

LETTER XV. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
JULY 15.
EVERY day here brings new pleasures with it, my dear mamma. Your son is now
become a gardener. Will you lend me your assistance, said my friend to me the
other day? I want to turn up afresh the ground in my garden: the flower-season
is passed, and I have a mind to sow some sallad to regale my mamma during the
remainder of the summer. Will I? said I, yes, certainly; you always oblige me
when you give me an opportunity of doing any thing for you. We dressed
ourselves in light waistcoats, and each being equipped with a spade, we cleared
the garden that very evening. We gathered up with care all the roots, in order
to put them under ground before we went away. Yesterday we rose at five in the
morning: we do not allow ourselves to sleep late, because we cannot transplant
any thing during the heat of the day. This morning we returned early to our
work, and had the pleasure to finish it before breakfast. We only wait now to
see our roots and our seeds spring up, and we shall employ this interval in
extirpating the weeds. What pleasure we shall have in seeing our plants grow
up! Hitherto I have, like other children, seen the productions of nature
without paying any attention to them: But Charles has taught me to make
reflections on all that I see. I will give you an example of this, in a
conversation which we held yesterday. I do not know whether I ever told you
that Charles had a pretty aviary filled with all sorts of birds, which he takes
care of himself. We had just finished our gardening, and were taking a walk
with Emily; stop a moment, said Charles, I must leave you, I have not yet
looked after my birds today.

Emily. We will go with him, shall we, William?


William. With all my heart, Emily.


Charles. You are very good to come and visit my little prisoners.


William. Oh! the pretty creatures! how pleased they seem to be at seeing you.


Charles. Because they are used to eat out of my hand.


William. One would think they knew you.


Charles. I flatter myself that I am a littl known by them: I observe, however,
that when I have my hat on, they fly from me as if I were a stranger: the
instinct of my dog is more certain; I believe he would know me under any
disguise whatsoever.


Emily. I wish Edward would learn of you, to be more careful: Did not he suffer
his linne^ to die of hunger the other day? Oh! if ever should have a bird, I
will take care not to forgo^ it.


Charles. You are in the right; we ought certainly to think of these poor
little animals, since they are taken out of that state in which they might
provide for their own wants.


Emily. But would it not be better to let them fly away than to keep them
prisoners here? We only confine those who have done wrong to others, and
surely, these little birds have hurt no one.


Charles. True, they have not; but they are not unhappy in their cages. Had
they indeed ever enjoyed their liberty, I should have taken care not to deprive
them of it: but they were born in their prison; and I would lay a wager, if we
were to open it, they would be afraid to fly out.


Emily. Nevertheless, they see other birds fly about at liberty in the air.
What should we think if we were shut up thus?


Charles. Why, we should think that it is very agreeable to be at liberty, and
a very sad thing to be a prisoner. But these birds have no idea of this
difference; provided you give them sufficient to eat and drink they are
content. They enjoy what they have, without thinking of what they have not.


Emily. I am very glad to be made easy on this head. My aunt Campley has
promised me a Canary-bird, and I intended, as soon as I received it, to let it
fly away; but you may come now, my pretty bird; I will take good care of you;
you shall have plenty of seeds in your cage, in spite of the winter, when other
birds can scarcely find any under the snow.


You see, mamma, what a good girl Emily is. I dare say, my little sister will
not think this letter too long. I give it as a model for her to imitate.

LETTER XVI. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
JULY 18.
CHARLES, Edward and I, dined yesterday at Mr. Friendly's. He has a son about
our age, with whom we were very happy. You shall partake, my dear mamma, of a
conversation which we had on this subject at our return. Emily came to meet us,
and asked, with a pleasant air, if we had spent our day agreeably.

Yes, my dear sister, answered Charles, but it would have been more so, had you
been of our party.

Emily. You are very good, brother; but, Edward, you don't seem very well
pleased with your visit.


Edward. True enough; I will stay at home another time. Young Friendly does not
suit me at all.


Charles. How so, dear Edward? when he is so gentle and so polite!


Edward. He appears to me more like a man of forty, than a boy of fourteen.


Charles. This is the very thing that I like in him. Do not you think it
surprising, to have acquired so much wisdom and knowledge at his age?


Edward. What business had he, to make a parade to us of his knowledge in
natural philosophy) What would you say, if I were to talk to a young lady about
the beauties of the Latin tongue? would it not be very unpolite on my part?


Charles. Doubtless, because you know, she is not brought up to understand that
language. But young Friendly could not but suppose that we were as well
instructed as himself, for I believe him too modest to wish to humble us; and
he only meant to entertain us for a moment with his electrical experiments. I
own they gave me the more pleasure, because it appeared to me, that this kind
of knowledge was not above the reach of our capacity; and it has inspired me
with fresh ardour, to make myself acquainted with all those sciences which have
the study of nature for their object.


Edward. But what say you to seeing a young man of fashion with a turner's
lathe?


Charles. Why, it is much to my liking; and I shall beg of my papa to give me
one.


Emily. Oh do, pray Charles; you will turn such pretty things in ivory.


Edward. Truly, you make me laugh now. Charles Grandison become a turner! an
excellent conceit this. What a good trade it will be if ever you become poor.


Charles. This is no joke, brother; there have been people much above us in
condition, who have fallen into poverty. Though, I hope never to have occasion,
for the art of turning to gain a livelihood, it is, nevertheless, an amusing
occupation, and gives handiness and ingenuity. I shall take it up sometimes by
way of relaxation, when I am tired with study.


Oh, my dear mamma, if you were but rich enough to give me a turning lathe: but
do not let this disturb you; I shall have the use of my friend Charles'. Young
Friendly turned before us an ivory box, which he gave to me. I send it to my
little sister till I can make her one myself.

LETTER XVII. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
JULY 22.
MR. and Mrs. Grandison are gone to spend a few days at a friend's house; and
Mr. Bartlet is just set off for London: we remain, therefore, my dear mamma, by
ourselves, with only an old waiting woman, and a small number of the domestics.
Emily manages every thing in the absence of her mother: yes, indeed, she gives
orders to all, and with as much discretion as if she were twenty years of age.
Is not this very pretty in so young a lady? She is not yet twelve years old,
and the servants respect her already as if she were their mistress. Do you know
why? it is, because she always treats them with kindness, without descending to
familiarity. She follows in this the example of her brother Charles. You cannot
imagine how much he is beloved and honored by all the people in the house.
Edward, on the contrary, is always at play with them, and yet they cannot bear
him. It is true, he is continually playing them malicious tricks, and
frequently treats them with insupportable haughtiness. Oh, that he had but gone
with his papa and mamma: now that they are no longer at hand to check him,
there is no keeping him in order. Charles, Emily, and I, follow our agreeable
studies in the same manner as if Mr. and Mrs. Grandison were here: but Edward
takes advantage of their absence to spend the day in trifling, and running
about the fields. Nay, he even tries to divert us from our studies, as if he
thought our application a reproach to idleness. We were all yesterday morning
in one corner of the room busy at our drawing. Edward amused himself with a fly
at the end of a thread; and under pretense of following it, came up to us, and
jogged our chairs, in order to hinder our business. Emily, carried away by her
vivacity, was going to rebuke him smartly, but Charles prevented her; and
addressing himself with gentleness to his brother, said, My dear Edward, if you
wish to play, do so; but why must you interrupt us?

Edward. Don't you see I am only following the fly?


Emily. That is very likely, indeed.


Charles. Tell me now, without putting yourself in a fret, what pleasure can a
boy of your age find in such an amusement? it is tormenting a poor animal
without any necessity.


Edward. Well, well, I Will let him go, provided you will take a walk with me in
the garden.


Charles. That is as much as to say, if I refuse you, you will continue to
torment the poor fly; and yet it will not be the fault of the poor insect if I
should.


Edward. This is always the way: you never like to do what I desire you.


Charles. Hark ye, Edward; it is in my opinion much better to do what papa
desires; and he wishes me to employ this hour in work.


Edward. As if he were here to oblige us to it now?


Emily. Are we to do nothing, but by force?


Edward. You are both of you always against me.


Charles. No, brother, we are not; and though Emily is very right in what she
says, yet, to show you that I do not always refuse you, here I am ready to
follow you. I will finish my drawing another time. Let us go into the garden.
It is always a pleasure to me to oblige you.

They were hardly got to the end of one of the walks, before a heavy shower
fell, which obliged them to come in again, to the great regret of Edward.
Charles, in order to console him, proposed that we should amuse ourselves in
reading a little ancient history. I want none of your books, replied Edward,
surlily: I am to be an officer: I have no occasion to be a learned man.


Charles. Well, and do you think that the knowledge of history will be useless
to you?


Emily. A pretty officer, indeed, who can talk of nothing but bombs and cannons!


Edward made a face at his sister, and wanted to oblige us to play at
puss-in-the-corner, and to take John to make a fifth. But Charles, who, with
all his sweetness of disposition, is capable of the greatest firmness, answered
him, No, brother, it was not my fault just now, that I did not gratify your
humor, but the rain prevented it. I then proposed to you another amusement,
which you might have been satisfied with, but you did not approve it, though my
sister and my friend are very well pleased; I think, therefore, I may give way
to a reasonable taste rather than to your caprices.

Edward, who knows very well that his brother is not easily turned from his
resolution, left the room grumbling; and, in spite of the rain, ran into the
court to play with a great mastiff, whom he is grown very fond of, for the sake
of teazing him. He did not return in less than an hour, almost wet to the skin,
and covered from head to foot with dirt. As for our part, during this interval,
after having read the life of Epaminondas, which had given us infinite
pleasure, we had time also to take up our drawings and finish them. An
opportunity happened after dinner, to send them to Mr. Grandison, and this
morning we have had the pleasure of hearing that he was very well pleased. But
what must he think of Edward, who has sent him nothing? I am quite afflicted at
this. I would give any thing in the world that he were as good, as amiable, as
diligent as his brother; then nothing would be wanting to complete the
happiness of his parents. I see with regret how much pain he causes them. Oh,
my dear mamma, may I never see the day in which I shall give you pain! No, no,
be assured I never can, whilst I think of your tenderness to me. I am too
sensible of what I ought to be, to render myself worthy of it. I dare even
promise that I will never give you cause for any thing but satisfaction: I
expect that my little sister will give you the same assurance, and I embrace
her tenderly for this good resolution. Adieu, my dear mamma.

LETTER XVIII. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
JULY 24.
ONE of the servants of the house is ill. You will see whether it be possible
to have a more feeling and compassionate heart than the good Emily. She arose
this morning by break of day, in order to give a medicine herself to the poor
sick maid. She could not rest till she had seen her take it entirely, because
it was strictly ordered by the physician. One would think to see her, that it
was a beloved sister whom she attended. How amiable it is in a young lady, to
have so much humanity! Edward, as usual, had some fault to find. It becomes you
much, said he, to wait upon your own servant. And why not, brother, answered
Emily? do not you play at nine-pins with them? If it be their duty to serve us
whilst they are in health, it is equally our's, to take care of them in
sickness: besides, poor Peggy has frequently watched over me during the
ailments of my infancy. What I now do for her is at least no more than she has
done for me: and I think of the pleasure that I should feel, were I in her
place, in every mark of attachment shown me. Edward felt himself ashamed, and
left the room hastily. Ah! said I to myself, Emily does not know what I have
seen my dear mamma do. When our poor Nanny had a fever, it was mamma that took
the whole care of her: but this recollection brought a sorrowful thought with
it. There is such a number of servants in this house! and you, my dear mamma,
have but one to do every thing for you. How unfortunate is this! You must needs
be forced to do a number of things very ill-suited to the widow of a colonel.
And then, if my sister were but big enough to assist you! But no, she only
increases your trouble: and I, what do I do here; instead of being with you to
comfort and support you with all my power? This reflection cuts me to the
heart. There is only one thing which softens it; it is the hope, that by
attending to my education, I may, one day, be in a situation to put an end to
your troubles. What new courage does this sweet hope give me! Adieu, my dear
mamma. I embrace you with tears of joy and sorrow.

LETTER XIX. MRS. DANVERS TO HER SON.
AMSTERDAM, AUGUST 6.
HOW I love your young Emily! Yes, my dear son, there is no virtue more amiable
than humanity. It were much to be wished, that every young lady would follow
this fine example; and instead of tormenting the servants, would learn to treat
them with goodness. How is it possible to be insensible to the pleasure of
being beloved by those who surround us?

But why are you afflicted, my dear son, at my having but one servant? it is no
happiness to have a multitude of domestics; there is more of show than real use
in it. Every servant in a house announces some additional want in the master or
mistress of it, and subjects them to additional cares. Had I the means, I
should, no doubt, have about me those attendants which my situation in life
would require. I should look upon this as a duty, as it would be the means of
giving support to many poor people, who might otherwise want employment. But
since Heaven has not thought fit to afford me riches, I do not think that I am
to be pitied for having only a single domestic: it is as much as is necessary.
I have no occasion for more attendance than here is.

And now, my dear child, tell me what are those occupations which you say do
not become the widow of a colonel! You certainly did not reflect on what you
were saying. There is no disgrace in serving ourselves, when we are not in a
condition to pay for the services of others. Will it not be better, after my
death, that you should have it to say; my mother herself prepared our simple
repasts; our clothes were the work of her hands; scarcely could she procure for
us what was necessary, but nevertheless, she owed no one any thing; than to
have this reproach thrown on you; your parents, it is true, lived according to
their rank and birth; they had a superb house, magnificent furniture, a train
of domestics, but all this is left unpaid for. What, in such circumstances,
would be the son of a colonel? a despised young man, who notwithstanding his
own innocence, would be stigmatized for the faults of his parents, whilst a man
of honor, of the most common birth, would scarce acknowledge him as his equal.
What I have now said to you, will, I hope, put an end to your concern on my
account, because it will show you that I am perfectly satisfied with my destiny.

As for the rest of your letter, my dear son, the sensibility of your heart,
and those affecting marks of tenderness with which it is filled, made me shed
tears of joy. Were I still poorer than I am, I should think myself rich in the
possession of so virtuous a son. Adieu, my dear child; continue to follow the
dictates of your happy disposition, and you will ever be the consolation of the
most tender of mothers.

Your little sister was touched in the most lively manner by your letter; and I
have remarked, that she has ever since redoubled her application and docility.
Oh! my children, may you always thus encourage each other in the practice of
your duties!

LETTER XX. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
AUGUST 12.
OH, my dear mamma, what a terrible misfortune was I witness to the other day!
I have not yet recovered from my terror. No, I have not the power to relate it
to you; I will therefore send you copies of the letters which Emily and Charles
wrote to their parents, to inform them of it; together with their answers. You
will see by them how much humanity reigns in this generous family. Read, pray
read.

LETTER XXI. EMILY GRANDISON TO HER MOTHER.
AUGUST 7.
WE have been in the greatest consternation this night, my dear mamma. The
house of our neighbor, Mr. Falston, is entirely burnt down. What dreadful
flames! The sky was as red as blood. My heart beat: I wept. It is such a
melancholy thing for the father of a family, to lose all his substance! What
strict precautions ought we to take against fire, since one moment may produce
so terrible a misfortune! It was the Miss Falstons who were the cause of this.
Yesterday evening, unknown to any one, they got some lighted coals out of the
kitchen, and carried them up into a little spare-room, in order to toast a
crumpet, which they had procured in secret. A little while after, they heard
their papa call them: hastily eating up their half toasted-crumpet, they ran
down to him. Their bed hour soon came, and they went up into their apartment,
without thinking any more of the lighted coals, which they had left in the
little room. The fire, doubtless, first took hold of the wainscot, and from
thence the floor and the furniture. In short, about two o'clock in the morning,
whilst all the family were asleep, the whole house was in flames. See, mamma,
how heaven has punished them! For the sake of eating a paltry crumpet, they
have reduced their father's house to cinders! Now they lament; they ask pardon:
they are almost dead with grief: but does all this avail? The fire has consumed
their whole property: they could neither save furniture, papers, or money.
Scarcely could the young ladies escape with only a slight covering over them:
and Mr. Falston himself, was near losing his life. He is terribly burnt in many
parts of his body; and must have perished in the midst of the flames, had it
not been for the courage of one of his servants. What will now become of the
pride of these young ladies? Yesterday so rich, today so poor! They treated
the peasants with contempt, because they had not fine houses. Today they feel
it as a favor, that these very peasants will, out of pity, receive them into
their cottages. In how short a time may pride be humbled! Oh surely, it is a
sad thing not to treat our inferiors with affability, when we are liable
ourselves to stand in need of the compassion of the lowest of them!

This letter is already so long, that I fear to be troublesome to you, my dear
mamma: nevertheless, though I hardly dare tell you what I have done, I have yet
something to say to you. Will you pardon your Emily? Oh, yes, you are so good
and so compassionate! The poor Miss Falstons have lost all their clothes in the
fire. Not one thing saved. I have sent the youngest, who is about my size, one
of my gowns and some linen. I could wish to have sent her more; but all that I
possess belongs to you; I therefore cannot dispose of it, without your consent.
I must entreat you to approve of the liberty that I have taken; and I promise
in future to be the better oeconomist for it. You have no occasion to replace
what I have given. Thanks to your goodness, I have enough left. Adieu, my dear
mamma. Embrace my papa for me: and both of you be assured of my respect and
tenderness.

LETTER XXII. CHARLES GRANDISON TO HIS FATHER.
AUGUST 8.
I Take the liberty, my dear papa, to make an humble petition to you, in behalf
of an unfortunate family. Can this emotion of my heart displease you? No, I do
not fear it: your own is too full of goodness and compassion!

You have been informed, by Emily's letter to mamma, of the cruel misfortune
which has befallen Mr. Falston; but not the whole of it. Emily could only tell
you of the house and effects; but he is also on the point of losing his last
shilling. He has creditors, who forbore to press him, whilst he was rich; but
now that his security seems doubtful, they insist upon payment, without delay,
and have already threatened him with a seizure of, all his property. On a
visit, which I paid him, I heard him say to Nelson the attorney, that all his
debts did not amount to more than two hundred pounds. This is but a small sum.
Must he, for want of this, after having suffered so terrible a misfortune, be
deprived of the only means left him of breeding up his family, and be himself a
prey to want, in his old age? Heaven forbid that we should suffer it! Now,
papa, I Will tell you what I have thought: the legacy which my uncle left me, is,
you know, five thousand pounds. I think this a great sum. It is in your hands,
and you may dispose of it. I surely may give up two hundred pounds to extricate
an honest man from such an embarrassment. I shall be rich enough after, as you
have the goodness to add, every year, the interest to the principal of this
legacy. I entreat, papa, that you will not refuse my request. It gives me a
thousand times more pleasure than the two hundred pounds ever can. Oh! if I
should but preserve from indigence an unhappy man, and his two children, what a
happiness this will be for me! Permit me to resemble you on this occasion, you
who are so beneficent. Do not you instruct me to be so? If you were here, I
would throw myself at your feet: I would ardently supplicate -- But there is no
occasion; your wisdom must decide on my request. My duty is a blind submission
to your will; a profound respect for your virtues, and the most tender love for
your person.

Vouchsafe, I beseech you, to present to my mamma my most lively sentiments of
respect and tenderness.

LETTER XXIII. MR. GRANDISON TO HIS SON.
AUGUST 9.
YOU say, my dear son, that you have learned of me to be beneficent. I have,
without doubt, always labored to render your heart sensible of the misfortunes
of your fellow creatures. The love of our brethren, besides the happiness which
it yields us, is, of all things, what renders us most acceptable to the supreme
Being. The petition that you make me is a proof of the generosity of your
heart; and so laudable a request deserves its recompense. The sentiments by
which I see you actuated, are to me far more valuable than two hundred pounds.
You will find enclosed, a Bank-bill of that sum. Fly then, and soften the
distress of the unhappy Falston; and, at the same time, enjoy the noblest
delight of a great soul. But as for your uncle's legacy, that, neither you or I
can touch, before you are of age. I hold it as your guardian, not as your
father. Adieu, my dear son; receive the embraces of your father and mother, who
love you more than ever.

LETTER XXIV. MRS. GRANDISON TO HER DAUGHTER.
OH! were I but with you, my dear Emily, with what transport would I press you
to my bosom! Yes, I approve entirely of your having succored the distressed
Miss Falstons; and intend, by way of recompense, to give you a fresh occasion
of tasting the sweets of doing good. You will find, in my wardrobe, a piece of
stuff, which I meant for a gown for myself: it will be enough for both the
young ladies; and, if I judge right of the heart of my Emily, she will have
more pleasure in this destination of it, than had I made it in her favor.
Adieu, my dear child; never forget the lesson which you have given to yourself
in your letter, never to be proud of the possessions of this world, since a
single night may deprive us of them all; nor haughty to your fellow creatures,
since you may stand in need of their assistance at the moment when you least
think of it. Always keep in mind the terrible event which you have described to
me; and never cease to be aware of the danger of playing with fire, since on a
single spark, our ruin, or even our death, may depend.

LETTER XXV. CHARLES GRANDISON TO HIS FATHER.
AUGUST 10.
I Hasten, my dear father, to answer the kind letter that you have honored me
with. You would have wept with tenderness, as I did, could you have been
witness to the testimonies of gratitude which Mr. Falston has lavished upon me.
Whilst he embraced me, I saw the big tears fall down his cheeks. How sweet must
these tears have been to him, since I found my own so delightful: but I ought
to give you an account of all that I have done; here it is: you know Mr.
Falston has naturally some pride; it would have been too humiliating in his
circumstances, to receive an assistance which might have had the air of a
charity. I presented him therefore with the Bank-bill, not as a present, but as
lent to him, and which he might pay again at his own convenience. He would give
me an acknowledgment, which I received, but immediately tore it before him,
telling him, that his word was enough, to let him see that he would not be
liable to any further trouble on this subject. I should have liked it better,
could I have slipped the note into his snuff box, that he might never have known
from whence it came; but I could find no opportunity.

Oh! my dear papa, what a delightful enjoyment have you given me! and how do I
long to throw myself at your feet, to thank you as I ought!

Pray tell mamma that Emily has fulfilled her orders. She has deprived herself
of two hour's amusement to put her own hand to the work: and now, thanks to her
activity, the work women have finished the two gowns in a day; and Emily is
just going to send them. With what impatience do we expect the moment, which
will bring back to us, parents, so worthy of our duty and affection.

PART II. LITTLE GRANDISON.
LETTER I. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
AUGUST 12.
OH! my dear mamma, poor Charles has met with a sad accident! his leg is
scalded so badly, that he is not able to walk: it is all owing to Edward's
aukwardness; he threw a tea-kettle of boiling water over him. Never, no never,
was seen such patience and goodness as my friend displayed on this occasion.
Any one else would have been in a passion with his brother, and have loaded him
with reproaches; but Charles, on the contrary, only sought to conceal the pain
which he felt. Do not afflict yourself, Edward, I beseech you, said he, it is
not very bad: but we soon perceived that he suffered more than he was willing
to confess, for his leg became so much swelled, that we were obliged to cut off
his stocking with a pair of scissars. Emily burst into tears: see, said she, to
Edward, what you have done by your heedlessness; you have, perhaps, lamed your
brother for the rest of his life. I wish this misfortune had befallen you,
instead of him. It had better have happened to no one, said Charles,
interrupting his sister. But come, my dear Emily, this is not worth so much
concern. I shall soon be cured: Edward did not do it by design; it is a
misfortune; but had it been still greater, we must have consoled ourselves. No,
replied Emily, I cannot forgive his want of care: look at him too; he stands
there like a post, instead of flying to send for a surgeon. There is no
occasion for one, said Charles; give me only a cloth and some cold water to
bathe my leg, and in a few days it will be well. But, said he, addressing
himself to Emily and me, Mr. Bartlet will soon be here; I beg you will not tell
him that Edward had any hand in this accident; and you, my dear brother, give
me your hand; your affliction is more painful to me than this little burn, of
which I now scarcely feel the smart.

What a happiness it is to be thus master of one's self! We may well admire
Charles, when he can behave in this manner: at the same time, I feel, how
useless it is to fret and be impatient, and that being transported with anger
will not remove the evil.

But the pleasure which I have in writing to you, makes me forget that Charles
has entreated me to keep him company. Adieu, my dear mamma; permit me to leave
you to return to my friend. I salute my little sister, and conjure her by our
friendship, to take care not to burn or scald herself: she will find her
advantage in this proof of love which I require of her.

LETTER. II. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
AUGUST 14.
ALAS, poor Charles! It is now two days since his leg has been extended on a
cushion: I believe he suffers much, but he persists in keeping it to himself.

Emily asked him yesterday, if he did not find himself very sad, under his
confinement. Why should I make myself so, answered he, it would only aggravate
the pain that I suffer; I had much rather amuse myself with the hopes of being
soon cured: besides, would it not be a shame if I could not comfort myself
under so small a misfortune as this? I have reason to expect many greater in
the course of my life, and these slight accidents will teach me, in time, to
exercise my courage and resolution against the approach of greater. But it is
very hard though, said Emily, to be forced to suffer so much for the fault of
another. It is true, answered Charles, I had rather it had been by my own, for
then my brother would not have had so much uneasiness about it.

Emily. But are you not weary of staying so long in your chamber, without
daring to move?


Charles. How can I be wearied, when I have the happiness of receiving so many
affecting proofs of your kindness to me?


Emily. It is your goodness, my dear brother, which makes you pay attention to
them: but you have narrowly escaped losing your leg by this accident.


Charles. This ought to console me under it. I have much reason to complain,
indeed, when I see so many people condemned to walk on crutches their whole
lives!


Emily. I really believe brother, you would have found out the secret of
comforting yourself, even if it had been necessary to cut your leg off.


Charles. It is needless to say that I should have been much afflicted at such
a misfortune, but as it could not have happened to me unless by the will of
heaven, I should have endeavored to submit my own to that, in order to have
obtained strength, to support me under the affliction.

What do you say, mamma? to think like Charles, is not this the only way to
combat misfortune? I yet remember the fatal day on which I lost my father. You
wept; I was inconsolable; but our tears and lamentations could not bring him
back to life. You took me by the hand, and said, Come, my son, let us pray to
the Almighty, and he will comfort us; I soon saw that you became more tranquil;
and I found also my own heart relieved by prayer. I found this a sure means of
alleviating distress; I will submit therefore to the decrees of Providence,
whatever evils may befall me; and hope that I shall bear them with constancy,
when I reflect that it is the will of God which inflicts them; of that God to
whom I say daily, " thy will be done."

But why do I remind you of these sad events, my dear mamma; you, in whom I
would wish to excite no sentiments, but those of joy? -- If I have afflicted
you, I know but of one remedy; it is to take my little sister in your arms, to
caress her, and tell her of your tenderness and of mine for her; I am sure that
her sweet smiles will give you back to peace and happiness.


LETTER III. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
AUGUST 18.
MR. and Mrs. Grandison are just arrived, my dear mamma: we are all overjoyed;
even the very servants are transported with pleasure. Is not this a good sign,
when domestics rejoice at the return of their masters? When I grow up, I am
determined, I will be as humane as Mr. Grandison, since there is so much
pleasure in making one^s self beloved. But I must return to my friend Charles.
Mr. Bartlet asked us this morning after breakfast if we would take a turn in
the park; though Charles finds himself much recovered at present, he begged to be
excused being of the party. My burn is not entirely cured, said he; and I wish
that my papa and mamma, at their return, should not perceive that any thing
ails me. If I should walk now, perhaps my leg may suffer from the fatigue, and
my parents will not fail to observe it. This will afflict them, and I would
rather deprive myself of the pleasure of a walk than cause them the least
uneasiness. You are in the right, said Mr. Bartlet, and I approve this
foresight; it does honor to your heart. Charles remained in his chamber, and
Edward, Emily and I walked till noon.

At our return we found Charles waiting for us in the parlour below: we were a
little surprised at this, as he had told us that he did not intend quitting his
chamber. He had suffered some pain by coming down stairs, but the pleasure of
meeting his papa and mamma something the sooner by it, was, said he, well worth
that. He had ordered the dinner earlier, that we might be more at liberty to
receive them. With what alacrity did he fly down the steps, when he heard their
carriage enter the courtyard! With what joy did he throw himself into the arms
of his father and mother! Scarcely could he force himself from them, to give
place to us. You would have been astonished, had you seen with what grace he
gave his hand to his mother, to conduct her into the parlour: it put me in
mind, my dear mother, of the joy that I shall feel when I return to you: it
will be as lively as that of my friend Charles, I promise you. But I must
recount to you a conversation which has just passed between him and his
brother: you will judge whether it be to his honor, or not, without my
anticipating.

Mr. and Mrs. Grandison were retired to their apartments to put off their
riding-dresses, whilst Edward, Charles, and Emily, and I, remained in the
parlour. Charles had desired his sister to play us a piece on her harpsicord,
Emily had readily complied, but scarcely had she began when we were
interrupted, by the fall of a piece of china, which was broken into a thousand
pieces.

Edward. Oh, there is a piece of china broken, I hear; What clumsy blockheads
those servants are!


Charles. Do not accuse them so hastily, brother; we do not know yet whether
the accident has happened through their fault.


Edward. I know that the china is all to pieces; these gentry use the furniture
as if it cost nothing.


Charles. I will go and see; perhaps there is no great mischief done.


Edward. I Will lay a wager now, Emily, that he will find out some excuse for the
culprit.


Emily. He will do very well then, brother: when you commit a fault, are not
you very glad to have a friend to speak for you? How many punishments has
Charles saved us both? Do put yourself in the place of the poor servant.


Edward. You will see presently: Charles will uphold him, as if nothing had
happened.


Emily. Charles never tells a falsehood; he knows how to manage the business
without that.


Edward. Here he comes; one would think, to look at him, that he had done the
mischief himself.


Emily. That shows a good heart.


Edward, (to Charles.) Well, what is it? Was I wrong when I said the china was
broken?


Charles. I never said you were; it is a china plate.


Edward. You speak as if that was nothing.


Charles. Had the mischief been greater, we ought to excuse it.


Edward. If I were in mamma's place, I would make the fellow pay for his
aukwardness.


Charles. That would be a little hard upon a poor servant, who has nothing but
his wages to depend upon.


Edward. It would teach him to be more careful in future.


Charles. But, Edward, were you never so unhandy as to have an accident
yourself, and are you sure that you never will?


Emily. If it be but to spill some boiling water over one's legs.


Edward, (to Emily.) Why do you meddle in what does not belong to you? (to
Charles.) If ever I do break any thing, it is our own at least.


Charles. I ask your pardon, my dear Edward; the goods of our parents are not
our's: we possess nothing of our own, yet.


Edward. If ever you should become a master, I see, your servants may break
just what they please.


Charles. What they please, do you say? I believe there never were servants who
broke any thing by way of amusement: it is always by accident, and in that
case, they ought to meet with allowance.


Edward. This is wondrous good, no doubt; and a negligent servant will never do
wrong in your house.


Charles. I hope not. I will take care not to take negligent people into my
service; therefore, if one of them should break a thing by accident, I will
pardon him, as I may do the same myself.


Edward. But I think my papa and mamma ought to be informed when their things
are broken.


Charles. It is my design to tell them of it, but at the same time I mean to
intercede for the culprit.


Edward. Who is it? is it John; is it Arthur?


Charles. Neither of them: suppose I should tell you that it is yourself,
brother?


Edward. I? this is very extraordinary indeed.


Charles. When you went to walk this morning, did not you give your dog his
meat in a china plate; and did not you put that plate on a wooden bench in the
out-house?


Edward. This is true; but what then?


Charles. The servant went for this bench without a light, and in taking it up,
he threw down the plate which was on it.


Edward. Well, is that my fault? What business had he to go rummaging in the
dark?


Emily. It is no more than he does every day. Come, brother, own that you are
the cause of all the mischief. The plate was not in its right place: and how
was the servant to guess that it was on the bench?


Edward. You are always talking, Miss, when it does not concern you. But
harkye, Charles, papa and mamma know nothing of all this, and they will not
think of enquiring after this china plate.


Charles. How, Edward! just now you were quite eager to inform our parents of
this accident, and now you wish to conceal it from them, only because you were
the occasion of it yourself. Is this just? You will easily obtain your pardon;
the case is a very excuseable one. But let it teach you not to be so severe on
a servant for an inadvertency, when we are so often liable to the same
ourselves.

Charles had scarcely said this, when Mr. and Mrs. Grandison came down. He
related the adventure of the china-plate with so much wit and address, and gave
such a turn to the whole affair, that they found more to laugh at than to be
displeased with; and as for Edward, he was delighted to be so well rid of the
business. Oh! mamma, what a happiness it is to have a brother like my friend! I
hope I shall also have as good an advocate in my little sister, if ever I
should need her eloquence on a like occasion.


LETTER IV. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
AUGUST 22.
I HAVE nothing new to tell you of today, my dear mamma, but I expect, that
tomorrow will afford many interesting things to entertain you with: it is the
birthday of Charles. Edward tells me, that we are to be entertained like
kings, because it is his brother's custom to give a treat to all the young
people of the neighborhood on that day. Emily, on the contrary, says, that he
will invite no one this year; and that he has already formed the resolution of
employing the money which his father will give him, in buying books of
instruction and entertainment. I, for my part, wish he may do this last: for
the company will leave us when the day concludes, but the books will always
remain with us.

I think I do not betray his confidence, when I tell you that he has privately
trained up a pretty starling, which he intends as a present to his sister,
until she receives one which her aunt is to send her. He has accustomed it
already to eat out of his hand, and to fly out of its cage. Emily does not
expect this present, and she will be surprised when she receives it. The bird
begins already to repeat her name very prettily. I will also train up one which
shall continually repeat to me yours and my sister's: not that I have occasion
for this to make me think of you, for happy as I am here, this is the chief
pleasure that I enjoy whilst so far removed from those whom I love the best in
the world.

LETTER V. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
OH! my dear mamma, how delighted you will be with my friend! He has not given
an entertainment to his young neighbors with the money which he received from
his father; neither has he employed it in buying books: he has made a very
different use of it. But in the first place, I must relate to you a
conversation which he had with his father.

We rose this morning very early: our custom is, to read every day one or two
chapters from the Old Testament, before we come down to breakfast. Mr.
Grandison came into the room in the midst of our lecture: Charles immediately
rose to salute his father.

Charles. Good-morning to you, my dear papa; I hope you have rested well last
night.


Mr. Grandison. Very well, my dear; and you also appear to have done so too:
but pray go on, I will not interrupt your reading.


Charles. I should fear, papa, that it would not be decent to read before you,
when you do me the honor of a visit.


Mr. Grandison. Your duty must first be attended to, I shall have a pleasure in
hearing you.


Charles. I am ready to obey you.

After placing an armed chair for his father, he resumed his book, and read
with a distinct voice. When he had done, Mr. Grandison expressed much
satisfaction in his manner of reading: it is a talent, added he, much more
difficult to acquire than is commonly imagined. The generality of readers
pronounce their words either with a snuffle or a whine, without attending to
the sense of what they read, which is extremely tiresome to their hearers. One
ought particularly to read history in a natural and unaffected tone, as if the
recital were made by one's self. But this is your birthday, and I am come up
to pay my compliments to you.


Charles. Thank you, papa, permit me to embrace you, and to express my
gratitude to you: this day recalls to my remembrance all that I owe to your
tender cares, and to those of my dear mamma.


Mr. Grandison. They are already recompensed by your good behavior. Continue,
my dear son, to fulfill all your duties, and may heaven complete those blessings
already vouchsafed to us, by permitting us to be witnesses of thy felicity.


Charles. I will labor with redoubled ardour to render myself worthy of this
wish. Vouchsafe to honor me with your wise precepts, and I will, on my part,
endeavor to profit by them. But father, before I enter on a new year of my
life, I ought to ask your pardon for all the faults which I (...) committed in
those preceding it.


Mr. Grandison. I do not recollect that you have ever given me any cause of
complaint; and I give you this testimony of my approbation, not to make you
proud, but to encourage you in doing well. But come, this is a day of
happiness, and it shall be spent joyfully. I give you what you will find in
this paper to make use of, if you choose, in entertaining your young friends. It
is already near nine o'clock; finish dressing, and come down with William: your
mother waits for us. Farewell: I will go forward, and tell her that you are
coming.

Oh! mamma, what a heartfelt satisfaction there is in thus rendering one's self
worthy the affection of a good father. How delighted did Mr. Grandison appear
to be with his son, whilst tears of joy and tenderness filled his eyes! On the
other hand, how much must good parents suffer whose children are unworthy of
this love! Oh! I will always follow the example of my friend, whom God himself
must love. How many things have I to say to you, if my letter were not already
too long; but you shall lose nothing by it: I will keep them all for another,
which I will begin tomorrow morning, as soon as I rise. How much do I wish to
be with you, to express my duty and affection to you as I ought. My letters, I
always fear, are insufficient for that purpose. Oh! if my little sister could
but say this for me, she who has the happiness to embrace you! My dearest
mamma, think that I am caressing you whenever she is. We will have but one
heart between us, which shall be filled with love for you.


LETTER VI. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
AUGUST 25.
I BEGIN this letter, my dear mamma, where I left off yesterday.

Before we went down to breakfast, Charles opened the paper which his father
had given him. He found four guineas in it: he had never before seen so much
money at once. After considering over it a little, he turned to me: William,
said he, I should like to know your opinion: there are few young people in our
neighborhood, whose society will give us much pleasure; they are for the most
part so fond of noise and racket, that their company is insupportable. Young
Friendly, is the only one whose character is at all suited to mine; and he has
been gone these three days to London with his mother. What do you advise me to
do with this money? Were I in your place, said I, I would keep it, in order to
purchase something useful: three or four hours of playing and dancing will soon
pass away, but some books or prints will be a daily amusement to us. But will
not you be disappointed, said he, if we spend this evening in our ordinary way
without company? No, surely, answered I, I am happy enough in your society. If
that be the case, said he, taking me by the hand, I may follow my first idea.
By this time we were at the entrance of the parlour. Mrs. Grandison embraced
her son with tenderness, and gave him her blessing. After breakfast we remained
alone with Mr. Grandison. Charles took his father by the hand, and said to him,
may I ask you one question, papa?

Mr. Grandison. What is it, my dear?


Charles. Do you judge it absolutely necessary that I should give an
entertainment to my young neighbors today?


Mr. Grandison. This does not depend on me.


Charles. Then I may do what I please with the money which you had the goodness
to give me?


Mr. Grandison. Certainly, my child.


Charles. Then I know how I will celebrate my birthday.


Mr. Grandison. Will you let me into the secret?


Charles. I wish for nothing more, papa; nevertheless, I am a little afraid
that you will not approve of my project.


Mr. Grandison. Why not, my dear? you may safely speak. I never yet knew you
make an ill use of your money. You are at liberty to dispose of it now as you
like best: I approve beforehand of whatever you may do. Let us see what you
wish to buy?


Charles. Pardon me, papa; I want nothing: thanks to your goodness, I have all
things in abundance; I only wish that others may rejoice on my birthday. But
do you know whom I have chosen to celebrate it? they are the poor of our
neighborhood. I have procured a list of all the honest and necessitous
families around us. How much will these poor people be rejoiced at the little
feast which I shall prepare for them! The sons of our rich neighbors whom I
might have invited, enjoy superfluities every day as I do; but those, whom I
mean to regale today, often want a morsel of bread. How joyful they will be
over the feast which I shall give them! and I shall have more pleasure in their
enjoyment, than I should have had in all the diversions that I might have taken
with my companions. But this is only on condition that you are not displeased
with it, papa.


Mr. Grandison. And did you think, my dear son, that I could be displeased at
this. No, no, I approve entirely this generous design. Your fourteenth year so
well begun, cannot fail to bring with it days of happiness. The goodness of
your heart will have its recompense.


Charles. My dear papa, I only do my duty. How many favors have I received
from heaven during the course of the preceding year! Ought I not to render some
of them back to my fellow creatures?


Mr. Grandison. Embrace me, my child, and hasten to accomplish your laudable
design. You may give your orders to the servants, and I will take care that
they shall be obeyed.

What do you say to all this, my dear mamma? Oh! if I were but as rich as Mr.
Grandison, I would give you all, mamma, you and my little sister. Might I, in
that case, ask you for a small part to enable me to be as beneficent as my
friend Charles?


LETTER VII. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
AUGUST 27.
YESTERDAY, my dear mamma, Charles gave his entertainment to the poor people of
the parish. They were feasted with plenty of roast beef, plumb-pudding, and the
vegetables of the season. I never had more pleasure than in seeing these good
people regale themselves. Joy and gratitude were painted on their countenances.
They drank our healths in some excellent beer, repeating at every draught, Long
life and happiness to Charles Grandison! The eyes of Charles were frequently
filled with tears. During dinnertime, he took notice of a poor man, almost
blind with age, who, he fancied, was not sufficiently attended to by the rest:
he called to a young one, who sat next him, saying, take care of that good man;
he is one of my principal guests; I want to see him eat with a good appetite.
Father, said he, you deserve the first place in my festival. The young ones
ought to honor your old age, that they themselves may be honored in their
turn, when they become old.

When the repast was ended, Charles divided the remainder of his money among
his guests. Yes, mamma, he gave them all that he had received from his father.
You will readily imagine what blessings they bestowed upon him. He was so moved
with tenderness, that he could not contain himself. He took me by the hand, and
we went off together, without being able either of us to speak a word. It was
not till we had entered the house, that he said to me, Well, my dear friend,
can there be a greater pleasure than in comforting the unfortunate? Oh, no,
answered I, throwing my arms round his neck, you could not have given me a more
delightful entertainment. I felt myself as much affected as my friend. Alas!
thought I, how much are the poor to be pitied! They often want the first
necessaries of life, whilst we are seated every day at tables, covered with
delicacies, where our only trouble is how to choose the most delicious. I shall,
from this day, be the more grateful to Heaven, from whom we receive these
favors, as well as more compassionate to those who suffer for the want of
them. Yes, my greatest pleasure shall be, to give them comfort, by following
the example of my friend Charles.

After dinner, we went to take a walk. We expected to pass the evening among
ourselves, in our ordinary amusements; but what was our surprise, when, on
returning to the house, we found there a large company! Mr. Grandison had
invited all the gentlemen of the neighborhood, with their children, to
celebrate the birthday of his son. We had a pretty concert; and after it, a
ball. Charles and his sister did wonders. How much I wished that I could sing
and play as they did; but you know, mamma, it is not my fault that I cannot.
You were not able to give me the advantage of masters. At present, I partake of
that benefit, with my friends, and I hope to profit so much by it, as to be
able one day to equal them.

I am obliged to break off here, my dear mamma, being just called upon to
partake of a little tour into the country. I expect a great deal of pleasure
from this tour, which I will not fail to give you an account of in my next: but
I forgot to tell you, that Charles made his present yesterday to his sister, of
the little starling, in return for a pocketbook which she had presented him
with. Emily is already quite fond of her bird. I never saw so diverting an
animal. I wish my sister could see all the care that Emily takes of it; but I
wish, yet more, to be with her, for then I should also be with you, my dear
mamma.

LETTER VIII. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
AUGUST 27.
WE had not so much pleasure yesterday as we expected, my dear mamma. The
weather was very fine at our setting out; but a violent shower of rain coming
on, obliged us to take shelter, in a very indifferent little inn, whilst the
storm lasted. Edward grumbled, and put himself out of humor. Emily was vexed:
and, as for me, I must confess to you, I was not very well pleased. Charles,
who is always master of himself, was the only one of us, whom this little
accident did not disconcert, as you will perceive by the following dialogue.

Edward. How unlucky it is, that this rain is come; all our pleasure is at an
end now.


Charles. Perhaps not: we will have our tea here, and by that time the rain may
cease. If it should not, we can easily send for the coach, that my sister may
not be obliged to walk through the wet.


Emily. I thank you, brother, but I would much rather it were dry.


Charles. I do not doubt it; a walk would have been more agreeable to you. But
our gardener was wishing for rain this morning, because the plants and trees
have need of it. Now, whose wishes do you think ought to prevail, his or yours?


Edward, (with a contemptuous smile.) Oh, those of the gardener, no doubt.


Charles. Why, truly, I think so too; for without rain, the trees must suffer
much from the drought; and would you not be very sorry if we should have no
fruit? And what will become of the poor, should the heat destroy the corn, and
if a bad harvest should raise the price of bread?


Emily. Oh! they will be sadly to be pitied.


Charles. Let us rejoice then at the rain, which may prevent these evils.
Besides, if it deprives us of the pleasures of our walk, it will afford us
others in return: we shall behold the verdure more fresh and brilliant, and the
flowers in our parterre will bloom with redoubled luster.


Emily. Enough, brother; you have convinced me. I am no longer angry at the
rain. Let it fall if it will, I shall find no fault.


Edward. One day longer would have made no great difference: it would have been
better for us, if it had not fallen before tonight, or tomorrow, and then we
might have had our walk today.


Charles. But those who happen to be obliged to travel either tonight or
tomorrow, had rather it should fall now. Would you have the weather governed
according to your fancy?


Emily. Charles is in the right; the desires of different people are so
contradictory to each other, that it is impossible all the world should be
pleased.


Charles. Believe me, we should be very unhappy if all our prayers were granted
us: but to return to the weather. What a small matter it is, that we should be
deprived of our pleasures for one day, in comparison to the good which this
rain will produce to others, as well as to ourselves.


Emily. But look at the poor birds; I cannot help pitying them.


Charles. They know where to seek shelter when the rain incommodes them:
besides, as my papa says, there is a kind of oil in their feathers which repels
the wet.


Emily. I am glad of that: it seems to me, that every thing around us is very
wisely ordered.

The rain now became more violent; however, Mrs. Grandison did not forget us;
the carriage was sent, and we were soon conducted back to the house. Emily
amused herself with her starling. Charles and I made a party at shuttle-cock,
to supply the exercise of a walk. As for Edward, he remained in the dumps, and
could find out no way of consoling himself, but by teazing his dog. I have
learned a good lesson from him today, for I see, when we suffer our humors to
get the better of us, on every little disappointment, we are sure to be very
often unhappy. Well then, I will do my best, to accommodate myself to every
mischance, that may befall me. There is one, however, to which I cannot be
insensible; it is that of being separated from you and my little sister. I
stretch forth my arms, to embrace you; without the power of doing it. A
thousand times in the day, I fancy that you are doing the same by me; but,
alas! we can only draw near to each other by our sentiments. But what then, are
not they sufficiently lively and tender to reunite us?


LETTER IX. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
AUGUST 29.
I MUST relate to you, my dear mamma, a droll adventure that befell us last
night.

We had scarcely been half an hour in bed, when we heard a great noise. What is
it, said I, to my friend? I know not, answered he. Perhaps, said I, some
thieves may have broken into the house. At this instant, we heard Edward cry
out violently. Charles immediately leaped out of bed, hastily threw something
over him, and seizing his sword, Follow me, William, said he, it is in Edward's
chamber. I lighted a candle at our lamp, and we went up into his brother's
room, to see what was the matter. Charles did not discover the least sign of
fear; but to confess the truth to you, I trembled all over. On entering the
room, we saw Edward lying on the ground under a table, which had fallen on him,
with all his books and papers. After having assisted in raising him up, Charles
said, What is the matter, brother? what has happened to you?

Edward. I do not know; but I have been terribly frightened.


Charles. But by what accident came you on the ground?


Edward. I will tell you: but let me recover myself a little.


William. Have you seen any one? Are there thieves in the house?


Edward. No, I believe not; but I don't yet know what it is.


Charles. Then why did you cry out so?


Edward. You would have done the same, had you been in my place. I don't know;
I fell out of the bed. It was a ghost, I am sure, that dragged me away.


Charles. Did you think so, Edward?


Edward. It was a ghost, I tell you; I am sure of it.


Charles. Indeed, Edward, I thought some dreadful accident had befallen you;
but I see it is now only something to laugh at. But you look quite scared; and
William too is all in a flutter. I will go and fetch you some hartshorn: you
had better take a few drops.


Edward. But don't go down alone; call one of the servants.


Charles. There is no occasion; let us take care not to make a noise, left we
wake papa and mamma.


William. And can you venture to go about the house without any one with you?


Charles. Why not, my friend? What is there to fear?


Edward. I am no more of a coward than you, but I should be afraid to go.
Harkye, Charles --


William. You call to no purpose; he is out of hearing; and he went off very
deliberately. He certainly has great courage. But, Edward, how did all this
happen?


Edward. I will tell you, when Charles comes back.


William. Then here he is.


Edward. Have you seen nothing, brother?


Charles, (with a smile.) Oh yes; I have seen the passage, the staircase, my
chest of drawers, and this bottle. Come, take a few of these drops; they will
give you courage to face the ghost.


Edward. I desire you will not make a jest of it.


Charles. Why not? it is the best way of treating a ghost.


William. That is because you do not believe it-will come back again.


Charles. It is true. But tell me, Edward, how comes it that we are all three
out of our beds at this time of night? but, in the first place, how came you to
get out of yours?


Edward. It was the ghost, I tell you.


Charles. It is rather a dream that you have had.


Edward. No, indeed; I was quite awake.


Charles. Tell us then all about it.


Edward. It was thus: you know, I do not like to sleep with a light in my
chamber; I had just put out my candle, and got into bed, when I heard something
tread softly on the floor; I rose up on my seat, and drawing aside the curtain,
saw clearly in the corner of the room, two lights, which appeared sometimes
great, sometimes small, and which moved about.


Charles. It was the dazzling of your eyes, no doubt.


Edward. The dazzling of my eyes, indeed! I tell you it was a real object; I
saw it as plain as I see you.


Charles. Well, and what followed?


Edward. I remained perfectly still, hardly daring to breathe; at length the
lights were extinguished, and I heard something trot about the chamber, and
then throw itself violently against the door.


William. The mere recital chills me with fear.


Edward. With all Charles' steadiness, he would have been as much frightened as
I was.


Charles. But why did not you call out for a light?


Edward. How could I? terror had stopped my mouth. For a moment all was still:
then I heard something glide against the wall; and by the pale light of the
moon, I saw a great phantom, all in white, standing against the window-curtain.
It seemed every moment to become taller and larger. I put my hand before my
eyes, left I should see something still more dreadful. I crept softly out of
bed, in order to escape out of the chamber; but the phantom, as it appeared to
me, began to leap about, and then came up close to me: in my fright, I fell
against the table, which I overturned upon me, uttering, at the same time, a
loud cry, which was what you heard. But hush, I think I hear it again.


William. I think so too; I heard something move by that bureau.


Charles. (...) lay a wager it is a rat hid under it.


Edward. But a rat is not white; besides, what I saw was at least as big as our
great dog in the courtyard.


Charles. We have nothing to do but to search: if it be here, we shall see it.


Charles immediately began searching into every corner; under the bed, the
bureau, and the drawers; at length he cried out, Here is the ghost; I have
found him. And what at last was this ghost? you will never guess, my dear
mamma: it was no other than a great white cat, belonging to the tenant, which
had stolen into the house, and ran into Edward's chamber. At the sight of it,
we all three burst into laughter. Charles rallied his brother on his credulity,
and the cat made her escape as soon as she saw the door open: Edward appeared,
however, a little confused at this adventure. I cannot comprehend, said he, how
this cat could appear to me of such a formidable size. It is the property of
fear, answered Charles, to represent things falsely, and to magnify them to our
imagination. But the two flambeaus which I saw? They were the eyes of the cat,
which appeared, either large or small, as she opened or shut her eyelids.
Believe me, all the stories that we hear of apparitions are like this of our
cat. Could we trace them to their source, we should find their causes quite
natural.

After this conversation, we returned to our beds, and slept very well the
remainder of the night. This morning at breakfast, we diverted Mr. and Mrs.
Grandison with our night-alarm: they bestowed great praises on the coolness and
resolution of Charles. I must confess, I never saw his presence of mind fail
him on any occasion. As to Edward, and me, we were not the last to laugh at our
own weakness: indeed, I am ashamed not to have shown more courage. I hope, that
this little history will serve to amuse my sister, and to inspire her with more
boldness on a like occasion, than has been shown by her brother.

Adieu, my dear mamma; you do not write to me so often as I desire, or as I
have occasion for. Emily talks to me frequently of my sister: she wants to
know, if you are as well satisfied with her as ever. Write particularly about
her, I beseech you, both to gratify my own affection, as well as the enquiries
of my young friend, who vouchsafes, to interest herself for a little girl whom
I love so much. Embrace her for me, and convince her how tender the regard is,
that I bear her.

LETTER X. MRS. DANVERS TO HER SON.
SEPTEMBER 6.
I SENSIBLY feel your tender reproach, my dear son, that I do not write to you
often enough: were I at liberty to give myself up to it, no occupation would be
more pleasing to me; but you may easily conceive how much my time is engaged by
the affairs of my family, and the attention that I think it necessary to pay to
your little sister: I am obliged, you know, to instruct her myself, not having
a fortune sufficient to procure her the instruction of different masters. But
my cares are well repaid by her happy disposition: she learns every thing with
the greatest facility; her industry is not to be repulsed by any difficulty;
and I am every day astonished, at the rapid progress of her understanding; nor,
do her sentiments afford me less cause of satisfaction. It would be difficult
to conceive, a heart, of more rectitude and sensibility. All that you have
written, to me, from time to time about Emily, pleases her infinitely. The
pretty letter which this young lady wrote to her mamma, on the subject of the
poor people who suffered by a fire, and of which you sent me a copy, has made a
lively impression on her. She finds something to say about it every day. Oh! my
dear mamma, said she to me yesterday, had I been rich, I would have done like
Emily; how much pleasure must she have had in relieving those poor Miss
Falstons! Yes, my child, said I, she has reason to be happy, and I am so also,
in seeing you capable of taking part in the troubles of other people; it is a
proof of a good heart: and this disposition gives you a right to expect the
same sympathy, in others toward you. These affectionate sentiments, are
necessary among mankind, for the mutual consolation of their troubles. This is
very true, mamma, said she, for when I suffer any uneasiness, if my little
friends appear afflicted for me, it lessens the evil by one half, at least;
besides, I am sure to love them the better for it, and that is always a
pleasure. Is not this a very delicate sentiment, my dear son, and altogether
charming for its simplicity? I hear such, continually, from her, which excites
in me the tenderest emotions; nor am I less affected, by those which you
display in your letters: I feel that they come from the bottom of your heart;
and it is with joy that I receive them back into mine. They soften my
afflictions, and prove to me that I have not lost all that I possessed on
earth, when I lost my husband, since my children remain to cherish me with as
much tenderness as I have love for them. Yes, it is to you and your sister that
I commit the care of my happiness. It will not be a painful one to you; for to
see you made happy by your virtues, will not fail to render me so.

All Mrs. Grandison's letters to me are filled with the most flattering
accounts of you. The friendship which has long united us, has, no doubt, its
share in these encomiums: nevertheless, I am willing to believe that you have
so lively a sense of her goodness, as to guard you from doing any thing which
may justly incur her reprehension; it would indeed be shameful in you to
deserve it, having before you so perfect a model as Charles. We never love
those long whom we cannot esteem: continue then to follow the good example of
your friend. A young man endowed with such noble qualities, ought to inspire
you with a laudable emulation; and there is no way, by which you can repay his
tenderness, but by endeavoring to make yourself worthy of it.

I see how much you suffer in not being able to imitate his beneficence. What
pleasure should I feel, could I put it in your power to exercise this
attractive virtue! cultivate it, nevertheless, in your breast, against the
moment that fortune may enable you to follow these generous emotions; in the
mean time, my dear, receive the trifle that I send you: I wish it were more,
but it is all that the present state of my affairs will permit. I have
transmitted to Mr. Grandison whatever is wanting for your necessaries: what I
send you, is destined for your pleasures: and these, I know, consist in such
things as are most worthy of a sensible and generous heart. Farewell my son. I
embrace you with all the transports of a mother, whose felicity depends on the
tenderness and virtues of her children.

LETTER XI. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
SEPTEMBER 12.
A THOUSAND thanks to you, my dear mamma, for the present which you have sent
me. A trifle do you call it! permit me to contradict you, in this; I, for my
part, think it a great sum. You are not rich, and yet you make me a present of
two guineas for my pleasure: ten times as much, were you possessed of a large
fortune, would be less to me. But alas! I fear that you may have put yourself
to some inconvenience, in order to enrich me; and this thought interrupts the
joy that I feel in receiving these marks of your bounty. Be at least persuaded,
that I am sensible of all the value of this gift, and that I know how to employ
it, in a manner with which you will be satisfied.

I must own to you, that I felt a little proud when I related to Emily what you
wrote to me of my sister. I seemed, as if I valued myself more on her
perfections, than on those which I might acquire myself. Emily appeared
flattered that her conduct had merited your approbation. She becomes every day
more sensible and more amiable. Since my little sister knows so well how to
profit by what I write to you concerning my friend, I will relate to you
another adventure which has lately happened to her. I must confess freely, that
she was a little in fault at the beginning, but the conclusion does her so much
honor, that I cannot forbear relating the whole to you as it happened. The
poor child was yesterday in the parlour with Edward; they amused themselves by
turns, in playing little tunes on the harpsichord. You know, there is in this
parlour, a japan cabinet, filled with very valuable china. Emily had the
curiosity to open it, to look at some Chinese figures which Mrs. Grandison had
lately presented to her. She took one in her hand in order to examine it
nearer. Edward, who is ever at some unlucky trick, cried out, suddenly, mamma
is coming. Emily, fearing to be caught in the fact, hastily put back the china
into the cabinet; but in her fear and precipitation, threw down a cup, which
broke into a thousand pieces. She was seized with consternation. It was a cup
of great value, which she knew her mamma preserved with the utmost care, as it
made part of a set, which was only used on particular occasions. Edward quitted
the harpsichord, on hearing Emily cry; and this is the conversation which
passed between them.

Edward. You have done a pretty piece of work there, truly. I would not be in
your place for a good deal.


Emily. O brother, how can you teaze me so, when you see how I am distressed
already? you should rather give me your advice.


Edward. What advice can I give you? if you were to go to all the shops in
London, you would not find such another cup as that. You have nothing to do
that I know of, but to set off for China, in order to match it.


Emily. What pleasure can you take in tormenting me thus?


Edward. What had you to do rummaging in that cabinet?


Emily. If it had not been for you, this would not have happened.


Edward. Nay, it was you that did it; you had no business to touch the china.


Emily. It is true, I did wrong; however, if you had not put me in a fright, I
should not have broken any thing.


Edward. This set of china that mamma was so fond of, see, it is now
incomplete; there might as well be not a piece of it left.


Emily. I would give all that I am worth in the world that this had not
happened.


Edward. O yes, you may lament now; that will do much good.


Emily. O brother, how can you be so cruel? Charles would not torment me thus.


Edward. Well, well, don't cry any more, and I will tell you what you had best
do.


Emily. Let me hear, dear Edward?


Edward. Nobody knows any thing of what has passed: we have nothing to do but
to gather up the broken bits, and place them by each other in the cabinet.
Mamma will not look in it this morning. During dinner, you may say that you
heard some china fall in the cabinet; I will be ready to support the fact:
Mamma will of course go and look, and, without doubt, will conclude that it
fell of itself.


Emily. No indeed, brother, I will not do this.


Edward. And why not? you accuse no one by it?


Emily. No matter, it is a bad expedient; to tell an untruth is worse than
breaking the china.


Edward. Very well; I have shown you a way to get out of the scrape, which you
might take advantage of; but it is your concern, not mine.


Emily. Alas! what shall I do?


Edward. I am really frightened for you; but I am very good thus to trouble
myself about you, when you desire to be punished.


Emily. Yes, I had rather be punished than deceive mamma; I will go to her,
confess the fault, and ask her pardon, promising, at the same time, never to
touch the key of her cabinet as long as I live.

Emily was just going out, when she saw her mamma enter the room: she trembled,
and changed color; and before she was able to speak, burst into a torrent of
tears. She expected a sharp reproach: what then was her surprise, when Mrs.
Grandison, who had overheard all that had passed, took her tenderly in her
arms, and caressing her, said, you are a good girl, my dear Emily, I do not
know what it is that you have broken, but if it be the most valuable piece of
china in my cabinet, I forgive you, in consideration of your courage and
frankness. As for you, Sir, continued she, addressing herself to Edward, go up
into your chamber, and meditate on the lesson that your young sister has given
you. It is well for you that your father knows nothing of all this, or he would
be more severe than I am. Go and blush for ^he falsehood that you meditated: I
see, henceforward I must not depend on your word, but may rest in confidence on
that of your sister.

You perceive, mamma, how well Emily was rewarded for not following the bad
counsels of Edward; for she would have paid dear for his falsehood, as Mrs.
Grandison had overheard all. The relation of this adventure will not, I think,
be useless to my sister; not that I suspect her of ever being capable of
deceiving you. Heaven forbid I ever should! but it will be a fresh
encouragement to her to persevere in the good principles that she has received
from you. Ah! what good fortune is hers, to receive them from your own lips! It
is a long time, alas! since I have enjoyed that happiness: raging seas divide
me from those whom I love best in the world. Oh! when shall I embrace you! When
will you see us both, my little sister and me, at your knees, vying with each
other in giving you proofs of our affection!


LETTER XII. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
I CONGRATULATE myself, my dear mamma, on having it in my power, to make you
acquainted with a new instance of the moderation and generosity of my friend.
No, I cannot often enough repeat it. There is not, I believe, in the whole
universe, a young man of so noble a character.

The earl of -- made him a present, a few days ago, of a fine dog, of a very
rare and uncommon kind. Young Falkland, one of our neighbors, had before this,
asked the earl several times to give it to him, but he could not obtain it of
him, because this young man is remarkable for his ill-treatment of his dogs. He
has no other pleasure than in tormenting them; either by the most cruel
discipline, or by encouraging them to fight till they tear each other to
pieces. He has already above a dozen in his house: you will think, perhaps,
that this was sufficient; but no such thing: he has besides a collection of all
sorts of animals, particularly cats, monkies, and parrots; and with these
creatures he passes one half of the day. He must have, methinks, a most
contracted mind, thus to lavish his time in such a miserable occupation,
instead of devoting it to the study of the arts and sciences. Notwithstanding
the multitude he has of these beasts about him, he was quite enraged when he
found the earl had given his dog to another, after refusing it to him. What was
the consequence of this? Charles had scarcely been five days in possession of
it, when the poor creature was found dead in a corner of the house. It was not
till yesterday that we discovered, by means of one of Falkland's servants, that
he had contrived to get him poisoned, out of spite and jealousy. What monsters
are there among mankind! I say monsters; the term is not too strong. Yes, my
dear mamma, I call him a monster, who can deprive another of what he cannot
possess himself, with no other view than to give him pain. But the following
conversation, which passed between Edward, Charles and me, as we were walking
in the garden yesterday, will show you how my friend revenged this piece of
knavery.

I was lamenting the death of the poor creature. I am very much afflicted, said
he, also: I could hardly have believed that the loss of a dog would have given
me so much trouble: but this was an animal of such singular beauty, and he was
already become quite attached to me.

Edward. It was a shocking action on the part of Falkland, to poison him: I
would never forgive him as long as I lived, were I in your place.


Charles. I must forgive him, however, unless I resolve to be as wicked as he
is.


Edward. You are too good, brother; for my part, I shall hate him as long as I
live.


Charles. I do not hate him, but I despise his character; and I pity him yet
more for being the slave of such violent and detestable passions; to destroy an
innocent animal with no other view, than to deprive another of it. He who can
be guilty of such cruelty in cold blood, would stop at no excess.


Edward. And the traitor dared to call himself your friend.


Charles. I am not now to learn that we must not give credit to mere words, and
that we must know people well before we reckon upon their friendship.


Edward. Don't you intend to break entirely with such a dirty fellow as he is?


Charles. I do not mean to insult him publicly, I shall content myself only
with holding as little intercourse with him as possible. The society of a young
man of his base way of thinking, by no means suits me.


Edward. Pshaw; this is not enough. Shall I cut off his ears, Charles? you have
only to say the word.


Charles. I Will take care then how I say that word: his ears will not bring me
back my dog.


Edward. Well then, I have another scheme. Falkland has a dozen spaniels and
greyhounds; we have nothing to do but to poison them in our turn; he deserves
this revenge.


Charles. But have the poor beasts deserved it?


Edward. What then, do you mean to let him escape unpunished?


Charles. That is not my affair, I shall not take his punishment upon me; it is
enough for me to leave him to his conscience.


Edward. I shall be curious to know what my papa will think of this adventure.
I do not wonder now at his always being so careful to keep us from too strict
an intimacy with this young profligate.


Charles. It is a proof to me, that my father understands the heart; and I
learn from it, that we ought to consult our parents in the choice of our
friends: as they have more experience than we have, they know better how to
distinguish characters: by their wife advice, I hope to preserve myself from
dangerous connexions, by which I might be corrupted. But, Edward, I think, we
ought not to acquaint my father with this base action of Falkland's.


Edward. How then will you manage it?


Charles. Methinks, we shall mortify him more, by a cold contempt than by our
complaints.


William. This is a noble way of thinking.


Charles. It will be best, believe me. But let us talk of something more
agreeable. Come, shall we take a walk in the fields this fine evening?


Edward. Stop a moment; look yonder, don't you see something up in that tree?


William. Methinks I see a bird in it with very extraordinary feathers, and he
flutters as if he were in distress.


Charles. It is very true; he is caught by his wings in the tree.


Edward. How lucky this is: it is Falkland's parrot that has escaped out of his
cage; I know him very well. Now we have him in our power, he shall pay for the
dog. His master would not take ten guineas for him: he shall be well punished
now.


Charles. O my dear Edward, the poor creature suffers sadly: be so kind,
William, as to get me a ladder, I will get up into the tree and disentangle the
poor bird.


Edward. To give it to Falkland, I suppose?


Charles. To be sure: Is it not his?


Edward. He killed your dog, and you mean to save his parrot.


Charles. And why not? It would make me happy, if I could from this time forth,
do him any good in return for the injury that he has done me.


Edward. You had better be advised; you will never again have so good an
opportunity of being revenged.


Charles. I look upon it as such: it is sufficient revenge to me, to show him
that my heart is better than his.


Edward. Oh yes, he is very capable of feeling this to be sure.


Charles. Well then, I shall have the satisfaction of feeling it.

Just then the gardener brought us a ladder. Charles climbed into the tree
himself, and found the parrot entangled with his wings between two branches,
and held fast: he soon disengaged him, and immediately charged one of the
servants to carry him to young Falkland.

What do you think of my brother, said Edward to me, as Charles left us?

Can you blame him, answered I, for being so generous?

No, certainly; but I do not feel myself perfect enough to imitate him.

-- It is our part to become so, from so good an example.

Charles now came up to us; his face was animated with the most sweet
expressions of satisfaction: I never before was so sensible of the pleasure
which arises from doing good. O my dear mamma, preserve, I pray you, all my
letters, that I may read them over again when I return home. I should be very
unworthy of such a friend, if the lessons that I daily receive from his
conduct, did not inspire me both with inclination and power to profit by them.
I wish he were known to all the young people of our age. If we feel so much
pleasure in reading of the good actions of others, what do we not enjoy in
doing them ourselves! Oh! my dear mamma, I will ever cultivate this sentiment,
that I may become the more worthy of your tenderness. I salute my little sister
across the great space which divides us, once for myself, and once for Emily.


LETTER XIII. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
SEPTEMBER 16.
WE assisted yesterday, my dear mamma, in gathering in the fruits of autumn.
The air was mild, and the sky serene: nothing was heard on all sides but
sprightly songs, accompanied by the fife and violin. It was a charming sight,
to behold between the trees young boys climbing to the highest branches to
gather the fruit, whilst the women and girls received them below in their
aprons, in order to fill their baskets. We too were employed, in stripping
those branches which hung within our reach. All these labors carry with them
an air of festivity, which fills the heart with pleasure.

We observed some little country girls, meanly dressed, earnestly look at us
over the hedge. When we had finished our business, one of them beckoned to the
gardener, and we could perceive her talking to him in a supplicating manner, at
the same time, casting frequent looks at my friend. Charles perceived it, and
when she had done speaking, called the gardener to him. I will give you their
conversation, which will be the best way of relating the thing.

Charles. What was that little girl asking so earnestly?


Gardener. I will tell you, Sir. Every body here knows the goodness of your
heart. She has been asking me to beg some fruit of you, for her mother, who is
sick at home.


Charles. Does she ask it for her mother? She is a good girl for that. Go and
give her as many apples as she can carry. It will be a pleasure to me, to
reward her for loving those to whom she owes her life.


Gardener. I will go then and give her some of the wind-falls, they will do
well enough.


Charles. How, friend! What would you pick out the worst that we have for a
poor sick woman! No, no, I insist on your giving her some of the choicest.


Gardener. I fear, that will lessen our store.


Charles. Did not you tell me that we had an extraordinary plenty of fruit this
year?


Gardener. It is true, Sir, we have hardly room to hold all our hoards.


Charles. Well then, out of the abundance which heaven bestows upon us, let us
at least give some to those who have nothing.


Gardener. Ah, my dear young master, it is not without reason that you are so
beloved and honored. You are a blessing sent to us by heaven. I will
punctually obey you, for I know full-well, whatever you do will be approved by
your parents.

Upon this, the gardener went to execute Charles' orders. Edward, having heard
what had passed, came up to his brother, and said; I don't disapprove of your
goodnature, but I cannot bear to see the common people always coming with some
petition to you.


Charles. But, my dear brother, if they did not ask of us what they want,
should we be otherwise so attentive to their wants? We ask our parents every
day for a thousand superfluous things; suffer then the poor, at least, to lay
before us their urgent necessities.


Emily. Charles is very right. Would it not be a sad thing, that we should have
so much more than we want even for our pleasures, and that the poor should be
without even the common necessaries of life? I will tell mamma this evening of
the situation of this little girl's mother, and I am sure she will send her
some assistance. Mr. Bartlet, who was just then coming up to us, overheard what
Emily had said, and praised her for her humanity. Charles asked him, if apples
were good for a sick person: Undoubtedly said he, if they be ripe. This fruit,
said he, which is produced in almost all climates, is by so much the more
valuable, as it will (...) ^he best part of the year. How great is the wisdom
and goodness of our Creator, who thus provides for us during winter, when the
exhausted earth is no longer in a state to produce these delicious fruits, by
which we have been nourished and regaled in the summer season.

Oh! my dear mamma, I shall always be full of gratitude to the Creator of the
earth, who thus provides for the wants of his children with the tenderness of a
parent. Alas! mamma, how many ungrateful children are there who devour the
provisions of winter, without once thinking of the beneficent hand which
provides them I Heaven preserve me from ever being one of this number: we, in
particular, who owe so much to it, for being permitted to share its bounties
with so good a mother! Yes, mamma, I should be thankful to Providence if I
possessed nothing on earth but you. Vouchsafe to receive from me the homage of
these sentiments, and continue to me those by which you have always honored
me. I ask this both for myself and my little sister, and as a pledge of your
granting it, I accept the first kiss which you will give her, since I cannot
have the happiness to partake of it with her.


P. S. Mr. Grandison has this moment received a letter from the earl of ***,
the first lord of the bedchamber, to require the attendance of his son Charles
at court. They are ignorant of the reason of this. My friend sets off tomorrow
with Mr. Bartlet. How much shall I regret his absence! I, who have lately lived
in the pleasing habit of seeing him every instant, must now pass whole days
without his society! Neither do we know how long he may be absent. Mr.
Grandison is not at all uneasy at this message; the earl's letter is too
gracious to be the prelude to any thing undesirable. But in the meanwhile, I
lose my friend. Nothing but the hopes of something good to him could console me
for this separation. He has promised to write to me. Oh! my dear mamma, with
how much joy shall I send you the copy of his letters!



LETTER XIV. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
SEPTEMBER 20.
I HASTEN, my dear mamma, to send you, according to promise, a copy of the
first letter that I have received from my friend Charles. You will in it see
what happened to him on his journey, and at his arrival in London. I shall
expect with impatience the next news that he will have to send me; my heart
forebodes that it will be good. Judge then how eager I shall be to make you
partake of it. Full of this sweet hope, I embrace you and my little sister more
tenderly.

LETTER XV. CHARLES GRANDISON TO HIS FRIEND WILLIAM DANVERS.
I DO not yet know, my dear friend, what our journey to London will produce;
the beginning of our expedition has not been the most happy. A superstitious
mind might look upon this as a bad presage; but you and I, my dear William,
thanks to the good-sense of our parents, are in no danger of being disturbed by
vain prognostics. We had scarcely gone a few miles, before one of our horses
stopped short, and would not advance a step farther. The postillion, thought to
get on by exercising his whip, which I could not see without pain; I cannot
bear that so gentle and useful an animal should be treated hardly. However, we
soon perceived that the poor creature had met with a hurt in his foot, and that
it was not his fault. We were therefore obliged to go gently on to the nearest
inn, where we provided ourselves with horses, and pursued our rout with renewed
expedition, till an unlucky accident stopped us. In a rugged part of the road,
the axletree of our chaise suddenly broke: happily we were none of us hurt; but
we were obliged to get out of the carriage, and there being no house within a
good distance, we had no other course left us, but to walk on foot. I should
have made myself very easy under this accident, had it not been for my concern
on account of our worthy friend Mr. Bartlet: I feared much le^t his health
might suffer from the cold and dampness of the air, and the fatigue of the
walk. The sun was already set, and we proc^eded slowly, followed by our servant
Henry. A violent rain came on. At length, after a half-hour's walk, we
perceived to the right, a small house at a little distance from the road. We
were let in by an honest labourer, bowed down by the weight of years and hard
work, and his wife, who appeared to be as old. We were hospitably received by
this worthy old couple and their children. The eldest son ran to fetch a
wheelwright in the neighborhood, and then went with him to assist the
postillion in mending the chaise as well as they could; which they could not
complete till the evening was far advanced. As it was then too late to pursue
our journey, we resolved to pass the night in this little hut, which, under
these circumstances, I found as comfortable as the most superb palace. Whilst
one of the daughters was preparing for us a simple repast, gentlemen, said the
old man, do not be uneasy, we will give you up our bed, in which you may
refresh yourselves after your fatigue. It was with difficulty that Mr. Bartlet
was persuaded to agree to this proposal, but at last, the pressing entreaties
of our host and his wife prevailed. They had placed but two covers on the
table. Mr. Bartlet perceiving it, said, Have you already supped, my good
friends?

No, Sir,

Well then, we must eat together; our meal will be the heartier for it.

We should not have thought of taking that liberty, Sir, replied the old man,
but, since you order it, you shall be obeyed*

The rustic meal was soon put on the table; it consisted of a piece of cold
meat, with vegetables, cheese and butter, and some good apples. Plain as this
repast was, I never made a better supper in my life, and slept so soundly after
it, that Mr. Bartlet had some difficulty in waking me the next morning. I have
just now ate an excellent breakfast, and take the opportunity, while Mr.
Bartlet is thanking our hosts for their hospitality, to write you this. I am
now obliged to break off, but as soon as we have paid our first visit to Lord
-- you shall hear again from me. Present my duty to my papa and mamma, and
remember me affectionately to my brother and sister.

I remain, my dear friend, ever yours, Charles Grandison.

LETTER XVI. MRS. DANVERS TO HER SON.
SEPTEMBER 3.
I SAID right, my dear mamma, when I told you that I should have good news to
send you of my friend Charles. I enclose you a copy of a letter that he has
written to me, and one from Mr. Bartlet to Mr. Grandison. I have scarce time to
transcribe them before the post goes out. I would fain express to you the joy
which fills my heart; but I can only say, what a felicity it is to see my
friend happy, and to wish this to my dear mamma!

LETTER XVII. CHARLES GRANDISON TO HIS FRIEND WILLIAM DANVERS.
DECEMBER 22.
COULD you ever have guessed, my dear friend, what could be the object of my
journey to this city? Without doubt no, since I myself hardly dare now to
believe it. Well then, it is by order of the king, who has just bestowed on me
the post of page of honor, and invested me with a place about his children. I
know not to whom I am indebted for these favors; but they try to persuade me
that I owe them to my own conduct. But it seems to me that I have only
fulfilled my duty, and that alone deserves no recompense: I regard therefore
what has befallen me, as the pure bounty of heaven; which thus rewards the
virtue of my worthy parents. I rejoice more on their account than my own. Mr.
Bartlet has written to my papa; you will doubtless see his letter. I have
scarce time to assure you that I am ever your faithful and affectionate friend,

Charles Grandison.

LETTER XVIII. MR. BARTLET TO MR. GRANDISON.
My dear Friend,
WHAT happy news have I to send you* and how much will the heart of Mrs.
Grandison be filled with joy! Your amiable son -- but you well merit those
favors with which heaven has vouchsafed to recompense his goodness. I always
told you that he was destined to be the happiness of your future life. And so
young to be thus distinguished by his sovereign's favors, whilst all good men
applaud the act! Yes, my dear Sir, there is no one here, but who, after having
seen your son, pronounces him worthy of his promising destiny. But I will no
longer keep you in suspense. Know then, that the king has conferred on him the
post of page of honor, and given him a place about the royal children, as a
fit object for their emulation. The earl of --, whose wife is sister to See
letter from William Danvers, Vol. I. p. 325, which letter it was thought
unnecessary to repeat among these.
Major Arthur, whose life was saved by Charles, had represented your son to his
majesty in so advantageous a manner, had spoken so highly of his good sense,
his acquirements and goodness of heart, as to inspire the king with the desire
of seeing him; and it was after his first interview with him that he conferred
on him these favors.

The earl, who introduced Charles to his majesty, and was present at the
audience, declared that he never saw any one received so graciously. The king
himself, after ordering his children into his presence, vouchsafed to present
them to him. Your amiable son answered all questions put to him with a
respectful freedom, and a nobleness of expression quite astonishing for his
age. The young princes were desirous that he should from that moment remain
about them. But he represented to them the occasion there was for his remaining
yet some time in his father's house, in order to profit by his instructions,
and to render himself more worthy of the high office allotted him.

He owned to me afterward, that he had another reason for asking this delay:
it was, that his friend William having only three months more to spend in
England, he much wished to pass the remainder of that time with him. Thus you
see, his presence of mind never forsakes him; nor can the seductions of fortune
make him forget the duties of friendship.

The earl gave yesterday a grand entertainment in honor of your son. Charles
received the compliments of all the company with as much grace as dignity. The
many praises bestowed on him, excited not in him the least emotions of pride;
and he left the company all captivated by his amiable qualities. Do not think,
my dear friend, that the enthusiasm with which I speak of your son, is the
effect of that partiality which I feel for your family: you will find the same
testimonies in his favor in the letter which Lord -- has written you.

We shall be detained about six days longer here, and then I hope to bring back
to your arms the worthy object of your tenderness.

P. S. The earl of -- has made me open my letter again, to inform you that
Edward is presented with a lieutenancy in the same regiment with Major Arthur,
of which he is now lieutenant colonel.



LETTER XIX. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
SEPTEMBER 26.
I WAS so impatient, my dear mamma, to send you my friend Charles' letter, and
that of Mr. Bartlet, that I had not time to give you those reflections which
the good fortune of my friend have given birth to in my mind. Indeed, were I to
attempt to say all that I think on this subject, my letter would not be
finished today. I will therefore confine myself to the more easy and
delightful task, of attempting to describe to you, how sensible I am of his
faithful remembrance of our friendship. What then! Could he, for the sake of my
society, during the remainder of my stay here, resist the desires of the young
princes, and sacrifice all the pleasures of a court! Ah! he has not made this
sacrifice to an ungrateful friend. You will witness for me, mamma, how much I
ever loved him, that all my letters were filled with expressions of my
tenderness for him. Well then, he is now become a thousand times more dear to
me. During his absence, I have been made too sensible how necessary he is to my
happiness. Notwithstanding all the caresses of Mr. and Mrs. Grandison,
notwithstanding the friendship of Edward and Emily, I find that I miss him
every hour in the day. I seem, as if I were but half myself, without him. I
have no other resource, but to employ myself continually in doing something for
him. Yes, mamma, all the business that we did when we were together, I now do
alone, in order to render his absence less tedious to me. I have cultivated his
garden, and ornamented it with the flowers of the season, that he may see, at
his return, what care I have taken, of all that he is interested in. I have
continued to copy a set of designs in architecture which he had begun: they are
not, it is true, so well drawn as he would have done them, but they are better
than if I had done them for myself. I am sure that his friendship will excuse
the weakness of my pencil, and that he will see them in his collection with
pleasure. I have also transcribed into his music-books, all the new airs which
we have had since his departure. I have arranged the books in his library; I
have fed his birds; I have given something to his poor people: in short, I have
attempted to do all that he would have done himself. It is at these times, that
I have more than ever felt the force of that maxim, which you have so often
repeated to me, that application to business is the best means of composing the
mind under grief or uneasiness. Ah! had I been condemned to idleness during
this interval of my friend's absence, how should I have been to be pitied! I
have labored not to leave a moment in the day vacant, lest I should fill it
with my sadness. As a proof of this, I send you a little piece which I have
just translated, on the advantages of industry.

Adieu, my dear mamma; now that my friend is so far from me, I doubly feel the
pain of being so from you. I have no consolation but in knowing that you love
me, and in feeling how much I love you.

THE ADVANTAGES OF INDUSTRY.
MR. Dorville, a rich manufacturer, was the most inveterate enemy to idleness.
He not only dedicated the whole day to labor himself, but took care also, to
have every person of his family employed in the same manner. Liberal to all
whom age or infirmity had rendered incapable of work, but implacable toward
those idle vagabonds, who, with the advantages of health and strength, come to
beg at his door. He would ask them why they did not work; and if they excused
themselves, by saying that they could get no employment, he would offer it to
them in his manufactory; but after once refusing it, they dared never more
approach his presence.

He never suffered a bale of goods either to be packed up or opened, without
obliging his two sons Francis and Robert, to put their hands to it. He had a
large garden behind his house, in which he made them both work, under the
direction of his gardener: and during winter, he would employ them in turning,
and other works of ingenuity. His three daughters, also, had not more time
allowed them for idleness. They had the charge of the domestic economy; with
every other occupation suitable to their sex.

The better to excite their industry, Mr. Dorville paid each for his work; and
those among them, who had distinguished themselves by their activity, had an
extraordinary reward. These little perquisites, they had the liberty of laying
out in their own pleasures and amusements.

No quarrels or ill humor were ever heard in this family. They enjoyed perfect
health, and each day brought with it new pleasures, by making them taste the
sweets of their own labors.

If the boys presented to their sisters a nosegay of carnations or hyacinths,
they received from them in return either embroidered ruffles, purses, or
strings for their canes or watches, all, the work of their industrious hands.
If their desserts were furnished by the fruit of their young trees, which they
had planted and grafted themselves, they had the satisfaction to hear their
parents praise them, by acquainting their guests, to whom they owed their
regale; at which, each would take his glass, and the company in chorus, drank
to the health of the little gardener.

Seven days in the year, were celebrated as festivals in the family; these were
the birth-days of each of the children, and those of their father and mother.
Pleasure and mutual tenderness reigned on those occasions: particularly on the
birth-days of their parents, when they generally gave an entertainment to the
children, to which they invited their young acquaintance. The feast always
ended in a ball, at which youthful vivacity, heightened by music, animated
every look and motion, whilst their fond parents beheld, with transports of
joy, their playful gaiety and natural graces.

Who would believe, that these children should ever grow weary of a way of life
so full of pleasure? This was, however, the case. Francis one day went to pay a
visit to his young cousins: he returned home with a sorrowful contenance. His
father, from some indirect words which he let fall, comprehended at once the
cause of his chagrin: he, however, did not appear as if he observed it: In the
mean while, as Francis wore the same face of sadness the next day, Mr. Dorville
having engaged him to take a walk with him after dinner, over his plantations,
they had together the following conversation.

Mr. Dorville. What is the matter with you, my dear Francis? the air of sadness
which I observe on your countenance, makes me very uneasy.


Francis, (affecting a cheerful air.) Nothing at all, papa.


Mr. Dorville. Come, come, notwithstanding that smile, your whole appearance
has less of cheerfulness than usual.


Francis. I cannot disown it.


Mr. Dorville. What is it then that makes you thus sad?


Francis. Ah! if I dare to tell you --


Mr. Dorville. Are you afraid to open your heart to me? Am not I your friend?


Francis. True: but, pray, papa, do not question me any more on this subject.


Mr. Dorville. And why not, since it afflicts you?


Francis. Because I think you would not afford me any remedy.


Mr. Dorville. Do you think then, that I would rather see you afflicted than
happy? I thought you had a better idea of my tenderness for you.


Francis. Oh! papa, do not mistake me; no, no, I am sensible, you have no
greater joy than to see us rejoice.


Mr. Dorville. I do not see, then, what can hinder you, from making me your
confidant; but hold, we will settle this matter between us. Tell me your
grievance, and I will promise on my part to do all in my power to remove it.


Francis. Well then, papa, since you will have it, I must tell you: you keep us
like so many slaves to our work from morning to night; there are my cousins,
you see how their papa lets them spend their time; shall not we have as much
fortune as they will?


Mr. Dorville. What, my dear child, is this all that afflicts you? nothing can
be easier, than to satisfy you in this business. God forbid, that I should make
you work against your inclination; you are at full liberty to take your rest,
and not to return to your work again, till you yourself desire it.


Francis, happy to enjoy his liberty with the consent of his father, spent the
rest of the day, in loitering about here and there, sometimes in the house,
sometimes the garden.

Mr. Dorville always rose early; and when the weather was fine, generally
amused himself with a walk into the country, and took with him those of his
children, who the day before had been most diligent and attentive to their
work. The next morning after this discourse, the early dawn promised a most
beautiful day; Mr. Dorville was preparing to go out; Francis heard him; and
though he was very sensible that he had not deserved the indulgence, he
nevertheless hastened up, and asked his father's permission, to accompany him.
Mr. Dorville willingly consented. They went together, and seated themselves at
the top of a hill, from whence they had a view of the surrounding country. It
was in the early part of the spring. The meadows, which but a month before were
buried in snow, now displayed the most lively verdure. The woods were covered
with tender foliage, and the fruit trees adorned with the gayest blossoms. The
harsh whistling of the north wind, no more grated on the ear; nothing was heard
around, but the sweet warbling of birds, Young lambs, and playful colts were
seen sporting in the rich pasture-grounds. Echo resounded with the cheerful
song of the labourer, as he trod the furrowed land The roads were filled with
troops of country people; some conducting their wagons loaded with corn, wine,
and other merchandise; others carrying on their shoulders baskets filled with
herbs and flowers. The young milk maids seemed to walk in cadence: all bent
their steps toward the city, the gates of which were just opened to receive
them. Francis, affected by this scene, felt his heart so elated with
cheerfulness, that throwing himself into the arms of his father, he exclaimed.
Oh! papa, I have you to thank for the pleasure which this moment affords me!

Mr. Dorville. If all our friends were but here to enjoy it with us! I am sorry
we did not call on your cousins, as we passed by their door.


Francis. Oh they will not be up these two or three hours, at least.


Mr. Dorville. Is it possible? Why then they spend one half of the day in sleep!


Francis. I have sometimes called on them at nine in the morning, and they had
scarcely their eyes open.


Mr. Dorville. No doubt, they are objects of your envy just now.


Francis. No truly, papa; if I were asleep like them, I should lose all the
pleasure I enjoy now.


Mr. Dorville. This is one advantage then, arising from industry; it calls us
up early enough, to make us relish the charms of a fine morning.


Francis. But, papa, cannot I be an early riser, without working?


Mr. Dorville. And what will you do, when you are up?


Francis. I would go and walk sometimes to one place, and sometimes to another:
today I would ascend the hill; tomorrow I would enter the thick forest;
another time I would seat myself on the banks of a river.


Mr. Dorville. It is very well, my dear, but we have three hundred and
sixty-five days in the year; if we take from these all the cold and wet
mornings, there will scarcely remain sixty-five such as this of today. Would
you walk out through the thick fogs, and when it rains or snows, or when the
impetuous winds render the hoar frosts more biting?


Francis. No certainly, I should have very little relish for walking in such
bad weather.


Mr. Dorville. What then will you do with the other three hundred mornings, if
you do not work?


Francis. I don't know.


Mr. Dorville. Tell me freely then; do you think that you would find it a very
pleasant thing not to know what to do with yourself?


Francis. No; I confess, time would seem very long to me.


Mr. Dorville. Would it not be better to go briskly to work, than to be rubbing
your eyes, yawning, and stretching out your arms, and then sinking into your
chair like a person overcome with fatigue?


Francis. But, papa, if I do not work, I can amuse myself with some play.


Mr. Dorville. You know very well, I have never hindered your amusing yourself:
but let us examine whether to work, or to pass our time in vain dissipation,
yields us the most solid pleasure. I am far from wishing that my children
should not be as happy as they are capable of being. You shall always play, and
never work more, if you can prove, to me, that play will give you more
satisfaction than work.


Francis. Take care, papa, it will not be very difficult to prove this.


Mr. Dorville. Well then, let us see; I am willing to run the risk.


Francis. Did you never observe, that when I am at play, I run, I jump, I
dance, and make a thousand gambols; but when I work, I do nothing of all this.


Mr. Dorville. Nevertheless, I have often seen you and your brother laugh and
amuse yourselves when you have been at work together.


Francis. That is true; but yet it is better to be at play.


Mr. Dorville. There is not a day passes, but you play: have you any thing to
show me, in consequence of all this play?


Francis. No, papa, I have only the remembrance of them.


Mr. Dorville. And have you nothing remaining, from your work?


Francis. Oh yes, I have in my garden above a dozen young trees which I have
planted and grafted myself; all my beds are furnished with good vegetables, and
my borders with fine flowers.


Mr. Dorville. Is that all, my dear?


Francis. No indeed, papa; I have in my chamber a great cupboard full of my
workmanship in straw and pasteboard, besides a thousand little toys of ivory
and ebony, that I turned in my lathe.


Mr. Dorville. But, without doubt, you look at all these things now with
regret, when you think how many drops of sweat they cost you? here you will
say, I spent a whole day's labor on this.


Francis. And suppose they had cost me as much again?


Mr. Dorville. What then?


Francis. Why, papa, so long as I see my cupboard furnished with the fruits of
my labors, whilst I gather nosegays for my sisters, or fine fruits, and good
vegetables to present to my mother, I find myself so happy, that I no longer
think of the trouble that these things cost me.


Mr. Dorville. Tell me: all the time which you have spent in cultivating your
garden, or in turning; do you wish now that you had passed it in play?


Francis. No, certainly, for then I should have had nothing to show for it
today.


Mr. Dorville. You would have had the remembrance of it at least. Do you reckon
that nothing?


Francis. It is but a very little thing.


Mr. Dorville. I think, it appears from your own account, that play only amuses
the present moment, and that it does not even always do that in proportion to
our expectations; and that work, on the contrary, after having agreeably
occupied us, leaves behind it some useful enjoyment. After twenty years are
past, you will have a renewed pleasure in gathering fruits from the trees which
your hands have planted, though you will, by that time, forget all your
frivolous pastimes. Decide therefore, yourself, which affords the most solid
pleasure, useful labor, or vain amusement.


Francis. Oh! papa, according to the light in which you have set the thing,
there is no room to balance. Labor, without dispute, renders us most happy.


Mr. Dorville. You see then, it was not without reason that I have urged you to
follow it. Were I to say to you, come, Francis, work no more; I will have you
spend your whole time at play. Would it not be making you miserable for the
rest of your life?


Francis. Oh! yes, I can feel this now: every different play would soon become
tedious and insupportable to me.


Mr. Dorville. And do they not, on the contrary, appear more sweet to you after
labor?


Francis. Yes, papa, I confess, they do.


Mr. Dorville. At those times, I myself urge you to enjoy your pleasures. You
know how often I have invited your cousins and your other companions to come
and share in your amusements. Have you forgotten how you have wrestled
together, and run races, and thrown the bar?


Francis. No, papa, I remember it very well; you have yourself been so good as
to assist almost always at our sports; and I have often seen you smile, when I
have happened to have the advantage.


Mr. Dorville. And this was pretty often the case.


Francis. Because I am stronger than any of my companions, especially my poor
cousins; I never feared to engage with both of them at once.


Mr. Dorville. Perhaps they are not so old as you?


Francis. O, you know very well that I am not so old as the youngest by a full
year.


Mr. Dorville. You are better fed then?


Francis. I beg your pardon; they live better every day of their lives than we
do.


Mr. Dorville. I do not see then how you came by all this strength, unless it
be the effect of labor.


Francis. Excuse me, papa; I do not know how that can be; because I am so much
weakened sometimes by hard work that I can hardly stir.


Mr. Dorville. But, my dear, who are those that run best?


Francis. Those who frequently (...) races.


Mr. Dorville. What is the reason of this, pray?


Francis. Because they are used to run.


Mr. Dorville. Nevertheless, running weakens them, sometimes, as labor does
you.


Francis. Without doubt.


Mr. Dorville. But, the next day are they less alert, or you less brisk?


Francis. It is true.


Mr. Dorville. One word more. Have you never observed that some people have
their limbs much more strong and nervous than others?


Francis. O yes, our blacksmith for instance: you have only to look at his
arms; every muscle is expressive of vigor!


Mr. Dorville. And how, do you think, has he acquired this vigor?


Francis. How should I know? this man is the whole day with his body bent over
his anvil; and he has been accustomed from his earliest youth, to wield a
hammer, which I can scarcely lift with both hands.


Mr. Dorville. What, do you think he is stronger than I am?


Francis. Oh! papa, I should be very sorry to see him lay hold of you, even if
I were by to assist you.


Mr. Dorville. This is a farther proof, then, that labor strengthens the body.
Here is a blacksmith who uses more violent exercise than I do, and yet he is
more robust. You use more violent exercise than your cousins, and you are more
robust than they are: labor must certainly have something to do in this.


Francis. I own I begin to think it.


Mr. Dorville. You told me, just now, that your cousins eat very delicately.


Francis. It is very true.


Mr. Dorville. I think, however, they have frequent disorders in the stomach.


Francis. Yes, almost always.


Mr. Dorville. Are you ever troubled with those complaints?


Francis. Never, papa; you know very well that my appetite never fails me.


Mr. Dorville. Yes, but on some days I observe, that you eat with more pleasure
than ordinary: especially after you have been digging in your garden.


Francis. Yes, truly, I make a brisk attack upon your provisions after I have
been hard at work.


Mr. Dorville. But how is this; work strengthens your arms and your stomach; it
whets your appetite; and shall I prohibit it? No, certainly; I wish to see my
son do honor to my table, without fearing indigestion, like his cousins: and I
should be very sorry to see his companions outdo him in wrestling, or running
races.


Francis. But, papa, I have been told by many people, that being so rich as you
are, you ought not to make us work.


Mr. Dorville. These people talk like blockheads, and you will be a still
greater blockhead if you believe them. If you remain every day in bed till nine
o'clock, can I, with all my money, make you enjoy such a fine morning as this!


Francis. No, certainly.


Mr. Dorville. For these many years to come, you will have to gather of the
fruit of those trees which you have planted. You may also, from time to time,
make presents to your sisters and friends of the pretty pieces of workmanship
which you have made. This is the fruit of your industry, and a source of
enjoyments which are for ever renewing. But with all my money, can I make the
consequences of your amusements, when once they are past, equally sweet?


Francis. Alas! no, papa.


Mr. Dorville. In short, can I, with all my riches, make your limbs robust, or
preserve your stomach from indigestion?


Francis. Nor this either.


Mr. Dorville. Behold then what advantages you owe to labor! advantages so
precious, that not all the gold in the world can procure them.


Francis. I cannot deny it.


Mr. Dorville. And why is it that I get money? Is it that my children may be
happy or unhappy?


Francis. That they may be happy, without doubt.


Mr. Dorville. And which of the two is most happy, he who slumbers away the
best part of the morning in bed, or he, who by rising with the dawn, may, when
the weather is fine, walk in the country, and contemplate the ravishing
beauties of nature?


Francis. The latter, undoubtedly.


Mr. Dorville. Again; which is the happiest, he who wastes his life in pursuit
of vain pleasures, which by habit will become insipid, and which, when past,
leave no trace behind them; or he, who employs his time in useful and pleasant
labors, by which, he secures a thousand sweet enjoyments for the time to come?


Francis. Oh! the latter, certainly.


Mr. Dorville. I do not ask you, whether it be best to have the limbs strong
and robust, or enervated; a fresh and lively complexion, or sickly paleness;
vigorous health, or continual weakness; and a good appetite, rather than
perpetual indigestion.


Francis. Oh! it will not admit of a question.


Mr. Dorville. You have just allowed, that labor gives us all these advantages.


Francis. I have.


Mr. Dorville. Should I not then be highly blameable, if, in compliance to the
opinions of certain silly people, I were to neglect to cultivate a love for
work among my children, under the vain pretense that I am rich? when, with all
my riches, I should but make them the more unhappy!


Francis. Yes, yes, I see it plainly, now; what a blockhead I was, when I grew
tired of my work. Come, papa, the day is advanced: I am impatient to return to
my usual occupations. I hope to have a pretty bouquet to give to my sisters,
and some excellent strawberries for your dessert.


Mr. Dorville. Come, my dear, I am charmed to see you so reasonable: this
encourages me to consult you on an affair of importance which I have in my
mind. We will talk about it tomorrow.


On the morrow, Francis, a little proud, but still more curious to be of this
consultation with his father, hastened the next day to attend him, with some
degree of importance in his air.

It is a long time, son, said Mr. Dorville, since I have been thinking how to
place a certain sum of money most advantageously for my children.

Francis. You are very good, papa.


Mr. Dorville. I am therefore very glad to consult you on this business.


Francis. Me, papa; O nothing can be more simple; you have only to throw it
into trade.


Mr. Dorville. It is in that already, my dear; but on the contrary, I think of
withdrawing it from trade, in order to make it more secure to you: in our way
of business, we are exposed to many losses; I experience this every day; and in
case some great stroke should befall us, I should wish to place a certain part
of my fortune so securely, as to ensure a comfortable subsistence to my
children for the rest of their lives.


Francis. I should think, you might purchase houses?


Mr. Dorville. True, but then there is the hazard of their being burnt.


Francis. In that case buy land, that cannot be burnt at least.


Mr. Dorville. That is true; but then if we do not ourselves attend to the
cultivation of it, it will soon become barren and sink in value, after we have
been at much expense on it; so that in the end, we shall find ourselves poor in
the midst of large possessions.


Francis. I do not know then, papa, what advice to give you.


Mr. Dorville. Why truly, child, I see no way of absolutely securing this sum,
but by spending it in such a manner that we never can lose the interest of it.


Francis. How, papa, spend a sum of money for fear you should lose it?


Mr. Dorville. Even so; for instance: if I should lay it out in giving you
useful acquirements, which would make you independent of all reverses of
fortune; you then would be, in whatever situation chance might throw you, able
to procure the necessaries of life. You understand accounts and book-keeping;
you know every thing belonging to the cultivation of trees; you are a tolerable
turner; your brother and sisters have also their particular talents: it has
cost me a great deal of money to have you instructed in these things. I will
sacrifice yet more, to make you complete; and then, I shall look upon you as
possessing more riches, than those who have a great inheritance; for we may
lose our fortune, but useful knowledge remains with us for ever.


Francis. But, papa, you are in very easy circumstances; you are master of a
good manufacture; and I think with that we never can want.


Mr. Dorville. Much richer people than we are, have experienced reverses of
fortune, and it is good to be prepared against all possible events. I recollect
a story which will illustrate this observation: I will relate it to you.


Francis. Pray do, papa; I shall be glad to hear it.


Mr. Dorville. A young gentleman in Germany paid his addresses to a very
amiable lady, and asked her in marriage of her father. The father said to him,
I will give you my daughter very willingly, but have you a good trade to
maintain her and her children? A trade, Sir, answered the young gentleman? are
you ignorant that I possess a large country-seat in your neighborhood, with a
considerable estate besides? All this is nothing, replied the father of the
lady; your house may be burnt, your land may suffer devastation; besides this,
many other ruinous accidents may happen to you, which I cannot foresee. In a
word, if you wish to obtain my daughter, you must learn some trade, or I shall
not be satisfied. It is the absolute condition of our alliance. It was in vain
that the young gentleman remonstrated: the father would not recede. What was to
be done? he loved the lady too passionately to give her up. He put himself
apprentice therefore to a basket-maker, the easiest business he could think of;
and it was not till after he had made a very neat basket, and some other pieces
of workmanship, before the eyes of her father, that he could obtain the lady.


During the first years of his marriage, he laughed inwardly at the foresight
of his father-in-law, and the whimsical condition which he had imposed upon
him; but he had soon occasion to see the matter in a much more serious light.

War was declared: the enemy entered his province. They ravaged his lands; cut
down his forests; demolished his castle; pillaged his effects; and obliged him
and his family to take flight: our rich gentleman found himself all at once
reduced to indigence. At first he did nothing but deplore his ill-fortune,
living with difficulty on the little money that he had saved: but this resource
soon failed him. He then bethought himself of the trade which he had learned.
His spirits began to recover, and he gave himself up to work with the more
ardour, as he had taken refuge in a city where his name and rank were unknown.
His wife, between the intervals of her domestic occupations, comforted him
under his labors. The children were employed to sell the baskets which he
made. In this manner, he provided decently for the support of himself and
family, until the happy moment arrived, which by the return of peace, restored
him again to the possessions of his fortune.

This story made a lively impression on Francis. He related it himself to his
brother and sisters, who were also as much taken with it. It put them upon
making a number of reflections on the wisdom of providing resources against the
unexpected turns of fortune. Alas! they did not then foresee that they soon
would have occasion to apply this to themselves. A little time after, a fire
broke out in the night in one of Mr. Dorville's magazines; and all the
buildings belonging to his manufactory were consumed before any assistance
could be got to stop the flames. Another man might have been cast down by this
disaster; but, on the contrary, it served only to fortify his resolution, and
redouble his activity. All his friends were eager to support him. His industry
made the best use of these advantages, by laboring to repair his losses. Nor
did this reverse of fortune prevent his daughters from being sought in marriage
by the richest and most sensible men; because they knew, that, in them they
should find women capable of conducting the affairs of their house, with
economy and prudence. As for his two sons, they applied themselves with such
indefatigable ardour to business, that, in a few years their affairs were not
only re-established, but carried to a degree of prosperity, which they had
never known before that misfortune which seemed to have overthrown them for
ever.

LETTER XX. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
SEPTEMBER 27.
O MY dear mamma, what danger my friend Charles has been in! Alas! I have been
within a little of losing him! I tremble yet whilst I think of it. What would
have become of me if he had been as brutal as his adversary; if he had either
lost his life, or taken away that of his antagonist, and been obliged to fly
his country? Happily all has terminated to his honor; whilst he is preserved
to his family, and to his friend, he has given us fresh reason to love and
esteem him. But I am too long without satisfying your curiosity: read, pray
read the letter which Mr. Grandison has just received from Mr. Bartlet. I have
spent the whole evening in transcribing it in order to send it to you. Oh! my
dear mamma, how many times has my heart beat whilst I was taking this copy! But
it is not of me that it speaks; forget me, I pray you, for a few moments, that
you may be the more at liberty to attend to my friend.

LETTER XXI. MR. BARTLET TO MR. GRANDISON.
SEPTEMBER 26. My dear Friend,
I CAN never sufficiently congratulate you on the happiness of possessing such
a son as yours. I was witness yesterday, without his knowing it, to an
adventure which does him infinite honor. But why should I be astonished at his
conduct, when I only see, in it, the effect of the good example and wise
lessons which he has received from you! We fell in company yesterday with a Mr.
Stukely, son to Lord G --, a young man of a most violent and brutal character:
though he is but eighteen years of age, he is devoured by ambition and envy. I
had already observed, that he was jealous of the post which your son had
obtained. He threw out many spiteful sarcasms, which Charles, with admirable
self-command, passed over in silence. They engaged in a game of piquet
together. Stukely, like a bully, took advantage of your son's moderation,
pluming himself on a false courage He took occasion to quarrel with him at
play, in so pointed a manner, that Charles could not refrain from showing his
indignation, by his looks. I will give you their conversation, word for word.

Charles. Methinks, Sir, you do not seem to take much pleasure in this game,
had not we better leave off?


Stukely, (throwing the cards on the table.) Very true. There is very little
pleasure in playing with people who understand nothing of the game.


Charles. It is very possible, I do not understand it so well as you, by a
great deal: I do not play so much.


Stukely. If you are not better informed in other things, I fear you will find
it somewhat difficult to support the honor that you so lately obtained.


Charles. I do not look upon the science of gaming to be absolutely necessary,
to this purpose. But let us talk of something else, if you please. You have a
very pretty snuff box.


Stukely. You would like such an one perhaps, with your new dignity.


Charles. It would be quite useless to me; I do not take snuff. I think it
better not to accustom myself to it, at my age.


Stukely. Do you mean by that, that I am wrong in taking it?


Charles. By no means. I have nothing to say against what you or your parents
think proper.


Stukely. My parents have nothing to do in this business; it is sufficient that
I like it.


Charles. Very well. Each according to his own way of thinking.


Stukely. What a dutiful little boy! He will not take a pinch of snuff, without
asking leave of his papa and mamma.


Charles. It is very true, I do nothing without consulting them.


Stukely. I ought not to be surprised at this: you are not so old as I am yet,
therefore, are not fit to think and act for yourself. You want time for
improvement.


Charles. I hope indeed to be better informed, when I come to your age.


Stukely. Do you mean to insult me, Sir? by telling me that you are better
informed than I am!


Charles. Better than you, Sir! I am incapable of so gross a rudeness. You must
certainly comprehend what I said, that at your age, I hoped to be better
informed than I am now.


Stukely. You have the art of evading your own words.


Charles. No, Sir. I think, before I speak: my words, therefore, need no
evasion.


Stukely. Enough. Shall we go into the garden together?


Charles. With all my heart, Sir. I have no objection.


Stukely rose up hastily, putting his hand to his sword: Charles calmly laid
his in an armed chair, and followed Stukely with a firm air. I waited till they
were out of the room, intending to follow them, as I perceived, plainly, that
Stukely meant to pick a quarrel. They walked at some distance from each other,
toward a little grove at the farther end of the garden. I went a shorter way to
the same place, and hid myself behind a clump of trees, where I could
conveniently listen to their conversation, which was as follows.

Stukely. Where is your sword? You had it on just now.


Charles. True, Sir: but I left it in the house*


Stukely. Go and fetch it, if you please.


Charles. Why, pray? I do not want my sword, to walk in the garden.


Stukely. No: but you want it, to repair the offense that you have given me.


Charles. The offense! It is somewhat strange, that I should have offended you,
without knowing it.


Stukely. You have offended me, however, and I only waited, till we were alone,
to take notice of it.


Charles. You might as well then have done that before. I should not have been
afraid of witnesses to what had passed between us, as I am conscious, that it
is against my principles to offend any one.


Stukely. To what end are all these words; fetch your sword. I will either have
satisfaction, or you must ask my pardon.


Charles. Ask your pardon, Sir! Had I offended you, I should not wait till you
required it: but as the matter stands, it is perfectly use less.


Stukely. But why did you leave your sword, when you saw that I wore mine?


Charles. What was that to me, Sir? I see no reason why I must regulate my
actions b^ yours.


Stukely. It was, however, to say the least, a great imprudence on your part.


Charles. As how, pray? Had I taken you for an assassin, I should doubtless
have kept my sword. Then indeed you would have had cause to take offense.


Stukely. You put me out of patience; my sword is now in the scabbard, but take
notice, I advise you to beware.


Charles. I am very easy, Sir, having nothing to fear.


Stukely. Nothing to fear! Do you expect, that I can bear, without resentment,
that a person of inferior birth to myself, and my junior, by four years, should
arrive at a preferment which I think I have a better right to?


Charles. You have been a long while in coming to the point. I guessed that
this was at the bottom of your displeasure. You are very good to give yourself
the trouble to envy me for it, when I do not envy you the advantage of your
high birth.


Stukely. What, do you despise this advantage then?


Charles. Certainly not, but, I should be very foolish to be jealous of it, or
to dispute it with you sword in hand.


Stukely. Why so, pray?


Charles. Because, my sword can no more take your birth, from you, than yours
can the post, which the king has been pleased to confer on me. Reflect upon
this; and then, tell me, whether there is any occasion for us to cut each
other's throats.


Stukely. But people fight often to prove their skill in the sword.


Charles. We may as well do this with our foils; and I will, if you please,
meet you at the fencing-school, where we may try our skill to the utmost, and
settle this grand quarrel.


Stukely. Do-you laugh at me?


Charles. God forbid: but I must confess, I fear, our duel will be laughed at,
and that the world will say, here are two young cowards, who have agreed
together to give each other a scratch, to make parade of their courage. Will
you listen to me, and accept of a satisfaction which will suit us both much
better?


Stukely. What is it?


Charles. It is this: that in all things in which you are really my superior, I
shall never blush to acknowledge you as such; and that I believe you will have
the same sentiments with regard to me.


Stukely, (putting up his sword.) Well then, it is I, that ought first to
render you the homage so justly your due. Yes, amiable Grandison, you have
conquered; and I yield to you. You have made me but too sensible of the
unworthiness of my behavior. Would you could but pardon me as sincerely, as I
reproach myself.


Charles. Enough, Sir; I have no longer any resentment.


Stukely. Let this scene, I conjure you, remain for ever a profound secret. It
is enough, for me, to carry about with me the remembrance of it, without
meeting the reproaches of others.


Charles. Be easy, Stukely: I give you my hand, as a pledge of my secrecy.


Stukely. And I receive it, with confidence: I do not dare to ask your
friendship; but let me live in the hope of obtaining it, by assisting to make
me more worthy.


After having embraced, the two young men returned back together into the
house. Nobody knew any thing of this adventure. It redounds as much to the
honor of your son, as to the disgrace of his adversary; had he not in some
sort repaired it, by the last part of his behavior. Throughout the whole of
this delicate circumstance, Charles manifested a courage, without rashness, and
moderation, without weakness. Though young and unarmed, he knew how to bring
his adversary to terms, by the force of his reasons. In a word, I know not
which the most to admire in him, his prudence, or his intrepidity.

LETTER XXII. WILLIAM DANVERS TO HIS MOTHER.
OCTOBER 2.
MY friend Charles is at length returned, my dear mamma. What was our joy at
seeing him again. The moment of his return served as a signal for a feast.
Without saying any thing to Mr. Grandison, the young boys of the village had
erected, with the boughs of trees, a triumphal arch at the entrance of the
avenue. The young girls, in their best attire, waited with baskets of flowers,
which they strewed before him. It was by a cry of, Long live Charles Grandison,
that his approach was first announced to us. We immediately ran to meet him,
Mrs. Grandison leading the way. He threw himself out of the carriage into the
arms of his parents. Mrs. Grandison pressed him to her heart, bathing him with
her tears; and Mr. Grandison, as he embraced him, strove in vain to conceal
his. As for Emily, her arms seemed fastened round his neck; and Edward, also,
was much rejoiced: though the eldest, he seemed to look up to his brother with
a kind of respect. But, mamma, I cannot describe to you what I felt. I wept, I
sighed, as if I had been in trouble; whilst my heart was filled with the most
lively joy. Ah! when it came to my turn to embrace him, how closely did I hold
him in my arms! I thought of you at the same time. Ah! said I to myself, if I
could but this moment carry my friend into the presence of my mamma! The
servants ran backward and forward, crying out with joy. They would have given
the world to have embraced and kissed him as we did. No one was ever beloved
like him; nor was any one ever so worthy of it. All the country people came
yesterday evening, and danced under our windows; and tonight, there was a
general illumination throughout the village.

Charles has received this morning the compliments of all the neighboring
nobility. What an honor at his age! But he is not rendered proud by it: on the
contrary, he is more modest than before. Is not this the best proof in the
world that he is worthy of his dignity?

Just as we were sitting down to table, the old gardener (Matthews) came in: he
is the husband of Mrs. Grandison's nurse. He lives about three miles off, on a
pension allowed him by Mr. Grandison, upon which he passes a happy old age. He
advanced slowly on his crutches to pay his compliments. Charles saw him at the
end of the avenue, and ran to meet him. He took him by the hand, and brought
him to his mother. He made him sit down to table next to himself. You see,
mamma, that honors have not changed the nature of my friend. A young of honor
makes an old gardener sit by his side, and serves him all dinnertime! Not that
I saw any thing so extraordinary in this, but I could perceive, that Edward was
inwardly astonished at it. I do not know how it is, said he to his brother
after dinner, but this visit of Matthews seemed to give you more pleasure than
all the rest. It is true, answered Charles: the words of this honest man are
not made up of vain compliments; they come from the heart. He would not, at his
age, have walked three miles on his crutches to congratulate me, if he had not
been sincerely rejoiced at my good fortune; and besides, ought I not to love
him who had the care of dear mamma's infancy? I am sure, he loves her as if she
was his own daughter. Charles was in the right; for during the whole meal, I
had my eyes fixed upon this good old man; and though he was in the gayest
spirits, I could frequently observe his eyes filled with tears, when he turned
them toward Mrs. Grandison. The worthy Matthews wished to return home early,
because of the length of the walk; but in order to enjoy his company longer,
Charles easily prevailed on his father to send him back in his carriage.

You may well imagine, my dear mamma, that I could not be witness to all these
scenes, without figuring to myself the happy day on which I shall return to
you. Alas! I shall have no place or dignities to bring back to you, but I shall
at least have done all in my power to bring you back a heart less unworthy of
your affection. No illuminations will celebrate my return; but I shall see your
eyes, and those of my sister, shine through their tears with all the brightness
of joy. I shall receive no flattering compliments on the advancement of my
fortune, but I shall receive from your mouth the words of love; I shall receive
your kisses and caresses. I do not envy my friend the favors bestowed on him
by the bounty of heaven: I feel, that be deserves them better, than I. But when
I see him in the arms of his mother, I ask why am not I in those of my dear
mamma. I have nothing but you to love on earth, and I am far from you. You are
all my riches, and I possess you not. Oh! mamma, my dear mamma? I must break
off: I must not give myself up to these cruel reflections! I should have
strength enough, perhaps, to support them for myself alone, but not for you. It
is not my own grief which I fear, it is yours. I should not dread afflictions,
were it not for the fear of afflicting you.

FINIS.

