THE Right Education of CHILDREN RECOMMENDED, IN A SERMON, PREACHED IN A NEW
SCHOOL-HOUSE IN NORTH-YARMOUTH, September 23, 1788; And now published by the
Desire of those who heard it. By TRISTRAM GILMAN, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN
THAT TOWN.

BOSTON: Printed by SAMUEL HALL, at No. 53, Cornhill. MDCCLXXXIX.

To the READER.
THE following Discourse was preached at the opening of a new school-house, at
the request of the proprietors, without the least suspicion that one would
propose its publication. And when I heard that some persons were desirous it
should be ^^ted, I was much averse to it, supposing it to be inconsiderable a
performance to be made any more ^lick than by preaching it where it was
delivered. (...) being informed there was a large number, who ^^efond of having
it in their own possession, I gave up (...) own judgment in the matter, and
conceded to their ^^uest, being willing to hope it might, by the divine
^^ssing, to which I would humbly commit it, be of ^ther use to those who heard
it, and perhaps to ^^e others into whose hands it may fall. The subject
^^confessedly important, but too copious to be fully ^^ated in so short a
discourse as this is. But if even ^^at is here offered to the public should be
a means further encouraging the well-disposed to go for^^rd, in aiming to
establish and maintain good ^^ools here, or elsewhere, and of exciting others
to ^^end to the right education of their children, it will (...) public
benefit, and a comfort to all who wish ^ll to the rising generation. May the
Lord our ^^d pour out his spirit on our seed, and his blessing our offspring,
and form us and ours for himself, ^^t we may show forth his praise, and be
happy in his ^^our, here and hereafter.

T. GILMAN.

A SERMON.
PROVERBS xxii. 6. Train up a Child in the Way he should go, and when he is old
he will not depart from it.
THE right education of children is a matter of great importance, and has been
viewed in this light by wise men in all generations. No creatures come into the
world in a more needy and helpless condition, as to the body, than mankind;
being naked and feeble, they require much care and nursing before they are able
to help themselves: and they equally stand in need of assistance as to their
minds, which are void of knowledge and wisdom, and (which renders their
condition more piteous) naturally inclined to imbibe error rather than truth,
and to prefer the paths of vanity, folly and sin to the ways of virtue, wisdom
and religion. It is written, Job xi. 12. "Man is born like the wild ass's
colt," which is a lively similitude of ignorant and depraved mankind, for an
ass is a silly, ignorant creature, even to a proverb: and a wild ass has
something in him whereby he more fully resembles fallen man; this creature is
noted in scripture for wantonness, Jer. ii. 23. and also for stubbornness and
an ungovernable disposition. Job xxxix. 5. "Who has sent out the wild ass
free, or who has loosed the bands of the wild ass? whose house I have made the
wilderness, and the barren land his dwellings. He scorneth the multitude of the
city, neither regards he the crying of the driver." The horse must travel and
the ox draw the plough; the one has a bit put into his mouth, and the other is
under a yoke: but a wild ass is a stranger to discipline, and likes not to hear
of any master but himself, or to be a servant to any but his own will. Such is
the nature of man, he loves to be free, or rather to be dissolute. He cannot
endure to be subdued to order; he would know no law but his own lust, nor rule
but his own desire. He is so much for sinful liberty, he cares not for true
liberty. The liberty he seeks makes him a bond-slave to corruption. Thus man is
born like the wild ass's colt, ignorant, wanton and licentious. And as he is
thus born, so, without right education, he is in danger of growing up wild,
rude, and destitute of profitable knowledge and true wisdom. As uncultivated
land brings forth briars and thorns, so, in untutored and uninstructed minds,
odious and hurtful lusts grow up, numerous and strong, which, in their
operation, render the subjects themselves unhappy, and often disquiet all
around them, or with whom they are concerned, Those who have had no good
education are liable to become the slaves of every lawless appetite and
passion, to be led astray by every temptation to evil, to take wrong methods to
procure the supports of the present life, and to walk in the broad road which
leads to ruin hereafter. And hence appears the importance of right education,
with respect to the interest of children themselves, that they may be preserved
from such evils as have been mentioned, and be led in the way which leads to
virtue and wisdom, peace and comfort here, and to glory, honor and immortality
hereafter. It is of importance also with respect to civil society, that this
may be supported, and the benefits and blessings which result from thence
enjoyed. It is of importance with respect to the church of Christ, that this
may be preserved on earth, and true religion maintained in the world. In a
word, the interest not only of the present, but of future generations, is
deeply concerned in this matter. It has therefore been justly accounted a wise
act in parents and others to pay a particular attention hereunto, and to spare
no suitable pains and cost in having the rising generation well instructed.

To this end we have the injunction in the text, from a wise king, under the
influence of divine inspiration, to "train up a child in the way he should go;"
which implies, that there is a wrong way, in which children ought not to go,
and for preventing of which, right education is necessary, and also a right
way, in which they ought to walk, and to which a good education must point and
introduce them; and for our encouragement to the practice of this duty, it is
said, "when he is old he will not ^epart from it."

It may be objected here, that sometimes we see ^ose, who have been favored
with the best educa^ion, miserably apostatizing from it, and exhibiting (...)
melancholy proof that all the cost and pains that ^ave been bestowed upon them
has been to no good ^urpose. How then does it appear, that such as have ^ad a
good education, when they come to maturi^^, will act or conduct themselves
agreeably? To ^is it may be answered, (1.) "That this is the (...) most likely
means of bringing persons to walk (...) in right ways, or conduct themselves in
a right (...) manner, that they were taught so to do from (...) their childhood
and youth." Though it be but (...) means, yet it is a means well adapted to the
end, and that which is often, or most commonly, suc^^ssful to answer this end.
Mankind often walk (...) after life, outwardly at least, according as their
^ducation has been: yea, we may say that a good ^ducation has been blessed and
sanctified as a means (...) saving conversion unto God; though it is not a
^eans that can of itself reach this high end, yet it ^as been often sanctified
to promote it. The in^ructions received in youth often abide with persons (...)
after life: and if good knowledge and sound ^isdom enter the minds of those who
are young, ^^ey will not be effaced or eradicated afterward. ^2.) When
children are rightly instructed and ^ained up, they will not easily and
ordinarily de^art from such an education." They will find ^ore difficulties
than others do, in breaking over ^e rules of virtue and religion, and of
walking in the paths of vanity and folly. They have not only the light of
conscience, but the light of education, to conflict with; and many a struggle
they must have in their own minds, and many upbraidings of conscience, before
they can easily go contrary to all the wise instructions that have been given
them, and addict themselves to vicious courses. (3.) If they do depart for
awhile, there is great hope that they will see their error, and be reclaimed.
Even the great and wise King Solomon, the author of this book of Proverbs,
turned aside, for a time, from the right way, but was brought to true
repentance and reformation, as is evident from the book of Ecclesiastes, which,
it is highly probable, he wrote in his old age, and which contains a public
testimony of his repentance and abhorrence of all those sinful courses to which
he had been addicted. So that when it is said in the text, that those who are
trained up in the way wherein they should go, will not depart from it in after
years, we may understand, that they ^ill not easily and ordinarily depart from
it, or if ^^ey do so for a time, yet that there is great reason to hope they
will be happily recovered. There are no general rules without exceptions; and
though upon some, all care and pains prove but lost labor, yet, as to many
others, it is otherwise. And if the labor is lost as to the youth themselves,
yet those, to whose care and instruction they have been committed, will have
the satisfaction of having discharged their duty, though they have not attained
the end they desired.

If it be inquired, wherein does a right education consist, or how we must
conduct to afford ^^ch an one to children? it may be answered, that (...) few
things comprise the whole, viz. suitable ^^structions, good examples, and a
wise discipline (...) good government; all being attended with ^^ayer for the
divine blessing, to render them effect^l to the great end proposed. It is
observed, that (...) original word, translated child, is used with great
^^titude in scripture, and runs through all the dates (...) infancy, childhood
and youth. And the word ^ndered train up, signifies to dedicate, initiate,
in^^uct, and set in order.

Instruction, therefore, in the necessary parts of ^man learning, and whatever
else is likely to be ^^eful and beneficial to the persons taught, is a ^incipal
part of a good education. These instruc^^ns should be suited to the age,
capacities and ^^er circumstances of children. They should be ^mmunicated with
judgment, as to time, and as (...) the quantity at any one time. The learners
should be led on from those things that are more ^^ple and plain, to those
which are more difficult ^^d abstruse. These instructions should be repeat^^^
from time to time, with a patient, persevering ^rit, as the children or youth
are able to receive ^^em. They should consist both of matters of art (...)
science, and also things of a moral and religious ^ture, that children and
youth may obtain the ^^eful parts of human learning, and come to know ^at is
just and right, what is decent, lovely and good report, that they may embrace
and prac^^^^ these things: and also understand and per^^ve what is evil, sinful
and base, that they may abhor and avoid it. And further, still, that, by the
divine blessing, they may be induced to remember their Creator in the days of
their youth, and fear the Lord betimes.

Good examples must accompany and follow good instructions, or the latter, so
far as relates to moral conduct, are not likely to be very beneficial. Naked
precepts, as to civil, moral or religious conduct, where there is no suitable
example attending, are commonly heard with indifference, and but poorly
observed. Examples carry strong conviction to the mind, and make deep
impressions on the heart; these, therefore, should always accompany precepts,
as a means to persuade to a compliance, or enforce an observation. They,
therefore, who are instructors of children, but careless whether they exhibit
any good examples of moral or religious behavior before them, ought not to
wonder if they see the greatest inattention and disregard paid to the most
solemn injunctions; while the instructor who practices agreeable to the rules
he gives unto his scholars, will convince their judgments, win their
affections, and persuade them to imitation.

A wise discipline or government must be intermixed with instructions and
examples. This is absolutely necessary in families and schools, for maintaining
good order, correcting the disobedient, restraining and overawing the viciously
inclined, and encouraging the well disposed. Where there is no rule or right
government, disorder, confusion and every evil work will soon take place; the
progress of learning is impeded, and no great good is to be expected.
Government of children and youth should be managed with care, concern and
judgment, with steadiness and lenity, firmness and impartiality. All milder
methods should be ^^ken with children before chastisements or corpo^^l
punishments are administered. But when no other means will answer, these must
not be with^^ld: and whenever the case calls for the disagreeable task, the
instructor and governor should en^^avour to convince the child of the
necessity of ^^ch correction, and that he does it not to gra^^y any passion or
resentment of his own, but in ^^ve and faithfulness to him and others. These
^^nishments should be adapted to the nature of ^imes, and be greater or less,
in proportion to the ^grees of criminality, and the age and other circumstances
of the offenders, and be always free ^^om every species of cruelty or unjust
severity.

These several parts of education should be ac^^mpanied by servent prayer to
the God of all ^^ace, for his blessing, to succeed and render effect^^l our
endeavors. We should always maintain (...) humble sense of our need of the
divine blessing, (...) prosper all our lawful undertakings, and particularly to
render the means of education effectual, (...) communicating useful knowledge
and true wisdom, to those we are aiming to train up in the way therein they
should walk. Under this apprehen^^^n, instructors and governors of children
ought (...) be daily committing their charge to the divine ^^e and benediction.
They should pray with and (...) them, every day, that God would show them
fa^^ur, and give them knowledge and understanding, and sanctify them to
himself, keep them from (...), and bless them in all respects.

This matter of a good education s^ems to be divided between parents or
guardians, and those who preside and instruct in schools and other seminaries
of learning. Parents and guardians should endeavor to afford to their
children, and those under their care, all the useful instruction they can; they
should direct, restrain and govern them in a right manner, set good examples
before them, and so do all in their power to train them up in a right manner.
If parents, who are able to do it, neglect all instruction of their children,
and will not be prevailed with to govern them according to the rules of right
reason and religion: if they are so far from setting good examples, that they
exhibit evil ones before them, such as using profane language, teaching their
children, by example, to be disrespectful and impudent to superiors, injurious
and oppressive to equals and inferiors, and careless and negligent with respect
to the fear and worship of God; as they do the greatest injury to their
children, so they impose an hard task upon a schoolmaster to instruct and
govern them aright, and cannot expect they should reap any great advantage from
school instruction. Some parents expect too much from a schoolmaster, both as
to instruction and government. As to instruction, they sometimes suppose their
children may learn so far in such a space of time, when it is beyond their
capacities or powers to attain thus far within that space. Or they may expect
that a master should bestow more time and pains upon a single scholar than it
is in his power to afford, considering the numbers he has under his care, all
which are to be attended to (...) their turn: and many times parents are
displeased ^ith masters without reason, because their children (...) not come
up to their expectations in learning, ^^ough the master uses his utmost
endeavors to ^ing them forward. And the same thing may be ^^served with
respect to government, viz. that ^me parents expect more from a master than
they ^ght to, with regard to government, while they should have him to govern
his scholars, not only ^^en they are under his inspection, but at all other
^es, so as to call them to account for all misde^anors committed abroad, or at
home, as well as school. But this matter of governing at home ^s not so
properly belong to the master as to ^^ents, who, if they would have their
children ^ll taught and governed at school, should endea^^r to perform their
part of these duties at home, the utmost of their power. Parents must not
forward to receive complaints from children ^^st the master, nor talk
disrespectfully of him ^ore them, but endeavor to aid him in his in^^ctions,
and to render the just exercise of his ^hority easy to him and beneficial to
them, as (...) they would hope to see their children well ^^cated. The first
care, with respect to this mat^lies upon parents. They begin the educa^^ of
their children; and this care is to be conti^d after they go to school, and
during all the (...) of their minority.

^ut it may be time to say something more par^^^^ (...) and govern^ (...)
benefical to (...) not leisure to (...) instruct instruct th^^^ own children,
or may not sufficiently understand the various parts of school-learning, so as
to become instructo^s, and because experience proves that children ordinarily
make greater proficiency when a number are instructed together, in different
classes or forms; therefore schools are instituted, in which a number of
scholars are committed to the tution of one master (or more, if the school is
large) whose business it is to instruct them in those parts of learning, which
are allowed to be necessary and useful, and also to teach them the principles
of religion, and the rules of morality, civility and good manners. These
instructions, therefore, have always been valued highly by persons of good
judgment, and the expense has not been grudged, which is necessary to support
them.

A person who undertakes the employment of keeping school ought to be competent
to the business in which he engages. A grammar schoolmaster should be capable
not only of teaching other things, but also the Latin and Greek languages, that
if any one has a desire that his child should be initiated in the knowledge of
these tongues, he may have an opportunity for it in the place where he resides.
But all schoolmasters should have a good understanding of the English
Language, and be able to teach English Grammar, right spelling and
pronunciation, according to the most approved standards. They ought to be able
to teach Wri^ing in a fair and elegant manner; and also Arithmetic, or the
science of numbers, in its most useful branches. The knowledge of these things
is necessary, that we may read the word of God, and ^^her books and writings,
to our own profit, and ^e advantage of others: that we may commu^cate our minds
to others by writing, or free our ^wn memories from the burden of many things
that it would be impossible for us to retain, by the ^^fy method of treasuring
them up on paper. This ^t of Writing is very useful; and so is the know^dge of
Numbers, without which many kinds of ^usiness could not be transacted at all,
and others ^ut poorly. There are higher branches of litera^re, which are taught
in academies and colleges, ^ith which we are not at present concerned. But ^e
things, which have been now mentioned, are ^^tly accounted necessary to be
taught in every school: and in addition to the above, and where ^here is
opportunity for it, instruction respecting (...) best methods of Speaking in
Public, or in pri^te circles, is sometimes taught to good advan^ge in schools:
and so is the art of Singing ac^ording to rule, when the master has a musical
ear, ^d sufficient knowledge of the rules. This art is (...) no means to be
despised, inasmuch as hereby ^ersons attain a capacity of performing one part
of ^blick workship, as to what is external, in a proper, ^cent manner, and so
as is best calculated to pro^te a spirit of devotion in the worshippers.

Schoolmasters should be men of virtue, good ^orals, and such as fear God
themselves, that they ^ay give good moral and religious instruction to ^ildren,
and set the purest examples before them. ^rents are certainly culpable if they
employ those (...) this office, who are known to be profane o^ ^mperate, or
person^ of ^oul language, or given to falsehood, and other vices. Yea, if any
candidate for this employment manifests an open contempt of religion, and the
worship of God, he is not to be put therein, though he may be capable on other
accounts. A schoolmaster should be virtuous and prudent; he should be
possessed of a good spirit of government, and know how to render himself both
beloved and revered by his scholars. He should be one who will condescend to
little children, and endeavor to find out the best methods of instilling
knowledge into them, and of leading them on to an acquaintance with the most
useful things. He should not put on a formidable aspect before young children,
left he so intimidate and discompose their tender minds as utterly to
disqualify them from attending to learning, and, it may be, fix lasting
prejudices against it. A winning, alluring method is best. He should be patient
to bear with the dullness of some scholars, and be disposed to take all suitable
pains with them. A man of an hasty spirit and violent passions is not so
suitable, as one of a more sedate and dispassionate constitution. A man whose
air, mien and language savor of an haughty, scornful disposition, is not to be
chosen; but rather such an one as is meek and affable, kind and benevolent,
though firm and steady, at the same time, in supporting his authority, and
doing whatever is necessary in his station.

Whoever acts in character, in this employment, will be diligent and faithful
in the improvement of the hours allotted for the school. He will consider
himself as having an important charge committed to him, and as acting, not only
for a pecu^ary reward, but to promote the greatest good to (...) rising
generation. Animated with the most ^ble and generous views, and fired with the
de^e of acquitting himself with honor, and of be^g serviceable in a most
important business; in ^ve to his generation and country, and under a (...)
concern for the glory of God, he will ad^ess himself to the arduous task with
activity, re^ution and perseverance; and nothing will afford (...) greater
satisfaction, than to see the seeds of ^owledge and virtue, sown by him,
springing up (...) the most amiable appearances, and promising, (...) time, the
most substantial and useful fruits. He ^ll check and reprove the idle and vain,
encour^e the industrious, support the seeble, and endea^ur that every one shall
profit. He will aim to ^pire the whole school with a noble emulation, (...)
excel in every thing that is virtuous and praise^rthy. He will set vice before
them in its odi^s colors and pernicious consequences, that they ^^y be led to
abhor and avoid it; and, at the ^me time, he will represent virtue and religion
^th their genuine attracting charms and happy ^ts, that his scholars may be in
love with them, (...) practice them. If these things are neglected, (...)
important part of school education is omitted, (...) they are performed, the
most beneficial conse^ences may be expected.

Once more: A good schoolmaster will endea^ur to conduct impartially,
instructing the child^^ of the poor equally with those of the rich, aim^^ that
every one may be equally benefited, according to their capacity, age, and the
particular parts of learning in which they are employed.

Thus have I endeavored to give some outlines of a good education of children,
both at home and at school. Let us now, by way of improvement, make some
reflections on what has been offered.

1. Hence we may see, that parents and others are well employed, when they are
doing what is in their power, that their children, and others under their care,
may be well instructed, that, if their lives are spared, they may fear the
Lord, and be useful members of society in their generation; and if they are
taken away while young, that they may be blessed hereafter. If any think the
time and necessary expense bestowed this way is to little or no purpose, it is
because they do not rightly consider the benefits of a good education.
Certainly it is to the commendation and praise of any people, when they are
careful to institute and support good schools, at suitable distances from each
other, for the instruction and right education of children. In this respect,
perhaps the endeavors of the inhabitants of this town are equal, according to
their numbers and ability, to those of any other people in these parts. We have
a number of school-houses, in different parts of the town, which are sometimes
all at once in use. We are now worshipping in a new and elegant one, erected
for the same noble purpose. Our wishes, with respect to this edifice, and every
other appropriated to this use, are, that they may always be supplied with
suitable instructors, and that the most useful learning may ^lourish in them:
that those who have been, and (...) still, exerting themselves in this matter,
may ^e the satisfaction of seeing the happy fruits of their labors in the good
tuition of their child^^^.

(...) We may see that the office of a schoolmaster ^^onourable, and the
employment most benefi^^^. As some of the best authors have conde^^ded to write
many things for the instruction of ^^dren, so others, who have been persons of
good ^ning and wisdom, have willingly spent their ^s, or great part of them, in
keeping schools of ^ral kinds; and those who have been instructed them, have
esteemed them among their great^enefactors. Certainly it is an useful and
hon^^able employment, to open the tender mind to (...) rays of truth, and to
bring those, who are ^ng, into a capacity of obtaining knowledge, and ^eing
useful in their day; to instill the max^^^ of wisdom and prudence into young
minds, (...) form them to virtue and religion. Those (...) are capable and
faithful in this business, merit (...) esteem and respect, and should be
suitably ^arded.

^ome addresses may close our subject.

To parents. Be exhorted, in every point, ^o your part, that your children may
be well ^cated. Afford them such instructions, as you ^able, that are right and
good. Set good ex^^les before them, pray daily with and for them. (...) the
morning and evening sacrifice of family prayer and praise be offered up in your
houses, and implore the divine blessing on your households continually. While
you are laudably employed in the institution and support of schools, be not
remiss in aiding and forwarding a school education, by all those means which
are in your power. Depend not entirely upon the master; but let your endeavors
precede, accompany and follow his, that your children may reap the greatest
profit and advantage. Be anxious for them, that they may obtain useful
knowledge, and become virtuous and soberminded.

Let it be the matter of your constant prayer, that they may know the true God,
and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent, which is life eternal. And also, that they
may be endowed with prudence and discretion, humanity and benevolence,
integrity and truth, which may lay a foundation for their becoming blessings
hereafter, in the church and commonwealth: That they may rejoice your hearts,
by their suitable deportment and behavior in the world; and that you may have
good hopes concerning them, as to future happiness and glory. The author of
this book says, (chap. xxiii. 15.) "My son, if thine heart be wife, my heart
shall rejoice, even mine; yea, my reins shall rejoice when thy lips speak right
things." That you may possess this joy, you should use those means with
diligence which are most suited to attain it.

2. To children. You see what pains, care and expense your parents are at, that
you may be taught and instructed in a right manner, while you are young. Let it
be your desire and endeavor, ^at their labors may not be lost, but answer the
^ost valuable purposes. Be in love with learning and your books. Attend to the
instructions that (...) given you. Respect and obey your instructors, (...) all
their lawful requirements. Be ^mulous to ^xcel in every thing that merits
commendation and ^aise. Be a credit to your families, and to the ^hools to
which you respectively belong. Above (...) things, fear your Maker while young,
obtain (...) saving acquaintance with the Redeemer, and de^te yourselves to God
in Christ Jesus, to be his ^rever. Avoid all profane, lewd and vicious com^any.
Imitate the best examples. Be modest and ^umble, respectful and civil. Always
be aiming ^ther to get good, or do good: and may the Lord ^ur God, in whose
favor there is life, give you an ^terest in his gracious covenant, and make
you ^artakers of all its blessings: may he enrich your ^inds with the most
valuable knowledge, and qua^y you for usefulness in your generation: may (...)
render you blessings on earth, and make you ^ever happy hereafter.

To conclude: Let us all be concerned to know ^he way wherein we should walk,
so as to please ^od, and serve him in our generation, according (...) his will.
This is no other than the way of ^ith in Jesus Christ, and new obedience. They
^ho receive him by faith, as he is offered in the ^spel, and live a life of
dependence on him for ^ghteousness and strength, and a life of devoted^ss to
him and his service, as they are by divine ^ace made accepted in the beloved,
so in their general course they live to the glory of God; and as their fruit is
now unto holiness, so their end will be everlasting life. May the God of all
grace fend forth his light and truth into all our minds, show us his glory in
the face of Jesus Christ, and incline our hearts to come to him for life, and
dispose us to obey him in all things. May he enrich us with that wisdom which
is from above, and enable us to serve him in this world, and make us meet for
the mansions of bliss, and finally receive us there, to be with him in glory:
To whom, through Jesus Christ, be everlasting praises.

AMEN.

