OBSERVATIONS ON THE Duties of a Physician, AND THE METHODS OF IMPROVING
MEDICINE. ACCOMMODATED TO THE PRESENT STATE OF SOCIETY AND MANNERS IN THE
UNITED STATES. DELIVERED IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA, FEBRUARY 7, 1789,
AT THE CONCLUSION OF A COURSE OF LECTURES UPON CHEMISTRY AND THE PRACTICE OF
PHYSIC.

BY BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. PROFESSOR OF CHEMISTRY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF
PENNSYLVANIA. PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE CLASS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY PRICHARD and HALL, IN MARKET STREET NEAR
FRONT STREET. M.DCC.LXXXIX.

GENTLEMEN,
I SHALL conclude our course of lectures, by delivering to you a few directions
for the regulation of your future conduct and studies, in the line of your
profession.

I shall, first, suggest the most probable means of establishing yourselves in
business, and of becoming acceptable to your patients, and respectable in life.

Secondly. I shall mention a few thoughts which have occurred to me on the mode
to be pursued, in the further prosecution of your studies, and for the
improvement of medicine.

I. Permit me, in the first place, to recommend to such of you as intend to
settle in the country, to establish yourselves as early as possible upon farms.
My reasons for this advice are as follow.

1. It will reconcile the country people to the liberality and dignity of your
profession, by showing them that you assume no superiority over them from your
education, and that you intend to share with them in those toils, which were
imposed upon man in consequence of the loss of his innocence. This will prevent
envy, and render you acceptable to your patients as men, as well as physicians.

2. By living on a farm you may serve your country by promoting improvements in
agriculture. Chemistry (which is now an important branch of a medical
education) and agriculture are closely allied to each other. Hence some of the
most useful books upon agriculture have been written by physicians. Witness the
essays of Dr. Home of Edinburgh, and of Dr. Hunter of Yorkshire in England.

3. The business of a farm will furnish you with employment in the healthy
seasons of the year, and thereby deliver you from the taedium vitae, or what is
worse, from retreating to low or improper company. Perhaps one cause of the
prevalence of dram or grog drinking, with which country practitioners are so
generally charged, is owing to their having no regular or profitable business
to employ them in the intervals of their attendance upon their patients.

4. The resources of a farm will create such an independence as will enable you
to practice with more dignity, and at the same time screen you from the trouble
of performing unnecessary services to your patients. It will change the nature
of the obligation between you and them. While money is the only means of your
subsistence, your patients will feel that they are the channels of your daily
bread; but while your farm furnishes you with the necessaries of life, your
patients will feel more sensibly, that the obligation is on their side, for
health and life.

5. The exigencies and wants of a farm, in stock and labor of all kinds, will
enable you to obtain from your patients a compensation for your services in
those articles. They all possess them, and men part with that of which money is
only the sign, much more readily than they do with money itself.

6. The resources of a farm will prevent your cherishing, for a moment, an
impious wish for the prevalence of sickness in your neighborhood. A healthy
season will enable you to add to the produce of your farm, while the rewards of
an unhealthy season will enable you to repair the inconvenience of your
necessary absence from it. By these means your pursuits will be marked by that
variety and integrity, in which true happiness is said to consist.

7. Let your farms be small, and let your principal attention be directed to
grass and horticulture. These afford most amusement, require only moderate
labor, and will interfere least with your duties to your profession.

II. Avoid singularities of every kind in your manners, dress, and general
conduct. Sir Isaac Newton, it is said, could not be distinguished in company,
by any peculiarity, from a common well-bred gentleman. Singularity in any
thing, is a substitute for such great or useful qualities as command respect;
and hence we find it chiefly in little minds. The profane and indelicate
combination of extravagant ideas, improperly called wit, and the formal and
pompous manner, whether accompanied by a wig, a cane, or a ring, should all be
avoided, as incompatible with the simplicity of science and the real dignity of
physic. There is more than one way of playing the quack. It is not necessary,
for this purpose, that a man should advertise his skill, or his cures, or that
he should mount a phaeton and display his dexterity in operating to an ignorant
and gaping multitude. A physician acts the same part in a different way, who
assumes the character of a madman or a brute in his manners, or who conceals
his fallibility by an affected gravity and taciturnity in his intercourse with
his patients. Both characters, like the quack, impose upon the public. It is
true, they deceive different ranks of people; but, we must remember that there
are two kinds of vulgar* viz. the rich and the poor; and that the rich vulgar
are often below the poor, in ignorance and credulity.

III. It has been objected to our profession, that many eminent physicians have
been unfriendly to christianity. If this be true, I cannot help ascribing it in
part to that neglect of public worship with which the duties of our profession
are often incompatible; for it has been justly observed, that the neglect of
this religious and social duty, generally produces a relaxation, either in
principles or morals. Let this fact lead you, in setting out in business, to
acquire such habits of punctuality in visiting your patients, as shall not
interfere with acts of public homage to the Supreme Being. Dr. Gregory has
observed, that a cold heart is the most frequent cause of deism. Where this
occurs in a physician, it affords a presumption that he is deficient in
humanity. But I cannot admit that infidelity is peculiar to our profession. On
the contrary, I believe christianity places among its friends more men of
extensive abilities and learning than any other secular employment. Stahl,
Hoffman, Boerhaave, Sydenham, Haller and Fothergill were all christians. These
enlightened physicians were considered as the ornaments of the ages in which
they lived, and posterity has justly ranked them among the greatest benefactors
of mankind.

IV. Permit me to recommend to you a regard to all the interests of your
country. The education of a physician gives him a peculiar insight into the
principles of many useful arts, and the practice of physic favors his
opportunities of doing good, by diffusing knowledge of all kinds. It was in
Rome, when medicine was practiced only by slaves, that physicians were
condemned by their profession "mutam exercere artem." But in modern times, and
in free governments, they should disclaim an ignoble silence upon public
subjects. The history of the American revolution has rescued physic from its
former slavish rank in society. For the honor of our profession it should be
recorded, that some of the most intelligent and useful characters, both in the
cabinet and the field during the late war, have been physicians. The
illustrious Dr. Fothergill opposed faction and tyranny, and took the lead in
all public improvements in his native country, without suffering thereby the
least diminution of that reputation, or business, in which, for forty years, he
flourished almost without a rival in the city of London.

V. Let me advise you, in your visits to the sick, never to appear in a hurry,
nor to talk of indifferent matters before you have made the necessary inquiries
into the symptoms of your patient's disease.

VI. Avoid making light of any case. "Respice finem" should be the motto of
every indisposition. There is scarcely a disorder so trifling, that has not,
directly, or indirectly, proved an outlet to human life. This consideration
should make you anxious and punctual in your attendance upon every acute
disease, and keep you from risking your reputation by an improper or hasty
prognosis.

VII. Do not condemn, or oppose, unnecessarily, the simple prescriptions of
your patients. Yield to them in matters of little consequence, but maintain an
inflexible authority over them in matters that are essential to life.

VIII. Preserve, upon all occasions, a composed or cheerful countenance in the
room of your patients, and inspire as much hope of a recovery as you can,
consistent with truth, especially in acute diseases. The extent of the
influence of the will over the human body, has not yet been fully ascertained.
I reject the futile pretensions of Mr. Mesmer to the cure of diseases, by what
he has absurdly called animal magnetism. But I am willing to derive the same
advantages from his deceptions, which the chemists have derived from the
delusions of the alchemists. The facts which he has established, clearly prove
the influence of the imagination and will upon diseases. Let us avail ourselves
of the handle which these powers of the mind present to us, in the strife
between life and death. I have frequently prescribed remedies of doubtful
efficacy in the critical stage of acute diseases, but never till I had worked
up my patients into a confidence, bordering upon certainty, of their probable
good effects. The success of this measure has much oftener answered, than
disappointed my expectations; and while my patients have commended the vomit,
the purge, or the blister which was prescribed, I have been disposed to
attribute their recovery to the vigorous concurrence of the will in the action
of the medicine. Does the will beget insensibility to cold, heat, hunger, and
danger? Does it suspend pain, and raise the body above feeling the pangs of
Indian tortures? Let us not then be surprised that it should enable the system
to resolve a spasm, to open an obstruction, or to discharge an offending humor.
I have only time to hint at this subject. Perhaps it would lead us, if we could
trace it fully, to some very important discoveries in the cure of diseases.

IX. Permit me to advise you to attend to that principle in the human mind,
which constitutes the association of ideas, in your intercourse with your
patients. A chamber, a chair, a curtain, or even a cup, all belong to the means
of life or death, accordingly as they are associated with cheerful or
distressing ideas, in the mind of a patient. But this principle is of more
immediate application in those chronic diseases which affect the mind. Nothing
can be accomplished here, till we produce a new association of ideas. For this
purpose, a change of place and company are absolutely necessary. But we must
sometimes proceed much further. I have heard of a gentleman in South Carolina
who cured his fits of low spirits by changing his clothes. The remedy was a
rational one. It produced at once a new train of ideas, and thus removed the
paroxysm of his disease.

X. Make it a rule never to be angry at any thing a sick man says or does to
you. Sickness often adds to the natural irritability of the temper. We are,
therefore, to bear the reproaches of our patients with meekness and silence. It
is folly to resent injuries at any time, but it is cowardice to resent an
injury from a sick man; since, from his weakness and dependence upon us, he is
unable to contend with us upon equal terms. You will find it difficult to
attach your patients to you by the obligation of friendship or gratitude. You
will sometimes have the mortification of being deserted by those patients who
owe most to your skill and humanity. This led Dr. Turner to advise physicians
never to choose their friends from among their patients. But this advice can
never be followed by a heart that has been taught to love true excellency,
where ever it finds it. I would rather advise you to give the benevolent
feelings of your hearts full scope, and to forget the unkind returns they will
often meet with, by giving to human nature -- a tear. --

XI. Avoid giving a patient over in an acute disease. It is impossible to tell
in such cases where life ends, and where death begins. Hundreds of patients
have recovered, who have been pronounced incurable, to the great disgrace of
our profession. I know that the practice of predicting danger and death upon
every occasion, is sometimes made use of by physicians, in order to enhance the
credit of their prescriptions if their patients recover, and to secure a
retreat from blame, if they should die. But this mode of acting is mean and
illiberal. It is not necessary that we should decide with confidence at any
time, upon the issue of a disease.

XII. I shall now give some directions with respect to the method of charging
for your services to your patients.

When we consider the expense of a medical education, and the sacrifices a
physician is obliged to make of ease, society, and even health, to his
profession; and when we add to these, the constant and painful anxiety which is
connected with the important charge of the lives of our fellow creatures, and
above all, the inestimable value of that blessing which is the object of his
services, I hardly know how it is possible for a patient sufficiently and
justly to reward his physician. But when we consider, on the other hand, that
sickness deprives men of the means of acquiring money; that it increases all
the expenses of living; and that high charges often drive patients from
regular-bred physicians to quacks; I say, when we attend to these
considerations, we should make our charges as moderate as possible, and conform
them to the following state of things.

Avoid measuring your services to your patients by scruples drachms, and
ounces. It is an illiberal mode of charging. On the contrary, let the number
and the time of your visits, the nature of your patient's disease, and his rank
in his family or society, determine the figures in your accounts. It is
certainly just to charge more for curing an apoplexy, than an intermitting
fever. It is equally just, to demand more for risking your life by visiting a
patient in a contagious fever, than for curing a pleurisy. You have a right
likewise to be paid for your anxiety. Charge the same services, therefore,
higher to the master or mistress of a family, or to an only son or daughter,
who call forth all your feelings and industry, than to less important members
of a family and of society. If a rich man demands more frequent visits than are
necessary, and if he imposes the restraints of keeping to hours by calling in
other physicians to consult with you upon every trifling occasion, it will be
just to make him pay accordingly for it. As this mode of charging is strictly
agreeable to reason and equity, it seldom fails of according with the reason
and sense of equity of our patients. Accounts made out upon these principles,
are seldom complained of by them. I shall only remark further upon this
subject, that the sooner you send in your accounts after your patients recover,
the better. It is the duty of a physician to inform his patient of the amount
of his obligation to him at least once a year. But there are times when a
departure from this rule may be necessary. An unexpected misfortune in
business, and a variety of other accidents, may deprive a patient of the money
he had allotted to pay his physician. In this case, delicacy and humanity
require, that he should not know the amount of his debt to his physician, till
time had bettered his circumstances.

I shall only add, under this head, that the poor of every description should
be the objects of your peculiar care. Dr. Boerhaave used to say, they were his
best patients, because God was their paymaster. The first physicians that I
have known, have found the poor the steps by which they have ascended to
business and reputation. Diseases among the lower class of people are generally
simple, and exhibit to a physician the best cases of all epidemics, which
cannot fail of adding to his ability of curing the complicated diseases of the
rich and intemperate. There is an inseparable connection between a man's duty
and his interest. Whenever you are called, therefore, to visit a poor patient,
imagine you hear the voice of the good Samaritan sounding in your ears, Take
care of him, and I will repay thee.

I COME now to the second part of this address, which was to point out the best
mode to be pursued, in the further prosecution of your studies, and the
improvement of medicine.

I. Give me leave to recommend to you, to open all the dead bodies you can,
without doing violence to the feelings of your patients, or the prejudices of
the common people. Preserve a register of the weather, and of its influence
upon the vegetable productions of the year. Above all, record the epidemics of
every season; their times of appearing, and disappearing, and the connection of
the weather with each of them. Such records, if published, will be useful to
foreigners, and a treasure to posterity. Preserve, likewise, an account of
chronic cases. Record the name, age and occupation of your patient; describe
his disease accurately, and the changes produced in it by your remedies;
mention the doses of every medicine you administer to him. It is impossible to
tell how much improvement and facility in practice you will find from following
these directions. It has been remarked, that physicians seldom remember more
than the two or three last years of their practice. The records which have been
mentioned, will supply this deficiency of memory, especially in that advanced
stage of life when the advice of physicians is supposed to be most valuable.

II. Permit me to recommend to you further, the study of the anatomy (if I may
be allowed the expression) of the human mind, commonly called metaphysics. The
reciprocal influence of the body and mind upon each other, can only be
ascertained by an accurate knowledge of the faculties of the mind, and of their
various modes of combination and action. It is the duty of physicians to assert
their prerogative, and to rescue the mental science from the usurpations of
schoolmen and divines. It can only be perfected by the aid and discoveries of
medicine. The authors I would recommend to you upon metaphysics, are, Butler,
Lock, Hartly, Reid, and Beattie. These ingenious writers have cleared this
sublime science of its technical rubbish, and rendered it both intelligible and
useful.

III. Let me remind you, that improvement in medicine is not to be derived only
from colleges and universities. Systems of physic are the productions of men of
genius and learning; but those facts which constitute real knowledge, are to be
met with in every walk of life. Remember how many of our most useful remedies
have been discovered by quacks. Do not be afraid, therefore, of conversing with
them, and of profiting by their ignorance and temerity in the practice of
physic. Medicine has its Pharisees, as well as religion. But the spirit of this
sect is as unfriendly to the advancement of medicine, as it is to christian
charity. By conversing with quacks, we may convey instruction to them, and
thereby lessen the mischief they might otherwise do to society. But further. --
In the pursuit of medical knowledge, let me advise you to converse with nurses
and old women. They will often suggest facts in the history and cure of
diseases which have escaped the most sagacious observers of nature. Even
negroes and Indians have sometimes stumbled upon discoveries in medicine. Be
not ashamed to inquire into them. There is yet one more source of information
in medicine which should not be neglected, and that is, to converse with
persons who have recovered from indispositions without the aid of physicians.
Examine the strength and exertions of nature in these cases, and mark the plain
and home-made remedy to which they ascribe their recovery. I have found this to
be a fruitful source of instruction, and have been led to conclude, that if
every man in a city, or a district, could be called upon to relate to persons
appointed to receive and publish his narrative, an exact account of the effects
of those remedies which accident or whim has suggested to him, it would furnish
a very useful book in medicine. To preserve the facts thus obtained, let me
advise you to record them in a book to be kept for that purpose: it may be
called a quack recipe-book. There is one more advantage that will probably
attend the inquiries that have been mentioned; you may discover diseases, or
symptoms of diseases, or even laws of the animal economy, which have no place
in our systems of nosology, or in our theories of physic.

IV. Let me recommend to your particular attention, the indigenous medicines of
our country. Cultivate or prepare as many of them as possible, and endeavor to
enlarge the materia medica, by exploring the untrodden fields and forests of
the United States. The ipecacuana, the Seneka and Virginia snake roots, the
Carolina pink-root, the spice-wood, the sassafras, the butter-nut, the
thoroughwort, the poke, and the strammonium, are but a small part of the
medical productions of America. I have no doubt but there are many hundred
other plants which now exhale invaluable medical virtues in the desert air.
Examine, likewise, the mineral waters, which are so various in their
impregnation, and so common in all parts of our country. Let not the properties
of the insects of America escape your investigation. We have already discovered
among some of them, a fly equal in its blistering qualities to the famous fly
of Spain. Who knows but it may be reserved for America to furnish the world,
from her productions, with cures for some of those diseases which now elude the
power of medicine? Who knows but what, at the foot of the Allegany mountain
there blooms a flower that is an infallible cure for the epilepsy? Perhaps on
the Monongahela, or the Potowmac, there may grow a root that shall supply, by
its tonic powers, the invigorating effects of the savage or military life in
the cure of consumptions. Human misery of every kind is evidently on the
decline. Happiness, like truth, is an unit. While the world, from the progress
of intellectual, moral and political truth, is becoming a more safe and
agreeable abode for man, the votaries of medicine should not be idle. All the
doors and windows of the temple of nature have been thrown open by the
convulsions of the late American revolution. This is the time, therefore, to
press upon her altars. We have already drawn from them discoveries in morals,
philosophy, and government; all of which have human happiness for their
objects. Let us preserve the unity of truth and happiness, by drawing from the
same source, in the present critical moment, a knowledge of antidotes to those
diseases which are supposed to be incurable.

I have now, Gentlemen, only to thank you for the attention with which you have
honored the course of lectures which has been delivered to you, and to assure
you, that I shall be happy in rendering you all the services that lie in my
power, in any way you are pleased to command me. Accept of my best wishes for
your happiness, and may the blessings of hundreds and thousands that were ready
to perish, be your portion in life, your comfort in death, and your reward in
the world to come.

THE END.

