ADVERTISEMENT.
THE substance of the following relation was verbally delivered to the editor,
by the hon. INCREASE MOSELEY, esquire. who was intimately acquainted with mr. John
Fillmore, the hero of the tale, both before and after his captivity; and who
had heard him so often and so emphatically relate it, that he thinks it will
never be obliterated from his memory.

Mr. Fillmore the subject of these adventures, being dead, the editor has
chosen to deliver the story as though it was written by the sufferer himself,
judging that mode would prove most agreeable to the reader.

A NARRATION OF THE CAPTIVITY OF JOHN FILLMORE AND HIS ESCAPE FROM THE PIRATES.

Printed at BENNINGTON, state of VERMONT. by HASWELL and RUSSELL, in the year
1790.

A Narrative, etc.
THE depravity of the human mind is so universally acknowledged in the present
enlightened age, and a belief of the universal presidency of providence over
the affairs of men so evidently established, as to need no argument to enforce
the reception of a narrative in which both are peculiarly manifest.

Convinced of the truth of the above ^^^^^ment I shall proceed in my narrative,
^^^^^voring on the one hand to avoid tedious ^^petitions, and on the other to
omit no ^^^dent that may afford entertainment to my courteous reader.

My father dying when I was young, my mother put me apprentice to learn the
trace or occupation of a carpenter. On the other side of the road, opposite to
the house where I lived there dwelt a tailor, who had an apprentice named
William White, with whom I was very intimate, during the time of his
apprenticeship, but he was out of his time and went to sea some time before I
was free, being about three years older than myself.

White, as I before observed, went to sea sometime before I was free, but he
did not return, nor do I remember that I ever saw or heard of him afterward,
till I found him among the pirates.

From my youth I had an almost irresistible desire for undertaking a voyage to
sea, which I resolved at all events to gratify, as soon as I obtained a right
to dispose of myself. In establishing this resolution, a love of novelty,
joined to a secret delight I enjoyed in hearing sailors relate the curiosities
they met with in their voyages, doubtless had a great effect, and the older I
grew the impression became the stronger.

But however strong my desire was to follow the sea, a sense of the duty I owed
my surviving parent, so far overballanced my inclination, as to occasion me to
form a determination not to gratify it until I should be of age, unless I
could gain her consent. The propensity however was so strong as to induce me at
the age of seventeen, to apply to my mother and request liberty to go (...)
voyage to sea. My mother was very uneasy at the request, and used every art of
persuasion that maternal tenderness could dictate, to induce me to relinquish
the design. Expressing some surprise that I should entertain any idea of
following the sea, as it was a life most evidently attended with innumerable
fatigues and dangers: urging, as a particular reason for her disapprobation of
the measure, the melancholy fate of my father, who being a seafaring man, was
taken by a French frigate, on a voyage homeward bound, and carried into
Martinico, a number of years before, where he underwent all the hardships of a
close and cruel confinement, and although ultimately redeemed, with many others,
was supposed to be most inhumanly poisoned by the French, on board the cartel,
as they principally died on their passage home.

However strong an argument this might have appeared to my mother it failed of
its desired effect upon me, it only lulled my desire for a while, but by no
means eradicated it: I waited however with a great degree of impatience about
two years longer, when I again asked leave to go a voyage to the Westindies,
and my mother finding my resolution unabated, concluded she could as well part
with me then as when I became of age, after which she imagined she should not
be able to detain me. Upon the whole she told me she was unwilling I should go
to the Westindies, but that the sloop Dolphin, capt. Haskell was then in the
harbor, fitting out for a fishing voyage, and if I would go with him she would
give her consent; to this proposal I readily assented.

I accordingly shipped on board the sloop, and had a tolerable passage to the
fishing ground; but soon after our arrival there, we were surprised by the
appearance of a ship, which from external signs we suspected to be a pirate. We
were not by any means prepared to oppose so formidable an enemy, and she was so
close upon us before we suspected her as to render it impossible for us to
escape by running away, we were therefore obliged to abide our fate peaceably
let the consequence be what it would.

The pirate soon came up and sent a boat on board our sloop, demanding who we
were, and where we were bound; to which our captain gave a direct answer. By
this boat's crew we learned, that the noted pirate capt. Phillips commanded
their ship. This intelligence it will readily be conceived, gave us great
uneasiness, most of our crew being quite young, and having often heard of the
cruelties committed by that execrable pirate, which made us dread to fall into
his hands.

The pirate's boat soon boarded us again, demanding the name of every hand on
board: In this boat came White the tailor, with whom I had been acquainted
during his apprenticeship, as beforementioned. I was greatly surprised to find
him employed in so criminal a course of life, though I said nothing of the
matter to him. On the return of the pirate's boat with a list of our names,
White, as I was afterward informed, acquainted Philips of his knowledge of me,
informing him, that if he could engage me in his service, he would gain a good
stout resolute fellow, every way he supposed, such a hand as he wanted.

On receiving this information, as he stood in need of a hand, and found we had
no property he wanted on board, he sent his boat once more with orders to capt.
Haskell, to send me on board his ship and the rest of the crew with the sloop,
may go free. My worthy commander, with much visible concern in his countenance,
took me aside, and informed me of Phillips's orders, adding, that although it
would be exceedingly disagreeable and painful to him to let me go, yet as we
were entirely in the power of a bloody merciless ruffian, and no hopes of
escape but by giving me up, I believe, says he, you must go and try your
fortune with them.

The thought of being sacrificed as it were to procure liberty for the rest of
the crew, opperated greatly upon my spirits, and the first conclusion I drew up
was, that I would not on any conditions agree to go on board the pirate. I
therefore told my captain that I had ever been faithful to his interest and
commands, that I had always wished to do my duty punctually and well, but that
I was determined not to go on board the pirate let the consequence be what it
would. Our conversation ended here, for that time, and the boat returned
without me.

Phillips was greatly incensed when the boat returned without me, and sent
again, with orders to bring me either dead or alive. My capt. took me aside
again, and told me the pirate's resolution and message, adding that he believed
I should do well to go with them, for if I refused to go, and made resistance,
it would be inevitable death to me, and probably to our whole crew: He urged
further, that my submitting would prove the certain release of the rest of the
crew, and there would at least be a probability of my making an escape from
them at sometime or other: But if I could not find a way to escape, it was not
impossible but Phillips might discharge me, for he had sent word that if I
would agree to serve him faithfully for two months, he would then set me at
liberty.

Those only who have been in similar circumstances can form an adequate idea of
the distress I experienced at this time. If I obstinately refused to join the
pirates, instant death stared me and my comrades in the face, if I consented to
go with them I expected to be massacred for refusing to sign their piratical
articles, which I had fully determined never to do, though I should be put to
the extremity of torture for refusal. Into so critical a situation had my bad
fortune plunged me, that inevitable destruction seemed to stare me in the face
from every quarter.

I took the matter however into serious consideration, and after the most
mature deliberation, determined, to venture myself among them, rather than
bring the vengeance of the pirates on my comrades; I therefore went with them,
seemingly contented, and the capt. renewing his promise to set me at liberty in
two months, I engaged to serve him to the best of my abilities during (...)
term. I was likewise agreeably disappointed in their not urging so strenuously
as I expected the thing I most of all dreaded, viz. the signing of their
articles. To induce me to join them they used more arguments of a persuasive
than a compulsory nature, judging I suppose, that youth would be more easily
enticed than compelled to join in sharing their ill-gotten gain.

When I first went aboard of the pirate their crew consisted of ten men,
including their captain, and the whole of them I think, as stout, daring, hardy
looking fellows as ever I saw together. As I was then the only hand aboard who
had not subscribed their articles, the capt. assigned me to the helm, where I
kept my station during the greatest part of the time I stayed with them.

No captures of any consequence were made during the first two months: Some
small vessels were taken, but their lading was too inconsiderable to satisfy
the insatiable disposition of the pirates.

The period being now arrived, when I had a right, according to agreement, to
demand my liberty, I thought it a proper season at least to remind the capt. of
the manumission he had engaged me. For this purpose I went to him, and in
language the least offensive I could frame, reminded him of his promise, and
requested him to fulfill it. Phillips in tolerable good humor, replied, that
we had done but little business since I came aboard; that he could not well
spare me yet, but if I would stay with him three months longer, he would then
set me at liberty UPON HIS HONOR, and I was obliged quietly to submit, comply
with his demands, and trust to his honor, though it turned out in the end that
it did but mock me.

Nothing of any importance occurred during this three months. Some few small
vessels were taken and plundered; their cargoes were of no great value and
their hands were dismissed with their vessels, except two or three robust,
stout looking men whom Phillips picked from among them and compelled to sign
his articles.

When the three months were expired, I went to the capt. and once more reminded
him of the expiration of my servitude, and handsomely requested him to set me
ashore according to his promise, that I might go to my mother, who had not
heard from me since my first capt. returned from his fishing voyage.

Set you at liberty, damn you; you shall be set at liberty when I damned and
not before replied Phillips; in a rage more comparible with the diabolical
disposition of an infernal fiend than a being endowed with a rational soul,
susceptible of human sensations.

It is evident, and experience daily evinces, that persons, by habituating
themselves to any particular vice, become so familiarized thereto, as to be
unable to distinguish it from a real virtue; and in such case conscience ceases
to alarm the understanding and suffers the culprit to pursue it to its
extremity. This was undoubtedly the case with capt. Phillips, who was not
addicted to one particular vice, but to every vice.

Having now lost all hope and probability of being liberated, there was no
alternative more eligible for me than to sustain my servitude with as much
patience, resolution and fortitude as possible. Although the capt. had asserted
that I should not be set at liberty till he was damned, I was still in hopes
that we might be taken by some vessel, or that we might take more prisoners,
who, in concert with myself, might be able to contrive some plan whereby we
might take the ship, and thereby incapacitate Philips to determine whether I
should obtain my freedom before he received his final doom, or not.

As we were sailing, one day, we came within view of a fine merchant vessel,
the appearance of which pleased the capt. much, who swore by heaven he would
have it. Accordingly I was ordered to bear off for her as direct as possible.
Phillips being extremely anxious for taking this vessel, walked the deck with
his glass in his hand, viewing of her the greatest part of the day, and damning
me because, as he said, I did not steer so well as I might.

Eleven holes he cut through my hat and the skin of my head, without the least
provocation, with his broad sword. But the merchantman being lightly built and
completely rigged, left sight of us before night. Phillips exclaiming in a
horrid rage, that the loss of that fine ship was all my damned doings, adding
that he wanted the damned thing just long enough to sail to hell in.

We had sundry prisoners on board, Frenchmen and negroes; we had also an
American with whom I had been intimately acquainted when young, and whom the
pirates could neither persuade nor compel to sign their articles. Thus fortune
had sent me one friend with whom I could sympathize under my almost
insupportable calamities; though our sympathy was chiefly confined to looks and
private gestures, for we durst not complain in the hearing of the crew.

About the end of the seventh month from my entering on board, we took a
merchantman belonging to Boston, capt. Harridon commander, a young man only
twenty two years of age. The father of this young man was a merchant in Boston,
and had given this son the education requisite for a mariner and sent him to
the Westindies, capt. of this vessel, in which he was returning home when we
took him.

All except Harridon, James Cheeseman a ship carpenter, and a Spanish indian,
who was taken with Harridon, my friend whom I mentioned above, and myself, had
been compelled to sign the pirates articles. We had been enjoined to sign them
but had utterly refused, choosing rather to be killed by the villains, than to
be taken, condemned and executed, for being their associates. But I suppose
they thought we might be serviceable to them and therefore deemed it best not
to dispatch us yet.

One day we took a large vessel, after considerable trouble in chacing, but
found nothing on board worthy the attention of the pirates, except their
provisions and water, which being in some want of, Phillips stripped them of it
entirely, took out one or two of their hands, and then let them go.

Some of the pirates having been sent on board Harridon's vessel, there
remained only six of the old pirates on board, besides those who had been
forced to sign their articles, and as there were five of us who wished to
escape from them, we began to think and even to suggest something about trying
some scheme to effect that purpose. There was no time that we could confer
together without being discovered, except in the dead of the night, and even
then we durst not be all together, and consequently could not without great
difficulty, succeed in forming any regular plan to effect our escape.

One day we came in sight of a merchantman which Phillips imagining would prove
a valuable prize gave orders for chacing. His orders were put in execution
immediately, but the merchantman being lightly built, and a prime sailer, we
chaced her three days before we were able to capture them. Having made what
disposition he pleased of the hands etc. he found on board the new prize,
Phillips ordered one Fern, a daring resolute fellow of the old pirate crew, to
go on board of her, and take command, taking some of the old crew along with
him.

Phillips had now become so exceedingly arbitrary as to be hated by his own
crew, but they stood in such dread of him that they durst no more contradict
his orders than they durst to die. Soon after night came on, Fern proposed to
the pirates with him, that as they were now in possession of a fine vessel,
every way fitted for a cruiser, and as good a sailor as Phillips's if they
would join him he would put out his lights, and steering by the light of the
old pirate, make their escape from the tyranny of Phillips, and set up for
themselves. The crew accordingly joined, and they began to execute their plan,
but Phillips suspecting their design, on finding they darkened their ship, put
out his own light and endeavored to follow them; in which design he succeeded
so well as to be in sight of them next morning. We continued to chase the new
pirate till the third day before we came up with her, when a fierce engagement
ensued, but Fern soon finding himself overpowered, and no hope of escape, sent
word to Phillips, that if he would grant him a pardon he would strike to him,
and once more serve him faithfully, but if not they would all fight till they
died; Phillips immediately complied with their demand, and sent orders for Fern
to come on board his ship, which he did, and Phillips, not regarding his
engagement to pardon, immediately ran his sword through his body, and then blew
his brains out with his pistol, and thus glutted his own vengeance, and ridded
us of a desperate enemy.

I mentioned before that there were five of us who had not signed the pirate's
articles, and as Phillips by killing Fern had left but five of the old pirate
crew alive, we began to conceive it a proper opportunity to make our escape. We
were however exceedingly cautious, and had not yet had an opportunity to
communicate our plans to my New England friend beforementioned, yet conscience
made the pirates suspicious of something of the kind being in agitation, and
from the consequent murderous proceedure of Phillips we had reason to apprehend
they had in reality discovered our intentions.

My friend the American before mentioned being on board the vessel lately taken
from Capt. Harridon, Phillips ordered out a boat and went on board, where he
accused him with joining in a plot, assisted by me, to kill him and all his
crew, and take the vessel. My friend solemnly denied the accusation and
declared he knew nothing of such a plan, which was, in fact the case, for I
afterward learned that there had nothing been said to him about it. This
reply, however true, did not mitigate the captain's passion, in the least, for
he damned him, swore he would send him to hell, and instantly ran him through
the body with his sword, in such a manner that he twisted the point of it off,
leaving it in his backbone.

My friend, I suppose, not being conscious of having received his death wound,
still denied the charge, and with great earnestness begged that his life might
be spared, but the capt. whose insatiable thirst for flaughter was not
sufficiently gorged, damned him, presented his pistol and shot him through the
head, exclaiming, I have sent one of the devils to hell and where is Fillmore,
he shall go next. I was then ordered to go aboard Harridon's vessel.

My long familiarity with, and constant apprehension of death, rendered its
near approaches less terrifying than formerly; but I did not receive this
message without heart-rending sensations and thrilling emotions of trepidation
and fear. But Phillips was completely despotic, and there was no such thing as
evading his commands: I therefore drew up a resolution that if I found he was
bent on my death I would sell my life as dear as possible and endeavor to kill
him first. With this resolution, and as much fortitude as I could muster, I
went on board to Phillips, and stood by a handspeak that lay upon the deck,
Phillips charged me as he had done my friend with contriving to betray him and
take the ship. The accusation was true enough, but I concluded a lie was
warrantable in that case, and consequently replied that I knew nothing of any
conspiracy either against him or his crew. I had prepared myself to make
resistance in case he offered any abuse, but he had a pistol concealed under
his coat, which he presented to my breast and snapped it before I had time to
make any evasion; but happily for me, it missed fire. He drew it back, cocked
and presented it again, but I struck it aside with my hand, so that it went off
by my side without doing any injury.

I thought of knocking out his brains with the handspeak that lay near me, but
I knew it would be instant death for me, and therefore concluded, if he would
leave me, I would not meddle with him at that junctur^ He then swung his sword
over my hea^ damned me and bid me go about my busness, adding, that he only did
that to try me These last words raised my spirits one degre^ higher than they
had been before; for I confess I thought that snapping a loaded pisto^ at a
man's breast, was an harsh mode of trial, and such an one as I had by no means
been accustomed to before. I stooped to take up the handspeak, thinking to try
him with the but end of that, but upon mature consideration, concluded to let
the matter rest a little longer, and watch for a more convenient opportunity to
resent the injury. The pistol missing fire when snapped at my breast, and then
going off by my side, was a strong indication to me that providence had
interposed graciously in my preservation, that our final deliverance from the
barbarity of the savage Phillips, and his abandoned banditti, might be the more
speedily effected.

A few weeks now ensued which were spent in tolerable good humor and peace
among all hands on board, and myself and friends put on the semblance of
content as much as possible, though we were incessantly seeking opportunities
to confer with each other upon some mode of escape; but no proper opportunity
occurred, nor indeed were our measures properly concerted as yet.

Again we were called upon to sign their flagitious articles, and become
willing members of the piratical band, with menaces of immediate death in case
we still refused; but we had heard their threats too often to be frightened
into a compliance by them now.

A short time after this, being about nine months after I was taken, and about
two from the time we fell in with and made a prize of the the vessel, board of
which Harrison was taken, the crew, in commemmoration of some signal advantage,
which they had obtained, had a grand carouse; eating, drinking, and spending
the day in such diversions as their gross inclinations required. A favorable
opportunity now seemed to offer to extricate us from our suffering, and we
determined to improve it if possible. Cheeseman was ordered by Phillips, to
bring some tools on deck and do something toward repairing the ship, early
next morning, and the master was ordered to take an observation next day at
noon to find out where we were. Thus far providence seemed to favor our design
and we felt firm in the determination of executing of it next day.

It was late in the evening before the pirates retired to rest, and White and
one more of the o'd pirates got into the caboose, as drunk as beasts and lay
down before the ire. A favorable opportunity now seemed (...) offer for us to
improve in confering upon some means for our escape. We got together, held a
consultation and concluded to risk our lives in trying to work our deliverance,
concluding that we had better die in so just a cause, than share the fate of
our late New England friend, which we had no doubt would soon overtake us, if we
persisted in our determination never to sign their articles or share in their
unlawful gain.

When I mention that we had determined on an immediate execution of our design,
I would inform the reader that there were but three of us, viz. Cheeseman,
myself and the Spanish indian before mentioned, for poor Harridon declared that
his heart was broken, his resolution and courage gone by a series of
ill-usuage, and that he durst not engage to assist but would not discover our
plot: thus there remained only three of us to engage the whole crew, and the
indian we felt rather dubious about, though we gained a confidence in him from
his having firmly refused several times, though threatened with immediate
death, to subscribe the pirating articles. However I must do him the honor to
say he was true to his trust, and had it not have been for him our plot would
most probably have failed in the execution.

Cheeseman, the indian and myself got the other and agreed that Cheeseman should
leave his broad ax on the main deck when he had done using of it, and when I
saw Cheesman make ready to grasp the master, I was to catch it up and make the
best use of it I could, cutting and flashing all that offered to oppose me,
while the indian was to stand ready to help as occasion may require. And each
one of us in the mean time was to do every thing he could think of to forward
the design.

Our plan being thus concerted, I went down into the caboose where White and
John Rose Archer, a desperate fellow who had been taken in one of the prizes,
and immediately joined the pirates, laid on the floor, as before mentioned,
drunk as beasts. I took fire and burnt these two villains in the feet, while
they lay senseless, so badly as to render them unable to be upon deck next day.
There were only four left now of the old pirate gang, and five who had joined
them since, besides the two who I had rendered incapable of injuring us.

We were up early in the morning and Cheeseman used the broad ax and left it as
agreed. It was very late in the morning and the pirates were none of them up,
and we were afraid they would not arise until too late to take an observation,
and our plan of consequence must fall through. To prevent this, about ten
o'clock I went to the cabin door and told the captain the sun was almost up to
the meridian. Damn you, said he, it is none of your business. This was all the
thanks I got, and indeed all I expected for my service. However, it answered
the end designed, for the captain, boatswain, quarter master and master came
upon deck a little after eleven o'clock. Enquiry was made for White and Archer
and their burns imputed to accident. Harradon was nearly dead with fear and the
indian became near as white as any of us. Phillips took notice of Harradon's
paleness, and I cloaked the matter by informing him that Harridon had been sick
all night, and I believed a dram would help him: Phillips told me to go to his
case and get a bottle of brandy which I did, and we all drank heartily except
the indian who refused to taste a drop, though something apt to drink at other
times.

The important crisis now drew near when three of us were to attack the whole
crew; the master prepared to take his observation, and Cheeseman was walking
the deck with a hammar in his hand. The quartermaster was in the cabin drawing
out some leaden slugs for a musket, and the Spanish indian stood by the cabin
door. The captain and boatswain stood by the mainmast, talking upon some
matters, and I stood partly behind them, whirling the axe round with my foot,
till my knees fairly smote together.

The master being busied, I saw Cheeseman make the motion to heave him over,
and I at that instant, split the boatswain's head in twain with the broad ax,
and dropped him upon the deck to welter in his gore. Before the capt. had time
to put himself into a posture of defense, I gave him a stroke with the head of
my ax which partly stunned him; at the same time Cheeseman dispatched the
master overboard, and then came to my assistance and gave the capt. a blow with
his hammer on the back side of his head, which put an immediate end to his
mortal existence.

The quartermaster hearing the bustle, came running out of the cabin with his
hand up to strike Cheeseman with his hammer, and would probably have killed
him, had not the indian catched him by the elbow, as he was bringing the hammer
down, and there held him, until I came up and gave him a blow upon the back
side of his head, cutting his wig and neck almost off, so that his head hung
down before him.

We had now dispatched all the old pirates except White, and demanded a
surrender of the vessel, which was granted, and those poor frenchmen and
negroes came to us, fell down, and embraced our legs and feet, begging for
their lives.

White, Archer, and one more of the pirates were tried, condemned and executed
in Boston, the three other pirates were sent to England with the vessel, with
whom my friend Cheeseman and the indian went likewise, whom government
liberally rewarded for their services, and gave Cheeseman an honorable birth in
one the king's shipyards: the three pirates who went home with the vessel, were
hung at execution dock, and the vessel made a prize of by government.

I never saw any of the human specie more spiteful and malicious than White
was, from the time he was taken till he was executed. I believe he would have
killed me any time in that interval had it been in his power.

The honorable Court which condemned the pirates gave me captain Phillips gun,
silver hilted sword, silver shoe and knee buckles, a curious tobaccobox, and
two gold rings that the pirate capt. Philips used to wear.

When we came in sight at the cast^^ (...) Boston, we hoisted our pi^^^^
colors and fired a gun, as a signal for them to come off to us. At this time
some of the pirates were on deck, and one of them asked leave to fire another
gun, which being granted, he would not swab the gun out nor have the vent
stopped, but put in the cartridge, and stood direct before the muzzle to ram it
down, by which means the cartridge took fire, and blew him into pieces; it is
supposed he did this purposely in order to escape the punishment which he knew
must be his lot in case he was carried into the harbor.

FINIS.

