NATIONAL CREDIT AND CHARACTER. 1790.
THIS country will more and more experience the good effects of the steadiness,
wisdom, and energy of her general government. The ability of America is now
consolidated in an approved and adequate system, which will give consequence
abroad and assure harmony and protection at home; whereas a number of little
sovereignties were rather threatening perpetual discord, with insecurity, and
every effect opposed to the good sought by men in forming governments, for the
protection of their persons, and of the wages of their labor and care, against
bad people at home and enemies abroad.

UNDER this efficacious, mild, and free government, over an extensive and fine
country, we have now before us a report of the price of her freedom, and of the
means for satisfying her creditors; which is nervous, clear, and promising, as
it also is honorable to the abilities and integrity of the Secretary of her
Treasury. It offers naught to inthral its honest purpose of performing what
this people nationally promised they would perform, and for which they have a
consideration; though indeed in national engagements a consideration, or value
received, is not necessary to give validity to them. What, between man and man,
would be nudum pactum, is not considered as such respecting a government or
state. A national promise requires the most ready and complete performance, in
all cases, and will not admit of circumlocution or modification, however smooth
the presence. Governments suspected to be capable of committing a breach of
faith in trimming their engagements, whatever be the plausible advantages
proposed, will be in low credit; and, when trusted, must pay a premium, in a
high interest, for estimated risques.

A FULL unequivocal performance of engagements, in every iota, stamping a
character of inflexible integrity in the sovereign authority of a nation, will
communicate to such nation the highest credit and respect with the attendants
national health and ability: whereas, nations deficient therein, will want,
will be weak, will be deranged will be necessitous; and must pay at dear and
ruinous rates. It is opinion, alone, of this invincible integrity in a
sovereign power, that commands the loans and the confidence of individuals and
nations upon the cheapest and best terms: but to obtain or preserve this
opinion every step, every word, every thought of sovereigns, respecting their
engagements, must be unequivocal, and with assurance that "though they promise
to their loss, they will make then promise good."

SOVEREIGNS cannot be sued; because they are not amenable in their own or other
national co^^^s; therefore, if they ^^isle in performing their engagements, or
but presume to hint that they can alter them in a little, distrust is awakened,
and becomes alert: the consequence whereof is, the nation sinks in her
character, credit, and power, in proportion to the degree of distrust, -- and
where will distrust, or a dread of loss founded on apprehensions of insincerity
or ignorance in supremacy The sovereign power of a nation, which, to use a
familiar expression, is not comatable -- not compellable in these cases, as
individuals are. Governments are so far omnipotent. -- History abounds with
instances of ignorance in supremacy. To the account of ignorance, is chargeable
the general depravity of Europe, for most if not all of the centuries of the
christian era, which have preceded the present; and it was the ignorance of
sovereigns and of legislators. It led them to believe that their safety, their
grandeur, and their happiness depended on their brutalizing the people, who
were under their subjection. They did brutalize, they swaggered in diabolical
wantonness, and they dogmatised: but apprehension of assassination or of
deprivation was continually grating their minds. The people were wretched --
the sovereign more wretched -- all were ignorant; and it was an arcanum of
those who could read, to prevent others from learning to read: the body of the
people were to be kept in ignorance, surpassing the ignorance of their feudal
sovereigns -- but clerks read, and clerks read for their own purposes. -- It
was the art of printing which became the great instrument in diffusing
knowledge, as it arose in the minds of a few people of wisdom and goodness, and
was by them communicated to the world through that noble instrument. The press
has nearly annihilated tyranny, in diffusing knowledge to the world, and
warning wisdom of her danger from the wicked. It is to be lamented, however,
that this noble friend of mankind should ever have been perverted to become the
instrument of incendiaries -- or of malicious slanderers. Whilst it is free to
communicate intelligence of a public nature, common sense -- humanity -- the
sweets of social happiness -- and a consciousness of its own dignity and
office, will forbid its degenerating into a vehicle of chitchat abuse and
scandal of individuals in private life, or of malignancy toward the government
of the country. Freedom of communication concerning public affairs, will be
expected from it, -- it will be sought for by the people, whilst it speaks to
the understanding: but attempts to impose ribaldry on them, would disgust their
good sense, as being foreign to any good purpose, and affrontive to their
understandings.
-- where will it end! Even in the course of enacting laws on other common
occasions, a weakness appearing in them cheapens a legislature, in the judgment
of the world, and lessens energy in the government; for it lessens opinion of
the abilities of her public men; which mars confidence in the government tinged
with ignorance or affected with caprice: this assuredly is a sink to public
credit.

INDIVIDUALS perform their contracts from honest principle, or to support
character for future advantages, or to avoid compulsion, with cost and shame,
in the courts of justice: governments are quickened in the performance of
theirs to promote their credit and character; without which their consequence
and power are contemptible. On national character depends all credit -- all
power -- and all public happiness. -- In a word, integrity united with wisdom,
is the essential, -- the sine qua non of the independence and happiness of
nations.

B.

Printed by DANIEL HUMPHREYS, Front-street, near the Drawbridge, Philadelphia.
-- M.DCC.XC.


