A SHORT EXPLICATION OF THE WRITTEN WORD OF GOD; LIKEWISE OF THE CHRISTIAN
BAPTISM, AND THE PEACEABLE KINGDOM OF CHRIST.

AGAINST THE PEOPLE CALLED QUAKERS.

PRINTED, In the Year M,DCC,XC.

A christian and true Confession to you,
Dear and in God beloved Friends,
BY these I would give you a short Explication, being called thereto upon by
you, to tell you the objections I had against your Principles. I have made you
therefore in the first place, a sincere confession, out of pure love to God and
his word, of the written Word of GOD; likewise of the Christian Baptism, and
have mentioned something of the peaceable Kingdom of CHRIST. From your friend
and lover of your souls,

FRANCIS HERR.

PREFACE.
TO the benign and God loving Reader or Hearer who might see this, and to you
my dear Friends, wishing from my heart, that each who should read this, to give
ear to it with an impartial heart and mind it. This Treatise, which I have
drawn in my simpleness, treating in the first place of the written Word of GOD,
against all those, who reject the old and new Testament, or do not confess it
to be the word of the Almighty, which was received and confessed from all ages,
by all holy men and children of God, to be the true and everlasting Word; which
word as our Savior says, will judge us in the last day. I have told you my
dear friends also my opinion, about the christian Baptism with water, and
something of the peaceable Kingdom of CHRIST. I wish from all my heart, that
you my dear friends, and all who should see it, not to be offended, at this my
Treatise, or to speak scornfully of it, but to examine it well, and judge of it
with an impartial heart, and to prove it well on the touchstone of the word of
God, for the council of the Almighty will stand, for he that rejects me, and
received not my words, has one that judges him; the word that I have spoken,
will judge him in the last day, and the foundation of God stands sure, having
this seal, "The Lord knows them that are his, nobody can lay another
foundation, save that which was laid by Jesus Christ."

Dear Friends and Readers,
LOVING you with a divine love, I wish you and me and to all mankind, that the
eternal creator and preserver of all things, may pour out his fatherly spirit
over us all, that we poor sheep who go astray in the wilderness of this world,
may be led and guided by him, to the excellent pasture of his word, and to be
fed with the true bread of life, that our souls may live. But perceiving from
your Publications, that you Quakers, (for consciencesake, or your consciences
being so delicate) do not confess the books of the written word, to be the word
of God. Therefore, I would give you to understand by this my simple epistle,
since I confess it to be the true word of God; as I hope to show by the divine
grace, beseeching each and every one of my readers, that they might read this
with an impartial heart, and to weigh it on the balance of the word of God, and
on the testimony of the Prophets, Jesus Christ and his Apostles, who have made
us known the will of the Almighty, whether it is inconsistent with holy writ.
Hear and understand, you who think your consciences to be so tender, that you
would not take the written word, which you call the holy Writ, for the word of
God. Therefore dear friends give ear, what the man of faith Moses has spoken
from the mouth of the Almighty, who has made heaven and earth, and all that is
in it, when he begins thus: -- In the beginning God created the heaven and
earth. And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face
of the deep: and the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters, Genesis
1, 1. 2. Here my dear friends you may hear, and God said, ah! dear-bought
souls, what was it that the Almighty said? He the eternal creator and builder
of all things, has said, "Let there be light:" and there was light; from whom
came the written and conceiving word, must we poor creatures not all confess
with Moses, that it was spoken by the Almighty, as king David confesses in his
XXXIII. Psalm, 6 verse. By the word of the Lord was the heavens made: and all
the host of them by the breath of his mouth. Hear farther, what the creator of
all things has spoken, "Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters,
and let it divide the waters from the waters," whose word was it, that came
from the eternal creator, whereby he has made all things? I hope we must
confess with all saints, that it is the eternal word of the Almighty, which was
before the creation in the creator and in the godhead, and which at his time,
by the same divine and spoken word came from the father of lights, it is the
everlasting essential word of God, whereby every thing that is in heaven and on
earth, in the sea and under the earth was created and made; therefore continue
reading, in the said first chapter, and I am sure you will find by the grace of
God, that it was uttered and spoken by the mouth of the Lord, so that it could
not be called otherwise, at the time it was not written yet, as the word of
God. But since his will and his divine word which he has spoken, should be
known unto man, he has laid open his council will and his spoken word and
commandments unto mankind, since he has endowed man, above all other created
beings with an immortal soul, theresore he has revealed him his will and law.
Now tell me dear friends, was it not the Almighty, who spoke the words, saying,
Of every tree of the garden thou may freely eat; But of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not ear of it: for in the day thou
eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. Was it not spoken by the Almighty? O!
without doubt, it was the word and commandment, which our first parents have
transgressed, through deceit of the serpent, and Adam and his posterity fell
thereby into eternal misery, death and damnation. So that God has found means
and has given Adam the promise, on which Adam with all saints has put his hope
and trust, well knowing that what God promises, he will and can bring about,
being a God of truth and without falsehood. Consider farther what God said to
Noah, and the Lord said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for that
he also is flesh. And God said unto Abraham, Get thee out of thy country, and
from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will show
thee. Here we can see, how the Lord God has spoken with Adam, Noah and Abraham.
Who would be so daring and bold as to say, that it was not the Lord who spoke
it; except that the Lord has revealed them his word by means of the angels, or
by dreams, or by his divine voice as with Adam, or that the Almighty has made
them known his word and will, by his everlasting spirit. Ah! dear children, if
the Almighty manifests himself in and within us in such a manner, and reveals
us his word, would it not be absurd to tell him in face, that it was not his
word, would we not be guilty like Adam. The Lord having manifested himself
before the law was given, as was shown with Adam and the family of Seth, with
Noah, Abraham and Lot, and with many others, so they have received it as the
true and perfect word from the mouth of the Almighty, and have put their hope
and trust therein and were contented, well knowing, that what he promises, he
can and will bring it about. But since the law was given us by means of the
angels, and made known by Moses in his writings, and it being sprung from the
Almighty and given to man by angels. Therefore give ear what the Lord himself
said about his word: Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. And thou
shall love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy might; and these words which I command thee this day, shall be in
thine heart. Here we may see what the true man Moses testifies of the word of
God, how strongly he indicates it to his people, when he said, "And the Lord
spoke with you in the mount, out of the midst of fire, you have heard his
voice, and he revealed you his Covenant, which he commanded you to keep, even
the ten commandments, and he wrote them on two tables of stone." Since the Lord
has let hear his voice, to his people on mount Horeb, and has brought his word
before their ears, and has wrote it himself, how should we poor mortals be so
daring, to bend and stretch it, or to say because it was wrote, that it is not
the word of the Lord, it being brought to us, from God's own mouth, and he
himself has made it manifest, by Moses and by all his holy Prophets, as he
says: I will raise them a Prophet, from among their brethren, like unto thee,
and will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them, all that I
shall command him. And it shall come to pass that whosoever will not hearken
unto my words, which he shall speak in my Name, I will require it of him. Hear
farther how the true servant Samuel, in his first book the 15 chapter, calls it
the word of the Lord, when he said. Now therefore hearken thou unto the voice
of the words of the Lord, when he commanded Saul to destroy Amalek; but Saul
transgressed the word of the Lord: then came the word of the Lord unto Samuel
saying, It repents me, that I have set up Saul to be king: But Samuel rebuked
Saul for it and told him, "that rebellion is a sin of witchcraft, and
stubbornness as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou have rejected the word of
the Lord, he has also rejected thee." Who dare say without injuring his
conscience, that the citations from holy writ abovementioned, which Moses, God
Almighty himself, Samuel, Abraham and all men of God have lest us, that they
have not confessed it to be, the everlasting word of God; as the Prophet
Jeremiah in his 2 Chapter said: Hear ye the Word of the Lord, and in his 7
chapter the Lord commands him, to stand in the gate of the Lord's house, and
to proclaim there this word, and say, Hear the word of the Lord, all ye of
Judah, and in his 16 chapter, the word of the Lord came also unto me. This
shows clear, how this man of God has spoken it as the word of God, also
Ezekiel, in his 6, 7, 12, 13 and 15 chapter, there you will find it confessed
for the true word of God. The Prophet Daniel in his 9th chapter, the 9, 10, 11
and 12 verse, as we may read in the said 12th verse, testifies it to be the
same, and he has confirmed his words which he spoke against us; also Hosea,
the first chapter, and this is the word of the Lord, likewise in his 4th
chapter; Joel the 1st. chapter, the word of the Lord came to Joel. Amos in his
fifth chapter, Hear ye this word, which I take up against you, O house of
Israel. Jonah the 1st. chapter 1st. verse, now the word of the Lord came unto
Jonah, saying, Micah first chapter, 1st. verse, the word of the Lord came to
me: again Zephaniah it is called the word of the LORD, and Zachariah 1st.
chapter, 1 verse, the word of the Lord came unto me; and Sirach said, the word
of the most high, is the fountain of Wisdom, and the everlasting commandment is
their source, and a wise man puts his pleasure to learn the word of God,
blessed is he that searches the word of God, and teaches it.

I have cited above many passages from the old testament, how they have all
confessed it to be the word of God; but as some may stand up, and might say,
that it was the word of the spirit, since they had spoken it, by the holy
Ghost, as St. Peter says, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private
interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old times, by the will of man: but
holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Therefore it is my
real opinion, that they have spoken it by the holy Ghost, and it being
manifested from time to time by the spirit of God, so it is indisputable, since
God and his spirit are one in the Godhead; or as our Savior faith in his word,
God is a spirit: and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in
truth. Therefore I trust entirely in the Almighty, that he has not deceived
these dear instruments, in not having filled and moved them by his eternal
spirit in such a manner, that they broke out in so many places: "hear the word
of the Lord," and have preached it so manyfold to the disobedient people.
Therefore I shall put the question to each and every sensible man, whose word
they have set forth, since they have spoken nothing, as what the Almighty has
revealed them, by his eternal spirit. You will confess undoubtedly, that if it
was spoken out or from God or by his eternal spirit, that it is the everlasting
essential word of God, which these holy men have written, and God himself. So
that this word has received the high name of the holy Writ. Holy since it
sprung from the Almighty himself, and was set forth by the holy Ghost, from the
mouth of the Prophets and Apostles. WRIT, it being written and set down by so
many faithful men of God, so that it may be termed the holy Writ. Dear friends,
whereas you teach and confess, that the written word of God, is not the word of
God, but only the holy writ and the word of the spirit, which manifests itself
in our souls, that it is the quickening word. Therefore, my dear children! I
must bring this question home to all and every one of you, whose word it is,
that you preach, when the same spirit of the eternal father, moves, presses and
drives you, and makes your tongues fiery, so that you by the pressing power of
the spirit of God, teach, speak and manifest unto all men, the word and will of
God? as Moses and the Almighty, and all Prophets and Saints have preached, by
the eternal spirit of God, and have it all from time to time, confessed and
spoken as the word of God, as I have shown heretofore by many quotations from
scripture; I could cite more passages, but to prevent much writings, I shall
refer the benign Reader to their own publications, there they will find enough.
Such a great number of children of God, having taken it, in so many places for
the word of the Lord; I must ask you once more, whose word it is, that nothing
is spoken with you, as what the holy spirit says; will you say, it is not the
word of the Lord, that you preach, I must tell you that you err, and dare say
with the Prophet, How do ye say, we are wise, and the law of the Lord is with
us? Lo, certainly in vain made he it; the pen of the Scribes is in vain. The
wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed and taken: lo, they have rejected the
word of the Lord; and what wisdom is in them? or as he farther says, by the
mouth of the Prophet; he that has my word, let speak my word faithfully: What
is the chaff to the wheat? says the Lord, Is not my word like as fire? says
the Lord; and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces; but if they had
stood in my counsel, and had caused my people to hear my words, then they
should have turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings.
But if you will say, that it is the word and will of God you preach or reveal,
I must tell, that it is impossible that the Spirit of God, or God himself
should have erred so far, as to think himself too clean, just and good, to call
it the word of God, which the Almighty from all ages has spoken by his Spirit;
this is contrary to all scripture of the old and new testament. Our Savior had
greatly mistaken himself, when he says, They have Moses and the prophets, let
them hear them, and again, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle,
shall in nowise pass from the law; and the Lord says, Ye shall not add unto
the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it. I have
quoted many passages from the old testament, how the Lord God himself has
spoken by his Spirit through the holy prophets, and has styled it his word, or
his will, law and commandment. There you may see my dear friends, with what
excellent name the word of God was styled before it was written; therefore I
shall quote you some testimonies from the new testament, where our Savior
Jesus Christ himself teaches, when he called us unto repentance and to believe
in the gospel: this word of the gospel is the good tidings of the Almighty
father, which no patriarch, nor prophet or other saint could bring us, but it
has cost the word of the Almighty, whereby he made all things, the eternal word
of God, which was from eternity with the father and in God. Yea, it required
that God himself came, when the time was accomplished, into flesh, to take away
the enmity and to announce unto all men these good tidings, of which Adam under
the law and all prophets have prophesied in so many places; but none of them
could bring us this perfect good tiding, but it required the man from the tribe
of Judah, who has brought us the same by his free grace, from the high throne
of his divine majesty. On this good tiding of the divine grace have hoped all
good children of God. But whereas you (for conscience sake) deny the written
word and the everlasting peace of God, the gospel time, which was brought to us
by no mortal man, but the son or the word of the almighty Father, has brought
it to us from heaven, as his father's word and will. This gospel-word of the
almighty Creator, my dear friends, was with the godhead, which was manifested
as well under the law as by all prophets, as a ray of the divine light, till
the Son of God as the perfect lawgiver, has preached the gospel of the peace,
and has called it in many places the word of God, as we may read, If a man love
me, he will keep my words: verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my
word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life. Here you will
see my dear friends, how our Savior repeats verily, he that hears my word;
but whole word, ah! undoubtedly the gospel-word, which he has brought from
heaven, but the Godhead dwelling perfectly in him, he says farther, and
believes on him that sent me. There my dear friends we may see, how he called
his doctrine his word; since the father dwells in him, so the heavenly father
has spoken out or through his dear child, which is and was his word. This
gospel-word is flown from the Father through the mouth of Christ; and in this
word says our Savior, shall we believe, that we might live thereby. And again
he says, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me; he teaches moreover,
If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of
God, or whether I speak of myself. I am not come to judge, but the word that I
have spoken, the same shall judge him, in the last day. Verily, verily I say
unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall never see death. If a man love me,
he will keep my words, and my father will love him, and we will come unto him,
and make our abode with him. He that loves me not, keeps not my sayings: and
the word which you hear, is not mine, but the father's which sent me: if they
have kept my saying, they will keep yours also. There my dear friends you see,
how Christ, the son of the living God, who was with God and in God, by whom all
things were made, the fountain of all, the king and ruler of the universe, the
high and eternal God, was not ashamed, nor thought it below his dignity, to
call his doctrine his word, and this in so many places, and has given the word
he has spoken, divine honor, that he should not judge, but the word, that he
has spoken. Therefore I confess it also, with Jesus Christ, with the Almighty,
with Moses, with all prophets and children of God, that it is the law, word and
commandment of the most high God, which all true children of God, were bound to
keep, without adding or diminishing it. Therefore I must ask each and every one
of you whose word and commandment it was, that Adam transgressed, without doubt
the word of the eternal creator which he pronounced: For in the day that thou
eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. Whose word was it that the children of
Israel have transgressed, that they all fell in the wilderness. Tell me whose
word it was, that the Almighty spoke on mount Sinai, and which he has written
on two tables of stone, was it not the commandment and word of the Almighty?
which he has given them by Moses, that they might know and understand, how they
should serve the Almighty, and in this law he has commanded them, If you will
set a king over you, in the land where I shall bring thee, the book of the law
shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life, and that
he turn not aside from the commandment, to the right hand or to the left. Dear
friends, it was this commandment that Ahab and all Israel have set aside and
worshipped the idols. Whose word and commandment was it that Saul has
transgressed? Was it not the word and commandment of the most High, given him
by Samuel? Whose commandment was it, that Manasseh and his people have
transgressed when they sacrificed their children to the devils, and adored all
hosts of heaven? and have rejected the will of the Almighty, the book of the
law, which was given through Moses from the mouth of the Almighty. Was it not
the commandment of God that Jerobeam and Israel broke, when he made two calves
of gold, that the man of God, through the word of the Lord, prophesied against
him and the altar in Bethel? Whose word was it, that the man of God has
transgressed, when the false prophet persuadeth him to turn back with him, and
did eat bread in his house, and drank water? Has not David sinned against the
word of God by instigation of Satan, when he out of pride got the people
numbered, he has also transgressed the word of the Lord, when he committed
adultery with the wife of Uriah, and got him slain by the sword of the
Ammonites? Whose word was it, which Nathan said unto David, was it Nathan's
word or the Lord's? O! certainly it was the word of the Lord. Therefore look
and read the holy prophets through, and there you will find, that they have
been always a disobedient house or people, and how the Almighty, so many times
and in so many places, has called, threatened and warned them by his prophets;
that they might return from their wickedness, and commands them to keep his
law strictly; which prophecies, God the Almighty father, in so many and various
places, calls, pronounces and professes himself to be his word, that if we only
should read it, we would be sufficiently convinced, that the law and the
prophets are nothing less, as the word, will and commandment of God, manifested
from time to time unto mankind, and set down in writing by these good men, and
for reason they were written, styled the writ. From these reasons I say that
those people err greatly, who do not confess it to be the word of the Lord, but
take it only for the holy writ, and your confessing, that men being misled by
it, you decline to call the written word, the word of God. Therefore I must put
this question home to you, By what was Adam and Eve deceived, were they
beguiled by the word of the Almighty father or by the subtlety of the serpent?
Dear friends, by what came Cain, to the atrocious crime of killing his brother
Abel? has the everlasting word of God brought him to this act? I think not, but
his own revengeful, wrathful, irreconcilable heart, which was not lighted by
the word of God, but of hell; hear how the divine Majesty has warned and
addressed him: Cain why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen? If
thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well, sin
lies at the door. And unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over
him. What was it, that has made the Antideluvians so wicked, was it the word of
the Lord, which the most High said unto Noah, My spirit shall not always strive
with man, for that he is also flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and
twenty years, or his numerous admonitions or the ark be built. Have these
divine manifestations of the everlasting word of God corrected these people, I
think not, but the cursed disbelieve, (which is the source of all ungodliness)
blended their hearts, that they could not believe the correcting word of God,
but lived in their lusts and satanical desires, little minding the word of the
Lord, nor his various admonitions, in which he foretold them God's punishment,
nor the ark, which should be a sign to them of God's correcting hand. Is there
any person that could show, that the rebellious children of Israel, who fell a
sacrifice in the wilderness, that they were deluded by the commandment and word
of God. I think in my opinion, that whosoever will shun his conscience must
confess, that they through their lusts of flesh and devilish desires, have
always rebelled against the word of God. What made Ahab and Iezebel and all
Israel, transgress the law and word of the Almighty? I should think the false
prophets and priest of the high places, and not the word of the Lord. Ah! how
well would it have been for Ahab, if he had taken to heart the word of God,
which was told by the man of God Micah. Was Manasseh seduced by the law of the
Lord, that he and all Israel lived after the abominations of the heathens and
worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them? Tell me dear friends, have
they wrought wickedness by the word or commandment of God, in which the Lord in
various places of the old testament, calls, admonishes and warns, that they
should serve no other Gods but him? After my opinon dear friends, all them that
have transgressed the law, word and commandment of God under the old testament,
have not done it by the word of God, but by their own wickedness, lusts of
flesh and bad desires, they fell from the law of God and did after the
abominations of the heathens, and thereby provoked the Lord to anger. Tell me
whose book of the law it was, that Hilkiah found in the house or temple of the
Lord, which book Shaphan read before king Josiah; who hearing the words of the
book, rent his clothes. Whose words were they, that the king grew terrified at?
I think not at the word of Moses, but the word and commandment of the Almighty
was transgressed by Manasseh, by Amon and all Israel, so that they by their
wickedness have provoked the anger of God. Read all the books of the prophets,
wherein the will of God is manifested, there you will find by the grace of God,
that the rebellious children, were not seduced by the word of the Lord, but by
instigation of Satan. It might be put the question, whether the children of men
in our days, are made to sin by the word of God? I think not, but as the
apostle Paul said, because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved: And for this cause, God shall send them strong delusions, that
they believe a lie; and whereas our own flesh and blood is always rebellious
and disobedient to the word of the Lord, and bent to do evil, seeks and desires
nothing, but the things and pleasures of this world, and as long as we stop our
ears before the menacing word of the Almighty, and not let us lead by the
spirit of grace and the gospel which Jesus Christ brought from heaven; Ah! as
long as we stop our ears before the menacing word, and not accept the gladful
tidings of the gospel, ah! it is not the law nor the gospel that makes us sin;
but it must be the Son of God himself that seduces poor mortals, since it was
him that brought us his gospel, and has confirmed it with so many signs and
wonders: so that we cannot see Jesus after the flesh, but after the spirit,
that is, if we let us led by the eternal spirit of God, he will lead us in all
truth; God being the truth, and cannot tell a falsehood after Paul, it must be
his word without contradiction, and what he has spoken must be the truth, which
all children of God have accepted as the same, not as a literal but as a
spiritual word: And if we will look with spiritual eyes into the written word
of God, there we cannot see Jesus after the flesh, but after the spirit, we can
see his image, how he came into this world and how he has opened by his
virtues, light, life and example, the door to the kingdom of grace and to
eternal life. Ah! who only believes, that his word is truth, he can see him, as
they have seen him seventeen hundred and ninety years ago, with all his signs
and wonders. But finding in various places of holy writ, especially in the
prophets, how he was a stumbling block, whereon the two houses were offended; I
must ask each one of you, since men, when he was on earth, grew only worse,
stumbled at him and fell, was the Son of the Almighty, the cause of it? who as
St. John said, was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God.
Should any body dare to step forward, against the testimony of St, John and
others, who witness of him, that he was the word, and say, that he was not the
word of God, because men grew only worser by him? as old Simeon said of him,
that he was set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel; and for a sign
which shall be spoken against; Ah! dear friends whom or at what have the
children of men spoken against or were offended at, at him or at his doctrine
or word? I think not at his word, which he preached to men, but as they say
themselves, that they do not stone him for his good works, but for his
blasphemy, being a man and making himself a God; Here my dear friends here you
may see, that they were not offended at his being a man, ah! they could have
bore and tolerate him, if it had not been for his divine doctrine and word,
which came from God, and was spoken by the eternal Son of God. See dear
friends, at this very same word of God, which the Son of God has revealed,
whereby he has manifested his divine image, light and brightness, the image of
his godhead, his father's everlasting will and counsel, being with God from
eternity; which gospel doctrine, has spread such divine light and brightness
and has expressed the image of Jesus in such a perspicuous and perfect a
manner, that it shone into darkness, but darkness have not comprehended it, for
their works were bad. But since the light of life, that is the word of God, has
shone so clear, through Jesus Christ, that it not only reprimanded wicked
sinners, but the thoughts of the heart also, why think you so evil in your
hearts? Ah! they were not deluded by the meek gospel of Jesus Christ, but by
their own flesh and blood and through deceit of Satan and by his hypocrisy,
whereby he thinks to cloak his devilish doctrine under the figure of an angel,
and pretending to be a teacher of the gospel, he does as he did our first
parents, and has done since and at all ages, when he pretended truth for his
falsehoods. Ah! therefore, dear friends, don't be deceived, as if men were made
to sin by God's holy word; Ah! by no means friends, but we poor creatures are
deluded, by our own lusts and desires, which dwell in our flesh, and by
subtlety of the Devil; this each sensible man will confess. For this reason I
must ask you, perceiving from your writings, that you take the word of the
Spirit, for the word of God, which I do likewise; whether the holy Ghost, who
is the true teacher and expounder, of the many gifts of God, may reveal unto us
another law, word, doctrine or gospel, than the Son of God or God himself has
made manifest unto us? I think not! or the Son of God must have erred, when he
said, he shall take it of mine, and shall show it unto you, and again: But the
comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom the father will send in my name, he
shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance.
whatsoever I have said unto you. St. Paul would have been mistaken also, when
he said, if any man preach any other gospel unto you, than that ye have
received, let him be accursed, and the gospel which was preached of me, is not
after man. For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by
the revelation of Jesus Christ; for I have not shunned to declare unto you all
the counsel of God. See also in St. John where he says: if there come any unto
you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house. And St.
Peter says: we have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well,
that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place; and St. John
again: whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has
not God: and St. Paul, and if any man obey not my word by this epistle, note
that man, and have no company with him. The written word being then so well
attested, and its doctrine by a number of witnesses and of our Savior himself,
declared for his word, which he has confirmed by his precious blood, and of
which St. Paul says, How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation,
which at the first began, to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us
by them that heard him. I have told you in the foregoing my meaning and belief
of the written word of God, and have shown you from the old and new testament,
how all saints and children of God, have confessed it, to be the word of the
Lord. And if the contrary can be proved to me, and the testimonies of all these
witnesses I have quoted, annihilated; but not through philosophical subtlety,
but by the immediate testimonies of holy writ, that they have erred or wrote
falsely; then I will confess and say, that I am mistaken, for taking the
written word, for the word of God. But O my God! I trust in thee, that thou will not ashame us poor creatures, in this respect, with thy child Jesus and
all holy prophets, apostles and so many thousands of saints, who have all
received it as thy word. Therefore I must beseech you, to take up this my
epistle in love, and take it in consideration without partiality, and not to
see on the simple style, but look to the ground. I shall quit here and refer
the reader to the holy bible, there he will find more ground, if he searches
with an upright heart. I recommend you to the word of grace, wishing that God
will lead and enlighten me and you, with his everlasting Spirit through Jesus
Christ, Amen. His holy name be praised now and evermore, Amen.

OF THE CHRISTIAN BAPTISM.
I CONFESS also dear friends! a christian Baptism of the faithful children of
God, which is to be administered with water, in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost, which baptism is a reception into the church
and congregation of saints; which baptism ought to be administered unto all
men, who stand in their first birth, and ought not to be called a christian
baptism, if it is knowingly administered unto unconverted, since the gospel
doctrine of Jesus Christ, is not literal but spiritual, as he himself says,
the word which I have spoken is spirit and is life. It being then spiritual, it
requires also spiritual and regenerated men, whose hearts were changed by the
word of truth, and became new creatures, that were brought from sin, to the
virtue of Christ, from death to life and from darkness to the light of Jesus
Christ, who strive to crucify their flesh and to mortify and to subdue their
lusts. All such has St. John the baptist baptized and not wicked sinners, but
has told them to repent, that they might bring forth fruits meet for
repentance. See! these has St. John baptized, and all such has Jesus Christ
commanded to baptize, when he says, All power is given unto me, in heaven and
on earth. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you; and again: go ye into all the world,
and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believes, and is baptized,
shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned. This injunction the
disciples or apostles, received as the commandment of their Lord and master:
But the Lord saying by Jeremiah, Behold the days come, that I will make a new
covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah. Not according
to the covenant I made with their fathers; but this shall be the covenant, that
I will make with the house of Israel; after those days, says the Lord, I will
put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be
their God, and they shall be my people. And they shall teach no more every man
his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord; for they shall
all know me, from the least of them, unto the greatest. The gospel word or new
testament, which our Savior has revealed, being spiritual, it is out of the
power of the natural man to comprehend it, therefore the disciples of Christ
were not able at first, to comprehend it perfectly, being yet earthly minded,
therefore our Savior told them, that they could not bear it now; But the holy
Ghost, whom the father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and
bring all things, to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.
Therefore the disciples of Christ were yet wholly unable to propagate the
economy of the gospel, the holy spirit not resting perfectly upon them; for
this reason their Lord and master commanded them, not to depart from Jerusalem,
but wait for the promise of the father, to this commandment they were obedient,
waiting in prayer day and night, till the day of Pentecost, when they were
filled with the holy Ghost, so that their tongues, were like as of fire, and
then they began after their Lord and master's commandment to teach and to
baptize, and in administering of the same they have continued, not by the
literal word of the law, but by the word of the Spirit, of which the Spirit of
God is the right teacher and interpreter, and in this order they have
continued, as we can find in so many places, in the Acts of the apostles.
Therefore the prophecies of the prophets are accomplished, that they will teach
no more one another, but they will all be teached of the Lord; the disciples
having not teached, but the Spirit has spoken through them, and have
established, the economy of the gospel, as baptism and the Lord's supper, and
the washing of feet, likewise excommunication and forbearing. All these
ordinances I confess not to be derived from the Jewish law, but to be
evangelical and christian ordinances of God. You dear friends! confessing in
your writings, that baptism, belongs not to the economy of the gospel, but
being derived from the law. Therefore I must ask you dear friends, to prove to
me by the law; where baptism has begun under the law, has it not taken its
rise, with John the baptist? had John his baptism from the law? I think not,
but by the divine commandment, or this great prophet, has misinformed us, when
he said, but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, upon
whom thou shall see, the Spirit descending and remaining on him. Our Savior
also questioned the Pharisees, whether the baptism of John was from heaven or
of men? Why did not the scribes and Pharisees answer it was from the law, they
had not need to be in fear of being stoned by the people, but they could not,
baptism not being founded in the law. John being a forerunner and preacher of
repentance, he baptized with the baptism of repentance, which is the entrance
into the new covenant; thus he had the commandment from God, and Jesus Christ
being not come, to do his will, but the will of his Father, therefore he got
himself baptized by John, in obedience to God, telling him, for thus it
becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. Wherein consists the righteousness
of Christ, that he got himself baptized by John, what use could he derive from
water, being the Son of God, perfect, just and good? Tell me dear friends,
wherein could the righteousness of Christ be, in the water or in the word of
God, which commanded John to baptize? In my opinion in both, in the first
place, the righteousness of God pressing on the word, and being obedient to his
father, righteousness is fulfilled. And water was only a sign, proof, or
outward ceremony or work, whereby the obedience of Christ, was confirmed and
established. There you may see, wherein the righteousness of Christ consisted,
in his baptism with water, or only in his obedience. Your teaching that Christ
has not commanded the outward baptism with water, but only the baptism with the
Spirit; has he not told them after his resurrection, to go teaching all
nations, and to baptize them who believes? To this commandment the apostles
were obedient, as we find, when St. Peter on the day of Pentecost, preaching to
them, that they were pricked in their hearts, that they cried out, men and
brethren, what shall we do, to be saved? Then Peter said unto them, repent, and
be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. Dear friends, here you
may see, how they have baptized them with water, and after baptism promised
them the gift of the holy Ghost; we find that Philip has teached and baptized
in Samaria, and that after baptism, Peter and John prayed over them and laid
their hands on them, that they might receive the holy Ghost. Philip has also
baptized the eunuch, tell me what has he teached the Ethiopian, that he wanted
to be baptized, when they came unto a certain water? Likewise St. Peter with
Cornelius, when the holy Ghost fell on them, before they were baptized with
water; why has Peter commands them, to be baptized with water afterward? Do
you think that this dear instrument, who was full of the holy Ghost, was not
sensible of the word of God? I think not, but being a clear commandment of the
gospel. We can find also, how St. Paul was baptized by Ananias, likewise, how
Paul has baptized the keeper of the prison with all his house, when he believed
in God; also the seller of purple, and the disciples, unto which he said, have
ye received the holy Ghost since ye believed? and they said unto him, we have
not so much as heard whether there be any holy Ghost, and who were baptized
with the baptism of John. The baptism of John, being the baptism of repentance,
which refers man unto Christ, therefore has St. Paul baptized them on the name
of Jesus Christ, then they received the holy Ghost and spoke with tongues. Many
more testimonies could be produced, how they administered the outward ceremony
of the baptism with water unto them. It being dear friends! your intention to
break through the outward baptism with water, I must ask you, answer me from
holy writ, where our Lord Jesus Christ, has given his disciples or apostles,
the power, or commands them, to baptize men, with the holy Ghost? Does not
our Lord himself exclaim, in many places by the prophets, that in the last
days, he would pour out, his Spirit upon all flesh; and John the baptist said,
I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, but he that comes after me,
he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire. Take notice dear
friends, what our Savior himself said: it is expedient for you that I go away:
for if I go not away, the comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart I
will send him unto you; and when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin.
Lo! dear friends from these quotations of the old and new testament, and you
will find, that these baptism of the Spirit. was commands unto no man, or
much less, that we poor mortals, could communicate one another the gift of the
Spirit, but it is a divine hidden wisdom of God, and power of the almighty
Father, which spirit of grace, he gives to all his children, through Jesus
Christ, so that he comes upon each of them, who is become a new creature and
regenerated, humbling himself with a low and contrite heart, in obedience to
Christ, that is, his word, which he has spoken and revealed, in all humility
before the throne of grace, ardently praying day and night, for the spirit of
grace, to be clothed with power, and to lighten the fire of his divine love in
the heart. The baptism of the spirit is therefore a free gift and effusion of
the Almighty, which we poor ereatures, can attain in no other way, than by a
contrite heart and continual prayer. On this spirit of grace were the disciples
of Christ waiting at Jerusalem, till they received the spirit of grace, and by
their continual prayers they have obtained the promise of the father, and thus
the spirit of grace, is to be obtained in no other way, as I have shown
heretofore, I shall ask you, answer me, has St. Peter baptized the house of
Cornelius, with the holy Ghost, or was it an heavenly divine secret baptism of
the Spirit, unknowing to Peter? so that he was astonished, that the holy Ghost
(mind) fell on the Gentiles. Tell me have St. Peter and John baptized the
disciples of Samaria with the holy Ghost, or was it done by him, who John the
baptist has shown? I think it was done by him, (...) Peter and John's ardent
prayer: hear, what Peter said, that by him which they had denied and killed,
the Spirit had been poured out, and quotes from the prophet Joel, that this
were the days, promised by God, in which he would pour out, his Spirit upon all
flesh. Tell me has Ananias, baptized Paul with water or with the holy Ghost? I
think with water, and Paul turning himself unto repentance and received the
word and will of God, with an open heart, God has given him, his Spirit by his
free grace. Tell me has Paul the apostle baptized the twelve, only with the
holy Ghost, and not with water? Ah no! but with water, and afterward the holy
Ghost fell on them, that they spoke with tongues. From this it is clear and
evident, that Christ, has not commanded his disciples, or given them power, to
make use of the baptism of the Spirit, but has told them to preach the gospel,
and whosoever believes in the same, and repents in humble obedience, him they
should baptize; and who was baptized already, but believes not the gospel,
shall be damned. Here dear friends! we may see, how it is not the baptism of
the Spirit, which our Savior commanded his disciples; for it may not be
obtained by any men, except he is a true child of God. God knowing and
searching the hearts of men, we cannot deceive him, with hypocrisy: but poor
mortals as we are, we may be deceived, as we may see, how Philip was deceived
by Simon; when Peter and John came, laying their hands on the disciples and
praying over them, they received the holy Ghost; there the heart of Simon
revealed himself, when he offered them money, to give him power that on
whomsoever he laid hands, he might receive the holy Ghost. But Peter said unto
him, thy money perish with thee, because thou have thought that the gift of
God, may be purchased with money; thou have neither part nor lat, in this
matter. Here we may see, that to be saved, consist not in baptism, but in the
word, being commanded in it; as Abraham, when he received the command to
sacrifice his son Isaac, he being obedient unto God, which was held him for his
righteousness. The sacrificing of his son, being a testimony, proof or seal of
his obedience, whereby his faith was confirmed. It is the same with the outward
baptism with water, since it was expressly commands, therefore all faithful
children of God, become new creatures, by obedience and the word of truth; our
Savior saying, If a man love me, he will keep my words; if you love me, keep
my commandments; for this reason they believing firmly, that whosoever
transgresses, has no God. But since you say and will take it for a strong
argument, when the apostle said, that there is one Lord, one faith, one
baptism, from this you will infer, that there is only the baptism of the
Spirit, and you will of course deny any other baptism, though our Savior
himself says: that he must be baptized with a baptism, and again he said to
his disciples, are ye able to be baptized with the baptism, that I am baptized
with? ye shall indeed be baptized, with the baptism that I am baptized with.
Here we can see how Christ, speaks of another baptism, wherewith they must be
baptized; all children of God having participated in that baptism of
sufferance. Here we may see, how Christ speaks not only of the baptism of the
spirit, but of three different baptisms, that is, of water, spirit and
sufferance, and calls them all three baptisms. Therefore, if we look rightly
into the doctrine and meaning of the apostle, it may be well, that there is
only one Lord, one faith and one baptism, that is, he being the only Lord and
Ruler of the universe, and has manifested his gospel word, and caused it to be
revealed and preached by his disciples and apostles, how it is the perfect will
and commandment of the Almighty Father, which Jesus Christ brought from heaven.
See dear friends for this reason, he is called one Lord by Paul, when he said
further, that there is one faith, so we cannot find more but one faith; this
faith is not literal, as all men confess, when they say, that they believe in
Jesus Christ, but deny his word, by their works and deeds. Ah dear friends!
this is not the genuine quickening faith, but this faith has the quality, to
make the heart good and upright before God, it is a gift and present of the
Almighty, which we poor creatures cannot communicate one another, but is to be
derived from the word of God, if it is preached in right a manner, there it
receives faith, which quickening faith moves and presses sinners, so that they
grow terrified, quit sin and live voluntarily in obedience to the word. This
faith being accompanied with the love or spirit of God, and our Savior says,
that he leads into all truth, and love being from God, it leads also to the
keeping of the commandment of God, as our Savior says, if you love me you will
keep my commandments, and John teaches: he that said, he loves God, and keeps
not his commandments, is a liar. Since true quickening faith, bids so strictly
the keeping of the word, and the spirit leads unto truth, and love to obedience
and keeping of the commandments of God. And whereas the apostles were clothed
with the same spirit, faith and love, so this spirit, faith and love have
driven, moved and made their tongues fiery, that they in the first place, after
the commandment of their Lord and master, begun to teach, and then to baptize
with water, in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, in the name
of the Father, and of the Son and of the holy Ghost, as they received the
commandment from Jesus. See here, in what light, Paul called Jesus one Lord, he
having given unto men, his commandments and interdictions, and there being only
one faith who accompanied with spirit and love, brings to obedience, therefore
it is spiritual, through the word of God, spirit, faith and love; I say once
more spiritual, since every thing was teached and performed by the spirit of
God, according to what the apostle said, that we were all baptized through one
Spirit to one body, and as he calls it in another place, the washing of
regeneration. But it is not to be understood, that baptism, is the
regeneration, but I would only prove, how baptism is necessary unto
regenerated, as a proof and seal, that they were regenerated, or else
circumcision must have been the covenant himself; but circumcision was only an
addition to the covenant, as a proof of obedience: So it is with baptism, for
St. Paul said, that they were cleansed with the washing of water by the word;
Ah! dear friends it is not to be understood, that they were cleansed by the
washing of water, but by the word, being obedient unto God; as our Savior
says, ye are clean, by the word, that I have spoken unto you. We can read
likewise how St. Peter represents baptism after Noah, when the ark was a
preparing, wherein few that is eight souls were saved by water. The like figure
whereunto, even baptism, does also now save us (not the putting away the filth
of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God.) To understand
this right we must take Noah as a figure on Christ and the ark as his word, and
the entrance of Noah the congregation of God; therefore was Noah called a
preacher of righteousness, and thus he has prepared the ark by the commandment
of God, for himself and his house, therefore the ark was prepared by the word
of the Lord and at the same time repentance preached. Thus Christ as the true
preacher of righteousness, came into this world, and prepared the ark of the
new covenant by the command of his heavenly father, for his children and people
and has preached repentance. It was also with Noah, when he received the divine
command, to enter into the ark he and his house, he paid obedience unto it,
Thus Christ when the ark of the new testament was prepared, entered into it,
and has confirmed and sealed the new covenant by his precious and innocent
blood, in obedience to the will of his father. So as the family of Noah entered
it after him obediently, also the economy of Christ enters, through obedience
and repentance into the ark of the new covenant, and as the waters of the flood
rose and all flesh perished, but the water bearing the ark, that Noah and his
family were saved by the water. But it is not quite to be understood, that they
were saved by the water only, Peter calling it a type on baptism. Therefore the
preservation of Noah and his family, consisted not in the water, but especially
in obedience, he believing God and preparing the ark by faith; So it is with
the baptism of water, it being commanded in the unalterable will of God,
therefore all faithful, will not reject it, but pay obedience, with living
faith, unto the word of God, accepting the baptism with water, so as time and
occasion occurs, for St. Peter said, that even baptism, does also now save us,
(not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God.) Here we may see how explicitly Peter speaks of
baptism, for the sake of our salvation, how necessary it is to be saved, our
salvation consisting altogether in Christ and in keeping of his commandments;
faith without works being dead, and it being told in the gospelword, to make
use of this baptism with water, and whosoever is become a new creature and
regenerated, keeping all and every thing prescribed in the gospel, and would
refuse the baptism with water, if he could have it in a christian manner, but
would reject it, from spiritual pride or negligence or self-conceited
righteousness, the same shall know, that he slights the will of God, for our
Savior says, that whosoever transgresses one, is guilty of the whole. We find
also, that the selfthoughts of men are of no avail; for Saul erred greatly in
transgressing the word of the Lord, and acting after his own thoughts; what
avail had the man of God, in going to Bethel, to prophesy, when he
transgresses the word of the Lord, that the lion devoureth him? Therefore St.
Peter calls baptism a saving, faith and obedience being made perfect thereby;
he says also, "that it does not put away the filth of the flesh, but the answer
of a good conscience toward God; Water is also not able to cleanse us, but our
hearts must be cleansed by the word and blood of Christ, if we prostrate
ourselves in humility and true repentance before him, crying for mercy, he then
forgives us our sins, out of his free grace, when faith, spirit and love are
united together. In this obedience, all true children of God went and got
themselves baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, yielding themselves into the
communion of saints, renouncing the Devil, denying their own flesh and blood,
giving over their own will and devoting themselves wholly, to their husband and
bridegroom Jesus Christ. And this is the covenant, which all children of God
must enter into with their God and bridegroom. Water therefore is not the
covenant, but a testimony of the covenant and of the true obedience; we find
also, that the apostles have kept this rule, for St. Paul repeats it, to the
Romans that if they should have been loath, and exhorts them, that they should
know, that so many of them as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized
into his death, and tells them, that like as Christ was raised up from the
dead, by the glory of the father, even so they also should walk in newness of
life: And he admonishes the Galatians, they having left the faith and depended
upon the law, he shows them again to the new covenant, which they had accepted,
when he said, whether they did not know, that as many of them as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, he says, There is neither Jew nor
Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye
are all one in Christ Jesus. But it is not to be understood, that they became
one by the water, but by the quickening faith, spirit and the love of God, who
wroughts always their fruit and brings unto obedience, and the water being only
the fruit and proof of obedience, whereby faith is confirmed. We find also how
the apostle exhorts the Hebrews, for when for the time ye ought to be teachers,
ye have need that one teach you again which be the first principles of the
oracles of God, and are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong
meat. Therefore he says, leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let
us go on unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance from
dead works, and of says toward God, of the doctrine of baptism, and of laying
on of hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment. See here
how the apostle exhorts the faithful, how they have need, that one teach them
again, but to continue in the doctrine, he will leave it, and go on unto
perfection; so that we can see, that all epistles, which the apostles have
wrote, were directed to congregations, which they had edified before by the
gospel, exhorting them always, to be steadfast, in what they had accepted. St.
Luke has related us the whole economy of the gospel, that we may see, how the
apostles have established it, by the spirit and word of God. Therefore I
acknowledge all institutions of God, which are outwardly performed in the
congregation of saints, that they are right and unexceptionable, as also the
breaking of the bread, and I acknowledge likewise, that they are not derived
from the Jews, but appertain unto the economy of Christ, since he has
instituted them himself, and has commanded that they should be exercised. But
your doctrine saying, that all these institutions were brought to their end
under the new covenant, and that the apostles found it expedient to continue
them any farther, being derived from the law of Moses, I must ask you, what
shall be the reason, when St. Paul writes to the Hebrews, that he will leave
the the principles of the doctrine of Christ. Was Paul's intention to leave
all, the doctrine, and all what he has mentioned there? I think not, or else he
would have continued in instructing them. But hear! he will leave the
principles of the doctrine of Christ only with them, who were instructed many
times therein, and received the baptism already, with them it would have been
unnecessary, he having found them remiss therein. Or it is because St. Paul had
said that he had not been sent to baptize, but to preach the gospel; if he was
not sent to baptize, why did he baptize nevertheless? for he says that he
baptized some amongst them. But this is no proof, that he thought baptism to be
unnecessary, for he tells them moreover, that he has planted, Apollos watered,
but God gave the increase, he said this, about their distensions and divisions
amongst them, he apprehending, that they might say, he having baptized in his
name. I shall leave it here and refer the cordial reader to the holy Bible, and
if it can be proved otherwise to me from the same, I am ready to take advice,
and if I should be called up, to give more ground, I am willing in my
simpleness, to give it after the admonition of St. Peter. But if you
acknowledge it to be right, then give the honor unto God, and not unto men. I
recommend you my dear friends, with me, to the powerful word of his Grace, that
he may comfort your hearts and stablish you in every good word and work, and
lead us and every one to the pasture of his word, and to the right
understanding of God, this I wish you and me, and unto all men, through Jesus
Christ Amen.

Of the peaceable Kingdom of CHRIST.
I MUST add one short question or admonition to you my dear friends! Perceiving
in the gospel word and the books of the Prophets, that our Savior Jesus
Christ, is a peaceable King, and reigns a peaceable kingdom, as the prophet
says: For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government
shall be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called, Wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. He
says moreover, that they will turn their swords into ploughshears and their
spears into pruning hooks, and they shall know of no wars; the wolf also shall
dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf
and the young lion, and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead
them. And the cow and the bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down
together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the suckling child
shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on
the cockatrice's den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain.
Many more passages could be quoted from the books of the Prophets of this
peaceable king Jesus Christ, and of his peaceable kingdom and church, how he
will establish right on earth and the isles shall wait for his law. This king
of kings in coming into this world, was not born in a royal palace, but a
stable must be his inn, he was also always persecuted, banished, hated and
mocked at from his youth, and came at last to the ignominious death on the
cross as a curse and expiatory sacrifice for all the world. But since we can
find in no place, that he even sought revenge, or revenged himself, but he
teaches us, that it was said by them in old times, "an eye for an eye, a tooth
for a tooth, and thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy;" the Son
of the Almighty tells us the contrary, saying, but I say unto you, that ye
resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him
the other also, and love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them which dispitefully use you, and persecute
you; and if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him
have thy cloak also. Jesus Christ having gone before us, in this doctrine, life
and example, and has commanded us, to follow his said example and has denied
all revenge and resistance, which he has shown and manifested in his gospel
doctrine and kingdom of grace, and has told us to bear all afflictions
wherewith he visits us, and not to revenge ourselves, but leave vengeance unto
him. You saying in your publications, that all revenge was forbidden under the
new covenant, which I confess also: I must put this question to you, where war,
is more and earnestly forbidden as going to law, resist force by force and to
be elected into offices; and if we for the gospel and Christ's sake, cannot
hold any office, how should we be capable, to elect others into offices, does
not Jesus say, "that his kingdom was not from this world, and that he would
appoint unto us a kingdom, as his father has appointed unto him." You denying
totally all warfare, but make use of going to law, by resisting force by force,
almost as much and more as people of other denominations. I must ask you once
more, where the one is more forbidden than the other. I confess also that there
are two kingdoms, Christ saying, that his kingdom was not from this world.
There we find, that the kingdom of Christ is different from the kingdoms of
this world, as he says to his disciples, "the kings of the Gentiles exercise
lordship over them; and they that exercise authority upon them are called
benefactors. But ye shall not be so: but that is greatest among you, let him be
as the younger; and he that is chief as he that does serve." And again when the
revenge of the law took place with his discipies, that they said unto him, will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as
Elias did? Our Savior rebuked them and said, ye know not what manner of spirit
ye are of. There we can see how Christ has commanded his disciples, to keep
peace: when he said, Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as
the world gives, I give unto you. By this shall all men know, that ye are my
disciples, if ye have love one to another. Greater love has no man than this,
that a man lay down his life for his brethren. Since it is clear and manifest,
that the kingdom of Christ is a peaceable kingdom, but men being bad from
nature, withstanding the peace of the Almighty and will not submit themselves
under the scepter of his word. Therefore all men who will not submit under the
scepter of the Almighty, they must submit themselves under the scepter of the
kings and princes of this world, which were ordained of God the king of kings
and lord of lords, to reign the kingdom of this world. Therefore all and every
one stands under the obligation to pay allegiance and obedience unto them, and
to avoid, all rebellion or conspiracy, that might be ploted against them; but
not for the sake of kings or princes, but for God's sake, they being ordained
of God to their administrations; children of God and regenerated, and who have
followed the spirit of God and have voluntarily submitted themselves under the
scepter of his word, have no further obligation to be obedient unto them as in
so far, as their law are not contrary to the word of God, for it is just and
right to obey God more, then unto men. This peace being offered unto all men,
and unto all without exception, repentance was preached through Christ, (...)
in the gospel word, therefore no man (...), be he Jew, Gentile or Turk, or of
what (...), nation or denomination he may be, be they (...) or of a mean
descent, rich or poor, king or prince, they were all called unto repentance,
for God is no respecter of persons: Unto all was also given, one and the same
law and word, for he does not care the power of the mighty, nor is he ashamed,
of the lowness of the poor; Therefore whosoever repents, prostrating himself
with a contrite heart, before the majesty of the Almighty in humility and
submitting himself, in true regeneration, quits sin, and goes out of every
thing, that is against God and his word, he may be who he will, the same will
obtain this free grace. Whosoever comes unto me, I will in no wise reject him,
and come unto me, all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest, for the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, "The Lord
knows them, that are his. And let every one, that names the name of Christ,
depart from iniquity." As to your addresses, which you send to kings and
princes, I can at this time see no other motive in it, as that they are meant
to flatter with, and to obtain applause and honor before the world. I bid you
farewell dear friends, and the God of peace will bless our hearts. To him be
praise, honor and power, now and evermore, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

FINIS.

