DIVINE CALL TO That highly favored people THE JEWS.

JUSTICE AND MERCY OPENING NOW THE WAY FOR THEIR RESTORATION.

BY THE WATCHMAN.

For thus has the Lord said unto me, Go, set a watchman, let him declare what
he sees.

Isai. xxi. 6. Now go, write it before them in a table, and note it in a book,
that it may be for the time to come -- for ever and ever.

Isai. xxx. 8. ANNAPOLIS: PRINTED BY FREDERICK GREEN, PRINTER TO THE STATE.

* THE substance of this TRACT, is a full and satisfactory answer to the
important inquiry now made by the JEWS, " Whether JESUS CHRIST was the promised
MESSIAH." It falls in with that design of PROVIDENCE for which it was intended,
and in its proper time, though in manuscript since the year 1783, it was not
till now published -- this being its time, and no other.

PREFACE.
THIS little book is a part taken from SEVEN PIECES written on the Millennium,
answering to the SEVEN Lamps of Fire burning before the THRONE OF GOD. Rev.
4.5. -- And to the SEVEN Trumpets or Thunders. Rev. 10.3. -- As likewise unto
the SEVEN Spirits of God. Rev. 1.4. -- The former SEVENS denoting the highest
perfection, or outgoing of JUSTICE. with a double force unto mankind -- the
latter SEVEN denoting the greatest depth of divine MERCY and GRACE to all who
yield to this present call; as opening a new scene to them within the gospel
dispensation, where JUSTICE and MERCY display a renewal of operation, each
acting so far, or as high, as human beings may bear, without being borne down,
or carried away therewith, beyond that balance of personal freedom which man is
(...) have in himself -- in either yielding to these renewed truths, or in
opposing them. At this crisis, (which is a momentous period,) each intelligent
being, whether in the visible or invisible worlds, must show to be on one side
or the other, JUSTICE or MERCY then measuring accordingly -- not only meeting
him as upon his own grounds, i. e. on that which he in his own freedom gives,
but as carrying him forward, in which ever of these lines (for or against this
cause) that he willingly runs.

THE substance of this book is in itself a twofold display of TRUTH, in the way
of JUSTICE and MERCY -- and as belonging to the said SEVEN PIECES, which take
their date from anno domini 1783, opens the most awful and glorious REVOLUTIONS
to the world -- turning round now as it were upon their own center, viz. the
power of God, who confines himself to his foreknown periodical times, never
deviating therefrom in any of his important designs or first eternal plan.

IT was at the fullness of time, or center of the world's duration, that God
sent his son. Gal. 4.4. -- The very period of his coming was to signify him to
the world as its ETERNAL CENTER, and the only balancer of time, as well as the
disposer of it -- And as he had an appointed time, viz. his FIRST COMING, in
which he divided the whole duration of this world into two parts, so has he an
appointed time, or SECOND COMING, within his general gospel, ( i. e. in
renewing its spiritual power, to extend out unto and gather in all people,)
called the Millennium -- at the promulgation of which, (even this present day,)
the whole duration of the gospel is divided into two parts -- And as great
revolutions were the consequence of his first coming, so will the like now
attend upon this his SECOND COMING to reclaim the world, church and states, i.
e. all orders and degrees of men, and bring them to a knowledge of himself and
his divine appointments.

As there were to be two covenants for the full completion of the whole designs
of the GODHEAD, respecting man in the first and second state of probation in
this creation, so were there to be two great ERAS of time that should complete
the whole duration of this creation -- And as the first ERA, from the creation
to the coming of Christ, was divided into two parts, by the opening of a new
scene in the days of Noah -- so the second ERA of the world's duration, viz.
from the FIRST COMING of Christ to the end, is divided into two parts by a
SECOND COMING, which opens this very ERA that completes the duration of the
gospel -- the eternal God never leaving himself, in any order of his
appointments, without a double witness; nor could the ends foreordained by Him
be completely answered, but in this exactness of order, nor otherwise proceed
from the GOD OF ORDER, justice and mercy, having thereby renewing and
interchanging scenes that fully answer his eternal purpose -- particularly this
latter period, in which both these attributes put forth their joint power, as
it were to the highest, in first, CONVICTING and bringing in all as guilty
before God. Secondly, in converting or changing all (which in the course of a
little time will be the case,) to a most righteous life, and which righteous
spirit begins in reforming the orders of human governments, casting off
(through the instrumentality of its instruments, who work therewith,) all that
iniquity, whether of church or states, that held the people as slaves unto it.

As the whole body of the JEWS has hitherto stood afar off, opposite the gospel
kingdom of the Messiah, therefore this CALL goes out in justice to them first,
because being the beloved for the Father's sake, in order that they, with all
men, whether Jew or Gentile, may be brought near, to hear distinctly, and also
clearly perceive, what this new thing is that God performs. Nor could any thing
less than ALMIGHTY POWER open out and bring forward a new and general change in
things, by the removing of those which have been so long and securely
established on the earth; and that this is a scene perfectly new, the very
grounds that it opens on do show, giving such light upon these main heads as
never appeared before -- and its consistency with scripture, and refined
reason, evidences that it is of God. -- And if he has now fully concerned
himself, not only in a renewal of determination thereon, but renewed action
also, setting all things now on the motion of bringing about universal
happiness to JEW and GENTILE, how worthy must this be of human notice.

WATCHMAN.

A Divine Call, etc.
AS there is natural light, as well as darkness, two standing opposites -- so
is there spiritual light and spiritual darkness, truth and error, which are
ever opposing each other; the one flowing from God, as the fountain of light
and truth, the other spreading out from the devil, as the center of dark
wickedness, being the father of all sophism and lies.

GOD has witnesses of truth in all circles of the creation. -- each according
to order or appointment, bearing testimony to his outgoing and incoming,
respecting the various dispensations or displayings of his truth, or true
spirit, as well as providence. So satan also has instruments of error or
falsehood, who, in the spirit of darkness, run in direct opposition to God's
holy light, let the outgoing of its power and testimony be what it will.

THE first intelligent witness of God's purest truth and power placed on this
earth, was Adam, who in his personal office was a prophet, a priest, and a
king, as the true figure of the Messiah that was afterward to come in these
characters to redeem the world -- who, upon his coming, should of necessity
open out a new dispensation, or change of worship, by his gospel, answerable to
the second covenant -- the conditions of which, in the most true or perfect
sense, as well as benefits, were reserved for this gospel's promulgation -- as
standing upon, or rising out from, its true head, viz. the Messiah born into
the world -- for before he appeared in person, the fullness of the second
covenant, as belonging to him, and in which he encircled human nature, never
could be manifested -- which covenant was to be revealed to men, and from the
first establishing of that covenant, at the time of Adam's fall or promise
being made, up to the very center of time that he was to come, in every renewal
or the opening out of each new circle of divine light and truth, still pointed
unto him, as also to the manner of his coming, as well as to the period of
time, giving the very signs and marks that should go before, attend and follow.
-- All the prophets, as one continued chain of living witnesses linked after
each other -- as in a twofold row, giving from the spirit of God's own mouth a
double testimony, (every eminent prophet having a cotemporary;) the angels of
heaven bore witness also, upon every occasion, giving a distinct and yet joint
testimony with all the prophets and wise men, enfolding their double testimony
into theirs, making the whole then as a threefold cord that could not be broken
-- and thus it ran from Adam to the birth of the Messiah, at which point of
time a host from Heaven appeared to several living witnesses, testifying his
birth into this world -- these witnesses seeing him also with their eyes. --

NOR was it at hand, but also afar off, that his birth was known -- for God's
spirit clearly revealed the very time of it to the eastern philosophers; and
his star in the elements bore witness thereto, which they followed, traveling
to the place to which his providence led them, till they both beheld and
handled him.

SIMEON the prophet, and Anne the prophetess, bore witness to him in the
temple, and when an infant, embraced him as the Messiah -- his divine wisdom
(when he was but twelve years old) bore witness of him before all the learned
doctors -- His spotless life, before he began his ministry, witnessed him to be
the Son of God, because no man lived free from transgression but he. -- The
Messiah was to have a forerunner or herald, to prepare his was -- and his be
had, viz. John the Baptist, who was in honor greater than all the forerunning
prophets, because he could point with his finger to the only begotten son of
God, in person then on the spot, who was come to take away the sins of the
world by the sacrifice of himself. -- John was commissioned to attend upon his
initiation into public office, which was an honor peculiarly reserved for him.
-- Now this John was acknowledged to be a true prophet, and revered as such by
all that nation at first, but some were a little after hardened in wickedness
to maliciously bate that truth and divine purity in him that they could not
deny -- for if John was not true in his testimony of the Messiah, all the
prophets from the beginning must be false witnesses. -- God the father bore
witness to Jesus by an audible voice from Heaven, saying, "This is my beloved
son," and God the Holy Ghost bore witness also, openly descending on him -- And
here the blessed TRINITY visibly meets on or in his person, in one point of
unity, what could not be seen in any such sense ever before, that manifestation
being reserved for that period of opening the new dispensation -- for these
extraordinary openings could not be to the world, until that the only begotten
son of God came to dwell as a creature in it -- then the father could no longer
conceal himself in these glorious manifestations from the world -- because
where the son of his love was, there he should be, as in his fullest presence,
and where that is, it cannot but be known -- and the most conclusive
demonstration should be given on his dedication to the gospel ministry, that
being his sealing into office.

IT was impossible for John to be a salse witness herein, because if so, all
the prophets must be liars, who exactly agree with him in pointing out the
Messiah to the world; and if these could not be liars, how much less could God
the father -- and when he said Jesus was his only begotten son, would not he be
a liar if that he was not his son -- and this of Jesus being the true son of
God, was declared in the hearing of other witnesses, upon another occasion, by
the audible voice of God himself, speaking from Heaven, who saw with their
bodily eyes his divine glory shining through the vail of his flesh, even too
glorious to be looked upon, how much less then to be described.

IF Jesus of Nazareth was not the true Messiah, the Holy Ghost must be a
deceiver -- not only at his birth, baptism and transfiguration, but during the
whole course of his life, particularly that of his public ministry, and that
not only through the means of his words, (truth itself says, no man ever spoke
like him,) but also through the works which he did, for no man ever before did
the like -- no, nor since, even in any sort of comparison, save by his power or
divine appointment to peculiar persons chosen to work wonderously in his name
-- and the many glorious works his servants have wrought by his power with
them, yet never equal to his, in intrinsic value. -- Devils became not only
subject to his power, but trembled and fled at the very found of his name when
expressed by others -- acknowledging him to be the true Messiah, and holy one
of God; and men who deny him to be that person, and resist self conviction, act
even worse than does Satan, which sully proves that there are many embodied
spirits on earth, more disingenuous than some disembodied fiends in bell.

TO the JEWS were committed, not only the revealed law, and divine ordinances,
but the living prophets of God, as the most lively images of his son, raised up
in regular course from time to time amongst them -- and though often
disapproving of their testimony, yet they were never in point of truth able to
contradict them. -- All these prophets in general, one after the other, were
most inhumanly murdered for testifying against the vice of these people. So the
very heads of this nation, or in other words the reigning spirit of that whole
body, rose still from one generation to another to be as wicked comparatively
as the powers of the infernal region. The JEWS do not deny but they put the
holy prophets to death, and yet cannot say that they slew them for their
wickedness; and as the last of the ancient Prophets, or head of all, the Father
of Heaven, sent them down his only begotten Son to turn them from the error of
dark wickedness unto the truest light or holy knowledge of himself. His divine
precepts, both in their deep purity and power, fully proved him to be the
Messiah; his miraculous works on others, as well as the miraculous events that
still attended him, proved him altogether so supernatural, that they had no way
under heaven to deny him, but by alleging all this superabundant goodness, or
supernatural power, as coming wholly from Beelzebub within him. -- O! deluded
nation, when did the Devil become such a benefactor to men? It is well known
that Jesus discovered his power of giving life unto those who were totally
dead, and brought the souls of some, back again, into their bodies, after being
long in the invisible world; of this there were different instances, viz.
raising a dead person to life, whose corpse was stretched and laid out -- a
second, who was carried on a bier, to be buried -- and a third, who lay four
days in the grave. Often he opened the eyes of grown persons who were born
blind; made those who were always before dumb and deaf, to hear and speak; the
lame or dead limbed, at his word, would leap up and walk with all natural
liveliness, the bowed down or paralytic he delivered from all such infirmity,
the incurable lepers cleansed at his word -- in short, be gave instances of his
almighty power in repeatedly curing diseases of all kinds, on the bodies and
souls of men, without any medicine whatever, by his touch, (nay by the diseased
person even touching his garment,) by his word, on those who heard, or by his
intention to those who were afar off. These are notorious facts, seen, heard
and witnessed, by an innumerable number of spectators. He fed at different
times, several thousands, in the barren wilderness, having only a few small
loaves and two or three little fishes -- his Disciples taking the bread from
his hands and stretching it unto the heads of the ranks, as they sat around,
who found it to increase as they brake it then one to the other; nor was it
lessened even after they had eat of it to their full satisfaction, for the
remaining fragments were more than was the whole bread, before be miraculously
increased it to them; and while he could feed hundreds and thousands to their
full satisfaction, upon ever so trifling a morsel, yet he himself could live
without any natural food; an instance of which is given in his fasting, in a
wilderness forty days and forty nights together. Nor was it only in his own
natural body he did this, but also enabled others, viz. Moses and Elijah, by
his supernatural power upon them, even hundreds of years before his coming in
the flesh, to fast the same length of time, as two distinct types, figuring or
referring to what himself should do, when he would come. These being appointed,
each one in his day, a striking sign of him, as forerunning servants unto him
who is Lord of all. It was his divine power that raised up and preserved the
holy fathers, who all lived according to appointment with a single eye to him;
it was he who brought all Israel, with a high hand, up out of Egypt; (yet
afterward murdered him as touching his human person,) led them on dry ground,
through the red Sea; overthrew their enemies; bore with their disobedience, in
the wilderness, forty years; fed and nourished them all that time in a
supernatural manner, bringing them into the possession of a land flowing with
milk and honey.

BEING the second in the divine plurality, and in point of unity -- God of the
whole creation. He was therefore in his own person, above all creatures: Every
thing that he created should in its own order or place serve his holy design;
even in his human person he could walk over or upon the seas, when his way was
to pass thereon, without the help of any natural means whatsoever, and gave a
visible instance therein of his divine power; and not only doing it himself,
but by his word, could appoint any other to do the same. -- He could transport
himself, in less than a moment, to any distance; and not himself alone, but
cause any number of persons, or natural bodies, to be insensibly moved to ever
so great a distance, as in a moment; of which there was art instance -- witness
the ship and crew of Disciples, who found themselves on the intended shore
without ever sailing their ordinary course -- he being found with them the
other side of the sea, to the miraculous astonishment of numbers of Jews, who
knew him to be on this side, the very night before; and that there was no ship
or boat of any kind there, for his passage. Now this was a notorious fact,
known to thousands; and yet he never acted upon caprice or whimsical fancy, but
upon grounds altogether necessary to make known his divine power, without
moving out of the straight line of providential occurrences, for it was upon
whatever offered, or providentially occurred, that he always acted like a God
of truth and order, without doing violence to any of his creatures, respecting
time, thing, place or person, for all created nature, should give way, and each
order yield a compliance to serve as well as to prove or bear testimony as he
passed in course through this creation, that he alone is GOD, (...),
independent to all, and on whom alone, all (...), and who, in all the fullness
of (...) GODHEAD, duelt in that of his own person, or veil of flesh. He had no
occasion to form any new invention, or introduce any (...) unconnected or
inconsistent with the even course of things; for that of doing things
unnecessary, never was or could be the ways of the divine Spirit; all that God
ever does is truly necessary to his own true order and good ends. -- By his own
divine power, he could cause his natural body, at any time to become invisible,
when there was the utmost necessity that he should not be seen even by those
enemies who had their eyes fastened upon him, nor be thon felt by them who had
griped him in their hands to murder him: This was the case, else he could not
so often nave escaped death, or at least gross abuse, from those who were in
the very act of doing it; yet would lose him out of their hands and sight, and
could not tell how: He could not suffer himself to be put to death until the
due time, and until all things which be laid out from eternity, and that were
also written by the Prophets, concerning his course of humiliation and
suffering, were fully accomplished.

THAT the ALMIGHTY was living in the person of Christ Jesus, and that he was
still in Heaven, though dwelling on the Earth, acting at one, and the same time
in both the visible and invisible worlds, is very evident from his working so
powerfully by his Apostles, after he sent them away two and two, to different
quarters to preach, acting then more effectually by them and for them, than
while they were beside or dwelling with his human person. -- If he was not God
of all power, how could he cause the fish that had the piece of money in its
belly to come and fasten itself on Saint Peter's hook, whom he sent to take up
that fish, foretelling him what money he should find in it, which piece was
just as much as answered the end of paying the tribute that was then demanded
of him -- though he did not move all the time of Peter's absence, but waited
his return! If not God, how could he cause, not only the fire, but the fish to
be roasting thereon at the sea shore, where there were neither fish nor fire in
any such nature, till his almighty power caused it then to come into that
place, as well as being, in order to refresh and feed his fatigued and hungry
Disciples, who had been toiling all night on the sea? If not God, how could he
cause such multitudes of fishes to come into their nets, at different times, as
was sinking their little ship, even where themselves, by long endeavors, could
not take one?

CHRIST'S miracles seem to have run two and two, where ever space gave room, or
circumstance offered -- He cured two who were possessed with logion, dwelling
in the wild (...) and cutting their own flesh with stones, (...) could not
bind, even with iron (...) near them, yet one is (...) cured two blind men
together, when (...) for both; where his miracles have been (...) generally
fall under the one head for (...) and agreeably to the divine order, are
described as knit together in one. And not only the miraculous mercies, out the
miraculous judgments of God, generally run with a double force, or in twofold
order. Two were struck dead on Saint Peter's sentence against them, at the one
time, and for the one offense; two were devoted and both together made over to
Satan, under the one sentence of Saint PAUL: these two men of God acting
through the power of Christ Jesus, and even where a judgment is executed on a
single person, it is generally in a double or twofold nature -- Elymas the
sorcerer, was struck with dimness within, and stone blindness without -- The
angel of the Lord smote king Herod inwardly, and worms or lice then began
outwardly to eat him alive, etc. etc.

NUMEROUS instances of Christ's ALMIGHTY power, might be mentioned, shining
forth even through the most simple things in nature, which all the powers of
Earth and Hell would fall totally short of ever effecting. His personal
actions, as well as what he wrought through his Apostles, proved beyond all
contradiction that he was the true Messiah unlimitted in wisdom, spiritual
presence and power divine. For not only in the days of his sojourning here in a
human body, were the Devils subject unto him, but by his holy spirit in all his
servants from the beginning, has he fully made known, on every necessary
occasion, his power over the spirit of darkness -- and also ever since the days
of his humiliation has his divine power, in all his faithful witnesses, or true
ministers of his holy gospel, been displayed, i. e. upon every appointed
occasion in which he designed to honor himself in the eyes of the world, and
exalt his truth above the power of error: yet, as it was his eternal design to
redeem the world, and tha without shedding of his blood, there could be no
remission of sin, did he, therefore, suffer himself to be murdered -- If he did
not give his life a ransom, and thus suffer himself to be slain, by the
instruments of iniquity, there could be no redemption for man; yet his having
power in himself first to lay it down, and secondly to take it again, fully
proved him to be that Messiah, who in his own wisdom and divine power as God,
redeemed his creation by laying down that life; and though all this his
goodness unto men was foreordained, and the manner of accomplishing it the wise
result of his own mind -- yet those who murdered him, though acting even in the
very course that forwarded God's foreordained purpose, were therein committing
the greatest wickedness. His goodness in dying for the world, was not the least
share of goodness in those who killed him, because he and they were of opposite
spirits; and his suffering himself to be sold, betrayed, falsely accused, to be
condemned, taunted, derided, scoffed, spit upon, beaten, wounded, torn, pierced
and wrecked, when hung up a spectacle between Heaven and Earth, to fully
accomplish the whole circle of his eternal design; as also what had been
recorded of him, in the scripture of truth, fully proved him to be the Messiah,
who was to bear in his body, the iniquities of all men; the chastisements
justly due to all being laid upon him, that by his stripes they might be
healed; and having run (as to his manhood) a course of suffering, was in length
worn out, and his life thus by wicked hands, taken from him, for he should be
led as a lamb to the slaughter, according to his own eternal purpose, as well
as scripture prophecy. All truths that in anywise related hereto, as well as
visible demonstration, meeting in the one point, or person of Jesus, evidenced
him to be the son of God: Nor was it possible that any one inferior to that
Messiah, could lay down his life for these his bitter enemies, purchasing the
love of God for his murderers, by the pouring out of that blood which they were
spilling, and the free pardon of Heaven for every sinner, who would believe in
his goodness, and yield to the influence of his grace, which strove then with
his murderers, and continues to strive for a certain period, to reclaim all,
men, even the most abandoned sinners; and if laying down his very life for his
enemies, evidenced him to be that person, how much more does his rising from
the dead, in which be takes that life into him again. The angels who attended
his coming forth from the tomb, in the very order of their waiting upon him,
evidence him to be the Son of God; the guards who were placed to watch him
there, trembled and became as dead men, at the sight of his glorious
attendants; and upon recovering themselves to be able to retreat, were found
then in the city, as so many living witnesses of his resurrection, till
threatened by their rulers, and also bribed by them, to say that he was stolen
away by his Disciples, while these guards were asleep, though watching him.
When he was risen from the dead, they could not say he was then in the tomb,
and yet by shutting it up and keeping it so, they could better pass the cheat
upon the world, than by such an ill framed lie, that had not even the smallest
probability: They were broad awake, and yet they could not hinder him from
rising! If asleep, how could they perceive his Disciples taking him away? Nor
was it possible that the Son of the living God, who is Lord of life and glory,
could be holden down by the chains of death; or that all the lying inventions
of Devils and Men could for ever deceive the world in the disbelief of his
resurrection; for God has both ways and means to make himself and his truths
manifest where he will, and whenever he pleases. Although he suffers those who,
for a just punishment of their sins, are given over to the blindness of their
own perverse hearts, or delusions of the Devil, to believe lies and harden
themselves in falsehood, his visible ascension to glory, before a crowd of
living witnesses, evidenced him to be the son of God, seated for ever, at the
right hand of power, having, with the eternal Father, the whole government of
all worlds. His sending down the Holy Ghost, even visibly on his Disciples,
evidences him to be the living God, one with the Father, and the supernatural
power that was publicly known to remain with them, proved to a demonstration,
that through him they possessed the Holy Ghost -- enabling them instantaneously
to speak all kinds of languages -- cure all manner of diseases without any fort
of medicine, by their word, or by their shadow, and even by handkerchiefs or
aprons only touching one of these persons, and carried ever so far to the sick,
were then recovered in laying the same upon them -- also their raising the dead
to like again by his name, their casting out Devils; converting of sinners to
the true love and worship of God; likewise in his name, pronouncing just
judgments, which were visibly executed.

AND the graces of the same pure spirit that still remains with all the true
servants of God, as well as its miraculous operations, bear witness that Jesus
of Nazareth was the true Messiah, and the only advocate or mediator between God
and man, and that through him alone is SALVATION. And all the doctrines of that
spirit which have been providently preserved hitherto, manifest their true
light, even by self demonstration, and as branching cut in all their various
channels; yet never run contrary to themselves, in countenancing sin in the
smallest degree, opposite the purity and uprightness of their holy nature,
making against sin and deceiving error at all times. And they could not, in
every past and particular, be pure and holy, if all sprung from a false head --
for as the fountain, so should be the streams. -- Then as the gospel of Christ
is pure and holy, it evidences, beyond all contradiction, that Christ is GOD,
and through him alone that fountain of light and happiness, viz. the second
covenant as well as the first was opened to the world, and this is the true
fountain for sin and uncleanness, which was in that center of time, opened in
the midst of the house of David; for divine purity could come from no other
head but God, through the second Person, or Son of his love, by the agency of
God the Holy Ghost. If there was the least deceit or imposture in Jesus of
Nazareth, his gospel should be false and blasphemous, and be abhorred by God
the Father -- but, on the contrary, it is most pleasing to God, who, by his own
voice from Heaven, declared Jesus to be his Son, commanding then his disciples
(and through them all the world) to bear him. And the light that shines in the
conscience of every intelligent being upon Earth, bears witness to the
strivings of his grace within them, though all do not know him by name, and do
also justify the motions of that spirit, though they may not follow it; yet
they know there has been the motion of that good spirit in them. -- So be they
saved or be they lost, they shall justify him, or his gospel spirit, in the
great day of accounts. And all that were written in the new testament
concerning the birth, ministry, suffering, death, burial, resurrection and
ascension, of Jesus Christ, as also the obtaining, through his merits, the
various gifts or portions of his spirit for men, exactly correspond with the
fights the Prophets of the old testament got of the Messiah, hundreds of years
before he did come.

MOSES was the highest and grandest witness in all the old testament, as a
lawgiver, and in that respect stood the nearest related to Christ, whose figure
he was -- answering not only in office and character exactly, but also in all
his laws, whose aim or end was Christ and his gospel, that being as the true
substance itself, and the outward or literal ceremony of Moses, as the shadow
of it. And Moses, in a clear foresight of Christ, says of him, "a prophet shall
the Lord your God raise up unto you like unto me." Here Moses shows that
himself was a figure of him. And the prophet Isaiah, in one extensive view,
eyes him as man and God in one person, speaking thus of him, "unts us a child
is borw, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his
shoulders, and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God,
the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace," his names being descriptive of
his nature. Afterward he describes the nature of his birth -- "Beheld, a
virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel," (God
with us;) then the nature of his ministry, "preaching good tidings to the meek,
proclaiming liberty to the captives, opening the eyes of the blind, unstopping
the ears of the deaf, making the lame man leap as a bort, and the tongue of the
dumb to sing." He then describes him in his suffering, "despised and rejected
of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief, who was cut off from the
land of the living, and poured out his foul unto death; he has borne our
griefs and carried our sorrows, was wounded for our transgressions and braised
for our iniquities, because the Lord, or Father of Heaven, laid upon him the
iniquities of us all." Also in patiently enduring -- "he was oppressed and be
was afflicted, and yet he opened not his mouth; be was brought as a lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before his shearers is dumb, so opened be not his
mouth."

THE language of the spirit out of this Prophet's mouth runs all in the past
tense, because the spirit of God had all along an eye to this present age, or
dawning of the millennium, when there was to be a general CALL to all, (who
rejected Christ in the first circle or era of the gospel,) that they might look
back and take a view of all this, which has been long fulfilled -- although
hitherto neglected by the greater part of the world, the word of God suiting
itself to men in the most suitable and striking manner, always falling in with
the situation of things or course of his providence to which ancient
scriptures, the whole new testament, exactly agrees, proving the full
accomplishment of these prophecies in his holy person. Instance the following
harmony:

THE Prophet Micah, 5 chap. 2. ver. in the old testament, foretold him to be
born at Bethlehem, and Saint Matthew and Saint Luke's gospel, of the new
testament, shows he was born there, and the inhuman massacre of the young
infants gave cause for a public remembrance of that to be the very place of his
birth, as also the time of it. The Prophet Malachi, speaking the language of
Christ's spirit, says, " behold I send my messenger, (John the baptist) and he
shall prepare the way before me;" and so he did, for John came before him into
this world, and also began his ministry before, as the gospel evidences, and
the Prophet Isaiah describes John in that public office, "crying in the
wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight a high way for our
God." Now if Christ was not the Lord or true God, this Prophet must be all
along a liar. And the gospel shows how exactly all this was fulfilled -- And
the public alarm that was given by John's preaching, was well known to all the
countries about Judea, for it was of him the Prophet Malachi speaks, where he
says in the word of God, behold I will send you Elijah the Prophet, before the
coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. So John came in that very
spirit and alarming power of Elias, to turn the hearts of parents to their
children, and children to their parents. This, the most unnatural rebellion, is
mentioned, to signify how far the whole Earth was-corrupted at the time John
came to begin that prepartion of bringing them back to the true fear of God,
answering exactly to that situation of things, when Elijah began to restore the
true worship of God, when lost as it were from the Earth. They were not only
inwardly but also outwardly the likeness of each other -- Elijah was clad with
a rough garment and a leathern girdle, and so was John -- Elijah was supported
in an uncommon manner in the desert, and so was John in an uncommon manner in
the wilderness -- three years and a half was the time of Elijah's retirement
with the cause of God, and three years and a half was the course signified by
Daniel's prophecy for John's ministry to continue. It was said of Elijah, that
he stood up as a fire, and that his word burned like a lamp -- Eccles. 48, 1.
And the son of God said of John that he was a burning and a shining light. The
one did not fear to reprove king Ahab, nor the other to reprove king Herod --
the one forced to fly from Ahab's wise, who would have put him to death -- the
other put to death by the instigation of the wise of Herod. -- And as Elijah
was the true figure of John, so was John a true figure of the son of God, and
the very nighest to Christ in preparing men for the kingdom of heaven. John
baptized with water, as setting men cleanly apart for-God's kingdom, and
Christ, as the only true God, baptized with the Holy Ghost, taking them into
it. John's circle of action therein was his last three and a half years, and
the course of Christ's public ministry in his body of flesh, was his last three
and a half years also. The matchableness of God's equptal ways should be kept
up, so the scriptures also should be fulfilled, the one in course still giving
place to the other, all things going on hand in hand and consistent with each
other. The gospel of the new testament evidently shows that Jesus or Messeah
was sold and betrayed by his own friend or Apostle, and that they pierced both
his hands and his feet, nailing him to the cross; and after they hanged him up,
stood staring and looking upon him, dying thereon, and did not the Psalmist, by
the clearest foresight hereof, in the old testament, describe him in that
situation, when he says of him, "mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted,
which did eat of my bread, has lifted up his heel against me; they piercea any
hands and my feet, they stand staring and looking upon me." Psa. 41, 9. The
treatment they gave him on the cross David clearly foresaw also by the same
spirit of prophecy. -- "All they that see me laugh me to scorn, they shoot out
the lip and wag the head, saying, he trusted in God that he would deliver him,
let him deliver him if be will have him. They gave me gall to eat, and when I
was thirsty they gave me vinegar to drink; they parted my garments amongst
them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots" -- Psa. 22. How exactly was all
this fulfilled, both in word and action, on the Son of God.

THE gospel of the new testament shows he was crucified between two thieves,
and the spirit of the Prophet, hundreds of years before that, in the old
testament, eyed him in that situation. See Isa. 53, 12 -- "He was numbered with
the transgressors." The new testament shows he was interred in a rich man's
tomb, and there surrounded by a guard of wicked men, and did not the Holy Ghost
eye him thus when it speaks by the Prophet, "that he should make his grave with
the wicked, and with the rich in his death." Isa. 53, 9. By the gospel of the
new testament, his resurrection in every circumstance is plainly showed, to
which these very guards of wicked men gave affirmation, as eye-win nesles of
it, and their framing a lie afterward to the contrary remains still only a
negative testimony to the same -- and did not the Holy Ghost foreshew his
resurrection, when (...) is said by the prophet, in the old testament, thou will (...) leave my soul in Hell, (Hades, or the place of separate spirits,) i.
e. to remain long separate from the body, neither will thou suffer the body,
though separated from the soul, (...) thy holy one, to see corruption. Psa. 16,
10.

THE very truth of the new testament manifests his ascension into Heaven, there
being a vast number of living witnesses beholding him with their eyes, going
up, till the clouds received him out of their sight, and this was only
fulfilling what the holy spirit declared in the old, when, by the mouth of
David, it cries, lift up your heads, O! ye gates, and be ye lift up ye
everlasting doors, and the king of glary shall come in -- Psa. 24, 9. This text
fully shows that the Prophet was by no means speaking of himself, but of
Christ, the everlasting King of glory, who thus ascended up to the eternal
Heavens. And if God had not come down in the person of Christ, dwelling bodily
in him, he could not, in the language of truth, be said to ascend up, to take
his glory above. The same Prophet Tpeaks of him as having actually gone up in
triumph, where he says, " thou art gone up on high, thou have led captivity
captive, and received gifts for men, not for himself; and to this the new
testament bears witness by the miraculous power of these spiritual gifts, which
men received, as do also the doctrines of grace and purity, in or upon those
who truly obey the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ; and all being thus, as in
the last sentence, brought home to a point, into the very center of man's
inward feeling, he must know these things to be true, and before ever his
conscience can be brought to discredit any of these fundamental truths,
respecting the incarnation of the Son of God, and full redemption of mankind
through him, he must be first persuaded that he has no lively feeling nor
existence, and that never could be, because while he is capable of knowledge he
has both life and feeling. So strong, conclusive, and self evident, has God
made the clear light of his gospel truth upon the souls of all men, that no man
can perish, but in wilfully persisting in sin, ever against the true light of
the gospel spirit that shines unto him, and appears within him, knowing himself
to be opposing God's saving truth, and also perverting his own understanding.

THE harmony that is between the old and the new testaments is worthy the
admiration of angels; how much more the admiration of men, for whose sake the
whole was accomplished -- not by a mean person -- not by a created angel; no,
but by the ETERNAL JEHOVAH. O! man, how highly favored.

ALL the scriptures of the old testament that related to the Messiah, were in
the only full or truest sense accomplished in Jesus Christ, at the very head of
the gospel, as failing all within the circle of the christian dispensation,
into which these prophecies should launch, and by no other person, nor at any
other point of time, could these scriptures be accomplished, else all prophecy
is false. And not barely through the words of a Prophet, but from the very
mouth of an Archangel of the first Heavenly order, was conveyed to Daniel, and
through him to all men, the very time that the Messiah should come, and be also
cut off for his people; and where all this has been fulfilled, even to the last
exactness, taking in all these prophecies within that point of time, and in
that very person, agreeable to the report of that Angel, it does not leave even
the smallest room for people to conceit any thing to the contrary.

That Angel said to Daniel, "seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and
upon thy holy city, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins,
and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
righteousness, and seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most
holy," even Jesus Christ, who is the most holy God; or that Angel is a liar.
Here this Angel delivers the whole circle or course of the time, counting a day
for a year, in which all these things in their full or truest heads were to be
accomplished. He then divides that circle of seventy weeks (or 490 years) into
three distinct periods, viz. seven weeks -- sixty-two weeks -- and one week,
and fully explains what should be accomplished in each of these distinctly, one
after the other, to the fulfillment of the whole 490 years, counting from the
seventh year of the reign of Artaxerxes, in which a commandment was to go forth
from God, through the mouth of that King, unto Ezra, to restore and build again
the walls and city of Jerusalem, which was completed by Nehemiah in the first
seven weeks period of forty-nine years, reckoning from the date of that
command. Just at the close of three score and two weeks, or 434 years after,
which was the second period, making in all 483 years, John came preaching in
the wilderness, the 26th year of Christ; then there remained but the third
period, viz. one week, or seven years of the whole 490; and this one week was
particularly singled out, and chiefly pointed at by the Angel as the crowning
of all; for the Messiah could not be cut off, within the second period, nor
until the close of the third, for he said, " and after (not before) three score
and two weeks, from the finishing of Jerusalem, shall Messiah be cut off," viz.
at the close of the last week, and then a particular account follows of what
was to be accomplished by the Messiah, and his forerunner these seven years,
allowing three and a half years to each, to wit: " He shall confirm the
covenant (of the gospel light) with many for one week, (even as many as did
receive it,) and in the midst of the week, (namely, when Christ began to
preach) -- he shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease, (Jewish
ceremonies never more to be accounted the true worship of God,) and for the
overspreading of abominations, he shall make it desolate, even until the
consummation of the whole; and that determined shall be poured upon the
desolate" -- And has not all this been known to be exactly and fully
accomplished, before the face of the world?

THE prophetic accounts of the Messiah's actions, sufferings and death, are so
wonderfully minute and exact, that they look altogether more like a history
than prophecies, resembling more a copy drawn from the events, than a
prediction of them; and yet these prophecies were written several hundred years
before his coming; and as an additional evidence in savor of these scriptures,
they were in the keeping of the enemies of the gospel, who hated and despised
Christ, and at that foreknown point of time crucified him -- being at once both
the preservers and accomplishers of the very prophecies, which their own wilful
blindness would not let them see fulfilled, and God justly gave them up thereto.

IN the first grand and extended view, this Angel (who conversed with Daniel)
gathers up all as into one head, in which he shows the full atonement to be
made for the sins of the whole world, viz. "to finish transgression, to make an
end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision" of all the prophecies of
the old testament concerning the Messiah, being all directed to this as their
central point. He then, as within this one great head, or upon the grounds of
it, particularizes every thing necessary, whereby the fulfillment thereof might
be clearly known, from his foregoing description, including also within these
seventy weeks the removal of the scepter from Judah, and after the end of that
space of time how the Romans were to destroy Jerusalem, as also the desolating
misery, or long scene of misfortunes, that were to follow that nation for
wickedly rejecting their Messiah.

IN this one revelation to Daniel, was determined first, the very point of
time, that Christ was to be born into this world, secondly, the exact time, he
was to enter into his ministry, and thirdly, the instant of time, he was to be
cut off for the sins or his people, and may be well termed one of the noblest
prophecies in all the old testament, this intelligence not being conveyed to
the Prophet in the ordinary line, but the most extraordinary, and in that sense
rises to the highest head of clearest knowledge, receiving it all from the very
mouth of the Archangel, whom he beheld face to face, and with whom he freely
conversed; and that great Angel always addressed Daniel as a man mightily
beloved of God for his great piety and truth, which love to him was made
manifest, where God changed the very nature of the lions, so that, instead of
destroying him, as was designed, they fawned upon him, when he was cast down
into their den; and that his light far exceeded all the Prophets in discerning
particular periods in which the most extraordinary events were to happen, and
giving an account of the number of years that reached to each, is very evident
as also the amazing extent of his views, and so far as things have had time to
come about, or follow in course, his prophecies have been so far fulfilled to
the nicest exactness; and in point of freedom with the Almighty he stands not a
whit below any man, but was, in this respect, a striking figure or type of
Christ; he conversed freely with God himself in the person of the Angel of the
covenant, afterward manifested in the flesh as the Messiah, and that Messiah
has named him Daniel the Prophet, and the Holy Ghost has signified him, in Zek.
14, 20, to be one of the greatest worth in the sight of God. If Daniel was
liable to err in his judgment, yet the Arch Angel could not err in his
commission; and how much less could the Angel of the covenant, or God himself,
who confirmed these truths unto him, and when all the Prophets bear witness
hereto, in the most exact harmony, and that the fulfillment of all has been
truly accomplished before the face of the world, there cannot then be the least
room left for any error in all these accounts of the Messiah, and his gospel
kingdom, neither can the truth of those which have been long since fulfilled be
now disputed, for those prophesies which are now fulfilling evidences the truth
of those which have been already fulfilled. Daniel's prophecies are this very
moment fulfilling, and so are all the extended prophecies of the old testament
which reached into this gospel era, where men now stand, for the gospel time
now surrounds all, being come to its middle point, in which there must be a
general change or turning round, and unto which the whole old testament does
lend its strength to assist that change -- standing no longer, as it were, upon
its own legs or old grounds, but as uniting with that is entirely new, and
shall bring forth a new scene in its present revolution throughout the world,
turning about as it were upon its own center, yet this strength, or strong
revolve of the gospel, is not upon any thing old, but upon that which is now,
in its present motion. Though the old testament was written long before the
new, to which is bears a forerunning witness, yet the new testament fully
proves itself to be diving, without a dependence on the old for that proof. The
old testament, considered altogether in itself, is but one witness -- and in
the nature of things there could not but be a second in that order -- for God
would not leave himself without a second witness therein. And that the gospel
dispensation has sufficiently proved itself, may be now fully known from all
the true grounds already opened in the circular courses of its twofold order,
exactly correspondent to that foreknowledge, which at its first head was
displayed by numerous predictions -- and the full completion of these
predictions not only prove the gospel true, but also manifests its divine
independence to any thing else for that proof. The prophecies of the new
testament, corresponding exactly with the occurrencies of these seventeen or
eighteen hundred years past, plainly discovers that this gospel of the new
testament is divine, and totally independent to the old testament for any
support, which proves its head Christ Jesus to be GOD, and also shows, that all
the revolutions on the whole face of this creation since the commencement of
the gospel era, depended upon it, as lying in, and proceeding from, the womb of
God, whose providential power over-ruleth all things; and through the wisdom,
mercy and justlce, of the gospel, is his presence displayed, the true picture
of which in matter and miniature, was his veil of flesh; nor is there any
knowing or huding him out, but as in the truth of that gospel, for through this
alone be displays his attributes; first, in the light of his spirit; secondly,
through the doctrines and precepts of the scripture word; and thirdly, the
revolving and wondrous occurrences of Providence; and it is through these that
men can see him, and through which, in all the depths of divine wisdom, he
ministers both mercy and justice to all pations, as well as individuals. Not
even a devil in hell can with any face, say, but there have many things
occurred in this world these eighteen hundred years past, and that all these
momentous things have been consistent with the prophecies of the new testament,
is what the powers of darkness cannot deny -- Therefore all that has occurred
throughout the whole world these eighteen hundred years, is one continued proof
of the gospel's truth, and they who deny the truth of it, only set their poor
little insignificant selves against the weighty force of all the revolutions
that have been in either the visible or invisible worlds, during the immense
sphere of eighteen hundred years -- but the very delusion on which they labor
to settle themselves, obliges them first to overturn all that the power of
Heaven has effected, during eighteen hundred years, else they cannot securely
fix themselves on any grounds whatsoever that are opposite the gospel; and what
number or power of men can do what is impossible? Therefore, shallow, light and
empty, must those be, though their number be ever so great, who set up
themselves against divine wisdom, or that weight of God's fullness; and where
the whole force of Heaven and Earth, in a bulk of eighteen hundred years
occurrences, (not to mention more,) come against such, what can be their wisdom
and strength, in comparison? Less than nothing! So that all must become
exceeding evil, who attempt from henceforth to stand or fight against that
immeme power or force of truth that comes now full against them.

As time runs on, so does the cause of God, it never stands still, and as his
outward providence still brings round all general changes, so does the spirit
of his cause ever run parallel thereto and consistent therewith -- and as every
day or season is perfectly new in itself, so is the renewed scenes or outgoings
of God's cause. It stands at this instant, upon its own invisible and eternal
center, totally independent in its truth and strength to all that preceded,
(save within this particular circle which belongs to the center upon which its
present motion stands, or turns;) yet all the earlier eras of time or circles
of its holy course, do as much illustrate, or bear witness to its present
motions or out goings, as what all days, since the creation of the world, do
illustrate or bear witness to this present day, viz. to be as true a day in
itself as ever was the first day, or any other since, and yet the present is
distinct in itself from the first day, as well as every day that was since. The
season of the movements (...) renewings of God's cause in its widest extent, as
well as its particular manifestations to individuals, is ever new and distinct
in itself, as much as it there never was such a thing before; yet never stands
opposite to the former outgoings of truth -- these that went before being all
proving illustrations, bearing witness to the present work of God. God himself
is the present God, not a past one; his highest work, which is most to be
thought of, is his present work, and not that which is past; it is what is
doing this moment that bas his greatest engagement, and it is what he is
engaged most in, that is to be the greatest concern of men and angels; then his
chief concernat this present, is to bring all men back unto him, or his true
spiritual worship, through a new dispensed power of light and truth, which is
now to extend to all, in order to gain them, even on the grounds of their own
freedom; therefore this is what every intelligent creature is now to eye or
attend.

ALL the former outgoings of truth, in the line of redemption, have had a
tendency to this present outgoing; and this, as the last and highest, being the
upper head or middle point of the gospel duration, gathers in all the former;
therefore the present is the mean point, in which God, Angels and Men, are
concerned, and also that against which all the infernal powers are engaged, and
not against any scene that is past; what is past and gone, is past and gone,
but now sets in a seens that is perfectly new, (though the likeness has been in
ages past) and as to its foundation rise, stands entirely upon its own center,
the eternal, 1 AM; without a dependence for its support upon any former scene,
or upon him who was; for the Messiah, or great deliverer comes out now anew, in
his splendid power, the same as if he had never come before, yet fully
illustrated, and witnessed by his former coming; not as opposite to his first
coming, but consistent with it, having all the light and strength of his first
coming bearing witness to this his second; yet the former grounds are not it,
invisible support, no more than its direct circle of action, for the strength
of this comes anew down from above, and all the former truths manifested even
from the beginning of the world, are but illustrations to it, backing and
confirming it. This new scene stands upon its own true base, even the eternal
independent, under no obligation for the aid of any thing that is past to hold
him up, and yet, before this can be contradicted or reversed, all the truths
from the beginning that have been even already openly fulfilled before the face
of the world, must be proved false, which could not be done by all the powers
in Heaven, Earth or Hell; and even in case the truth of any former scene was
never called in question, nor a portion of ancient scripture alleged, as a
proof in all this, yet God would make his present cause stand in itself strong
against every opposition, though adversaries, in all the power and subtilty of
Satan, were to twist about even the whole letter of scripture against it, yet
it would be but a dead word against this living power, or moving of God upon
the face of the world, and in which motion all men find their hearts moved for
something great, which they term freedom. There are no bounds to be set by men
or angels to the free liberty of God, who has his own way and time for all
things, and Christ is this God. The incontenstible proofs of his godhead could
never be delivered in full, for they would not only be beyond all number, but
they run as long as eternity, and as wide as immensity, so that not only a
book, but this whole world could not contain all the proofs of it. Himself, who
contains all worlds, says he is one with the Father, and commands men to
worship him eveil as they worship the Father; and the Father of glory speaks
down out of Heaven, and desires all men to hear and obey him; and God the Holy
Ghost does openly appear, as a distinct attendant upon him, or as one with him
in point of inseparable union, obeying his command, or working together by the
word of his own power, to bring all men to that faith and obedience of him.

IT is through God that men live, move, and have their being, as well as
freedom of power either in ordinary or extraordinary things; and this power is
through Christ as God, for he treated all things, and by him all things now
subsist; and he says to his Disciples and true worshippers, I give you power
over devils, etc. and has not Providence openly bore witness, together with the
holy word and spirit, manifesting that Christ is God, seated above the Heavens,
at this present upholding all things, visible and invisible? Every occurrence,
or whatever has been within the circle of the creation, must witness to
Christ's godhead. It is only God himself could save a lost world, and all the
angels in Heaven testify that he is the Savior of all. All the created
elements stooped to him as God of all, and were attendants on his beck, in
either ordinary or extraordinary cases, and all do at this day serve his
purpose, and fall into the line or circle of his wise designs. The powers of
the damned region, so sar as they have had a communion with men, openly
acknowledged him to be the God of Heaven. All the Prophets and wise men taken
together witness him to be God, nor was there ever a divine prophecy yet given
that contradicted it, or denied him to be one with the Father, whatever alleged
to the contrary, at any time, was altogether from the infernal region. The
accomplishment both of his threats and promises, and the general occurrences of
his overruling providence, continually evidence that he is God over all; for
God the Father, God the Holy Ghost, Archangels, Angels, Prophets, holy Men,
learned Philosophers, as well as the unlearned and simple, together with holy
Apostles, Evangelists, as also an innumerable number of pious Preachers, and
multitudes of righteous people, in all ages since, give a full and
incontestible evidence to the divine nature and power of Jesus Christ, as have
at times the very infernal powers; so that all worlds, creatures and things,
visible and invisible, do harmonize in this, let them appear ever so opposite
in other things, leaving it out of the power of any to call this (even in any
degree of probability) in question, having now no sort of grounds lest them to
act upon against it. If the word, which was made flesh in the person of Jesus
of Nazareth, and dwelt amongst men, was not God, as the second person coequal
and coeternal with the Father, one and all of these must be false witnesses.
Long before he assumed the fleshly form of a man, his spirit says, by one of
its instruments, " behold I will send Elijah the Prophet, (viz John, who acted
as Elijah,) before the coming of the great and awful day of the Lord, and be
shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the
children to the spirit of the holy fathers, lest I come and smite the Earth
with a curse." The hearts of the children have been turned to the true spirit
of the fathers, and parents to a pious regard for their children, so far as
they embraced and obeyed John's doctrine, who was the immediate forerunner to
the Lord of that great and awful day, or gospel scene; and all those who
slighted that reclaiming doctrine of John, and disregarded his warning,
particularly that nation to which he was immediately sent, sell under that
curse, to the utter destruction of their temple, city and selves; for, at the
first head, or highest outgoing of its power, it swept the chief part of them
away with the besom of destruction, and has, though in a lighter sense, been
pursuing a punishment upon their children, from generation to generation, above
1700 years, their native land, all that time lying under the essects or that
curse.

ALL the foregoing truths that bear witness to Christ's divine power as God, do
also witness that he has long ago come in the flesh; for if he has not come in
the flesh, the whole of what has been said is false, and if false, all the
Prophets are liars, and if liars, the whole grounds upon which Judaism was
founded, as well as that upon which Christianity is founded, is erroneous, and
of the devil. But christianity is founded upon GOD, and if Christ is not GOD,
the wisest and holiest men that ever were in the world have been all deceived
in every age, none being right or true but infidels.

LET men think what they may, God is true, and delights in nothing but truth,
and the Prophets who were influenced by his spirit must be true, for he had
pleasure in them, and all who hurted his faithful Prophets highly offended him,
and yet hurt they would be, as he clearly foresaw and predicted, in the serpent
biting their heel; and even those who slew the prophets well knew that they
were neither false nor wicked, for it was for bearing testimony against the
errors and vices which these people themselves were conscious of, and
foretelling them the consequence of their doings, and the judgments that should
follow, that provoked them to kill them; and as God cannot vary in the least
from his own truth and holiness, neither can that prophecy which comes from his
own spirit, vary even the smallest degree from what it absolutely declares; for
it is that that must be, and nothing else -- and as a crowning or concluding
point, even the closing of the patriarch Jacob's life, he in his last words
declared by the spirit of God, "that the scepter should not depart from Judah,
nor a ruling lawgiver until Shiloh should come" -- So the temple, city, or
Jewish polity, never could be destroyed until after the coming of the Messiah,
and these have been destroyed above 1700 years, therefore it is above that long
since he did come in bodily person.

ALL prophecies in both the new and the old testaments do in this agree, nor is
there any one, in all the scriptures, against it, nor could there even one
sentence, from the spirit of truth, by any person whatsoever, be delivered
since to the contrary; and Christ the head, as God of all the Prophets, should
suffer in his flesh in like manner with them, for testifying that the deeds of
men were evil, and pronouncing his righteous judgments against such, which, in
all particulars, answered to the predictions of all the forerunning Prophets,
as have been verified upon them who crucified their King, even the holy one of
God; and this their doing in all particulars, was just fulfilling the
predictions of the Prophets, who, through the light of God, foresaw they would
do it; also the severe chastisement that such have undergone ever since, is but
a fulfillment of the predictions of that true spirit; for, upon committing that
evil, they were to be punished, and undergo such a course of affliction, as
could not be one jot lighter than that decreed, nor a whit shorter than the
foreknown course of its appointed bounds, agreeable to the prophecies of
Daniel, and declarations of Christ, as also of his Prophets of the new
testament, witnessed particularly by his two chief or most extensive seers,
Saint Paul and Saint John; and yet the Prophet Daniel, in respect of the Jews
deliverance, as foreseeing the very date or day of it, seems to lie closest to
them of all, for as living and dying within the Jewish Church, he was favored
with the clearest views of all things that were to befall the children of his
people, during the rites of Moses, and even afterward, until they should be
all gathered into the christian fold, under the one true shepherd; and therein
this holy Prophet rejoiced in the close of that true account delivered him by
the Angel of the covenant, viz. "blessed is he that waits and comes to the
thousand three hundred and five and thirty days," which is forty-five days
longer than the "thousand two hundred and ninety days," being two particular
points or eras of circulating time, mentioned to this Prophet; and this waiting
or patiently enduring, implies an eager longing for that little time of
forty-five days to be closed -- and the natural occurrences within these
forty-five years, it seems will need this patient waiting, or steady enduring,
and blessed is he that comes to the end thereof, (this was written in Europe,
by the Watchman, where the great slaughter was to begin,) or to whatever time
he is suffered to live, in the line of believing and holding to what this new
opening or renewing dispensation, now in its first outgoing declares; acting
all along consistent therewith, and growing up in the divine power thereof. The
lesser circle, viz. Daniel's 1290 days, has reached to the first dawning of
this new dispensation; the greater, viz. his 1335 days, reaches unto its
setting in, in all its fullness of conquering power. By or through the trials of
these forty-five years, "many shall be purified and made white," to enjoy the
fullness of blessings that is to be dispensed, in all civil and religious
freedom, to the whole world, i. e. established universally at the end of those
days, namely, at the close of the 1335 days; but the wilfully wicked (if the
Angel spoke truth to Daniel) shall do wickedly in the intermediate time, and
and (...) of these wicked, who wilfully continue so, shall understand their
delusion so great, notwithstanding the alarming outgoing of the divine power
through its zealous instruments, to overthrow the corruption and iniquity of
high states, and the help afforded them by the renewing light of true prophecy,
which one might think would make the most foolish wise. But the wise, says the
Angel, shall understand, i. e. all discerning Christians and enlightened JEWS,
who may now prepare themselves for a return to their own land, where none shall
be able, after this little time, to make them afraid.

THEY who reckon these forty-five days (as that foreordained period of purging
the general floor,) from the year 1789, taking the year 1790 as the first of
the forty-five which reaches to 1836, will hardly be mistaken.

ALL the prophecies of the peaceful state of the Messiah kingdom, are yet, in
the most eminent sense, to be fulfilled; nor could he ever answer that
character, Prince of Peace, if he was not to give universal peace on Earth,
which has not yet come to pass. It seems that peaceful state falls into this
second era, or higher circle of his gospel. It was a grand error or in those
who rejected the Messiah, to suppose that his kingdom of universal peace was to
take place immediately on-his appearing. The prophecies of the old testament
plainly intimate, that this prosperous state of his kingdom was not only to be
preceded by his suffering, but the prophecies of the new testament also show
that persecutions, trials, and sufferings, should, in different degrees, attend
his followers, before the kingdoms of the earth became, by a general
conversion, the kingdom of the Lord and his Christ. See Math. 10, 34.

THE new testament prophecies take in, as it were, all the old, and add not
only new luster, but extended strength unto them; so that had the JEWS believed
Moses and the Prophets, they would have believed in Jesus Christ, and their
opposition to him, proved they were neither of the faith or spirit of Moses,
Prophets, or holy Fathers, set these (...) at the sight of his day, though
seeing it a great way off, but foolish Jews were grieved and offended at the
day that he in person dwelt amongst them, casting him from them, and preferring
a robber and murderer before him. They confounded themselves in every sense by
opposing the MESSIAH, and in justice, God confounded them; sor in the very line
of their disobedience, his judgment overtook them. They put the Messiah to a
shameful death, when all their nation were assembled at the celebration of the
passover; and when assembled to that celebration, Titus the Roman, (as the
instrument of justice) shut them up within the walls of Jerusalem to put them
to death. The rejection of the true Messiah was their crime, and the following
of false Messiahs was their sore punishment. They sold and bought Jesus as a
slave, and were afterward sold and bought at the lowest price for miserable
slavery themselves. They made him a companion of thieves and robbers, and they
were afterward infested with bands of thieves and robbers. They put their
Messiah to death, lest the Romans should come and take away their place and
nation, and in so doing the Romans did come, and took away their place and
nation. They crucified him before the walls of Jerusalem, and before the walls
themselves were crucified, in such numbers that it is said room was wanted for
the crosses, and crosses for the bodies; so their own imprecation, "his blood
be upon us and our children," was remarkably fulfilled; and that predicted by
Moses has been verified, viz. the Lord shall scatter thee among all people,
from the one end of the Earth even to the other, etc. Deuteronomy. 28, 64. And being
now so many hundred years under the effect of that prediction, fully proves
that till now there has been some heinous crime amongst them, for which they
did not repent. The downfall of the tabernacle of David, could not be before the
rejection of the Messiah; for it was upon that sin that God gave it wholly up,
to be trodden down by the Gentiles, justly rejecting them who rejected his Son,
and this tabernacle could not be again raised up, according to the predictions
of the Prophets, if it was not first broken down, nor could it be raised up
according to all (...) prophecies, until they look upon him whom they have
pierced, and mourn; for all the prophecies, as they follow in order, must be
fulfilled in regular course, and that second era of time is now set in, in
which they will look upon him and mourn. The true light has now dawned forth,
by which they cannot but see he has come.

THEIR fathers put the Messiah to death, not for any evil that was in him, but
to satisfy their malice; and to the opening of this new scene, they have been
of that same spirit of their fathers; so that the guilt, till now, has lain
upon them, and of course the punishment continues, while ever there is guilt.
They persecuted him to death, merely upon their own judgment; and was not this
at best acting upon the greatest uncertainty? He that trusts his own heart, or
depends upon the public cry, often finds himself a fool; and if their hearts
deceived them herein, is it any wonder that they now shrink at the thought, and
keep as far off as possible from it? But though they should strive ever so much
against it, yet it is true, and truth will break in and overpower them.

HE was to come at the very time he did come, and at no other time could he
come, agreeably to the Prophets. If he has not yet come, all their ancient
Prophets must be false, and of course their manner of worship, founded upon
their scriptures, were always false; so if he did not come, their present
worship must be utterly false; and if he has come, their Jewish worship now is
erroneous, and rejected of God, because opposing his gospel; so their present
case, as to the Mosaic ceremonies, is bad on every hand; and we be unto them if
he has not yet come, because his coming was to be unto his own people, the
stock of Israel, and him they will not receive, as their own scriptures affirm,
but cast him out and stay him, in order to keep the inheritance; so that, upon
the grounds of their own supposision, if he is yet to come in the flesh, they
are to put him to death, and after that, there is above 1700 years of such,
misery to come upon them, as never besel any nation. Now here is what they gain
by denying that he did come; for if he was yet to come in the flesh, all this
would lie before them, as certain as God is in Heaven; but in the very nature
of things that cannot be, because they are that long in a course of shame and
afflicting misery -- Already dispersed, their temple and city destroyed, and
their polity gone; so that he has no house of David now to come unto as a King,
they having no particular kingdom, being broken down long since. Moreover,
God's spirit, word and providence, must have confounded one another, and
wrought all along against each other, to the great frustration or confustion of
divine economy.

BUT know, O! JEW, that blindness in part only happened to Israel. TRUTH leads
thee now into the light of a new mystery, which could not be opened before this
second ERA of the gospel disclosed it, and which fully corresponds with thy
idea of expecting the Messiah.

UPON your rejecting the Son of God, you were then given up to the blindness of
your own hearts, and upon murdering him, divine justice engaged itself against
you; yet, during the foreordained period of your long punishment, you were in
part supported, and by mercy kept distinct from every people, from generation
to generation. Through all your calamities a remnant was still preserved. An
expectation of the Messiah's coming, one day or other, to deliver you, has been
always your hope, and this has been founded in the very depth of God's truth.
But your denying that he came before, is not of God, but of that evil power
that deceived your hearts. When ye rejected him, at the first head of his
gospel, ye could not, in point of divine justice, receive him, until that first
circle, belonging to that head of its dispensation, closed, but as consisting
of two eras within itsels -- Christ comes at the head of the second, as well as
he did at the head of the first, not in bodily person, but spiritual power,
through which he brings all nations, kindreds and people, to acknowledge him;
so that, in expecting the Deliverer, you have been all along right; and though
you had that hope, yet you could not clearly comprehend the manner of his
coming, nor the nature of his kingdom, till opened out unto you,
notwithstanding your being in a measure united to God through grace, and
reserved until this day should dawn, and its morning star rise clear before
your eyes, and you receive the true evidence thereof in your own consciences.
And further, this WORD, is the first DIVINE CALL to you on this head; for the
calls given you before this, were only from men, but now God's power speaks,
and sooner than now it could not be; nor was the like from Heaven to you these
1700 years past, nor could you sooner than this, as one great body, come into
the Messiah's kingdom; but now you will enter therein, for this word cannot
return till it accomplishes that for which it is sent; and you will know that
it is from HIM, by his light shining upon your hearts, and by the general
influence of his grace swaying your wills, which now is yielding thereto, as if
the whole of ye were but one man.

HERE is good tidings for you -- and shall, in the course of a little time be
matter of joy unto all nations. But then it is required of men, as Beings
capable of free action, to fall in with God's designs, concerning them: His
richest blessings are received only in the line of believing his report, i. e.
yielding thereto. Without faith it is impossible to please him, much less to
rise high in his favor.

THOUGH you have waited now above 1700 years, expecting your MESSIAH, yet ye
have had no deliverance, and you should wait now not only 1700, but 17000
years, were the world to last so long, and yet find no MESSIAH to deliver you,
if you do not accept him in the light and truth of this simple word, through
which he offers himself unto ye.

THEREFORE open your hearts to God, and he will now satisfy you with an
enlarged freedom in all happy circumstances, both internally and externally,
becoming a people peculiarly beloved and favored. You are called at this
moment, not only to stand up from lying longer in your broken down or scattered
condition, but as enlivened beings to move with the present general revolve,
(as the effect of Divine Providence) toward meeting your God, who has his way
in this whirlwind, and comes toward you in all the fullness of his boundless
blessings. The extraordinary promises that never were yet fulfilled, are now to
be made over to you.

FINIS.

