THE MORALIST: OR, YOUNG GENTLEMAN AND LADY's Entertaining Companion, etc.
BEING A COLLECTION OF MORAL TALES, AND STORIES. Selected from the best modern
Authors.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by JOHN W. FOLSOM, No. 30, Union-Street. MDCCXCI.

THE MORALIST: OR, YOUNG GENTLEMAN AND LADY's Entertaining Companion, etc.
THE GENEROUS FRIEND: OR UNFORESEEN ALLIANCE.
TO make others happy, is to be happy ourselves; beneficence is one of the
cardinal virtues, "said Alcindor to Ergastus, his son: "it is one of the
attributes of the supreme being, it is that which claims our reverence, and
makes us the most sensible of his existence.

Alcindor passed for a philosopher, without making philosophy his study.
Misfortunes sustained with constancy, an unshaken resolution, and an
inclination for solitude, acquired him that vain title. Born in an age of
dissipation, of illustrious parents, whose virtues were not equal to their
titles, he had learnt at his own cost the condition of one who is abandoned to
the most lively passions, and knows not how to restrain them.

Recovered from his wanderings, he became sensible of the danger of a neglected
education, and was desirous of guarding his son against the temptations of a
number of insignificant beings, who followed no other guide but appetite. He
was in no want of examples to enforce his exhortations; but he thought that the
most striking, and what would make the deepest impression upon the imagination,
would be the narrative of his own life.

"Ergastus," said he, one day, as they were taking a Tour in the park, at a
small distance from his castle, "I am going to treat you in a manner that few
parents treat their sons. I am desirous by giving you a recital of the follies
of my youth, to put it in your power to make yourself a good man, that your old
age may be free from remorse: few young men have this advantage. Listen to me
with attention, may the words be engravened on your heart, and alway^ treasured
up in your memory; and may my story be a means of preserving you from the
snare^ which you will meet with from your contemporaries.

Young, rich, and my own master, I entere^ the world when I was about eighteen.
Unacquainted with the allurements of flattery, or the politeness of fashion, I
imagined I was transported into the regions of delight. Every thin^ gratified
my senses, and I followed no other guide^ I had a friend, but, unworthy of the
sacred nam^ he assumed, he plunged me in an abyss of voluptuousness. He was my
only counselor; the most implicit obedience ^^infancy could not be more
obsequeous to the precepts of a parent than I was to the lessons of Philintus.
In short, he was every thing.

I was soon taught to recognize no other desire but my passions, and to have no
other desire but that of gratifying them. Innocence, virtue and beauty could no
longer claim respect. We got ourselves introduced into families, where we made
it our study to seduce those whom imprudence had exposed to our contemplation.
Among others, whose fall effects me most was Calista.

She was charming, my son. Her heart was noble, her temper, her understanding,
every thing about her was worthy of admiration, and irresistably captivating.
But what can innocence avail amidst the tumults of the passions, and the
deceitful artifices of seduction? I gazed at her. She pleased me, and from that
moment I thought of nothing else but to make her increase the number of my
conquests. The most flattering proposals, attachment, sighs and tears, were
practiced to seduce this young beauty.

Three months escaped without my perceiving that I had made the l^ast progress.
Exasperat^d at the opposition of Calista, I had recourse to Philintus, who at
that time was a stranger to the passion I had for her. What I thou (...) to be
only taste, was love; I never suspected that this was my case; my vanity
concealed my defeat from me. Philintus, on hearing of my adventure, clearly saw
my condition; an i^onical smile ushered in this reply. 'Very p^e^^y,' said he,
'Al^inder is in love* seriously, in love! the object of his passion is a mere
child; she resists him, and he is despairing, though not beside a clear stream.
To be serious, my dear, your brain is out of order. Go into the woods, make
them echo with your sighs, and carve your lover's name on the bark of every
tree; for you are unworthy either of my advice, or my friendship. It is a great
pity that you should be lost to the world; you set out well, and I had better
hopes of you.

After this rallying he turned upon his heel, and went out. This reception
chagrined me; I persuaded myself that he made use of this handle to break with
me; I formed a resolution to seduce Calista, to convince this diletanti, that I
was more worthy of his acquaintance than he imagined.

That very night I planted my cannon, and was determined to be revenged of
Calista and Philintus. I intended to triumph over the weakness of the too
credulous fair, and then to leave her to the tortures of remorse. By this, my
son, you may perceive the dangers of the passions, and the misfortune of an ill
conducted education. We give only superficial accomplishments to our children,
at the same time neglecting to form their hearts; virtue and reason, which only
distinguish us from the brute creation, is either overlooked, or despised.

In prosecuting my base design, I hypocritically assumed the garb of virtue; by
which means I imposed upon Calista, and her relations, and I even exposed
myself to raillery on the occasion. My reformation gave me so much credit with
people of character, that I was mentioned as an example for those of my own
age, You would be surprised, nay, you cannot imagine how I dissembled; but your
surprise will cease, when you know the world yourself, and you will then be of
my opinion; that few persons really are what they appear to be.

Calista accustomed herself to hear me profess my love for her, she listened to
me with attention and answered me with kindness; but her modesty would not
suffer her to disclose her sentiments. One day I found her alone, and pressed
her to make some return to my love. She lifted up her eyes to me, which
expressed both inclination and modesty. 'Will you never keep company with
Philintus any more?' said she, in faultering accents. This question, which had
no relation to our discourse, surprised and perplexed me. She perceived it:
'Answer me,' said she, 'but, no -- do not. I had rather think you will not.' As
soon as she had said this, she ran away. Her flight disconcerted me very much.
This caprice, which I could not account for, chagrined me; I was resolved never
more to see a raw girl that seemed to be void of feeling.

Enraged with Calista, I had recourse to Philintus. I met him that very day by
chance. Though it was somewhat disagreeble to inform him of the bad success of
my project, the rage in which I was, forced me to disclose the motives for the
virtuous conduct, which I had assumed. He heard me with patience, and when I
concluded, embraced me. 'This artifice,' cried he, 'shews that you are worthy
of my esteem. Why! with all my craftiness, I could not have played my part half
so well. Nay, I was myself deceived by your reformation. I pitied you a
thousand times; and was really sorry for your weakness. But will you fling away
the fruits of six months restraint? Calista is but a weak girl; she is in love
with you, and a single moment may bring her into your arms. The question she
has proposed to you, supposes that you must drop my acquaintance. I forgive
her, but shall wait for my turn. Conceal our reconciliation from her with the
greatest precaution. We will see each other in secret. Adieu, remember that
your reputation depends upon the affair.'

When alone, I loved Calista more than I imagined; her tears, her despair,
which I anticipated, overwhelmed me with confusion. But alas! I had gone too
far to retreat. I got rid of the impertinence of reflection, thought of nothing
but securing the victim.

I saw Calista again, on the earnest invitation of her mother. She was ignorant
of the distress, which she was going to bring upon her daughter.
Notwithstanding all that I had heard from Philintus. I could not meet her
without changing color. I imagined that she could read in my very eyes the
criminal projects which I had entered into. I found her melancholy; a sudden
flush, an emotion, which she could not suppress, convinced me that I was not
disagreeable to her. This conviction, instead of increasing my remorse, served
to disperse it. I persuaded myself that she would at last own herself obliged
to me for teaching her how to shake off the yoke of prejudice.

My passion, which increased every day, forced me to leave no stone unturned to
obtain a complete victory. Philintus, whom I saw every evening, stimulated me
by his importunities. One day, being alone with Calista, as I was striving to
extort from her the conf^ssion of (...) affection for me, a slight accident
which happened to me let me into the secret, notwithstanding her reservedness.
I had spent several nights in company with Philintus and some other friends. My
constitution was rather delicate. A bleeding of the nose, proceeding from
fatigue and debauchery, seized me in to violent a manner, that I found myself
very much indisposed. Calista, being terrified, rung the bell, and called for
her attendants, who were at that time fortunately from home, and she was alone
-- alone with me in this condition. On my recovery I found myself in her arms,
She was bathed in tears. I perceived at that instant an inconceivable mixture
of joy, pleasure, and shame. I snatched the hand of Calista, which she never
thought of withdrawing, being engrossed by other ideas. How happy am I! said I
to her. Confirm my happiness, let one tender consent complete my felicity! I
adore you. I have no other wish, no other view than to dedicate my life to your
service. She made no reply, but her looks discovered her thoughts. I imprinted
a thousand kisses upon her hand; which I still held between mine. The timorous
Calista, agitated with an emotion which increased every moment fell backwards
upon a couch, when one of her domestics entered. I was chagrined at his
presence, and took my leave a few minutes after in so much trouble and
confusion, that I could not tell where I was.

When I came home the idea of Calista, her sweet delirium, her credulity, and
her tenderness, rushed upon my mind, and I thought it was a crime to take
advantage of her innocence. My recovery was but of a short date, my unbridled
appetite returned, I once more resolved that Calista should gratify my passion.
I went to her house the next day, where, though I found a great deal of company,
I found means of having a Tete-a-tete with her. I was convinced of her
affection, but had no regard for the purity of my own. To cut this narrative
short, my son, she was in love with me, and loved me to her own ruin.

My attentions for Calista discovered our intimacy to our two families. They
talked of uniting us; but the proposal alarmed me. My desires were now
gratified. I (...) several objections. The mother of Calista, ^ho was ignorant
of her daughter's weakness, disgusted with the delay, which I caused, broke off
the treaty, and forbade Calista to see me.

It was not long before this unfortunate lady repented of the sacrifice she had
made to me. She wrote to me, described her situation, and used every method to
secure my return. I did not condescend to give her any answer, nay, I had the
baseness to expose her letters to Philin^us. He published them. The distressed
Calista retired from the world, and resolved to bury her shame and despair in
the glooms of a convent.

Other intrigues served to obliterate the very name of Calista from my memory;
there was no excess which I was not guilty of to avoid the ridicule of being
thought religious or virtuous. I was guilty of so many, that I found myself
under a necessity of quitting the capital, and went to join my regiment. War
was declared soon after; I was rejoiced at it, for my villainies began to
disturb my repose. I endeavored to signalize myself, not so much from a desire
of glory, as to eraze the remembrance of the crimes I had been guilty of. A
letter which I received from Philiatus, on his deathbed, made me detest my
irregularities, and pay the fruitless tribute of remorse to the ^ate of
Calista."

Alcindor was advanced thus far in his narrative; the remembrance of his
debaucheries affected him with so much horror that he was not able to continue
it, when he perceived Alcipus approaching toward him. -- This visit surprised
him, because for two years, in which they had lived in the same neighborhood,
they had made no connection. He recovered himself as he could, and went to meet
him.

Alcipus, formerly a friend of Alcindor, had entirely declined his company on
account of the badness of his character. He sincerely loved him, and always
promoted his interests, even unknown to him. After his return to the paths of
virtue, Alcindor was so much engrossed by his religious exercises and the
education of his son, that he lived in the greatest privacy, without enquiring
who belonged to the estate which was contiguous to his own. Some encroachments
of the tenants had discovered that it belonged to Alcipus, but he did not
venture to make himself known to him, and chose rather to give up his property.

Alcipus, after some compliments, taking Alcindor aside, told him ingenuously
that the goodness of his character had made him wish to renew his acquaintance
with him, and farther, to unite their families, if it were agreeable. "We are
neighbors, said he, we have known each other for some time, our families may
form an alliance together. With respect to fortune, I have more than enough to
make your son happy. I have no regard for punctilios or false delicacy: it is
but natural, that as you never visited me, you could not be supposed to demand
my daughter of me, and therefore I am come to give you a voluntary offer of
her. My dear friend, added he, I have heard much of your son, I am in love with
him; as for my daughter, she is not disagreeable, and I imagine they will make
no bad match. If you will both of you come to my house, you shall see her, and
I flatter myself that you will not reject the proposal I have made to you.

Alcindor made his acknowledgments to his friend; but as he was desirous of
finishing his instructive history, or rather finding himself under a necessity
of disclosing his distress and compunctions, he prevailed on Alcipus to spend
the evening with him, promising to attend him the next morning. Alcipus
consented, they supped together, and spent their time in talking of things that
were past. Alcindor let some few tears escape him, on which account they
changed the subject of their discourse, and the night was spent in the sweet
delights of friendship and gratitude.

It was scarce day break when Alcindor entered the apartment of Ergastus, who
had passed one part of the night reflecting upon what his father had disclosed
unto him, The idea of the approaching alliance had disturbed him likewise, what
frivolity, and the love of mischief occasions in young people, Ergasius
experienced, but from a different motive. A mild reserved temper, assisted with
an education, though not fashionable, yet at the same time founded upon
rational principles, enabled him to form a right estimate of things. He was
apprehensive lest a connection formed at his age, on the motive of interest,
might render him unhappy; the benevolence of Alcipus charmed him, he was afraid
of proving ungrateful, by refusing an alliance, or of being unhappy in uniting
himself to a person whose character and disposition should be contrary to his
own. These reflections disturbed him, when his father entered his apartment.
After giving him some instructions relating to the visit they were to make, he
resumed his narrative in the following manner.

I told you, my son, that Philintus wrote me a ^etter which deluged my eyes
with tears. The poor man had abandoned himself so much to de^auchery, that at
four and twenty he could not help wishing for death, though he durst not
procure it. In this crisis he came to himself, and repented his having been the
ruin of a vast number of young men, who had too implicitly followed his
pernicious counsels. When we are on the point of giving an account of our
actions, the veil, which intercepted the sight of them, rends, and we are
filled with horror; and the weakness of the body communicating itself to the
mind, carries us in an instant from the excess of vice to that of a forced and
involuntary repentance. The impossibility of making reparation for the evils
which we have done fills as with terror, which of itself would be sufficient to
accelerate our end. It was in this fatal moment that Philintus, terrified with
the retrospect of his past life, sent for his friends* confessed the crimes he
had perp^^ra^ed, and exhorted them to repentance i^ so pathetic a manner, that
most of them, affected with the spectacle they saw before them, changed their
conduct, and became illustrious for their virtue.

I was informed of the death of Philintus almost as soon as his sickness. The
circumstances with which it was attended almost freezed me with horror. I began
to reflect, and I must confess that the apprehensions of meeting a similar end
had as much influence over me as virtue itself. I turned my eyes within, I took
a retrospect of my irregularities, I groaned at the villainy I had been guilty
of to Calista; shame covered my face, and despair got possession of my heart.

The peace which had lately been proclaimed, left me at liberty to repair to
court. I returned thither very unlike myself. I employed myself in endeavoring
to find out the unfortunate Calista. Some years were spent in the fruitless
research, at length time abated somewhat of the poignancy of my remorse, and I
yielded to the importunities of a family, of which I was the only descendant. I
married your mother. Love did not preside at our wedding, my wounded heart
could not harbor so sweet a guest. We were, however, united by esteem, and
lived very comfortably, when my happiness was interrupted by the loss of your
mother, who died a few hours after she had introduced you into life.

The remembrance of the crimes of my youth heightened the distress in which I
was involved by the loss of a valuable wife. I should not have supported it, my
son, if the hopes of being useful to you had not enabled me. I retired to this
estate, where my whole study has been to form your heart to virtue. After the
loss of a law sui^. I struggle with ^er mi^^rtunes. I should not have been
affected with them were it not for your sake. The more I reflect upon the
propensity we have to evil, and the easiness which grandeur gives to the
perpetration of it, the more am I thankful ^o the supreme Being for having
reduced me to a mere competency. I thank him for your sake; it is at least a
rock which I have escaped.

Alcipus, with an unbounded generosity, is desirous of repairing your losses,
and wishes that our two families were united; I must say that I concur with
him. Pay his daughter a visit* should she please you and her heart be
disengaged, it is an a^^^ance which wi^^ give me inexpressible transports. I
beg, my son, that you would impa^t your sentiments to me with the greatest
freedom^ look upon me a^ your friend, as a sincere friend, who wishes for
nothing more than your happiness, and ^^aims no other ^^ght over you than that
of approved friendship. Alcindor ceased speak^ng, and Erga^tu^, after returning
him thank^, promised him the most implicit obedience.

Being joined by Alcipus, they accompanied him to his castle, where they were
received by Amelia as persons whom she expected. Selinda, the companion of
Amelia, assisted her in doing the honors of the t^ble.

Some days passed in great festivity, (...) which Alcipus observed with
pleasure the impression which the c^arms of his daughter made upon Ergastus.
This youth kept his eyes constantly fixed upon her; his assiduity, his trivial
attentions, which are important in love, meeting with an air of complacence,
convinced him that he was not indifferent to her.

Friend! said Alcipus to Alcindor, let us leave the young folks by themselves,
I have something to say to you, and we will join them in the park. Ergastus
gave his hand to Amelia, Selinda accompanied them. They walked sometime without
speaking to each other, and Selinda, absorbed in melancholy, had no inclination
to break silence. Ergastus, at last ventured to speak a few words, his looks
and his expressions were animated; love itself could not appear more
irresistible. He revealed his passion to Amelia with a force and energy, which
could proceed from sincerity alone. The amiable fair one, being instructed by
her father before, did not strive to conceal her feelings, and a modest, but
ingenuous reply, insured the happiness of her lover.

Satisfied with each other, they beheld no other objects, and the arbor in
which they were seated was a little world to them. Amelia, who till that
moment, had seen none but her lover, recollected Selinda, rolled her eyes in
search of her, and was surprised not to find her. She was disturbed at her
absence, and was going in quest of her. "I cannot ingross your attention, fair
Amelia," said Ergastus to her in the accents of tenderness, "what are you
afraid of?" Nothing, replied the inamoretta, the regard I have for you is a
kind of security or a pledge that you have the same for me. But Selinda is in
distress, and demands my attention. She has no relations; and being entrusted
to my father's care from her most tender age, the knows no one but him. Till
this crisis she has lived a happy life; but an alarming discovery of her
present situation has plunged her into the glooms of melancholy. I conjure you,
Ergastus, to permit me to take her as my companion, and suffer me to keep her
with me as long as I live. Were you acquainted with her virtues? No virgin was
ever possessed of more virtues than Selinda.

Charming Amelia, replied Ergastus, I shall never have any will but yours. It
will give me the greatest happiness to contribute any ways to soften the pains
of Selinda.

As they were speaking, they looked after her; but how great was then
astonishment to find her in the arms of Alcindor, who, together with Alcipus,
was bathed in tears.

My son, cried Alcindor, heaven has restored me my daughter, your sister, and
the very copy of Calista.

Ergastus and Amelia looked at each other with surprise; but their surprise was
superseded by the pleasure to find a sister in a friend, whom they loved so
much. Selinda quitted her father's embraces for those of Ergastus and Amelia.
They demanded with all the eagerness of curiosity how this discovery was made?
I can inform you, my children, replied Alcipus.

Calista, preyed on by the most lively sorrow, had confidence enough to repose
in me the secret of her circumstances, and her just apprehensions. Her parents
were going to confine her to those gloomy retreats, which are dedicated for the
reception of involuntary penitents. I formed the resolution of snatching her
from their obduracy. I was aquainted with the superior of the convent, where
she was to reside till her delivery. We concerted measures to rescue distressed
innocence. The relations of Calista were so much blinded with rage, that it was
no very difficult matter to impose upon them. A pretended illness and death,
which they seemed to hear of with pleasure, were the means we made use of to
rescue Calista. -- My sister carried her to the extreme parts of Silesia, where
she has a small estate. The distressed fair was delivered of Selinda, and her
sorrows put an end to her miseries. With her dying breath she conjured us to
have pity on her orphan daughter, to conceal her birth from her, and make use
of our utmost endeavors to inspire her with the love of a religious life.

We undertook this charge. I married a little while afterward, and had Amelia.
I brought them up together. The unwillingness of Selinda to take the veil
obliged me to disclose some part of the fatal secret. She felt the distress of
her circumstances, lamented them with the pangs of anguish, and persisted in
her refusal. My daughter, whom I took out of the convent, begged me to let her
be with her; I consented to her request with joy. By chance I understood that
Alcindor had seen his error, and was become a convert to virtue. I knew he had
a son, whom he had educated himself. I then conceived the design of marrying my
daughter to him, and to prepare my old friend to recognize his (daughter.) My
wishes are accomplished. I have but one condition to make with respect to my
daughter's marriage, which is this; my fortune is considerable, I shall divide
it between Amelia and Selinda: I offer my heart to the latter; her father gives
his consent; and to be short, one word will unite all four of us together.

Alcindor, who had gone aside to avoid hearing the narrative of Alcipus,
returned at this period, and asked Selinda if she would give her consent.

Yes, my dear father, replied she, the obligations I am under to Alcipus cannot
be compensated but by the most sincere affection and attachment. I am ready to
perform any thing you can command.

Alcindor, Alcipus, Ergastus, Amelia, and Selinda embraced and congratulated
each other on account of an alliance so happy, and so unforeseen.

The two weddings were solemnized without pomp, but with a general
satisfaction. Alcindor retired to a solitary place, where he employed himself
in regretting his dear Calista. He went yearly to visit his children, imparted
to them the fruits of his meditations, and recommended to them, above all
things, to remember his failings, that they might not only preserve their
children from the same, but likewise all those whom providence should commit to
their care.

INDISCRETION. A Moral Tale.
MISS Jenny Bradshaw was one of those figures which, without being very
regular, had something in her which seldom fails to please and charm. Born with
a candid and virtuous heart, each day produced in her all the requisite
qualities for making a husband happy. The pride, inspired by high life,
praises, flattery, and still more the bad examples and wrong conceived maxims
of the Lady, her mother, wife to Sir James Bradshaw, of an opulent fortune in
Hampshire, soon corrupted her good dispositions. This Lady resided always in
London during the winter season, and with reluctance quitted it even in summer,
so few attractions had rural pleasures for her, comparatively to the means that
facilitated her gratifications in town. She was possessed with a singular mania
of believing herself a fine wit, and greatly admired for her vast erudition.
One time she was seen to enter the list with a band of Literation political,
religious, and metaphysical discussions. Mallebranche, Lock, and Newton, were
favorite authors with her. Another time she prided in giving her patronage to
every young adventurer in authorship of any kind; she read all the pamphlets,
plays, and poems they brought her, and in the enthusiasms of her heart
considered herself as the only arbiter of good taste.

Miss Jenny assisted assiduously at the conferences held in her Ladyship's
apartment. As she grew up, the inclinations of the mother gathered strength in
her, but success was not answerable to her desires. She had some difficulty in
expressing herself. Often, in the midst of a conversation, she would stop
short, as bewildered. Forming two or three connected phrases was to her a
painful business. A natural timidity still added to the embarassment of her
tongue. Nothing could vex her Mamma more than the poor display of her
argumentative faculties: she did not cease preaching to her daughter, and in
her scientific delirium would cite examples to her of some philosophic Ladies,
and many others of the sex, who had distinguished themselves for their genius
in a variety of composition. How can your frozen imagination, said she, receive
no warmth, collect no fire from the reading of the works of such incomparable
women? See what glory has crowned them! will you, by indolent life add to the
number of ordinary women, whose sole talent is to adorn, and to borrow from art
charms which nature has refused them, or add to the number of those that waste
their time and spirits amidst the obscure details of domestic occupation. A
woman properly is no other wise commendable but by the extent of her wit and
genius.

Such was Lady Bradshaw's manner of constantly lecturing her daughter. She was
ignorant how dangerous it is to tamper at procuring too much wit for women.
Nature calculated them for pleasing and not for becoming learned. A
forgetfulness of the duties annexed to their condition is the fruit of a taste
misplaced on sciences. The wanderings of the mind commonly produce those of the
heart. A young Lady that seeks instruction, in the view of shining as learned,
is but too often instructed at the expense of her virtue.

Opportunity soon favored the designs of her Ladyship on Miss Jenny. Mr.
Reynolds, a young Gentleman of some rank, but of depraved morals, seemed to her
the fittest person for inspiring her daughter with a love of the Belles
Lettres. This Mr. Reynolds was one of those superficial beings that haunt all
our gay towns and places of resort, yet able only to impose on the senseless
and undiscerning multitude. He had something of a sprightly imagination, spoke
with ease and fluency, and reasoned upon every thing without knowing any thing
to the bottom. The reading of novels and plays was his principal occupation. He
would descant on the merit of every actor and actress on the stage, and as a
perfect connoiss^ur in theatrical matters, would enter into minute details of
their justness or improprieties. He also pretended to be an adept in the
doctrine of chances at any sort of game or diversion. Nothing could be more
pleasing to him than the favorable opinion Lady Bradshaw entertained of his
qualifications. For a long time he had been courting some notice from her, and
he secretly aspired to Miss Jenny. He had already made some successful attempts
in that way; but Jenny was a rich heiress, and himself had dissipated a good
part of his patrimony, so that he had reason to apprehend lest the inequality
of fortune might become an obstacle to his desires. How great was his joy, and
how confident his presumption, when he saw himself permitted to give lessons to
his dear Jenny. He profited of every occurrence in them that could be
applicable to love (for his first lessons were out of romances and novels) to
make the case here is and his own, and more especially, when a strained
sensibility took place, all the sighs and raptures of Q^ixotism were adopted.
Thus it was that this new Abelard and this new Eloisa spent the moments in
amorous parley, which Lady Bradshaw imagined to be dedicated to study: 'Mr
Reynolds, said she, I find my daughter has a smoother and readier elocution
since she has been under your tuition; her mind begins to open, and her
intellects show a more clear and lively conception.'

Reynolds, with many flattering speeches kept the mother in her fatal delusion.
He saw with pleasure the progress his young pupil made in the science of love.
Now he tried what effect soft and tender poetry might have on her mind. Ovid's
Art of love and his Epistles were not forgot. To these succeeded some select
passages from Tragedy. The young Lady's imagination became daily more heated.
He was careful to dwell longer on the more passionate parts to give Miss Jenny
a due feeling of them; she listened to him with avidity, and insensibly
suffered herself to be wrought upon to give into all the snares of seduction.
Already they wrote the tenderest billets-doux to each other. Their interviews
and conversation were more frequent under the specious pretext of acquiring
wit, and, the more they saw each other, the more they loved.

Sir James Bradshaw, a man of rough manners, and little or no learning, had
however wit and sense enough to know his wife's foible. At times he would
become boisterous, and fly out into a passion against her, reproaching her
tartly with her strange manner of conducting herself and family. He loved
sincerely his children, was sollicitous for their welfare, and did not look
with so indifferent an eye as his Lady on the preposterous education of his
daughter. On this account he expressly forbad her to receive Reynolds's visits.
This order seemed to strike Jenny with consternation. Love had made too deep a
wound in her heart. Nothing was capable of effecting her cure.

The impetuous temper of the Baronet, and the melancholy air of Jenny's
countenance, were soon as presages to Mr. Reynolds that some storm was
gathering against his happiness; and what confirmed him in his notions was the
cold reception he had from Lady Bradshaw. She at length began to think that his
assiduities to her daughter might be attended with very disagreeable
consequences. Reynolds had grounded his principal hopes on the confidence that
blind mother had placed in him; however, as an expert man, and versed in the
airs of intrigue, he schemed other measures to attain his end. He knew how Miss
Jenny's heart was disposed; he was beloved by it, and he agreed with her, that
it was best to desist from further visits; but, before separating, they
concerted the means of keeping up an epistolary correspondence.

Reynolds appeared no more at Lady Bradshaw's assemblies, which indeed were now
become less frequent than before. He wrote pretty often to Jenny, and strove to
dispose her insensibly to private interviews. He knew by experience that love
is irritated by difficulties, and that a young female, once going beyond the
bounds of modesty, runs afterward of herself to the precipice. Miss Jenny
after many reflections, fears, uncertainties, and after having listened to and
long struggled against the murmurings of virtue, yielded at last to her lover's
solicitations. They saw each other as often as opportunities served, by the
intervention of a waiting woman, to whom Reynolds, in the disguise of a country
farmer, was to personate the lover. This stratagem succeeded from time to time
with little or no interruption. In the country, Miss Jenny and her maid used to
take their evening walks by the recesses of wood^* and along the banks of
winding streams. Here too the industrious lover failed not (...) meet. Nature's
ga^ attire, the melody of birds, the sweetness of the every thing, in short,
painted for Jenny the scenes and the language of love. While the maid would
step aside to gather some wild flower that catched her eye, the amorous pair
would go astray, and often out of sight, in their agreeable solitude. Reynolds
became more passionate and fond; Jenny more adventurous and more weak. What
will not an enterprising lover so circumstanced, attempt? Jenny lost sight of
virtue, and was defeated.

Reynolds applauded himself in secret for his triumph. His happiness appeared
certain to him. A marriage so much to his advantage would repair the disorders
of his fortune occasioned by the eccentricities of libertine youth. Jenny on
the other side, soon became inconsolable. Her heart was rent, her mind
distressed and depressed by all the remorse that commonly follows illicit
pleasure and the loss of virtue. She dared no more appear before her mother,
and how should she confess her fault to her? To what reproaches was not she
going to expose herself? Her situation, however, did not permit her to disguise
it longer: Each day the indications of her dishonor were more and more
visible* Encouraged by the solicitations of her lover, she went trembling to
her mother's apartment, and reveals to her the fatal secret with all the shame
the ^cknowl^dgment of so bad an action usually inspires. ^dy Bradshaw was
highly incen^ed and exp^d Jenny her presence. She dis^red, but too late, the
dangerous illusion that had dece^ved her. Sensible of all her faults, she
ha^tened in some manner to repair them by a marriage, generally disliked, and,
in the sequel, ver^ unha^py.

An Account of an Unfortunate Young LADY who was betrayed by her FRIEND.
SIR,
IF your breast has any feeling for the distresses of a ruined wife and mother,
I beseech you to communicate my unhappy story to the public. ^t may possibly
come time enough to prevent a catastrophe, which would add horror to ruin, and
drive to utter distraction a poor helpless family, who have more misery already
than they are able to bear.

I am the wife of a very worthy officer in the army, who by a train of
unavoidable misfortunes, was obliged to sell his commission; and from a state
of ease and plenty has been long since reduced to the utmost penury and want.
One son and a daughter were our only children. -- Alas! that I should live to
say it! happy would it have been for us if one of them had never been born! --
The boy was of a noble nature, and in happier times his father bought him a
commission in the service where he is now a lieutenant, and quartered in
Scotland with his regiment, O! he is a dear and dutiful child, and has kept his
poor parents from the extremity of want, by the kind supplies which he has from
time to time sent us in our misfortunes.

His sister was in the eyes of a fond father and mother lovely to an extreme.
Alas Mr. Fitz Adam! she was too lovely. -- The times I have watered her dear
face with my tears at the thought that her temper was too meek and gentle for
so engaging a form! She lived with us till she was turned of fourteen, at which
time we were prevailed on by a friend to place her with a gentleman of fortune
in the country, (who had lately buried his lady), to be the companion of his
daughters. The gentleman's character was too honorable, and the offer too
advantageous, to suffer us to hesitate long about parting with a child whom,
dear to us as ^he was, we were not able to support. It is now a little more
than two years since our separation, and till within a very few months it was
our happiness and joy we had provided for her so fortunately. She lived in the
esteem and friendship of the young ladies, who were indeed very amiable
persons, and such was their father's seeming indulgence to us, that he advanced
my husband a sum of money upon his bond, to free him from some small debts
which threatened him hourly with a jail.

But how shall I tell you, Sir, that this seeming benefactor has been the
cruelest of all enemies! The enjoyment of our good fortune began to be
interrupted by hearing less frequently from our daughter than we used to do;
and when a letter from her arrived, it was short and constrained, and sometimes
blotted as if with tears, while it told us of nothing that should occasion any
concern. It is now upwards of two months since we have heard from her at all;
and while we were wondering at her silence, we received a letter from the
eldest of the young ladies, which threw us into a perplexity which can neither
be described nor imagined. It was directed to me, and contained these words.

"MADAM,
"For reasons that you will too soon be acquainted with, I must desire that
your daughter may be a stranger to our family. I dare not indulge my pity for
her as I would, lest it should lead me to think too hardly of one whom I am
bound in duty to reverence and honor. The bearer brings you a trifle, with
which I desire you will immediately hire a post chaise, and take away your
daughter. My father is from home, and knows nothing of this letter; but assure
yourself it is meant to serve you, and that I am, Madam,

Your very sincere friend, and humble servant."


Alarmed and terrified as I was at this letter, I made no hesitation of comp^,
with its contents. The bearer of it either could not, or would not, inform me
of a syllable that I wanted to know. My husband indeed had a fatal guess at its
meaning; and, in a fury of rage, insisted on accompanying me: but as I really
hoped better things, and flattered myself that the young ladies were
apprehensive of a marriage between their father and my girl, I soothed him into
patience, and set out alone.

I traveled all night* and early the next morning saw myself at the end of my
journey. -- O, Sir! am I alive to tell it? I found my daughter in a situation
the most shocking that a fond mother could behold! she had been seduced by her
benefactor, and was visibly with child. I will not detain you with the
swoonings and confusion of the unhappy creature at this meeting, nor with my
own distraction at what I saw and ^ard. In short, I learned from the eldest of
^e young ladies that she had long suspected ^me unwarrantable intimacies
between her fa^er and my girl; and that finding in her alter^ shape and
appearance a confirmation of her ^spicions, she had questioned her severely
upon ^e subject and brought her to a full confession ^ her guilt: that farther,
her infatuated father as then gone to town to provide lodgings for ^e
approaching necessity, and that my poor de^ded girl had consented to live with
him after^ards in London in the character of a mistress.

I need not tell you, Sir the horror I felt at is dismal tale. Let it suffice
that I returned ^ith my unhappy child, with all the haste I was ^le. Nor is it
needful that I should tell you ^ the rage and indignation of a fond distracted
^ther at our coming home. Unhappily for us, ^ was too violent in his menaces,
which I sup^se reached the ears of this cruelest of men. ^o eight days ago
caused him to be arrested ^on hi^ bond, and ^urried to a prison.

But if this, Sir, had been the utmost of my ^sery, cruel as it is, I had
sp^red you the trou^ of this relation, and ba^^ed my grief in my (...). Alas!
Sir, I have another concern, (...) is more ins^pport^ble to me than all I have
(...). My (...) in the anguish of (...) and given him (...) of his daughter's
(...); conju^ing (...) me this (...)) by (...) his (...) upon this (...) his
(...) was sent (...) and has left me in the utmost horror at the thought of
what may happen. I dread every thing from the rashness and impetuosity of my
son, whose notions of honor and justice are those of a young soldier, who, in
defiance of the law, will be judge in his own cause, and the avenger of
injuries which Heaven only should punish.

I have written to him upon this occasion in all the agony of a fond mother's
distresses. But O! I have fatal forebodings that my letter will come too late.
What is this honor, and what this justice, that prompts men to acts of
violence and blood, and either leaves them victims to the law, or to their own
unwarrantable rashness? As forcibly as I was able in this distracted condition
I have set his duty before him; and have charged him, for his own soul's sake,
and for the sake of those he most tenderly loves, not to bring utter ruin upon
a family, whose distresses already are near sinking them to the grave.

The only glimmering of comfort that opens upon me is the hopes that your
publication of this letter may warn the wretch who has undone us, of his
danger, and incline him to avoid it. Fear is commonly the companion of guilt,
and may possibly be the means of preserving to me the life of a son, after
worse than death has happened to a daughter.

If you have pity in your nature, I beg the immediate publication of this
letter, which will infinit^ly oblige,

Sir, Your greatly distressed, but most faithful humble servant.

THE HAPPY PERSEVERANCE.
HOPE seems to have descended from heaven in the suit of love to console
mankind in the evils which that deity occasions; she always attends upon
lovers. She insinuates herself into their hearts. She warms their imagination.
She multiplies their ideas. There is no beauty whom she will not promise to
move; no coquettes which she will not pretend to fix; no obstacles which she
will not undertake to surmount. She creates a delicious illusion which leaving
the coldness of reality behind, gives you the enjoyment of many ages.

Ye who are now perusing this narrative, if invincible obstacles separate you
from the object of your affection; if a constant but unsuccessful passion
afford you no desirable prospect to console yourselves with hope: perhaps the
next moment a ^rtuitous vicissitude, or some unforeseen event, may present you
with that happiness after which you sigh. The lover should not despair; let the
history of Salvador, son of the king of Ceylon, confirm this assertion. In one
night he lost his father, his relations, and his kingdom. The Portuguese, who
had lately made the discovery of the Indies, and conquered the island of
Ceylon, sent him to L^^bon, where he struggled with new misfortunes to which he
was exposed by love. Of all the Portuguese nobles who had showed their
civilities to Salvador, the count d' Almodovar was the most ardent in the
pursuit of his friendship. This nobleman was rich, of great interest at court,
but fiery, ambitious, of rigid virtue, too credulous in believing ill, an enemy
to his own age and mankind in general, disposed to find fault, and imagining
that others were not possessed of those virtues which he felt in his own
breast. He was pushing for the vice-royalty of the Indies, and in hopes that
Salvador might some day be of service to him, he omitted nothing to gain his
confidence. He easily succeeded. The unfortunate run to meet their comforters,
and kiss with transport the hands which wipe away their tears. Their connection
became so imtimate, that Salvador made no scruple of accepting a lodging with
his friend. The first object which struck him was the daughter of his new
friend; she was one of the greatest beauties in Portugal: it is impossible to
conceive the charms and graces which Donna Isabella united in her person. Her
air was noble and engaging, her figure majestic, her eyes full of fire, and her
head adorned with jetty hair which she dressed herself: in a word, she seemed
to be some angelical existence that had descended from heaven.

Her father said, as he presented Salvador to her, My daughter, I present one
of my friends, which I wish may likewise add to the number of yours. He has
conflicted with great misfortunes; you will aid me in closing his wounds with
the balm of consolation.

Donna Isabella made a vague but ingenuous reply, but Salvador was unable to
utter a word. The sight of Isabella made a strong impression upon him, a sweet
emotion sh^k his whole (...)! a glowing red ^fused i^self all over his
countenance; his eyes were infl^med, and striving to fix them on Isabella, they
lowered themselves as if unable to sustain the splendour of so many charms. He
strove to raise them again, but they lowered themselves again. His soul
intoxicated with the sight, seemed to have quitted him: he remained without
motion, plunged in an ecstasy of delight. Such are the delicious moments which
feeling hearts experience but once, and which those who are cold, or void of
feeling, never experience.

Salvador found his heart wounded for the first time. A consuming fire, which
circulated through all his veins, informed him that he was in love; he
shuddered at the event, but could no longer prevent it, a single glance had
inflamed him for the rest of his life. It is the nature of great passions to be
born in an instant. The count perceived his embarassment, and imputed it to his
reviving the idea of his misfortunes. He made him several very polite
apologies, and in order to divert his thoughts, took him aside into his garden.
"You are master of all my house," said he to Salvador; "look upon it as your
own; esteem me as your parent; your age, and my friendship, vindicate me in
assuming that title. I have but two children, they w^ll be happy in looking
upon you as a brother. My son is with his regiment; you have seen my daughter;
her person is well enough: her soul is far more amiable. I have had the
pleasure of educating her myself, and her improvements have more than
recompensed me for all my cares. I should be glad to settle her before I sail
for the Indies; you will assist me in the c^oice of a son in-law.

The last sentence made Salvador quake; it pierced his heart with a dreadful
light, which discovered to him the dangers which attended his passion; like a
flash of lightning in a stormy night, which discovers to the despairing
passenger the rocks and breakers with which he is surrounded. From that instant
he was resolved to struggle against his passion; but he struggled in vain! It
is in vain to wrestle with our fate. His inflamed heart resisted in vain the
passion by which it was enslaved. The reflection he made to destroy his
affection served only to increase it. He saw and conversed with Isabella every
day, and drank from her eyes the fire which consumed him. The sound of her
voice, or guitar, pierced his heart, the fragrance of the flowers which she
wore in her bosom overpowered him; all his senses were intoxicated with love,
and his passion was never more violent, than when his feeble reason strove to
suppress it.

Love made as great a progress in the heart of Isabella. Her eyes were fixed
upon those of Salvador, and were rejoiced to meet them; a secret anxiety made
her uneasy in his absence, and the days which they passed together sted away
like so many moments. The most intimate confidence was established between
them. Their mouth was a stranger to the secret of their hearts, their eyes
communicated their mutual thoughts and desires; and the pleasure of seeing each
other, left them no other to wish for. That age must be very deplorable in
which the sight of two young and innocent lovers should appear either strange,
or chimerical!

The happiness of Salvador and Isabella wanted nothing for its completion, but
some circumstances which taught them the value of it. One day Salvador, with an
heart and eyes full of tenderness, met with Isabella as she was going up to her
apartments. The elegant disorder of her dishabille seemed to give a great
addition to her charms. Never had she appeared to him with so much beauty. He
offered her his hand, and trembled to receive hers. He grasped it softly. He
thought he felt it tremble, and in his transport (...) glued his burning lips
upon it. Isabella was in great agitation. She blashed, and retired.

Salvador, intoxicated with pleasure, was at length confused with the thought
or his daring to offend one whom he loved: it was some time before he was able
to appear in her presence. He dreaded her sight and he had reason for doing so.
Isabella thought herself offended. Though she was not without feeling, she was
nevertheless of rigid virtue; and the rashness of her lover appeared
inexcusable. However, chance offered him an opportunity of excusing himself.

The king's comedians had brought out a new play. The count d'Almodovar begged
Salvador, who had been at it the first night, to give some account of it before
Isabella and a numerous company: the subject of the piece was a quarrel between
too lovers, occasioned by an indiscreet salute. Salvador enforced the excuses
^f the shepherd with so much address and warmth, and described his distress in
so pathetic a man^er, that the company would have been displeased, had not the
shepherdess granted him his pardon. Isabella perceived that Salvador was
pleading his own cause: she was affected with his remorse, the turn he gave to
his excuses, and with the glance from her eyes, assured him of his pardon.

The reconciliation which took place between them was productive of a
shortlived happiness. A crowd of suitors flocked to Isabella; they were all
suitable to her in age, fortune, and birth. Isabella was not a little disturbed
at the appli^ations which were made to her. She confided in the affection which
her father had for her, as a means of avoiding an engagement which was
disagreeable to her. But Salvador was in despair, from an apprehension of
losing the object of his affections. He reproached himself for being an
obstacle to the happiness of Isabella; for disturbing the tranquillity of a
worthy family; for practicing upon the affections of the daughter of his
friend; and he was resolved to triumph over his weakness. He saw Isabella but
seldom; but the efforts he made to conquer his passion flung him into a
profound melancholy, and impaired his health. Isabella perceived it, and was
greatly alarmed. She was resolved to run any risk to procure his recovery. She
wrote him a billet, which she sent by a slave, whom she thought she could
confide in. Salvador received it with an anxiety, which was not very favorable
to his cure; it was to the following effect.

"Your condition makes me very uneasy, take care of yourself for my sake, and
repeat this charming couplet which I sing with as much pleasure as sincerity;
"Esteem gave birth unto our fires,
Friendship increased the social strife,
Love has crowned our warm desires.
I love, -- and I shall love for life."


Salvador read this billet with transport; he bedewed it with his tears, and
put it into his bosom. He was enjoying the happiness of pleasing the object of
his love, when he was sent for by Isabella's father. On his entrance, "Dear
Salvador," said he, come and comfort your friend. I assure you he never had
more need of it. You know my intentions with respect to Isabella, and the
desire I have to settle her before I go to the Indies. Very advantageous offers
have been made; I gave my consent to several, but my daughter refuses every
one: though hitherto she esteemed it her greatest happiness to please me, yet she
now opposes my intentions with a firmness which astonishes me. Her heart, which
is full of ingenuousness and simplicity, seems to be affected with melancholy;
perhaps ^t is not disengaged; perhaps some perfidious ^educer -- But away with
so unjust a suspicion: ^t is in your power to clear up my doubts. Isa^ella
esteems you; she may grant you that con^idence which she refuses to her father.
Sound ^er heart, read her soul, and if any sentiment, which ought to make her
blush, has made too ^eep an impression, undertake her cure, and res^ue us both
from an attachment unworthy of ^er and myself.

The count melted as he pronounced these words; a few tears burst from his
eyes, and he ^lasped Salvador to his bosom. Salvador, con^used and disconcerted
with his address, reproach^d himself for the misfortunes to which he was ^rivy.
He was going to make a discovery, when the count thus resumed his discourse.
"But you, my dear Salvador, who are melted ^ith my distresses, what cause has
augmented your own? You have fallen into a melancholy, which affects me very
much; you drag on a chagrin which preys upon you: your health is impaired; I
have till now avoided enquiring into the cause of your melancholy, but if it be
in my power to afford you any consolation, the keeping it a secret is a crime
in the eyes of friendship. Does my friendship cease to be agreeable to you? Has
my daughter forgot the regards which are due to you? Have my friends or
domestics neglected you? Have you suffered any considerable loss? Speak! my
dear friend. My fortune, my life is at your service; you shall meet with
satisfaction in every thing. Are you impatient on account of not being able to
obtain that compensation which the king has promised? You ought to rely upon
his promises, and I will do my utmost to realize them."

Salvador, pierced with so affecting an address, and ashamed to harrow up the
soul of so generous a friend, was for some time in suspense whether he should
not fall at his feet, and discover the whole affair to him; but he was
apprehensive of making too deep a wound in his own heart; he conceived the rash
hopes of banishing himself from the heart of Isabella, and to reconcile her to
the views of her father. He pretended that the motive of his melancholy was his
distance from his own country, the remembrance of his misfortunes, and several
other circumstances which is not in the power of the count to redress. He
thanked him hearti^y for his friendly offers, and quitted him with a thou^^nd
protestations of gratitude.

In the interim, the slave who carried Isabella's bill^t to Salvador, had the
indi^^retion to read it; on reflecting upon the contents, he was filled with
apprehensions, and prostrated himself at his master's feet, where he confessed
his crime, and discovered the contents of the billet with which he had been
charged; and the confusion, joy, and transport with which Salvador had perused
it. This impoisoned the breast of the father with jealousy, hatred, and fury.
"It is this wretch, then," cried the count, "that has disturbed her
tranquillity, betrayed his friendship, and violated the laws of hospitality! the
wretch! with what artfulness did he wipe off the tears, which he alone was the
cause of! With what perfidiousness did he receive my addresses! How calmly did
he enjoy the fruit of his crimes! Bid him quit my house directly," said he to
one of his domestics, "and never dare to come there again." In the height of
his fury he wrote him the following billet:

"You have betrayed my friendship and confidence: quit a house of which you are
the disgrace, and never dare to appear again in the presence of a friend whom
you have so cruelly offended."

The count d' Almodovar set no bounds to his passion, because he thought that
Salvador had set none to his. The contempt he had for those of his own times,
and the ill will which he bore them, were united against Salvador and Isabella.
He might have been convinced of their innocence, but his natural ferocity, and
the rigidness of his principles were equally hurt; and he ran the risk of doing
an injury to his daughter, merely for the sake of a pretense of hating a
friend. Salvador was overwhelmed with grief, but he resigned himself to his
exile without murmuring against Isabella's father. He imputed his misfortunes
to none but himself; he did not hesitate to seek an asylum f^r from the spot
where the count resided, and he formed a resolution which he kept inviolate;
which was never to disturb the repose of Isabella, or to augment the grief of
her father by his presence.

Isabella heard of the departure of Salvador, without being informed of the
cause. She durst not speak of it to any one, nor durst any one, speak of it to
her. At one time she grieved at the cruel usage, which she was apprehensive
that he was unable to support; at another time she was offended at his
coolness; she accused him of deserting her, and, if it were possible, of hating
her. "If he loved me still," said she, "would he not have contrived to see me?
Should I not have seen him at church, or the public walks, or at the play?
Would not love have inspired him with some expedients to assure me that he
loved me still?

Notwithstanding Isabella constantly rejected all the offers that were made
her, she artfully eluded the importunities which her father made use of to
engage her to choose a husband. She knew that Salvador ought to carry his point
at court; that the king had honored him with strong promises, and she hoped
that if the favors he might meet with were any wise suitable to his birth, and
the loss of his estates, he would soon be in a condition to offer her a hand,
which her father himself would urge her to accept.

Salvador cherished the same ideas in his retirement. The image of Isabella was
always before his eyes. He would not have wished, for the sake of Isabella,
that she should think too much of him; but he could not but wish that she would
not imagine him inconstant. He often repeated the song which she sent him,
wrote it upon the sa^ds of the Tagus, and engraved it upon the bark^ of the
orange trees which grew upon the banks of that river. He dwelt with singular
delight upon the last line.

I love, -- and I shall love for life. He knew the inexorableness and the views
of the count d'Almodovar: he could not flatter himself with a certainty of ever
possessing Isabella: but at the same time finding no obstacles which might not
be surmounted, his heart gave entrance to hope. He redoubled his applications
to the king; and in hopes of obtaining some favor from him, which might make
him nearer to Isabella in point of fortune, he frequently visited the
ministers, and laid aside that air of importance which his birth and the
justice of his pretensions inspired him with. Love, which melts the most
savage, softened his temper. He became an assiduous, importunate, if ^^t a
servile suitor; for nothing appeared mortifying to him, when compared with the
loss of Isabella.

One day as he was at the levee of Don Diego de Mello, the Lord high-admiral, a
lady whom he formerly had been acquainted with, and was waiting as well as
himself to have an audience of the admiral, accosted him. She was an intimate
friend of the count d'Almodovar, and had heard a part of Salvador's history,
which affected her. Whether it were from curiosity, or compassion for his
misfortunes, she spoke to him concerning Isabella, informed him that her health
was impaired more and more every day; that she constantly refused every offer
which was made her, and at last, promised to introduce him to her, if she could
do it without wounding either her discretion, or her delicacy. Salvador closed
the proposal with transport, and the day and place for receiving the answer
were fixed. At the time appointed he flew to the place of rendezvous; but how
great was his agony when he was informed, that "Isabella heard his name
mentioned with indifference, that she pretended to question whether he had any
great desire of an interview, and that she at last ordered her to acquaint him
that she was quite recovered.

Heavens! cried he, is it possible that Isabella should be inconstant, unjust,
and cruel! Even though she ceased to love me, providing her indifference would
have contributed to her health, I should not have complained; but to suspect
that I was no ways interrested in her health, to give me notice of her
inconstancy, to plunge the dagger herself into my heart, is such a shock as I
cannot support! I am determined to fly a place where there can be no feelings,
when there are none in Isabella's heart.

He ran over every part of the inhabitable globe in idea in quest of a place to
bury his grief in. But his choice was soon fixed, a secret, a natural
propensity generally attracts us to our own country. He recollected, that
amongst the Indians, who are in alliance with his ancestors, the Marattoes were
the most numerous, the most courageous, and most favorable to his own views,
because they were continually at war with the Portuguese. He was resolved to
seek an asylum among them, and solicit a commission in their army. He soon
informed them of his descent, and gave them proofs of his courage. The skill he
acquired in military affairs enabled him to discipline their troops. Though he
sought for death in every engagement, he met with nothing but glory. A man may
easily become a hero who had no value for his life! The Indians regarded
Salvador as some celestial being, who was sent to protect their liberty and
their country; they imagined a sovereign who resembled him would insure their
happiness; and the unanimous voice of the nation placed him upon the throne. He
ascended it with transport, in hopes of sharing it with Isabella.

I have, said he, at last a throne to offer to one, who is more worthy of it
than any other. The absolute sovereign of my heart, she shall be so likewise of
an extensive dominion; but this dominion is rather too small, I could wish to
be the king of the universe, to make her a more meritorious offer.

Salvador thus pleased himself with the idea of presenting a crown to his
mistress. But he was perplexed for the means of obtaining her acception. -- The
war which the Portuguese carried on against the Marattoes, and especially the
immense distance which separated him from Isabella, formed almost insuperable
obstacles to his wishes. He imagined that Isabella was at Lisbon, and was under
a mistake. She had traversed the ocean, inhabited the same continent as
himself, and almost breathed the same air. The count d'Almodovar had at last
ob^ned the vice royalty of the Indies, which he had solicited so long. He was
at Goa, and fortified it with the greatest expedition, that it might be in a
condition to resist the attacks of the Marattoes with which they were
threatened. His daughter still constant to her attachment, had accompan^^d him
with an aching heart. She thought that she was flying from her lover, and never
dreamt of meeting him in the midst of so shocking a scene*

Salvador had scarce taken possession of his sovereignty, when he was obliged
(...) ^^ke which should decide the liberty of the Indies. At the head of a
numerous army he ventured to lay siege to Goa, which was the capital of the
Portuguese. It was fortified both by nature and art, but what fortresses can
resist an invincible courage? That of the Marattoes bordered upon savageness.
The resistance which the Portuguese made, augmented their ferocity, fury and
rage took possession of their breasts, and with a general cry they demanded to
be led on to the assault. Nothing could withstand the impet^osity of the
Marrattoes, they surmounted every obstacle, forced the ramparts, and hewed down
all before them. In an instant the houses were pillaged, the streets flowed
with blood, and horror spread itself every where.

In this terrifying confusion Salvador could not be heard, he endeavored in
vain to stop the enr^ged troops. He knew not the vicer^y, he was ignorant of
the danger to which Isabella was exposed; he had no thoughts of the cruel
spectacle which was to torture him. Excited sol^ by the meltings of generosity,
he endeavored to ^ave the governor from the fury of his troops; he r^^ to his
palace; but the gates had been already forced. The (...) penetrated to the
apartments of the viceroy; his domestics were massacred in his sight; he
himself made but a weak resistan^ (...) His daughter, rendered (...) affecting
by her beauty, confusion, and (...) the soldiers and her father, to (...) from
their attacks, and intercept that danger with which he was threatened. The
obdu^ (...) going to sacrifice her; their battle axe were lifted up, when
Salvador entered, and recognizing Isabella, slew to her as quick as lightning,
and parried the blow which was aimed at her. Stop! my com^ades! cried he. The
Marattoes fell back, astonished at his words, and Salvador prostrated himself
at the feet of his mistress. Isabella, who could scarcely believe her own eyes,
fell in fit into her father's arms. The count, who ^pported her with one hand,
attempted to push ^w^y his generous friend with the other. The Marattoes,
affected with this scene, retired with ^spect. Isabella opened her eyes again
to in^rm herself whether he^ happiness was real.

As for the count, who was sti^ implacab^e, he ^uld not but behold with horror
one whom he ^ked upon as the greatest enemy he had in the ^^ole world. He would
have discharged his ^ole rage upon him, when Salvador prevented (...), by
saying, that he never had betrayed his ^ndship; that he must confess he loved
Isa^la; that he loved her still, but that he never (...) the rashness to avow
it to her. In a word ^ed he, my views are honorable; I am the ^g of the
Marattoes, and I can in offering my ^d to the charming Isabella, give her ^
share ^ne of the most considerable kingdom^ of the Indies. In granting my
wishes you will restore the happiness of one who has always been your friend;
and you will at the same time for ever reconcile the Portuguese and the
Indians. I scorn to take any advantage of the victory which has endangered your
life. I give up my conquests. I restore to the Portuguese the country which I
have taken from (...). I will give them more if it be requisi^e; and, in one
word, I leave you free, and more free than I am.

The count, overcome by the generosity of Salvador, ashamed of having even
denied him his friendship, begged him to forg^t what was past. and gave him his
daughter with joy. That of Isabella and Salvador was inexpressible. That their
happiness might meet with no farther delay, the next day was fixed on for their
marriage.

The confusion and carnage immediately ceased. -- The a^iance of Salvador and
Isabella reunited the conquerors and the conquered. The Marattoes consented to
the restitution of Goa* The count d' Almodovar appeared confused a^ the injury
he had done his children.

Salvador could give his attention to no subject but his mistress, could scarce
believe his o^^ eyes, and imagined that what was transactin^ was an illusion.
As for Isabella, whose joy a^ded new charms to her beauty, she gazed at h^^
lover, embraced her father, and as she approached the altar said to herself. I
know that co^stancy and perseverance lead to happiness.

History of DORANTES. A Moral Tale founded on fact.
DORANTES was naturally well disposed, and full of sensibility; but losing his
parents in his infancy, he was entrusted to the care of mercenary tutors, who
regarded their salaries more than the improvement of their pupil. I need not
say that their abilities were not very great; it cannot be otherwise where
persons are void of sentiment.

Dorantes despised his tutors and consequently conceived a very high opinion of
himself, and was obstinate in all his desires.

This character grew into a habit by the time when a person enters into the
world, and chooses his manner of life for himself.

Honored with a military post, as soon as he was able to enjoy it, Dorantes
was introduced to Lucinda; her house was the receptacle for all those that were
des^rous of studying the taste of the day, to seize the fashion of the moment,
or figure in the art of pleasing.

Instead of submitting to the general to^, Dorantes, would not adopt it till he
had seen how it would take for one month, which was the way of never submitting
to it.

To brave the torrent of fashion, to make it the subject of s^tire, is mere
singularity and ^olly: though the person who does this may be laughed at, yet
he is excused.

What the world could not forgive in him, was his obstinacy in his sentiments,
and the positive manner in which he defended them against his superiors, I mean
those who had gained an ascendency in society.

This pertinaciousness may sometimes be found in the company of truth; but yet
it is no proof of it: for error has had its martyrs. Dorantes never quitted an
opinion which he had adopted. Persons of such a temper may at first be sincere,
and though afterward they are undeceived, yet their vanity will not suffer
them to confess it.

Those who were in the right in their disputes with Dorantes, co^^ented
themselves with bantering him on account of his oddities; for superiority is
indulgent. Those who were in an error, and were for destroying the veil of
error in his company, were not quite so easy; on which account he was
frequently engaged in some affair of honor.

For instance, he broke with Medor, one of his friends, only because he had not
so high an opinion as himself, of an eminent actor. Dorantes grew warm, and
they drew their swords; the engagement was not a very bloody one, they came off
slightly wounded but yet, it might have been attended with more fatal
consequences.

Though they st^ove to bury their duel in oblivion, yet we know that secrets of
this nature cannot be kept from the knowledge of our acquaintance (...) news is
spread with a single hint, and the world is soon in possession of them.

The blame was universally said upon Dorantes. Lucinda was affected with it.
"It is a pity, said she to herself, that a man of honor, and one whom I have
entered into my list, should ruin himself, at the beginning of his career!
Come, my dear Cloe, I will prepare a triumph for you. Love must reform him --
nor is there a greater master."

This proposal was agreeable to her wishes* Lucinda could not have made a
better choice. Cloe ^ new how to set off reason without giving up any of its
rights. It is frequently represented as surrounded with thorns; if the road to
it be difficult, it is only owing to the guides.

It was by this secret charm that Cloe acquired an ascendency over Dorantes;
subdued by her graces, he thought that he yielded only to her arguments.

As it is impossible to draw the character of Cloe to perfection, I shall only
add that her beauty was the only subject of discourse among the other sex, and
that her good friends among the ladies, could find but one defect in her;
though her rivals thought she had two. "Her eyes, said the latter, are
expressive of tenderness, when they ought to express indifference; and the
coloring of her complexion has too near a resemblance to that of art, on
account of its being too glaring."

Cloe soon received a visit from Dorantes: he endeavored to efface, by his
presence, the reports which had been spread of his duel. "What here already!
cried she; you have very little value for your health." -- "My health! replied
he; I do not understand you." -- "Dorantes, resumed Cloe, none of your
evasions; preserve your ingenuousness, especially as it will not become
obstinacy, which is a great thing in your favor." "Well, answered Dorantes, I
will confess. I have had an affair; yet I was but slightly wounded; will you
blame me for showing that I did not want for courage. It is the inheritance of
those who are in the army." "It may be so, said she, but politeness is their
inheritance likewise. What was the cause of the rupture between you and Medor?
You admired the expression, the fire, and sensibility of -- the actor, and I
cannot but say I have the higher opinion of your taste for doing so. Medor who
is more phlegmatic than you, admires him without enthusiasm; in the name of
good sense was there any reason for your falling into a passion on that
account? Dorantes, your confusion and silence show that you are sorry for it."
"Madam, answered he, they only show my astonishment; I could not have imagined
that valor would appear as a crime in your eyes." "I have told you, replied
she briskly, that I have no objection to valor; I only object to the abuse of
it; blood should never be drawn in a dispute on taste. Repair your fault. --
You may do it without any prejudice to your character. Confess to Medor that
you attacked him without grounds or reason." "What would you have me do? cried
Dorantes. No, I shall not dishonor myself. A concession of that nature would
only expose me to fresh insults. -- Perhaps I may have been in the wrong. Ah
Madam, what an expression have you extorted from me!" This kind of confession
was all that Cloe could draw from him; and he was sorry that he had made it.

We are very partial to ourselves, and are offended with those who do not
flatter our prejudices. Hence Cloe displeased Dorantes by the very circumstance
which ought to have increased his love. "She censures my conduct, which is a
sure token that it is worthy of esteem: for nothing but what is intrinfically
valuable is deemed a proper object for criticism. Well I shall leave these
censurers to themselves, and I am determined to begin with Cloe, she is like
others carried away by the stream of vulgar errors, and ready to give her
sanction to every thing that is in fashion; she may indeed have too much sense
to differ from me in opinion -- but she seems at present only to flatter those
that are my enemies."

To renounce our present connections is to reduce ourselves to the necessity of
contracting new ones: Dorantes experienced the truth of this observation. A
character like his, and an opulent fortune, open a favorable prospect to those
who strive to extricate themselves from their difficulties by their
officiousness, and substitute the most servile compliances and intrigue, in the
stead of honest labor for their support.

Among those with which he was surrounded, no one surpassed Damis in finesse.
Employed incessantly in developing the foibles of humanity, attentive to their
motions, their conversation, and their looks, he turned all the light he
acquired to his own advantage. Persons of a positive disposition are fond of
applause; this was the instrument which Damis availed himself of; far from
opposing his opinions to those of Dorantes, he cried up their sublimity, and
reverenced them as much as a critic does one of the Greek or Roman classics.

At the first shaft of flattery Dorantes was shock^ (...) where is there a man
who can resist the (...) heart becomes an accomplice to betray us, and if we
aspire at public applause, we are in part seduced.

To dispute every inch of ground with address; to oppose or comply with the
public taste, was the artifice which Damis employed on this occasion. "I must
bring you acquainted with a young lady from the country, whose relations have
committed her to my care," said he to Dorantes; and he added, "she is tolerably
handsome, you shall form her, and be her instructor."

Dorantes, prejudiced in favor of Clarinda's character, perceived nothing but
simplicity, where others would have discovered finesse, and was enchanted with
her person, which he had given them but a faint description of.

Not that her person was equal to that of Cloe's, but there is a great deal of
partiality blended with the judgment we make of beauty. We frequently
depreciate in private those charms which others applaud with the greatest
warmth, and commonly fall a victim to those which others pass by unnoticed.
Were it not for this opposition from partiality to the general taste, two or
three persons would ingross every one's adoration, and the major part of the
sex would not have a single heart left for them.

Be this as it may, the affection of Dorantes fluctuated between the two
Belies; but when he found himself applauded by Clarinda, when he contrasted the
captivating notes of ad^iation with the gra^ing sounds of reproof, it admits of
no doubt to which he gave the preference. A siren obtained the prize which he
refused to wisdom.

Clarinda easily got the ascendancy over him, and ^ded her designs upon him* At
first ^he confined herself to raise contributions from ^is purse, to obtain
furniture and jewels in concert with Damis; but considering the impression
which she had made, she aspired to the honor of being his wife. "Certainly,
said she to Damis, he shall be my husband: -- pray do not ^^ugh at me. I have
some scruples, I intend to ^^e an honest woman. It is my fancy to try all
characters; to say no more, my probity is well known to you; I am indebted to
you for the ^^diments of love, and I shall be faithful to my master."

Clarinda had two difficulties to struggle with; her poverty, which is a very
great obstacle in these days; but that was nothing in comparison ^ith the
whispers which were spread against her character. She had never strove to make
a se^ret of the latter; and as the bare suspicion of ^nfidelity will sometimes
set aside a marriage, how was it possible to accomplish designs, when a
thousand witnesses deposed against her? How was it practicable to smother the
rumor of ^^me* At first, Clarinda thickened the cloud, which hid Dora^tes from
the public view; she excited in him, by artful i^sinuations, an indif^^^ence to
those who were of the same character ^s himself; she persuaded a man, who was
al^eady discontented, that the world was full of criminals; whether more from
indulgence or truth, she added that ^^ults seldom proceed from the heart, but
almost always from frailty, pre^ice, error, or ignorance; for it is the
interest of the bad to depre^i^^e human nature, and bring it down to their own
level.

After having given an unfavourable picture of th^se who were not her friends,
Clarinda's grand secret was to inspire her lover with a ^iking of modest and
discreet appearances, and to feed his love by little liberties. To secure the
former she made choice of those situations where a person may risk every thing
without too much rashness; to procure the other, she tempered by her
discourses, the ardor which she had excited? she made him contented in
receiving small favors, by giving him a prospect of obtaining still greater;
thus at the same time as she inflamed his desires, she chained them with hope;
and from the whole of her conduct she was able both to keep his love alive, and
to preserve his esteem.

Dorantes would readily have proposed marriage, had it not been for the
excessive precautions of Clarinda. But she had painted mankind in so
disagreeable an attitude, that he was afraid to furnish new victims, and add to
the number of dupes; or the bad.

However, to hasten the catastrophe, Clarinda changed her battery. She became
reserved and scrupulous. She never received Dorantes without lamenting the
force of the passion by which she was attached to him. She assumed an external
appearance of devotion; and after having prepared him by these artifices, she
declared that her virtue, honor, conscience, and the advice of persons of the
greatest piety, obliged her to take refuge in one of those asylums of
innocence, wherein that time is dedicated to prayer, which others dedicate to
pleasure.

Dorantes entreated, conjured, made a hundred protestations of affection, and
concluded with a promise of leading her to the altar.

If Clarinda had not consented, if she would have applied for a license which
would not have been refused her, instead of bands, nothing could have added to
her triumph. But she employed that time in affected delicacy, which ought to
have been employed in a more material affair* and she let fortune slip out of
her hands, while she was contemplating it.

This news was not long in spreading all over the place. Dorantes's former
friends, shocked at an example which might have a contagious influence,
endeavored to dissuade him from the match.

This was no proper time for truth to be heard; always prejudiced with his own
ideas, he shut his heart to her whispers; he was approaching toward a
precipice; his feet tottered upon the brink of an abyss.

Dorantes, now became the jest of the town, and valuing himself more for that
very reason, was to have been married in a week's time. Happily for him,
Clarinda, who was near the end of her labors, and held the palm in her hand,
grew tired of a dissimulation which appeared of no farther use, and which is
always difficult to support. Dorantes saw, as well as the rest of the town,
that he was her dupe, and that she treated him more like a husband than a lover.

It may be thought incredible, that she could not have held out one week
longer. They who think so, forget conquest infatuates, and that no one is
nearer a fall, than he who has arrived at the summit of grandeur; but even they
should have reason on their side, yet I cannot sacrifice the truth of history
to the false delicacy o^ the age.

This alteration in Clarinda's behavior removed the bandage from the eyes of
Dorantes. He compared what he saw now, to what he had seen, and to what he had
heard. Scarcely awaked from a long lethargy, and freed from illusion, he had
recourse to his friends and owned for once in his life, that advice was
necessary. Truth, which had been long smothered bur^t out on all sides, and the
unhappy lover was entertained with several anecdotes from the Scandalous
Chronicle.

I shall not attempt to describe his feelings, Those who have experienced such
disagreeable situations, can conceive them well enough, while others cannot
form any idea of them. The image of Cloe revived in his imagination; he thought
he had offended her too grossly, to recover her esteem, or expect her
forgiveness. Fluctuating thus between love, which attracted him to her, and
shame, which kept him at a distance from her, he was informed that she was gone
off with another man. The manner in which this event was described, was
somewhat remarkable. The ladies who gave this information were no great friends
to Cloe, because she eclipsed them. They said, "they saw her by herself in a
lonesome place; after which they saw a gentleman accost her, who led her away."
All this was true; but they should have added, that Cloe prostrated herself at
the gentleman's feet and was bathed in tears. But the eye of jealousy can
perceive nothing but what flatters its wishes.

When this anecdote transpired, Cloe was vindicated by some; others said, that
this event gave them no surprise, as it was suitable to her character, and
some, who were more bold, said they foresaw it. Dorantes was determined to
search this affair to the bottom, and to snatch Cloe from her troubles; for her
virtue was never suspected by him. But he knew not what course to take. After
many a tedious enquiry, he discovered that a vessel had lately failed from
Dieppe, for the island of Jersey, having on board a young lady who was very
handsome; who no one was permitted to see, and that she was a prey to grief.
With this glimpse of light, he set out; no sacrifices are too great to one who
would be a protector of female honor, and is desirous of delivering his
mistress, and meriting her love. He landed. Heavens! what a sight! He met Medor
conducting Cloe to church.

"Condescend, said Medor to him, to be present at the union of two lovers, who
are going to vow an incessant fidelity to each other." The priest was ready,
and going to begin the ceremony, when Cloe cried -- "Stop! Stop! do not be
guilty of sacrilege; deliver me from his impious hands! Oh, deliver me!" -- At
this crisis Dorantes discovered himself; the thunderbolt which strikes a person
dead in the middle of a feast, could not cause a greater astonishment. Cloe
alarmed at this interposi^ion, uttered many an exclamation of joy. Medor knew
not where he was, what he was doing, or what he said; every motion indicated
the greatest perturbation and confusion: he mut^ered some inarticulate sounds,
he confessed hi^ ^rime, and quitted the island with the greate^^ ^recipitation.

After this Dorantes ran into Cloe's arms. The chagrin which he had occasioned,
was eclipsed by the important service he had rendered her. His fault was being
positive and obstinate; but misfortune, which works many a change in the human
heart, wrought one in his; and love which sweetens it softened ^his. Dorantes
married Cloe, and was happy with her to the day of his death.

Story of AMBITION.
SIR,
AMONG the variety of subjects with which you have entertained and instructed
the public, I do not remember that you have any where touched upon the folly
and madness of ambition; which, for the benefit of those who are dissatisfied
with their present situations I beg leave to illustrate, by giving the history
of my own life.

I am the son of a younger brother of a good family, who at his decease left me
a little fortune of a hundred pounds a year. I was put early to Eton school,
where I learnt Latin and Greek, from whence I went to the university, where I
learnt -- not totally to forget them. I came to my fortune while I was at
college; and having no inclination to follow any profession, I removed myself
to town, and lived for some time as most young gentleman do, by spending four
times my income. But it was my happiness, before it was too late, to fall in
love, and to marry a very amiable young creature, whose fortune was just
sufficient to repair the breach made in my own. With this agreeable companion I
retreated to the country, and endeavored as well as I was able to square my
wishes to my circumstances. In this endeavor I succeeded so well, that except
a few private hankerings after a little more than I possessed, and now and then
a sigh when a coach and six happened to drive by me in my walks, I was a very
happy man.

I can truly assure you, that though our family economy was not much to be
boasted of, and, in consequence of it, we were frequently driven to great
straits and difficulties, I experienced more real satisfaction in this humble
situation, than I have ever done since in more enviable circumstances. We were
sometimes indeed a little in debt, but when money came in, the pleasure of
discharging what we owed was more than equivalent for the pain it put us to;
and though the narrowness of our circumstances subjected us to many cares and
anxieties, it served to keep the body ^n action as well as the mind: for as our
garden was somewhat large, and required more hands to keep it in order than we
could afford to hire, we labored daily in it ourselves, and drew health from
our necessities.

I had a little boy who was the delight of my heart, and who probably, might
have been spoilt ^y nursing, if the attention of his parents had ^ot been
otherwise employed. His mother was ^aturally of a sickly constitution, but the
affairs ^f her family, as they engrossed all her thoughts, ^ave her no time for
complaint. The ordinary troubles of life* which to those, who have nothing else
to think of, are almost insupportable, were less terrible to us than to persons
in easier circumstances: for it is certain truth, however your readers may
please to receive it, that where the mind is divided between many cares, the
anxiety is lighter than where there is only one to contend with. Or even in the
happiest situation, in the midst of ease, health, and affluence, the mind is
generally ingenious at tormenting itself, losing the immediate enjoyment of
those invaluable blessings by the painful suggestion that they are too great
for continuance.

These are the reflections that I have made since: for I do not attempt to deny
that I sighed frequently for an addition to my fortune. The death of a distant
relation, which happened five years after our marriage, gave me this addition,
and made me for a time the happiest man living. My income was now increased to
six hundred a year; and I hoped, with a little economy, to be able to make a
figure with it. But the ill health of my wife, which in less easy circumstances
had not touched me so nearly, was now constantly in my thoughts, and soured all
my enjoyments. The consciousness too of having such an estate to leave my boy
made me so anxious to preserve him, that instead of suffering him to run at
pleasure where he pleased, and to grow hardy by exercise, I almost destroyed
him by confinement. We now did nothing in our garden, because we were in
circumstances to have it kept by others; but as air and exerci^^ were necessary
for our healths, we resolved (...) abridge ourselves in some unnecessary
articles and to set up an equipage. This in time broug^^ with it a train of
expenses, which we had neither prudence to foresee nor courage to prevent. For
as it enabled us to extend the circuit of our visits, it greatly increased our
acquaintance, and subjected us to the necessity of making continual
entertainments at home, in return for all those which we were invited to
abroad. The charges that attended this new manner of living were much too great
for the income we possessed, insomuch that we found ourselves in a very short
time more necessitous than ever. Pride would not suffer us to lay down our
equipage; and to live in a manner unsuitable to it was what we could not bear
to think of. To pay the debts I had contracted I was soon forced to mortgage,
and at last to sell the best part of my estate; and as it was utterly
impossible to keep up the parade any longer, we thought it advisable to remove
of a sudden, to sell our coach in town, and to look out for a new situation at
a great distance from our acquaintance.

But unfortunately for my peace, I carried the habit of expense along with me,
and was very near being reduced to absolute want, when, by the unexpected death
of an uncle and his two sons, who died within a few weeks of each other, I
succeeded to an estate of seven thousand pounds a year.

And now, both you and your readers will undoubtedly call me a very happy man:
and so indeed I was. I set about the regulation of my family with the most
pleasing satisfaction. The splendor of my equipages, the magnificence of my
plate, the crowd of servants that attended me, the elegance of my house and
furniture, the grandeur of my park and gardens, the luxury of my table, and the
court that was every where paid me, gave me inexpressible delight, so long as
they were novelties; but no sooner were they become habitual to me than I lost
all manner of relish for them; and I discovered, in a very little time, that by
having nothing to wish for, I had nothing to enjoy. My appetite grew pallid by
satiety, a perpetual crowd of visitors robbed me of all domestic enjoyment, my
servants plagued me, and my steward cheated me.

But the curse of greatness did not end here. Daily experience convinced me
that I was compelled to live more for others than myself. My uncle had been a
great party man, and a zealous opposer of all ministerial measures; and as his
estate was the largest of any gentleman's in the country, he supported an
interest in it beyond any of his competitors. My father had been greatly
obliged by the court party, which determined me in gratitude to declare myself
on that side; but the difficulties I had to encounter were too many and to
great for me; insomuch that I have been baffled and defeated in almost every
thing I have undertaken. To desert the cause I have embarked in would disgrace
me, and to go greater lengths in it would undo me. I am engaged in a perpetual
state of warfare with the principal gentry of the county, and am cursed by my
tenants and dependants for compelling them at every election to vote (as they
are pleased to tell me) contrary to their conscience.

My wife and I had once pleased ourselves without thoughts of being useful to
the neighborhood* by ^ea^^ng out our charity to the poor and indu^^r^ous; but
the perpetual hurry in which ^e (...) renders us incapable of lo^king out for
objects ourselves; and the agents we entrust are either pocketing our bounty,
or bestowing it on the undeserving. At night, when we retire to rest, we are
venting our complaints on the miseries of the day, and praying heartily for the
return of that peace which was only the companion of our humblest situation.

This, Sir, is my history; and if you give it a place in your paper, it may
serve to inculcate this important truth, that where pain, sickness, and
absolute want, are out of the question, no external change of circumstances can
make a man more lastingly happy than he was before. It is to an ignorance of
this truth that the universal dissatisfaction of mankind is principally to be
ascribed. Care is the lot of life; and he that aspires to greatness in hopes to
get rid of it, is like one who throws himself into a furnace to avoid the
shivering of an ague.

The only satisfaction I can enjoy in my present situation is, that it has not
pleased heaven in its wrath to make me a King.

I am, Sir, Your constant reader, and most humble servant, A. B.

History of Sir HARRY PRIGG.
NOT long since, I met at St. James's coffee-house an old acquaintance of mine*
Sir Harry Prigg; who having been long rusticated, and much altered, I should
never have recollected, had it not been for the information of a fine old coat,
in which I remembered him to have made a figure about town many years ago.
After the usual civilities had passed between us, amongst many other questions,
he asked me when I had seen our old school fellow, Sir John Jolly. I answered,
that I had last summer spent some days with him at his country seat, in a
manner which would have been highly agreeable to a person of more fashionable
turn, but was to me rather fatiguing, from its excess of gaiety and
hospitality, which, according to my unpolite taste, were by no means consistent
with the soft and serious pleasures of a rural retirement. He said, he
perfectly agreed with me in my sentiments, and passed his time in the country
in conformity to them: his manner of life, he was sure, would exactly suit me,
and obligingly begged I would make the experiment, adding, that he should go
down in a few days, and would carry me with him in his chariot. I accepted his
invitation, not so much out of inclination as curiosity to see a new scene of
country life, formed on principles so opposite to what I had before
experienced, and promised to attend him at the time appointed.

But, first, it will be proper to give some account of the birth, parentage,
and education of my friend. He came young to his title and a small estate, and
was soon after sent to the university; where his title absurdly giving him the
rat^^ of ^ility, and his estate, though small^ an allowance sufficient to
support that rank at that place, he there contracted an affectation of
grandeur, and a pert kind of self-importance, which he has ever since retained,
and which neither poverty nor solitude has been yet able to conquer. Having in
two or three years acquired the advantages of that sort of education, such as
the arts of sporting, toasting, billiards, and coach-manship, he came to
London, entered into the gay world, and had address and qualifications
sufficient to introduce himself into what he still calls the best company; that
is, the company of smarts, bucks, jockeys, and gamesters: nor was he deficient
in point of gallantry; for he soon commenced an intrigue with the sister of one
of these his friends. Whether his intentions were at first honorable is not
perfectly clear; but he was quickly obliged to declare them so, being
acquainted, that a lady of her rank was not to be trifled with, and that he
must either fight or marry! the latter of which he courageously chose, as being
the most daring action of the two. This lady had more gentility than beauty,
more beauty than understanding, more understanding than fortune, and a fortune
about equal to her reputation. She was tall and well-shaped, carried her head
very high, and, being the younger daughter of the younger son of the first
cousin of an Irish baron, looked upon herself as a woman of quality. In a
little time Sir Harry heartily ha^ed her for compelling him to marry, and she
no less despised him for being compell^d: so that finding ^ittle happiness at
home, they were obliged to seek it abro^d at prays and r^, operas and ^^ming
tables, at no small expense. This could not continue long; so that before one
^inter was a^ an end they discovered that the town air would not agree with
them, and so retired to their country seat, about forty miles from London;
whither I shall now conduct my reader.

On the morning appointed I attended early at their lodgings in town, where I
found the post chariot at the door, and my friend standing by it, with a long
whip in his hand, ready to mount the box; saying, at the same time, that
coach-men were such insolent and expensive rascals there was no keeping them;
and that therefore he always chose to be his own. In the parlour sat my lady,
and colonel Macshane; a gentleman who had long been very intimate with Sir
Harry, and not less so with her ladyship; and in the passage stood her French
woman, in a sack and long ruffles, with her arms full of band-boxes and
bundles; which were no sooner disposed of in various parts of the chariot, than
my lady and myself, with her woman on a low stool at our feet, were stuffed
into the little room that was left. Sir Harry mounted the box, his valet de
chamber rode by, and a sniveling footboy climbed up behind. Thus the whole
family, with their baggage, and myself into the bargain, were conveyed without
the expense of either a stage-coach or a wagon.

Nothing passed during our journey worth relating. Her ladyship spoke little,
and that little was only complaints of her bad nerves and her ill state of
health; to which, having no expectation of a fee, I paid little attention. They
both declared that nobody but a carrier could dine at an inn, therefore they
never stopped on the road; so with the assistance of a fresh pair of horses,
that had come twenty miles that morning without a bait, about sunset we
arrived at our journey's end. The colonel got there before us, having rode
post: for Sir Harry frequently declared to us both, that though his friends
were welcome, he never entertained their horses; that it was not the fashion in
that country; neither my Lord --, nor the Duke of --, nor himself, did it.

It was not long before the dinner made its appearance; which was so very
genteel, that had it not been rendered uneatable by a bad affectation of French
cookery, it would not have been half sufficient, after so many miles
traveling, and so long fasting. At the conclusion, we had mead, which passed
for to^ay; and elder wine, which Sir Harry swore was the best Burgundy in
England, and that he himself had imported it, in conjunction with a noble lord
in the neighborhood. Over a glass of this, the cloth being removed, he
informed us that when the smoke of London, and the bad hours incident to
keeping good company, would no longer agree with his own or his wife's
constitution, he had determined to seek health and quiet in an elegant
retirement. He had been offered, indeed, a seat in parliament, and a
considerable employment; but his crazy constitution would not permit him to
accept of the one, nor his sound principles of the other. -- Retirement was
their object, therefore all they dreaded was the horrible irruptions of a
country neighborhood* but this they had happily prevented. -- That indeed, on
their first coming, every family within ten miles round tormented them with
their impertinent visits; but they returned none, affronted them all, and so
got rid of them. D^t you think we did right, my dear? turning to his wife. I
think, answered she, in a surly and dejected voice, that it is better to forget
the use of one's tongue than to converse with squires' wives and parsons'
daughters. You are right, Madam, added the Colonel, with an oath and a loud
laugh; for what can one learn in such company? Tomorrow, says my friend,
addressing himself to me, you shall see that we want no company, and that we
can sufficiently amuse ourselves with building and planting, with improvements
and alterations, which I dare say will be honored with your approbation.

Accordingly the next morning, as soon as breakfast was finished, my lady and
the Colonel retired into her dressing room to cribbage, and Sir Harry and
myself to reconnoitre the place. The house stands at the end of a dirty
village, and close by it are a few tame deer impounded in an orchard, to which
he gives the pompous title of a park. Behind is a fen, which he calls a piece
of water, and before it a goose common, on which he bestows the name of a lawn.
It was built in that deplorable era of English architecture, which introduced
high doors, long windows, small rooms, and corner chimnies; and of gardening,
which projected gravel walks, clipped yews, and strait lined avenues, with a
profusion of brick walls, iron pallisadoes, and leaden images. But all these
defects, and many others, he has now corrected by a judicious application of
modern taste. His doors are reduced, you cannot enter with your hat on; and his
windows so contracted, that you have scarce light enough to find it if you will
pull it off. In the midst of the front, one large bow window is stuck on^
^esembling a piece of whited brown paper plaistered on a broken nose; and a
great room is added behind to dine in, which, was it ever inhabited, would make
all the little ones appear still less: but having never yet been finished, for
want both of cash and credit, it remains at present only a repository of broken
china, a pair of back gammon tables, and the children's play-things. His brick
walls are converted into chimnies and ovens, and his yew-trees supply them with
faggots, his iron work is sold to the black^^^ns, and his heathen gods to the
plumber for (...) pious use of covering the parish church; his grave, walks are
sown with grass; and he frequently repeats that frugal, yet genteel maxim, that
sheep are the best gardeners. His horse pond being made serpentine, is become
useless, l^^t it should be trod up; and his senses, being all Chinese, are not
fences at all, the horses leaping over, and the hogs walking under them at
their pleasure. The transplanted avenue is expiring in ^less platoons; the
kitchen garden, for convenience, is removed two farlongs from the house; and
the kitchen itself unjustly turned out o^ doors for smelling of victuals; a
crime of which it has ^ver been acquitted by the voice of the whole country.

When our survey was finished, our amusements we^^ all at an end; for within
doors the the pleasures both of society and solitude were equally wanting. Of
our conversation I have given a specimen; and books there were none, except a
small one containing tunes for the French horn, belonging to Sir Harry, and the
third volume of Peregrine Pickle, and a Methodist prayer book, the property of
her ladyship. I began now to wish for a little of my friend Sir John's
hospitality, of which there was not here the least appearance. We heard not of
a human creature, except by their injuries and insults, not altogether indeed
unprovoked; for the pantry and the cellar, though usually empty, were always
locked. Strong beer there was none; and the small, though no body at home could
drink it, was not suffered to be given away. The servants were always out of
^umour, and frequently changing; and the tradesmen who brought their bills were
paid only by a wrangle, or a draught on some tenant who owed no rent. There was
not a neighbor near, except the parson of the parish, and Alderman Grab, a rich
citizen, who had purchased a considerable part of it from Sir Harry. With these
they lived in a state of perpetual hostilities: they quarrelled with the
alderman for presuming to buy an estate which they wanted to sell* and the
parson quarrelled with them because he was in possession of the only living in
the gift of Sir Harry and the alderman had a much better to dispose of. By the
encouragement of these good neighbors, and their own ill conduct, consisting
of a strange mixture of insolence and avarice, of meanness and magnificence,
they were despised, persecuted, and affronted by all around them. Their pigs
were w^rried, their poultry murdered, their dogs poisoned, their game
destroyed, their hedges broke, and their hay stacks set on fire. They were
hissed and hooted at; and now-and-then a great pair of horns were fixed on
their gates; an insult at which they were highly enraged, but the meaning of
which neither Sir Harry nor my lady, not even with the assistance of the
Colonel, could ever guess at.

I soon grew weary of this land of contention and uneasiness; and having
recourse to the old excuse of urgent business, I took my leave and went post to
town: reflecting all the way with surprise on the ingenuity of mankind to
render themselves at on^e miserable and ridiculous; and lamenting that the
happiness and innocence of rural life are now scarce any where to be found but
in pastorals and romances.

History of Sir JOHN JOLLY.
HAVING been frequently pressed by Sir John Jolly (an old friend of mine,
possessed of a sine estate, a large park, and a plentiful fortune) to pass a
few weeks with him in the country, I determined last autumn to accept his
invitation, proposing to myself the highest pleasure from changing the noise
and hurry of this bustling metropolis for the agreeable silence and soothing
indolence of a rural retirement. I accordingly set out one morning, and pretty
early the next arrived at the habitation of my friend, situated in a most
delicious and romantic spot, which (the owner having fortunately no taste) is
not yet defaced with improvements. On my approach I abated a little of my
traveling pace, to look round me, and admire the towering hills and fertile
vales, the winding streams, the stately woods and spacious lawns, which, gilded
by the sunshine of a beautiful morning, on every side afforded a most
enchanting prospect* and I pleased myself with the thoughts of the happy hours
I should spend amidst these pastoral scenes, in reading, in meditation, or in
soft repose, inspired by the lowing of distant herds, the fall of waters, and
the melody of birds.

I was received with a hearty welcome, and many shakes by the hand, by my old
friend, whom I had not seen for many years, except once, when he was called to
town, by a prosecution in the King's Bench, for misunderstanding the sense of
an act of parliament, which on examination, was found to be nonsense. He is an
honest gentleman, of a middle age, a hale constitution, good natural parts, and
abundant spirits, a keen sportsman, an active magistrate, and a tolerable
farmer, not without some ambition of acquiring a seat in parliament by his
interest in a neighboring borough: so that between his pursuits of game, of
justice, and popularity, besides the management of a large quantity of land,
which he keeps in his own hands, as he terms it, for amusement, every moment of
his time is sufficiently employed. His wife is an agreeable woman, of about the
same age, and has been handsome; but though years have somewhat impaired her
charms, they have not in the least, her relish for company, cards, balls, and
all other manner of public diversions.

On my arrival, I was first conducted into the breakfast-room, which, with some
surprise, I saw quite filled with genteel persons of both sexes in dishabille,
with their hair in papers; the cause of which I was quickly informed of, by the
many apologies of my lady for the mea^ness of the apartment she was obliged to
allot me, by reason "the house was so crowded with company during the time of
their races, which, she said, began that very day for the whole week, and for
which they were immediately preparing." I was instantly attacked by all present
with one voice, or rather with many voices at the same time, to accompany them
thither; to which I made no opposition, thinking it would be attended with more
trouble than the expedition itself.

As soon as the ladies and equipages were ready we issued forth in a most
magnificent cavalcade; and after traveling five or six miles through bad
roads, we arrived at the Red Lion, just as the ordinary was making its
appearance on the table. The ceremonials of this sumptuous entertainment, which
consisted of cold fish, lean chickens, rusty hams, raw venison, stale game,
green fruit, and grapeless wines, destroyed at least two hours, with five times
that number of heads, ruffles, and suits of clothes, by the unfortunate
effusion of butter and gravy. From hence we proceeded a few miles farther to
the race ground, where nothing, I think, extraordinary happened but that,
amongst much disorder and drunkenness, few limbs and no necks were broken: and
from these, Olympic games, which, to the great emolument of pickpockets, lasted
till it was dark, we galloped back to the town, through a soaking shower; to
dress for the assembly. But this I found no easy task; nor could I possibly
accomplish it before my clothes were quite dried upon my back: my servant
staying behind to settle his betts, and having stowed my portmanteau into the
boot of s^^e coach, which he could not find, to save himself both the trouble
and indignity of carrying it.

Being at last equipped, I entered the ballroom, where the smell of a stable
over which it was built, the savor of a neighboring kitchen, the fumes of
tallow candles, rum punch, and tobacco, dispersed over the whole house, and the
balsamic effluvias from many sweet creatures who were dancing, with almost
equal strength contended for superiority. The company was numerous and
well-dressed, and differed not in any respect from that of the most brilliant
assembly in London, but in seeming better pleased, and more desirous of
pleasing; that is happier in themselves, and civiller to each other. I observed
the door was blocked up the whole night by a few fashionable young men, whose
faces I remembered to have seen about town, who could neither dance, drink tea,
play at cards, nor speak to any one, except now-and-then in whispers to a young
lady, who sat in silence at the upper end of the room in a hat and negligee,
with her back against the wall, her arms a kimbo, her legs thrust out, a sneer
on her lips, a scowl on her forehead, and an invincible assurance in her eyes.
This lady I had also frequently me^t with, but could not recollect where; but
have since learned, that she had been toad-eater to a woman of quality, and
turned off for too close and presumptuous an imitation of her betters. Their
behavior affronted most of the company, yet obtained the desired effect: for
(...) overheard several of the country ladies say, "It was pity they were so
proud; for to be sure they were prodigious well-bred people, and had an immense
deal of wit:" a mistake they could never have fallen into, had these patterns
of politeness condescended to have entered into any conversation. Dancing and
cards, with the refreshment of cold chickens and negas about twelve, carried us
on till daybreak, when our coaches being ready, with much solicitation and
more squeezing, I obtained a place in one, in which no more than six had before
artificially seated themselves; and about five in the morning through many and
great perils, we arrived safely at home,

It was now the middle of harvest, which had not a little suffere^ by our
diversions; and therefore our coach-horses were immediately degraded to a cart;
and having rested during our fatigues, by a just distribution of things, were
now obliged to labor while we were at rest. I mean not in this number to
include myself; for though I hurried immediately to bed, no rest could I obtain
for some time, for the rumbling of carts, and the conversation of their drivers
just under my window. Fatigue at last got the better of all obstacles, and I
fell asleep; but I had scarce closed my eyes, when I was awaked by a much
louder noise, which was that of a whole pack of hounds, with their vociferous
attendants, setting out to meet my friend, and some choice spirits, whom he had
just left behind at the assembly, and who chose this manner of refreshment
after a night's debauch rather than the more usual and inglorious one of going
to bed. These sounds dying away by their distance, I again composed myself to
rest; but was presently again roused by more discordant tongues, uttering all
the grossness of Drury Lane, and scurrility of Billingsgate, I now wake^ indeed
with somewhat more satisfaction, at first thinking, by this unpastoral
dialogue, that I was once more returned safe to London: but I soon found my
mistake, and understood that these were some innocent and honest neighbors of
Sir John's, who were come to determine their gentle disputes before his
tribunal; and being ordered to wait till his return from hunting, were resolved
to make all possible use of this suspension of justice. It being now toward
noon, I gave up all thoughts of sleep, and it was well I did; for I was
presently alarmed by a confusion of voices, as loud though somewhat sweeter
than the former. As they proceeded from the parlour under me, amidst much
giggling, laughing, squeaking, and screaming, I could distinguish only the few
following incoherent words -- frightful -- ridiculous -- Fr^es^and hen -- r^gue
-- Red Lion at Brentford -- stays padded -- Ram's Horn -- saucy mi^x --
impertinent ^oxcomb. I started up, dressed me, and went down, where I ^ound the
same polite company, who breakfasted there the day before, in the same
attitude, discoursing of their friends with whom they were again hastening with
the utmost impatience. I was saluted with a how do you from them all at the same
instant, and again pressed into the service of the day.

In this manner I went through the persecutions of the whole week, with the
sufferings and resolution, but not with the reward, of a martyr, as I found no
peace at the last; for at the conclusion of it, Sir John obligingly requested
me to make my stay with him as long as I possibly could, assuring me, that
though the races were now over I should not want diversions; for that next week
he expected Lord Rattle, Sir Harry Bumper, and a large fox-hunting party; and
that the week after, being the full moon he should pay and receive all their
neighboring visits, and spend their evenings very sociably together; by which
is signified, in the country dialect, eating, drinking, and playing at cards
all night. My Lady added with a smile, and much delight in her eyes, that she
believed they should not be alone one hour in the whole week, and that she
hoped I should not think the country so dull and melancholy a place as I
expected. Upon this information I resolved to leave it immediately, and told
them, I was extremely sorry that I was hindered by particular business from any
longer enjoying so much polite and agreeable company; but that I had received a
letter, which made it necessary for me to be in Town. My friend said, he was no
less concerned; but that I must not positively go till after tomorrow: for
that he then expected the mayor and aldermen of his corporation, some of whom
were facetious companions, and sung well. This determined me to set out that
very evening: which I did with much satisfaction; and made all possible haste,
in search of silence and solitude, to my lodging, next door to a brasier's at
Charing Cross.

STORY of an UNFORTUNATE CLERGYMAN.
I AM the same clergyman who troubled you with an account of his misfortunes in
your paper and am indebted to your kind publication of that letter, for the
ease and happiness which, with only one single interruption, I have enjoyed
ever since. My uncommon, and I hope I may say, unmerited distresses,
recommended me to the n^^ice of a noble lord, who called to see me at my
lodgings, brought me home to his lordship's own house, and honored me so far
as to make me his dom^^tic chaplain. His lordship'^ regard f^r me was so truly
sincere, that he married me soon after to my lady's woman, a young person of
admirable beauty and virtue, and a great favorite of my lord, because, as his
lordship used to tell me* she was a clergyman's daughter* and, for what reas^n
he knew not, extremely hated by his lady. But my good fortune did not end here:
his lordship, whose nature is never to be tired with doing good, was so very
^iging as to take us a little (...) ready ^^rnished* in a retired and pl^a^
part of the town, pa^ing the rent of it himself, and man us considerable
presents from time to time ^he was also so very cond^scending (...) to ^pend
^^o or three evening in a (...) with us, ^^d ^^eq^ently to take my wi^e with
(...) ^he c^ario^ (...) an afternoon's a^ring (...) ^he misfortune, (...) after
our (...), of bouring under an ill state of health, which we all feared would
terminate in a dropsy.

His lordship was still kinder to me in other affairs, insomuch that in less
than two months after our marriage he sent me into the west, with thirty
guineas in my pocket, to supply the place of a worthy clergyman whom my lord
had sent for to town upon particular business; and because the ill health of m^
wife required a little country air, his lordship proposed taking lodgings for
her at Knightsb^idge during my absence, where she was daily to be attended by
his own physician.

At the end of six weeks, his lordship was pleased to recall me to town, where
I had the inexpressible satisfaction of finding my wife returned to her house
perfectly cured of her disorder, with only a litt^e paleness remaining, from
the violent remedies prescribed to her by her physician. I had the additional
happiness of finding his lordship with my wife waiting my return, and to be
honored with his thanks for the faithful disch^rge of my trust, together with
a promise of the very first living that should fall within his gi^t.

I m^^tion these things, Sir, to the honor of my noble benefactor, who ever
since my marriage, which is now three y^ars ago, has been lavishing his ^avours
upon me: who has been so very ^des^^nding as to st^nd godfather in person to my
t^o children: and to take every opportuni^^ (...) making me happy by his
visits. But I am not (...) a particular detail of the plea^es I ^njoy: ^ have
another motive for troubi^ (...) letter

His (...), the beginning of this mont^, was pleased, amongst the many
instances of his goodness, to procure for me a chaplainship in one of the
regiments now in Scotland; and as my attendance was immediately necessary, and
my wife too far gone with child to think of going with me, as soon as I had
prepared every thing for my journey, I sent an advertisement to the Daily
Advertiser, in the following words.

Wanted, an agreeable companion in a postchaise to Edinburgh. Enquire for the
Reverend W. B. at the Green park Coffeehouse, Piccadilly. Note, The utmost
expedition will be necessary.

The next morning, as I was reading a newspaper in the coffee-room, I heard a
young gentleman of a very modest and decent appearance, inquiring at the bar
for the Reverend Mr. W. B. I told him that I was the person, and calling for a
couple of dishes of coffee, we sat down together, and entered upon the subject
of the advertisement. He assured me, that if his friends did not flatter him,
he was a very agreeable companion; that he had business of consequence to
transact at Edinburgh; that he was particularly pleased to find, by the
advertisement, that I was a clergyman, having a great veneration for gentlemen
of that function; that he had entertained thoughts of becoming one himself, was
a near relation of the Bishop of --, and though young, as he appeared, he was
never so happy at when engaged in serious conversation with a worthy divine. He
was p^eased to add, that he saw something in my appearance which entitled me to
that character, and that he did not doubt of being greatly edified during so
long a journey. Many civilities passed on my side in return; and, in the end,
it was agreed that we should set out that very evening at six o'clock. He was
punctual to his appointment, with a servant on horseback, leading a handsome
gelding for his master, who with two young gentleman, his friends, were waiting
for me at the inn. I could not help observing, while the chaise was getting
ready, that these young gentlemen were taking a good deal of pains to stifle a
laugh, which, on our stepping into the carriage, they were no longer able to
contain: but I made no remarks upon their behavior, and we set out upon our
journey.

We reached Ware that night, without any thing happening worthy of remark,
except that we were st^pt upon the road by two young gentlemen on horseback,
and interrupted in a very serious conversation by their saluting my companion
with Z -- ds Jack! what playing the saint, and traveling to heaven with a
parson! My fellow traveller gave them a look of contempt, and after assuring
them that he had not the honor of knowing them, and pulling up the glass,
ordered the possition to drive on.

Our evening at Ware was spent in remark^ on the dissolutene^s of the times,
and the indecent liberties that wild and prostigate young fellows were every
where taking with the clergy. After much ser^^ discourse, and moderate
refreshment, we retired to rest. I slept longer than usual in the morning, and
no sooner was I awake than I discovered, with equal confusion and surprise,
that I was in bed with a woman who, as I attempted to get up, threw her arm^
about my neck, and compelled me to lie down. The struggle and the noise I made
upon this occasion, together with the screams of the woman, who still held me
fast, alarmed the whole inn, and drew a crowd of spectators into the room
headed by my companion, and followed by a soldier, who owned himself the
husband of the woman, swearing that he would have my heart's blood for
currupting the chastity of his wife. I pleaded my innocence to an unbelieving
audience, while the woman accused me of having forced her against her will;
pretending that it was her misfortune overnight to be a little in liquor, and
that she had mistaken the room I lay in for her own.

To dwell no longer than is needful upon this disgraceful affair, I was in the
end compelled to give a guinea to the soldier, and afterward to submit with
patience to the insults of a mob, who surrounded the inn at our entrance into
the post-chaise, and followed it with hootings to the very extremity of the
town.

From the passive behavior of my companion at the inn, and the demure looks
that he now put on, I began to harbor a suspicion of him not greatly to his
advantage: and while I was deliberating in what manner to address him, an
accident happened, which at once threw him off his guard, and discovered to me,
that instead of an agreeable companion I was traveling with a ^^end. This
accident was the sudden and violent overturning of the post-chaise; upon which
occasion, though neither of us was hurt, he discharged such a volley of curses
on the postillion as made me tremble to hear him. I endeavored to pacify him
by the gentlest admonitions, which instead of calming his anger, turned it all
upon myself; and amidst a thousand oaths and imprecations, he vowed revenge
upon my head, telling me that he hated a parson as he hated Old Nic; that he
had bribed the soldier's whore to go to bed to me at the inn, and that he came
out upon no other business than to play the devil with me all the way. I stood
aghast at what I heard, and refused getting into the chaise again; upon which a
struggle ensu^d, and blows passed between us; till by the assistance of his
servant, and the knavery of the postillion, whom he gained over to his side
with a whole handful of silver, I was thrust into the chaise, and compelled to
go on.

We had scarce traveled a mile before we overtook a couple of gypsies upon the
road; one an old woman, the other a girl. They were all over rags and filth,
and so intoxicated with liquor that they reeled every step. My companion called
to the postillion to stop, and after questioning those wretches about the way
they were going, got out of the chaise, and told me that he could not in
charity fit lolling at his ease while two of the tender sex were walking
barefoot on the road; and that if I had no weighty objections he would make the
old lady an offer of his seat, and miss, as he was pleased to call her, might
with great convenience sit upon my knee. It was in vain for me to expostulate,
or to attempt leaping after him: his servant held me fast by the arm, handed
the creatures into the chaise, and then mounting his horse, rode close by its
side, talking obscenity to the wretches, and instructing them to behave to me
in a manner not to be endured nor described.

In this manner we passed through the villages, and entered Roysto^, the
postillion being ordered to walk his horses gently to the inn, that we might be
followed by a mob whom my companion called to at every turning to smoke the
parson and his doxies.

I stepped from the chaise amidst the hallooing of the rabble and ran into the
room, the door of which I locked. Here I determined to remain, or to fly to the
magistrate for protection had not my tormentor made his appearance at the
window, telling me, that as the joke was now at an end, and as he believed I
had enough of an agreeable companion, he had altered his intention of visiting
Scotland, and should return to town that morning. I thanked him for the favor,
but kept close to my room, till I saw him with his servant ride out of the inn,
and take the road to London. I then ordered some refreshm^nt to be brought me,
and a post chaise to be in readiness; but how great was my astonishment, when
feeling for my purse, which contained forty guineas at my setting out, I found
that my pockets had been rifled and that I had not so much as a brass farthing
left me!

As it was no doubt with me, that the gypsies had robbed me, I made immediate
inquiry after them, but learnt that they had disappeared on our arrival at the
inn; and though the most diligent search was made for them, they were no where
to be found.

It was now impossible for me to proceed; I therefore determined to stay where
I was till I could receive a fresh supply from my wife, to whom I dispatched a
messenger with a letter, setting forth at large all the cruelties I had met
with.

When the messenger was gone, it occurred to me, that however i^l my companion
had used me, he could not be base enough to concert this robbery with the
gypsies, and therefore might be inclined to make up my loss, upon knowing that
I had sustained it. For this reason I determined once more to transmit my
complaints to you: that if the young gentleman has any one principle of honor
remaining, he may send to your house the sum I have been defrauded of. My
demand upon him is for the sum of seven and thirty guineas, which unless he
pays within six days after the publication of this letter, I will forthwith
print his name in the newspapers, and proclaim to the public the injuries he
has done me.

I have another reason for giving you this trouble, which is, to caution all
gentlemen for the future against advertising in the papers for an agreeable
companion in a post chaise; as it consoles me not a little that I am enabled to
make other people wise, even by my own misfortunes.

I am, SIR, Your obliged, and most faithful servant. W. B.

On the DEGENERACY of HUMAN NATURE.
IF we give credit to the vulgar opinion, or even to the assertions of some
reputable authors, both, ancient and modern, poor ^uman nature was not
originally formed for keeping: every age has degenerated; and from the fall of
the first man, my unfortunate ancestor our species has been tumbling on,
century by century, from bad to worse, about six thousand years.

Considering this progressive state of deterioration, it is a very great mercy
that things are no worse with us at present; since, (geometrically speaking,)
the human ought by this time to have sunk infi^itely be^ow the brute and the
vegetable specie^* which are neither of them supposed to have d^^^dled or
degenerated considerably, except in a very few instances: for it must be owned
that our modern oaks are inferior to those of Dodona, our breed of horses to
that of the Centaurs, and our breed of ^owls to that of the Phoenixes.

But is this really the case? Certainly not. It is only one of those many
errors which are artfully scattered by the designs of a few, and blindly
adopted by the ignorance and folly o^ many. The moving exclamation of -- these
(...) times! this degenerate age! the affecting lamentations over declining
virtue and triumphant vice and the tender and final farewell bidden every day
to unrewarded and discouraged public spirit, arts and sciences, are the common
place t^p^^s of the pride, the envy, and the malignity of the human heart, that
can more easily forgive, and even commend* antiquated and remo^e, than bear
co^empora^^ and contiguous merit. Men of these mean sentiments have always been
the sati^ises of their own, and the paneg^r^^^s of former times. They give thi^
^^ne, which ^ools, like birds in the dark, catc^ by the (...) and whis^^e all
day long.

A^ (...) has constantly been my endeavor (...) (...)* or, if ^ could not, to
expo the vices of the human heart, it shall be the object of this paper to
examine this strange inverted entail of virtue and merit upwards, according to
priority of birth, and seniority of age. I shall prove it to be forged, and
consequently null and void to all intents and purposes whatsoever.

If I loved to jingle, I would say, that human nature has always been
invariably the same, though always varying; that is, the same in substance, but
varying in forms and modes, from many concurrent causes, of which, perhaps we
know but few. Climate, education, accidents, severally contribute to change
those modes; but in all climates, and in all ages, we discover through them the
same passions, affections, and appetites, and the same degree of virtues and
vices.

This being unquestionably the true state of the case, which it would be
endless to bring instances to prove from the histories of all times and of all
nations, I shall by the way of warning to the incautious, and of reproof to the
designing, proceed to explain the reasons, which I have but just hinted at
above, why the human nature of the time being, has always been reckoned the
worst and most degenerate.

Authors, especially poets, though great men, are alas! but men; and like other
men, subject to the weaknesses of human nature, though perhaps, in a less
degree: but it is however certain, that their breasts are not absolutely
strangers to the passions of jealousy, pride, and envy. Hence it is that they
are very apt to measure merit by the century, to love dead authors better than
living ones, and to love them the better the longer they have been dead. The
Augustan age is therefore their favorite era, being at least seventeen
hundred years distant from the present. That Emperor was not only a judge of
wit, but, for an emperor, a tolerable performer too; and Maecenas, his first
minister, was both a patron and a poet: he not only encouraged and protected,
but fed and fattened men of wit at his own table, as appears from Horace: no
small encouragement for panegyric. These were times indeed for genius to
display itself in! It was honored, tasted, and rewarded. But now -- O ^empora!
O mores! One must however do justice to the authors who thus declaim against
their own times, by acknowledging that they are seldom the aggressors; their
own times have common^y begun with them. It is their resentm^nt, not their
judgment, if they have any, that speaks this language. Anger and despair make
them endeavor to lower that merit, which, till brought very low indeed, they
are conscious they cannot equal.

There is another and more numerous set of much greater men, who still more
loudly complain of the ignorance, the corruption and the degeneracy of the
present age. These are the consummate volunteers, but unregarded and unrewarded
politicians, who, at a modest computation, amount to at least three millions of
souls in this political country, and who are all of them both able and willing
to steer the great vessel of the state, and to take upon themselves the whole
load of business and burden of employments for the service of their dear
country. The administration for the time being is always the worst, the most
incapable, the most corrupt, that ever was, and negligent of every thing but
their own interest, Where are now your Cecils and your Walsinghams? Those who
ask that question could answer it, if they would speak out, Themselves: For
they are all that, and more too.

I stepped the other day, in order only to enquire how my poor country did, into
a coffeehouse, that is without dispute the seat of the soundest politics in
this great metropolis, and sat myself down within ear-shot of the principal
council table. Fortunately for me, the president, a person of age, dignity, and
becoming gravity, had just began to speak. He stated with infinite perspicuity
and knowledge, the present state of affairs in other countries, and the
lamentable situation of our own. He traced with his fingers upon the table, by
the help of some coffee which he had spilt in the warmth of his exordium, the
whole course of the Ohio, and the boundaries of the Rus^ian, Prussi^n,
Austrian, and Saxon domini^ns* ^saw (...) long and bloody war upon the (...),
calculated the supplies necessary for carrying it on, and pointed out the best
methods of raising them, which, for that very reason* ^e intimated would not be
pursued. He wound up his discourse with a most pathetic p^roration, which he
conc^uded with saying* Things were not carried on in this way (...) Queen
Elizabeth's days; the public was considered, and able men were con^ulted and
employed. These were da^s (...) Aye, Sir, and nights too, I presume (...) a
young f^^low who stood near him)* some longer and (...) according to ^e v^tion
^f the season pretty much like ^u^. Mr. Pre^^dent was (...) surpr^^ed of ^e
sudde^ness and (...) interruption; but, recomposing himself, answered with that
cool contempt that becomes a great man, I did not mean astronomical days, but
political ones. The young fellow replied, "O then, Sir, I am your servant," and
went off in a laugh.

Thus informed and edified I went off too, but could not help reflecting on my
way upon the singular ill luck of this my dear country, which, as long as ever
I remember it, and as far back as I have read, has always been governed by the
only two or three people, out of two or three millions, totally incapable of
governing, and unfit to be trusted. But these reflections were soon interrupted
by numbers of people, whom I observed crowding into a public house. Among them
I discovered my worthy friend and tailor, that industrious mechanic, Mr.
Regnier. I applied to him to know the meaning of that concourse: to which, with
his usual humanity, he answered, We are the master tailors, who are to meet
tonight to consider what is to be done about our journeymen, who insult and
impose upon us, to the great detriment of the trade. I asked him whether, under
his protection, I might slip in and hear their deliberations. He said, Yes, and
welcome; for that they should do nothing to be ashamed of. I profited of this
permission, and following him into the room, found a considerable number of
these ingenious artists assembled, and waiting only for the arrival of my
friend, who it seems was too considerable for business to begin without him. He
accordingly took the lead, opened the meeting with a very handsome speech, in
which he gave many instances of the insolence, the unreasonableness, and the
exorbitant demands of the journeymen tailors, and concluded with observing*
that if the government minded any thing nowadays but themselves, such abuses
would not have been suffered; and had they been but attempted in Queen
Elizabeth's days, she would have worked them with a witness. Another orator
then rose up to speak; but as I was sure that he could say nothing better than
what had just fallen from my worthy friend, I stole off unobserved and was
pursuing my way home, when, in the very next street, I discovered a much
greater number of people (though, by their dress, of seemingly inferior note)
rushing into another public house. As numbers always excite my curiosity almost
as much as they mutually do each others passions, I crowded in with them, in
order to discover the object of this meeting, not without some suspicion that
this frequent senate might be composed of the journeymen tailors, and convened
in opposition to that which I had just left. My suspicion was soon confirmed by
the eloquence of a journeyman, a finisher, I presume, who expatiated with equal
warmth and dignity upon the injustice and oppression of the master tailors, to
the utter ruin of thousands of poor journeymen and their families; and
concluded with asserting, It was a shame that the government and the parliament
did not take notice of such abuses; and that had the master tailors done these
things in Queen Elizabeth's days, she would have mastered them with a
vengeance, so she would.

I confess I could not help smiling at this singular conformity of sentiments,
and almost of expressions, of the master politicians, the master tailors, and
the journeymen tailors. I am convinced that the two latter really and honestly
believed what they said, it not being in the least improbable that their
understandings should be the dupes of their interest: but I will not so
peremptorily answer for the interior conviction of the political orator;
though, at the same time, I must do him the justice to say, he seemed full dull
enough to be very much in earnest.

The several scenes of this day suggested to me when I got home various
reflections, which, perhaps, I may communicate to my readers in some future
paper.

HISTORY of a YOUNG ADVENTURER.
AS the history of my life may be of some service to many of your readers, I
shall relate it with all the openness and simplicity of truth. If they give a
due attention to the errors and mistakes of my conduct they will pass over
those of my style. I am no scholar, having had a private education under the
eye of my mother. Instead of conversing or playing with other boys, I went a
visiti^g with her; and while she and my tutor were at Cribbage, in which they
passed a considerable part of the day, I read such books as I found lying about
her room; the chief of which were the Atlantis, Ovid's Art of Love, novels,
romances, miscellaneous poems, and plays. From these studies I contracted an
early taste for gallantry; and as nothing pleased me so much as the comedies of
the last age, my thoughts were constantly engrossed with the enviable situation
of the heroes of those pieces Your Dotimants and your Homers struck my
imagination beyond the brightest characters in Pope; and though I liked the
gallantry of fighting ten years for a woman, yet I though it the Greeks might have
found a readier way of making themselves amends, by visiting their friends at
Troy and taking revenge in kind. Such were the exploits to command my
admiration, and such the examples which I looked up to* and having manifest
advantages of person, I entertained most extravagant conceits of my future
triumphs. Yet even in the height of those extravagancies I had no hope of
obtaining every favor that I solicited; much less should I have been persuaded
that such uncommon success could be productive of any thing but consummate
happiness. The history of my life will prove the contrary; and I choose to
record it, with a view of showing what a succession of trouble, distress and
misery, arose from the very completion of my desires.

I was precipitately sent to Oxford, on being discovered in an intrigue with a
young girl, whom my tutor had lately married, and who had a prior attachment to
me. As my love for her was excessive, this separation was inexpressibly
painful; and I learned from it, that past joys were no consolation for present
disappointment. I found the university life to little suited to my taste, that
I soon prevailed upon my mother to let me come to London. Before I had been a
week in town I was introduced to a young woman, whom I took so great a fancy
to, that the very violence of my passion made me despair of success. I was,
however, so agreeably disappointed, that I could scarce conceal the transports
of joy which possession gave me: but this joy was more than balanced, when at
the end of some months I was told of the condition into which this kind
creature was brought by her compliance with my desires. My anxiety upon this
event was too great to be restrained; and honor, which alone had stopped the
overflowings of my joy, prompted me to give a loose to my concern. I bewailed
with remorse and tears the shame and misery of deluded innocence, and cursed
myself as the author of so much ruin and infamy. I spared no expense to render
her unhappy situation as comfortable as it could be made, and shut myself up
with her till the expected time of her delivery. That fatal hour infinitely
increased our mutual shame, by giving birth to a little negro, which though it
delivered me at once from the pangs of conscience, put me to an immoderate
expense in bribes to the nurses to keep the secret of my disgrace.

This unlucky adventure had almost spoiled me for a man of gallantry; but I
soon lost all remembrance of ill usage in the innocent smiles and gentle
sweetness of a young lady, who gave me every mark of tender love and constancy.
Our mutual fondness made it impossible for us to bear that separation which
discretion required: as she gave up all her acquaintance for my sake, she soon
found herself abandoned by them; so that our constant living together, which
hitherto had been choice, was now become an absolute necessity This
confinement, though it did not abate, but, if possible, increase my tenderness,
had so different an effect upon her temper, as to cause a total change of
behavior to me and all about her: she stormed day and night, like a fury, and
did every thing to drive me from her company; yet if ever I went from her upon
the most urgent business, she would throw herself into fits, and upbraid me
with the most bitter reproaches. On my being sent for to attend my mother in
her last moments, she threatened, with horrid imprecations, that, if I left her
then I should never see her more. I had scarce broke from her menaces when she
flew from her lodgings in an agony of passion, and has not been heard of since.

Soon after the death of my mother, a lady of quality who visited her, and who
had cast an envious eye upon her diamonds, which were not contemptible, took
occasion to make some advances toward me. Whenever we met, her discourse
always turned upon the great merits of my mother, and the taste which she
showed in the choice and manner of wearing her jewels; and this conversation as
constantly ended in an assignation at her house. Though I was at first a little
proud to find my presents meet so ready an acceptance, I was not exceedingly
flattered in the progress of this amor; especially when I began to perceive
that the strongest recommendation I had to her favor was growing weaker every
day. I found also that a declaration which I had made of not loving cards did
not contribute to strengthen my interest in that family.

My next affair was with a lady who was really fond of me, and I thought
myself, then, at the height of my wishes; for she managed so discreetly, that
we had not the least interruption from her husband at home: but her conduct
abroad was a perpetual scene of in^iscretion and tyranny. She obliged me to
attend her every night to the opera, and never to stir from her side. She would
carry me to the most frequented plays and keep me in a whisper during the most
interesting scenes. Not satisfied with this, she made me walk with her
eternally in the Park, the Old Road, and Kensington gardens; and to complete
her triumph, she dragged me, a miserable object! about the streets of London,
with the same pityless ostentation as the inhuman conqueror trailed the
lifeless carcass of Hector round the walls of Troy. To complete my misfortunes,
it happened that the beau monde established a new mode of gallantry, and all
knights amorous were required to make love after the new fashion, and attend
their fair on horseback. Unluckily for me, my mother, not suspecting that
horsemanship would ever become, here, a requisite in gallantry, had made it no
part of my English education: therefore, being an absolute novice, I procured
the quietest beast that was to be got, and hoped that I was properly mounted:
but I soon found my mistake, for the dullness of the beast tended to bring a
most disgraceful suspicion on the spirit of the rider; and I was obliged, at
all events, to undertake a more mettlesome ^eed. The consequence was this* the
moment joined my mistress she drew out her handkerchief, which, fluttering in
the wind, so frigh^ene^ my horse, that he carried me directly into the
serpentine river. While I was taken up with my own danger and disgrace, her
horse, which had started at the same time, ran a different way, and as she was
no otherwise qualified for a rider but by the consciousness of being a woman of
fashion, she was thrown against a tree, and killed on the spot. The remembrance
of her fondness for me, though so troublesome while living, was the cause of
great affliction to me after her death; and it was near a twelvemonth before I
settled my affections on a new object. This was a young widow, who though she
did not give me the same occasion of complaint as the last, created me no less
pain by turning the tables upon me; instead of requiring my constant
attendance, she would complain that I haunted and dogged her; and would
frequently secret herself, or run on purpose into suspicious company, purely to
give me uneasiness. Though confessedly her favorite, I have frequently been
denied admittance, when the most worthless pretenders have been let in: and
when I have offered her tickets for a concert which she liked, she has refused
them, and accepted of an invitation to a dull play, with the most despicable of
my rivals. When we have been at the same table at cards, she has made it
remarked by the whole assembly that her eyes and her discourse have been
industriously kept from me; and such has been her cruelty, that when I have
desired the honor of walking with her the next morning, she has answered with
a significant sneer, she was very sorry she should not have my company, for she
intended to ride. With all this, who could imagine that I was the happy man!
and yet, as I spared no pains nor cost in the enquiry, I can venture to
pronounce that no other person whatever shared her favors with me. Of all the
tortures that can be devised for the punishment of poor lovers, there are none
so excruciating as this inequality of behavior.

Not to detain you with a farther detail of the plagues and disquietudes, the
discoveries, expenses, fines, and dangers, which are incident to gallantry in
general, I shall only tell you that I at last perceived there was no peace nor
comfor^ for the votaries of Venus but under the auspices of Hymen. To overcome
my inveterate prejudices against the conjugal state, so long despised,
insulted, and injured by me, was the great difficulty: but as the thorough
detection of the vanity and folly of every degree of gallantry had by no means
extinguished my unalterable love for the sex, I found upon mature reflection,
that marriage was my only resource, and that I should run no great risk in
exchanging the real for the imaginary pains of love.

Having taken this resolution. I stepped into the ridotto, fixed my eyes upon a
very engaging figure, and immediately advertised for the young lady in blue and
silver, requiring only a certificate of her good humor. I went to the
coffee-house, received a letter for A. B. and in the space of a few months,
from being a restless, tyrannized, tormented wretch, I found myself a husband*
a cuckold, and a happy man. I lived ten years in a state of perfect
tranquillity: and I can truly say, that I once met with a woman who, to the day
of her death, behaved to me with constant attention and complacency.

I am, SIR, Your most humble servant, T. Z.

STORY of AGAMUS.
TO indulge that restless impatience, which every man feels to relate incidents
by which the passions have been greatly effected, and communicate ideas that
have been forcibly impressed, I have given you some account of my life, which,
without farther apology or introduction may, perhaps, be favorably received in
your Book.

My mother died when I was very young; and my father, who was a naval
commander, and had, therefore, no opportunity to superintend my conduct, placed
me at a grammar school, and afterward removed me to the university. At school
the number of boys was so great, that to regulate our morals was impossible;
and at the university even my learning contributed to the dissoluteness of my
manners. As I was an only child, my father had always allowed me more money
than I knew how to lay out, otherwise than in the gratification of my vices: I
had sometimes, indeed, been restrained by a general sense of right and wrong;
but I now opposed the remonstrances of conscience by the cavils of sophistry;
and having learned of some celebrated philosophers as well ancient as modern,
to prove that nothing is good but pleasure, I became a rake upon principle.

My father died in the same year with Queen Anne, a few months before I became
of age, and left me a very considerable fortune in the funds. I immediately
quitted the university and came to London, which I considered as the great mart
of pleasure; and as I could afford to deal largely, I wisely determined not to
endanger my capital. I projected a scheme of life that was most agreeable to my
temper, which was rather sedate than volatile, and regulated my expenses with
the economy of a philosopher. I found that my favorite appetites might be
gratified with greater convenience and less scandal* in proportion as my life
was more private: instead therefore, of incumbering myself with a family, I
took the first floor of a house which was let into lod^ings, hired one servant,
and kept a b^ace of geldings at a livery stable. I constantly frequented the
theaters, and found my principles confirmed by almost every piece that was
represented, particularly my resolution never to marry. In comedy, indeed, the
action terminated in marriage* but it was generally the marriage of a rake, who
gave up his liberty with reluctance, as the only expedient to recover a fortune
-- and the husband and wife of the drama were wretches whose example justified
this reluctance, and appeared to be exh^bited for no other purpose than to warn
mankind, that whatever may be presumed by those whom indigence has made
desperate, to marry is to forfeit the quiet, independence and felicity of life.

In this course I had continued twenty years, without having impaired my
constitution, lessened my fortune, or incumbered myself with an illegitimate
offspring; when a girl about eighteen, was hired as a chambermaid by the person
who kept the house in which I lodged: the native beauty of the health and
simplicity in this young creature, had such an effect upon my imagination that
I practiced every art to debauch her, and at length succeeded.

I found it convenient for her to continue in the house, and therefore, made no
proposal of removing her into lodgings, but after a few months she found
herself with child, a discovery which interrupted the indolence of my
sensuality, and made me repent my indiscretion: however, as I would not incur
my own censure by ingratitude or inhumanity, I provided her a lodging and
attendants, and she was at length delivered of a daughter. The child I regarded
as a new encumbrance; for though I did not consider myself as under parental or
conjugal obligations, yet I could not think myself at liberty wholly to abandon
the mother or the infant. To the mother, indeed, I had still some degree of
inclination; though I should have been heartily content never to have seen her
again, if I could at once have been freed from any farther trouble about her;
but as something was to be done, I was willing to keep her within my reach, at
least till she could be subservient to my pleasure no longer: the child,
however, I would have sent away; but she entreated me to let her suckle it,
with an importunity which I could not resist. After much thinking, I placed her
in a little shop in the suburbs, which I furnished, at the expense of about
twenty pounds, with chandlery-ware, commodities of which she had some
knowledge, as her father was a petty shopkeeper in the country: she reported
that her husband, had been killed in an engagement at sea, and that his pay,
which she had been empowered to receive by his will, and purchased her stock. I
now thought I had discharged every obligation, as I had enabled her to subsist,
at least as well as she could have done by her labor in the station in which I
found her; and as often as I had an inclination to see her, I sent for her to a
bagnio.

But these interviews did not produce the pleasure which I expected: her
affection for me was too tender and delicate; she often wept in spite of all
her efforts against it, and could not forbear telling me stories of her little
girl with the fond prolixity of a mother, when I wished to regard her only as a
mistress. These incidents at once touched me with a compunction, and quenched
the appetite which I had intended to gratify; my visits, therefore became less
frequent; but she never sent after me when I was absent, nor reproached me,
otherwise than by tears of tenderness when she saw me again.

After the first year I wholly neglected her; and having heard nothing of her
during the winter, I went to spend the summer in the country. When I returned,
I was prompted rather by curiosity than desire to make some inquiry after her;
and soon learnt that she had died some months before of the smallpox, that the
goods had been seized for rent, and the child taken by the parish. At this
account, so sudden and unexpected, I was sensibly touched; and at first
conceived a design to rescue the child from the hands of a parish ^urse, and
make some little provision for it when it should be grown up: but this was
delayed from day to day; such was the supineness of my disposition, till the
event was remembered with less and less sensibility; and at length I
congratulated myself upon my deliverance from an engagement which I had always
considered as resembling in some degree the shackles of matrimony. I resolved
to incur the same embarrassment no more, and contented myself with strolling
from one prostitute to another, of whom I have seen many generations perish;
and the new faces which I once sought among the masks in the pit, I found with
less trouble at Cuper's, Vauxhall, Ranelagh, and innumerable other places of
public entertainment, which have appeared during the last twenty years of my
life.

A few weeks ago I celebrated my sixtieth birthday with some friends at a
tavern; and as I was returning to my lodgings, I saw a hackney coach stop at
the door of a house which I knew to be of ill repute, though it was private and
of the class. Just as I came up a girl stepped out of it, who appeared, by the
imperfect glimpse I caught of her as she passed, to be very young, and
extremely beautiful. As I was warm with wine, I followed her in without
hesitation, and was delighted to find her equally charming upon a nearer view.
I detained the coach, and proposed that we should go to Haddock's: she
hesitated with some appearance of unwillingness and confusion* but at length
consented: she soon became more free, and I was not less pleased with her
conversation than her person I observed that she had a softness and modesty, in
her manners, which is quickly worn off by habitual prostitution.

We had drank a bottle of French wine, and were preparing to go to bed, when,
to my unspeakable confusion and astonishment, I discovered a mark by which I
knew her to be my child: for I remembered that the poor girl, whom I so cruelly
seduced and neglected, had once told me with tears in her eyes, that she had
imprinted the two letters of my name under her little NAN^'s left breast,
(...), perhaps, would be the only memorial she would ever have of her father. I
wa^ instantly struck with a sense of guilt with which I had not been familiar,
and, therefore, felt all its force. The poor wretch, whom I was about to hire
for the gratification of a brutal appetite, perceived my disorder with surprise
and concern; she enquired with an officious solicitude, what sudden illness
had seized me; she took my hand, pressed it, and looked eagerly in my face,
still inquisitive what could be done to relieve me. I remained some time
torpid: but was soon rouzed by the reflection, that I was receiving the
caresses of my child, whom I had abandoned to the lowest infamy, to be the
slave of drunkeness and lust, and whom I had led to the brink of incest, I
suddenly started up; first held her at a distance; then catching her in my
arms, strove to speak, but burst into tears. I saw that she was confounded and
terrified; and as soon as I could recover my speech, I put an end to her doubts
by revealing the secret.

If it is impossible to express the effect it had upon her* she stood
motionless a few minutes; then clasped her hands together, and looked up in an
agony, which not to have seen is not to conceive. The tears at length started
from her eyes; she recollected herself, called me father, threw herself upon
her knees embracing mine, and plunging a new dagger in my heart by asking my
blessing.

We sat up together the remainder of the night, which I spent in listening to a
story that I may, perhaps, hereafter communicate; and the next day I took
lodgings for her about six miles from town. I visit her every day with emotions
to which my heart has till now been a stranger, and which are every day more
frequent and more strong. I propose to retire with her into some remote part of
the country, and to atone for the past by the future: but alas! of the future a
few years only can remain; and of the past not a moment can return. What
atonement can I make to those upon whose daughters I have contributed to
perpetrate that calamity, from which by miracle I have rescued my own; How can
I bear the reflection, that though for my own child I had hitherto expressed
less kindness than brutes for their young; yet perhaps, every other whom I
either hired or seduced to prostitution, had been gazed at in the ardor of
parental affection, till tears have started to the eye: had been catched to the
bosom with transport, in the prattling simplicity of infancy; had been watched
in sickness with anxiety that suspended sleep; had been fed by the toil of
industrious poverty, and reared to maturity with hope and fear. What a monster
is he, by whom these fears are verified, and this hope deceived! And yet, so
dreadful is the force of habitual guilt, I sometimes regret the restraint which
is come upon me; I wish to sink again into the slumber from which I have been
rouzed, and to repeat the crimes which I abhor. My heart is this moment
bursting for utterance: but I want words. Farewell.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
The Generous Friend: Or, Unforeseen Alliance. Page. 3 Indiscretion. A Moral
Tale. Page. 19 An Account of an unfortunate Young Lady who was betrayed by her
Friend. Page. 26 The happy Perseverance. Page. 31 History of Dorantes. A Moral
Tale founded on fact. Page. 47 Story of Ambition. Page. 58 History of Sir Harry
Prigg. Page. 63 History of Sir John Jolly. Page. 71 Story of an unfortunate
Clergyman. Page. 78 On the degeneracy of Human Nature. Page. 85 History of a
Young Adventurer. Page. 92 Story of Agamus. Page. 99

