UNION: OR, A TREATISE OF THE CONSANGUINITY AND AFFINITY BETWEEN CHRIST AND HIS
CHURCH.

By JAMES RELLY.

For as the Body is one, and has many Members, and all the Members of that one
Body, being many, are one Body: so also is CHRIST. 1 COR. xii. 12. LONDON:
PRINTED.

BOSTON: Reprinted by EDES and SON, M,DCC,XCI.

PREFACE.
HEARING an Apostle say, that he used not the excellencies of speech, nor the
enticing words of man's wisdom, when he came preaching the Gospel of Jesus
amongst the Gentiles: I conclude, that what was then useless, is altogether as
unnecessary now. Truth needs no art, but manifests itself by plainness of
speech, in the demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power.

I believe I may say, without uncharitable censure, that mankind in the
general, judge according to appearance, and not with righteous judgment; the
flowery style, the swelling word of vanity alluring to the flesh, is that,
which, (by reason of the depraved senses) is most pleasing to the ear, and
striking to the mind, it being not important, whether it contains any matter or
not: The Truth itself, being seldom that which the reader falls in love with;
it is language, founds, and pomp of words, that enamours a flattering world.

To urge, that the allurements and elegance of speech adorns the Truth, and
removing the prejudice which many have conceived against it, excites them to
read with delight, etc. I say, this plea will be found upon impartial inquiry,
to be a flat contradiction of the scriptures, a stale device of Truth's grand
enemy: For let the same subject, be but treated of in the true apostolic
language, viz. plainness of speech; and those raptured admirers of the sublime,
however nervous its argument, will reject it.

To assert that the excellency of speech, and the enticing words of man's
wisdom, is necessary to enforce the Truths of the Gospel; is to impeach the
judgment of one whose choice did not proceed of necessity, when he chose
plainness of speech, such as was familiar to the meanest capacity; I mean the
apostle to the Gentiles; he looked on the enticements of speech, as a
proceeding unworthy the majesty of his matter, yea rather hurtful than (...)
unto his hearers; left their faith should stand in the wisdom of man, and not
in the power of God. Hence I am encouraged to hope, that the absence of those
embellishments from my Treatise, (though it proceed of necessity) will neither
mar the beauty, nor relax the nerves of Truth contained therein: And, what
further conspires to render my expectations sanguine in this particular, is the
persuasion, that there are such in the world, whose ears cannot be charmed with
dead unmeaning sounds, and whose hearts are susceptible of Truth, in its
artless native dress.

But as the multitude think otherwise, and are contrary to me; in the grace and
love of Jesus Christ, I stand prepared for censure, and reproach, and am not
afraid of their utmost enmity: nor is it in the power of the world to torment
me with disappointments, because my expectations are suited to their candor
and clemency.

Through the knowledge of myself, and the observation I have made in life, I
understand a little of human nature; and having learned of the Father, am not
altogether ignorant of him who is the Truth: I therefore perceive, that
reproach and the Gospel are inseparably connected; that it is impossible to
believe, and bear witness of the one, without being exposed to the virulence of
the other, therefore God forbid that I should seek to avoid it, but rather meet
it rejoicing, and receive it with open arms; being thereby crucified unto the
world, and the world unto me.

As I make no pretension to infallibility, nay as I pretend not to the
abilities of fallible authors: respecting wisdom, and Letters, it will not
surprise me, nor need it surprise any body e^se, if some busy critic, whose
genius leads him ever in search of offal, and garbage, should pretend to detect
in my book, not only bad grammar, with inaccuracies in phrase; but errors in
judgment also: Nor shall this trouble me, provided he substitute instead
thereof, what consists more with the honor and glory of Jesus Christ our Lord,
for then my aim and end is answered.

If I am asked in meekness to explain myself in any particular, wherein it is
judged I have not been quite intelligible, ^^ough I cannot promise success, I
find m^s^l^ ^^lling to attempt it. But, when any conceited spirit, from mere
wantonness, majesterially declares me wrong, I shall not reply; because the
servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach,
patient, etc.

As I do not remember to have read the author, who has treated of the subject
contained in the following Tract; any farther than to drop some very brief
hints of such a Truth, which has been immediately contradicted by some other
position: So neither do I remember to have read any thing wrote in consutation
thereof, except a few admirable pieces lately handed about; in some of which,
my name stands conspicuous as an Heretic. I have reasons with me very
sufficient, why I take no notice of those important spirits, so as to answer
them in form.

First, Respecting such that I have seen, their performances evidence beyond
all controversy, that they did not understand the matter which they wrote
against, and therefore treated that with contempt which was above them, being
not afraid to speak evil of dignities. I would always, (unprovoked by their
petulancy) answer those with silence, as being beneath my attention. I would
harden my ear against the roarings of ignorance, and be utterly insensible of
their invectives:

It being ridiculous to fret at the barkings of a Cur, when it is the nature of
the animal to be noisy. Moreover, my wife, and powerful Antagonists, are
generally positive without candor; yea even infallible in their own conceit:
With such it is unlawful to reason. To see what important airs those little
masters give themselves, strikes one at once with laughter and contempt; and
constrains the serious mind to commiserate the abject state of Man, which
nothing more fully discovers, than the egregious vanity, and insolence, of
absolute determinations without reason. For my part, after having abjured the
Pope of Rome, I can never submit to any infallible chair of an inferior Sort:
Therefore their positions have no weight with me, where they produce not their
reasons, and such reasons as immediately relate to the matter in hand, and take
in its meaning.

Until then, they may think as high as they please of themselves, (as vain
conceit seems necessary to keep up their spirits) I must of necessity respect
them, so, as to take no notice of their Anathemas, but boldly confess that
after the way which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers.

Another reason, why I do not choose to answer (in form) those Antagonists who
have as yet appeared in public against me, is, that personal pique,
disappointments, self-interest, etc. was not the least powerful motive with
them in their opposition; and where those considerations influence the mind, it
is an easy matter to find fault, Yea prejudice is dexterous at making faults,
where there are none. I would not answer such as these, left, by inflaming
them, I should drive them to an utter renunciation of Christianity: Left they
should cast off, and reject that measure of Truth which at present they may
have, only because, (from personal enmity) they may be in all things my
opposites. For, where a spirit of resentment and self-seeking takes the lead,
(...) not strange to see men change their Maxims, lest they should be thought
to agree in any particular with the objects of their envy; it is a pity the
Evidence that some of my opponents are already too guilty of this Charge, is so
full.

Besides, there were many other stimulating considerations, well nigh as
powerful as that of personal enmity, and revenge, which made them opponents to
me, and my doctrine: such as making their peace with the World, at the expense
of the persons, and matter, trampled on. They were well aware, of its being a
very likely method to gain the favor of mankind, in the general, especially of
the pious populace; the light, in which things stand at present, administering
them abundant opportunity for so doing, it being shrewdly foreseen, that
prejudice against the person and matter exploded, would not permit the world to
inquire impartially, into the merits of the Cause. They could not but be
greatly encouraged, being assured of victory, before they came to the trial. It
might reasonably be expected from hence, that their exclamations, and
invectives, would have a large run in the world; to the great advantage of the
Authors: This Thought had a sweet feeling in it. But, I believe, there has been
a disappointment here; it should have been considered, that the Person, and
Doctrine, which they bespatter, are not sufficiently popular, and formidable,
to raise a general Call, for their confutations, and preservatives. -- The
deliverance, is always proportionable to the Danger, nor can the latter be
great, from what is only the object of hatred, and contempt, and not of fear:
Had this been considered, their expectations had not been so sanguine. I might
by appealing to Human nature, prove that those my reasons, for not taking any
farther notice of my Antagonists, are not mere surmise; which may possibly be
false: But I decline this, and declare myself well assured of what I have said,
from circumstances sufficiently convincing; however, I bid them all farewell in
the words of the Poet, If Want provoke, or Madness makes them print,
I wage no War with Bedlam, nor the Mint.


It is not my aim in this Treatise, to defend by external Argument, against
gainsayers, what I conceive to be the Truth, as it is in Jesus; but simply to
throw such a light upon the matter, that as it is true, it might appear in a
measure intelligible also. I was for a long season, after satisfied of the
redemption which is in Christ; very uneasy at times, concerning the Equity
thereof: Indeed the hints which occasioned those disputings in my Mind, were
merely accidental; for having received much consolation in the first persuasion
of redemption, the forgiveness of sins, in the Blood of Jesus, I judged myself
sufficient, (from the Argument I fancied I was Master of, and that resistless
authority, which I dreamt attended my words when I spoke of divine things) for
the conviction of the most hardened, and averse to salvation by Jesus; and
accordingly, as opportunity offered, failed not to exert myself upon this
principle: at length I met with one, who (though his zeal, and
self-sufficiency, bare no proportion to mine,) was far my superior in
understanding: after he had with coolness heard what I had to say, he asked me
wherein was the justice, and equity, of one Man's suffering Death, yea even the
torments of Hell, for another: so contrary to reason and also to the testimony
of scripture, which often declares, that the Righteous shall not suffer for the
Wicked; but that every man's sin should be charged upon his own head, etc. I
was not prepared for such a question as this and was therefore involved in a
difficulty, which I could not obviate. I appealed to the Sovereignty of God, it
was granted that God was Sovereign, and that from his Sovereign pleasure, he
created us, redeemed us, etc. having nothing to move him to it, but his own
will: yet he wills nothing but what is just, and equitable, because he is just
when he judges, and justifies. I would then have urged, that as God is
infinitely above us; his tho'ts, and ways above ours; we are not to conceive of
him, his Justice and Equity, according to our low, and scanty notions thereof.
It was answered, if I granted that mankind had any true notion of Justice, and
Equity, though but in the smallest degree, then what is contrary to this, must
be much more so to God, whose Justice and Truth, is infinite, pure, and
eternal. I urged other matters, to as little purpose, and though I considently
continued in my former assertion, yet I was forced to abate much of my
selfimportance, and very often afterward, was greatly disturbed in my mind, on
account of these things. As far as my capacity would admit, I applied myself to
reading; and read a great many Books, treating of redemption by Jesus Christ;
and found them all run in one Channel, viz. that Man being a debtor, and
transgressor, and unable to save himself, Jesus Christ became his surety, under
an engagement to pay his Debts, and to bear his punishment: The Equity of
which, is generally resolved into the Sovereignty of God, or accounted for,
from the willingness of Christ (as an independent Divine Person) to suffer, in
the sinners stead: whilst others satisfy themselves, with the bare positive
assertion, that it is equitable, for one person to be surety for another, not
only in case of Debt; but even in capital offenses. Those resolutions, I read,
over, and over, but rather more perplexed than satisfied thereby. In vain it
was, that the most pious and orthodox writers, and preachers, explained the
matter thus; I was constrained to despise all human authority, in things of
this nature; especially where there was not the shadow of Reason and Fquity. I
applied myself more carefully, to the reading and study of the Scriptures; as
without notes, or expositions: submitting in spirit, unto Him, who at first
dictated, and has taken it upon him to make us understand them. And thence it
was, I discerned according to that scanty measure I have attained, what I
conceive to be the harmony of divine Truth, viz. the Union of Christ and, how
clear the equity of redemption by the blood of Jesus, appears in this Truth, in
the following Treatise I have attempted to thew. And, because I have thereby
found a retreat in Jesus, from the face of the Enemy, and all his dangerous
insinuations, whereby he would have shaken the foundations, I publish it to
others, that if there should be amongst my readers, such who are tried with
trials of like nature, they may possibly have instruction sealed, to their
peace, and consolation. It is also probable, that such may read, whom either
prejudice or lack of opportunity, will not permit to hear. -- There are
generally but few, amongst the great multitude, who inquire into the merits of
the cause they engage in: Tradition, received from their Fathers, zeal and
affection for their Leaders, spirit them on to persuasion beyond scruple, that
they are in the Truth. It is very probable, there are others, who simply
crediting the scripture testimony, that Jesus Christ died for our sins, and
rose again for our Justification, are happy in that Truth; without once
inquiring into the equity thereof, or ever thinking it necessary so to do. The
reality of their peace, I will not pretend to deny, as they believe the Facts,
which the gospel relates, and proposes as the Joy and Peace of Mankind. But
yet, the necessity of examining the equity thereof, remains; as is evident,
first from the scriptures treating so plentifully of it: To deny the necessity
of attending to which teaching, would be the highest arrogance. Again, though
they may hitherto have escaped the temptation within, and the argument of such
without, who walk enemies to the Cross of Christ; yet it proves not, that they
shall always escape: therefore it is necessary, they should, from the faithful
apprehension of their union with Christ, be so rooted, and grounded in Love,
that their Joy may abide, and no man take it from them. Again, it is necessary,
that knowing God, they may glorify him as God, who, being infinitely glorious,
and exalted, in all the perfections of his Nature, has in this gracious plan,
most wonderfully exhibited that Divine harmony, which to man, is so rich a
proof of his unity.

As to my talking so much of Christ, his person, and excellencies, my continual
endeavor to point him out, as the Way, the Truth, and the Life; I hope, even
such who would be thought the guardians of true godliness, will bear with me a
little, when I give them my reasons for so doing. First, I am under very great
obligations to Him, which coming to light every Day, more and more, constrains
me to speak of him, and to esteem Him very precious. Again, I may be excused a
little, because testimonies of this nature, are very rare: whilst M^es, has
them who preach Him, every sabbath day, in every synagogue. And whilst most of
the publications on Divinity, are now entitled P^; as the Dady Advertisements
bear witness, (than which, there is nothing according to my apprehension more
fully proves the decline of real Christianity. I hope so insignisicant a person
as I, may be indulged with saying somewhat of Jesus Christ. The phrase
Practical, when applied to Divinity, seems to be made use of, in direct
opposition to Christ; and that, which immediately treats of him: as though he
was dry Theory, a Fable, or an idle speculation only. Will it be answered, that
the wickedness of the age is such, as renders it needful to write, and preach,
practically as called? Is not this giving up the cause to the enemy, and a
tacit acknowledgment, that the Article Christ is insufficient? Yea, that this
Article rather tends to corrupt mankind, and promote bad morals; or indeed to
say thus: fain would we reform the world, we have used all means to do them
good, we have tried Christ, we have preached, and wrote of him, but he would
not do: He only made all things worse, how can he be of God, whose Disciples
break the Sabbath Day? etc. we are therefore obliged to lay him aside, and
betake ourselves to the Law of Meses, with other good rules, which pious Men
have planed; and by insisting upon their living up to those (promising
salvation unto such who do; and threatening all that do not, with Eternal
Damnation) we hope to stem the torrent of vice, and turn mankind into the paths
of virtue and piety.

Have your inventions answered the End intended; are they more reformed than
they were in the days of the Apostles, who made it their business to preach a
crucified Jesus? where is the Church, or Society of Christians now, who attain
to this Character, The multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and
of one soul, neither said any of them, that ought of the things which he
possessed was his own, but they had all things common? Acts iv. 32. This was
effected by the simple testimony of Jesus, his death, and resurrection; the
people were then taught, that they were the body of Christ in particular, and
members one of another. Whereas, the more modern doctrines have taught mankind
to respect each other as Aliens, each esteeming of himself, better than
another; imagining he has property distinct from his brother, yea even in
spirituals; he looks on his own things, and not on the things of another. Thus
the modern doctrines, and traditions of men, are calculated to promote
self-love, spiritual pride, bigotry, and hatred of each other, ^tead of love.
Therefore is it, that the morals of mankind are as bad as ever, not
withstanding the necessity and benefit of holiness, and good works, is daily
sounded in their ears. And even amongst the reformed, as they would be thought,
is there not envying, strife, contention, backbiting, evil-speaking,
whispering, uncharitableness, the putting forth of the finger, revenge,
inhumanity with every evil work and disposition? and indeed this is the genuine
fruit of the doctrines of the age; for where people are taught to distinguish
between saints and sinners, and to think themselves holier than their
neighbors, it is not strange that they use them ill. As this is so general, I
suppose it will not greatly irritate, that a few worthless men, without
character, or popularity, should make Christ their subject, and be ever
preaching or writing of him. It is to be feared, that being merely orthodox, in
point of works, with a desire at times of doing, and at other times, a sigh and
sorrow for not doing, with a zeal for propagating the doctrine, is that which
sooths and keeps in peace the consciences of many, who otherwise are very
sensible of their deficiency in this particular: And to talk of practice, and
knowing nothing more of it; yea in short, to talk of it, without keeping the
whole Law, is such a deception where scripture authority is admitted, yea or
even what reason suggests of the nature of the divine Being,) as cannot be
accounted for, but by the pride, bewitchery and madness which we are naturally
involved in. Persons in this cast, please themselves, like the kings of Bedlam,
who imagine their rags a purple robe, and their heap of straw a throne; and are
very angry with all who will not humor their vain conceit.

As to the zealous promoters of the doctrine of works, in opposition to the
complete salvation of Jesus Christ our Lord, we know what he says of them: That
they lay heavy burdens upon men's shoulders, which they themselves will not
touch with one of their fingers: and the Apostle says, neither they themselves
keep the Law, but desire to have you circumcifed that they may glory in your
flesh. Thus we are not always to judge of men by their sounds, or to imagine a
man greatly pious because he talks of works, or writes practical Treatises;
nay, it is certainly reasonable and just for us to withhold our credit, and
shut our ears, until his tempers and actions speak: and of such I have no need
to be afraid, however zealous they may be, for as Mercy, Compassion and
Charity, are none of the least prevalent in the composition of true Piety,
their precious balms can never break my head.

Nothing is more probable than that it will be objected, I am an enemy to good
works, or, that convinced by the holy practice of some particulars amongst the
Professors of Religion, I pine with envy; affecting to (...) what I cannot
attain unto. To which I answer, I am far from being an enemy to good works,
that which is truly Good, when manifest, always commands my respect: nor can I
conceive how any man, when convinced of the good, should hate it for being so.
I do not mean to deny, that the truly Good, is at any time the object of Man's
hatred; but then we always suspect that of evil, which we allow ourselves to
hate; and if from the corruption of nature we hate the Good, because it forbids
us the gratification of the sensual appetites, yet even that hatred does not
totally exclude from the Bosom a secret approbation of the Good. But as
weakness and ignorance are (accidentally) properties of human nature, we are
not always capable of distinguishing, perfectly, between good and evil.

I am not, cannot, possibly be an enemy to Good works; but then, I must have
some more incontestable proof of goodness, before I become an admirer, than
ignorant roarings, the clamours and important airs of vain pretenders. When I
consider good works, as mentioned in the scriptures, I would distinguish
between them as spiritually and morally good; the former, which merits the
divine complacency, mankind are incapable of performing at any time; as I could
easily prove was there occasion. The latter, which respects Beneficence one
toward another, as reasonable Beings, as Fellow Creatures, or if you please,
from a high^ consideration, as the Body of Christ in particular, and M^hers
(...) of another, is what the Apostle recommends, in that often cited passage;
That they (...) believed in God, may be careful to maintain good works; these
things are Good, and profitable unto men, Tit. iii. 8. And again, verse 14. Let
ours also learn to maintain good works, for necessary uses. That Bread is
profitable to the Hungry, Drink to the Thirsty, Clothes to the Naked, and
Honesty in all your dealings, unto such whom you are concerned with; I say,
that it is profitable thus mutually to bless each other, is not to be doubted:
profitable to the R^, and profitable to the Giver; as it entitles him to the
respect and esteem of his fellow creatures. Hence may the Benefits, and
Benefited, both be said to profit thereby; and therefore are the works called
Good, and said to be profitable unto men, yea of necessary use, thus Thy (...)
may (...) man as thou art, and (...) may prosit the Son of Men, Job xxxv. 8.
But let us not mistake the Apostle's meaning, and imagine them profitable unto
us with God, to our salvation and acceptance with Him: This would be to
renounce the Lord who bought us, to pretend that we have whereof we may boast,
even before God; and thus believing a lie, fall into the strong delusion. As a
Friend to benevolence, equity, and peace among mankind, I should be glad to see
those good works abound; and from a right principle, would encourage them with
all my power. But when men begin to speak of these things, and consider them as
spiritual Good, as well-pleasing, and acceptable with God, as Righteousness,
Holiness, or fruitfulness before Him; or, when making this their
sanctification, they go about to prove their Faith thereby, inwardly respecting
thsoe motions, as Proofs and Marks of their Grace and Christianity: I fay, when
this is the cafe, with ardent zeal, ten-fold more burning than they can ever
show for the works of their own hands, we will prove all their righteousness to
be filthy Rags, Dross, and Dung: exposing the pride, vainglory, hypocrisy,
covetousness, self-love, etc. of all their Works, Words, and Thoughts,
protesting with all our souls, against bringing the Blind and Lame into the
House of the Lord: for as much as we conceive, that the honor of Jesus Christ,
and the real happiness of mankind, is greatly concerned here. And, if for this,
I am deemed an enemy unto good works, so be it. I will remember the word of the
Lord, who said, the World cannot hate you, but me it hates, because I testify
of it, that the works thereof are evil, John vii. 7. And, as to any conviction
received from the most upright amongst men, from their holy example, etc. the
God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, before whom I stand, knows that I
lie not, when I declare, That there is but one Man, THE MAN CHRIsT JEsUS.
amongst all the individuals of Adam's race, whose example I admire and can
perfectly approve of: by his example, I confess I am deeply convinced, not to
envy, but (...) the most profound admiration! and, though I see that in Him,
unto whom I cannot attain, nay, it would be the highest arrogance in me, or any
other mortal, to seek, or expect, by works of righteousness, imitations, etc.
to attain unto his perfection; yet, I cannot despise, but must for ever
reverence, admire, and wonder before Him. When I except this Man, I believe
that word of the Lord applicable unto all the others, where he says, the (...)
of them is as a (...), the most upright (...) Hedge. M^ah, vii. 4. (...) work
with (...). Jer. ix. 4. Thus faith the Lord, and thus I think: and therefore
cannot behold any man upon Earth, with an envious, or evil eye, on the account
of his dazzling perfections; nor is it possible I should ever despise good
works, on this account. But, wherever I have spoken slightly of Human Goodness,
it is because I am convinced it is not good; but a false show, and lying
vanity; and therefore as a falsehood, always to be opposed. Another reason, is,
because these vain pretensions gaining ground amongst mankind, tends greatly to
the dishonor of Jesus Christ, and his Gospel; and to make void the Grace of
God. Again, it tends to (...) the Soul, who is convinced of the weakness of
Human Nature, according to the scriptures; and to keep him from the rest, that
remains for the people of God: nor can any rejoice in it, but the deceived,
who know not themselves, nor the scriptures, nor the Power of God.

Again, it encourages to party: its warmest Advocates, being of the number of
those who separate themselves. And yet, nothing more fully establishes that
exploded Maxim, Let us do evil, that good may come. It is this which allows;
yea even authorizes, one Man, to think himself holier than another, and
consequently to say in his Heart, stand by, come not near me, I am holier than
thou. From hence, instead of loving his Brother, He takes an occasion to Judge
Him, despise and hate him: yea, from this very principle, proceeds all the
animosity, pride, backbitings, whisperings, contentions, and c. which abound
amongst all the various sects of religious people: Yea, such is their zeal, for
the Good as considered in the creature, that (least they should turn from it)
they will not scruple to break any, yea every commandment, in the Book of God;
and to run a Tilt, against the whole of the perfect example, which the holy
Jesus has exhibited; only to keep their votaries steady to their favored
plan. And, lest you should think my assertion too strong, you need only for
your conviction, put your Head into some of those places, where Human (...), or
inward holiness, or, that work of the Spirit upon the Heart, which opposes the
free salvation of mankind by the Blood of Jesus, is the chief, or continual
subject: for though the term, are different, the Matter is the same: I say, put
but your head into any of those places, and you will hear and be convinced
soon, if you are impartial, of the truth whereof I affirm. You, may there hear
a person in defense of inward holiness, (and as he pretends, with a pure zeal
to promote the same,) raving, with all the energy and eloquence of Pride,
censoriousness, slander, cruelty and ignorance; against, such, whose Names are
not in His Legend, bespattering them with the epithets of Dogs, Swine, Devils,
Heretics, etc. threatening them with eternal destruction, warning the people
against them, as the pest and plag^e of the earth; withal, giving such
descriptions of them, that their Disciples knowing them, may learn to hate
them, and copy their pastors examples, in speaking all manner of evil of them.
This is not only Satan rebuking sin, but Satan propagating holiness also, a
doing evil, that good may come. But, if it should be objected, that our Savior
and the Apostles used these epithets, when speaking of unbelievers, I answer,
When they used them, it was (by showing mankind what they naturally were) to
enhance the Grace, (...) they were saved: and were commonly given to such who
trusted in themselves; that they were righteous, despised others. Besides, our
Savior and his Apostles, had power, when they applied those characters to any
individual, to demonstrate by undeniable signs, the truth of what they spoke:
and that they were not revilers. As for instance, when Saul, who is called
Paul, set his eyes upon Elymas the sorcerer, and called him a Child of the
Devil, an Enemy to all Righteousness, and c. he proved the truth of what he
said by striking him blind. God, thus bearing witness unto his accusation. As
with Peter also, in the case of Ananias and Saphira. But, where any, who would
be thought infallible now, are for ever filling their mouths with the
Apostolic censures, and anathemas, without being able to show the like proof
of their infallibility; they are to be respected as proud, arrogant, conceited;
and rather railing, reviling accusers of their Brethren, than Apostles of
Christ: yea; as the offerers of strange fire before the Lord, and not the fire,
which fell from God upon the Altar, when Moses and Aaron blessed the people.
How ridiculous must it be! to read or hear, a Man writing, or preaching up
holiness; which is the Love of God and his neighbor; in such a spirit, and
terms, as, (rendering the divine Being so implacable, and difficult of access,
and his neighbors so much worse than himself) has certainly a more powerful
tendency to promote enmity, hatred, and contempt, than Love. Thus men preach
and write of goodness, until Love entirely cease. And of Faith, until it
dwindle as small as a grain of mustard seed; until all hope, and charity, for
their Neighbors, is wholly lost. Nothing is more common, than for men to
preach, and dispute, for holiness; yea for its being in themselves, until
quarrelling with the opponent, there appear nothing in them, but the most
unholy tempers and dispositions. And yet, they must be thought holy, and that
in themselves though our every sense testify the contrary. Sure man is scarcely
a reasonable creature, to be thus imposed upon, or what is worse; He is a most
bewitched and infatuated creature. O! Thou great Archetype of true holiness,
Jesus Christ: thou only art holy, thou only art the Lord: and thou know,
wherefore I thus speak. It is because mankind would rob thee, by assuming what
belongs unto thee only, it is because the principle of self is such that they
would found Dominion in Grace; from a supposition of superior holiness, use
their fellow creatures ill.

I have thus spoken, thou know; because I apprehended what I have spoken
against, to be utterly false; a grand deception, and yet the Idol of mankind,
Thou art my standard, and everlasting pattern of true Goodness; and I always
conclude that whose gathers not with Thee, scatters: nor can I ever believe
that to be holy or good which is contrary to thee: unto thy Grace, and Keeping
I commit my all; and that thou should Bless what I have written, unto the
Glory and Praise of thy venerable Name: and respecting my readers, unto their
conviction, even to that Eternal Life, which is in thee; I Pray.

It may easily be seen, that I aim only at illustrating that Grand Capital
Proposition of the Savior's: I am the Truth.

To do which, I am not afraid to tread the most unfrequented Path, and walk
therein undisturbed, notwithstanding the clamorous accusations; of Sin
gularity, Novelty, and Heresy. Affectation of being singular, from selfish
Views, I hold abominable: and as an equal Abomination, the attempt to shun the
Cross, when standing in the Path of Truth.

Respecting the matter and scope of the following Treatise, I am above
uncertainty therein: Nor can the piddling Pedant who feeds on garbage, the
detection of Errors in Grammar, the obsoleteness and impropriety of Words;
exclaiming at want of Literature in Authors: Neither the Orthodox Precise, who
sits in the infallible Chair, and condemns as Heresy, whatsoever squares not
with his Dogma; supported by Creeds, Confessions of Faith, and the positive
determinations of the most sound and pious expositors: I say, neither the one
nor the other, will be able to shake my confidence respecting the Truth I aim
at illustrating: which is, that Jesus Christ our Lord, is ascended far above
all Heavens, that He might fill all things, and that in the new Man there is
neither Greek, nor Jew, circumcision, nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian,
bond, nor free, but Christ is all, and in all. As to my Defects as an Author, I
hope, I have by confessing my insufficiency, and renouncing all pretensions to
any such Abilities, Anticipated my Examiners in their Censures: but if Time
should show the contrary, I have an infallible remedy in Silence, as there is
nothing appears to me, worth contending about, besides the Faith once delivered
to the Saints which contention is spiritual, and manifest through the whole of
the Christian life; against all without and within that would pervert, and draw
the mind from Christ: And consists not in vain Jangling, perverse Disputings,
and Contentions with each other, to the subverting of the mind; as many have
vainly imagined: Feeding, and pleasing themselves, with the fond conceit of
eminence in faith, and knowledge; because they were better versed in argument
than their opponents, or could run them down, by the mere dint of positiveness,
and much speaking.

The latter I would always shun, as contrary to Christ: but in the former I
would be found, hurting no man, but earnestly contending for the Faith: unto
the edification of all whose Servant I am, for Christ's Sake.

UNION: OR, A TREATISE, etc.
THE doctrine of Union between Christ and his Church renders the System of
man's redemption by his Blood, beautifully consistent, and worthy its glorious
Author.

It explains the harmony of the divine perfections, and reveals God, acting
according to the principles of his nature, in the salvation of mankind by Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Hence, it appears greatly worthy of our consideration; and in treating
thereof, I would observe the following method: I. Attempt the proof of Union as
necessary to the equity of Salvation by Jesus. II. Explain, as far as I may,
the nature thereof. III. Hint its Antiquity, and unchangeable Duration. IV.
Point out a few of the never-failing Springs of Consolation, arising therefrom.


The Union of Christ, and his Church, appears to me a Truth of such importance,
that I can see no consistency in the Doctrine of Salvation by Jesus without it.
The method of grace and salvation according to Union: is not at all
contradictory to the sovereignty of God: That being sufficiently manifest,
where he has decreed the honor, and glory of his Son, as the principal and
leading maxim in all his divine appointments. He was before all things, and by
Him all things consist. The creation of Man, and his being appointed to obtain
salvation, by Jesus Christ, is a farther proof of divine sovereignty; nothing
moving the Almighty thereunto, but his own will: Yet this hinders not the
Method and Execution of this Grace, its being according to equity, and that
such as We, by Reason and Revelation may properly conceive of. But when
sovereignty is introduced from first, to last; to the utter exclusion of
equity, which is often done; (as a palliative for man's ignorance in divine
things) the consequences attending are dangerous. First, as it depreciates the
sacrisice of Christ and makes his Death unnecessary: since Absoluteness might
have remitted the offense without shedding of blood. Or if it is hinted, that
this Condition took place and was accepted from mere sovereign pleasure only:
Then, of consequence it was not proportionable, as an atonement unto the
offense; and its Dignity as the Blood of God denied: Nor (upon such a
supposition) was it necessary that our Savior should be more than man. But, if
the scriptures dignify the Blood of Jesus, in saying, that God purchased the
Church with his own Blood; if he was made a curse for us: if his sufferings as
the punishment of sin was equal to the offense; then was it accepted, not from
mere absoluteness, but from the harmony and full consent of Mercy and Truth,
Righteousness and Peace. Again, such an use made of Divine Sovereignty, would
be to reject the testimony of Moses and the Prophets; where they declare that
God will not hold the sinner guiltless, nor acquit him without the shedding of
Blood, even the Blood of the offender. To throw a light upon which, and to
instruct the people in the mystery thereof, they were taught from the Union
subsisting between themselves, and their sacrifices, to respect the Blood, and
death, of their sacrifice, as their own: and as such, was the Blood taken by
the High priest into the holy presence; where the names of the people engraven
on the stones o^ memorial, were present with the blood; confessing it, and
claiming the benefits resulting from the shedding thereof, as a punishment
adequate to their sin. Which blessings were remission and justification to
Life. Thus through all the dispensations committed to Moses, the symbols of
equity are inseperably connected with the Figures of Salvation by Jesus. From
all which it appears, That God's sovereign Grace, and Will to save mankind,
has been executed according to strictest Truth and Equity: and such is the
Wisdom, that God is unspeakably glorious in the Honor, and Glory his Son has
obtained thereby; and mankind infinitely advantaged. Should it be objected,
that the Apostle himself resolves certain queries in the sovereignty of God;
saying, who art thou that reply against God? shall the thing formed, say
unto him who form. (...), why have thou made me thus? etc. I answer, the (...)
was not speaking here of Salvation and the method thereof, but of the people;
some of whom, as respecting the Knowledge of the Truth, were taken whilst
others were left. The wherefore (...) believe, and others do not, is not the
object of Faith, no (...) within my line to thew; and should I be inquisitive,
the Answer is recorded; What is that to (...), such inquiries being more
curious than pre^ble, our Savior will give no other answers it being not
necessary to our peace and happiness. And as God has not thought sit to (...)
himself in that particular, we are constrain to (...), to resolve it into his
(...), though it is not to be doubted, but the Time will come, when the equity of
this and all his ways with (...) will clearly appear. And (...) (...) all that
I have done (...) 23.
My present design, is to render, with as much plainness of Speech as possible,
the reasons of my Ideas; intending thereby, to prove at once, the necessity and
utility of this Grace.

1. I apprehend it necessary to the harmony of the Divine Perfections. For as
all the hopes and expectations of the Creature from the Creator, are founded
upon the supposition of his goodness; Men of every sentiment will agree to this
proposition, God is Good.

And that we may rightly conceive of him under this character, it is as
necessary we should see him Justice, Holiness and Truth; as Mercy and Love:
since all those properties must unite, and act in perfect Harmony, to
constitute real goodness. Thus considering the Almighty, we are verily
persuaded, that as a God infinite in Goodness, He does not, will not, act from
one Attribute to the dishonor of another. Nor may we expect any exhibition of
Mercy and Love, but in a way of Justice, Purity, and Truth. Therefore it does
not appear how God from a principle of mercy and peace toward mankind, could
punish sin upon Christ, without the concurrence of Rightcousness and Truth; nor
can this concurrence or harmony be proved, without Union between Christ, and
those for whom he endured the Cross, and despised the shame,

1st. Because contrary to Truth; which declares that every man shall die for
his own Sin. 2d. Cor. xxv. 4. Dent. xxiv. 26.
Again, whosoever has sinned against me, Him will I blot out of my book, Fxod.
xxxii. 33.
this was the answer of God unto Moses, when he would have a^oned for the sin
of the people, by suffering in their stead. Nor will he destroy the Righteous
with the Wicked, because the Judge of all the Earth does right. Genesis xviii. 25.
Keep thee far from a false matter; and the innocent and the righteous slay
thou not: for I will not justify the wicked. Exodus xxiii. 7.
Thus the voice of Truth is, that the Sinner shall die for his own sin: and
that the Righteous shall not suffer. Say ye to the Righteous it shall be well
with him, for they shall eat the Fruit of their doings: Woe unto the Wicked, it
shall be ill with him, for the reward of his Hands shall be given him. Isai.
iii. 10, 11.
This is the Language of Truth: one jot, or tittle of which, shall not fail;
though Heaven and Earth should pass away: Therefore such an Union, or relation,
between Christ and his Church, as gives Him the right of redemption, and brings
Him under that Character which is obnoxious to punishment; is absolutely
necessary: that His sufferings for sin, might accord with the declarations, and
demands of truth.

2dly. It is contrary to Justice to afflict the Innocent: to punish and destroy
him, is cruelty and injustice. Without the consideration of Union, where is the
Justice of charging the black rebellion, and crying guilt of Man upon the pure
and spotless Head of Jesus? but God does nothing unworthy of himself, or
contrary to the Harmony of his Nature. To say that the undertaking on Christ's
part was voluntary, neither proves nor implies, his right to suffer: because it
is not his willingness, but the approbation of divine Justice, which proves His
right to taste the Death of the Cross. And, as the nature and property of
Justice, is always its own rule of acting; it cannot admit of the Innocent's
being punished, nor of the Transgressor's being acquitted: For God the
righteous Judge, has pronounced a woe unto such who su^fy the wicked for
reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him. Isaiah v. 23.
I am aware of an objection here, from such who would establish imputation,
without relation, or union, viz. that the Law admits of one Man's being surety,
or bondsman for another; and can justly oblige him to fulfill his engagements:
To this I answer, It is most absurd to make human Laws a standard for God's
method of dealing with mankind; except it be first proved that those Laws are
fully conformable to the Law of God; in Justice and Equity: Until this be
proved, what Man decrees, or what the Law of Nations is, has no weight at all
when brought to teach the way of God with Man. Besides, I know not of any human
Laws, which admit of suretyship in capital Offenses; and Sin is not only a
Debt, for which suretyship is sometimes admitted, but a Transgression, a Crime,
capital in the highest sense, only attoned for by the shedding of Blood; by the
Death, yea, by the eternal Death of the Sinner: which Justice must inflict,
before it can be properly satisfied; nor can it possibly admit of a Surety
here: because, it can only punish Him, whom it first finds guilty; and that not
by reckoning him to be what he is not, according to human quibbles; but
according to artless, reasonable, divine Equity; which can only declare such
guilty, on whom the fault is found, and can only find the fault on such who
have committed it; We only committed the fault, upon Us only can it be found:
Therefore, without such an Union between Christ and us, as exposes us in his
person, to Judgment and Condemnation; the harmony of the divine perfections,
does not appear in the things which he suffered, because contrary to Truth and
Justice.

Again, it is contrary to Mercy, as Mercy may not, consistent with it own
nature, trespass the limits of Truth and Justice. But, if Jesus suffered for
sin, without such an Union to the Sinner, as made his Sufferings and Blood, to
be regarded as that of the offender; though there be an appearance of mercy
toward us, there is great lack of it toward Him, who suffered for sin
unjustly charged upon him, Such is not the nature of infinite Goodness, to show
mercy to one, through injustice to another: But, if united to the Sinner, there
is a (...), yea, a Divine Equity, in His (...); and mercy appears to M^; where
God has provided himself a Lamb for the Burnt-offering the like appears to
Christ, where God has engaged to support him, under his Just sufferings, to
hold his Hand, and to keep him, when He gave him a purifier to the people. This
is Mercy, tempered with Justice, and in the faithful view of this every
Believer can sing of Mercy and Judgment.

Again, it is contrary to Wisdom; yet God has marked out all his ways in
infinite Wisdom: But that System which is not founded in equity, has no
exhibition of true wisdom in it; nay rather accuses God (if imputed to Him)
either as lacking wisdom when concerting His plan, or else, of unwillingness to
give us a specimen thereof; and consequently of denying his own Praise, and
Man's happiness; which consists in admiring, and glorifying Him, in the
discoveries of His infinite wisdom. For, where is the wisdom of imputing Sin to
Christ, which he had no right to bear? and whence his right, if not from Union
to the sinner? but grant this, Then indeed the great Deep breaks open, and
Wisdom, infinite Wisdom appears: whilst each beholder, with wonder cries, O!
the Depth! who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has been His Counselor?

It is also contrary to Love: the scriptures are very explicit, in declaring
the Father's Love to the Son; but the punishment of this Son, for crimes he
stood in no relation to, implies a defect in Love: yea, rather a greater Love
to Man, the offender, than to his well-beloved Son, who was the Brightness of
his glory, and the express Image of his person: and is withal a manifest
contradiction to the divine Testmony, which asserts the preeminence of Jesus in
all things. Withal, to love the impure, is inconsistent with the morality of
the divine nature; therefore, where the Father giving his son, is at any time
mentioned as an evidence of his Love to mankind, it is a proof of his
superlative Love unto Him, God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, etc. The superlative love of God to his Son, is manifest here:
where the valuableness of the Gift so infinitely preferable to the receiver,
is, in order to enhance the Grace intelligibly hinted. God's giving his Son,
and giving himself, is a Synonymy in Scripture; and confirms the above
proposition: The Lesser being always blessed of the Greater. Only considering,
that all things were made for him and that he is the appointed Heir of all
things, it will appear in brightness, that the Honor, and Glory, of the
beloved Son; and of the Father in him, was first, and principal in view, when
he was given for the life of the World: consequently, God's love to the World,
was subordinate unto that where with he loved his Son: and all his Grace and
Kindness to the World, subservient unto his Glory.
and a manifestation of his glory; the descent of his humbled Life, and bloody
Death, being the appointed Depth, from which he was to ascend above all
Heavens, that He might fill all things: and, that he might thus inherit the
boundless, infinite Riches of His Father's Love, it was necessary he should
suffer what He did: and, that the extendings of the Love of God, to Man, might
be subordinate unto the Love he bears to the eternal Son of his Bosom, His
union to those, for whom he suffered the Death of the Cross appears absolutely
necessary.

The union of Christ, and his Church, is a necessary consideration; for the
right explication of the scriptures; without which, they would want a key, and
(...) great part of them be altogether unintelligible, and without any just
propriety in phrase. To prove which, I need only note a few of the numerous
passages, which are pregnant with this matter. And here I design not the least
intimation, of my quoting all the scriptures which positively speak of this
truth; nor will I affirm, that those mentioned, are of the whole, the most
pertinent to the purpose, but having their light, and perfection, in Jesus
Christ our Lord; and being (as I conceive,) such that treat of His union with
the Church, I often make use of them, as a confirmation of my Doctrine, when
discoursing on this subject: Therefore, occurring the more readily to my
memory, I mention them in particular, as (a) Psalm. cxxxix. 16.
In thy Book all my members were written. (b) Ephesians. v. 30
We are members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones. (c) 1 Cor. xii. 26.
Whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it: or one member be
honored, all the members rejoice with it. (d) 1 Cor. xii. 12.
For as the Body is one, and has many members, and all the members of that one
Body, being many, are one Body: so also is Christ. (a) Cor. xii. 27.
Ye are the Body of Christ, and members in particular. (b) Coll. 1. 18.
He is the Head of the Body, the Church; (c) Ephesians. i. 22, 23.
The Head over all things to his Church, which is his Body, the fullness of him
that fills all in all. (d) Coll. ii. 10
Ye are complete in Him. (e) Romans xii. 5.
We being many are one Body in Christ, and members one of another. (f) Ephesians. ii.
16.
And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross. (g) Ephesians.
v. 3. 32.
And they two shall be one flesh; this is a great mystery: but I speak
concerning Christ and the Church. (h) Heb. 2. ^.
For both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one; (i)
John xvii. 22, 23.
and the glory which thou gave me, I have given them; that they may be one,
even as we are one, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in
one, and that the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them,
as thou have loved me. (k) Jer. xviii. 4.
And the vessel that he made of clay, was marred in the band of the potter, so
he made it again another vessel, as seemed good unto the potter to make it. (a)
Isaiah ivvi. 7, 8.
She was delivered of a Man Child. Who has heard such a thing? Who has seen
such things? Shall the Earth be made to bring forth in one Day? shall a Nation
be born at once? (b) Coll. ii. 11.
In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in
putting off the Body of the sins of the Flesh, by the circumcision of Christ:
(c) Coll. ii. 12.
Buried with him in Baptism. (d) Gall. ii. 20.
I am crucisied with Christ. (e) Psalms x^x. 5
Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my heels
shall compass me about? (f) ^ Pet. ii. 24.
Who his own self bare our sins in his own Body on the Tree, that we being dead
unto sin, should live unto righteousness, by whose stripes ye were he ^ed. (g)
Romans vi. 6.
Knowing this, that our old man is cru^ with him. (h) Coll. iii. 3.
Ye are dead, and your Life is hid with Christ in God. (i) Romans vii. 4.
Dead to the Law by the Body of Christ; (k) Romans vi. 3.
if we be dead with Christ, we believe we shall also live with him. (l) Romans
vi. 11.
R^kon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin; but alive unto God
through Jesus Christ our Lord. (a) Isaiah xxvi. 9
Thy dead shall live, my dead Body shall they arise; (b) Hosea vi. 2)
after two days will he receive us, in the third Day he will raise us up, and
we shall live in his sight. (c) ^Pet. i. 3.
Has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the Dead. (d) ^ Pet. iii. 21.
Not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. (e) Coll. xxi. 21,
22.
Now has he reconciled, in the body of his flesh through death. (f) 2 Cor. v. o.
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. (g) Romans iv. 25.
And was raised again for our justification. (h) Fph. ii. 6.
And has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in
Christ, (i) Ephesians. ii. 5.
even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ. (k)
Col. ii. 13.
And you being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcison of your s^sh, has he
quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses. (l) Ephesians. i. ^,
4
(...) has blessed us with all spiritual blesings in heavenly places in
Christ: according as he has chosen us in him before this foundation of the
world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him, (a) I John iii. 2.
we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is, (b) 1 John iv. 17.
because as he is, so are we in this world: (c) 2 Timothy i. 9.
who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace which was given in Christ
Jesus, before the world began. (d) Ephesians. i. 6.
He has made us accepted in the beloved. (e) Isaials xlv. 17.
Israel shall be saved in the Lord, with an everlasting salvation: (f) Ver. 24,
25.
surely shall one say, in the Lord have I rig^teousness and strength: in the
Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory. (g) Jer.
xxxiii. 15.
This is the name where with he shall be called, the Lord our Righteousness (h)
Caap. xxiii. 6.
this is the name wherewith she shall be called the Lord our Righteousness (i)
1 Cor. i. 2.
to them who are sanctified in Christ Jesus, (k) Ver^
but of Him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God, is made unto us Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption; that according as it is
written, He that glorysieth, let him glory in the Lord. (a) Mat i. 23.
They shall call his Name Emmanuel, which being interpreted, is God with us.
Time would fail me, to mention all the scriptures which I apprehend are full of
this matter; and are as I conceive, incapable of any consistent explication,
that takes not in the Union subsisting between Christ and his Church. If what I
have already said, has the weight, which it appears to me to have; then,
without Union with Christ all our hopes and expectations by him are groundless,
and without the least shadow of reason: What I have said before, when proving
the inconsistency and unreasonableness of his suffering for sin, without Union
to the sinner, is of equal Force to prove this assertion, as I am persuaded,
that all the ways of God with Man are founded in equity.

Though I might offer many reasons showing the necessity of this Union, yet at
present I shall forbear; judging the hints already given, sufficient to the
purpose. I shall therefore hasten to consider its nature, attempting in my
measure an explication thereof according to Truth.

In speaking of the nature of Union, as subsisting between Christ and his
Church, I might have recourse to numerous similitudes which the scriptures
afford; and, which the Holy Ghost makes use of to that purpose: but shall
confine myself to a few only, and those, such as show the matter with more case
and familiarity.

The Apostle shows us Adam, as a figure of him who was to come. Romans v. 14.
I would therefore consider wherein this divine grace was shadowed forth in
Adam: Moses tells us that when God created Man, Male and Female created he
them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the Day when they were
created. Genesis v. ii.
Thus, were the Twain created in one: the Woman in her Husband, where they had
one name given them: He called their name Adam: It was whilst they were in this
condition, that the Lord God breathed into their nostrils the breath of Life,
and Man became a living soul; it was whilst they were in this capacity,
undistinguished in person, that the Lord God commanded Man, saying, of every
Tree of the Garden thou may freely eat, but of the Tree of Knowledge of Good
and Evil thou shall not eat of it, for in the Day that thou eatest thereof thou
shall surely Die. Genesis ii. 16, 17.
It was whilst the Twain thus existed in one, that the Lord God brought all the
Beasts of the field, and Fowls of the air, unto Adam, to see what he would call
them, that he might, at once, give a specimen of his wisdom, in making their
names explanatory of their nature; and, also by this act, be instated in that
Dominion over the creatures, which the Lord God had given him. Yea, it was
whilst the Person of Adam was plural, as containing the Woman, in Himself; that
the Lord God said unto them, be fruitful and multiply and replenish the Earth,
and subdue it, etc. and, when the Lord God afterward (causing a deep sleep to
fall upon Adam, and taking the Rib from his side, of which he made the Woman)
brought her unto him, Adam said, This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my
flesh, she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man. Genesis ii. 21.
Thus her existing in a distinct personality, did not hinder her union to the
Man, for when Adam saw her, he said this is now, bone of my bones, and flesh of
my flesh, as truly so now, as when she only existed a Rib in my side. The twain
were created in one; the woman in her Husband: Similar with this, the Church
existed in Christ; according as he has chosen us in him before the foundation
of the world Ephesians. i. 4.
having this Purpose and Grace, given us in him, before the world began. 2 Timothy
i. 9.
The Man and Woman, under this consideration, had but one Name: he called their
Name Adam. So Christ and his Church, in this Union bears one Name, bath are
called the Lord our Righteousness. He Jer. xxiii. 6.
and She Chap. xxxiii. 16.
we the righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. v. 21.
The Lord God covenanting with Adam as the Head of the earthly creation, as
having the woman in himself; drew a figure of His covenant with Christ; as
having the Church existing in him, He as the head engaging for his Members; as
the Husband for his Wife, as the King for his Subjects, as the Root for his
Branches, etc. Which covenant was afterward confirmed of God, in Christ; when
he swear unto Abram, that in his seed all the nations of the earth should be
blessed. The promises made unto him, are all Yea and Amen, in him, 2 Cor. i. 20.
in him declared, in him fulfilled upon all his members. Adam having the Woman,
in himself, manifesting his wisdom in naming the Creatures, and withal his
dominion over them, was the wisdom of his Wife; and her honorable exaltation,
in point of dominion: so Jesus, having the Church in himself, in all the
displays of His wisdom, is the wisdom of the Church. I Cor. i. 30.
Likewise his dominion, where all things are put under his feet, is the exalted
Grace and Glory, which was promised the Church: Psalm viii.
compared with Heb. ii. 6, 7, 8, 9.
Eve when taken from Adam into a distinct consciousness of existence, was not
less related unto him, than when she was only a Rib in his Side: as appears
from Adam's testimony, she is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: In
like manner, the Church when put forth in the creation of Adam, into a distinct
personality from her Head and Husoand Christ, was not less united unto him,
than when she only existed in him; which she did, before the earthy man was
created, or ever the worlds were made: as is manifest from the Apostle, who
tells us, that he speaks of Christ and his Church, where he says that they
twain shall be one Flesh Ephesians. v. 32.
Members of his Body, of his Flesh and of his Bones, Verse 30.
one Spirit, Cor. vi. 7.
with him their own Lord and Husband: After this manner (according to my
apprehension) did the beginning of the Creation of God preach Jesus: and the
Union of Adam and his Spouse, represent that of Christ and his Church.

The next thing, I shall attempt an explanation of this divine Union by, is the
Fall of Adam, and of the world in him; for this also abounds with instruction,
with positive and intelligible figures of the Lamb and his Wife. The Apostle
tells us, that Adam was not deceived, but the Woman being deceived was in the
transgression. (...) Tim. ii. 14.
Nevertheless, neither is the Man without the Woman, neither the Woman without
the Man in the Lord. Cor. xi. 11.
From hence we gather, that Adam was not deceived in his own Person; but
knowing what Eye had done, and seeing their ruin inevitable, he voluntarily put
himself into her condition; by receiving the fruit from her hand, and eating
thereof: such was his love unto his wife. And as they were not, (though
distinct in person) without each the other in the Lord, her transgression
extended unto him: and his Union unto her, made it equitable, for the curse and
condemnation of her folly, to fall upon him: and that without the consideration
of his consent and compliance with her.

In like manner, Christ the Husband was not deceived: but his Wife the Church
being deceived was in the transgression. Yet as the Union was such, that Christ
was not without the Church nor the Church without him at any time; it was
equitable for her Curse and Condemnation, to fall upon him. Withal, such was
his Love unto his Spouse, that he voluntarily put himself into her condition,
when he appeared in the likeless of sinful Flesh, tempted in every point like
her, that he might compassionate her ignorance and wanderings, and be touched
with a feeling of her infirmities. Moreover the Scriptures affirm, that by the
offense of one, Judgment came upon all men unto condemnation Romans v. 8.
. For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. Romans iii. 23.
It is evident hence, that in Adam's offense, all offended: which supposes such
an Union between Adam and his Offspring; that his sin was their sin; and his
ruin their ruin; thus by his offense, were they made sinners; whilst, They
included in him were in passivity, and He the active consciousness of the
whole. And, that his sin has reached the ends of the earth, has corrupted the
whole mass of mankind, both the scriptures and common experience, (from the
visible effects thereof daily produced in every man) abundantly declare. If it
be granted, that there was such an Union between Adam and his Offspring, as
rendered his sin theirs, why should it be thought a thing incredible, that the
like Union, subsisting between Jesus and his Seed renders his Condition theirs?
especially as the Apostle has stated the matter thus: As by one Man's
disobedience, many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many be
made righteous, Romans v. 19.
the scriptures here showing the method of Sin in Adam, and of Grace in Christ,
takes an occasion to illustrate the latter by the former: intimating that as
sin came upon all Adam's Posterity, by his single act; before they had any
capacity of sinning, after the similitude of his transgression; or of personal
concurrence with him in his iniquity: it must have been from such an Union to
him, such an inclusion of the whole in him, as rendered his condition theirs in
whatever state he was: hence, his Sin, its Curse and Fruit, was theirs, before
they selt, knew it, or ever were conscious of Existence. Thus, by one Man's
disobedience, many were made sinners. In like manner, Christ's righteousness is
upon all his seed; by his single act, before they had any capacity of obeying,
after the similitude of his obedience; or of assenting to what he did, or
suffered: This manifests such an Union to him, such an inclusion of the whole
seed in him, as renders his condition theirs, in every state which he passes
through; insomuch that his righteousness, with all the blessings and fruits
thereof, is theirs; before they have known it, believed it, or ever were
conscious of Existence. Thus by the obedience of one are many made righteous.

For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive: I Cor. xv.
22.
(Besides proving the general resurrection) the Apostle explains in those
words, the matter whereof I am treating. As all died, and were lost in Adam
when he was caught in toils of Sin and Death, it is evident they were then in
him, then united to him, so that his sin, was their sin: his Death, their
Death. As in Adam, so in Christ, united in him, in all he did, and suffered;
saved in him, crucified with him, risen with him, ascended and seated with him,
in heavenly places, etc. Why may not our salvation in Christ, from union with
him, in his obedience, and death, be judged as reasonable as our condemnation
in Adam, from union with him, in His Sin and Misery? I acknowledge the latter
is more familiar, when I would do good evil is present with me: Whilst the
former is more remote from our senses, and only manifest when we look not to
the things which are seen, but to the things which are not seen. But, if laying
sensible things aside, as that which is temporary, we attend wholly to the
testimony of the scriptures; having the anointing to guide us, we shall enter
into truth, and spiritual things will be manifest. I would now proceed to
consider Aaron clothed with the garment of his priesthood, as a figure of
Christ, and his Church united. It may not be denied, that Aaron was a Type of
Christ; neither as I conceive, that the garment was a figure of the Church, as
attending circumstances sufficiently prove. The different Colors, and
Materials, in the Garment, denote the many nations, languages, kindreds and
tongues, gathered into the body of the Lamb: where Jew and Gentile are
reconciled, an both made one. Aaron's Garment was so contrived, that He should
bear the names of the people upon his shoulders, engraven upon the stones of
Memorial: his bearing them on his shoulders, signifies his carrying their
names, persons, and burdens, through the whole of what he officiated in. This
answers well to Jesus, who says of his Church, He bare t^, and carried them all
the Days of old. Isa. xliii. 9.
The Names of the people were also engraven upon the breastplate of judgment,
which ( Aaron bearing them on his Heart) implied his tender concern, and care
for their welfare. And, how carefully concerned Jesus is, for the welfare of
the people, let his humbled and sorrowful Life, His sharp dolorous Sufferings,
His shameful and bloody Death, upon the accursed Tree, bear witness. And, that
their Names were engraven on precious stones, denotes first, the value of them,
since the most valuable of Gems were appointed to receive the engraving. The
everlasting durableness of their names was hinted here also, where such stones
were ordained to bear them, whose nature admits not of their being erased. This
also leads to Jesus, who says, behold I have graven thee upon the palins of my
hands. Isa. xlix. 6.
Aaron could not be consecrated until he had the Garment on him. Neither could
Jesus officiate as the High Priest and Savior of the people, without taking
upon him the seed of Abraham. Heb. ii. 16.
It being necessary that he as an high priest, should have somewhat to offer.
When Aaron had his Garment on Him, he was anointed, and not before: It was
then, the precious ointment was poured on his Head, and running down his Beard,
reached the Hem of his Garment. Concerning which oil, the Lord says, Upon
man's flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make any other like it,
after the composition of it, it is holy: and it shall be holy unto you;
whosoever compoundeth any like it, or whosoever puts any of it upon a
stranger, shall even be cut off from his people. Exodus xxx. 32, 33.
May it not be determined, that this oil, answers to the unction which is from
the holy one; the anointing which guides us into all truth: that washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly,
through Jesus Christ our Savior. Tit. iii. 5, 6.
Jesus, when anointed with the Holy Ghost and with Power, was clothed with the
people; they being anointed in him. Behold how pleasant a thing it is, for
Brethren to dwell together in unity; it is like the precious ointment upon the
head, that ran down upon the Beard, even Aaron's Beard, that went down to the
shirt of his garment. Psalm. cxxxii. 1, 2.
The Composition like unto this, forbidden by the Lord, is a compound or such
virtues, amiable qualities, gracious dispositions, etc. as are thought to
abound in man: and when distinct from the consideration of Union with Christ,
and of being anointed in Him, Men profess themselves anointed with the Holy
Ghost and with Power, imputing every change of sentiment, and behavior, to the
immediate influence of the Divine Spirit; and thus judging of spiritual things,
by their own passions, and fleshly reformations, they may be said to pour the
oil upon the Flesh of Man; yea, upon the stranger, contrary to the divine
institution.

Aaron was to have his garment on when he ministered in holy things, nor was he
to enter into the holy place without it, lest he died: And it was to be unto
him for Glory and for Beauty. A true representation of Jesus, clothed with the
people; when by himself he purged our sin, offering himself up unto God,
through the eternal Spirit; having put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.
And, as by Union to him, they were crucified with him, so also being risen with
him, he entered not into the holy place without ^m: but like Aaron he entered,
wearing the people into the immediate presence of God: and there presenting
himself, said, Behold I, and the Children whom God has given me. For, when
Aaron entered into the holy place, with Blood in his Hand, (the names of the
people sparkling upon his Breast Plate, before the face of God,) the Blood
which He then offered, was rejected in Justice, as the very Blood of the
offending people; whose names being engraven on the garment, were there
present; and sparkling, were seen in the Blood, by divine Justice: there
rendering a reason of their expectations from the mercy seat. On this account,
was the Breast Plate called the Breast Plate of Judgment; because, by what was
there represented, it is evident that mercy was expected in a way of Judgment;
that the song might be of Mercy and Judgment. The very same Union (with as much
more reality, as the substance has above the shadow) is there between the
sufferings and Blood of Jesus, and the people: That Blood, and wounded Form,
with which he entered into the holiest of all, and in which, he still appears
as a Lamb who has been slain, relates so truly to the seed of Abraham, whom he
took upon him as a Garment, who were contained in his Body, as members thereof,
of his Flesh, and of his Bones, as to be in Justice, respected as their own
Blood, shed for their sins: and a sufficient reason rendered, of their faith
in, and their hopes from the mercy seat. Almost all things are by the Law
purged with Blood, and without shedding of Blood is no remission. Heb. ix. 22.
Into the Breast Plate of Judgment, Moses put the Urim and Thummim, the Lights
and Perfections; whereby a free intercourse was opened, between God and Man:
This was a true representation of divine Wisdom and Purity; of God manifest in
the Flesh, dwelling in the midst of the people, Psalm. cxxxii. 14.
This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it. Thus the
Urim and Thummim was a figure of the Godhead, Aaron of Christ, and his Garment
of the people; these three agreeing together in one; as where Jesus speaking to
the Father, says, I in them, and Thou in me, that they may be made perfect in
one, John xvii. 23.
at that day ye shall know that I am in the Father, and you in me, and I in
you. John xiv. 20.
Aaron's Garment was to be unto him for Glory, and for Beauty: so also was the
Church to be unto Jesus, all things were made for him, and he is before all
things, and by him all things consist, Coll. i. 16, 17.
and He is the appointed Heir of all things. Heb. i. 2.
His being before all things, implies, that his Honor, and Glory, was what the
Father had first, and principally in his view, when the Decree went forth for
the Creation of Man: whilst all his permissions concerning man, and all his
immediate dealings with him, are rendered, in infinite wisdom, subservient to
this view. And indeed, upon this foundation, where he has made all things for
the glory of his Son, and has put all things in subjection under him,
decreeing him the Hornage and Worship of every knee; with a full acknowledgment
of his being Lord: I say, upon this Foundation, has the Father established His
own Glory, and Praise. As appears from, Phil. ii. 0, 10, 11.
All things were made for him, that as a Son, he might have an inheritance, as
a King, might have a kingdom, as a Bridegroom, he might have a Bride, and as a
Head, he might have a Body consisting of many Members. And, that he might be
the Savior of that Body, was Man created in a mutable state. For the creature
was made subject to vanity not willingly, but by reason of him who has
subjected the same in hope, Bo^. viii. 2^.
that the creature being deceived through Sin, and lost in the bondage of
corruption, Jesus might have an opportunity of exerting his Grace, his Wisdom,
Power and Love, in the redemption of their soul by his Blood; and in saving
them in himself, with an everlasting salvation. This being the means of his
obtaining that everlasting name, glory, honor, immortality, and eternal
renown, which had been decreed and promised him; He humbled himself, (...)
obedient (...) the Death of the (...): wheresore God (...) highly exalted him,
and given him a Name, which is above every Name. Phil. ii. 8, 9.
God having, in the riches of his wisdom and love, so inseparably connected
man's happiness with the Glory of his Son, that each is included in the other:
and here are the people the Glory of Christ, as the priestly Garment was the
Glory of Aaron. For as the Girdle cleaves to the Loins of a Man, so have I
caused to cleave unto me, the whole House of Israel, and the whole House of
Judah, that they might be unto me for a people, and for a name, and for a
praise, and for a glory, Jer. xiii. 11.
out of Zion the perfection of beauty God has shined. Psalm. l. 2.
And as beauty consists in a perfect Body, where none of the members are
lacking, nor any thing superfluous; bearing withal, a just proportion in every
part, so is the Church the beauty of Jesus as the fullness of him who fills
all in all. Ephesians. i. 3^.
My substance was not hid from thee, w^ I was made in secret, and (...) in the
lowest parts of the Earth, the ^s did see my substance, yet being unperfect,
and in thy Book all my members were written, which in continuance were
fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. Psalm. cxxxix. 15, 16.
Time would fail me to mention all the particulars of this mysterious Garment:
as those also of sundry other mysteries in the Jewish Church, which I apprehend
were instituted as positive Figures of that blessed Union, subsisting between
Christ and his Church.

I might go on, to use similitudes drawn from Moses and the Prophets, as a
farther explication of this matter, tending also to prove and confirm it: for
such was the manner of the Holy Ghost's speaking unto the Fathers, under the
Old Testament. But as all who profess Jesus Christ, understand not the
scriptures, nor the Power of God, it is probable that this method may be
objected unto and the matter treated by many as fables of Allegory. I would
therefore consider what the New Testament says thereof, as using greater
plainness of speech, and by all the Litterals acknowledged as speaking more to
the purpose.

Our Savior teaches us the Grace of Union under the similitude of a Vine and
its Branches: I am the Vine, ye are the Branches. John xv. 5.
Where our Savior takes on him this appellative, the Vine, he is to be
understood as speaking of himself, according to his Human Nature, hence is
called the Plant of Renown, ^k. xxxiv. 29.
the Plant which the heavenly Father has planted: Maz. xv. 13.
wherein his husbandry appears. When the Stock or Set is first planted, there
are no Branches thereon; but nevertheless the Husbandman knowing its seed to be
in itself, planteth in hope; being well assured of its putting forth its
Branches, and bearing fruit thereof in due season: All his skill, care and
sufficiency, standing engaged for the same.

Thus Jesus, when first planted by the Father's hand, as the (...), and only
begotten, chosen and beloved, was as the Stock or Set, whose Branches does not
appear; but having then his seed in himself, he was to put them forth as his
Branches in due season; according to the appointment and foreknowledge of the
Great Husbandman; His Wisdom, Power, Care, and All Sufficiency, standing
engaged for the same. As the Stem and Branches, make one Tree; so Jesus, and
the People make one Body, one Man, one Christ, one Elect, one Beloved of the
Father, one crucified, raised, and everliving. The Stock and Branches, making
one Tree, grow in one soil; so Christ and the people, are jointly rooted, and
grounded, in the Father's Love: And have loved them, as thou have loved me.
John xvii. 23.
Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs with Christ. Romans viii. 17.
Standing with him, in the same relation to the Divine Majesty; Go to my
Brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father, and to
my God, and your God. John xx. 17.
The Root and Branches, making one Tree, have but one and the same Life, Sap
and Fruitfulness. So Christ and the People, have both one, and the same eternal
life: God has given to us eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son. John v.
11.
Therefore the Savior says, Because I love, Ye shall live also: John xiv. 10.
They have also the same Fruit, for the fruit is not of the branches distinct
from the stem, nor of the stem, without the branches: But of the Tree,
consisting of stem and branches. So also is Christ, who says from me is thy
Fruit found. Hosea xiv. 9.
In brief, if Jesus meant to teach us the Union subsisting between himself and
his Church, under the similitude of the Vine and its Branches, which he
certainly did; Then, whatsoever can be said of the oneness of the Tree,
consisting of Stock and Branches, as a Figure; can with much more propriety be
said of Christ, and the people united, as the Thing signified. The Date of that
Union which the Branches has to the Stem, is equal to their existence: Yea, as
considered in the stock, the Union which made them one therewith was before
they had any apparent existence. And, though the Vine-stock in itself may have
the most fruitful qualities; yet, it cannot exhibit the same, by bringing forth
Fruit to perfection, except it first put forth its proper Branches: Therefore
the existence of the Branches, yea the Union thereof to the Stem, and their
Life therein, is before, yea necessarily antecedent to all their fruitful
productions. So also is Christ: our Union to him bearing a superior Date to our
apparent personal existence. Therefore, said to be chosen in Him, Ephesians. i. 4.
and to have Grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the World began.
2. Tim. i. 9.
And, though Jesus as the Root and Stem, was possessed of qualities infinitely
fruitful; yet, there was neither possibility nor occasion of his exhibiting
this by bringing forth his fruit; except his people, or proper Branches, are
first put forth: accordingly they were put forth in Adam to a personal
existence.; and sin entering, His bringing forth fruit was possible, and an
opportunity administered him, of signalizing himself in so doing: for as the
Union of the Branch to the Stem, is not lessened by sprouting into an apparent
existence, but is as full as when they were hidden in the Stock; neither was
the Church, or members of Christ, less united unto him, when put forth in Adam,
than what they were, when only existing in Him; being still his true and proper
Branches. But, smitten with mildew, and blasting, in Adam's offense, their
life, sap and fruitfulness, was repelled and driven back to the root; until the
great Husbandman in infinite wisdom, so manured and dressed the Root, that
forcing the life and sap upwards, the Branches were passive unto its influence,
until all its Fruit appeared. In order to their fruitfulness, the Branches were
purged in the Vine: There the superfluities of the whole were cut off, and all
necessary for their perpetual fruitfulness accomplished. In like manner, the
Church, included in Christ, were purged in him, in order to their fruitfulness.
In putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ,
Col. ii. 11.
when he had by himself purged our sins, Heb. i. 3.
being now justified by his Blood, Rem. v. 9.
and sanctified through the offering up of the body of Jesus Christ once for all,
Heb. x. 10.
wherefore Jesus also that, he might s^nctify the people with his own Blood,
suffered without the gate. Heb. xiii. 12.
The Vine thus purged, brings forth its fruit upon the native Branches; having
no other medium of bringing it forth. Thus Christ brought forth all the fruit
of his pure conception, his spotless birth, his circumcision, and holy Life,
his bloody, shameful and terrible Death, his glorious resurrection and
ascension, upon the people, as the Branches. Having taken on him the seed of
Abraham, he in them and they in him, fulfilled all righteousness, obeyed the
Law, and endured the penalty for the past transgression, being thus made
perfect in one. And because, through all this, the people were in passivity,
and Christ the active consciousness and quickening spirit of the whole;
therefore, says the Prophet, Lord thou will ordain peace for us, for thou also
have wrought all our works in us. Isaiah xxvi. 12.
From me is thy fruit found. Hosea xiv. 8.


Again, the Apostle treats of this glorious Grace of Union, under the Figure of
the oneness and harmony of many members in one Body. For as the Body is one,
and has many members, and all the members of that one Body being many, are one
Body, so also is Christ. Cor. xii. 12.
The complete Body here spoken of, is similar to Christ, and the Members which
fill up this Body, to the people. Take away the members, and there will remain
no body; take a few, yea only one away, and the body is not perfect: deny the
proportionable perfection of any one of these members, and then the Symmetry of
the Body is destroyed. So also is Christ; Take away the people, or deny that
they were united to their Head Jesus at some certain time, then was there at
that time no Christ: Or, if the Church were not united to Him, but some
particular member, or members, stood at any time unrelated unto him; then was
he not a perfect Christ at that time: Or, if it is possible that a bone of that
Body should be broken, or a member cut off, then may he yet be rendered an
imperfect Christ. and withal, a deficiency in his power will appear, because,
no man hates his own Flesh, but naturally cares for it, loves and cherishes
it: Or, if this Church, as united to Christ, is not perfect according to the
perfection of beauty, in Righteousness, Holiness, Wisdom, etc. then is Christ
deficient in those particulars: Which to affirm, will be agreed upon by all his
worshippers, to be blasphemy. From hence we may infer, that whatever Jesus was,
whatever he did, suffered, or now is, under the character Christ, the people,
as the fullness of him who fills all in all, are not excluded; but to be
considered with him, and in him, in the same circumstances and condition,
through every dispensation. Jesus is Head over all things to the Church, which
is his Body, the fullness of him that fills all in all. Ephesians. i. 22, 23.
This leads us to the consideration of the human Body as the intelligible
figure of this sublimity, our Union with Christ. The Head and Members are one
in conception: This represents the peoples oneness with Christ, as the object
of the Father's Love. Thou have loved them, as thou have loved me. John xvii.
23.
As the Head and Members are born at once; so Christ and his Church, were
united in his Birth: as pure, and free from the original Taint. And also in his
glorious resurrection, as born from the Dead. As the Head and Members in one
Body, are nourished by the same food; so Christ and the Church live by the same
grace, good will and eternal love of the Father. As the Head and Members in one
Body, have but one Life; so Christ and his Church have but one eternal Life,
one Life unto God, our eternal life is in Christ, John v. 11.
because I live ye shall live also. John xiv. 19.
This is the word of the Lord. Again, from the harmony of the Body, the Head
and Members have but one condition: they mourn together, and rejoice together;
so also is Christ: we were planted together with him, in the likeness of his
Death, and are also with him in the likeness of his resurrection. As the
harmony of the body prevents all schism therein; so that the Head says not
unto the Feet, I have no need of you: neither is there any separate in Christ:
nor will he say unto the people, I have no need of you: nor will the Feet
though thus acknowledged, boast themselves against the Head, usurp its dignity,
and say I have no need of thee; but will confess, and reverence it, as
pre-eminent as the seat of wisdom, by which the economy of the whole is
preserved: So also is Christ, made of God unto us wisdom. 1 Cor. i. 30.
As the Head is the source of Light to the Body, the wise man's eyes being in
his Head, Eccles. ii. 14.
so also is Christ the light of the world. John viii. 12.
The Head is the seat of reason to the body, by which it is directed, and
influenced to shun all dangers, to refuse the evil, and choose the good; it is
the disorder of the Head only that can deprive the Body of this: if the Head is
free, the hurt of any other member cannot spoil the economy of the Body; so
also is Christ, He as the Head is our divine Reason and Influence; as for the
people, the Lord says of them it is not in man that walks to direct his
steps. Jer. x. 23.
Christ as our Head is above all distress, cannot be disordered; therefore the
harmony and economy of his Body cannot be spoiled, which makes us sing,
Christ's our Head, gone up on high,
And we his Body are:
All our Fears before him fly,
Our each distracting care.
Though we Satan's Darts should feel,
His power can never strike us dead,
He may bruise us on the Heel,
But cannot reach our Head.


Again, the increase and nourishment of the Body, is by Union with the Head,
from which all the Body by Joints and Bands having nourishment ministered and
knit together increases with the increase of God. Col. ii. 19.
The Head first receives the food, relishes and prepares it for the whole Body:
So also is Christ; as the head he first received the Grace, it being given us
in Him before the world began: as the head he tasted for us, not Death only,
which he tasted for every man; but Life and Immortality, which he entered into,
and relished in our name, and nature, as the head for the Body. He, as our head
prepared our food for us, which he did, by fulfilling the condition, and
enduring the penalty, that we might inherit the promise: our Union to him,
making his condition ours; we are nourished by him. As the head, though the
most exalted and comely part, is yet a member of the Body; it has a right to
suffer for the other members, the chastisement of their peace: So also is
Christ, when they smote the Judge of Israel upon the Cheek with a Rod, it was
the iniquity of his heels which compassed him about: the chastisement of their
peace, which he bare, and their iniquities which were laid upon him. They
having wandered into forbidden paths, had the punishment of their wanderings
inflicted upon their Head; it was the Sacrilege, Blood and Oppression of the
hands, that was visited upon the head, when Jehovah's flaming sword awaked
against the man who was his fellow. The Union and harmony of the Body, renders
it equitable to punish, and chastise the whole Body, in one Member, for its
offense in another: because, if one member suffer, all the members suffer with
it. 1 Cor. xii. 25.
As the Union of the body makes it equitable to punish the head for the offense
of the other members; with like equity does the members participate with the
head, in all its honors and glory. Thus the crowning of the head, crowns the
whole man; and every member partakes of the honor.

The precious ointment poured upon the head, runs down to the Hem, the whole
man; yea every member is anointed in the anointing of the head, by the laying
on the hands upon the Head only, the blessing was conferred on the whole man.
Thus whether one member be honored, all the members rejoice with it, I Cor.
xii. 26.
so also is Christ; is he crowned with glory and honor? Behold he faith in his
appeal to the Father, The glory which thou gave me I have given them, that
they may be one, even as we are one, John xvii. 22.
our Head Christ first, as having the pre-eminence, is immediately united to
the Father; and we by Him. He is immediately the Son of God, and we have the
adoption of Children by him. Ephesians. i. 4.
He is the immediate object of the Father's Love, but we by Union with him are
beloved, as he is beloved. John xvii. 23.
He is the first Elect, immediately the chosen of God, but we by Union with
him, were chosen in him before the foundation of the world. Ephesians. i. 4.


Thus considering him, as the head of his Body the Church, we give him the
preeminence, as immediately receiving all Grace and Glory from the Father:
which honor, all the members as united to him the head, must necessarily
partake of in him. Thus the Union of Head and Members, mutually communicating
their condition to each other, when rightly weighed, throws a light upon the
matter; and shows us how Jesus has from hence, the right of redemption: the
Justice of his Bloodsheding appearing here, those where the harmony of the
body, renders the punishment of one member, that of the whole man. According to
the laws of Union and Harmony, the whole Body may be considered in each member,
but with greater propriety, in the more exalted, pre-eminent Member the Head.
Accordingly, the Scriptures are very explicit on this point, and speak very
much of our being in Christ, chosen in him, justified in him, fanctified in
him, saved in him, and blessed with all spiritual blessings in him. According
to this Union, or being in him, as Branches in the Vine, as Members in the
Body, and c. the People are considered together with him, through all the
circumstances of his Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection and Glory. She was
delivered of a Man-Child, who has heard such a thing, who has seen such
things, shall the Earth be made to bring forth in one Day, or shall a Nation be
born at once? For as soon as Zion traveled she brought forth her Children.
Isaiah lxvi. 7, 8.
Christ was certainly the Man-Child here spoken of: compared with, Rev. xii.
5.. And yet, this ManChild is here shown to be the Children of Zion, to be a
Nation born at once. Hence we conclude, that the Union between Christ and the
People is such, that they as Members of his Body, of his Flesh and of his
Bones, Ephesians. v. 30.
were in him in his Birth, that they might inherit the blessings of his holy
Nativity: That of Jer. xviii. 2, being here fulfilled. Man being the Vessel
marred between the Potter's hands, was not rejected, but here was made another
and better vessel; where the nature once spoiled by sin, was born into the
world pure and spotless, and called the Son of God; and here, was that saying
brought to pass, a Woman shall compass a Man. Under this consideration, we see
Christ prepared and qualified, to accomplish the work which was before him: not
only as having hereby a capacity of suffering Death, by being clothed with a
Mortal Body, and made a little lower than the Angels, but having taken on him
the feed of Abraham, Heb. ii. 16.
being made of a Woman, made under the Law. He, as having the People in
himself, had the right of redemption, and as them, stood engaged to fulfill
every requisite to the Glory of God, and their eternal salvation: which
requisites, were first a holy principle, a privation of original guilt,
fulfilled in his Birth; a just observance of the Law, and conformity to the
Divine nature, fulfilled in his Life; and a full propitiation for the sin that
was past, accomplished-in his Sufferings and Death. The whole of which, he did;
as containing the People in Himself, who are upon that account, not only
represented as being in Him, in his Birth, as above; but also in the whole of
his Life, Death and Resurrection. In him were they circumcised, and the body of
the sins of their flesh; put off by the circumcision of Christ. Col. ii. xi.
In him fulfilling the Law, and walking in all the ordinances of God blameless.
Crucified with him, Gall. ii. 20.
and that the resurrection of Christ, was the resurrection of the people, from
Death, as the wages of sin, the Holy Ghost testifies BY THE PROPHETS: Isaiah
xxvi. 19.
Thy Dead shall live, my Dead Body shall they arise. -- And Hosea vi. 2.
after two days, will he revive us, in the third day he will raise us and we
shall live in his sight. And by the Apostle as, Ephesians. ii. 5, 6.
Even when we were Dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ, and
has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in
Christ. From hence it is evident, that the Union between Christ, and the
People, was such (as Head and Members in one Body) that they were with him and
in him, in his Birth, his Life, his Death, Resurrection and Glory. Therefore
his Sufferings, Wars, and Triumphs, all are theirs: And they have a right from
this to rejoice in him; in what he has done, in what he is, and in the
acceptance he has found with the Father; and that, over all the weakness, and
vanity, they perceive in themselves.

Again, the Union of Christ and his Church, is taught from the similitude of a
Building; of which (...) is both the Foundation, and the Top-stone: As appears
from Isaiah xxviii. 16.
behold I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious
corner stone. And, Luke xx. 17.
the stone which the builders refused, the same is become the head of the
corner. As the whole building is locked in, and enclosed, between the
Foundation-stone, and the Head-stone: so also is Christ. He is the Alpha and
Omega. The Building was begun, and finished in him: He is the foundation of our
election, grace, and sonship; We having all by Union with him: And the whole is
supported by him; so is he, as the Author, and finisher of our salvation, as
made wisdom, righteousness, and sanctification unto us, the Head of the Corner:
Our first and last, our Security in Eternity, and Time. In whom you also are
builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit. Ephesians. ii. 22.
We consider Christ appointed the Savior of Man in the eternal Decree, as the
foundation laid, and in his incarnation, holy birth, and life of righteousness,
as the building rising; until through his Sufferings, Death, Resurrection,
Justification in the Spirit, and reception in Glory, the building was finished;
and the head stone brought forth with shoutings, crying grace, grace unto it.
The people as chosen in Christ, had this Grace given them, that Jew, and
Gentile, should be builded together in him, until they were found a meet
habitation of God through the Spirit. The foundation, and corner Stone, with
the middle stones, make one Building; so Christ and the People make one House,
where God delights to dwell: One Temple, the glory of which as the latter is
greater than that of the former. Here God walks in the midst of the people, as
he has promised; because his dwelling in Christ is his dwelling in them. To
come up to the faith and understanding of this, in the Spirit; is the substance
of that shadow, where the Tribes of Israel, at a certain age, came up from
every quarter of the Land, to the Temple at Jerusalem to worship. Again, the
Union of Christ and his Church is represented under the figure of a Man, and
his Wife: For this cause shall a Man leave his Father, and Mother, and shall be
joined unto his Wife, and they two shall be one flesh: This is a great mystery,
but I speak concerning Christ and his Church. Ephesians. v. 31, 32.


Those words of the Apostle, are a quotation from Genesis ii. 23, 24.
: where Adam, on the first sight of his Eve, declares the Union subsisting
between them. It is evident from his words, that this relation did not consist
in that matrimonial connection, which commenced, when by mutual consent, and
covenant, they cohabited and possessed each other: But was dependant on
something prior to this. The source of their Union, and kindred relation, was
their being one in the Love of the Father; where they were undistinguished in
sex, and c. there being neither Male nor Female, in Christ Jesus, in whom they
were loved, and chosen, before the world began. And yet the man was not without
the woman, nor the woman without the man in the Lord: This source, had its
first opening in their concreation, in one Body, and Human intelligence: which
Body, and intelligence, was Male; though not without including the Female: But
the Latter, according to the distinction of Sex and personal existence, was, as
being in the Male in a state of passivity, and the Male, the active
consciousness of the twain in one. Adam considering his perfection in
knowledge, could not be ignorant of this, his true state; and therefore
expecting the Woman, to be distinguished in person and sex, as a manifestation
to his senses, of the truth of her Being, and Union unto him; he knew her when
the Lord God brought her unto him: And though there was a deep sleep upon him,
when she was built from his side, yet when he saw her, he said, she was flesh
of his flesh and bone of his bone; alluding unto the former truth, and not unto
any thing which was to follow. For they were not made more one flesh, by that
mutual, matrimonial embrace which followed, than they were before: The latter,
as a fruit or consequence, being only declarative of the original truth, always
apparent to God, and in itself, with him, perfect, and permanent.

Thus the matrimonial bond of Union, was with them a consequence, and fruit of
an antecedent Union and kindred. This also is more manifest, where Abraham,
when he was old, caused his servant to swear by the Lord God of heaven and
earth, that he would not take a wife to his Son of the Daughters of the Land:
But that he would take him a wife of his kindred: Such also was Isaac's
injunction to Jacob. In this particular also, Esau offended; by marrying the
daughters of Heth, where there was no Union or kindred previous to the
Marriage. From all which, it appears that Adam's speech to Eve, was grounded
upon that kindred Union which subsisted between them before their Marriage.

When the Apostle had said, that a Man and his Wife should be one flesh; he
immediately adds, This is a great Mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and
his Church. From whence we may observe, that the Union of Adam and Eve, of
which I have already spoken, was truly a figure of Christ and his Church: And
again, that this figure, though close and pertinent, is but a figure; an
imperfect representation of the matter, which made the Apostle turn from the
fleshly marriage, and say it is a great mystery; and pointing to the Union of
Christ and the People, as the grand truth or thing signified, say, but I speak
concerning Christ and the Church. The Union and kindred relation of Adam and
Eve, and of the Patriarchs and their Wives, previous to their marriage (the
latter being subsequent to the former, and a positive proof thereof). according
to the primitive Law: The earthly things being a pattern of the heavenly,
represents the oneness of Christ and the Church. Their marriage as a figure,
shows our believing or closing with Christ by Faith: And that Union and
kindred, which subsisted between them before Marriage, was a shadow of the
Union between Christ and his Church, before the Church is brought to the
knowledge of her Husband; by believing, or ere they are married unto him who is
risen from the dead: But, as marriage is the consummate end of Union, it is to
be considered as explanatory of the blessings contained therein; it shows the
Woman under her Husband's name, in a joint possession; and enjoyment with him,
of his state and condition. As one flesh they cannot be insensible of each
other's state, but must naturally feel pain, ease, hunger, thirst, joy, sorrow,
happiness, and unhappiness; cannot possibly hate each other, because no man
hates his own flesh. As one flesh they have but one interest, one aim, and
end, are not twain in any condition, but constantly one in all things. If this
idea of marriage is true, it is easily perceived that it is only true in
Christ. Previous to our marriage by Faith with him who is risen from the dead,
there is a discovery made of his person, of his being our kinsman redeemer, of
his right to demand us: hence it appears wrong to refuse him, nor are we under
the compulsion of that divine right which he has to us, only; but he also
shows us his glory, his personal beauties, his suitableness to our wants, and
this he does, until our Reason is convinced, our objections silenced, and the
full consent of all our powers gained, to be his; to bear his name, to commit
ourselves fully to him, with all our concerns; until we cease from care,
contented and rejoiced that he should cloth us, feed us, instruct us, protect,
nourish, guide and preserve us unto everlasting life. The conscience judging of
Christ (thus revealing himself) that he is pure, accepted of God and lovely,
discerning withal the right of appropriation (from Union and relation unto him)
joins itself in affinity unto him: yea, puts him on, wrapping itself in him;
and thus standing in his state and condition, it is purged from all guiltiness;
and retaining no consciousness of evil, it is holily bold toward God, having
the answer of a good conscience toward God by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
1 Pet. iii 21.
because that the worshippers once purged, should have had no more conscience
of sins Heb. x. ii.
made perfect as pertaining to the conscience. Heb. ix. 9.
And that the Church as married unto Christ, is under his name, appears from
Jer. xxxiii. 16, where she is called the Lord our Righteousness, and from Rev.
iii. 12, I will write upon him my new name. And that she is a joint possessor
with him, the Apostle bears Witness, If children then heirs, heirs of God, and
joint heirs with Christ. Romans viii. 17.
And, that his state and condition is upon us John testifies, saying, Because
as he is, so are we in this world. John iv. 17.
And, that being one flesh, the husband cannot be insensible of our state, but
must have a fellow-feeling with us, and that in the tenderest manner, in honor
unto himself, and in love unto us, is evident from the Scriptures, We have not
an high priest which cannot be touched with the feelings of our infirmities,
Heb. iv. 15.
Who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way,
Heb. v. 2.
for he that touches you, touches the apple of his eye. Zec. ii. 8.
In as much as you have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren ye
have done it unto me. Mat. xxv. 40.
And that no man hates his own flesh, when spoken of the marriage Union, has
its truth, and perfection in Christ, for he has said, I will never leave thee
nor for sake thee Heb. xiii. 5.
though a woman should cease to have compassion, on the son of her womb, yet
will I not forget thee, Isaiah xlix. 5.
so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee, for the
mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not
depart from thee; neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says the
Lord that has mercy on thee. ** Isaiah live. 9, 10.
Thus marriage, consisting of love, and Union as the first; the espousal, or
contract as the second; the consummation, with all the attendant Blessings to
the Bride, with glory and honor to the Bridegroom, as the the third;
represents the Union of Christ and the Church: The first, answering as similar
to that ancient kindred Union subsisting between them, wherein he always loved
her; the second, being a figure of his being made flesh, where he betrothed us
unto himself; and the third, of the knowledge, and enjoyment, we have of our
lovely Bridegroom by Faith; when believing, we rejoice with joy unspeakable,
and full of glory. When we enter into the joy of our Lord, according to the
conscience; his whole state, yea all the blessings of his birth, life, death,
resurrection, and ascension, is apprehended, claimed, and possessed, by us as
our own proper inheritance. I might yet go on attempting to explain the nature
of this Union, the scriptures being very full of it: But as what I have already
said, may probably be as much to the purpose, as any future hint, should I say
much more; and intending at first setting out, to study brevity as much as
possible: I shall leave what I have written on the nature of Union, unto the
reader's consideration; and hasten to treat of its Antiquity, unchangeableness,
and c. according to my first proposals.

Union between Christ and the Church, is a matter universally acknowledged;
where that deference, which is justly due to the scriptures, is paid; though,
it is a subject very rarely treated of: Which silence concerning it, implies,
either a general ignorance of the nature thereof, or, that it is respected as a
matter, neither conducive to the glory of God; nor the happiness of mankind;
and therefore not necessary to be taught. And where the nature thereof is in
some measure known amongst men, and the utility of the doctrine allowed, they
are much divided about its antiquity; before our believing, or Faith in Christ,
say some: Whilst others with as much strenuousness assert the contrary. But, if
what I have already offered to the consideration of the public, shall be
allowed to have any weight, or argumentative force; it will appear, that our
Union with Christ is not only antecedent to our Faith, and believing, but also
to all that he did, and suffered, for us men and for our salvation. The matter
proposed in the gospel to be believed is true: And relates to the Person of
Christ, and his benefits. That he was the Son of God, the Christ, the true
Messiah, the I am, is a matter proposed to be believed, upon the credit of the
divine testimony: Because this is a truth, therefore it is to be believed, and
as it is a truth before believing; it is evident that it is not made a truth by
believing; but is in itself a truth, perfect, and permanent, whether believed
or not.

So also with relation unto his Benefits, that the Father is well pleased in
the beloved Son, is a truth; to be believed: And not to be made a truth, by
believing. I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a
Cloud thy sins, turn unto me, for I have redeemed thee. Isa. xliv. 22.
This positive testimony of Redemption, and the forgiveness of sins, is
declared unto them who believed not; upon the credit of which truth, they are
called upon to return unto their God. Cry unto her that her warfare is
accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned. Isa. xl. 2.
This was a truth concerning those who knew it not, and was to be declared unto
them as such, that they believing it, might be comforted. That he has put away
sin by the sacrifice of himself, was delivered for our offenses, and raised
again for our Justification, is true; and therefore recorded to be credited,
and rejoiced in. And, if it appear that the gospel is true before our
believing, then Union with Christ before faith is true: The latter being
necessary to the truth of the former; as I have sufficiently shown under the
first proposition in this Treatise: Where the necessity of Union with Him, not
only as previous unto our faith in him, but also unto his suffering for our
Sins, I think appears pretty obvious. That God loved mankind before Jesus died
for them, the scriptures affirm: Where they make the latter, a fruit of the
former; and if God loved them before, he certainly saw them in a sinless state;
for it is contrary to the holiness of his nature, to love the unclean, being of
purer Eyes than to behold iniquity: But in themselves, as related unto the
earthy Adam, (...) were unclean: Therefore he must have beheld them in Christ,
loved them in him: which if true, then were they on him: And, as being in him
in this sense, does not suppose their knowledge of his Person, through the
belief of the Gospel, but a passivity with respect to them; as Branches hidden
in the stock, or the Woman in the Man; it implies the closest Union, and the
necessity thereof (before their believing) to render and preserve them Objects
worthy of the divide love and favor.

Jesus in his appeal unto the Father, says, thou have loved them, as thou have
loved me. And again; thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world. In
those words, the love of the Father unto the Son, is represented as the grand
archetype of his love unto the people: The Father loved the Son before the
foundation of the world; but says the Son, thou have loved them, as thou have
loved me. The Father loved the Son, as the brightness of his glory, and his own
express Image (...) But says the Son, thou have loved them, as thou have loved
me. The Father loved the Son, and prefered him before Angels, having not said
unto any of them, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee: But says the
Son, of the children of men, thou have loved them as thou have loved me. The
Father loves the Son, with everlasting, unchangeable delight and pleasure: But
says the Son, thou have loved them as thou have loved me. The Father loves
the Son, and has revealed it unto him, yea has given him the knowledge of it
above measure: But, says the Son, that the world may know that thou have sent
me, and have loved them as thou have loved me. From all which it appears, that
Christ, and the Church, are one object of the Father's love; of his choice,
good will, delight, and pleasure. He the Head, and they the Body, constituting
the elect precious, the Man beloved of God and accepted. But the Head being the
Medium, between God, and the Body, has the pre-eminence in all things. And, as
the Head was never without the Body, nor the Body without the Head in the Lord,
the Body has always been by Union with the Head, entitled unto all the
blessings, honors, and glories thereof. Nor does the Head withhold from the
Body, that glory, and honor, which he immediately receives from God, but
divinely sheds it over the whole man; according unto that washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly
through Jesus Christ our Savior. Therefore says the Head, the glory which
thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as we are one.
John xvii. 22.
But to be brief, what has already been urged to prove the necessity of Union,
proves it to be also before faith; it being necessary unto the Father's loving
us, as he loved his Son, yea unto his choice of us in his Son; necessary unto
the engagements of Christ on man's behalf; otherwise he had not the right of
redemption: Necessary unto his suffering the Death of the Cross for us, as has
been largely shown in the former part of this work. It is also necessary unto
our believing a truth, except it appear that our faith, or believing, makes it
a truth. Indeed the Apostle says, through faith we understand the worlds were
framed by the word of God, but he does not say that Faith made the worlds. So
truly through Faith we understand our (...) with Christ; yet it is not our
Faith that makes it.

But if it is not true until our believing, and by means thereof; then does
believing make that a truth, which was not a truth, and says creates its own
object, and then embraces it. This looks like the heathen Idolatry, first
making their gods and then traiting in them. Or, like Milton's adventurous
flight of Satan, through Chaos into the new world; which he performed before
the bride was made. That this is contrary to the Scriptures is EVIDENT FROM I
John v. 10, 11.
He that believes not God has made him a liar, because he believes not the
record that God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. The
truth here proposed to be believed is this, that God has given to us eternal
life in his Son; and that this is a truth before it is believed, is evident;
otherwise it does not appear, how our unbelief makes God a liar. Besides, to
deny this truth, is to depreciate the sacrifice of Jesus; and to make it an
insufficient atonement for sin; without faith and compliance on our part:
Thereby making the glory of Christ, and the truth of the promises made unto
him, wholly dependent on the will and actions of the creature. And how fully
this frustrates the grace of God, I leave unto every man who knows himself, to
determine. Moreover, I take it, that where the all sufficiency of the sacrifice
of Jesus to put away sin, and that without any act of ours, either mental or
external, is denied; it amounts to what the Scriptures call a crucifying of the
Son of God afresh, and putting him to open shame. But to acknowledge the
all sufficiency of the sacrifice of Christ to put away sin, without any act of
ours; and yet to deny this a truth until believed, (viz. that he has put away
sin by the sacrifice of himself) is a palpable contradiction; a position
founded in prejudice and obstinacy, without the least shadow of reason:
otherwise we are to consider such a confession, as containing an equivocation;
and when they confess the sacrifice of Christ as having put away Sin, they make
it synonimous with the Sorrow, Hatred, Fear, Faith, Love, Joy, etc. which they
feel in their own bosoms: Thereby making no account of the person and personal
sufferings of Christ, they embrace a phantasm. Of this spoke the Savior, when
he said false Christ's should arise and deceive many. And indeed, our modern
profession of Christianity, seems to be taking large strides toward this
deception; where passion, humor and pride is opposed unto the Lord that bought
us. Or, will there yet be some way found out, to reconcile its being a truth
before believing, with its becoming a truth by believing? A position of this
sort might suit the subtilties of Scotue and Aquinas, but the Definition
thereof, would be too labored, artificial and sophistical, for Honesty and
common Sense. The Gospel is plain, simple and unartificial, suited to the
meanest capacity; and would be more universally known, was it not for that
unreasonable Estimate which men set on themselves, on account of their
learning, wisdom, experience, etc. thence judging themselves qualified to
direct the consciences of their fellow creatures, they will not suffer them to
think for themselves; nor commend them to Jesus, and the word of his Grace; but
always amusing them with an artificial religion, consisting of directions how
to attain to Faith, to Sanctification, etc. and yet to consent that they can do
nothing, but that the agency of the spirit is free as the wind: With resolving
cases of conscience, and thereby appropriating the authority of Lawgivers
withal giving such definitions of saving faith, true holiness, etc. as none but
schoolmen can understand: Thereby puzzling the minds of people, pussing up the
vain and opinionated with pride and arrogance, from a supposition of their
being possessed of those excellencies; and distracting the minds of the more
phlegmatic and melancholy, through the fear of their not being possessed of
them. But should mankind be released from those chains, and suffered to think
for themselves, how natural would it be for them to conclude when God proposes
a matter in his word to be believed, that that matter is true before they have
believed it. Therefore, if it is true, that Jesus was delivered for our
offenses, and raised again for our justification, and that before our faith,
that which was necessary unto this transaction, namely our Union with him, is
true also before faith. If it is not our faith or believing that makes this
Union, then it is an act of eternal love, the purpose and grace which was given
us in Christ Jesus before the world began; the antiquity of which is obvious,
nor may its date be fixed, because exceeding the limits of time. And what has
been from everlasting will be unto everlasting, the eternal sameness of the
person of Jesus, being an undeniable proof of the unchangeableness of this
Union. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, to day and forever. Who says unto the
Church, Because I live, you shall live also, for ye are dead, and your life is
hid with Christ in God: I am He who was dead, but am alive and lives
forevermore. It is easy to see, that if our Union with Christ was dependent on
our faith, or believing it would be changeable; except it appear that we are
perfect and unchangeable in the faith. And if by being perfect and unchangeable
in the faith we understand a believing the whole with a full understanding of
the Mystery, of what God has spoken by the mouth of his Prophets and Apostles,
and that constantly, and without the least shadow of wavering; it will appear
pretty plain, unto such who know themselves; that mankind are very far from
being infallible, and perfect in the faith. And if any would pretend unto his
perfection, (as the pride of Man dare do any thing) whilst the things yet
appear in them which show the least distrust, and doubtfulness of God's
providence and grace; we must be excused when we declare without fear, that
they deceive themselves and the truth is not in them. If the Union of Christ
and the Church, is dependant on her faith, and knowledge of him, then is it
proportioned unto her faith, and admits of degrees, it is also subject to
change, yea may possibly be dissolved; as it is not impossible according to the
Scriptures, for a person once believing, to turn from the faith. But says the
Apostle, I am persuaded that neither Death nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present nor Things to come, nor Height
nor Depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans viii. 38, 39.
And, as the Apostle here does not intend an impossibility of Believers
departing from the Faith, or falling from grace; (having elsewhere proved this
possible) he of necessity points out something, which remains a truth, should
they cease to believe: And such a truth as their unbelief cannot make void or
of none effect: And that is the love of God; always embracing them in Christ
Jesus, from which, the Loss of their light and confidence, can never separate
them; the Seal of their Foundation being God's knowledge of them and not their
knowledge of him. From all which it appears that the Union with Christ, and his
Church has been of old, before Faith, before Time: And remains to be
indissolvable, and unchangeable.

I would now consider the objections generally made unto the Grace of Union;
and endeavor to give them satisfactory answers.

The old trite objection, of its tending unto Licentiousness, leads the way,
saying if Union with Christ is the ground of our acceptance with God, and our
security in his favor; then the doctrine of rewards and punishments, is
overthrown; and man has nothing left to stimulate him to virtue.

Answ. To work from an expectation of being rewarded, is to make it of Debt;
and not of Grace: But the nature of the Deity is so infinitely pure; so holy,
just, and true his Laws; that it is impossible Man should make him his Debtor:
Nay it would be the highest arrogance to pretend it: The scrip^es are against
it when they protest that no flesh shall glory in his presence; common
experience in its sober moments is against it: For that teaches us, that every
man living, is infinitely short of conformity unto the divine nature; therefore
the notion of obedience from an expectation of reward, is a tacit
acknowledgment of Man's utter ignorance, both of himself, and his God. And
then, to suppose that the fear of punishment is necessary to excite Man to
obedience, is to reverse the scriptures. The Gospel is preached for the
obedience of Faith; that, being thereby delivered from fear, we might serve him
in holiness, and righteousness, all the days of our life.

But the obedience of fear, is diametrically opposite unto the obedience of
faith: The former, has its rise and maintenance from a Li^: From that habit,
and principle, which makes God a Liar; by not believing the record which he
has given of his Son. But the latter springs from a belief of the Truth, from
a full persuasion of the love of God, and of his being reconciled in Christ
Jesus. the former, is a doing evil, that good may come; for where the fear of
punishment is judged necessary to obedience, unbelief is established, and
authority given to crucify the Son of God afresh, and to put him to open shame,
to trample his Blood underfoot, and count it an unholy thing; for all this is
tacitly taught, in the fear of punishment as necessary unto obedience; and yet
this manifest antichristian policy, is generally taught by those conscience
directors, who seek themselves, and not Christ Jesus the Lord: They very well
know, that ignorance, unbelief, and fear, are the nerves of implicit obedience,
unto their doctrines and traditions. But, that such an obedience, is far from
being compensate, for the despite done thereby to the spirit of Grace, and
dishonor to the crucified One, they shall sooner or later know; when all their
works shall be burnt up, and they shall suffer loss. But the obedience of faith
is genuine, free from artifice, without fear, dependant on the perfect amity of
God; yea, consists in a constant persuasion of, and rejoicing in this truth;
that Jesus Christ the Son of God, died upon a cross, and rose again from the
dead, having thereby justified us, from every charge once brought against us;
and sanctisied us from all our pollutions: To submit unto this, to have the
conscience purified through the view and belief of this, yea to have every
thought brought in captivity unto this, is the true obedience of faith. And,
this is so far from being urged by fear, that fear would annihiliate it. And so
far from having an eye to the reward, that it answers unto that Charity, which
seeks not its own; but says, when saw we thee hungry, and fed thee; or
thirsty, and gave thee drink, and c. Therefore, that the Grace of Union with
Christ, and salvation in him, overturneth the Doctrine of rewards, and
punishments, as that which influenceth our Lives, is a truth: But then, it only
overturns what the scriptures explode; and what Reason confesses mean, and
selfish, and not that generous disinterested service of Love, which it declares
worthy of the Divine Being, and becoming the dignity of Man.

Object. But, does not the scriptures rather establish the Doctrine of rewards,
and punishments, as that which excites to choose the Good, and refuse the Evil?
Is not this their express language, say ye to the Righteous that it shall be
well with him, for they shall eat the fruit of their doings, woe unto the
wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given
him. Isaiah, iii. 10, 11.
With many other texts of like import.

Answ. Unto the right understanding of the scriptures, it is necessary to know,
that they consist of two parts, Letter and Spirit, or Law and Gospel; now the
Letter, (or the Law) kills, says the Apostle but the Spirit (or the Gospel)
gives life. And as this is needful to be known, so is it also, that we should
be able to distinguish one from the other; else how does it appear that we
rightly divide the word of life? If the Gospel be considered, as God's good
sayings, or glad Tidings to mankind, we need only consider briefly the state
and condition of Man; and then, what may with any propriety, be called glad
Tidings, unto one thus circumstanced, will easily appear. Man is a fallen
creature, who breaking the Law of his God, incurred the penalty of eternal
death: And, is so far from having ability to extricate himself, that all the
imaginations, and thoughts of his heart, are continually evil; without wisdom,
without strength, there being none righteous, no, not one; all being shut up,
and concluded under sin, they have neither power to will, nor to do; Now, what
can be called glad Tidings unto a Creature in this condition? surely nothing
short of that which tells him all is given: And that freely, without condition
on his part because he can perform none; without Money, and without Price,
because he has naught wherewith to purchase; and that the Grace, which
rediesseth all his grievances, and replemshed him with all good, is given him
in Christ Jesus, who has brought this life, and immortality to light by the
Gospel; by his Birth, Life, Sufferings, Death, and Resurrection; confirming all
his blessing, and Glory, unto his Church, by the Grace of Union: This appears
to be the gospel of glad Tidings, and is a Doctrine with which the scriptures
abound.

The Law, is considered as the very opposite of this; consisting of commands,
to fulfill its precepts on pain of damnation, of threatenings, and curses,
against all who offend it, though (...) in one point; and never makes any
promises of happiness unto mankind, but upon condition of perfect obedience;
which is always implied, (though not expressed) in every requisite, yea even the
most minute, intithing to the inheritance of the promise. The Doctrine of
rewards and punishments, is indeed contained in the Law; but then, it rewards
none but such who fulfill every jot, and tittle thereof: And curses every one,
who continues not to do all that is written in the Book thereof.

The Gospel gives us all, without requiring ought of us. But the Law, giving us
nothing, requires all of us. And thus distinguishing them in the scriptures, we
appeal from the Law, unto the Gospel: Our Authority for so doing, is founded on
what follows; whatsoever the Law says, it says unto them that are under it:
But Jesus was made of a woman, made under the Law, therefore the Law speaks
unto him; and commands him to perfect obedience. But, the Law can only curse
the sinner: God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, he was made sin
for us, Christ has delivered us from the Curse of the law, being made a curse
for us: The equity of which proceeding, appears from the Union subsisting
between Christ and the Church; of which I have sufficiently spoken. And thus,
considering the whole Law fulfilled in Jesus, its precepts obeyed, its
penalties endured, he now inherits the promise: And apprehending ourselves in
him, united unto him, through all his doings, and sufferings, his condition, and
state is ours. And thus standing in him, we can indeed read the Law, or the
Doctrine of rewards, and Punishments, without fear: Because the punishment,
yea, all the threatenings in the book of God, have been executed upon us (as
sinners and Law-breakers) in him. Hence is it we dare not read the demands of
the Law unto ourselves, as distinct, or separate from the view of our Union,
and oneness with him: Because we cannot answer them; it being only designed as
a ministration of Death, to ^lay us to ourselves, and to make us dependant on
him. Nor, dare we read, any one threatening in the scriptures against the
sinner, and ungodly, unto ourselves, out of him; because we cannot endure it.
And, to imagine from any worthiness in ourselves, that we come not under those
Characters, which the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against; and which,
are so dreadfully threatened in the word; is, to be most wretchedly ignorant of
the spirituality of God's Law; and consequently, of the condition of human
nature: For, where the holiness of the Law is known; it will appear, that there
is not one obnoxious character in the Scriptures, which (according to the
purity of the Law) does not belong to all mankind: Nor can the most upright
amongst Men, in Justice deny, its belonging unto them: Therefore, our exemption
from such characters, and from the punishment due unto them, is only by Union
with Christ; where his character, is upon us before the Father. And, according
to the consciousness we have of our salvation state, standing here; we are free
from the fear of present or future punishment: Having seen the end of it in
Christ Jesus, and therefore are no longer to be influenced thereby. And as the
promised reward, the promises were made unto Abraham, and to his Seed; which
seed according to the Apostle) is Christ; it is also to be observed, that
previous unto inheriting the promise, there must be a fulfilling of the Law; to
make it appear that the promises of God are not against the Law. Where the
promises in general speak unto Man, it is unto him, as willing, obedient,
repent, fearing the Lord, believing, etc. every which characterism amounts unto
what the Law demands of Man, viz. Satisfaction for its dishonor received by
sin that is past, and perfect obedience unto his precepts for the future. And
although those requisites are not expressly mentioned in every promise, they are
nevertheless implied, otherwise the promises of God would be against the Law,
which God forbids. Now, if the promise only rewards the Man whom the Law
approves of, as Holy, Just, and True, it is easy to perceive that Jesus only is
the Man: For all the promises of God, in him, are Yea, and in him Amen. 2 Cor.
i. 20.
Therefore the rewards are his, he as the Head is crowned with glory, honor,
and immortality; whilst every Member by Union with the Head partakes of his
honors: Whereas, to expect reward for the work of our own hands would be to
set up for ourselves, to a^t independent of our Head, and to refuse him the
pre-eminence in all things: But when we give him this, we are neither
inth^en^ed by the ^ear of (...) or hope of (...), but by our Head, C^ al^, our
hearts as in (...) hand, and committing ourselves with all our concerns unto
him, we permit him to guide us, and are pa^live with him. And certain it is,
the more we are delivered from that religion which consists in self-seeking,
the less injurious we are in this present world.

Object. Does not your description of the person unto whom the promises belong,
make Salvation conditional, by asserting that the promise rewards none, but
such whom the Law approves of? This contradicts the Apostle's doctrine, By
grace ye are saved.

Answ. That God is sovereign I grant, but that he saves Mankind from mere
sovereignty, or arbitrary Grace, without having respect unto his Law, as a
transcript of his own perfections, I think I ought to deny: Because he has
pledged his faithfulness and truth, unto his Law, that the transgressor should
be punished; and that it should be (...) rather than made (...), by the faith
of the Gospel: Whereas the Law would be against such promises, as has no
respect unto its Justice and Pu^ty. But (...) ^ Again, Grace without truth, or
salvation without respecting the Purity and Justice of the Law, would be to
pour contempt upon the Death and Blood of Jesus Christ our Lord, as not
necessary unto salvation; and to make it either merely accidental, from the
rage of his enemies; or at farthest, exemplary only; which supposition would
overturn, and invalidate the testimony of the scriptures, concerning his
fulfilling all righteousness, enduring the Curse of the Law, and washing us
from our Sins, in his own Blood. Again, to suppose that mankind are saved by
any new Law, consisting of repentance, faith, and new obedience, substituting
sincerity in the stead of perfection; I say, to suppose this, would be to make
God changeable: first, giving a Law as a rule of righteousness, and a standard,
whereby to know good and evil: And, in process of time giving another, upon
easier terms; which could not be, without a change in his perfections: His
Nature and Perfections being the original of every Law, given by him to
Mankind. But I would not multiply words, to confute what has not the least
shadow of reason or foundation in the scriptures: For Jesus says, Think not
that I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets. I am not come to destroy,
but to fulfill: For verily I say unto you, ^ill heaven and earth pass, one jot,
or one tittle, shall in no wise pass till all be fulfilled. Matt, v. 17, 18.
It is easier for heaven and earth to pass, than one tittle of the law to fail.
Luke xvi. 17.
It is evident, that our Savior means by this Law that which was given upon
Sinai: nor did he give any new commandment, which was not included in that Law,
as appears from his testimony elsewhere. But, when I assert that the promises
are only fulfilled on such whom the Law approves of, and that Jesus only was
the Man thus approved of God; I consider him, under the capacity of the second
Adam, including the People in himself; who, by Union with him, inherit the
blessing. And though they can upon this consideration, claim the forgiveness of
Sin, as an act of Justice in God; yet are they saved by Grace: Their Election
in Christ, their Union with him, their eternal life, with all the blessings
thereof, was God's purpose and Grace, given them in Christ Jesus before the
world began; according to which grace they are saved. Again, as it was Grace
that founded, so was it Grace that executed this Plan of Salvation; we being
passive in the hand of Grace, when he washed us from our Sins in his own Blood,
when he created us anew, and presented us unto himself, a glorious Church
without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; we as in him, being in passivity;
inactive and incapable of merit, makes that to be mere Grace unto us as
individuals, which unto him as including mankind was conditional.

Object. The doctrine of Union with Christ, (before faith) and of salvation in
him, tends to make faith, or believing void: because, if I am united unto
Christ, justified, forgiven, and accepted in him before I believe, where is the
necessity of believing at all?

Answ. To build without a foundation, is to labor in v^. How shall they
believe except they hear? faith the Apostle: And what shall they hear, if the
truth to be delivered, has to existence until it be believed, but having
spoken unto this under the article of (...) before faith, I wave it h^re.

I would only ask, is it from the belief of our Union with Christ, and
salvation in him; or from the disbelief thereof; that occasion is taken to live
in unbelief, and believing counted unnecessary? Not from the latter according
to the objection, because, to disbelieve a falsehood, is negative orthodoxy: And
to say it is from the former, is the most palpable contradiction; because
whosoever believes that believes what the gospel proposes to be believed:
Therefore, the objection of course falls unto the ground.

Every man, proposing a system unto his fellow creatures, does it with a view
that they should believe it; be it true or false; so also, when Union with
Christ, and salvation in him before they apprehend him, is taught the people;
is it not with a view that they should believe it; and believing, rejoice, with
joy unspeakable and full of Glory? It certainly is: and therefore, is not
designed to keep them in unbelief. Again, it is the word of God, whereby Faith
conies. The declaration, even unto Un^el evers, of their warfare accomplished,
and their iniquities pardoned as well attested in the scriptures, has
certainly a more genuine tendency to produce faith and confidence in God, than
to tell them, if they will believe, etc. they shall be justified, their sins be
expiated and forgiven: However smoothly and artfully this may be worded, it is
impossible to free it from the idea of condition, and what is yet worse, such a
condition, as Man has neither wisdom, will nor power to fulfill; yea, it is
still in effect to preach the Law. Believe, and thou shall be saved, is
certainly similar unto, Do this end live: Man, in himself, being as capable of
doing the one as the other. When Mankind are taught, that their eternal
salvation depends upon believing, (and what is yet more strange, believing a
matter which is not fact until believed) it is natural for every man, whose
conscience is alarmed, to attempt it; but the more he endeavors, the farther
he is off; like rowing against a violent stream: the dread of coming short
through unbelief, and his weakness and utter incapacity to believe, rus^es upon
him like a torrent, bears him back with violence: until discouraged and
enervated, he sinks, overwhelmed with sear and bondage. Indeed, where believing
is only respected as a bare assent unto a proposition, Mankind may with some
shadow of Reason talk of their Abilities and of the easiness of the condition,
pretending that it is an instance of the richest freest grace, where salvation
is promised upon believing. But it is not always practicable with a mind that
is in earnest to assent unto a human proposition without demonstration; much
less respecting divine things, because, the difficulty in believing, increases
in proportion to the magnitude, and con^ernment of the matter believed, which
difficulty, is owing unto the propensity of Human Nature, to an evil Heart of
unbelief, unto the remoteness of Heavenly things from our natural ideas, and
their contrariety unto our senses. B^^^^ve a^^ thou s^^lt be sav^^*, (equal to
any other Law precept) when enforced upon the mind of man, generating with his
weakness, begets unbelief, and fear, but never produces faith* That comes only
by the word of Life, that word which brings salvation, which preaches peace
by Jesus Christ, declaring him as made of God unto us, Wi^dom, R^ghteous^^^s,
Sanctif^^ation and R^^^mption, that whosoever glories, should glory in the
Lord. The belief of the Truth, comes by hearing of its perfection, reality,
and immutability: Of our being delivered from the curse in him who was made a
curse for us, of our being saved in him, with an everlasting salvation, of his
being such an High Priest as becomes us: In brief, of our oneness with him,
and indisputable right from thence, to consider ourselves according unto him,
as our Head and Hatband. Thus whilst men are (...) upon believing in order to
save themselves, but are taught calmly to hear the word that brings
salvation, they according to the power of the Holy Ghost, either
instantaneously, or gradually credit the report: And consequently enter into
the belief of the Truth, without their once (...) to believe, or troubling or
perplexing themselves about it. Whilst such who are more concerned about their
believing, then the truth of Christ, are distressed under the difficulty yea,
the impossibility of their performing it, when they have exerted themselves to
the utmost. Therefore as the doctrine of Union with Christ (before Faith) and
salvation in him, appears in this light, v^, the word by which faith comes,
nothing is more notorious than the unreasonableness of the objection, that it
makes void faith.

Object. But does not such an Union with Christ destroy his pre-eminence,
tending to exalt Man, to the degrading of Christ.

Answ. By no means; it rather establishes his pre-eminence; where the people
as the members by Union with him the Head, are chosen, beloved, called, saved
and accepted of God. They receive no honor, grace or blessing, but by him; and
being apprized of this, he is all their hope and salvation. They look unto the
Father, by him; nor dare they at any time approach him but in him. He has done
all, suffered all, and obtained all. But the glory which he has received, he
freely gives unto them: Whilst they confess him their Head, and Savior; and as
such, they honor him, and eternally give him praise. Christ in his of^
capacity, answers unto the idea of the human body; which being one, is composed
of many members: The Church being his Body, is composed of many people: Of
which, he himself is a member, viz. the Head, the pre-eminent, and most highly
exalted; upon whom all the members are dependent, for honor; the Head only,
wearing the Crown: For unction, the Head only was anointed: For all blessings,
the Head only receives them immediately from God; being always the medium
between him and the Body, and appointed, to guide, influence and nourish is.
Every member brings its tribute unto the Head, and with praise, confesses his
pre-eminence: Whilst the Head is not ashamed to call them brethren. The more
highly they perceive themselves exalted, the more glorious and eminent the Head
appears before them: For as much as through all exaltations in time and
eternity; a just and proportionable distinction is kept up and maintained,
between the Head and Members, in dignity, beauty and glory: And this all the
members know, when influenced by their Head; therefore the Doctrine of Union
with Christ, does not destroy his preeminence, nor exalt mankind unto his
dishonor.

Object. But does not the Doctrine of Union, which supposes Christ to suffer
under the ^acter of the sinner, contradict the Apostle who says, Christ also
has once suffered for sin, the just for the unjust. 1 Pet. iii. 18.


Answ. To intimate that Jesus was a sinner, in thought, word or deed, is what I
never intended, but would abhor the thought, as highly blasphemous: Nay, the
prince of this world when he came, having nothing in him; was therefore
constrained to appear in visible form and tempt him by his outward senses. He
was holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners, made higher than the
Heavens; this was his proper personal individual character; and in this sense
the Apostle is to be understood speaking, when he says the just died for the
unjust. But then we are told by another Apostle, that he ( viz. God) has made
him sin for us, who knew to sin, 2 Cor. v. 21.
from which it appears, that he who in his individual character was sinless,
was yet notwithstanding, as the Head and Representative of the Church, made
sin, yea ^ade a curse for us: And under that character was punished with that
Death, and condemnation nation, which was due to Man's offense. And this
accounting of him a sinner, in the eye of justice, as it was equitable, so was
it not from any personal guile; for he knew no sin: But from his Union unto the
sinful people which rendered the punishment of their sin upon him, an act of
divine and strict justice. Thus it appears, that the doctrine of Union, which
represents Jesus suffering under the character of the sinner, does not suppose
him such in his own particular person; nay, strongly witnesses the contrary,
and respects him only thus, by such an imputation, as (considered on the
Article of Union) is just and true, with God and Man.

Object. This doctrine of Union, as it speaks of our being one with Christ, in
all he did, and suffered, seems contrary unto his testimony by the Prophet;
where he says, I have trodden the wine press alone, and of the people there is
none with me. Isa. lxiii. 3.


Answ. It is evident from the words, that his meaning is; he received no help,
or assistance from the people; this the fifth verse shows, I looked and there
was none to help, etc. therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me. The
doctrine of Union contains no such proposition as this, that the people were
fellow-helpers with Christ, when he attoned for sin, and destroyed the enemies
of their salvation; In this sense, they were not with him. In this sense we
were not with Adam when he sinned, we were not abetting, concurring and active
in his offense; and yet we were in him, according unto Union; in him offending
in the great transgression.

We were also with Christ, and in him, through all he did and suffered, though
no^ active, not aiding or assisting in his obedience, nor enduring any part of
his torments, according to our sensation. In this sense, he trod the wine press
alone, and of the people there was none with him. And where the scriptures
speak of our being in him, of being crucified with him, raised with him,
sitting in heavenly places in him, and c. as they evidently speak of these
things according to Union; so, when compared with our Savior's saying by the
prophet, before mentioned; it appears that we were in him, and with him,
through all; but not a (...); we were altogether in a slate of Passivity,
whilst the toil, and torment, was wholly his. Yet through all, he was greatly
conscious of his including the people in himself, his Life and Death, being
that of the whole Body, for if one member suffers, all the members suffer with
it. Thus, though we were not with him, as helping, or assisting him according
to the Prophet; yet were we always in him and with him, according to the grace
of Union so abundantly taught in the scriptures. The objections already
mentioned, and which I have answered, being those which chiefly arise in the
minds of serious unprejudiced persons against the doctrine of Union; I shall
not consider any more at present, as I do not intend any thing controversial,
and have no expectation of pleasing the captions.

I shall proceed to consider as proposed at first, a few of the never-failing
springs of consolation, which arise from the Grace of Union with Christ.

And first, that the harmony of the divine Perfections (as manifestly
established in the Grace of Union) is a consolatory consideration, every man
apprehendING it, can abundantly testify: We can have no confidence toward God,
whilst we imagine that his attributes are contrary to us. Should it be
objected, that the perfections of the Deity, by reason of his infinite
greatness and glory, are unknown to us; that we have no certainty about them,
and therefore that it is arbitrary to attempt the proof of any thing thereby. I
would answer, Whosoever comes unto God must believe that he is. But, how to
believe that he is, how to conceive of a Being without properties, I know not:
I therefore must conceive of the divine Being, according to such properties of
his Nature, as instinct, rectified by revelation, suggests. God is a Being
infinite in Power and Goodness: and Goodness diversified, is Justice, Truth,
Purity, Love, Mercy, etc. Should it be objected, that by reason of ignorance,
it is possible our ideas of Justice, Truth, Mercy, Love, etc. may not be
strictly true, and consistent with the nature of such properties: especially
when we ascribe them to God. Answ. God deals with us according to revelation,
and requires us to determine of things thereby: The Apostle faith, That the
Gentiles which have not the Law, are a Law unto themselves; having the Law
written upon their hearts, accusing or excusing them; suggesting to them, such
a thing is just, and such unjust; this is true, that is false; this mercy; but
that is cruelty: such is love, and such is hatred; the one they approved of as
good, and ascribed to the divine being, as his nature and properties; and the
other they censured as bad, and thereby distinguished all evil beings. This
simple voice of nature, differs from revelation only as the ^ser light which
rules the Night, differs from the greater which rules the Day: And what is
discoverable by the ^ser light, is much more so by the greater: For revelation
reflecting upon those innate principles, throws such a light around us, that we
can come much further, see more clearly, and determine with greater certainty.
Thus our natural ideas of Justice, Truth, Mercy, Love, etc. (as simple before
debauched with passion and prejudice) are improved by the scriptures: Until he
discern the infinite difference between the nature of God, and the nature of
man; the former appears Holy, Just, True, Merciful and Gracious, whilst the
latter is quite the reverse: every man living being altogether vanity. If its
possible those our ideas of the divine perfections should be wrong, then have
we no rule whereby to discern between good and evil; we may give up the
scriptures, renounce the evidence of nature, shut our ears to its voice, and
commence Scepticks in right earnest: we may no longer reprove any thing a Man
can possibly be capable of, for fear lost from a wrong idea of the disine
perfection, we should reprove the Good. And yet such is the pride of Man, that
rather than he will be thought ignorant, or give up any indefensible Tenet
imbibed, he will shelter himself from the attacks of Truth under such pleas as
these: How know we whether our ideas of the divine perfections are right or not
thus to sap the argument of his antagonist, he would fain remove the
foundation, yea renounce the only Authority which he or any other has to
conclude his own tenets right. Where the scriptures are acknowledged, the
divine perfections are confessed the origin of that revelation: the latter
being always considered as a transcript of his nature and properties: And there
we find Him declared Holy, Just, Righteous, True, Wife, Merciful, Love, etc.
Nor has he left us in the dark concerning the meaning of those Terms; but by
his commands, promises, threatenings and prohibitions, and in the later Days
more perfectly by the Doctrine and Example of his Son; he has distinguished
the good from the evil, separating between the precious and the vile. After
such an exhibition of the divine properties, we are no longer at a loss to
conceive of them with certainty; but are taught to look for Truth in the
harmony of them: it being found there, and only there. True it is, no man can
comprehend him, nor by searching find him out to perfection: Nay we see but in
part, we know but in part; nevertheless, we apprehend and conceive of him, and
by what we understand of him, we determine with certainty: Therefore,
whatsoever appears contrary to his perfections, according to what we apprehend
of him, must be much more contrary with him, in proportion as his excellencies
and selfknowledge exceeds what we can possibly know of him: And here all
proportion fails, and is lost for ever.
And, I am persuaded that this imagination is very natural unto all such who
have seen human nature in its ruins; and, striving with all wisdom, power, and
diligence, to repair its breaches, have ^ound that their ^most efforts, have
been like untempered. More, which still falls off, and makes the brea^ worse:
Or, like a piece of new cloth, put upon an old garment, still enlarging the
rent. Where persons have been thus exercised, (though they might at times have a
saint hope in the mercy of God) they have thought it inconsistent with his
justice, and purity to save them from the wrath to come. But when the grace of
Union with Christ is manifest unto them, they can see all things consist by
him; mercy and truth are (...) together, righteousness and (...) have ki^ed
each other.

Mankind may now rejoice in the justice, and purity of God; yea appeal unto him
as just, as holy, as faithful, because according unto Union with Christ,
justice has been satisfied in his blood shedding and death: Where they in him,
and he in them, have been fully punished for all their iniquity: Upon which the
Lord faith, their sin^ and iniquities will I remember no more. Heb. 10. 17.
Hence he is just to forgive their sins, and to cleanse them from all
unrighteousness. Yea, according unto his holiness, may they now have con^ in
him. Though his eyes are pur^r than to behold iniquity, they may approach him,
and stand before him with boldness, being by Union with Christ, sanctified in
him, holy in him, yea he himself is their holiness: When this is discerned, we
are no longer terrified at the boldness of the divine nature, but have boldness
to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus; yea have unspeakable delight
in the holiness of God, and infinite expectations therefrom. As the promise is
to such who confess and forsake their sin, it is fulfilled upon us in Jesus;
all the promises of God being in him, yea, and in him, Amen. There have we,
(with all the prayers, and supplications, strong crying and tears which Jesus
offered in the days of his flesh) confessed our sins unto God; and where he
(having plunged our sin) appeared the second time without in unto salvation, we
have eternally forsaken them: Therefore we appeal unto the faithfulness of him
who has promised. In this blessed Union, this infinite love and grace of God
our Father, unto us in Christ Jesus; we see the harmony of his nature in all
his dealings with us, and can sing with untold delight, thou art glorious
forever, our Father and our God, thou art love, thou art mercy, thou art
righteousness, thou art justice, thou art holiness, thou art faithfulness, thou
art truth, holy and reverend is thy name, O Lord God of hosts! And yet all thy
glorious perfections agree in one, to accept us, delight in us, rejoice over
us, and bless us with eternal life, and all its happiness in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

Again, in this gracious Union, the scriptures are all fulfilled; and the Key
of David given us, that we may open, what no man can shut, and shut what no man
can open. When men who are strangers unto this Union, take it upon them to
expound the scriptures, it is amazing to see with what contradictions and
inconsistencies it abounds! The precept, the threatening, the promise, and
gracious declaration, are all jumbled together; often overthrowing by one, what
they have set up by the other. But in Christ they all agree in one: in him the
precept is fulfilled, the threatening endured, the promised reward received,
and the free and eternal salvation of God, continually embracing the Children
of Men: Therefore, standing in the Grace of Union with Christ, we are at peace
with all the scriptures. He in us and we in him, have fulfilled all
righteousness, fully kept the commandments of God, and suffered the punishment
due unto our sins, and now inherit the promise, whilst the voice of words, yea
every terrifying sound is silenced; and nothing now heard but the sound of
Grace, Love, and good will. Jesus is now the shield of our Faith, by which we
resist the fiery darts of the wicked one, would he come upon us with the
threatening; and urge, because we answer the Character of the Sinner
threatened, it must be executed upon us. Unto this fiery dart we oppose our
shield Christ, as made a curse for us: would he set before us the Precept, and
insist, on our destruction, because we cannot fulfill it; we still hold up our
shield, and plead Christ the end of the Law for righteousness. Will he trouble
us about the promises, and urge that God is either unfaithful, (who has
promised) otherwise we are not the people unto whom they are made, because we
do not inherit them, have not the pure heart, the right spirit, do not yet see
all things put under our feet, and c. our shield is still our defense; we
answer but we see Jesus, and can testify that he who has promised, is
faithful; for Jesus has the clean Heart, the right Spirit, the Heart which
has the Law written therein, that it may not depart from God; we see all
things put under his feet, insomuch that all the promises of God are in him,
yea, and in him, Amen. Where Union with Christ is manifest; it is enough for
salvation and happiness, in time and eternity, that he has suffered, that he
was obedient, that the promise is fulfilled in him, because being joint heirs
with him, we have a just claim unto his inheritance; hither are we led unto
righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. This man is our Peace, yea even
when the Assyrian comes into the land; our Union with him is our security and
defense against the face of the enemy: and as I have hinted before, his fiery
darts cannot hurt the soul that abides in him; we are then able to resist them
all, by holding up our shield, by opposing Christ unto all: He being our Sun
and our Shield, not only our shield for defense, but our sun to enlighten and
quicken us unto the use thereof. Did men but know what safety and peace we have
here, they would despair of terrifying us, as they hope to do, by their
writings and preachments: loading us with opprobrious names, and ignorantly
levelling the threatenings and cursings in the scriptures against us. Beholding
him to be the death of Death, and the victory of Hell; and how he has hid us
in the secret of his pavilion, from the strife of Tongues, they would either
join the Angels song, Glory be to God on high, on earth peace and good will
toward men; or else, despairing of making us miserable, their enmity stingless
toward us, but gnawing to their own bosoms, would so increase their torment,
that they would willingly cease from us, forget us and let us alone. What is
impossible with Man, is possible with God. If we read the Scriptures out of
Christ, they require impossibilities of us: hence it is, that some who are
aware of this, and yet ignorant of the power of God, are obliged to have
recourse unto new Laws; Laws of their own making, where, by a sincere intention
and all possible obedience, they would evade the force of the scripture
perfection, and put a foil upon the sword of the spirit; But truth needs no
artifice; unto this sword, unso^, sharp and two-edged as it is, piercing
through the soul and spirit, joints and marrow, discerning the thoughts and
intents of the heart, Jesus bared his Bosom; and sheathing it in his own
Heart's Blood, the divine glutinating power thereof, has rendered it
impossible to draw it again to another execution: God is just and true, and
will not; Men or Devils cannot.

When we read the scriptures in Christ, we determine according to the
possibility of things with God, unto him who believes, all things are
possible. The impossibilities and jarrings, with which the letter abounds; such
as the demands of perfect obedience, of satisfaction for sin, of salvation by
Grace, by Works, of the forgiveness of sin by Christ, and yet judged according
to the deeds done in the body, and giving an account at that day for every idle
word, etc. all this I say has its harmony and perfection in Jesus, nor have
all the Masters in (...), for these seventeen hundred years, (though there have
always been those who attempt it,) been able to point out a reconciliation, and
harmony of scripture out of him. But in him, as the representative of Man, as
having the people in himself, and he in them, the preceptive part is fulfilled
perfectly; and all the threatenings executed upon the sinner in him; in him
saved by Grace, in him justified by works, accepted in him having redemption in
his blood the forgiveness of sin. Our account for the idle word, is that in
ourselves we are carnal, sold under sin, and have no good thing; but, that in
Christ we are filled, in him sanctified, in him accepted, and therefore appeal
from the first Adam, unto the second. In like manner we account for the deeds
done in the Body, Jesus having attoned for the evil, and done the good. These,
and all other parts of scripture, which may appear in a critical, and
contradictory fight, unto a person who has not yet apprehended the Union, is
yet nevertheless consistent, harmonious and gracious, unto all such who know
what it is to be one with Christ, Christ with them. In this light we can read
the scriptures with pleasure, in seeing all fulfilled in him, every dark saying
opening up in him, and he gloriously triumphant, filling all in all. We also
read them profitably, forasmuch as speaking thus of Christ they hush, and
banish the fears arising from nature, or temptation; -- They fortify the mind
against the face of the enemy, cherish and support us, under all the
vicissitudes of life: And when depressed, beneath the sense of human nature in
its ruins, they present us with a glorious prospect of immortality, in the
perfect resemblance, and likeness of Jesus; and to warm, and refresh the mind
more effectually, they bring the prospect near, and show us now the workmanship
of God created anew in Christ Jesus, now passed from Death unto Life, it is
done says Jesus, I am Alpha, and Omeg^.

Again from the Grace and truth of Union, the Christian has a right to reckon
of himself, of his state, and condition toward God, according to Christ;
according to the date and condition which he is in: Hence ^th the Apostle (...)
yourselves to be Dead indeed unto sin, (...) alive unto God (...) Jesus Christ
our Lord.. Romans vi. 11.
And O what grace is this! that w^ helpless worms, whose every word, work and
thought is unholy, yea in whom according to the strongest testimony of our
sense^ and reason, there is yet found the motions life and love of sin; should
have a right to reckon ourselves dead unto sin: Dead unto what we yet feel the
life of, dead unto what we yet feel the love of, dead unto what is yet stronger
than we, and against which our utmost efforts when compared with its strength,
are feebleness itself; it esteems all our iron as straw, and our brass as
^otten wood; and, yet to reckon ourselves dead unto this, what an amazing
reckoning it is! Yea, not only dead unto sin, whereby we are exempted from its
filth, guilt and condemnation: But we are to reckon ourselves positively Holy,
Righteous, and Fruitful, alive unto God! and that in opposition to all we see,
feel, or understand of ourselves, according to sense. What are we then to
reckon of our selves by? by Jesus Christ our Lord; let the Heavens rejoice, and
the Earth be glad, for the Lord has raised up a horn of salvation, in the
House of his servant DAVID according to the mouth of all his Prophets which
have been since the world began. Union with Christ is our right of
appropriation, otherwise we appropriate him and his benefits improperly, yea
unjustly, but in this light we can say, here^ is our love made perfect, that we
may have boldness in the Day of Judgment, because as he is, so are we in this
World. John iv. 17.
Hence, we have authority to conclude, if he is righteous, we are righteous, as
he we are holy, as he we are wife; as he we have obtained redemption, and are
accepted with him. This does not suppose any excellency, or worthiness in
ourselves, whereby we are distinguished from our fellow creatures, or set above
our neighbors, for then we should glory in the Flesh, and should become an
Adulterous Generation, which glorying is not good, but deeply odious unto all
who are espoused as chaste Virgins unto Christ; insomuch that they can say, as
hinted by the Prophet, shameful spuing shall be on their Glory. Hab. ii. 16.
But Jesus is our all, and our perfection is in him: That according as it is
written, he that glori^th, let him glory in the Lord. 1 Cor. i. 31.
Against hope, believing in hope in Christ will we glory, against all the
hopeless depressing views, we may have of ourselves, when comparing ourselves
with ourselves. We would always believe in hope, in hope of his being accepted;
of God's being well pleased in him, and of our being accepted, and
well-pleasing as him, by ^^e grace of Uni^^ (...): Here we look to things
eternal and unseen, and not unto things present which are seen. Our right and
privilege is to Judge of ourselves and our st^^^ toward God, by Union with
Christ: By the Father's choice of him, his choice of us, by his love to him,
his love unto us, by his acceptance of him, his acceptance of us, by his
eternal life and glory, our eternal life and glory: And all this, without once
considering the work of our own hands, or the desires, yearnings or meditations
of our hearts: But passing from ourselves unto Jesus, we are wholly found in
him, not having our own righteousness, etc. Unto all who know themselves, this
is certainly a life-giving word, the word that brings salvation; nor can any
thing but that self-righteous principle, which is abhorred, and detested of
God, withstand it; and that ^etteth, and will let, until it be taken away,
which the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and the brightness
of his coming. But, unto all the Gentiles, the ^^^ca^^s, the destitute, the
sinners among mankind; with all who know themselves, and groan beneath the
miseries of man, here are tidings of great Joy: There is a Savior born unto
you, a Savior who is Christ the Lord; and what is more, though you are
worthless, he is worthy; though you are lost, he is found; though you are
unrighteous, unholy, unwise, yet he is Righteous, Holy, Wife; and withal, so
nearly related, so closely united unto you, that you may reckon yourselves to
be what he is, and viewing him as yourselves through all he he did, and
suffered, have your conscience purged from dead works; stand washed, and
acquitted in his Bloody Death, and have the answer of a good conscience toward
God, by his resurrection.

Moreover, in the grace of Union the Foundations are raised, and a glorious
truth presented unto our view; which as it is perfect, and permanent, before
our believing; so is it, if at any time we should be overtaken with unbelief
and doubtfulness. This is that which at first authorizes, excites and
encourages us to credit the Gospel report. This is that, which strengthens in
us what is often ready to die. This is that which raises us when fallen, which
bring us back when we have wandered, and affords strong Consolation, unto all
who have fled unto Jesus for refuge; hence if any man sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, etc. whilst he wears the Character
of righteous, we shall be accepted of God, and Glorious in his sight: And that
is everlastingly, for Jesus Christ is the same Yesterday, Today and for ever.
The Gospel is here a relation of facts, of who Jesus is, what he has done, and
that he has loved us, has saved us; has washed, forgiven and accepted us;
the divine beauty, and reasonableness of which, appears in the Grace of union.
This Grace does not require us, sophistically and unnaturally, to make that a
truth by believing; which was not a truth before; but first proposes Jesus, as
the truth, the grand original truth, before all things, and by whom all things
consist. The Ocean whence the Rivers of Grace and Providence first had their
rise, and whither (after having run through the intricasies of Time) they tend
again, discharging, and emptying themselves of all their floods, into the Bosom
of that Mighty Deep whence they first received them: That his might be the
kingdom, power and glory. That he is the truth of all the types, predictions,
and prophecies of the Jews, the truth of wisdom, righteousness, holiness,
redemption and salvation unto the Gentiles, is what the Gospel declares;
affirming, illustrating, arguing, persuacing, until the arm of the Lord is
revealed, and the report believed. Thus Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the word of God. Hence, I would cry unto the Ends of the Earth, your warfare is
accomplished, your iniquity is pardoned. You, who are lovers of Pleasure,
pursuing the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of Life; as
the highest, chiefest Good. Wherefore will you spend your money for that which
is naught, and your labor for that which satisfies not; wherefore will you
thirst after vanity, and attempt filling your belly with the east wind? The
Lord, your God, has given you a land flowing with milk and honey, beauty,
honors, riches, length of days, wisdom, strength, perfection of righteousness,
holiness and liberty unlimited, all divine, all eternal, all heavenly glorious,
are yours in Jesus; whose riches are unsearchable. Hence, he calls all the ends
of the Earth to (...) unto him, let those glorious prospects of Grace and
Salvation, the bounty, and benevolence of God to Men, render the fashion of
this world, old, and unseemly in your eyes, until it pass away, and you be
found looking at the King in his glory, and the land which once was very far
off; but is now brought nigh by the blood of Jesus: This when seen, shall
sicken your ear to every sound, your eye to every object, and your heart to
every enjoyment, wherein the voice of Jesus's blood, the beauties of his
person, the riches, and greatness of his salvation, are not made manifest; and
shall learn you to separate between the precious, and the vile.

You, who with Esau have been seeking Repentance with tears, and that for a
long season, but have not yet found it: Unto you I also call, and ask you why
will you die? Consider the Apostle, and high priest of your profession, Jesus
Christ; let his strong crying and tears, his tears of blood, yea, Rivulets wept
from every wound, and perspiring Pore; let his agonies, pains, and unknown
sorrows, and all for the transgressions of the people, be well considered: For
he is exalted a Prince and a Savior, and gives on this repentance; why will
you yet cry, bless me, even me also, O my Father; he has blessed you in
Christ, with all Spiritual blessings; whilst all those grievances which you
labor under, by looking unto yourselves, and judging according to appearances,
are redressed in him: why (...) will you due for lack of righteousness whilst
he is (...) righteousness and strength? Why will you faint under the sense of
your unholy dispositions, whilst he is your holiness? Why will you groan in the
bondage of nature, while he is your liberty? O! why will you perish, for want
of what you have? or what is Eternally yours by the g^t of God, by the Grace of
Union, by the love, and integrity of your head, ^h Priest and Mediator Jesus;
who is ^nthful in things per(...) unto God and Man? He is round of such who
seek him not, and reveals himself unto them, who have not asked after him;
whilst you who have been (...) all your days, frequenting his ordinances, and
seeking him in all appointed means, are yet strangers unto, and neglecters of
the great salvation: Wherefore? because you seek it as it were by the works of
the Law, you seek to establish, what God has rejected; and are always
rejecting what God has Chosen: Therefore faith the Apostle, we pray you in
Christ's stead be you reconciled unto God; be ye reconciled unto his Grace,
unto the riches, and salvation thereof, unto the method, and manner of its
working, and appearance; for he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. And this, he has
already done for us, and to be reconciled unto this, is to be happy. Thus Jacob
is Grace, and Esau is Works, the one obtaining what he had not expected, nor
sought after; Whilst the other, who sought it carefully with tears, obtained it
not. Yea, and where there has been a drawing back, a falling away from the
truth as it is in Jesus, until sunk in Misery and Darkness, until having
nothing left them to look at but themselves, they are affrighted, and at their
wits end: Unto them would I call and exhort them not to sorrow as men without
hope; because Jesus is alive, and lives for evermore. Your God and Father,e is
not disappointed in you; you have not deceived him: He never expected any thing
from you, more, or less, than what he has found. The satisfaction which he had
in you at first, was beholding you as the travail of his soul, and as such, he
beholds you still. Your unbelief cannot make his grace of none effect, and
though you have denied him, yet he cannot deny himself. That which was a truth
before you believed, at the first, viz. Christ being your Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, is a truth now, even when you
have ceased to believe: Insomuch, that in every time of need, though you have
sadly departed from him, you have the same foundation, authority and
encouragement, to believe and be assured as you had at the first. It is the
scripture testimony of Jesus, what he is, and what he has done, and suffered,
that is the ground of our confidence; and not the reflection that we repent,
believe, or obey; and it is most certain that this ground remains, that this
foundation is unshaken, for Jesus Christ is the same Yesterday, Today, and for
ever; and that our unbelief, or any change passing over us, as in ourselves,
cannot alter him who is unchangeable, and always Righteous and accepted. In him
we are always as He is, according to which similitude God always beholds us,
and accepts us; therefore, our change of frame or disposition, cannot change
His views of us; for, as he only beholds us in Jesus, He can always say that he
beholds no iniquity in Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel. The Lord his God is
always with him, and the shout of a King is among them. O! glorious Grace! O
triumphant Love! let him who is fallen from hence, say, rejoice not against me,
O mine enemy, for though I fall, I shall yet arise. Does not this testimony
quicken unto faith, and confidence in Jesus! Does it not obviate and silence
all the complaints and objections of the broken and despairing Spirit, and
bring back to the Savior, that which was driven away? surely it does. Thus
from the Grace of Union, which renders Jesus such an High Priest as becomes
us, we obtain favor, and find Grace to help us in every time of need.
Salvation and Perfection in Jesus Christ our Lord, by Union with Him, is that
glorious Truth, which first authorizes, encourages and influences to believe:
and that which preserves us spotless and acceptable unto God, when we fail to
believe and credit his testimony; and infinitely above all other
considerations, has a tendency to raise us in our hope and confidence toward
God; and to preserve us from desperation. It is therefore unjust and unnatural,
to charge this Doctrine with having a tendency to indulge people in unbelief.
Considering the condition of Man, and the testimony of Jesus, I would challenge
all the masters of Israel, to produce a system more powerfully tending to
reconcile Man unto God, and to raise the doubtful Soul unto confidence in Him:
let all such who (through the experience of human weakness, or the power of
temptation, are fallen from the faith of the Son of God, and sunk to the Hell
of their senses, consider this matter, and renew their strength as Eagles.

Furthermore, from the grace of Union, we are taught to consider Jesus, as the
hero of the scripture. All the members bring their tribute unto him, as the
exalted head. If what I have already aimed at proving, is true; that primarily
as the head of his body the church, all the promises were made unto him, all
the threatenings fall upon him, etc. then by him we inherit, by him we have
atoned; we claim no good out of him, nor will we acknowledge the evil, for as
much as in him we have been purged. All the beauteous characters in the
scripture are his, and are only typical in the persons unto whom they are given
in the letter; which is abundantly evident, from the contrast appearing in
every one of them; they being all guilty of vices, diametrically opposite to
the virtues for which they are famous; Righteous Noah and Lot, both charged
with Drunkenness, and one with horrid incest. Faithful Abraham with cistrust,
meanness of spirit, lying or equivocating, as in the case of Saran. Meek Moses,
with unwarrantable passion, unadvised speech, and such swellings at the waters
of strife as barred his entrance into the promised land. It charges holy.
David, the man after God's own heart, with such weaknesses and crimes, as are
by no means consistent with holiness; but were a glaring proof of his heart
being very unlike the heart of God. And Solomon so famous for wisdom, had his
darkside: how great were his follies! And whilst much might be said for his
wisdom, how many instances might be given of the most stupid and God provoking
foolishness in him. Job also, admired for his patience, gave the most pregnant
proofs of impatience and peevishness. It will be natural to inquire from hence,
why the scriptures which gives those men the most beautiful and amiable
characters, as righteous, faithful, meek, holy, wise and patient, should at the
same time, present us with a contrast in each of them, drawn in such strong
colors, that the most palpable contradiction appears? The answer is easy, Let
God be true and every man a liar. Those men were all types of Jesus, their
characters figurative of his. therefore divine wisdom thought proper, not only
to stain their glory, by suffering such blemishes in their spirit and conduct,
as gave the lie unto their virtues, but also to record the same; that at best
they might appear but mere shadows, reserving the substance for Jesus.
Therefore, whosoever reading the characters of those men, are not taught to look
beyond them, unto the blessed Jesus, have yet read the scriptures to little
purpose; having not yet known them, nor the power of God. Neither the Prophets
nor Apostles wrote with the view that such who venerate their writings should
have their persons in admiration; neither theirs, whose character they drew, as
eminent and famous, in the Church of God. But the spirit which moved them,
designed through the whole, the honor and glory of Jesus Christ: that passing
on from every man, we might attain to the admiration of the person and
excellencies of Jesus, as the only Righteous, the only Faithful, the only Meek,
Wife, Holy and Patient, until all with an unwavering. Tongue, shall cry, Thou
art altogether Lovely, worthy is the Lamb of the Kingdom and Glory. But least
any who are used to please themselves with Mankind, having men's persons in
admiration, should think we deal hardly with the saints of old, (for it is
often found more dangerous, even among Christians, to speak lightly of the
pious men, than it is to speak so of Christ) when we sav that they were not the
men which they are represented to be, their conduct and behavior considered:
-- I would here premise what will be equally obnoxious unto them, that those
persons were really what the scriptures say they were, that is, Righteous,
Faithful, Meek, Holy, Wise, Patient, etc. without any exception: they were so
in Christ. I know the Jew, however Christianised by Profession, will either
rave or sneer at this; but let him; He that sits in the Heavens will laugh
him to scorn: and the Christians indeed, will remain undisturbed. I would
calmly ask, what is the medium between Christ and Man? -- If its not true of
them in themselves, as I have shown it is not; nor true of them in Christ, as
the Greek and Jew insinuates, where is it true of them? It must have its truth
somewhere; I speak unto you who acknowledge the scriptures. I am well aware of
your Answer, viz. the Divine Wisdom characterises them according to what they
were in part and not in the whole. I would ask another question, Have we any
other Rule for the trial of right and wrong, good and evil, than the Divine
Law? And does not the Law demand perfection? Does it not when broken in one
point, declare the transgressor guilty of the whole? Does it not curse
whomsoever continues not to do all things written in the Book thereof? And
Jesus says, that Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but one jot or tittle of
the Law shall not fail, until the whole be fulfilled. But having spoken of this
matter before, I refer you unto it: and shall only observe here, the arrogance
and impropriety of assuming the Character of Righteous, Meek, Faithful, Holy,
etc. according to the works of our own Hands or habits of the Heart: This is
flying in the face of God, and giving the lie to the Divine Perfections as
revealed in the Law; yea, it is in fact a denying our only Lord God and Jesus
Christ: for unto what Purpose is he made Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification
and Redemption? Is it not that whosoever glories, should glory in the Lord?
But when Persons assume those Characters from the consideration of what they
are in part, as in themselves; they glory in themselves and not in the Lord.
This is that Antichrist of whom we were told that He should come, yea, was so
early in the World as the Days of the Apostles; and prevails so mightily in the
Christian World at present that the generality of Christains under his
influence, are upon a level in Faith and Doctrine with the Jews: or but very
faintly distinguished from them: The Jew maintains the necessity of inward, and
outward holiness in every Man, and looks for the Christ to come: The Christian,
especially the reformed, with superior ardour, and repeated asseverations,
declares for the same way of holiness, and looks also for a Christ to come; an
inward Christ, consisting of gracious habits, pious breathings, sincere and
upright dispositions, and which in effect, is to agree with the Jew, in
declaring, that the Man of Galilee, who was crucified without the Gates of
Jerusalem in the reign of T^erius, was not the true Christ: Or according to the
highest Idea of him, was but the figure of an inward and Spiritual Christ to
come: thus Antichristianly denying the true Christ is come in the Flesh. Again
there are others, who would be distinguished from the Jew, by confessing that
the true Messiah is come, and that according to his Obedience, Death and
Resurrection, he is the remote cause of Man's Salvation. But, then it seems if
he is not applied, he is no Christ at all. Hence it is, that many who call
themselves Preachers of the Gospel of Jesus, make use of this expression, An
unapplied Christ is no Christ at all. What can a Christian think of such a vile
Phrase a^ this?

This is in effect to make Christ a mere Quality, a Dispensation, which exists
and takes place, upon a certain change wrought in the Creature: A Christ
created, and made by application. Jesus Christ as the only Good, the true Balm,
was applied unto our Wounds and Diseases, when he took part of the same Flesh
and Blood with the Children. And, as a Plaster, or Medicine, when applied,
must unite, and become One, with the Wound or Disease, that by its superior
Virtue, it might drain, swallow up, and eradicate the opposite evil; so, Jesus,
united unto our infirm^ies, bare our Sins and Sicknesses, and carried our
Sorrows; purging them by himself, through the things which he suffered, until
his resurrection fully proved the Evil eradicated. Hence he dies no more,
Death has no more Dominion over him. Thus, the Grace and Love of God, was
applied to the misery of Man, in the person of Emmanuel; and all our Grievances
redressed in Him. He, being according to the Condition of his Person and
Office, the Physician, Medicine and Patient. With his stripes we are healed. Of
this Grace and Truth, the Holy Ghost is our witness; who is said to receive of
the things which are Christ's, that he might show them to the people. Hence, it
is called in the Scriptures, a Manifestation, a Revelation, or Declaration, but
never an Application as I remember: This being rather an adopted Phrase of
Antichrist, to give false Ideas on such an occasion; even such, that are most
derogatory to the Person, Death and Resurrection of Jesus, Far be it from me,
to aim at making any man an Offender for a Word: but, where Words are
expressive of Facts, and of singular import, designed to form Ideas, it is
right to inquire whether they are w^ or not and, upon inquiry, it will be
found, that the word Application, is not, when used as expressive of believing
the Gospel or receiving Christ; especially where it is asserted, that an
unapplied Christ^, no Christ at all. Is not this to make his office, yea his
very Being, to depend upon such an application? a most shocking Proposition!
and abhorred of (...), who conceive of Christ according to the scriptures.
And yet, how we should apply what does not exist, or is not true before, is, I
confess, a subtilty which I do not understand; and therefore, the Phrase
appears to me as ridiculously Nonsensical, as it is Blasphemous: and the latter
it is, if it has any meaning; because it is certainly a denial of the Person of
Christ, and setting up of another Jesus: such a one as the Apostle feared would
corrupt the Corinthians, from the simplicity which was in Christ. Our Savior
foretold the arising of false Christ's, (and every Christ has his Prophets) and
that they should show great Signs and Wonders. Except a few, vain,
insignificant Pretenders amongst the blinded Jews, who were not able to show
any great signs or wonders, but from Pride and Lunacy, dreamt they were
somebody; I say, excepting those, I never heard of any one, who pretended to be
the Christ. And, if any poor Lunatic has at any time talked wildly of his
being the Christ, he has not deceived any Body, neither could he show great
signs and wonders. Therefore, those could not be the false Christ spoken of,
and yet the word of the Lord is true; false Christ there must be, and I think
it behooves us to inquire what they are. False Christ's are things which bear the
name of Christ, and have that Honor, Power and Glory attributed unto them,
which belongs only to Jesus of Nazareth: a prevailing Deception, attested by
great Signs and Wonders. If false Christ's are those things which are called
Christ, and are not, I think it is not impossible to find them out, and to
prove that they are now in the World, and have deceived many. The false Christ
is a compound of Pride, Darkness, Deceit, Self-love, Enmity to the true Christ,
etc. but then it bears the names of Humility, the Light within, Faithfulness,
Truth, Love to God, and Zeal for Holiness; (in contradistinction to that
dangerous proposition of salvation by the Blood of Jesus Christ alone, and of
being complete in Him though sinners in ourselves,) where Mankind are ignorant
of the scriptures, and of the power of God, and yet, reading and hearing of
Christ being in them, and being also bid to examine themselves whether Christ
be in them, they look into themselves; thus enquiring, have I Christ, do I love
God, and hate iniquity? am I changed? am I humble, heavenly-minded, thirsting
to be more holy, and lamenting my faults? do I increase in Light, Knowledge and
Understanding? If I do, then I have Christ: this is Christ in me the hope of
Glory. This is the Christ whom many look unto, and respect as the true Christ.
This has its great Signs, and Wonders. This pretends to cast out Devils and to
work such changes in Mankind, as answers to the Ethiopian changing his skin,
and the Leopard his spots, pretends to produce signs of it, in such, or such
persons once greatly vicious but now made either perfectly Holy, or in a great
measure so; even perfect in parts if that can be understood. Furthermore, the
considerations of this great Change, and the feeling of its holy Tempers and
Dispositions, is a Contemplation so ravishing, a Sensation, or Frame of Spirit
so transporting, that it triumphs over the Fears of Death and Hell, and
anticipating the Joys and Powers of the World to come, makes the Deceived cry
out, partly in the words of the Apostle, Who shall lay any thing to the Charge
of God's Elect? Who shall condemn? But then, taking liberty to differ from
Paul, instead of founding it with him upon this fact, Christ died and rose
again: the Disciples of the false Christ rather cry, Who shall Condemn? I am
converted, I believe, I bear the fruits of the Spirit, I have the marks of
Grace in me! Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of God's Elect? and I am
certainly one, for he has distinguished me from my Neighbors! and made me holy
as the Elect of God; thanks be to God, I have, by much assiduity in all the
ordinances, by constant application unto all the means of Grace, at last, made
my Calling and Flection sure: and now how happy, how blessed am I! Come Life,
come Death, I am ready: Thus can the false Christ show great Signs and Wonders.
True it is, this is ascribed to different causes; one cries, Why me, Why me,
What am I that I should be so blessed! and talks of discriminating Grace, as
though God was a respecter of persons. Whilst another says, O blessed
Self-denial and Patience: Now I am blessed with the fruit of my labors and
sorrows, I shall never repent of my Watchings, Fastings and Prayers, nor of the
grievous Mortifications I have passed through, since I am possessed of that
holiness wherein I can see God. Whilst a Third exults, that he has not been
misled by that outward and carnal Christ, who might probably suffer in the
reign of Tiberius, without the Gates of Jerusalem: But that he has been
obedient to the true spiritual Christ, who was always in him from his Mother's
Womb, sometimes as a Spirit of Burning convincing of sin, at other times as a
spirit of Judgment or a Light shining in a dark place; showing him what was
right, with the path wherein he should walk: that he has had the faithfulness
to follow this Christ, and not as many of his Fellowmortals, resisted the
Light, is now the Joy of his Heart. Thus however things are ascribed to
different causes, and different terms made use of, yet the same matter is
intended; and all come to this point at last: that the true Christ is a
compound of religious qualities, and holy dispositions in Men. Hence it is,
that human Virtue is idolized, and complimented with the Name of Christian,
upon this principle even the Heathen Phisophers are supposed to have had Christ
in them: especially such amongst them who were famous for their piety, though
Heathen. Yea according to this, it is enough to have appearances to whine, and
cant, talk much of the work of the Spirit of the Heart I would not be
understood as speaking slightly of the Spirit of Truth, or of his operations in
the Heart of Man, according to the scripture account thereof: which, is there
undeniably made to consist in receiving of the Things which are his, (viz.
Christ's,) and in showing them unto us: that Jesus Christ alone might be
glorified: and this the Spirit is constantly engaged in, until we answer fully
in Heart, and Mind, unto the Character of the true circumcision; who worship
God in the spirit, rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the
flesh. But the Spirit of Error, reverses this Character* pretends to show
mankind other excellencies than what are found in Jesus, such as reformations,
changes, pious motions and desires in themselves: and this it does, until their
worship of God dwindle into Form, their rejoicing be in the work of their own
Hands, and all their confidence be in things of the Flesh.

Antichrist, or the false Spirit, seeks not the Glory of Jesus; but speaks of
himself, of its own operations: of Joys, Sorrows, Hatred to the Evil, and
Languishment after Goodness; by him wrought on the Heart: and teaches his
anointed ones, to conclude thence, that they are favorites of Heaven: to look
on themselves as greatly distinguished amongst Mankind, by what they call
inherent holiness: Yea, and to be Jealous of the Doctrine of Christ, because it
holds forth to man, the Testimony of Salvation; bound up, and sealed, where
Jesus is Alpha and Omega. This Spirit, insinuates that the Doctrine which
treats of the person of Christ, of His Life, Sufferings, Death, and
Resurrection; of our being justified and sanctified in Him; is a very
Dangerous, if not a Diabolical Doctrine, and chiefly, because if it does not
immediately oppose, it teaches to slight and disregard the work of the Spirit
upon the Heart: will not suffer men to look unto that quarter for comfort: will
not admit of it as an evidence for Heaven: nor suffer them from thence to exalt
themselves above their Fellows: but will always be proposing Jesus as a salve
for every sore, and a perfect redress of all grievances. Thus Antichrist
accuses the Spirit of Truth, (because he glorisies Christ,) of Heresy: in
denying the work of the Spirit upon the Heart: and supported by Tradition, and
its Cloud of witnesses, it storms so violently, prates and insinuates so
successfully, that it has almost jostled Christianity out of the World: and
has introduced instead thereof, gross Enthusiasm, Self-righteousness, Bigotry,
and Superstition, amongst the more zealously religious part of Mankind, and
amongst such who are less concerned, Deism; with all the pride of moral
virtues. This is that Spirit which I set my Face against, and of which I speak,
wherever I have through my Book, ranked this phrase, the work of the Spirit
upon the Heart, amongst the cant terms of Judaism blended with Heathenism.


of human Goodness, moral Virtue, and exclaim against Sin and Sinners: I say,
if men have but those appearances, they are according to the principle of the
false Christ, to be deemed devout, and pious Christians; though they speak in
the most irreverent terms of the person of Jesus, and scandalize the Doctrine
of Salvation alone by his Blood; ridicule his mysteries as whimsies; and with
the old Pharisees, accuse him as the Ring leader of the Wicked, and the Cause
of the Profaneness which is in the world. And so zealous are mankind become
for this Holiness, or Christ, as it is promiscuously called, that such who are
considered as Gospel Ministers, will not now grant any thing farther concerning
Jesus of Nazareth, than what they think tends to promote this holiness, or
inward Christ: Thus is this made the grand Criterion whereby to judge of all
Truth: It being now common to inquire upon any proposition concerning Jesus
Christ, does it tend to promote inward Holiness, and true Heart-work? If it
does, receive it; if it does not, reject it; let it be what it will. From hence
it is evident, that this Holiness within them, has infinitely the Preference
before the Person of Christ, since He shall not be allowed to plead his own
Cause, where there is the least Suspicion of his Doctrine clashing with their
Conceptions of inward Holiness, or Christ in them: Like the Martyr Stephen's
Antagonists, they will then put their Fingers in their Ears, and run down his
Testimony with Noise and Tumult. But, if the least Sparkle of this inward
Heliness or Christ be seen, or in short, if there be nothing of this nature
seen, provided there is a good will toward it, a hearty zeal and stickling for
it, let it be (as before hinted) under whatsoever name it may, whether
Morality, Virtue, Piety, Holiness, the Work of the Spirit upon the Heart, or
Christ within; I say, toward all such in whom any Thing of this Nature can be
seen, or if they are but contentious for it; they have the most enlarged Bowels
and extensive Charity. Toward all such, they are exceedingly prodigal of their
Favors; insomuch, that whether they desire it or not; yea, whether they will
accept it or not, they will Christian them: Yea, if a Jew, a Mchometan, a
Deist, or an Atheist, be according to the Phrase, a good Man, a holy Liver, he
must be supposed to have an interest in Christ, not withstanding he do not
believe in him, but rather reviles him; and whoever questions it, will be
deemed a very uncharitable and censorious Bigot. On the other Hand, if a Man
has a Sinner Character, makes no pretensions to inward Holiness, is not
contentious, or noisy about it; though he may believe in Christ, venerate him,
have all his hope and dependence for Salvation upon his Death and Blood: I say,
a Man of this Character stands no Chance: it would be reckoned credulous, yea,
the greatest abuse of Charity, to christian such a Man, or to conclude him
interested in Christ. From this Doctrine, those inferences naturally arise: A
Jew, a Pagan, a Turk, a Deist, or Atheist, if good and virtuous, according to
the beforementioned Goodness, is preferable to the most zealous worshipper of
Jesus, and believer in him, if imperfect and sinful. Again, Goodness and
Holiness in Man, by whatever Name it is called, more infallibly demonstrates
the accepted of God, the person with whom he is pleased; than Jesus Christ his
Death and Resurrection, or any confidence or trust in him: consequently, this
Virtue, this Holiness, this inward Work, is preferable to the Person, the Life,
Death, and Resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth. To be able to draw those
inferences from the principles of Freethinkers, Socinians and Arians, would not
at all surprise; but to see them naturally rise, from the Doctrines of such,
who would be contradistinguished from the former, and considered as Preachers
of Jesus Christ, may possibly surprise some, who have been used to say unto the
work of their own hands, Ye are our Gods.

We need go no farther than those false Testimonies, to find the false Christ's;
nor than such who vend them, to find the false Prophets.

I hope my Reader will pardon this digression, as not altogether foreign, or
unnecessary to my main design.

If we consider the Bible-saints and their Excellencies, in a figurative light,
as I have already hinted; our Jesus will appear the Hero of the Scriptures: Or,
if we respect them as being really in Christ, what they are characterized in
the Letter, (for it is easily proved that they were not so in themselves) He
still has the pre-eminence in all things, and every beautiful character given
unto man in the scriptures, is primarily His: as the substance of the shadow,
or as the Head, who by Union with the Body, blesses all the Members with his
own condition and character: Whilst they, above all things rejoice in his
Beauty, Power and Excellencies. That one thing so greatly desired by the
Psalmist, is granted unto all who discern their Union with the head, namely, To
dwell in the House of the Lord for ever, to behold his Beauty, and to enquire
in his Temple. Though the consideration of such a glorious Salvation in Jesus,
is infinitely refreshing and delightful, yet is there a higher Felicity,
consisting in the clear views of his personal Beauties and Glories. Thus the
Elders who surround his Throne, though perfected in his Likeness, wearing
Crowns of Glory, Palms of Victory, cast all their Honors, and themselves
likewise, before his Feet; prostrating, and singing incessantly, Worthy is the
Lamb: thereby intimating, that his personal Worth, Dignity and Beauty, as
beheld by them, is their highest Heaven, their sublimest consolation. For this
the Savior prayed, Father I will that they whom thou have given me, may be
with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory. Unto the Eye of Sense, there
was neither Form nor Comeliness; whereby Men should desire him, when in the Day
of his Humiliation his Judgment was taken away: when his Face being more marred
than any Man's, and his Form more than the Sons of Men, He was pressed with our
Sicknesses, Sins and Sorrows: Then, he appeared like the Tabernacle of old, (as
covered with Badger Skins) mean and contemptible, unto all such as judged
according to Appearance: But unto those who conceived aright of his Beauty and
Glory, even then, his Form was most excellent and his Comeliness perfect, the
fairest of the Sons of Men, Grace and Truth was poured into his Lips. My
Beloved, (faith the Spouse) is white and ruddy, the chief amongst Ten Thousand,
Yea, he is made the central Point of all Beauties and Excellencies, as when
thus described: His Head is as the most fine Gold, his Locks are Bushy, and
black as a Raven; his Eyes are as the Eyes of Doves by the Rivers of Waters,
washed with Milk, and fitly set. His Cheeks are as a Bed of Spices, as sweet
Flowers. His Lips like Lillies, dropping sweet smelling Myrrk. His Hands are as
Gold Rings set with the Beryl. His Belly is as bright Ivory, overlaid with
Sapphires. His Legs are as Pillars of Marble, set upon Socke^s of fine Gold.
His Countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars. His Mouth is most
sweet, yea he is altogether lovely. Thus Gold, precious Stones, Ivory, Marble,
Spices, Flowers, Trees, Mountains, Rivers, Gums, Birds, etc. are here
collected, to form a Composition of Beauties figurative of him. Yea whatsoever
is seen in all the Creation of God, all the Excellencies and Beauties, whether
they are Glories Terrestrial, or Gelestial, are Figures of him: All
transmitting their Luster to him, all pointing to him as their Perfection, and
He whose Glory and Honor was the ultimate End of their Creation: All things
were created by him, and for him, faith the Spirit. His Beauties of Holiness,
how inexplicable! How divine! Pure, without Austerity; Wise, without Vanity;
Humble, without Pride; Self-denying, without Selflove; Holy, Harmless,
Undefiled; Purer than the Heavens; Holier than the Angels, He only is Holy; He
only is the Lord: Such was his Self-denial, that though he was rich, yet he
became poor. Though all Honor, Power and Glory, was originally his; his name,
and character, the most exalted; yea, though without robbery he was equal to the
most High, yet he took upon him the form of a servant, and made himself of no
reputation. Whilst the Foxes had Holes, and the Birds of the Air had Nests, the
Son of Man had no where to lay his Head! As a Stranger and Pilgrim, he passed
through the Worlds which his own Hands had made, and unfeignedly felt the want
of such necessaries and refreshments, which the Creatures from Man to the
Reptile, yea even to the smallest Insect, through his Providence, were abundantly
supplied with. In all this, he sought not himself, but through all, his
unchangeable Motto was, Not my Will, but Thine be done: it being his Meat and
his Drink to do the Father's Will. Such was his Self-denial, that though he was
that Just one; in his own individual self, was Holy, Harmless, Undefiled,
separate from Sinners, made higher than the Heavens; yet was he content to be
numbered amongst the Transgressors; and to be accounted Seditious, a Rebel, a
Glutton, a Wine-bibber, a Blasphemer, a Deceiver, a Demoniack, an Encourager
and Ringleader of the most notorious Sinners: Unto those accusations, he
replied not; but by his silence denying his holy character, he seemingly
acknowledged the Charge exhibited against him, Though as an Individual he was
perfectly holy; and the charge of sin brought against him by his enemies, as
false as Satan: Yet as the Head and Representative of the people, as
personating the sinner, he confessed the charge by his silence: otherwise it
does not appear, wherefore he was silent; when the cause of truth called upon
him to make his defense. That his great and unparalled humility was evident
in this transaction, does not prove that his behavior in this particular, was
calculated only to exhibit that beauty. Therefore may ^e construe his silence,
a tacit acknowledgement of his being made sin for us.
and submitting to the punishment, was content to make his Grave with the
Wicked. He denied himself so far, as to permit Satan, (a creature of his power,
and one whom he had before crushed to everlasting Darkness for his rebellion)
to tempt him: and that with the glories of a world, which he himself had made,
and which at that time, he upheld by the right hand of his power: All living,
moving, existing in him, and governed by his providence: And also with
worshipping him, who was not only his Creature, but a creature fallen and
accursed, and whose very being, was enmity against him. Yea, he suffered the
Tempter to sift him like wheat; to rush upon him with all his policy and power,
by every Gate of Hell; to try him with Despair, Presumption, Selfmurther, and
with an inordinate love of Life; by using the most extravagant means for the
preservation thereof: yea even to hazard his knowledge of him self, of his own
Dignity and Glory, as the Son of God, upon the success thereof.

Thus seeking, if by any means he might oblige him to deviate from his own Law,
and rule of righteousness, written by Moses, and the Prophets. How beautiful
his humility! he patiently endured the contradiction of Sinners against
himself. How conspicuous his love, through the things which he suffered! many
Waters could not quench it, neither could the Floods drown it. His meekness!
how apparent, when as a Lamb led to the slaughter, and as a Sheep before her
shearers Dumb, he opened not his Mouth: when he was reviled, he reviled not
again, nor did he hide his face from shame and spitting, but calmly gave his
Back to the smiters, and his Cheeks, to them who plucked off the Hair. These,
and every other Godlike disposition and perfection, shining in Him, through his
Life and Death, renders him at once the object of wonder, delight and pleasure.
Yea, such is his superlative beauty, that when we have considered all
excellencies in Heaven and Earth with the utmost eaxctness and impartiality, we
are still with relation to them all, constrained to cry, as the Apple Tree is
among the Trees of the Wood, so is my Beloved among the Sons. Surprizingly
rare! one amongst thousands, yea, only one in all the wood: distinguished from
all in fragrance, fruit, and shade. Well may every admiring worshipper say, I
sat down under his shadow with great delight; and his Fruit was sweet to my
taste.

He is beautiful in the majesty of his power, and the glory of his kingdom. All
power in Heaven and in Earth is given into his Hand. By him Kings reign, and
Princes decree Justice. The Queen of Sheba came from the uttermost parts of the
Earth to hear the Wisdom of Solomon, and to see his Glory, (but behold a
greater than Solomon is here.) And when she saw his Wisdom, and the House that
he had built, and the Meat of his Table, and the sitting of his Servants, and
the attendance of his Ministers, and their apparel, and his Cup-bearers, and
his ascent by which he went up unto the House of the Lord, there was no more
Spirit in her.

We also, when we come up to Zion, to see the King in his beauty, with the
Queen standing on his right hand, shining in Gold of Ophir; are equally
surprised, astonished and smitten with wonder: How glorious the displays of his
Wisdom! In Creation, Redemption and Providence; especially in that admirable
economy with which he governs his own House: There he shows the beauties of
Holiness. Holiness for ever becomes his House, and reverence his Saints. Of
Experience having been tempted in every point, like unto us. Of Compassion, he
has compassion on the Ignorant, and such as are out of the way. Of Sympathy, he
is touched with the feeling of our Infirmities. His Wisdom, Love and Power, in
guiding, protecting, enriching and causing all things to work together for the
good of them who love him, and are the called according to his purpose, is most
beautifully seen here: The House which he has built, where through the labors
of his Life and Death, he has built us in himself an habitation for God,
through the Spirit.

The Meat of his Table, his Flesh is Meat indeed; his Blood is Drink indeed: by
Union with which, we are fed with all his grace and fruits. The sitting of his
Servant, the Rest that remains for the People of God, which rest is in him,
where all those who believe entering cease from their own Works, as God ceased
from his. The standing of his Ministers, their continual readiness to execute
his Will; and with unwearied pleasure and delight, to bear his message to his
Church: He makes his Ministers a flame of Fire, administering by the word of
his Cross, Light and Heat all around them. Apparallelled with him who is the
righteousness of the Saints, they bear witness of his Royalties, Majesty and
Glory: as the King of Kings and Lord of Lords.

His Cup-bearers, those who offer everlasting praise, resulting from his Blood
and Death; which as the Juice of the true Vine, the fruit of his own doings and
sufferings, he drinks for ever new in the Kingdom of the Father. His ascent
unto the House of the Lord, the Union of natures in his person; by which the
Man in him, is one with God: and therefore, goes up unto the House of the Lord.

When the Queen of Sheba saw this, only in the figure, there was no more Spirit
in her: but breaking forth in strains of ecstacy, it exceeds, said she, the
fame which I heard, the half was not told me, happy thy men, happy these thy
servants, which stand continually before thee, that hear thy wisdom, blessed be
the Lord thy God, which delighted in thee, to set thee on the Throne of Israel;
because the Lord loved Israel forever, therefore made he thee King, to do
Judgment and Justice.

What then must be the strains, when our greater Solomon, in all his Wisdom,
Majesty, Beauty, and glory is seen. Such is the poverty of speech, yea^ of the
most expressive words; that we are utterly incapable of declaring, what we then
conceive of his eternal excellency. Whilst our utmost conceptions, bear no
proportion to his real glories, his transcendent beauties: but are, as a moment
of time to eternity. Thousands of thousand minister unto him, and ten thousand
times ten thousand, stand before him: let us mingle with the multitude, thus
blessed with his presence; saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and
glory, and blessing: and with every creature, which is in Heaven, and on the
Earth, and under the Earth: and such as are in the Sea, and all that are in
them, saying, Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, unto him that sits
upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever, and ever. Amen.

A SUPPLEMENT UNTO THE FOREGOING TREATISE ON THE DOCTRINE OF UNION: EXHIBITING
A SPECIMEN OF APOSTOLIC PREACHING.
THE Matter and Manner of the Apostles Preaching, appears, when among Jews and
Gentiles, they taught that Jesus Christ was the Messiah, the Son of God; and
that he was crucified unto Death, and on the third Day rose again from the
Dead, for the Forgiveness of Sins, and the Justification of Mankind. And this
they proved from the predictions of the Prophets, from the pattern shown unto
Moses in the Mount, and by undoubted miracles wrought in the Name of that Jesus
whom they Preached. All who believed their Testimony, were thereby sensible of
Salvation: there were no such doubts as these amongst them then, viz. How do I
know whether he died for me, or whether I am particularly interested in him,
etc. Those queries and criticisms, are of later date than the Apostolic Age:
and owe their existence unto the wisdom of this world, which in the decline of
true Christianity, took place of that primitive simplicity, with which the
first Preachers of Jesus bare witness of Him. They had their rise from the
distinctions made amongst men: of Predestinate, and Reprobate, as unqualified,
for the Grace of the Gospel: of Fruitful, as having a right to believe their
personal interest in Christ: or unfruitful, whose interest in him is doubtful.
Those distinctions once concluded upon, between self-righteousness, and
ignorance of the scriptures; have, from generation to generation, been
carefully handed down: Whilst all the World assented to them, as traditions of
gracious Men, taking it for granted, without impartial inquiry, that they were
deducible from scripture.

This, by degrees, rendered the things belonging to our peace so intricate,
that the knowledge thereof was considered as wholly confined to the ^ools. And
h^nce it was, that when a Man believed the Gospel report concerr^ Jesus Christ,
Namely that he was the (...) of God, the Savior of the World, (...) be died,
and rose again for our Ju^ation (...) say, when a man had believed this, (...)
was ^et taught to inquire, how do I know (...) he died for me? whether I am
interested in him or not? was I sure says one, that I am predestinate, I could
be easy: says another was I but sufficiently convinced, and humbled, I could
believe that Christ died for me: says a third, could I but perceive the fruits
of the Spirit in me, the proper effects and obedience of Faith, I could be
assured of my interest in him.

Thus are mankind taught to establish their own righteousness: where, upon the
authority of some goodness wrought by them, or found in them, they are directed
to conclude of the love of God toward them, and of their personal interest in
Christ. But what shall that man do, who is assured that every imagination of
the thoughts of his heart is only evil continually, Genesis vi. 5.
whose goodness is as a morning cloud; and as the early dew it goes away, Hos.
vi. 10.
and that he is as an unclean thing, and all his righteousness Isai. ixiv. 6.
as filthy rags? I say, What shall the man do, who by deep experience, every
day and hour is sensible of those awful Truths, and knows them applicable to
every child of Man? Who has a continual sense of his Poverty, Misery, Blindness
and Nakedness According to the forementioned tradition he must despair and be
damned accordingly: for those Traditions say, it will avail him nothing to
believe all that the Bible reports of Jesus Christ, if he has not good Works,
good Fruits in himself, as more corroborating Evidences, more infallible
Recommendations unto God, yea, as more undeniable marks of his acceptance with
him than Jesus Christ: than his Birth, Life, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection
and Ascension. Let us only compare those conclusions with the Scriptures, and
we shall quickly perceive them to be the very sinews of Antichrist.

The Apostle says, It is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. 1 Timothy i. 15.
But Antichrist says, You cannot be saved, except you are holy and good in
yourself; nor shall the Death and Resurrection of Jesus profit you, except you
are changed and made fruitful in all good Works, Words and Thoughts. The
Scripture says, To him that works not, but believes on him that Justifies
the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness. Romans iv. 5.
But Antichrist says, That Christ does not Justify the Ungodly; and that he
Justifies only such who are Godly: who are repentant, humble, meek, loving
righteousness, and hating iniquity. And where the forecited text shows us,
that Christ's Faith is accounted for Righteousness, to all such who working
not, believes on him, as Justifying the Ungodly: Antichrist says, You are
Justified by your own Faith, which will produce Righteousness in you, to
evidence it. The Scriptures say, That while we were yet sinners Christ died for
us, Romans v.8.
and that when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of his
Son; Ver. 10.
and that God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not impating
their Trespasses unto them. Cor. v. 19.
But Antichrist says, sinners have no right to conclude that Christ died for
them: that such who have this right are distinguished from sinners, by inherent
holiness, and gracious qualities. And it farther says, in contradiction to
Christ, that he did not reconcile us to God, when we were enemies but that we
must love him, fear him, and serve him before we can be said to be reconciled
to him: and as to man's being reconciled by the Death of Jesus, it absolutely
^ies that; and says, we are reconciled by being reformed, changed, and made
conformable in heart and practice to God; and that until then, it is not true
that God has reconciled us unto himself in Christ, notwithstanding the Apostle
says it. The scriptures say, that we are saved by the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ; Acts xv. 11.
yea expressly, by Grace are ye saved. Ephesians. ii. 8.
But Antichrist says, there are Terms and Conditions to be complied with and
fulfilled, before you can be saved. The Apostle says, that God has given to
us eternal Life, and that this Life is in his Son: and that he who believes
not this record, has made God a Liar. John v. 10, 11.


From whence it is plain, that he who believes not, has eternal life given
him in the Son of God, as fully as him who believes: else it does not appear
how he could make God a liar, by not believing; nor, how the unbeliever can be
censured for not believing what was not true. But Antichrist says, all have not
a right to believe: some because they are not predestinate, others because not
qualified, by repentance, etc. others though they have believed, have no right to
be assured, because they are not sufficiently fruitful: Therefore those cannot
make God a Liar, when they believe not, it being not required of them to
believe a falsehood. Our Savior censured such who trusted in themselves that
they were righteous, and despised others: But Antichrist supports this
character, and is constantly for distinguishing, between Saints and Sinners,
and that not from any rejoicing in Jesus Christ, which one has above the
other, but from the Saints being more righteous, than the Sinners, more holy,
devout, and wise. Our Savior reproved the church of La^d^a, in the sharpest
manner, for growing rich, and increasing in goods, for not retaining a just
sense of her poverty, misery, blindness, and nakedness: But Antichrist says,
you must increase in goods, you must grow rich, rich in Wisdom, Knowledge,
Holiness, Goodness, Virtue, and Experience: and except you thus increase in
Goods, Christ shall profit you nothing. You was poor, and miserable, and blind,
and naked, says Antichrist; but not so now, you are converted, you are born
again, you are changed, therefore how should you know yourself to be what you
are not, now however, whatever you have been? The spirit of Truth says, Christ
is made of God unto us Wisdom, Right (...), Sandification, and Redemption. Yea
says Antichrist, but except you are made this in Yourselves, you cannot be
saved. Thus the Traditions of Man, make void the word of God; and thus
Antichrist warreth against Jesus, the Son of Mary. This is that Antichrist,
whose (...) was (...) of, and who made as appearance, as early as the days of
the Apostles. He mined the Labors of Paul, in Galatia, and made him complain
that all they who were in Asia, were turned away from him: insomuch that this
Apostle, laborious, and zealous for the Glory of Jesus Christ, lived to see
sundry of the Churches, whom he had espoused to one husband, as a chaste Virgin
to (...), overrun and spoiled by Antichrist. And indeed this and what followed
was foretold by him, in his Epistle to the Thessalonians, where he said, The
day of Christ should not come, except there come a falling away first, and that
Man of sin be revealed, the son of Perdition, who opposes and exalts himself
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that he as God, sits
in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God. It is easily seen, that
this prediction is fulfilled. John also said, that Antichrist was in the world
then, denying that Jesus was come in the flesh: or, as it signifies, that he
had finished the redemption of Mankind; and consequently taught Men to look for
him yet to come in their Flesh: under the notion of Light, Power, Wisdom,
Faithfulness, Humility, Love, etc. From the appearing of this Antichrist in the
world, we may date the Era of the Apostasy, or falling away from the Apostles
Doctrine; when Mankind began to entangle each other with their own Inventions.
The Apostles, as I have hinted, preached the Person of Christ, the simple facts
of his Death and Resurrection, as Justification and Forgiveness of Sins to the
Children of Adam. It was enough that their hearers believed their report of the
crucified One: and as I observed before, the persons thus believing, never once
questioned but it was for them, because hitherto they had not been taught that
any were excluded from it. Antichrist had not as yet the boldness to affirm,
that there were some amongst Mankind, who though they heard of the Death and
Resurrection of the Lord Jesus, yea, though they believed it, yet had no right
to conclude it was for them. Nor had he as yet, propagated that subtle
distinction, between the belief of the Truth, and the knowledge of their
personal interest therein. For in those days of undisguised truth and
simplicity, when any man believed the Testimony of the Apostles concerning
Jesus, his heart exulted in the Truth, nothing doubtful of his interest
therein. The belief of the Truth, and the purged conscience, were then
inseparable. For the Testimony is, not only that Christ died and rose again,
such as we might hear of some other Person, as Lazarus: but the truth is, that
he died for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification: insomuch that
believing the truth, necessarily implies the knowledge of our personal interest
in Christ, the latter is always in proportion to the former. To distinguish
between the belief of the Truth, and the knowledge of our interest therein, is
the invention of a Spirit, who professing Christianity, would not be thought to
be an unbeliever, but at the same time, having not the testimony of a good
conscience, the inward witness, which the scriptures affirm to be the case with
such who believe: but full retaining a conscience of sin, he was obliged to
scheme this distinction; to keep up his credit as a believer, but such a one as
was doubtful of his personal interest in the truth believed. Yea, and to ward
off all censure on this account, this doubtfulness must be nourished and
cherished, and strongly recommended to others, as prudent religious fear; from
which we are very rarely to be delivered; and that only in proportion to our
fruitfulness, as the effects of the Truth believed. And to make this the more
plausible, it is insinuated that the greatest danger lies on the side of a
consident believing; signifying, that men are rather damned for believing
(which is called presuming) than for doubting; thus from every quarter,
Antichrist aims by his Traditions, at making void the Word of God. It is very
surprising to observe, after a person has made a great bustle about Christ,
and raised a dust, by proposing a Truth to be believed, uncloged with any
conditions whatsoever in the person believing; requiring no other qualification
in him, than what is naturally common to mankind; and that the truth which is
thus to be believed, is none other than the simple fact of Christ's Death and
Resurrection: I say, after proposing this, and quarreling with all the world
about it, giving the hardest names, even unto such, who only differed unhappily
in the Mode of Expression: To find such a one sink to this, that a man may
believe the forecited truth, and not know his interest in it; yea, have no
interest at all in it; and that such who have can only know it by their fruits,
gives as a striking prospect of Antichristian policy, and makes us suspect the
intention, where it is proposed to exalt Christ alone. The Scriptures assure us
that Mankind as Sinners, are interested in the Death and Resurrection of
Christ: Therefore to apprehend and believe that Truth properly, is to believe
our personal interest in him. If it should be objected, that Christ does not
now say to any individual, thy sins are forgiven thee; I answer, he does: for
what he said unto one, he says unto every one who believes it: otherwise, we
may say there is nothing in the Scriptures said unto us; the Old Testament
being written unto the Jews; the New Testament, some to one Church and some to
another, but none to us: If we have not a right to believe that what Christ
said unto them, he said unto us; but, that we can only know our interest in
Christ by our fruits; is first a denial of the witness of the spirit; except it
is supposed that he bears witness by those things, and not by Christ: which by
the way, is to speak of himself, and prove himself a Spirit of Error. Again, it
is to make our goodness essential to the knowledge of our Salvation, which is a
manifest going about to establish our own righteousness, as the medium at least
whereby we believe; and a contradiction to the Scripture; which says, To him
who works not, but believes on him that justifies the Ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness. Again, it makes void the law: by not adhering to its
determination, concerning good and evil: for were we always to determine of our
good and evil by the perfect law, it would be much more easy, with the greatest
pretender to piety, to number his good fruits, than it is to find them. Was
this but truly considered amongst mankind, we should not have such proud
boastings, and pretensions to know this, and the other matter, by their good
works, and holy fruits, as we have in the world. I might say, it smells much
stronger of the Church of Rome, (if it does not look a little toward Deism)
than of the Protestant Faith; but as that would be saying nothing, to such who
think the Romish Faith true, and the Protestant wrong; I shall content myself
with saying, that it is a flat contradiction of the Apostles Testimony, as I
have in part, and shall yet further show; though it would fain shelter itself
under their Authority. Where those, and the like Suggestions of Antichrist take
place in any Heart, the Consequences are shocking; as to such who are vain
enough to imagine themselves fruitful in themselves, and from thence to draw
conclusions; as they must first make to themselves a new Law, before they can
thus think: so must they of necessity be puffed up, and come into the character
of the self-righteous. And, as to such who are not sufficiently vain, to think
themselves thus fruitful, as they cannot know their interest in Christ, there
remains naught for them but misery and fear; though they have this consolation,
to be taught that unbelief and gloom, is a much less dangerous state, than an
unshaken confidence. It is easily seen, that those propositions are calculated
to multiply and increase the perplexities, doubts, and objections of Mankind,
against the Gospel of Jesus: therefore is it, that we have many more of those
in the world now, than in the first ages of Christianity.

The Apostles preached Jesus, and his Benefits, promiscuously to sinners, and
did not ^reighten his Grace, by showing that there were some who had no right
to it; either from their being reprobated or from their being unqualified; but
by Divine Authority, they preached the Gospel to every Creature, and every Man
who was a Sinner, yea whether he knew himself such or not, (for they spoke of
things as true with God, and not according to the conceptions of man) was
sufficiently qualified, and had an indisputable right, to conclude the
Savior's Death, and Resurrection, his Justification unto Life. And this much
is to be understood by the Apostles assertions, We preach Christ crucified. And
again, We preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord: And with great
power, gave the Apostles witness of the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus; and
great Grace was upon them all. And again, he preached unto them Jesus, and the
Resurrection. Thus, the Apostles dwelt altogether upon the fact of Christ's
Death and Resurrection amongst Jews and Greeks, as the alone salvation of
Mankind. And what Paul himself thought of it, is evident from that Heart
exultation of his, Who is he that condemns, it is Christ that died, yea
rather that is risen again: Thus the resurrection of Jesus, without the
consideration of any other matter, in Heaven or in Earth, was the Joy of his
Heart: Yea all his Hope, and all his Salvation. He showed, that the fact of
Christ's resurrection, was his exemption from condemnation: He viewed it, and
rejoiced in it, as such. And without doubt, what he apprehended to be Truth, he
preached unto others, as he sought not himself, in the things which he spoke:
The Glory of the Lord Jesus, and the happiness of his fellow creatures, being
that which he had always in view, in preaching the Kingdom of God. As to
Mankind, the Apostles thought them sufficiently qualified, (as being all
concluded under Sin) for the Grace which they preached. They were taught to
drop all distinctions, and no longer to consider men as clean and unclean, as
chosen and rejected: For says Peter, the Lord has showed me, that I should
not call any Man common or unclean. This was not because mankind were reformed
and better now, than when God taught the Jews to respect the Gentiles as common
and unclean; which he did under the Law; where he forbid the Jews, to have any
connection with the Gentiles; and, if it was not owing to any Change in the
Gentiles, that they were now received, and were no longer to be considered as
(...) and unclean, The Query is, What was it owing to? I answer, it was unto
the Death and Resurrection of Jesus; for it was there that God had cleansed
them. Therefore was it, that when Peter refused to eat, in the Vition of the
Sheet, saying, Nothing that was unclean, had at any time come into his mouth;
He was answered, Call not thou that common and unclean which God has cleansed.
Thus was he taught, that mankind who in themselves were unclean, were cleansed
of God in Christ Jesus: according to which cleansing, he was instructed to
respect them; and that he ought not any more to call any Man uncommon or
unclean. Therefore, it was the business of the Apostles, to tell the People
what God had done for them: Namely, that he had loved them, and washed them
from their sins, in his own Blood. Thus as to Matter, and Manner, did the first
witnesses of Jesus preach his Salvation unto the Children of Men. For where
they tell us, that they preached the Son of God; that they preached Christ
Jesus the Lord, Christ crucified, etc. without meddling with the characters and
conditions of those unto whom they preached, to point them out, as qualified or
unqualified for the reception of the Truth. I say, this their Matter and Manner
of Preaching, plainly shows, that they did not aim at making a schism in the
Body, by dividing the Head and Members, as having separate interests: But, they
aimed at showing that the interest of the Head, was that of the Members:
therefore was it, that holding the Head, they constantly preached his
Excellence, his Labors, Triumphs and Honors; that the people as his Members,
hearing of it, might hear of their own salvation and grace; because, the glory
which is given unto him, as the Head, he gives to us, as his Members. From this
Union, it appears, that hearing and believing of Christ, according to the
Apostles testimony, we hear and believe, what truly relates unto ourselves. And
thus did they, by preaching the Obedience, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of
the Lord Jesus, preach the salvation of Mankind in him; thus lifting him up
that he might draw all men unto him; and, that they might espouse the people
unto this one Husband, as chaste virgins unto this Jesus, they were cautious of
meddling with the Characters of their Hearers, as Jews or Gentiles, as
Repentant or Unrepentant, lest by making a Distinction, those who thought
themselves on the favorable side of the question, should be lifted up, and
their minds be adulterated, and rendered unchaste to the Crucified one: Nay,
they had always causticks at hand, for the proud Flesh of their Disciples,
wherever they saw it rising; and this they applied without fear, or having the
persons of men in respect, whenever they saw occasion. And how careful Paul was
in this particular, appears from his reproving Peter, for giving the least
occasion to the Jews to glory in the Flesh, and keep up a distinction, which
God had before shown him an end of; where he actually forbad him to call that
common and unclean, which he had cleansed.

This is a short specimen of the Apostles Matter and Manner of Preaching: and
according to my Apprehension, it is obvious that they had the Union between
Christ and the people in view, when they thus preached.

There are many who respect the Epistles, written by the Apostles to the
Churches, as a pattern of their preaching: but they are to consider, that there
is a wide difference between private Letters, written unto such who already
believed on the Lord Jesus, wherein there is promiscuously thrown out such
hints, as were designed to establish their Faith, and form their Manners. I
say, a real difference between those, and their manner of preaching in public,
where having to do with the Multitude, their only subject was the Person,
Death, and Resurrection of the Lord Jesus; of which their sermons recorded in
the Acts of the Apostles are instances. But since then there has been a great
falling away, and the man of sin is revealed. And, as it is more than probable
that the Day of Christ is at hand, Antichrist has great wrath, and strives to
the utmost extent of his Power and Cunning, to hinder the revival of the
Apostolic Testimony, and the rising of the witnesses. Sometimes he seeks to
establish his own Maxims, under the popular names of Virtue, Benevolence,
Repentance, Faith, Fruitfulness, etc. Then he calumniates the Testimony of
Jesus, giving it the most opprobrious characters, and mad with rage against all
the witnesses thereof, breathes forth nothing but slaughter and threatenings.
And many are they, whom he either prevails on to adopt his Maxims and become
his willing disciples, or so intimidates with his Threatenings, that they dare
not embrace the Truth, because of the certain reproach that follows. But let
him rage, he has but a short time, ere the Lord shall consume him with the
spirit of his mouth, and destroy him with the brightness of his coming: and
then shall the witnesses who now lie slain in the streets of the great city,
stand again upon their feet; and the ancient Testimony be revived.

Come quickly Lord Jesus: make no long ^arrying, O my God.

FINIS.

