THE CONFESSION, etc.

OF Thomas Mount, Who was executed at Little-Rest, in the State of
Rhode Island, on Friday, the 27th day of May, 1791, for Burglary.



PORTSMOUTH: Printed and Sold by J. MELCHER, at his Office in MARKET-STREET.

To the PUBLIC.
SOME years ago there was in England a company of foot-pads and highway-men,
connected together under certain laws and regulations, having a language (and
books printed in that language) peculiar to themselves, called the Flash
Company, -- a similar gang of plunderers has infested the United-States ever
since the late war; and almost all the persons who have been hanged of late in
North America, have belonged to this company. Of this company are the two
convicts Thomas Mount and James Williams, now lying in Newport gaol under
sentence of death, for burglary. Both of these are noted villains, as well by
legal evidence as their own confession; and were there no others, these were
sufficient to contaminate all the unwary youth upon the continent, and to
deprive the good people of these States of one of the highest blessings of
heaven, that of sitting quietly under their vine and under their fig tree and
none to make them afraid. Williams, whether from artifice or an inferior degree
of guilt, has not divulged the Flash proceedings near so fully as Mount, whose
information, therefore, is the subject matter of the following sheets, and this
is the cause why Williams' name occurs so seldom here. The discerning public
will readily see my motives for handing these papers to them. From my constant
attendance upon these convicts, perhaps my opportunities (...), etc. are equal
i^ not greater, than any oth^^ person; and the public may depend upon their
authenticity, having committed to writing their respective confessions and
informations generally before one or more competent witnesses.

WILLIAM SMITH.
Newport, May 20, 1791.
The Voluntary Confession of Thomas Mount.
I THOMAS MOUNT, now under sentence of death in the gaol of Newport, and to be
executed agreeable to my sentence, at Little-Rest, on the 27th of this month of
May -- in bodily health and sound mind, and full of sorrow and regret for my
wicked life, in sincerity and truth make the following confession:

My parents, Samuel Mount and Mary Dobbs, lived in Middletown, in East-Jersey,
where I was born some time, I believe, in 1764. My father, for the benefit of
his family, removed to New York when I was about four or five years old, where
I and my brothers were put to school; they, viz. Adam and Joseph, now living in
good repute in New York, profited in their studies -- I played truant, hated
learning and every sort of good instruction. upon Sundays especially was fond
of doing mischief such as robbing orchards, and spreading my wicked example
among all the boys I could get acquainted with. -- I began to despise my
parents, and to count every thing they said to, or did for me, as beneath my
regard; and having never learned to know my duty, either toward God, or
toward man, or myself, I despised all religion; and at the age of 10 or 11,
quitted my parents, who often told me I should one day come to an evil end, and
went to sea on board one Capt. Hammond, bound for Antigua, thence to Statia,
Navis, St. Kitts, Santacruiz, Sanctakes and Savannah. At Savannah I left him,
and went on board the Florida brig bound for Jamaica; then I left him and went
to live with one Mr. Kennedy in Kingstown, with him I lived about five or six
weeks, then left him and got aboard of a sloop Capt. Alboy, and returned in her
to New York. In 1775, the war breaking out, I quitted my parents again, and
li^ted with Capt. Palmer, and went with him to Albany, thence to Fort George,
thence to Ticonderoga, thence to Crown-Point, thence to St. John's, thence to
Montreal, thence returned to Albany, and being sick was dismissed. As soon as I
recovered, I lifted again, and went to Fort George, where I remained five
weeks, and was dismissed on account of my youth, so I returned to live with my
parents, at New York. Not relishing the good rules and advice of my parents,
again I left them and went to live with one John Mino^, at Stonnington-point,
with whom I remained six or seven months; when he was drafted to go with the
militia -- I proposed to go in his stead; accordingly went, and at Groton, near
New London, availing myself of the privileges of a militia man, I listed in the
continental army under Col. Huntington, and accompanied him to Denbigh, when
the British troops landed and burnt it. -- At Valley-Ford, in Pennsylvania, I
deserted the American, and went over to the British army, then lying in
Philadelphia. In a few days after this, I and two companions broke into a
soap-boilers' store (this is my first act of theft) and stole some soap. When
the British troops left Philadelphia, I came along with them through the
Jersies, to New York, thence to Staten-Island, where I broke open a store in
the night soon after our arrival, and took a large quantity of goods, and about
twenty dollars in cash, and the night following I broke into the same store and
took a larger quantity of goods than I had done the former night. Determined to
desert for fear of a discovery, I and two of my companions confined the
corporal that commanded the patrol, and so we escaped and went off to the
American army, into the Jersies. -- With my uncle Joseph Cox, at Embley's-Town,
who married my father's sister, I remained some weeks; but soon wearied of this
too quiet sort of life, I left my uncle and went to Philadelphia where I
entered on board a schooner, Captain Strong, bound to Cape-Francois from whence
I returned safe to Philadelphia; and in about four weeks after my return I
entered again on board the same vessel, and then run off with the advanced pay,
and entered on board the St. James, Capt. King, and cheated him of a month's
advanced pay; next entered on board the Plow brig, Capt. Browster, with whom I
went to sea, and in 24 hours were taken by the Cyble frigate, carried into
New York and put on board the Jersey prison-ship, from whence in about eleven
or twelve days I escaped to New York, where I entered on board the Macaroni
privateer, and cheated the Captain of four or five guineas, the advance money.
In a day or two after this I entered on board a schooner, received the advance
money and made off with it. Next I was apprehended by the British regiment (the
fourth battalion of Jersey volunteers) to which I formerly belonged; and was
brought before a court martial, but received no punishment on account of my
youth. Under no restraint, and already hardened by the escapes I had made, I
determined to double my diligence, if possible to arrive at the head of my
profession; accordingly, next stole a watch from one Mr. Kelly; next broke open
a store belonging to Mr. Kiz^k; next stole another watch; next stole a gilt-case
watch; next (...) watch, next stole a large bag full of English boot and bend
(...) next in company with one William F^^negin, in the evening, (...) shop
door standing open, stole a piece of corduroy about thirty yards; in
Queen Street, a few days afterward, I went into a shop in the day time, and
stole a paper of worsted stockings; and a few days after, out of a shop in
Hanover-Square, I stole a piece of linen about twenty-five yards; about a week
or so, after this, I stole another piece in Broad-Way; next, in the night time,
I and one John Delevan knocked down a sailor and took his money -- I knocked
him down, but Delevan took the money and run off with it from me. The regiment
now removing to Newtown, on Long Island, I went with them, and in a few days
after our arrival, I and one Henry Milton stole two horses and rode off with
them to Brookland, and then let them go; next day after we came to Brookland,
we were apprehended and carried back to the regiment and tried for desertion:
Henry Milton was acquitted, and I sentenced to receive 500 lashes; but the day
before my punishment commenced, I broke out of the guard-house, and escaped to
the east end of the island, but there was taken up by Colonel Thomson's light
horse, and carried to Huntington, thence under guard to Jerico, there committed
to the care of one of the Yougers to carry me to the regiment. -- The Youger's
pocket I picked, as he sat by me in the wagon, and threw all his papers down
on the road within five or six miles of Jamaica; some time after we came out of
the carriage at Jamaica, I told him that I saw the driver pick his pockets and
take all his papers and throw them down on the highway, about five or six miles
from hence. Seeing the wagon at some considerable distance, the Youger,
desiring me to follow him, pursued after the waggoner, that instant I took a
contrary direction and so escaped. I went down as far as South-Hole and then
got over in a trading boat to the main, and traveled toward New Haven, there
one day went into a shop and stole out of a drawer a small quantity of cash;
next day, out of another store, I stole from the cash-box five or six crowns
and dollars with two French guines; same day in the afternoon I went into
another shop and stole about ten pounds in silver and one English guinea.
Leaving this place, I set off for Philadelphia, where I listed into Col.
Myland's light horse, he fourth regiment of dragoons: soon after this peace
took place, I quitted the army entirely. Immediately after my leaving the army,
I broke open a continental store, and stole two pair of boots, and a parcel of
shirts; a few days after I stole a piece of calico, thirty yards, in company
with James Dawson; some little time after this, I stole from a kitchen door a
silver tankard belonging to Mr. Penrose, -- it was instantly missed; Dawson had
cut it up, but one of the Captains of the garrison intercepted it, and Dawson
and I were taken up and tried for the theft; he got 25 lashes, and I 100 lashes
for the theft, and 25 for giving the court saucy answers. No sooner was this
account settled, but I proceeded in my old way, and stole three large silver
spoons from Mr. Joseph Carson, in Water-Street; next day or so, in the evening,
I went into an apothecary's shop and took his cash-box, containing about ten
pounds; a week after this I went into a shop in -- street, and took another
piece of calico; some days after I was taken up for a debt I owed to Mr. Carson
and put in gaol; whilst in gaol, the woman to whom I and Dawson had sold the
calico, which I stole from Mr. Pool, was apprehended, having on a gown of it,
informed that she had bought it of me, accordingly I was tried for the theft
and received 21 lashes, and sentenced to imprisonment for court charges of fine
and restitution money; the very second day after I broke gaol and escaped, I
picked the pocket of one Haggaty or about three or four dollars and two
depreciation notes of about sixty pounds each; leaving Philadelphia, I went to
Burlington, and there passed the notes; thence went to New York, and lived with
my brother Adam about one or two months at the baking business; here I got
acquainted with John Lipton, and we broke open a hen-roost and stole a parcel
of fowls; next day leaving New York, we went upon Long Island, thence to
Ostend, and so on to New London; upon the road Lipton stole a watch, but the
owner missing it, pursued us, and we in a very cowardly manner give it up to
him. We journeyed to Sagg-Harbor, thence crossed over to New London, and from
thence to Boston; there the first day of our arrival we stole a few articles,
such as shoes, and other wearables; but finding Boston no proper place for us
then, on account of the alarms about stolen goods before our arrival, we set
out to go back to New York. -- Having traveled about twelve or fourteen miles
from Boston, in the night we broke open a store that stood upon the road, and
took some cash and twenty five pair of women's shoes, a large quantity of
nutmeg and a gun; and traveling along with our booty, we came up to a wagon
with a trunk of goods tied on it, standing at a tavern door, we broke open the
trunk and taking out of it a large quantity of chintz, laces, silk and cotton
hankerchiefs, we left in their stead the shoes and gun; our next step was to
secure our flight, by taking two horses out of the stable at the same place,
and rode the remainder of the night, and in the morning turned them off, whilst
we retired to the woods during the day; and when night came on we pursued our
journey toward Worcester; but hearing a wagon behind us, we went out of the
road a little till it should go past us, we fixed our eye upon it, and saw one
man only in it and he seemed to be asleep; the wagon soon stopped, we suppose at
the onwers' house, straitway we made up to it, robbed the sleeping man of all
he had, about four or five dollars, and left him sound asleep to pursue our
journey, selling our goods after the best manner we could, pretending to be
speculating sailors, till we arrived at New York. Soon after our arrival at
New York, we listed with the troops destined for the Ohio expedition; the
second or third night after our enlistment, we broke open a dwelling house
belonging to Mr. Hyde, where Lipton formerly lived, and took a silver watch, a
guinea, some small money, and a silver stock buckle; a few nights after being
informed by one Millar, whose right name was Copy Gelly, that there was money
in a house close by Mr. Lither's ship-yard, Millar, Lipton and I broke into
this house, took a watch, and a pair of silver buckles, but were discovered
just as we were ready to seize upon the money, yet we escaped. Having now
received the bounty and our clothes, we deserted from the regiment, and we
three, viz. Lipton, Millar and I, went out about five or six miles from
New York, and there Millar went down a chimney and stole a watch, and handed it
to me through a window. Our next route was toward New Haven, and within about
four or five miles of New Haven, we broke into a dwelling house where a
physician lived, at the sign of the ball, here we took some money and departed;
thence to Hartford, here we listed with the troops going against the Indians
with Capt. Heart; we received the bounty-money, and in two or three days
deserted. Lipton chose to remain a little while at Hartford; Millar and I set
off for Boston. Within about four or five miles of Providence we broke into a
dwelling house and stole some silver spoons, then strait to Providence; and the
very same night broke into a dwelling house near Mr. Sterry's house and took a
large silver spoon and a quantity of clothes; and next day leaving Providence,
set out for Boston: here we went to board with Mrs. Rich, and when ready to
leave her, we stole from her a pattern of a silk and cotton jacket, and set off
for Dedham, where we broke open the dwelling house of Mr. Newall, and stole a
large quantity dry goods, for which we were apprehended and tried, and being
found guilty, received 30 lashes, I was put upon the gallows one hour with a
rope round my neck, and sent to Castle-William for three years. After about
eighteen months confinement, in a foggy day I escaped from thence by swimming
three miles, and just as I was approaching the wharves a boat took me up, with
an intention of delivering me up to the Castle, from whence they supposed I had
escaped; a little after we were on shore, and being favored by the darkness of
the night, I run off from them. Next day I arrived at Providence, and got into
employ with one Capt. De Wolf, late from Guinea; soon left him, and set out for
Norwich Landing, where I fell in with an old companion, Archibald Tailor (since
executed in Boston) and nex^ day setting out for Boston, upon the road we
robbed a woman of a gold earlock and a silk handkerchief, and used her very ill
besides; a few miles further on the road, I stole a gold ring and a tortoise
shell silver mounted fan, in Plainfield; here we changed our minds, and
returned to Norwich Landing, where I stole a surtout; the first night after our
return we broke into a store belonging to Mr. Devitt, and took about seventy or
eighty pounds worth of dry goods; took the goods along and set off for
New London, and within two or three miles of that place; hid the greatest part
of them in Mr. Parson's barn among hay: at New London we were both apprehended
on suspicion, I having the art of representing myself innocent got clear, but
my companion was confined in gaol. Being set at liberty, I went to Mr. Parson's
house, where I staid two or three days, and set off one evening toward
New York with a part of the goods, which I disposed of by the way. As soon as
my money was spent, in New York, I left that place and set off to go back to
Mr. Parson's for the rest of the goods; at Milford I got a companion to go with
me, one John Delavan, we found the goods just as I had left them, and set out
with them to New Haven, where we tarried a few days; in the mean time Delavan
received from me a part of the goods for his trouble; and making free to steal
more of them made off with them to his house at Milford. In a day or two after
Delavan left me, having sold the rest of the goods to different people, I and
one Harry M'Cormic hired a boat to carry us to Milford; we run her ashore among
the rocks, and before morning she stove all to pieces; from hence walking to
Milford, I called upon Delavan, made him deliver up to me such goods as he had
not sold. Leaving Milford, M'Cormic and I sat out for New York, where in two or
three days we fell in with another of our companions, George Gardener (from
Greenock, a famous key-maker.) Just before leaving New York, where M'Cormic
stayed behind, I called on my brother Adam and received about four dollars from
him; prepared for our journey, we then set out for Philadelphia, where next day
after our arrival, Gardener and I opened a barber's shop in Water-street, with
a false key, and stole razors, tooth drawers, etc. next day I stole some paper
money; some days after fell in with John Lipton and Daniel Kalaghan; by
agreement we four set out for Baltimore, upon our way through Charleston,
there, with a false key, opened a store, and took about twenty pounds worth of
goods; we carried them as far as Susquehanna ferry and there hid them, and
pursued our journey. At Bushtown we attempted to break open a store, but were
discovered, yet we escaped. Arrived in Baltimore, we fell in with our old
friend Holmes, and on the third day after Holmes and I went to fetch the goods
we had hid at Susquehanna ferry; we found them as I left them, and returned,
selling them by the way. In Baltimore I stole a watch and a surtout out of a
house; a few nights after we broke open a house and stole a large quantity of
clothing and a piece of broadcloath. Gardener and Kalaghan chose to remain in
Baltimore, whilst I and Lipton should set off for Annapolis and sell the goods
we had upon hand: At Annapolis Lipton was apprehended for breaking open the
store in Baltimore and imprisoned. Before I left Annapolis, to mend my luck, I
stole some black ribbon and a few more trifles. Again Kalaghan joined me, and
another companion (I cannot remember his name.) We three set out for
Alexandria, where I fell in with James Brown; he and I one day stole some silk
handkerchiefs and a beaver hat; next day Gardener and Stewart joined us; they
had fled from Alexandria, where they broke into a shop and had taken a large
quantity of goods, and hid them; next day they went for the goods they had hid,
and we all four in company set out for Dumfries, where I and Stewart were
apprehended and all the false keys found with us. Gardener and Brown escaped,
Stewart and I were thrown into Dumfries gaol, and thence carried to Alexandria.
We were tried, and nothing found against us, nevertheless we were all sentenced
to lie in gaol a year and a day, or get some one to be surety for our good
behavior. In the second week of our imprisonment we broke gaol: At Wilmington,
on our way to Philadelphia, we broke into a dwelling house and stole a great
many things, next day were apprehended and sent to Newcastle gaol, from whence
in two or three weeks, we escaped. Arrived at Philadelphia, I left Stewart and
took another componion, one Griffin, passed some counterfeit New York money,
stole some handkerchiefs, a beaver hat, a surtout, and two shawls, from
different shops; next, in company with Griffin and one Fogg, in the night time,
broke into a store and took cheese, sugar, coffee, and several other grocery
goods. Fogg was apprehended, Griffin and I escaped, and quickly leaving
Philadelphia, we set off for New York: On our way, at Perthamboy, we stole some
black silk handkerchiefs. Arrived at New York, Griffin, John Tailor and I broke
into a store belonging to Mr. Ford, and took a large quantity of shoes, tea,
cherry-rum, etc. next day, for this transaction, we were all apprehended and
tried; I got clear, my companions were branded, getting the benefit of clergy,
and so were dismissed. Then Ford swore his life against me, and got me shut up
in prison about eight or nine months: I got out upon condition of quitting the
place in twelve hours, and returned to Philadelphia, where, next day after my
arrival, I stole a piece of chintz and a piece of calico, from a store in
Market Street; a few nights after I and David Griffin, and one Logan, a tailor,
in Irishtown, broke open a dwelling house in Walnut-Street, and stole a large
quantity of dry goods; next day I and Griffin were apprehended, the goods were
found where we had hidden them in a church then building; I and Griffin were
committed to gaol; next day after our imprisonment, a man appeared who swore
highway robbery against me, which I was innocent of. After being confined
about eight weeks I broke out, and in company with George Williams and Daniel
Kalaghan set off to pass through the Jersies; upon our way stole some money,
about two dollars, from a man into whose house we had gone to rest ourselves;
and in Allentown we attempted to break open a store, but did not succeed;
thence to Middletown, crossed over to Long Island; thence to Huntington; thence
to Norwalk, where we three broke open a schooner and stole some clothes; on the
same night broke open a store belonging to Squire Lockhart in Norwalk, from
whence we took about seventy or eighty pounds in goods and some silver buckles,
and about two pounds in cash; next day we were apprehended and tried, first for
robbing the schooner; I and Kalaghan were found guilty and received 10 lashes a
piece, Williams got clear; and then we were all three committed to Fairfield
gaol, and tried for breaking open the store. I took all the blame upon myself
and cleared the other two, and received the punishment, 35 lashes and five
years imprisonment. Eight or nine days after my whipping broke out of gaol, and
I, Kalaghan, Kennedy and Williams set off for Norwich Landing, with an
intention of breaking open a store, but did not succeed. Upon the way we stole
some shirts and trowsers, and then we parted, Kalaghan and Kennedy took the
road for Providence, Williams and I to Norwich Landing; and at a dance in
Norwich Landing I took a silk cloak from a young lady, and sold it about two or
three miles from Pockatanock bridge, and then set off for Providence; here I
stayed and wrought a week or two with Mr. Brown, under the name of Charles
Minor; then leaving Providence I set off for Boston, where I fell in company
with James Williams, for the first time of our connection. I stole some
buckles, and then, in company with Williams, set out for Newbury-Port, there I
broke open a schooner, and took out of her some clothes, chocolate, and
tobacco, and a bottle of rum; Williams stood upon the wharf and helped to take
the things, we then set off for Portsmouth, and on the way I stole an axe and
sold it for a pair of shoes. At Portsmouth I left Williams, and returned to
Newbury-Port, there I fell in company with one Mr. Farrington, a gentleman
thief: Next night we two broke open a dwelling house, and took some silk gowns
and women's apparel out of it; there I got apprehended on account of robbing a
brig in Portsmouth, having part of the goods with me that were taken out of her
by Williams, I was confined two or three days in gaol and then liberated.
Leaving Newbury-Port I set off for Boston alone, where I broke open a schooner
and took a parcel of clothes out of her; from thence returned to Providence,
where I fell in company with John Hickcock. Leaving Providence in a few days,
we two set off for Norwich Landing, there we attempted to break open a store,
and while I was lifting up Hickcock in at the window, the gentleman of the
house alarmed us and we escaped: From thence we went to New London, where we
broke open a store and took some money, twenty or thirty shillings, and some
cotton and silk handkerchiefs, etc. and then set off for Newport and sold some
of the goods in Newport; here Hickcock and Weathers broke open a store
belonging to Mr. John Hadwen; for this I was apprehended and committed to gaol
for two or three days, then was cleared, and set off for Hartford, upon the way
I attempted to break open a house in Stonington, but being discovered I fled
out of town to Hartford, thence returned toward Providence, upon the way broke
open a dwelling house in Connecticut, and stole some silver and pewter spoons,
a hat and a tankard Carrying the goods with me I arrived at Providence and sold
them; here I worked with Mr. Brown a week or two under the name of Charles
Minor; then I stole a pair of shoes out of Mr. Roger's store where I had gone
to receive my pay; next I went to Nancy Smith and told her I was a
fortune tellers, and repeating several things that I had heard of her, she
thought I was really a fortune tellers; then I proposed to marry her, and she
approved of my offer; then I said I wanted to tell Miss Sally Brown's fortune,
but could not in her father's house lest it should offend him, and asked
whether it would be agreeable to bring down Sally Brown to her room; but this I
could not do unless I was disguised; accordingly I desired her to give me some
clothes for the purpose; she gave me a cloak and a surtout, but my plan was to
run off with them. All this while I was aboard the Washington, Capt. Donalson,
and Mr. Nightengale, as he thought he knew me aboard the Alliance frigate, but
was not the purser, trusted me with money in advance. Leaving Providence with
the advance money, I set off for Boston, there I took some sh^w^s; from thence
I went to Newbury-Port, where I fell in company with a young sailor going to
visit his friends, carrying some handkerchiefs and shawls, we walked together
about 14 or 15 miles, and at night we put up at Mr. Lovet's tavern betwixt
Newbury-Port and Portsmouth; in the night I got up and robbed him of all he
had, I took about four or five dollars in cash, a piece of calico, and two or
three shawls, a pair of new stocklngs, a pair of new shoes, a pair of new
buckles, a pair of new trowsers, a new shirt, and a beaver hat, a cotton and
silk jacket, and a silk striped jacket, a pot of sweet pomatum, two books and
two letters, and a parcel of oranges; from thence I went to Boston by the way
of Exeter; arrived in Boston, I fell in company with Robert Tresson and Thomas
Sheridan, where I took one or two shawls, and set out from Boston to go to
Connecticut, about ten miles from Pomfret, Tresson and I attempted to rob a
house, but were disappointed; then on we went to Pomfret, where we all three
were concerned in robbing a wagon, and took two pieces of homemade bearskin,
and on the same night broke open a blacksmith's shop, and got some tools
wherewith to break open a store belonging to Lemming Grosvernor, took about 110
pounds worth in goods, and about two or three dollars in cash, then set off to
Norwich Landing; about two miles from Norwich Landing, one Mountseer lives, who
is known to this sort of business, there we got apprehended, and sent to
Windham gaol; Sherridan turned evidence against us, and we were tried and found
guilty, and I received 40 lashes and to be imprisoned six months, Tresson 30,
and to be imprisoned three months: Within the first two months of our
imprisonment, Robert Tresson, William Stanton, Gershom Palmer and I, being all
in one apartment, broke gaol. Tressan, Stanton and I went to Voluntown, there
Stanton left us and Tresson and I went to Boston, where I stole two patterns of
silk jackets. Here meeting with William English, one of our company, we three
set off for Portsmouth; there we attempted to rob a store, but a fire breaking
out in the town at that instant, prevented us; hearing the fire called we ran
to where the fire was, there Tresson stole a jacket from Oliver Whipple, Esquire.
in the pockets thereof were a forty pound note of hand, a penknife and a comb;
next day we three were apprehended on suspicion of setting the house on fire,
but were acquitted; then I set off alone to Kennebunk, in Massachusetts,
eastward of Portsmouth, and there broke open a store belonging to Messrs. Condy
and Clark, and stole a large quantity of dry goods and escaped about 70 miles,
and then was apprehended, in consequence of an advertisement, and committed to
Old-York gaol, from whence after three weeks I broke out and set off for
Portsmouth. The next night after my arrival at Portsmouth, I broke open the
house of Mr. Chadwick, the jailer, and stole some money and a quantity of men's
and women's clothes, and gave Tresson (whom I found here in prison) part of the
money and two saws, and then set off toward Newbury-Port: Next morning Tresson
called the gaolkeeper and told him that it was I that robbed him, and had given
him two saws and a dollar in money, wherewith to effect his escape; then the
jailer sent a pursuer after me, who apprehended and carried me back to
Portsmouth gaol, from thence I was carried to Exeter for my trial; upon
Tresson's evidence I was found guilty, but received no punishment by reason
that I promised to inform of all those persons who received stolen goods, and
how the house was set on fire; and therefore the court adjourned one month, and
I carried back to Portsmouth gaol; but before the month was expired I broke
gaol and set off for Boston, and fell in company with Joseph Kelly who had two
coats and jackets he had stolen to bear our expenses to Newport. We set off for
Newport, and immediately upon our arrival, Kelly stole a pair of silver buckles
from Mr. -- a Jew, and I stole three or four black silk handkerchiefs from Mr.
Wickham; next I and Kelly broke open a cooper's shop to get tools to break into
Mr. Wickham's store, but daylight coming on we could not complete our business.
No body pointed out the store to us I had been in it the day before. Then
leaving Newport, Kelly and I went to Mansfield, and there we parted; there I
broke open a store belonging to Mr. Gilbert, and took a quantity of goods, to
the value of about twenty pounds, and with these goods set off to Voluntown to
one Mr. Stedman's a receiver of stolen goods; there I again met with Kelly, and
getting some money of Stedman for some of the goods, I returned to Providence,
where I got playing cards with a countryman, cheated him of some money and two
dressed sheepskins; there Kelly recommended me to one Lewis who supplied us
with tools, and then Kelly and I set out to break Mr. Roger's store, and had
almost completed our business; but being alarmed by two or three men, made our
escape, and took a couple of horses and rode almost to Voluntown, and then
turned them off. At Voluntown we stayed one day, and the next sell in company
with James Williams, who told me he was going to Providence to get on board Mr.
Brown's Indiaman: I asked him to go with me the way of Stonington, and he
consented; so Williams, Kelly and I set off to William Stanton's (we turned
Kelly off telling him that two might keep a secret, but three could not) then
Williams, Stanton and I set off for Hopkinton with an intention to break a
store, but did not succeed; but Williams and Stanton took a dozen pair of
stockings off a fence. -- Upon our return to Stanton's, I held the horses at
the bridge, Williams and Stanton broke open a mill, and took all the meal and
corn they could find, and we carried it to Stanton's house: Stanton next day
sent some of the corn to Rowse Babcock's for rum. Next night Stanton, Williams
and I set off to break into Joseph Potter's store; I broke open a mill and took
a crow-bar out of it, and went to the door and broke it, and we all three went
in, I first, and they following. Being most forward in this business, I lighted
a candle and handed down the goods, about seven hundred dollars worth, and some
money, two or three dollars, and carried them to Stanton's house, where we
divided them into three parts and cast lots. Williams and I took our shares;
after giving Stanton out of my share eight or nine pounds worth of goods for a
mare, and hiding the goods under two corn stacks and under a barn, about five
miles from Stanton's house, we set off for Voluntown, there were apprehended,
and brought back to Hopkinton, where Stanton, I and my wife were tried for
breaking open the miil; Stanton's wife and Williams were admitted as State's
evidence: accordingly I was sentenced to receive 20 lashes and my wife 10
(though she was innocent). -- I paid the fine by giving up part of my clothes,
then committed to Newport gaol, and tried for breaking Potter's shop, found
guilty, and received the sentence of death -- And the Lord have mercy upon me.

To the above Confession I here add my last Speech and Dying Words:

The LAST SPEECH and DYING WORDS of THOMAS MOUNT, published at his own Desire,
for the public Good in general, and for that of his Comrades in particular.
WHEN I see that every attempt to break gaol is unsuccessful and every effort
to prevent my suffering an ignominious death, is like to be fruitless, I Thomas
Mount, in conformity to the custom of publishing a last speech or dying words,
for the benefit of my survivors, do hereby declare this to be my last speech
and dying words.

And first -- I pray that the Lord may have mercy upon me, and that all good
people may pity and pray for me; and that my shameful end may deter others from
those actions which have brought me to this dreadful hour.

Secondly -- I desire to be truly penitent for my crimes, both against the law
of GOD and the laws of MEN; and to believe that Divine goodness has thus
arrested me in my career of wickedness, for his glory and my everlasting good.
I desire to be more resigned to my sentence than I fear I am. So great has been
my propensity to stealing, even from my childhood, that were my days prolonged,
it is more than probable I should get into my old way again. I am horribly
afraid to die; and yet confess I deserve not to live: but am certain, that the
mercy of government in pardoning thieves, is no mercy at all to them, for every
pardon they get hardens them so much the more in their villainy. The only way
to reclaim one thief, is either to banish or hang all the other thieves and all
the receivers of stolen goods; for so long as there are receivers and thieves
living and at liberty, however penitent one thief may be the hour he receives
his pardon and freedom yet whenever he gets abroad among his old acquaintances,
they will wish him joy of his escape from the gallows; they will get drunk with
him; they will carry him to the places of rendezvous, where the women and
liquors are all in common, and with relating their wonderful escapes from
justice, with the stimulating songs of his comrades, with the artful behavior
of the scandals of their sex, he becomes ten-fold more a child of the devil
than he was before.

Thirdly -- Nothing corrupts young fellows more, than idleness and bad women,
who are first the seducers to all evil, and if their extravagancies are not
gratified to the f^^^, become our betrayers: and therefore, as a dying man,
would entreat all young men to get married and settled at some honest oalling
as soon as possible

Fourthly -- At my desire, the language and songs of the American flash company
are published, to inform the world at large how wicked that company is, and how
necessary it is to root them up like so many thorns and briers which if
suffered to remain would destroy the rising crop of young fellows throughout
the Continent. The whole of the secrets concerning this business, the names of
the persons concerned in carrying it on, whether as thieves or receivers, or
setters on, or suppliers with tools wherewith to break out of gaols, or into
houses, to a good friend of mine when under sentence of death, I have
communicated; at the same time taking his promise that he will transmit the
same to the Governors of the United States of America immediately after my
decease, that they may be of general utility to this country.

Fifthly -- I have communicated likewise to this gentleman, the various ways of
discovering thieves and house-breakers, so that in future it will be next to
impossible to practice the thieving business without detection: And as all
thieves are great cowards (for the bark of a dog will make them run) I will
advise every honest man who wishes to preserve his property, to remenber the
rules I have communicated, and to act upon them; if he does, there is no great
chance of being robbed, or having his house broke. Likewise I would submit it
to the judgment of our rulers, whether it would not be proper to fine every man
who was robbed on the highway, provided only two thieves attacked him, because
he did not defend himself; for the heroism of one honest man is, or ought to
be, sufficient to make two thieves run.

Sixthly -- As a dying man, a debtor to my country, and desirous of making all
the compensation in my power, I further make known how any man of the least
common sense may discover a thief, -- by his often looking back -- turning
quick up lanes -- standing to gaze at signs -- and stopping to enquire for the
houses of persons who do not live in the place -- going into shops and giving
the merchant a deal of unnecessary trouble in calling for a sight of one thing
and another, and of twenty more, without buying one article. If a thief appears
in the day time, you never see him without his rogue's face on; look at him
pretty sharply, and you will see how suspicious and timorous he looks; take him
by the hand, it feels soft, and your touch makes him shrink, you may perceive
his hand nervous; but in nothing is this nervousness more perceptible than, if
he takes a pen at your desire, to write with -- it will therefore be to ask all
suspected persons to write, and their hand will instantly tell upon their heart.

Seventhly -- I must complain to the public of the receivers, or fences, as we
call them in the flash language, -- they are our setters on, and they cheat us
confoundedly; we seldom receive from them more than a tenth part of the value,
and must take it in what pay they please, and when they please; and by getting
us drunk with our whores, every now and then, they generally steal from us all
they can possibly come at, and then set us a fighting with one another about
the goods they had taken. These receivers being in league with our whores, make
them very extravagant in their demands upon us, who, after treating them with
the best of our spoils, if we do not promise quickly to get them more, threaten
to inform against us. -- In one word, a thief or highway-man is a pitiable
animal; he risks his life every adventure he engages in, and all the recompense
he gets for his pains, is the treachery of his whores and comrades, and last of
all an ignominious death. Though at any time we take a large quantity of goods,
we cannot sell them to any account; and after giving hush-money to some, paying
a comrade for his help (for we hire one another on such like expeditions, as
breaking a shop or house, or way-laying the stage-coach, etc.) and gratifying
our pretended friends with presents, we have seldom or never enough to buy
decent clothes, wherein to assume the character and appearance of honest men
and quit bad company, had we ever so much mind for it.

Eighth -- When I look back upon a company of thieves, with their whores, met
after some house or shop breaking match, full of plunder, and recollect the
scenes of cursing, singing, dancing, swearing, roaring, lewdness, drunkenness,
and every possible sort of brutish behavior, I detest myself for having so
often been one in such companies. -- Under these circumstances we are very
liable to be apprehended: and therefore, good people and bad people, thieves
and honest men, take warning by my fate, and mind my advice; for if ye get into
the way of thieving, nothing can cure you but the gallows -- I never heard of a
thief that was reclaimed but one, and that under such circumstances as can
never be the lot of any other thief to the end of the world.

Pray for me good people -- I am wicked, and there are many others in the
United States perhaps as wicked as myself; I pray they may depart from their
wickedness, before their cup of iniquity becomes full, and they entail upon
themselves the death I am going to suffer. It is but justice that such as have
lived like wolves and beasts of prey, should die like dogs, and not like men.

And the Lord have mercy upon me -- farewell.

One day, in a frame of mind more devout than ordinary, I composed the
following LAMENTATION, which I desire may be published exactly as I have
dictated it, as a conclusion to my last speech and dying words.
ALL ye good people who are assembled here this day,
Let my shameful end a warning be to you I pray,
Behold a dying victim who for his sins does pardon crave,
Who once lived in good credit among his friends both fine and brave.
THOMAS MOUNT is my name,
And to my shame cannot deny
In New Jersey I was born,
And on Little-Rest now must die.
Of robbing I own that I guilty be,
O may my dear redeemer from further torments set me free,
Through all this country it is well they know my name;
From Boston to New York it is well they know my fame;
From New York to Philadelphia, from thence unto Charlestown,
So basely I Have behaved in roving up and down;
From Charlestown to Baltimore, I quickly have set out,
For robbing of a merchant I was obliged to scout;
For robbing of another man I closely was pursued,
And my faithful comrade Lipton was taken on the road;
From thence to Newport gaol, which is the truth of my song,
So here I lie dismal bound down in irons strong.
Come all ye young men a warning take by me,
Love your wives, and mind your work, and shun bad company;
Quit gaming, and fine whores,
Pay off your tavern scores,
For they will be flaring at your daring,
When you can spend no more.
My wife pities my misfortune, alas! both night and day;
My comrades take good council and go no more astray:
I tried hard myself for to clear,
My relations will shed many a tear,
My wife she cries and tears her hair,
Oh! go I must, and the Lord knows where.
I hope my soul to heaven may flee,
And there remain to eternity:
Hoping that Christ will receive my soul.
And pardon my sins which are many fold.
Now on my dying day,
Pray for me all ye standers by,
(My friends do not parade
With sad and mournful tragedy.)
May the GOD of mercy grant me full pardon for my sin,
Open the gate, good Lord, and let a penitent sinner in.
(Signed) T. M*

The Flash Company in London (of which Mountain, lately executed in
Connecticut, was a member) had a language peculiar to themselves, and books
printed in that language; Mount says he never saw any of those books, but
Williams confessed to the publisher of these papers, that he had seen them in
London, and one of them in the possession of a J. S. -- rs, in Jacksonborough,
South Carolina. -- This language has been taken notice of in some British
magazines, but little information communicated concerning it; and therefore, to
gratify the public, the following dictionary of the Flash language (so far as
could be obtained from Mount and Williams) together with several Flash songs,
and the oath they administer to flats (as they call the novices in the art of
thieving) when they are admitted into the Flash society, are added:

THE FLASH LANGUAGE.
A man, a cove A woman, a blown A young woman, a young blown A young lad, a
young cove A house, a ken Play house or fair, garf Master of the house, cove of
the ken Mistress of the house, blown of the ken Son, young cove of the ken
Daughter, young blown of the ken A gentleman, a swell A lady, a fine blown A
child, a kinicher Hands, dads Eyes, peepers Head, nanny Nose, mugg Mouth, mamma
A hat, a kelp A wig, a busby A coat, a tog A jacket, a javin A shirt, a smisk
Breeches, kicksees Stockings, leg-bags Boots, quil-pipes Shoes, crabs Buckles,
latches Cash, lowr A watch, a trick A guinea, a quid A dollar, a wheel Money of
any kind, bit Bad money, blue bit Passing bad money, ringing blue bit Gold in
plate of any sort, ridge Silver plate of any sort, wedge Coppers, maggs Silver
spoons, wedge feeders A horse, a pred A horse stealer, a prednapper A sheep, a
woolly hi^d A knife, a chive A pair of pistols, a pair of pops A sword, a lush
A crow-bar, a gentleman A thief, a prigg A gambler, a sharp A blanket or sheet,
a spread A bed, a dause Dry goods, chattery Cards, broads or flats A
pocketbook, a reader A note of any kind, a screen Ribbons, dobbins Bread,
pinum Butter, a spread Cheese, caz Victuals of any kind, grub or peck Rum, suck
Drunk, sucky A bottle, a glaz' Sugar, pellock Tobacco, weed or ^unk Tobacco
smoke, bl^st of ^^^mer Thief's girl, bl^wen sp^ie or mush To take, to hobble To
lose, to sweet A gaol, a quod or qu^^ A gaol-keeper, a quod or (...) A
constable, a horney A sheriff, a trapp A judge, a beeks A clergyman, a d^ll
g^wn's-man The law, pa^^ The devil, the cri^^^^ c^ve Hell, the crim^on (...)
The moon, Olivea's lea^y The sun, Phoebu^ A fit night for stealing, a (...)
darky A town, a (...) A vessel, a b^^rkey Lewd women, cat^ A c^ach, a r^^^^e
(...) The highway, bonny-throw Picking pockets, diving A snitch, one that turns
evidence A drag, one that robs a wagon on the highway
FLASH PHRASES.
Peter (a watch word) somebody ^ea^s us, also an iron chest where cash is kept
Lea (another watchword) look who comes Nose the cove, watch the man and see
where he goes Go weed the cove, go speak to the man Stow your weeds, hold your
tongue I am spotted, I am disappointed, somebody ^aw me Let us sterry, let us
make our escape Rumble like a miza, wash my clothes Knuckling, picking of
pockets Doing the cove of a trick, taking a gentleman's watch A snow ^ig,
stealing clothes out of doors Taking chattery upon the list, taking goods in
the day time The evening or morning s^eak, (...) in the morning or late in the
evening A s^amp, robbing a gentleman on the highway A dub, ope^i^g a door with
a f^l^e key Cracking a ken, breaking into a hou^e Open a glaze, g^i^g in at a
window ^lying the lu^, going up or down a chimney Knocked down upon the crap,
(...) Turnips, acquil^ca Naptatees, a man to be f^ogged Knocked down upon the
slum, a place of confinement or castle I have done the cove out and out, I have
killed a man I have queered the quod, I have broke prison I Am in slangs, I Am in
irons I Am napping my bib, I Am crying Ready to be topped, going to be hanged
The OATH at the Admission of a Flat into the Flash Society.
THE oldest Flash cove takes the Flat by the hand, asks him if he desires to
join the Flash Company. The Flat answers, yes. The Flash cove (head man) bids
him say thus: -- I swear by -- that to the Flash Company I will be true --
never divulge their secrets, nor turn evidence against any of them -- and if a
brother is in ^tress, that I will hasten to relieve him at the risk of my life
and liberty -- and if he suffers, endeavor to be revenged on the person or
persons who were the means of bringing him to punishment. -- After taking the
above, or a similar oath, the Flat receives a pall, i. e. a companion, and they
two are sent out upon some expedition.

N. B. By the confession of Mount and Williams, it appears the Flash Company
have spread themselves all over the continent, from Nova Scotia to the remotest
parts of Georgia -- that the principal seaport towns are their places of
general rendezvous -- and that the number of the society a^ present, are from
about 70 to 80 males and females. They have receivers in the principal towns of
each State, who not only receive the stolen goods, but point out shops and
houses for them to break into and plunder.

Sometimes they swear by GOD, and sometimes by the Devil: when they use the
name of GOD, they swear by the Ola (...) knows all things; and when by the
Devil, by the Cove of the (...) K^n!

FLASH SONGS.
A Highwayman's Flash Song.
COME an ye roving scamping blades,
That scamping take delight,
That go out on the bonny throw
Upon a darky night;
With pops into your pocket,
And lashes in your hand,
We'll ride up to the Diligence,
And boldly bid her stand.
By stopping of the Diligence,
Put Jervis in a fright,
Who said I Will have your body hung
Before to-mo^^w night.
I said ye gallows rogue
Haul in your bridle reins,
Or else a leaden bullet
Shall pierce your bloody brains.
Then to the inside passengers
Straightway we did repair,
To do them of their lowr,
It was our only care.
We dunn'd them of their lowr,
And thought it all our own.
We bid them a good darky,
They rolled the road to town.
Another Highwayman's Song.
I WILL sport as good a pred away
As any boy in town,
I Will trot her fourteen miles an hour,
I Will back her ten to one.
She Is up to all the cross roads,
And never makes a stand,
Here and there and every where,
We ride with pop in hand.
Next to my blown spenie
I Will go without a doubt,
And if I meet a swell-cove,
I Will do him out and out.
A Pickpocket's Song.
I AND my blown to the garf
Straightway did repair,
We tripp'd the green flyers,
One two three pair of stairs.
She Is flashing to the miz,
Then I do her lose,
She does them of their tricks,
And then we go to snows.
Daylight being over,
And darky coming on,
We'll all go to the Flash-ken,
And have a roaring song.
A London Ken-cracking Song.
COME all ye scamps both far and near,
Listen a while and ye shall hear,
How five young lads, who in their prime,
Were all cut off before their ti^^e.
Up Ludgate hill we did set cut,
Upon the crack ye need ^ot doubt,
Scarce (...)
(...) to Sir Robert's ken we came,
Says Harry Jones, "as true's my name,
With iron chisels and crow-bars too,
To's iron Peter we'll soon break through."
And when his Peter we did burst,
His golden chain I hobbled first;
The next it was a diamond ring,
This was doing quite the thing.
With active hands and tongues (...) still,
With wedge and bit our sacks did till,
But when called for to be tried,
The fact we all bore, I denied.
Frank being cast, to's mush did say,
With other prigs never live I pray;
Jack Brim was there, Lions the Jew,
Who turned snitch on lads so true.
There was Franc Finis, a hearty blade,
Isaac Barton besides my dad,
Charley Jones, Bill Thomson too,
Five cleverer lads ye never knew.
Your honest trades pray don't forsake,
For if ye do, ye'll rue the day
That ever you scampt upon the lay.
Would'nt it grieve your hearts to see
Five clever lads hung on a tree,
Taking their leave and last farewell?
I hope in heaven their souls may dwell.
Mount's flash song upon himself.
COME ye prigs, and scamps full bold,
I Will sing you of a lad of fame,
Who in New York town once did dwell,
And Thomas Mount it is my name.
As I was going out on the scamp,
Void of any dread or fear,
I was surrounded by the traps,
And to the quod they did me steer.
And when I come into the quod,
Captain R -- ds did ^e know,
Tommy come tip me the ^it, he said,
And I Am the cove, that'll b^^ng you through,
(...) ^ind Sir I Have got no o^^
I had (...) all your (...)
Before they pro^^ ^y overthrow*
Ram'd into his closest gaol,
I had some bits, his traps well know,
I lent some bits to fetch me s^ck,
And then to cracking we did go.
And now I cracked the quod again,
Away to thieving I will go,
Gardener went to fetch me tools,
Away to -- we did flow.
We dunn'd him out of all he had,
And then to Lovelies we did steer,
For to whet the bit ye know,
And in the ken we hobbled were.
Again they brought me to the quod,
The quaecall said, you never shall go,
Hand me down large heavy irons,
On Thomas Mount a pair must go."
When the quaecall shut me up
I did not break my heart with woe,
I broke my slangs, then cracked the quod.
Again to thieving I did go.
Chorus, To thieving and cracking,
To scamping and napping,
Of coves with praddles,
Of kens with daddles
And away to thieving I will go.
FINIS.

