EXPLANATORY NOTES UPON THE NEW TESTAMENT.

BY JOHN WESLEY, M. A. Late Fellow of Lincoln-College, Oxford.

VOLUME THE THIRD.

THE FIRST AMERICAN EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY PRICHARD AND HALL: SOLD BY JOHN DICKINS, NO. 45,
FOURTH-STREET, NEAR THE CORNER OF SACK-STREET.

M DCC XCI.

NOTES ON St. PAUL's Epistle to the Philippians.
PHILIPPI was so called from Philip King of Macedonia, who much enlarged and
beautified it. Afterward it became a Roman Colony, and the chief City of that
Part of Macedonia. Hither St. Paul was sent by a Vision to preach; and here,
not long after his Coming, he was shamefully entreated. Nevertheless many were
converted by him, during the short Time of his Abode there; by whose Liberality
he was more assisted, than by any other Church of his planting. And they had
now sent large Assistance to him by Epaphroditus; by whom he returns them this
Epistle.

It contains six Parts, I. The Inscription, C. i. 1, 2 II. Thanksgiving and
Prayers for them, 3 -- 11 III. He relates his present State and good Hope:
Whence he exhorts them, 12 -- 14 1. While he remains with them, to walk worthy
of the Gospel, 25 -- 30 2. Though he should be killed, to rejoice with him, And
promises, 17, 18 1. To certify them of all Things by Timotheus, 19 -- ^4 2. In
the mean time to send Epaphroditus, 25 -- 30 IV. He exhorts them to rejoice, C.
iii. 1 -- 3 admonithing them, to beware of false Teachers, and to imitate the
true, 2 -- 21 commending Concord, C. iv. 1 -- 3 He again exhorts them to Joy
and Meekness, 4 -- 7 and to whatsoever Things are excellent, 8 -- 9 V. He
accepts of their Liberality, 10 -- 20 VI. The Conclusion, 21 -- 23

PHILIPPIANS.
PAUL and Timotheus, servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ
Jesus who are at Philippi, be unto you, and peace from God our Father and the
Lord Jesus Christ. it until the day of Jesus Christ, of the gospel. in all
spiritual sense, That ye may try the things that are excellent,

Now I would have you know, whole palace,

so now also, Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether by life or by death.

For to me to live is Christ, is gain. But if I am to live in the flesh, is the
fruit of my labor, and what I should choose, I know not. For I am in a strait
between two, which is far better. But to remain in the flesh is more needful
for you. is of God. For to you it is given with regard to Christ, not only to
believe on him, hear to be in me.

V. 1. Servants -- St. Paul writing familiarly to the Philippians, does not
style himself and Apostle. And under the common Title of Servants, he tenderly
and modestly joins with himself his Son Timotheus, who had come to Philippi not
long after St. Paul had received him, Acts xvi. 3, 12. To all the Saints -- I
he Apostolic Epistles were sent more directly to the Churches, than to the
Pastors of them; with the bishops and deacons -- The former properly took Care
of the internal State, the latter of the Externals of the Church, (1 Timothy iii.
2 -- 8.) Although these were not wholly confined to the one, neither those to
the other. The Word Bishops here includes all the Presbyters as Philippi, as
well as the Ruling Presbyters: The Names Bishop and Presbyter, or ^^der, being
promiscuously used in the First Ages.

V. 4. With joy -- After the Epistle to the Ephesians, wherein Love reigns,
follows this, wherein there is perpetual Mention of Joy. The fruit of the
Spirit is love, joy. And Joy peculiarly enlivens Prayer. The Sum of the whole
Epistle is, I rejoice. Rejoice ye.

V. 5. The Sense is, I thank God for your fellowship with us in all the
Blessings of the gospel which I have done from the first day of your receiving
it until now.

V. 6. Being persuaded -- The Grounds of which Persuasion are set down in the
following Verse, that he who has begun a good work in you, will perfect it
until the day of Christ -- That he who having justified, has begun to sanctify
you, will carry on this Work, till it issue in Glory.

V. 7. As it is right for me to think this of you all -- Why? He does not say,
"Because of at Eternal Decree;" or, Because a Saint must persevere; but Because
I have you in my heart, who were all partakers of my grace -- That is, Because
ye were all (for which I have you in my heart -- I bear you the most grateful
and tender Affection) partakers of my grace -- That is, Sharers in the
Afflictions, which GOD vouchsafed me as a Grace or Favor, (ver. 29, 30.) both
in my bonds, and when I was called forth to answer for myself, and to confirm
the Gospel. It is not improbable, that, after they had endured that great trial
of affliction, GOD had sealed them unto full Victory, of which the Apostle had
a prophetic Sight.

V. 8. I long for you all with the bowels of Jesus Christ -- In Paul, not Paul
lives, but Jesus Christ. Therefore he longs for them, with the bowels, the
Tenderness, not of Paul, but of Jesus Christ.

V. 9. And this I pray, that your love -- Which they had already shown, may
abound yet more and more -- The Fire which burnt in the Apostle, never says, It
is enough: in knowledge and in all spiritual sense -- Which is the Ground of
all spiritual Knowledge. We must be inwardly sensible of divine Peace, Joy,
Love; otherwise we cannot know what they are.

V. 10. That ye may try -- By that spiritual Sense the things that are
excellent -- Not only good, but the very best: The superior Excellence of which
is hardly discerned, but by the adult Christian: that ye may be inwardly
sincere -- Having a single Eye, to the very best things, and a pure Heart, and
outwardly without offense -- Holy, unblamable in all Things.

V. 11. Being filled with the fruits of rightcousness, which are through Jesus
Christ, to the glory and praise of God -- Here are three properties of that
Sincerity, which is acceptable to GOD. 1. It must bear Fruits, the fruits of
Righteousness, all inward and outward Holiness, all good Tempers, Words, and
Works, and that so abundantly, that we may be filled with them: 2. The Branch
and the Fruits must derive both their Virtue and their very Being from the
all-supporting, all-supplying Root, Jesus Christ: 3. As all these flow from the
Grace of Christ so they must issue in the glory and praise of God.

V. 12. The things concerning me -- My Sufferings, have fallen out rather to
the furtherance than (as you feared) the Hindrance of the gospel.

V. 13. My bonds in Christ -- Endured for his Sake, have been made manifest --
Much taken Notice of, in the whole palace -- Of the Roman Emperor.

V. 14. And many -- Who were before afraid, trusting in the Lord through my
bonds -- When they observed my Constancy, and Safety notwithstanding, are more
bold.

V. 15, 16. Some indeed preach Christ out of contention -- Envying St. Paul's
Success, and striving to hurt him thereby; not sincerely -- From a real Desire
to glorify God, but supposing -- Though they were disappointed, to add more
afflictions to my bonds -- By inraging the Romans against me.

V. 15, 16. Some indeed preach Christ out of contention -- Envying St. Paul's
Success, and striving to hurt him thereby; not sincerely -- From a real Desire
to glorify God, but supposing -- Though they were disappointed, to add more
afflictions to my bonds -- By inraging the Romans against me.

V. 17. But the others out of love -- To Christ and me; knowing -- Not barely
supposing, that I am set -- Literally I lie: Yet still going forward in his
work. He remained at Rome as an Ambassador in a Place where he is employed on
an important Embassy.

V. 18. In pretense -- Under color of propagating the Gospel in truth -- With
a real Design so to do.

V. 19. This shall turn to my salvation -- Shall procure me an higher Degree of
Glory, through your Prayer -- Obtaining for me a larger supply of the Spirit.

V. 20. As always -- Since my Call to the Apostleship, in my body -- However it
may be disposed of. How that might be, he did not yet know. For the Apostles
did not know all Things: Particularly, in Things pertaining to themselves, they
had Room to exercise Faith, and Patience.

V. 21. To me to live is Christ -- To know, to love, to follow Christ, is my
Life, my Glory, my Joy.

V. 22. Here he begins to treat of the former Clause of the preceding Verse. Of
the latter he treats chapter ii. 17. But if I am to live in the flesh, this is the
fruit of my labor -- This is the fruit of my living longer, that I can labor
more. Glorious Labor! Desirable Fruit! In this view, Long Life is indeed a
Blessing. And what I should choose, I know not -- That is, if it were left to my
Choice.

V. 23. To depart -- Out of Bonds, Flesh, the World, and to be with Christ --
In a nearer and fuller Union. It is better, to depart (...) It is far better,
to be with Christ.

V. 25. I know -- By a prophetic Notice, given him while he was writing this,
that I shall continue some time longer with you -- And doubtless he did see
them, after this Confinement.

V. 27. Only -- Be careful for this, and nothing else, stand fast ^e one spirit
-- With the most perfect Unanimity, striving together -- With united Strength
and Endeavors, for the faith of the gospel -- For all the Blessings revealed
and promised therein.

V. 28. Which -- Namely, their being Adversaries to the Word of GOD, and to you
the Messengers of GOD, is an evident token -- That they are in the high road to
Perdition, and you in the Way of Salvation.

V. 29. For to you it is given -- As a special Token of GOD's Love, and of your
being in the Way of Salvation.

V. 30. Having the same kind of conflict with your Adversaries, which ye saw in
me -- When I was with you, Acts xvi. 12, 19, etc.

II.
If there be then any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, Do nothing through strife or vain glory, but in
lowliness of mind, esteem each the others better than themselves. taking the
form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men. with fear and trembling.

Yea, things of Jesus Christ.

V. 1. If there be therefore any consolation -- In the Grace of Christ, if any
comfort -- In the Love of GOD, if any followship of the Holy Ghost; if any
bowels of mercies -- Resulting therefrom; any tender Affection toward each
other.

V. 2. Think the same thing -- Seeing Christ is your common Head; having the
same love -- To GOD, your common Father: being of one soul -- Animated with the
same Affections and Tempers, as ye have all drank into one Spirit; of one mind
-- Tenderly rejoicing and grieving together.

V. 3. Do nothing through contention -- Which is inconsistent with your
thinking the same Thing, or vainglory -- Desire of Praise, which is directly
opposite to the Love of GOD; but esteem each the others better than themselves
-- (For every one knows more Evil of himself than he can of another.) Which is
a glorious Fruit of the Spirit, and an admirable Help to your continuing of one
soul.

V. 4. Aim not every one at his own things -- Only. If so, ye have not Bowels
of Mercies.

V. 6. Who being in the essential form, the incommunicable Nature of God from
Eternity (as he was afterward in the form of man, real GOD, as real Man)
counted it no act of robbery (that is the precise Meaning of the Words) no
invasion of another's Prerogative, but his own strict and unquestionable Right,
to be equal with God. The Word here translated equal, occurs in the Adjective
^orm, five or six Times in the New Testament, Mat. xx. 12. Lake vi. 34. John v.
18. Acts. xi. 17. Rev. xxi. 16. In all which Places it expresses not a bare
Resemblance, but a real and proper Equality. It here implies both the Fullness
and the supreme Height of the Godhead; to which are opposed, he emptied and he
humbled himself.

V. 7. Yet -- He was so far from ten^ciously insisting upon, that he willingly
relinquished his Claim. He was content to f^reto the G^ries of the Creator, and
to appear in the Form of a Creature: Nay, to be made in the Likeness of the
fallen Creatures; and not only to share the Disgrace, but to suffer the
Panishment due to the meat est and v^lest among them all. He emptied himself --
Of that Divine Fullness, which he received again at his Exaltation. Though he
remained foul. John i. 14.) yet he appeared as if he had been empty; for he
veiled his Fullness from the Sight of Men and Angels. Yea, he not only veiled,
but in some Sense renounced the Glory which he had before the World began;
taking -- And by that very Act emptying himself, the form of a servant -- The
form, the likeness, the fashion, though not exactly the same, are yet nearly
related to each other. The form expresses something absolute; the likeness
refers to other Things of the same Kind; the fashion respects what appears to
Sight and Sense; being made in the likeness of men -- A real Man, like other
Men. Hereby he took the form of a servant.

V. 8. And being found in Fashion as a man -- A common Man, without any
peculiar Excellence or Comeliness, he humbled himself -- To a still greater
Depth, becoming obedient -- To GOD, though equal with him, even unto death --
The greatest instance both of Humiliation and Obedience, yea, the death of the
cross -- Inflicted on few but Servants or Slaves.

V. 9. Wherefore -- Because of his voluntary Humiliation and Obedience. He
humbled himself: but God has exalted him -- So recompensing his Humiliation,
and has given him -- So recompensing his emptying himself, a name which is
above every name -- Dignity and Majesty superior to every Creature.

V. 10. That every knee -- That Divine Honor might be paid in every possible
Manner by every Creature, might bow -- Either with Love or Trembling, of those
in heaven, earth, under the earth -- That is through the whole Universe.

V. 11. And every tongue -- Even of his enemies, confess that Jesus Christ is
Lord -- JEHOVAH; not now in the form of a servant, but enthroned in the glory
of God the Father.

V. 12. Wherefore -- Having proposed Christ's Example, he exhorts them to
secure the Salvation which Christ has purchased: As ye have always -- hitherto
obeyed -- Both GOD and me his Minister: Now in my absence -- When ye have not
me to instruct, assist, and direct you, work out your own salvation -- Herein
let every Man aim at his own things, with fear and trembling -- With the utmost
Care and Diligence.

V. 13. For it is God -- GOD alone, who is with you, though I am not; that
works in you according to his g^^d pleasure -- Not for any Merit of yours.
Yet his Influences are not to supercede, but to encourage our own Efforts. Work
out your even salvation -- Here is our Duty: for it is God that works in you
-- Here is our Encouragement. And O! what a glorious Encouragement, to have the
Arm of Omnipotence stretched out for our Support and our Succor.

V. 14. De all things -- Not only without Contention (ver. 3.) but even without
murmurings and disputings -- Which are real, though smaller Hindrances of Love.

V. 15. That ye may be blameless -- Before Men, and simple -- Before GOD,
aiming at Him alone, as the sons of God -- The GOD of Love; acting up to your
high Character, unr bukabi^ in the midst of a crooked, guileful, serpentine,
and perverse generation -- Such as the Bulk of Mankind always were, crooked --
By a corrupt Nature, and yet more perverse by Custom and Practice.

V. 17. Here he begins to treat of the latter Clause of chapter i. 22. Yea, and if
I be offered -- Literally, If I be poured out, upon (...) sacrifice of your
faith -- The Philippians, as the other converted breathens, were a Sacritice to
GOD through St. Paul's Ministry ( Romans xv. 16.) And as in sacrificing, Wine was
po^^ed at the Foot of the Altar, to he was willing that his Blood should be
poured out. The Expression well agrees with that Kind of Martyrdom, by which He
was afterward offered up to GOD.

V. 18. Congratulate me -- When I am offered up.

V. 19. When I known -- Upon my Return, that ye stand steadfast.

V. 20. I have none -- Of those who are now with me.

V. 21. For all -- but Timotheus, seek their own -- Ease, Safety, Pleasure, or
Profit. Amazing! In that golden Age of the Church, could St. Paul thoroughly
approve of one only, among all the Laborers that were with him? (...) how many
do we think, can now approve the^ (...) the thing (...) Jesus Christ -- They
who ^eek these alone, wi^^ sadly experience this. They will and few Helpers
like-minded with themselves, (...) naked to follow a naked Master!

V. 22. A (...) -- He^uses an (...) pe^^iarity of Prase, speak^ partly as of a
Son. party as of a Fellow Laborer.

V. 25. (...) -- B^^k immediately, your messenge^ -- The Phi^ppi^ had sent him
to St. (...) with their liberal (...)

V. 26. (...) -- Because (...) supposed you would be off (...).

V. 27. (...) -- Kesp^ him to Health.

V. 28. (...) -- W^ I ^now you are rejo^ng.

V. 30. (...) -- T^ do what you could not do in Perton.

III.
Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you, is
not tedious to me, it is safe for you. Beware of dogs, beware of evil-workers,
beware of the concision. For we are the circumcision, dung, was also
apprehended by Christ Jesus. I do, forgetting the things that are behind, and
reaching forth unto the things which are before, I press toward the goal, for
the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

Brethren, that they are enemies of the cross of Christ. is destruction, whose
god is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame; fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the mighty working, whereby he is able even to
subject all things to himself.

V. 1. The sam^ing -- W^ (...) heard before.

V. 2. Bewar^ (...) -- (...) Men. Title which the Jews usually gave the
Gentiles, he returns upon themselves. The concision -- Circumcision being now
ceased, the Apostle will not call them the Circumcision; but coins a Term on
purpose, taken from a Greek Word used by the Seventy, ( Lev. xxi. 5.) for such
a Cutting as GOD had forbidden.

V. 3. For we -- Christians, are the only true circumcifion. -- The People now
in Covenant with GOD, who worsoip God in Spirit -- Not barely in the Letter,
but with the spiritual Worship of inward Holiness, and glory in Christ Jesus --
As the only Cause of all our Blessings, and have no confidence in the flesh --
In any outward Advantage or Prerogative.

V. 4. Though I -- He subjoins this in the singular Number, because the
Philippians could not say thus.

V. 5. Circumcised the eighth day -- Not at ripe Age, as a Proselyte, of the
tribe of Benjamin -- Sprung from the Wife, not the Handmaid, an Hebrew of
Hebre^ws -- By both my Parents; in every Thing, Nation, Religion, Language,
touching the law, a Pharis^^ -- One of that Sect, who most accurately observe
it.

V. 6. Having such a Zeal for it, as to persecute to the Death, those who did
not observe it, touching the righteousness which is described and injoined by
the law -- That is, external Observances, blam^^ss.

V. 7. But all these things, which I then accounted gain, which were once my
Confidence, my Glory, and Joy, those, ever since I have believed, I have
accounted loss, nothing worth, in comparison of Christ.

V. 8. Y^a, I still account both all these and all things els^ to be mere ^ss,
compared to the inward, experimental (...) Christ, as my Lord, as my Prophet,
Priest, and King, (...) Wisdom, ato^ing for my Sins, and reigning in my (...).
To (...) this to Justification only, is miserably to pervert the whole Scope of
the Words. They manifestly relate to Sanctification also; yea to that chiefly.
For whom I have actually suffered the loss of all things -- Which the World
loves, esteems, or admires: Of which I am so far from repenting, that I still
account them but dung -- The Discourse rises. Loss is sustained with Patience;
but Dung is cast away with Abhorrence. The Greek Word signifies any, the vilest
refuse of Things, the Dross of Metals, the Dregs of Liquors, the Excrements of
Animals, the most worthless Scraps of Meat, the basest Offals, fit only for
Dogs, that I may gain Christ -- He that loses all Things, not excepting
himself, gains Christ, and is gained by Christ. And still there is more; which
even St. Paul speaks of his having not yet gained!

V. 9. And be found by GOD ingrafted in him, not having my own righteousness,
which is of the law -- That merely outward Righteousness prescribed by the Law,
and performed by my own Strength, but that inward Righteousness which is
through faith -- Which can flow from no other Fountain, the righteousness which
is from God -- From his Almighty Spirit, not by my own Strength, but by faith
alone. Here also the Apostle is far from speaking of Justification only.

V. 10. The Knowledge of Christ mentioned in the 8th Verse, is here more
largely explained. That I may know him -- As my complete Savior, and the power
of his resurrection -- Raising me from the Death of Sin, into all the Life of
Love, and the followship of his sufferings -- Being crucified with Him, and
made conformable to his death -- So as to be dead to all Things here below.

V. 11. The resurrection of the dead -- That is, the Resurrection to Glory.

V. 12. Not that I have already attained -- The Prize. He here enters on a new
Se^ of Metaphors, taken from a Race. But observe, how in the utmost Fervor, he
retains his Sobriety of Spirit, or an already perfected -- There is a
Difference between one that is perfect, and one that is perfected. The one is
fitted for the Race, ver. 15. the other, ready to receive the Prize. But I
pursue, if I may apprehend that -- ^erfect Holiness, prepar^tory to Glory, for,
in order to which I was apprchended by Christ Jesus -- Appearing to me in the
Way, Acts xxvi. 14. The speaking conditionally both here and in the preceding
Verse, implies no Uncertainty, but only the Difficulty of attaining.

V. 13. I do (...) account myself to have apprehended this already; to be
already possessed of perfect Holiness.

V. 14. Forgetting the things that are behind -- Even that Part of the Race
which is already run, and reaching forth unto -- Literally, ^retched ou^ over
the things that are before -- Pursuing with the whole Bent and Vigor of my
Soul, perfect Holiness and eternal Glory. In Christ Jesus -- The Author and
Finisher of every good Thing.

V. 15. Let us, as many as are perfect -- Fit for the Race, strong in Faith (so
it means here) be thus minded -- Apply wholly to this one Thing, and if in any
thing ye -- Who are not perfect, who are weak in Faith, be otherwise minded --
Pursuing other Things, GOD, if ye defire it, shall reveal even this unto you --
Will convince you of it.

V. 16. But let us take Care, not to lose the Ground we have already gained.
Let us walk by the same rule we have done hitherto.

V. 17. Mark them -- For your Imitation.

V. 18. Weeping -- As he wrote. Enemies of the cross of Christ -- Such are all
cowardly, all shamefaced, all delicate Christians.

V. 19. Whose end is destruction -- This is (...) in the ^ront, that what
follows may be read with the greater Horror, whose god is their belly -- Whose
supreme Happiness lies in gratifying their sensual Appetites, who mind --
Relish, desire, seek, earthly things.

V. 20. Our conversation -- The Greek Word is of a very extensive Meaning, our
Citizenship, our Thoughts, our Affections, are already in heaven.

V. 21. Who will transform our vile body -- Into the most perfect State, and
the most beauteous Form. It will then be purer than the unspotted Firmament,
brighter than the Luster of the Stars: and which exceeds all Parallel, which
comprehends all Perfection, like unto his glorious body -- Like that
wonderfully glorious Body which he wears in his heavenly Kingdom, and on his
triumphant Throne.

IV.
Therefore, my brethren, beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand
fast in the Lord, my beloved. are in the book of life.

Rejoice in the Lord always: is at hand. And the peace of God,

Finally, are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report: if there be
any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things:

I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, received of Epaphroditus the things which came
from you, an odor of a sweet smell, an acceptable sacrifice, be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.

Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. be with you all.

V. 1. So stand -- As ye have done hitherto.

V. 2. I beseech -- He repeats this twice, as if speaking to each Face to Face,
and that with the utmost Tenderness.

V. 3. And I entreat thee also true yoke fellow -- St. Paul had many
Fellow Laborers, but not many Yoke-fellows. In this Number was Barnabas first,
and then Silas, whom he probably addresses here. For Silas had been his
Yoke Fellow at the very Place, Acts xvi. 19. Help those women who labored
together with me. literally, who wrestled -- The Greek Word does not imply
preaching, or any thing of that Kind: but Danger and Toil endured for the Sake
or the Gospel: which was also endured at the same Time (probably at Philippi)
by Clement and my other follow-labourers -- This is a different Word from the
former, and does properly imply Fellow-Preachers: whose names, although not set
down he^e, are in the book of life -- As are those of all Believers: An
Allusion to the Wrestlers in the O'ympic Games, whose Names were all enrolled
in a Book. Reader, is thy Name there? Then walk circumspectly, left the LORD
blot thee out of his Book!

V. 5. Let your gentleness -- Yieldingness, Sweetness of Tempet, the Result of
Joy in the LORD, be known -- By your whole Behavior, to all m^n -- Good and
bad, gentle and froward. Those of the roughest Tempers are good-natured to
some; (from natural Sympathy and various Motives) a Christian to all. The Lord
-- The Judge, the Rewarder, the Avenger, is at hand -- Stands at the Door.

V. 6. Be anxiously careful for nothing -- If Men are not gentle toward you,
yet neither on this, nor any other Account, be careful, but pray. Carefulness
and Prayer cannot stand together. In every thing -- Great and small, lot your
requests be made known -- They who by a preposterous Shame or distrustful
Modesty, cover, stifie, or keep in their Desires, as if they were either too
small or too great, must be racked with Care; from which they are entirely
delivered, who pour them out with a free and filial Confidence; to God -- It Is
not always proper to disclose them to Men; by supplication -- Which is the
enlarging upon and pressing our Petition; with thanksgiving -- The surest Mark
of a Soul free from Care, and of Prayer joined with true Resignation. This is
always followed by Peace. Peace and Thanksgiving are both coupled together,
Col. iii. 15.

V. 7. And the peace of God -- That calm, heavenly Repose, that Tranquillity of
Spirit, which GOD only can give, which surpasses all understanding -- Which
none can comprehend, save he that receives it, shall keep -- Shall guard as a
Garrison does a City, your hearts -- Your Affections, your minds -- Your
Understandings, and all the various Workings of them, through the Spirit and
Power of Christ Jesus, in the Knowledge and Love of GOD. Without a Guard set on
these likewise, the Purity and Vigor of our Affections cannot long be
preserved.

V. 8. Finalty -- To sum up all, whatsoever things are true -- Here are eight
Particulars placed in two fourfold Rows; the former containing their Duty, the
latter the Commendation of it. The first Word in the former Row answers the
first in the latter, the second Word the second, and so on; true -- In Speech;
honest -- In Action; just -- With regard to others; pure -- With regard to
yourselves: Lovely -- And what more lovely than Truth? of good report -- As is
Honesty even where it is not practiced. If there be any virtue -- And all
Virtues are contained in Justice, if there be any praise -- In those things
which relate rather to ourselves than to our Neighbor: think on those things
-- That ye may both practice them yourselves, and recommend them to others.

V. 9. The things which ye have learned -- As Catechumens, and received -- By
continual Instructions, and heard and seen -- In my Life and Conversation,
those d^, and the God of peace shall be with you -- Not only the Peace of GOD,
but GOD Himself, the Fountain of Peace.

V. 10. I rejoiced greatly -- St. Paul was no Stole. He had strong Passions,
but all devoted to GOD, that your care of me (...) again -- As a Tree blossoms
after the Winter. Ye wanted (...) -- Either ye had not Plenty yourselves, or
you wanted a proper Messenger.

V. 11. I have learned -- From GOD. He only can (...) this, in every thing
therewith to be content -- Joyfully and th^^^fully patient. Nothing less is
Christian Content. We may observe a beautiful Gradation in the Expressions: I
have (...) I kn^w: I am instructed: I can.

V. 12. I know how to be abas^^ -- Having scarce what is needful for my Body;
and to abound -- Having wherewith to relieve others also. Presently after the
Order of the Words is inverted, to intimate his frequent Transition from
Scarcity to Plenty, and from Plenty to Scarcity. I am instructed -- Literally,
I am (...) into that Mystery, unknown to all but Christians, (...) be ^^^gry --
For one Day, (...) -- For a longer Season.

V. 13. I can'd (...) -- Even (...) the Will of GOD.

V. 15. In the beginning of the (...) -- When it was first preached at
Philippi, in respect of giving -- On your Part, and receiving -- On mine.

V. 17. Not that I desire -- For my own Sake the very gift which I receive of
you.

V. 18. An odor of a sweet smell -- More pleasing to GOD, than the sweetest
Perfumes to Men.

V. 19. All your need -- As ye have mine, according to his riches in glory --
In his abundant, eternal Glory.

NOTES ON St. PAUL'S Epistle to the Colossians.
COLOSSE was a City of the Greater Phrygia, not far from Laodicea and
Hierapolis. Though St. Paul preached in many Parts of Phrygia, yet he never had
been at this City. It had received the Gospel by the preaching of Epaphras, who
was with St. Paul when he wrote this Epistle.

It seems the Colossians were now in Danger of being seduced by those who
strove to blend Judaism or Heathen Superstitions with Christianity: Pretending,
that GOD, because of his great Majesty, was not to be approached but by the
Mediation of Angels: And that there were certain Rites and Observances chiefly
borrowed from the Law, whereby these Angels might be made our Friends.

In Opposition to them the Apostle, 1. Commends the Knowledge of Christ, as
more excellent than all other, and so entire and perfect, that no other
Knowledge was necessary for a Christian. He 2. shows, That Christ is above all
Angels, who are only his Servants; and that being reconciled to GOD through
Him, we have free Access to him in all our Necessities.

This Epistle contains,
I. The Inscription, C. ^ 1, 2. II. The Doctrine, wherein the Apostle
pathetically explains, the Mystery of Christ, By Thanksgiving for the
Colossians, 3 -- 8 By Prayers for them, with 9 -- 23 A Declaration of his
Affection for them, 24 -- 29. C. ii. ^ -- 3 III. The Exhortation, 1. General,
wherein he excites them to Perseverance, and warns them, not to be deceived, 4
-- 8 Describes again the Mystery of Christ, in Order, and in the same Order
draws his Admonitions, 9 -- 15 1. From Christ the Head, 16 -- 19 2. From his
Death, 20 -- 23 3. From his Exaltation, C. iii. 1 -- 4 a. Particular, 1. To
avoid several Vices, 5 -- 9 2. To practice several Virtues, 10, 11 Especially
to love one another, 12 -- 15 And study the Scriptures, 16, 17 3. To the
Relative Duties of Wives and Husbands, 18, 19 Children and Parents, Servants
and Masters, 20, 21 22 -- 25. C. iv. 1. 3. Final, To Prayer, 2 -- 4 to
Spiritual Wisdom, 5, 6 V. The Conclusion, 7 -- 16

COLOSSIANS.
I.
PAUL an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, be unto you, and peace
from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

We give thanks to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, it is in all
the world, and brings forth fruit, as it has done likewise among you, from
the day ye heard it, and knew the grace of God in truth: As ye likewise learned
of Epaphras our beloved fellow servants, for you: it, we do not cease to pray
also for you, and to desire that ye may be filled with the knowledge of his
will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding; us into the kingdom of his
beloved Son. every creature. they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities,
or powers; all things were created by him and for him. the Father, that all
fullness should dwell in him: things in heaven. now is manifested to his saints:

V. 2. The saints -- This Word expresses their Union with GOD, and brethren --
This, their Union with their Fellow Christians.

V. 3. We give thanks -- There is a near Rescriblance between this Epistle, and
those to the (...) and (...).

V. 5. Ye hea^d before -- I wrote to you; in the word strath, of the Gospel --
The true Gospel preached to you.

V. 6. It brings forth fruit in all the world -- That is, in every Place
where it is preached: Ye (...) to the grace of God in truth -- Truly
experienced the gracious Power of GOD.

V. 7. The fellow servants -- Or Paul and Tim about.

V. 8. Your love in the Spirit -- Your Love wrought in you by the Spirit.

V. 9. We pray for you -- This was mentioned in general (...) but now more
particularly; the^ (...) may be filled with the knowledge of his will -- Of his
revealed Will, in (...) wisd^ With all the Wisdom from above, and spiritual
understanding ^o discern by that Light, whatever agrees with or differs from
his Will.

V. 10. That knowing his whole Will, ye may walk worthy of the Lord, unto all
well-pleasing -- So as actually to please him in al^ Things, daily increasing
in the living, experimental knowledge of GOD our Father, Savior, Sanctifier.

V. 11. Strengthened unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness --
This is the highest Point: Not only to know, to do, to suffer, the whole Will
of GOD; but to suffer it to the End, not barely with Patience, but with
thankful Joy.

V. 12. Who by justifying and sanctifying us bath made us meet for Glory.

V. 13. Power detains reluctant Captives. A Kingdom cherishes willing Subjects:
His beloved Son -- This is treated of in the 15th and following Verses.

V. 14. In whom we have redemption -- This is treated of from the Middle of the
18th Verse. The voluntary Passion of our LORD, appeased the Father's Wrath,
obtained Pardon and Acceptance for us, and consequently dissolved the Dominion
and Power which Satan had over us through our Sins. So that Forgiveness is the
Beginning of Redemption, as the Resurrection is the Completion of it.

V. 15. Who is -- By describing the Glory of Christ and his Preeminence over
the highest Angels, the Apostle here lays a Foundation for the Reproof of all
Worshippers of Angels: the image of the invisible God -- Whom none can
represent but his only begotten Son; in his Divine Nature, the invisible Image,
in his Human, the visible Image of the Father, the first-b^ gotten of every
creature -- That is, begotten before every Creature; subsisting before all
Worlds, before all Time, from all Eternity.

V. 16. For -- This explains the latter Part of the preceding Verses, through
-- Implies something prior to the Particles by and for; so denoting the
Beginning, the Progress, and the End: Him -- This Word, frequently repeated,
signifies his supreme Majesty, and excludes every Creature: were created all
things, that are in heaven -- And Heaven itself. But the Inhabitants are named,
because more noble than the House: Invisible -- The several Species of which
are subjoined. Thrones are superior to Dominions, Principalities to Powers.
Perhaps the two latter may express their Office, with regard to other
Creatures: the two former may refer to GOD, who makes them his Chariots, and
as it were rides upon their Wing^.

V. 17. And be is before all things -- It Is not said, He was; He (...) from
everlasting to everlasting. And by him all things consist -- The Original
Expression not only implies, That he sustains all Things in Being, but more
directly, All things were and are compacted in him into one system. He is the
Cement as well as Support of the Universe. And is he less than the Supreme GOD?

V. 18. And -- From the whole, he now descends to the most eminent Part, the
Church. He is the head of the church -- Universal. The supreme and only Head
both of Influence and of Government to the whole Body of Believers, who is --
The Repetition of the Expression (see ver. 15.) points out the Entrance on a
new Paragraph, the beginning -- Absolutely, the Eternal, the first-begotten
from the dead -- From whose Resurrection flows all the Life, Spiritual and
Eternal, of all his Brethren; that in all things -- Whether of Nature or Grace,
He might have the Pre-eminence. Who can sound this Depth?

V. 19. For it pleased the Father, that all fullness -- All the Fullness of GOD,
should dwell in him -- Constantly, as in a Temple, and always ready for our
Approach to Him.

V. 20. Through the Blood of the cross -- The Blood shed thereon: whether
things on earth -- Here the Family began. Therefore this is mentioned first; or
things in heaven -- Those who are now in Paradise, the Saints who died before
Christ came.

V. 21. And you that were alienated and enemies -- Actual Alienation of
Affection, makes habitual Enmity; in your mind -- Both your Understanding and
your Affections, by wicked works -- Which continually feed and increase inward
Alienation from and Enmity to GOD; he has now reconciled -- From the Moment ye
believed.

V. 22. By the body of his flesh -- (So distinguished from his Body, the
Church) The Body here denotes his entire Manhood; through death -- Whereby he
purchased the Reconciliation, which we receive by Faith, to present year -- The
very End of that Reconciliation; holy -- Toward GOD, spotless -- In yourselves,
unreproveable -- As to your Neighbor.

V. 23. If ye contirue in the faith -- Otherwise ye will lose all the Blessings
which ye have already begun to enjoy; and be not (...) from the hope of the g^l
-- The glorious Hope of perfect Love; which is preached -- Is already begun to
be preached to every creature under heaven.

V. 24. Now I rejoice in my sufferings (...) you, and fill up -- That is,
whereby I sill up, that which it bel^nd of the (...) of Christ -- That which
remains to be suffered by his Members. These are ^ed. The Sufferings (...).
Christ. 1. Because the Subjecting of any Member, is the Suffering of the whole,
and of the Head especially, which supplies Strength, Spirits, Se^^er and Motion
to all. 2. Because they are for his Sake, for the Testimony of his Truth. And
these also are necessary for the Church; (...) to recen^^e it to GOD, or
satisfy for Sin, (for that Christ did perfectly) but for example to others,
perfecting of the Spirits, and increating their Reward.

V. 25. According (...) the (...) ^ation of God, Which is given me -- Or, The
St^ship with which I am entrusted.

V. 26. The Mys^y -- Namely Christ both justifying and sanctifying Gentiles as
well as Jews, which has been comparatively bid from (...) ages and past
generations of Men.

V. 27. Christ dwelling and reigning in you, the hope of glory -- The Ground of
your Hope.

V. 28. We teach the Ignorant, and admonish them that are already taught.

II.
For I would have you know how great a conflict I have for you, and for them at
Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh: That their
hearts may be comforted, so walk in him;

Beware lest any man make a prey of you through philosophy and empty deceit,
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ. him, through the faith of the operation of God, who raised him from the
dead. Having blotted out by his decrees the handwriting against us, And having
spoiled the principalities and powers, he exposed them openly, triumphing over
them in him.

Let none therefore judge you in meat, is of Christ. Let none defraud you of
your reward by a voluntary humility and worship of angels, intruding into the
things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind, yet are
not of any value, but are to the satisfying of the flesh.

V. 1. How great a conflict -- Of Care, Desire, Prayer. As many as have not
seen my face -- Therefore in writing to the Colossians, he refrains from those
familiar (...).

V. 2. Unto all rich^ of the ful^ (...) of understanding, unto the
acknowledgment of the (...) -- That is, unto the fullest and clearest
Understanding and Knowledge of the Gospel.

V. 6. So walk in him -- In the same Faith, Love, Holiness.

V. 7. Record in him -- As the Vine; (...) -- On the sure ^oundation.

V. 8. Through Philosophy and empty deceit -- That is, through the empty Deceit
of Philosophy blended with Christianity. This the Apostle condemns, 1. Because
it was empty and deceitful, promising Happiness, but giving none: 2. Because it
was grounded, not on solid Reason, but the traditions of men, Zeno, Epicurus,
and the rest: and 3. Because it was so shallow and superficial, not advancing
beyond the Knowledge of sensible Things; no, not beyond the first Rudiments of
them.

V. 9. For in him dwells -- Inhabiteth, continually abides all the fullness
of the Godhead. Believers are filled with all the fullness of God. (Ephesians. iii.
19.) But in Christ dwells all the fullness of the Godhead; the most full
Godhead: Not only Divine Powers, but the Divine Nature, (chapter i. 19.) bodily --
Personally, really, substantially. The very Substance of GOD, if one might so
speak, dwells in Christ in the most full Sense.

V. 10. And ye -- Who believe, are filled with him, (John i. 16.) Christ is
filled with GOD, and ye are filled with Christ. And ye are filled by Him. The
Fullness of Christ overflows his Church, ( Psalm cxxxiii. 3.) He is originally
ful^. We are fired by Him with Wisdom and Holiness. Who is the head of all
pro^ality and power -- Of Angels as well as Men. Not from Angels therefore, but
from their Head are we to ask whatever we stand in need of.

V. 11. By whom also ye have been circumcised -- Ye have received the spiritual
Blessings typified of old by Circumcision, with a circumcision not performed
with hands -- By an inward, spiritual Operation, in putting off not a little
Skin, but the whole body of the sins of the fiesh -- All the Sins of your evil
Nature, by the circumcision of Christ -- By that spiritual Circumcision which
Christ works in your Heart.

V. 12. Which he wrought in you, when ye were as it were buried with him in
baptism -- The ancient Manner of bapti^ing by Immersion is as manifestly
alluded to here, as the other Manner of baptizing by sprinkling or pouring of
Water is, Heb. x. 22. But no Stress is laid on the dge of the Baptized, of the
Manner of performing it, in on^ or the other: but only on our (...) with
Christ, (...) the powerful, Operation of GOD in the Soul; which we cannot but
know assuredly, if it really is so: And if we do not experience this, our
Baptism has not answered the End of its Institution; by which ye are also risen
with him -- From the Death of Sin to the Life of Holiness. It does not appear,
that in all this St. Paul speaks of Justification at all, but of Sanctification
altogether.

V. 13. And you who were deal -- D^ridy dead to GOD, not only wallowing in
trespasses, outward sins, but also in the uncircumcision of your flesh -- (A
beautiful Expression for Original Sin the inbred Corruption of your Nature,
your uncircumcised Heart and Affections; both he -- GOD the Father, quickened
together with him -- Making you Partakers of the Power of his Resurrection. It
is evident, the Apostle thus far speaks, not of Justification, but of
Sanctification only.

V. 14. Having blotted (...) -- In consequence of his pracious Decrees, That
Christ should come into the World to save Sinners, and that whosoever believes
on him should have everlasting Life; the Handwriting against (...) -- Where a
Debt is contratted, it is usually testified by some Handwriting. And when the
Debt is forgiven, the Handwriting is destroyed, either by blotting it out, by
taking it away, or by tearing it. The Apostle expresses in all these three Ways
GOD's destroying the Handwriting which was contrary to at, or at Enmity with
us. This was not properly our Sins themselves; (they were the Deb^, but their
quilt and cry before GOD.

V. 15. And having (...) the principalities and powers -- The evil Angels of
their usurp^ Dominions (...) GOD the Father, expesed them openly -- Before All
the Hoses of Hell and Heaven, (...) over them in or by him -- By Christ. Thus
the Faragraph begins with Christ, goes on with him, and ends with (...).

V. 16. Therefore -- Seeing these Things are (...) -- That is, regard none who
judge you, in (...) -- for not observing the (...), in these or any (...)
respect of a yearly (...): or the week (...).

V. 17. Which are but a lifeless (...) body, the Substance it of Christ.

V. 18. Out of pretended (...), at not daring to apply Immediately to GOD. Yet
this really (...) their being puffed up, (the constant Forerunner of a fall,
Prove. xvi. 18.) So far was it from being an lastance of true Humility.

V. 19. And not holding the bead -- He does not hold Christ, who does not trust
in him alone. All the Members are nourished by Faith, and knit together by Love
and mutual Sympathy.

V. 20. Therefore -- The Inference begun, ver. 16. is contioued. A new
Interence follows, chapter iii. 1. If we are dead with Christ from the radiments of
the world -- That is, If we are dead with Christ, and so freed from them, why
receive ye ordinances -- Which Christ has not enjoined; from which he has
made you free.

V. 21. Touch not -- An unclean Thing, taste not -- Any forbidden Meat, handle
not -- Any consecrated Vessel.

V. 22. Perish in the using -- Have no farther Use, no Influence on the Mind.

V. 23. Not sparing the body -- Denying it many Gratifications, and putting it
to many Inconveniences. Yet they are not of any real value before God, nor do
they, upon the whole, mortify, but sati^sy the flesh. They indulge our corrupt
Nature, our Self-will, Pride, and Desire of being dustinguished from others.

III.
If ye then are risen with Christ, seek the things above, where Christ sits
at the right hand of God.

Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth, man, nor free; but
Christ is all, and in all. Put on therefore, beloved, bowels of mercies,
kindness, humbleness of mind, do ye. And above all these put on love, do all in
the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks unto God and the Father through him.

Ephesians, V. 22, etc.
Wives, Servants,

V. 1. If ye are risen, (...) the things above -- As Christ being risen,
immediately went to Heaven.

V. 3. For ye are dead -- To the Things on Earth, and your real, spiritual life
is bid from the World, and laid up in God, with Christ -- Who has merited,
promised, prepared it for us, and gives us the Earnest and Toretaste of it in
our Hearty.

V. 4. When Christ -- The Abruptness of the Sentence surrounds us with sudden
Light, our life -- The Fountain of Holiness and Clory, shall appear -- In the
Clouds of Heaven.

V. 5. Mortify therefore -- Put to Death; slay with a continued Stroke, your
members -- Which together make up the Body of Sin, which are upon the earth --
Where they find their Nourishment, uncleanness -- In Act, Word, or Thought,
inordinate affection -- Every (...) which does not flow from and lead to the
Love of God, (...) -- The Desire of the Flesh, the Desire of the Eye, and the
Pride of Life; (...) -- according to the Derivation of the Word, means. The
Desire of having more, or of any thing, independent of God, which is (...) --
Properly and directly: for it is giving the He at to a Creature.

V. 6. For which -- Though the Heathens lightly regarded them.

V. 7. Living -- Denotes the inward Principle: Walking -- The outward Acts.

V. 8. W^ath -- Is lasting Anges, filthy discourse -- And was there ^^ed to w^n
even these Saints of GOD, against so gross and palpubie (...) Sinnus this? O
what is Mar, (...) perfect Love casts out both Fear and Sin!

V. 10. In knowledge -- The Knowledge of GOD, his Will, his Word.

V. 11. Where -- In which Case, it matters not what a Man is excertally,
whether (...) Gentile, circumcised (...), (...), vo^d of all the Advantages of
Education, yea, (...), of (...) most (...) as: But Christ it in all that are
thus renewed, and is all Th^^^ in them and to them.

V. 12. All who are thus renewed are (...) of God, holy, and therefore the more
believed of Him. Holiness is the Proof of their Election, and GOD's superior
Love, of their Holiness.

V. 13. ^^bearing one another -- If any Thing is now wrong; and forgiving on
another -- What is past.

V. 14. The Lovers GOD contains the whole of Christian Persection, and connects
all the Parts of it (...).

V. 15. And then (...) heart -- Shall sway every (...) ^^ction, Thought, as
(...) (so the (...) Word (...) of your proceeding Love and Obedience.

V. 16. (...) -- So the (...) the whole Scripture, and thereby (...) the
Divinity, (...) Matter, dwell -- Not make a their Stay or an (...) up its stated
Residence, (...). -- In the largest Measure, and with the greatest Efficacy, so
as to ^il and covern the whole (...).

V. 17. In the name -- In the Power and Spirit (...) Lord Jesus, giving (...)
unto God -- The Holy (...), and the Father through (...) -- Christ.

V. 18. (...) submit -- Or (...). It is properly a milit^ry Term, (...) to that
or the Submission they Soldiers pay to their General.

V. 19. Be not (...) -- (Which may be without any Appearance of Anger) (...) in
Word or Spirit.

V. 21. Life they be (...) unaged -- Which may (...) their turning either
desperate or s^upid.

V. 22. Eye-service -- Being (...) diligent under their Eye than at other
Times, singleness ^f (...) -- A simple Intention of doing right, without
looking any further, searing God -- That is, acting from this Principle.

V. 23. Heartily -- Cheerfully, diligently. M^n-pleasers are soon dejected and
made angry; the single-hearted are never displeased or ^^sappointed, because
they have another aim, which the Good or Evil Treatment of those they serve
cannot disappoint.

IV.
Masters, render unto your servants that which is just and equitable, knowing
that ye also have a master in heaven. be always with grace, seasoned with salt,
that ye may know how ye ought to answer every one.

All my concerns will Tychicus declare to you, are done here.

Aristarchus, Marcus, sister's son to Barnabas; (touching whom ye have received
directions, if he come to you, receive him,) are the only fellow-workers unto
the kingdom of God, who have been a comfort to me. be with you.

V. 1. Just -- According to your Contract; equitable -- Even beyond (...)
Letter of your Contract.

V. 3 That God would open to us a door of utterance -- That is, Give us
utterance, that we may open our mouth boldly, Ephesians. vi. 10. and give us an
Opportunity of speaking, so that none may be able to hinder.

V. 6. Let your speech be always with grace -- Seasoned with one Crace of GOD,
as flesh is with salt.

V. 10. Aristarchus, my fellow-prisoner -- Such was Epaphras likewise for a
Time. Philemon, ver. 23. Ye have received direction -- Namely, by Tychicus,
bringing this Letter. The Anci^^s adapted their Language to the Time of reading
the Letter; (...) (as we do) to the Time when it was written. It is not
improbable they might have scrupled to receive him, without this fresh
Direction, after he had left St. Paul and departed from the Work.

V. 11. These -- Three, Aristarchus, Marcus, and Justus, of all the
circumcision, that is, of all my Jewish Fellow Laborers, are the only
fellow-workers unto the kingdom of God -- That is, in preaching the Gospel, who
have been a comfort to me -- What then can we expect? That all out
Fellow-workers should be a comfort to us?

V. 12. Perfect -- Endued wi^ ^every Christian Grace, filled -- As no longer
being Babes, but grown up to the Measure of the Stature of Christ, being full
of his Light, Grace, Wisdom, Heliness.

V. 14. Luke, the physician -- Such he had been at least, if he was not then.

V. 15. Nymphas -- Probably an eminent Christian at Laodicea.

V. 16. The ep^^le from Laodicea -- Not, to Laodicea. Perhaps some Letter had
been written to St. Paul from thence.

V. 17. And say to Archippus -- One of the Pastors of that Church, take heed --
It is the Duty of the Flock to try them that say they are Apostles, to reject
the salse, and to warn, as well as to receive the real; the ministry -- Not a
Lordship, but a service, a laborious and painful work; an Obligation to do and
suffer all Things: to be the least and the Servant of all; in the Lord --
Christ; by whom and for whose Sake, we receive the various Gifts of the Holy
Spirit.

NOTES ON St. PAUL's First Epistle to the Thessalonians
THIS is the first of all the Epistles which St. Paul wrote. Thessalonica was
one of the chief Cities of Maccdonia. Hither St. Paul went after the
Persecution at Philippi. But he had not preached here long, before the
unbelieving Jews raised a Tumult against him and Syluanus and Timotheus. On
this the Brethren sent them away to ^erea. Thence St. Paul went by Sea to
Athens, and sent for Sylvanus and Timotheus, to come speedily to him. But being
in Fear lest the Thessalonian Converts should be moved from their Stedfastness,
after a short Time he sends Timotheus to them to know the State of their
Church. Timotheus returning found the Apostle at Corinth; from whence he sent
them this Epistle, about a Year after he had been at Thessalonica.

The Parts of it are these, I. The Inscription, C. i. 1. II. He celebrates the
Grace of GOD toward them, mentions the Sincerity of himself and his
Fellowlabourers; and, C. ii. 1-12 the Teachableness of the Thessalonians, 13-16
III. He declares, 1. His Desire, 17-20 2. His Care, C. iii. 1-5 3. His Joy and
Prayer for them, 6-13 IV. He exhorts them to grow, 1. In Holiness, C. iv. 1-8
2. In brotherly Love with Industry, 9-12 V. He teaches and exhorts, 1.
Concerning them that Sleep, 13-18 2. Concerning the Times, C. v. 1-11 VI. He
adds miscellany Exhortations, 12-24 VII. The Conclusion, 25-28

I. THESSALONIANS.
I.
PAUL and Silvanus and Timotheus to the church of the Thessalonians in God the
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, Grace be unto you and peace from God our
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

We give thanks to God always for you all (making mention of you in our
prayers, became examples to all that believed in Macedonia and Achaia. even
Jesus, who delivers us from the wrath to come.

V. 1. Paul -- In this Epistle St. Paul neither uses the Title of an Apostle,
nor any other, as writing to pious and simple-hearted Men, with the utmost
Familiarity. There is a peculiar Sweetness in this Epistle, unmixed with any
Sharpness or Reproof: Those Evils which the Apostles afterward reproved, having
not yet crept into the Church.

V. 3. Remembering in the sight of God -- That is, Praising him for it. Your
work of faith -- Your active, ever-working Faith; and labor of love -- Love
continually laboring for the Bodies or Souls of Men. They who do not thus
labor, do not love. Faith works, love labors, hope patiently suffers all
things.

V. 4. Knowing your election (which is through Faith) by these plain Proofs.

V. 5. With Power -- Piercing the very Heart with a Sense of Sin, and deeply
convincing you of your want of a Savior, from Guilt, Misery, and eternal Ruin,
with the Holy Ghost -- Bearing an outward Testimony by Miracles, to the Truth
of what we preached, and you selt: also by his Descent through laying on of
Hands, with much assurance -- Literally, with full assurance, and much of it:
The Spirit bearing Witness by thedding the Love of GOD abroad in your Hearts,
which is the highest testimony that can be given. And these Signs, if not the
miraculous Gitts, always attend the preaching of the Gospel, unless it be in
vain: neither are the extraordinary Operations of the Holy Ghost, ever wholly
withheld, where the Gospel is preached with Power, and Men are alive to GOD;
for your sake -- Seeking your Advantage, not our own.

V. 6. Though in much affliction, yet with much Joy.

V. 8. For from you the word sounded forth -- (Thessalonica being a City of
great Commerce) being echoed, as it were, from you. And your conversation was
divulged far beyond Macedonia and Achaia; so that we need not speak any thing
-- Concerning it.

V. 9. For they themselves -- The People wherever we come.

V. 10. Whom be has raised from the dead -- In Proof of his future Coming to
Judgment, who delivers us -- He redeemed us once; he delivers us continually:
and will deliver all that believe from the w^ath, the eternal Vergeance which
will then come upon the Ungodly.

II.
For yourselves, brethren, know our entrance to you, is not of deceit, Nor
sought we glory of men, are witnesses, and God, how hostly and justly and
unblameably we behaved among you that believe: even because when ye received
the word of God which ye heard from us, ye received it, not as the word of men,
but (as it is in truth) the word of God, who likewise effectually works in
you that believe. both killed the Lord Jesus and their own prophets, and have
persecuted us: and they please not God, and are contrary to all men;

But we,

V. 1. What was proposed c. i. v. 5, 6, is now more largely treated of:
concerning Paul and his Fellow Laborers, v. 1-12: concerning the
Thessalonians, v. 1^-16.

V. 2. We had sess^ed -- In several Places; we are b^d -- No^withstanding, with
^^ch contention -- Notwithstanding both inward and outward Condicts of all
Kinds.

V. 3. F^r (...) exhortation -- That is, our Preaching. A Part is put for the
Whole. Is not at any Time, of deceit -- We prea^^ not a Lie, but the Truth of
GOD; nor of uncleanness -- With any unholy or selfish View. This Expression is
not always appropriated to Lust, although it is ^orretimes emphatically applied
thereto; nor in guile -- But with great Plainness of Speech.

V. 5. Fiat^ing word^ -- This ye know, nor a cloak of covetousness -- Of this
God is witness. He calls Men to witness an open Fact: GOD the secret Intentions
of the Heart: In a Point of a mixed Nature, v. 10. he appeals both to GOD and
Man.

V. 6. Nor from others -- Who would have honored us more, if we had been
burdensome -- That is, taken State upon ourselves.

V. 7. But we were gentle -- Mild, tender, in the midst of you -- Like a Hen
surrounded with her Young; even as a (...) cherishes her own children -- The
Offspring of her own Womb

V. 8. To-impart our own souls -- To lay down our Lives for your Sake.

V. 10. Holily -- In the things of GOD, justly -- With regard to Men
unblameable -- In respect of ourselves, among you that believe -- Who were the
constant Observers of our ^^^^viour.

V. 11. By exhorting, we are moved to do a Thing willingly; by comforting, to
do it joyfully: by (...), to do it carefully.

V. 12. Table Kingdom here, and (...) hereafter.

V. 14. Ye suffered the same things. The same Fruit, the same Afflictions, and
the same Experience, at all Times, and in all Places, are an excellent
Cru^rion, of Evang^lical Trust; As they from the Jesus -- Their C^tryme^.

V. 15. Us -- (...) and Preachers of the Gospel: (...) these not God -- Nor are
they even careful to please him, notwithstanding their fair Professions: and
are contrary to all men -- Are common Enemies of Mankind; not only by their
continual Seditions and Insurrections, and by their utter Contempt of all other
Nations; but in particular, by their endeavoring to hinder their hearing or
receiving the Gospel.

V. 16. To fill up -- The Measure of, their sins always -- as they have ever
done; but -- the Vengeance of GOD, is come upon them -- both overtaken them
unawares, whilst they were seeking to destroy others, and will speedily
complete their Destruction.

V. 17. In this Verse we have a remarkable Instance, not so much of the
transient Affections of holy Grief, Desire, or Joy, as of that abiding
Tenderness, that loving Jemper, which is so apparent in all St. Paul's
Writings, toward those he styles his Children in the Faith. This is the more
carefully to be observed, because the passions occasionally exercising
themselves, and flowing like a To^rent, in the Apostle, are observable to every
Reader; whereas it requires a (...) Attention to discern those calm standing
Temperts, that (...) ^thure of his Soul, from whence the others only flow out,
and when more peculiarly distinguish his Character.

V. 18. Satan -- By those persecuting l^ws, Acts xvii. 13.

V. 19. Ye also -- As well as our others Children.

III.
For ye are our glory and joy. Therefore when we could bear no longer, we
thought good to be left at Athens alone, are appointed hereto, to see you: do
toward you, That he may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness (before
our God and Father, at the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ) with all his
saints.

V. 1. We Paul and Silva^o, could (...) no longer -- Our Desire and Fear for
you.

V. 3. We are appoin^ed (...) -- Are, in every respect, laid in a fit Posture
for it, by the (...) himself; For the Trial and (...). He gives Riches to the
World; but stores up his Treasure of wholesome Afflictions for his children.

V. 6. But now when Timotheus was come to us from you -- Immediately after his
Return St. Paul wrote; while his Joy was fresh, and his Tenderness at the
Height.

V. 8. Now we live -- Indeed. We enjoy Life; so great is our Affection for you.

V. 10. And perfect that which is wanting in your faith -- So St. Paul did not
know, That they who are once upon the rock, no longer need to be t^u^ht by Man!

V. 11. Direct our way -- This Prayer is addressed to Christ as well as to the
Father.

V. 13. With all his -- Christ's, saints -- Both Angels and Men.

IV.
It remains then, brethren, that we beseech and exhort you by the Lord Jesus,
as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God, that ye
abound therein more and more. commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. even
your sanctification, that ye abstain from fornication; how to possess his
vessel in sanctification and honor; none circumvent or defraud his brother in
this matter, because the Lord is an avenger of all these things, as we have
also told you before and testified.

Touching brotherly love, study to be quiet and to do your own business, and to
work with your hands, as we commanded you; That ye may walk decently toward
them that are without,

Now we would not have you ignorant,

V. 1. Man and more -- It is not enough to l^ve faith, even so as to please
GOD, unless we (...) more and more therein.

V. 3. Sanctification -- Entire Holiness of Heart and Life: Particular Branches
of it are subjoined, that ye abstain from so (...) -- A beautiful Transition
from Sanctification to a single Branch of the contrary. And this shows that
nothing is so seemingly (...), or below our Thoughts, but we have need to guard
against it.

V. 4. That every one know -- For this requires Knowledge as well as Chast^ty,
to possess his vessel -- His Wife, in sanctification and ho^our -- So as
neither to dishonor GOD or himself, nor to (...), but further Holiness:
Remembering Marriage is not delighed to inflame, but to conquer natural Desires.

V. 5. Not in passionate desire -- Which had no Place in Man when in a State of
Innocence. Who know not God -- And so may naturally seek Happiness in a
Creature. What (...) accidental Words slide in: And yet how fine and how vastly
important!

V. 6. In this matter -- By violating his Bed. The Things forbidden here are
three: fornication (v. 3.) the passion of d^pre, or mordinate Affection in the
married State, (v. 5.) and the Breach or the Marriage Contract.

V. 8. II. that despises -- The Commandments we ^ave, (...) God -- Himself,
who bath also given you his ^y Spirit -- (...) convince you of the Truth and
enable you to be holy. What naked Majesty of Words! how orato^ical, and yet
with what creat (...) a Simplicity that does not impair, but improve the
Understanding (...) to the utmost; that, like the Rays of Heat through a Glass,
coll^^s all the Powers of Reason into one orderly Point from being se^e^ed
abroad in utter Confusion.

V. 9. We need not write -- Barely; For ye are taught of God -- By his Spirit.

V. 11. That ye study -- Literally, that ye be ambitious: An Ambition worthy:
Christian, to work with your hand -- Not a needless Caution: For temporal
Concerns are often a Cross to them who are newly filled with the Love of GOD.

V. 12. (...) -- That they may have no Pretense to say but they will say (...)
still "This Religion makes Men idle, and brings them to ^ggary," and may want
nothing -- Needful for Life and Godliness. What Christian desires more?

V. 13. Now -- Herein the Effic^^y of Christianity greatly appears, That it
neither takes away, nor in bitter, but sweetly tempers that most refined of all
Affection, our Desire of, or love to, the Dead.

V. 14. So -- As GOD ra^^ed him; with him -- With their living H^^^.

V. 15. By the word of the Lord -- By a particular Revelation, we who are left
-- This ^^ti^^tes the ^ewness of these who will be then alive, compared to the
Multitude of the Dead. Fo^^evers of all Apes and Nations, make up, as it were
one Body: in consideration of which, the Believers of that Age, might put
themselves in the Place, and speak in the Person, of them (...) to live fill
the Coming of the LORD. Not that St. Paul (...) some seem to have ima^^ned
(...) that the Day of the LORD was at hard.

V. 16. (...) a (...) -- Properly, a Proclamation, made to a great Multitude:
^^^re this is, The (...) of (...): Above both, The (...) of God! The Voice of
GOD ^^^^what analogous to the So^nd of a (...).

V. 17. Together -- In the same Moment, in the air -- The Wicked will remain
b^^^th while the Righteous, being absolved, shall be Assessors with their LORD
in the Judement, with the Lord -- In Heaven.

V.
But of the times and seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I write to you.
children of the night,

Now we beseech you, Lord, and be at peace among yourselves. Prove all things;

Abstain from all appearance of evil. it. be with you. Amen.

V. 1. But of the precise times, when this shall be.

V. 2. For this in general ye do know: and ye can and need know no mo^e.

V. 3. When they -- The Men of the World, say.

V. 4. Ye are not in darkness -- Sleeping secure in Sin.

V. 5. (...) and (...) a wake -- Being awakened, let us have all our spirit and
Seases about us.

V. 8. They usually (...) and are drunken in the night -- These Things (...)
not love the Light.

V. 9. (...) -- As he has the obstractely (...).

V. 10. Whether (...) -- Be alive or dead at his Coming.

V. 12. Know (...) you in the (...) (...) mark; take knowledge of them and
their Work. Sometimes the same (...) may beth (...), (...), and adminish the
block by particular Application to each: Sometimes two or more different
Persons, according as GOD variously dispenses his Gifts. But O! what a misery
is it, when a Man undertakes this whole Work, without either Gifts or Grace for
any Part of it! Why then will he undertake it? For Pay? What! will he sell both
his own Soul, and all the Souls of the Flock? What Words can describe such a
Wretch as this? And yet even This may be an Honorable Man.

V. 13. Esteem them very highly -- Literally, more than abundant y, in lov^ --
The inexpressible Sympathy that is between true Pastors, and their Flock, is
intimated, not only here, but also in diverse other Places of this Epistle. (See
chapter ii. 7, 8.) for their works sake -- The principal Ground of their vast
Regard for them. But how are we to esteem them who do not work at all?

V. 14. Warn the disorderly -- Them that stand, as it were, out of their Rank,
in the spiritual Warsare: Some such were even in that Church; the feeble minded
-- Literally, them of little s^ul, such as have no spiritual Courage.

V. 15. See that non -- Watch over both yourselves and each other: fellow that
which is good -- Do it resolutely and perseveringly.

V. 16. Rej^ice evermore -- In uninterrupted Happiness in GOD: pray without
ceasing -- Which is the fruit of always (...) in the LORD: in every thing give
thanks -- Which is the Fruit of both the former. This is Christian Perfection.
Farther than this we cannot go; and we need not stop short of it. Our LORD has
purchased joy as well as rightconsness for us. It is the very design of the
Gospel, that, being saved from guilt, we should be happy in the Love of Christ.
Pray^r may be said to be the breath of our spiritual Life. He that lives cannot
possibly cease breathing. So much as we really enjoy of the Prefence of GOD, so
much Prayer and Praise do we offer up without (...): Else our Rejoieing is but
Deiusion. Thanksgiving is inseparable from true Prayer. It is almost
essentially connected with it. He that always Prays, is ever giving Praise:
whether in Ease or Pain; both for Prosperity and for the greatest Adversity. He
blesses GOD for all (...), looks on them as coming from him, and receives them
only for his sake: not choosing nor re^^^ine, liking nor disliking any Thing,
but only as it is agreeable or disagreeable to his perfect Will.

V. 18. For this -- That you should th^s re^^ice, pray, give Thanks, is the
will of God -- Always good, always pointing at our Salvation.

V. 19. Quench not the Spirit -- Wherever it is, it burns, it flames in Holy
Love, in Joy, Prayer, Thanksgiving: O quench it not, damp is not in yourself or
others; either by neglecting to do Good or by ^^ing Evil!

V. 20. Despise not prophesyings -- That is Preaching; for the Apostle is not
here speaking of extraordinary Gifts. It seems, one Means of Grace is put for
all. And whoever despises any of these, under whatever Pretense, will surely
(though perhaps gradually and almost insensibly) quench the Spirit.

V. 21. Mean time, prove all things -- Which any Preacher recommends. (He
speaks of Practice, not of Doctrines) Try every Advice by the Touchstone of
Scripture, and hold fast that which is good -- Zealously, resolutely,
diligently, practice it, in spite of all Opposition.

V. 22. And be equally zealous and careful to abstain from all appearance ^f
evil -- Observe, those who heap to themselves Teachers having itching ^ars,
under Pretense of proving all things, have no Countenance or Excuse from this
Scripture.

V. 23. And may the God of Peace sanctify you -- by the peace he works in you,
which is a great means of Sanctification, wholly -- The Word signifies wholly
and perfectly: Every Part and all that concerns you; all that is of, or about
you: and may the whole of you, the spirit and the soul and the body -- Just
before he said you, now he denominates them from their spiritual State, the
Spirit: Gal. vi. 8. wishing that it may be preserved whole and entire: Then
from their natural State, the soul and the body; (for these two make up the
whole Nature of Man, Matt. x. 28.) wishing it may be preserved blameless till
the Coming of Christ. To explain this a little further: Of the three here
mentioned, only the two last are the natural, constituent Parts of Man. The
first is adventitious and the supernatural Gift of GOD, to be found in
Christians only. That Man cannot possibly consist of three Parts appears hence.
The Soul is either Matter or not Matter; there is no Medium. But if it is
Matter, it is Part of the Body: If not Matter, it coincides with the Spirit.

V. 24. Who also will do it -- Unless you quench the Spirit.

V. 27. I charge you by the Lord -- Christ, to whom proper divine Worship is
here paid, that this ^pistle -- The first he wrote, be read to all the brethren
-- That is, in all the Churches. They might have concealed it out of Modesty,
had not this been so solemnly injoined. But what Paul commands under so strong
an Adjuration, Rome forbids under pain of Excommunication.

NOTES ON St. PAUL'S Second Epistle to the Thessalonians.
THIS Epistle seems to have been written soon after the former, chiefly on
Occasion of some Things therein, which had been misunderstood. Herein he ^.
Congratulates their Constancy in the Faith, and exhorts them to advance daily
in Grace and Wisdom. 2. Reforms their Mistake concerning the Coming of our
LORD. And 3. Recommends several Christian Duties.

The Parts of it are five: I. The Inscription, C. i. 1 -- 2 II. Thanksgiving
and Prayer for them, 3 -- 12 III. The Doctrine, concerning the Man of Sin, C.
ii. 1 -- 12 Whence he comforts them against this Trial, 13 -- 14 Adding
Exhortation and Prayer, 15 -- 17 IV. An Exhortation to Prayer, (with a Prayer
for them) C. iii. 1 -- 5 To correct the Disorderly, 6 -- 16 V. The Conclusion,
17 -- 18

II. THESSALONIANS.
I.
PAUL and Silvanus and Timotheus to the church of the Thessalonians in God our
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: be unto you and peace from God our Father,
and from our Lord Jesus Christ,

We are bound to thank God always for you, it is a righteous thing with God,
the glory of his power, this calling, and fulfill in you all the good pleasure
of his goodness, and the work of faith with power;

V. 3. It is highly observable that the Apostle wraps up his Praise of Men in
Praise to GOD; giving him the Glory. Your faith grows -- Probably he had
heard from them, since his sending the former Letter. Abounds -- Like Water
that overflows its Banks, and yet increases still.

V. 4. Which ye endure -- that ye may be accounted worthy of the Kingdom.

V. 5. A manifest token -- This is treated of in the sixth and following Verses.

V. 6. It is a righteous thing with God -- (However Men may judge) to transfer
the Pressure from you to them. And it is remarkable that about this Time, at
the Passover, the Jews raising a Tumuit, a great Number, some say thirty
thousand, of them were slain. St. Paul seems to allude to this Beginning of
Sorrows, 1 These. ii. 16. which did not end but with their Destruction.

V. 8. Taking vengeance -- Does GOD barely permit this? Or, as the Lord once
rained brimstone and fire from the Lord, out of Heaven, (Genesis xix. 24.) does a
fiery Stream go forth from him for ever? Who know not God -- (The Root of all
Wickedness and Misery) who remain in Heathen Ignorance; and who obey not --
This refers chiefly to the Jews, who had heard the Gespel.

V. 9. From the glory of his power -- Tremble ye Stout-hearted! Everlasting
destruction -- As there can be no End of their Sins, (the same Enmity against
GOD continuing) so neither of their Funishment: Sin and its Punishment running
parallel throughout Eternity itself. They must of Necessity therefore be cut
off from all Good and all Possibility of it; from the presence of the Lord --
Wherein chiefly consists the Salvation of the Righteous. What unspeakable
Punishment is implied, even in falling short of this, supposing that nothing
more were implied in his taking Vengeance?

V. 10. To be glorified in his saints -- For the wonderful Glory of Christ
shall shine in them.

V. 11. All the good pleasure of his goodness -- Which is no less than perfect
Holiness.

V. 12. That the name -- The Love and Power of our Lord may be gl^rified --
Gloriously displayed in you.

II.
Now I beseech you, brethren, concerning the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and our gathering together unto him, that day shall not come, unless
the falling away come first, and the man of sin be revealed, the son of
perdition, will restrain, not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

V. 1. Our gathering together to him -- In the Clouds.

V. 2. Be not shaken in mind -- In Judgment, or ter^ifi^d -- As those ^asily
are who are immoderately fond of knowing tuture Things; ^ither by any pretended
Revelation from the spirit, nor by pretense of any word spoken by me.

V. 3. Unless the falling away -- From the pure Faith of the Gospel, come
first. This began even in the Ap^stolic Age. But the man of sin, the sin of
perdition -- Eminently so called, is not come yet. However, in many Respects,
the Pope has an indisputable Claim to those Titles. He is, in an emphatical
Sense, the man of sin, as he incre^ses all Manner of Sin above Measure. And he
is too properly styled, The son of perd^tion, as he has caused the Death of
Numberless Multitudes, both of his Opps^rs and Followers, destroyed innumetable
Souls, and will himself perish everlastingly. He it is that (...) himself to
the Emperor, once his rightful Sovereign; and that exal^th himself above all
that is called God, or that is w^ shipped -- Commanding An^els, and putting
Kings under his Feet, both of whom are called Gods in Scripture; claiming the
highest Power, the highest Honor; suffering himself not once only to be styled
GOD or Vice-god. Indeed no less is implied in his ordinary ^itle, Most Hely
Lord, or M^st H^ly Father. So that he sits -- Inthro^ed in the templ^ of God
-- Mentioned Rev. xi. i. d^claring himself that he is God -- Claiming the
Prerogatives which belong to GOD alone.

V. 6. And now ye know -- By what I told you when I was with you; that which
restrains -- The Power of the Roman Emperors, When this is taken away, the
wicked one will be revealed. In his time -- His appointed Season, and not
before.

V. 7. He will surely be revealed; for the mystery -- The deep, secret Power of
inip^ity -- Just opposite to the Power of Godliness, already works. It began
with the Love of bonour and the Desire of power; and is completed in the
entire Subversion of the Gospel of Christ. This (...) of in^^ity is not wholly
confined to the Romish Church, but extends itself to others also. It seems to
consist of, 1. Human inventions added to the written word. 2. More (...) perfo^
put in the room of says and (...) 3. Other Mediat^^s besides the Man Christ
Jesus. The two last Branches, together with Id^ and (...), are the direct
Consequences of the former; namely, the adding to the Word of GOD. Already
works -- In the Church. Only be that restrains -- That is the Potentate who
successively has Rome in his Power. The Emperors, Heathen or Christian; the
Kings, Goths or Lomhards; the Cardingi^^ or German Emperors.

V. 8. And (...) -- When every Prince and Power that (...) taken away, will
that wicked one -- (...) so^ed, be (...) the Lord will soon consume with the
spirit of his mouth -- His (...) Power, and d^s^y -- With the very first
Appearance of his Glory.

V. 10. (...) they received (...) the love of the truth -- Therefore GOD
suffered them to fall into that (...) delusion.

V. 11. Therefore God shall sord them -- That is, judicially permit to come
upon them strong d^sion.

V. 12. That they all (...) be (...) -- That is, the Consequence of which will
be, that they all will be (...) not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness -- That is, who believed not the Truth, because they loved Sin.

V. 13. God has from the beginning -- Of your hearing the Cospel, chosen you
to sa^vation -- Taken you out of the World, and placed you in the Way to Glory.

V. 14. To which -- Faith and Holiness, he bath called you by (...) gospel --
That which we preached accompanied with the Power of his Spirit.

V. 15. Hold -- Without adding to or diminishing from the traditions which ye
have been taught -- The Truths which I have delivered to you; wh^ber by word or
by our epist^e -- He preached before he wrote. And he had written concerning
this, in his former Epistle.

III.
Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may run and be
glorified, even as among you: your hearts into the love of God and into the
patience of Christ.

Now we command you, him not as an enemy, him as a brother. be with you all.

The salutation of Paul, be with you all. Amen.

V. 1. May run -- Go on swiftly, without any Interruption; and be glorified --
Acknowledged as Divine, and bring (...).

V. 2. (...) and all who have not, are more or less (...) and wicked Men.

V. 3. Who will stab (...) -- That cleave to him by Faith, and guard you from
the (...) -- And all his Instruments.

V. 4. (...) in the Lord concerning you -- Thu^ only should we trust in any M^^.

V. 5. Now the Lord -- The Spirit, whose ^oper Work this is, (...) -- Lead you
(...) forward, into the patience of (...) -- Of which he set you a Pattern.

V. 6. That walks disorderly -- Particularly by not working; not according to
the tradition he received of us -- The admonition we gave both by Word of
Mouth, and in our former Epistle.

V. 10. Neither let him ^at -- Do not maintain him in Idleness.

V. 11. Doing nothing, but being busy-bodi^s -- To which Idleness naturally
disposes.

V. 12. Work quietly -- Letting the Concerns of other People alone.

V. 14. Have no company were him -- No (...), no Familiarity, no needless
Correspondence.

V. 15. Ad^ (...) ^^m as a brother -- Tell him lovingly of the Reason why you
shun him.

V. 16. The Lord of peace -- Christ. Give you peace by all m^ans -- In every
Way and Manner.

NOTES ON The First Epistle of St. PAUL to Timothy.
THE Mother of Timothy was a Jewess, but his Father was a Gentile. He was
converted to Christianity very early; and while he was yet but a Youth, was
taken by St. Paul to assist him in the Work of the Gospel, chiefly in watering
the Churches which he had planted.

He was therefore properly (as was Titus) an itinerant Evangelist, a kind of
secondary Apostle, whose Office was, to regulate all Things in the Churches to
which he was (...); and to inspect and reform whatsoever was amiss either in
the Bishops, Deacons, or People.

St. Paul had doubtless largely instructed him in private Conversation for the
(...) Execution of so weighty an Office. Yet to six Things more upon his Mind,
and to give him an Opportunity of having Recourse to them afterward, and of
communicating them to others, as there might be Occasion; as also to leave
Divine Directions in Writing, for the Use of the Church and its Ministers in
all Ages, he sent him this excellent Pastoral Letter, which contains a great
Variety of important Sentiments for their Regulation.

Though St. Paul styles him his own s^n in the faith, yet he does not appear to
have been converted by the Apostle; but only to have been exceeding dear to
him, who had established him therein; and whom he had diligently and faithfully
served, like a son with hi^ father in the Gospel. Phil. ii. 22.

The Epistle contains three Parts: I. The Inscription, C. i. 1 -- 2 II. The
Instruction of Timothy how to behave at Ephesus; wherein 1. In General, he
gives him an Injunction to deliver to them that taught the (...) in a wrong
Manner, and confirms at the same Time the Sum of the Gospel as exemplified in
himself. 3 -- 20 2. In Particular, 1. He prescribes to Men, a Method of Prayer,
C. ii. 1 -- 8 To Women, Good Works and Modesty, 9 -- 15 2. He recounts the
Requisites of a Bishop, C. iii. 1 -- 7 The Duties of Deacons, 8 -- 10 The
Duties of Women, 11 -- 13 3. He shows what Timothy should teach, 14 -- C. iv. 1
-- 6 What he should avoid, 7 -- 11 What follow after, 12 -- 16 How he should
treat Men and Women, C. v. 1 -- 2 Widows, 3 -- 16 Elders, 17 -- 19 Offenders,
20 -- 21 Himself, 22 -- 23 Those he doubts of, 24 -- 25 Servants, C. vi. 1 -- 2
4. False Teachers are reproved, 3 -- 10 Timothy is admonished, quickened, 11 --
12 and charged, 13 -- 16 Precepts are prescribed to be enforced on the Rich, 17
-- 19 III. The Conclusion, 20 -- 21

I. TIMOTHY.
I.
PAUL an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the commandment of God our
Savior, and Christ Jesus our hope,

As I exhorted thee when I was going into Macedonia, some to teach no other
doctrine, is good, if a man use it lawfully, Against whoremongers, it
ignorantly in unbelief. invisible, the only God, be honor and glory for ever
and ever. Amen.

This charge I commit to thee,

V. 1. Paul an apostle -- Familiarity is to be set aside where the Things of
GOD are concerned; according to the commandment of God -- The authoritative
Appointment of GOD the Father, Our Sa^^^^ -- So styled in many other Places
likewise, as being the grand Orderer of the whole Scheme of our Salvation, and
Christ our hope -- That is, the Author, Object, and Ground of all our Hope.

V. 2. Grace, mercy, peace -- St. Paul wishes Grace and Peace, in his Epistles
to the Churches. To Timotheus he add, Mercy, the most tender Grace toward
those who stand in need of it. The Experience of this prepares a Man to be a
Minister of the Gospel.

V. 3. Charge some to teach (...) doctrine -- Than I have taught. Let them put
nothing in the place of it, add nothing to it.

V. 4. Neither give head -- So as either to teach or regard them, to fables --
Fabulous Jewish Traditions, and endless genealogies -- Not those delivered in
Scripture, but the long, intricate Pedigrees whereby they strove to prove their
Descent from such or such a Person; which afford questions -- Which lead only
to useless and endless Controversies.

V. 5. Whereas the end of the commandment -- Of the whole Christian
Institution, is love -- And this was particularly the End of the Commandment
which Timethens was to enforce at Ephesus, (ver. 3, 18.) The Foundation is
Faith, the End Love. But this can only subsist in an heart purified by Faith,
and is always attended with a good Conscience.

V. 6. From which -- Love and a good Conscience, some are turned aside -- An
Affectation of high and extensive Knowledge sets a Man at the greatest Distance
from Faith, and all Sense of Divine Things, to vain jangling -- And of all
vanities, none are more vain, than dry, empty Disputes on the Things of GOD.

V. 7. Understanding neither the very things they speak, nor the subject they
speak of.

V. 8. We grant the whole Mosaic Law it good, answers excellent Purposes, if a
man use it in a proper Manner. Even the Ceremonial is good, as it points to
Christ; and the moral Law is holy, just and good in its own Nature; and of
admirable Use both to convince Unbelievers, and to guide Believers in all
Holiness.

V. 9. The la^^ does not lie against a righteous man -- Does not strike or
condemn him; but against the lawless and disobedient -- They who despise the
Authority of the Lawgiver, violate the first Commandment, which is the
Foundation of the Law, and the Ground of all Obedience; against the ungodly and
sinners -- Who break the second Commandment, worshipping Idols, or not
worshipping the true GOD; the unholy and profane -- Who break the third
Commandment by taking his Name in vain.

V. 10. Man-stealers -- The worst of all Thieves, in Comparison of whom
Highwaymen and House-breakers are innocent! What then are most Traders in
Negroes, Procurers of Servants for America, and all who last Soldiers by Lies,
Tricks, or In^icements?

V. 11. According to the glorious gospel -- Which far from making void, does
effectually establish the law.

V. 12. I thank Christ -- who has enabled me, in that he accounted me
faithful, having put me into the ministry -- The Meaning is, I thank him for
putting me into the Ministry, and enabling me to be faithful therein.

V. 13. A blasphemer -- Of Christ, a persecuter -- Of his Church, a reviles --
Of his Doctrine and People. But I obtained mercy -- He does not say. Because I
was unconditionally elected; but because I did it in ignorance. Not that his
Ignorance took away his Sin: But it left him capable of Mercy; which he would
hardly have been, had he acted thus, contrary to his own Conviction.

V. 14. And the grace -- Whereby I obtained Mercy, was exceeding abundant, with
faith -- Opposite to my preceding unbelief; and love -- Opposite (...)
blasphemy, persecution, and oppression.

V. 15. This is a faithful saying -- A most solemn Preface; and ^^^thy of all
acceptance -- Well ^^serving to (...) accepted, received, embraced, with an
the Faculties of our whole Soul, that Christ -- Promised, Jesus -- Exhibited,
came into the world to save sinners -- All Sinners, without Exception.

V. 16. For this cause GOD ^^^wed me mercy, that all his long-suffering might
be shown, and that ^o^e might hereafter despair.

V. 17. The king of eternity -- A Phrase frequent with the Hebrews. How
unspeakably sweet is the Thought of Eternity to Believers!

V. 18. This charge I commit to the -- That thou may deliver it to the
Church, according to the prophesies concerning thee -- Uttered when thou wast
received as an Evangelist, (c. iv. 14.) probably by many Persons, (c. vi. 12.)
that being encouraged by them, thou might war the good warfare.

V. 19. Holding fast faith -- Which is as a most precious Liquor, and a good
conscience -- Which is as a clean Glass; which -- Namely a good Conscience,
some having thrust away -- It goes away unwillingly. It always says, "Do not
hurt me." And they who retain this, do not make shipwreck of their faith.
Indeed none can make Shipwreck of Faith who never had it. These therefore were
once try Believers. Yet they fell not only soully, but finally. For Ships once
wrecked, cannot be afterward saved.

V. 20. Whom -- Though absent, I have delivered to Satan, that they may learn
not to blast home -- That by what they suffer they may be in some Measure
restrained, if they will not repent.

II.
I exhort therefore, that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions,
thanksgivings be made for all men: and honesty. is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior, there is one God, one mediator also between God and
men, without wrath and doubting:

V. 1. I exhort therefore -- Seeing GOD is so gracious. In this Chapter he
gives Directions, 1. With regard to public Prayers. 2. With regard to Doctrine.
Supplication is here, the imploring Help in Time of Need: Prayer is, any Kind
of offering up our Desires to GOD. But not Prayer is the Vehemence of holy
Zeal, the Ardor of divine Love. ^^^ing from a calm, undisturbed Soul, moved
upon by the Spirit of GOD. Interession is Prayer for others. We may likewise
give (...) all m^^, in the full Sense of the Word, for that GOD (...) all men
to be (...), and Christ is the Mediator of all.

V. 2. For all that are in and only -- Seeing even the lowest Country
Magistrates frequently do much Good, or much Harm. GOD supports the Power of
Magistracy for the Sake of his own People, when in the present State of Men, it
could not otherwise be kept up in any Nation whatever. Godliness -- Inward
Religion; the true Worship of GOD. Heres^y -- A comprehensive Word, taking in
the where Duty we out to our (...).

V. 3. For this (...) at we pray for all Men. Do you ask, Why are not more
(...)? We do not pray enough: is acceptable in the sight of God (...) ^^^viour
-- Who has actually saved us that believe, and wi^^ (...) to be saved. It is
strange that any whom He ha^ (...) should doubt the Universality of his Grace!

V. 4. Who wills seriously all men -- Not a Part only, much less the
f^^^^liest Part, to be saved -- Eternally. This is treated of ver. 5. p. And in
order thereto, to come -- (They are not compelled,) to the knowledge of the
truth -- Which brings Salvation. This is treated of ver. 6, 7.

V. 5. For -- The 4th verse is proved by the 5th, the 1st by the 4th. There is
one God -- And they who have not Him, through the one Mediator, have no GOD;
one Mediator also -- We could not rejoice that there is a GOD, were there not a
Mediator also; one who stands between God and men, to reconcile Man to GOD, and
to transact the whole Affair of our Salvation. This excludes all other
Mediators, as Saints and Angels, whom the Papists set up and idolatrously
worship as such: Just as the Heathens of old set up many Mediators, to paci^y
their superior Gods; the man -- Therefore all Men are to apply to this Mediator
(...).

V. 6. Wh^ ga^^ (...) the Word signifies, wherein a (...), as an Eye for an
Eye, or Life for Life. And this Ransom, from the Dignity of the Person
redeeming, was more than equivalent to all Mankind: to be testified of in due
season -- Literally, in his own Seasons, those chosen by his own Wisdom.

V. 8. I will -- A Word strongly expressing his Apostolical Authority;
therefore -- This Particle connects the eighth with the first Verse; that men
pray in every place -- Public and private. Wherever Men are, there Prayer
should be; lifting up holy hands -- Pure from all known Sin, without wrath --
In any Kind, against any Creature. And every Temper or Motion of our Soul, that
is not according to love is wrath; and doubting -- Which is contrary to Faith.
And wrath, or unholy actions, or want of faith in Him we call upon, are the
three grand Hindrances of GOD'S hearing our Petitions. Christianity consists of
Faith and Love embracing Truth and Grace. Therefore the Sum of our Wishes
should be, to pray, and live, and ^^e, without any Wrath or Doubt.

V. 9. With sobriety -- Which (in St. Paul's Sense) is the Virtue which governs
our whole Life according to true Wisdom; not with curled hair; not with gold --
Worn by Way of Ornament; not with pearls -- Jewels of any Kind, (a Part is put
for the Whole) not with costly raiment -- These four are expressly forbidden by
Name, to all Women (here is no Exception) professing Godliness. And no Art of
Man can reconcile with the Christian Profession, the wilful Violation of an
express Command.

V. 12. To usurp authority over the man -- By public Teaching.

V. 13. First -- So that Woman was originally the Inferior.

V. 14. And Adam was not deceived -- The Serpent deceived Eve, Eve did not
deceive Adam, but persuaded him. Thou have barkened unto the Voice of thy Wife,
Genesis iii. 17. The preceding Verse showed, Why a Woman should not usurp
authority over the man. This shows, why she ought not to teach. She is more
easily deceived, and more easily deceives. The woman. being deceived,
transgressed -- The serpent deceived her ( Genesis iii. 13.) and she transgressed.

V. 15. Yet she -- That is, Women in general, who were all involved with Eve in
the Sentence pronounced, Genesis iii. 16. shall be saved in childbearing --
Carried safe through the Pain and Danger which that Sentence intails upon them
for the transgression: Yea, and finally saved, if they continue in loving Faith
and holy Wisdom.

III.
This is a faithful saying, If a man desire the office of a bishop, apt to
teach; must be serious, not double tongued, not given to much wine, not
desirous of filthy gain; Holding fast the mystery of the faith in a pure
conscience. must be serious, not slanderers, vigilant, faithful in all things.

The mystery of godliness is the pillar and ground of the truth,

V. 1. He desires a good work -- An excellent, but laborious Employment.

V. 2. Therefore -- That he may be capable of it, a bishop -- Or Pastor of a
Congregation, must be blameless -- Without Fault or just S^spicion: The husband
of one wife -- This neither means that a Bishop must be married; nor that he
may not marry a Second Wife: which it is just as lawful for him to do, as to
marry a First, and may in some Cases be his bounden Duty. But whereas Polygamy
and Divoice on slight Occasions were common both among the Jews and Heathens,
it teaches us, That Ministers, of all others, ought to stand clear of those
Sins; vigilant, prudent -- Lively and zealous, yet calm and wise; of good
behavior -- Naturally flowing from that Vigilance and Prudence.

V. 4. Having his children in subjection with all seriousness -- For Levity
undermines all Domestic Authority. And this Direction, by a Parity of Reason,
belongs to all Parents.

V. 6. Lost being puffed up -- With this new Honor, or with the Applause which
frequently follows it, he fall into the condemnation of the devil -- The same
into which the Devil fell.

V. 7. He ought also to have a good report -- To have had a fair Character in
Time past, from them that are without -- That are not Christians; lost he fall
into reproach -- By their rehearsing his former Life, which might discourage
and prove a Share to him.

V. 8. Likewise the deac^s must be serious -- Men of a grave, decent, reperable
Behavior. But where are Presbyters? Were this Order essentially distinct from
that of Bishops, could the Apost^e have past it over in Silence? Not desirous
of filthy gain -- With what Abhortance does he every where speak of this? All
that is gained (above ^ood and Raiment) by mi^^^tring in Holy Things, is filthy
gain indeed! Far more fi^ly than what is honestly gained, by ^aking Kennels, or
emptying common Sewers.

V. 9 Holding fast the faith in a pure Conscience -- Steadfast ^n Faith, holy in
Heart and Life.

V. 10. Let these be proved first -- Let a Trial be made, How they behave; then
let them minister -- Let them be (...) that Office.

V. 11. Faithful in all things -- Both to GOD, their Husbands and the Poor.

V. 13. They purchased a good degree, or step, toward some higher Office; and
much boldness -- From the Testimony of a good Conscience.

V. 15. That thou may know how to behave -- This is the Scope of the Epistle,
in the house of God -- Who is the Master of the Family, which is -- As if he
had said, By the House of GOD, I mean the church.

V. 16. The mystery of godliness -- Afterward specified in Six Articles, which
sum up the whole Economy of Christ upon Earth, is the pillar and ground, the
Foundation and Support of all the truth, taught in his Church. God was manifest
in the flesh -- In the form of a Servant, the Fashion of a Man, for three and
thirty Years: justified by the Spirit -- Publicly declared to be the Son of
God -- By his Resurrection from the dead: seen -- Chiefly after his
Resurrection, by angels -- both good and bad: preached among the Gentiles --
This elegantly follows. The angels were the least, the Gentiles the farthest
removed from him; and the Foundation both of this Preaching and of their Faith,
was laid before his Assumption: was believed on in the world -- Opposed to
Heaven, into which he was taken up. The first Point is, He was manifested in
the flesh; the last, He was taken up into glory.

IV.
But the spirit says expressly, that in the latter times some will depart from
the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils, them that
speak lies, having their own consciences seared as with an hot iron: commanding
to abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with thanksgiving
by them that believe and know the truth. them with the words of faith, and of
the good doctrine which thou have accurately traced out. is a faithful saying,
believe, in word, in behavior, in love, in spirit, in faith, thy teaching:

V. 1. But the spirit says -- By St. Paul himself to the Thessalonians, and
probably by other cotemporary Prophets, expressly -- As concerning a Thing of
great Moment, and soon to be fulfilled; seat in the latter times -- These
extend from our LORD'S Ascension till his Coming to Judgment, some -- Yea,
many, and by Degrees the far greater Part, will depart from the faith -- The
Doctrine once delivered to the Saints, giving heed to seducing spirits -- Who
inspire false Prophets.

V. 2. These will depart from the faith, by the hypocrisy of them that speak
lies, having their own consciences as senseless and unfeeling, as Flesh that is
seared with an hot iron.

V. 3. Forbidding Priests, Monks, and Nuns to marry, and commanding all Men, to
abstain from such and such meats at such and such Times. Which God has created
to be received by them that know the truth -- That all Meats are now clean;
with Thanksgiving -- Which supposes a pure Conscience.

V. 5. It is sanctified by the word of God -- Creating all, and giving it to
Man for Food: and by prayer -- The Children of GOD are to pray for the
Sanctification of all the Creatures which they use. And not only the
Christians, but even the Jews, yea the very Heathens used to consecrate their
Table by Prayer.

V. 7. Like those who were to contend in the Grecian Games, exercise thyself
unto godliness -- Train thyself up in Holiness of Heart and Life, with the
utmost Labor, Vigor and Diligence.

V. 8. Bodily exercise profits a little -- Increases the Health and Strength
of the Body.

V. 10. Therefore -- Animated by this Promise, we both labor and suffer
reproach -- We regard neither Pleasure, Ease, nor Honor, because we trust --
For this very Thing the World will hate us, in the living God -- Who will give
us the Life he has promised; who is the Savior of all men -- Preserving them
in this Life, and willing to save them eternally; but especially -- In a more
eminent Manner, of them that believe -- And so are saved everlastingly.

V. 12. Let no one have Reason to despise thee for thy youth: To prevent this,
be a pattern in word -- Public and private: in spirit -- In your whole Temper;
in faith -- When this is placed in the midst of several other Christ ^aces, it
generally means a particular Branch of it; Fidelity or Faithfulness.

V. 13. Give thyself to reading -- Both publicly and privately, Enthusiasts
observe this! Expect no End without the Means.

V. 14. Neglect not -- They neglect it who do not exercise it to the full, the
gift -- Of Feeding the Flock, of Power, and Love, and Sobriety, which was given
thee by prophecy -- By immediate Direction from GOD, by the laying on of my
hands (2 Timothy i. 6.) while the Elders joined also in the Solemnity. This
Presbytery probably consisted of some others, together with Paul and Silas.

V. 15. Meditate -- The Bible makes no Distinction between this and to
contemplate, whatever others do. True meditation is no other than Faith, Hope,
Love, Joy, melted down together, as it were, by the Fire of GOD'S Holy Spirit;
and offered up to GOD in secret. He that is wholly in these, will be little in
worldly Company, (...) Studies, in collecting Books, Medals, or Butterflies:
Wherein many Pastors drone away so considerable a Part of their ^es!

V. 16. Continue in them -- In all the preceding Advices.

V.
Rebuke not an aged man, but exhort him as a father, and day. first faith. to
be idle, going about from house to house; and not only idle, but triflers and
busy-bodies, speaking what they ought not.

Let the elders who rule well be counted worthy of double honor, Deuteronomy. xxv. 4.
shall not muzzle the ox that treads out the corn: and, The labourer is
worthy of his reward. sin, rebuke before all, that the rest also may fear. I
charge thee before God, of some are manifest; and they that are otherwise
cannot be hid.

V. 1. Rebuke not -- Considering your own Youth, with such a Severity as would
otherwise be proper.

V. 3. Honor -- That is, Maintain out of the public Stock.

V. 4. Let these ^earn to require their parents -- For all their former Care,
Trouble, and ^pence.

V. 5. Widows indeed -- Who have no near Relations to provide for them; and who
are wholly devoted to GOD. Desolate -- Having neither Children, nor
Grandchildren to relieve her.

V. 6. She that lives in pleasure -- Delicately, voluptuously, in elegant,
regular Sensuality, though not in the Use of any such Pleasures as are unlawful
in themselves.

V. 7. That they -- That is, the Widows.

V. 8. If any provide not -- Food and Raiment, for his own -- Mother and
Grandmother, being desolate widows, he has -- virtually denied the faith --
Which does not destroy, but perfect Natural Duties. What has this to do with
heaping up Money for our Children, for which it is often so impertinently
alleged? But all Men have their Reasons for laying up Money. One will go to
Hell for Fear of Want^ another acts like an Heathen, left he should be worse
than an Infidel.

V. 9. Let not a widow be chosen -- Into the Number of Deaconnesses, who
attended sick Women or traveling Preachers, under threeseore -- Afterward
they were admitted at Forty, if they were eminent for Holiness, having been the
wife of one husband -- That is, having lived in lawful Marriage, whether with
one or more Persons successively.

V. 10. If she has washed the feet of the saints -- Has been ready to do the
meanest Offices for them.

V. 11. Refuse -- Do not choose, for when they are waxed wanton against Christ
-- To whose more immediate Service they had addicted themselves, they want to
marry -- And not with a single Eye, to the Glory of GOD; and so withdraw
themselves from that entire Service of the Church, to which they were before
engaged.

V. 12. They have rejected their first faith -- Have deserted their Trust in
GOD, and have acted contrary to the first Conviction, namely, that wholly to
devote themselves to his Service w^ (...) most excellent Way. When we first
receive Power to believe, does not the Spirit of God generally point out, what
are the most excellent Things; and at the same Time, give us an holy Resolution
(...) walk in the highest Degree of Christian Severity? And how unwise are we
ever to sink into any Thing below it?

V. 14. I counsel therefore the younger women -- Widows or Virgins, such as are
not disposed to live single, to marry, to hear children, to guide the family --
Then will they have sufficient Employment of their own: and give no occasion of
reproach to the adversary -- Whether Jew or Heathen.

V. 15. Some -- Widows; have turned aside after Satan -- Who has drawn them
from Christ.

V. 17. Let the Elders that rule well -- Who approve themselves faithful
Stewards of all that is committed to their Charge; be counted worthy of double
honor -- A more abundant Provision, seeing that such will employ it all to the
Glory of GOD. As it was the most laborious and disinterested Men who were put
into these Offices, so whatever any one had to bestow, in his Life or Death,
was generally lodged in their Hands for the poor. By this Means the Churchmen
became very rich in After-Ages. But as the design of the Donors was something
else, there is the highest Reason why it should be disposed of according to
their pious Intent; especially those -- of them who labor -- Diligently and
painfully, in the word and teaching -- In teaching the Word.

V. 19. Against an elder -- Or Presbyter, do not even receive an accusation,
unless by two or three witnesses -- By the Mosaic Law a private Person might be
cited, (though not condemned) on the Testimony of one Witness. But St. Paul
forbids an Elder to be even cited on such Evidence, his Reputation being of
more Importance than that of others.

V. 20. Those -- Elders that sin -- Scandalously, and are duly convicted,
rebuke before all -- The Church.

V. 21. I charge thee before God -- Referring to the last Judgment in which we
shall stand before God and Christ with his Elect, that is, holy Angels -- Who
are the Witnesses of our Conversation. The Apostle looks through his own
Labors and even through Time itself, and seems to stand as one already in
Eternity. That thou observe these Things without prejudging -- Passing no
Sentence till the Cause is fully heard; Or partiality -- For or against any one.

V. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man -- That is, appoint no Man to
Church-Offices, without full Trial and Examination. Else thou wi^s be accessory
to, and accountable for, his Misbehaviour in his Office. Keep thyself pure --
From the Blood of all Men.

V. 24. Some men's sins are manifest beforehand -- Before any strict Enquiry
be made, going before to judgment -- So that you may immediately judge them
unworthy of any spiritual Office: and some they -- Their Sins, follow after --
More covertly.

V. 25. They that are otherwise -- Not so manifest, cannot be long bid -- From
thy Knowledge. On this Account also be not hasty in laying on of Hands.

VI.
Let as many servants as are under the yoke, account their own masters worthy
of all honor; lest the name of God and his doctrine be blasphemed. And they
that have believing masters, them, because they are brethren; but rather do
them service, because they are faithful and beloved, partakers of the benefit.
These things teach and exhort. it is manifest that neither can we carry any
thing out; Having then food and covering, into many foolish and hurtful
desires, which plunge men into destruction and perdition. I charge thee before
God, be honor and power everlasting. Amen.

Charge the rich in this world not to be highminded, up for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.

O Timotheus, be with thee.

V. 1. Let servants under the yoke -- Of Heathen Masters, account them worthy
of all honor -- All the Honor due from a Servant to a Master; Lest the name
of God and his doctrine be blaspoemed -- As it surely will, if they do
otherwise.

V. 2. Let them (...) d^spise them -- Pay them the less Honor or Obedience,
because they are brethren -- And in that Respection a L^vel with them. They
that live in a religious Community know the Danger of this, and that greater
Grace is requisite to near with the Paults o. a Brother, than of an lu^idel, or
Man of the Wo^; but rather do them service -- Serve them so much the more
diligently, because they are joint partakers of the great Benefit -- Salvation.
These things -- Paul the aged gives young Timetheus a Charge to dwell upon
practical Holiness. Less experienced Teachers are apt to neglect the
Superstructure whilst they lay the Foundation. But of so great Importance did
St. Paul see it to enforce obedience to Christ, as well as to preach faith in
his Blood, that, after strongly urging the life of faith on Professors, he even
adds another Charge for the strict Observance of it.

V. 3. If any teach otherwise -- Than strict practical holiness, in all its
Branches: and consent not to sound words -- Literally, hear ^ful words: Words
that have no Taint of Falsehood, or Tendency to encourage Sin; and the doctrine
which is after godliness -- Exquisitely contrived to answer all the Ends, and
secure every Interest of real Fiery.

V. 4. He is puffed up -- Which is the Cause of his not consenting to the
Doctrine which is after inward, practical Religion. By it is mark we may know
them. Knowing nothing -- As he ought to know; sick of questions -- Doatingly
fond of Dispute. An evil, but common Disease; especially where practice is
forgotten. Such indeed (...) earnestly for singular phrases, and favorite
Points of their own. Every Thing else, however like the Preaching of Christ and
his Apostles, is all " Law and Bondag and ^arnal ^easoning;" stri^ of words --
Merely verbel Controvers^; whereof con^th (...) -- Of the Gifts and Success of
others; contention -- For the Pre-endrence. Such Disputants seldom like the
Prosperity of others, or to be less esteemed themselves; (...) sing -- It not
being their way t^ think well of those that differ from themselves in opinion.

V. 5. Supposing that (...) god^ness -- Thinking the best Religion is the
getting of M^ticy. A^^r more common Case than is usually supposed.

V. 6. But godliness with (...) -- The inseparable Companion of true^vital
Religion, ^greu gain -- Brings unspeakable Profit in Time, as well as Eternity

V. 7. Neither can we carry anything out -- To what Purpose then do we heap
together so many Things? O give me one Thing; a (...) and (...) Passage to my
own Country!

V. 8. Covering -- That is, Raiment and an House to cover us. This is all that
a Christian needs, and all that his Religion allows him to desire.

V. 9. They that desire to be rich -- To have more than these, (for then they
would be so far rich, and the very Desire banishes Content, and exposes them to
Ruin) fall, plunge -- A sad Gradation! into a temptation -- Miserable Food for
the soul! and a snare -- Or Trap: Dreadful Covering! and into many foolish and
hurtful desires -- Which are s^^n and fed by having more than we need. Then
farewell all Hope of Content! What then remains, but Destruction for the Body,
and Perdition for the Soul?

V. 10. Love of money -- Commonly called prudent Care, of what a Man has, in
the R^^^ -- The Parent ^f all Manner of Evil, which some coveting, have erred
-- Literally, missed the mark. They aimed not at faith, but at something else,
and pierced themselves with many forrows -- From a guilts Conscience,
tormenting Passions, Desures contrary to Reason, Religion, and one another. How
cruel are wor^^ly Men to themselves!

V. 11. But thou, O man of God -- Whatever all the World else do, ( A man of
God -- Is either a Prophet, a Messenger of GOD, or a Man devoted to GOD, a Man
of another World fl^^ -- As from a Serpent, ^^stead of covering these things:
follow after Righteousness -- The whole Image of GOD; though sometimes this
Word is used, not in the general, but in the particular Acceptance, meaning
only that single Branch of it, which is termed Justice; Faith -- Which is also
taken here in the general and full Sense: namely, a divine supernatural Sight
of GOD; chiefly in respect of his Mercy in CHRIST. This Faith is the Foundation
of Righteousness, the Support of Godliness, the Root of every Grace of the
Spirit; Love -- This St. Paul intermites with every Thing that is good; he, as
it were, penetrates whatever he treaty of with Love, the glorious Spring of all
inward and outward Holiness.

V. 12. Fight the good fight of faith -- Not about Words: Lay hold (...)
eternal life -- Just before thee. Thou have confessed the good confession --
(Perhaps at his Baptism:) So likewise, ver. 13. but with a remarkable Variation
of the Expression; Thou have confessed the good confession before many
witnesses -- To which they all assented. He witnessed the good confession; but
Pilate did not assent to it.

V. 13. I charge thee before God who quickens all things -- Who has
quickened thee, and will quicken thee at the great Day.

V. 15. Which -- Appearing: In his own times -- The Power, the Knowledge, and
the Revelation of which, remain in his Eternal Mind.

V. 16. Who only has -- Underived, independent -- immortality, dwelling in
light unapproachable -- To the highest Angel: whom no man has seen, or can see
-- With bodily Eyes. Yet we shall see Him as He is.

V. 17. What follows seems to be a Kind of a Postscript. Charge the rich in
this world -- Rich in such beggarly Riches as this World affords, not to be
high-minded -- (O who regards this? Not to think better of themselves for their
Money, or any Thing it can purchase: neither to trust in uncertain riches --
(Which they may lose in an Hour) either for Happiness or Defense: But in the
living God -- All the Rest is dead Clay: who gives us -- As it were holding
them out to us in his Hand, all things -- Which we have, richly -- Freely,
abundantly, to enjoy -- As his Gift, in him and for him. When we use them thus,
we do indeed enjoy all Things. Where else is there any Notice taken of the
rich, in all the apostolic Writings, save to denounce Woes and Vengeance upon
them?

V. 18. To do good -- To make this their daily Employ, that they may, be rich
-- May abound, in all good Works; ready to distribute -- Singly to particular
Persons; willing to communicate -- To join in all Public Works of Charity.

V. 19. Treasuring up for themselves a good Foundation -- Of an abundant
Reward, by the free Mercy of GOD, that they may lay hold on eternal life --
This cannot be done by alms deeds: yet they come up for a memorial before God.
(Acts x. 4.) And the Lack, even of this, may be the Cause why GOD will
withold Grace and Salvation from us.

V. 20. Keep that which is committed to thy trust -- The Charge I have given
thee, c. i. 18. avoid profane, empty bubblings -- How weary of Controversy was
this acute Disputant! and Knowledge falsely so called -- Most of the ancient
Heretics were great Pretenders to Knowledge.

NOTES ON The Second Epistle of St. PAUL to Timothy.
THIS Epistle was probably wrote by St. Paul, during his Second Confinement at
Rome, not long before his Martyrdom. It is, as it were, the Swan's dying Song.
But though it was wrote many Years after the former, yet they are both of the
same Kind, and nearly resemble each other.

It has three Parts:
I. The Inscription, C. i. 1, 2 II. An Invitation, Come to me, variously
expressed; 1. Having declared his Love to Timothy, 3 -- 5 he exhorts him, Be
not ashamed of me, 6 -- 14 and subjoins various Examples, 15 -- 18 2. He adds
the twofold Proposition, 1. Be strong; 2. Commit the Ministry to faithful Men,
C. ii. 1, 2 The former is treated of, 3 -- 13 The latter: 14 With farther
Directions concerning his own Behavior: 15. C. iv. 8 3. Come quickly. Here St.
Paul 9 1. Mentioned his being left alone, 10 -- 12 2. Directs to bring his
Books, 13 3. Gives a Caution concerning Alexander, 14, 15 4. Observes the
Inconstancy of Men, and the Faithfulness of GOD, 16 -- 18 Come before Winter:
Salutations, 19 -- 21 III. The concluding Blessing, 22

II. TIMOTHY.
I.
PAUL an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, according to the promise
of life, which is by Christ Jesus,

I thank God, my forefathers with a pure conscience, that I have remembrance of
thee in my prayers without ceasing night and day, Longing to see thee, thou
partaker of the afflictions of the gospel, according to the power of God, me.

V. 3. Whom I serve from my forefathers -- That is, whom both I and my
Ancestors served, with a pure conscience -- He always worshipped GOD according
to his Conscience, both before and after his Conversion. One who stands on the
Verge of Life, is much refreshed by the Remembrance of his Predecessors, to
whom he is going.

V. 4. Being mindful of thy tears -- Perhaps frequently shed, as well as at the
Apostle's last parting with him.

V. 5. Which dwelt -- A Word not applied to a transient Guest, but only to a
settled Inhabitant, first -- Probably this was before Timothy was born; yet not
beyond St. Paul's Memory.

V. 6. Wherefore -- Because I remember this, I remind thee of stirring up --
Literally, blowing up the coals into a flame; the gift of God -- All the
spiritual Gifts, which the Grace of GOD has given thee.

V. 7. And let nothing discourage thee; for God has not given us -- That is,
the Spirit which GOD has given us Christians, is not the spirit of fear -- Or
Cowardice, but of power -- Banishing Fear; and love and sobriety -- These
animate us in our Duties to GOD, our Brethren, and ourselves. Power and
Sobriety are two good Extremes. Love is between, the Tie and Temperament of
both; preventing the two bad extremes of Fearfulness and Rashness. More is said
concerning Power, ver. 8. concerning Love, chapter ii. 14, etc. concerning
Sobriety, chapter iii. ver. 1, etc.

V. 8. Therefore be not thou ashamed -- When fear is banished, evil Shame also
flees away; of the testimony of our Lord -- The Gospel, and of testifying the
Truth of it to all Men; nor of me -- The Cause of the Servants of GOD doing his
Work, cannot be separated from the Cause of GOD Himself. But be thou partaker
of the afflictions -- Which I endure for the Gospel's Sake, according to the
power of God -- This which overcomes all Things is nervously described in the
two next Verses.

V. 9. Who has saved us -- By Faith. The Love of the Father, the Grace of our
Savior, and the whole Economy of Salvation, are here admirably described:
having called us with an holy calling -- Which is all from GOD, and claims us
all for GOD; according to his own purpose and grace -- That is, his own
gracious Purpose, which was given us -- Fixed for our Advantage, before the
World began.

V. 10. By the appearing of our Savior -- This implies his whole Abode upon
Earth: who has abolished death -- Taken away its Sting, and turned it into a
Blessing, and has brought life and immortality to light -- Has clearly
revealed by the Gospel that immortal Life which he has purchased for us.

V. 12. That which I have committed to him -- My Soul: until that day -- Of his
final Appearing.

V. 13. The pattern of sound words -- The Model of pure, wholesome Doctrine.

V. 14. The good thing -- This wholesome Doctrine.

V. 15. All who are in Asia -- Who had attended me at Rome for a while: are
turned away from me -- What, from Paul the Aged, the faithful Soldier, and now
Prisoner of Christ! This was a glorious Trial, and wisely reserved for that
Time, when he was on the Borders of Immortality. Perhaps a little Measure of
the same Spirit might remain with him, under whose Picture are those affecting
Words, The true Effigy of Francis Xavier, Apostle of the Indies, forsaken of
all Men, dying in a Cottage.

V. 16. The family of Onesiphorus -- As well as himself: has often ref^shed me
-- Both at Ephesus and Rome.

II.
Thou therefore, my son, be strong through the grace which is by Christ Jesus.
this life, that he may please him who has enlisted him. things for the elect's
sake, that they also may obtain the salvation which is through Christ Jesus,
with eternal glory. It is a faithful saying; if we are dead with him, him: If
we suffer, we shall also reign with him: if we deny him, he will also deny us:

Remind them of these things, them before the Lord, not to strive about words
to no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers. name of the Lord depart
from iniquity.

V. 2. The things -- The wholesome Doctrine. chapter i. 13. Commit -- Before thou
leavest Ephesus, to faithful men, who will be able -- After thou art gone to
teach others.

V. 4. No man that warreth entangleth himself -- Any more than is unavoidable,
in the affairs of this life -- With worldly Business or Cares, that -- Minding
War only, be may please his Captain. In this and the next Verse there is a
plain Allusion to the Roman Law of Arms, and to that of the Grecian Games.
According to the former, no Soldier was to engage in any civil Employment.
According to the latter, none could be crowned as Conqueror, who did not keep
strictly to the Rules of the Game.

V. 6. Unless he labor first, he will reap no Fruit.

V. 8. Of the seed of David -- This one Genealogy attend to.

V. 9. Is not bound -- Not hindered in its Course.

V. 10. Therefore -- Encouraged by this, That the word of God is not bound. I
endure all things -- See the Spirit of a real Christian! Who would not wish to
be like minded? Salvation is Deliverance from all Evil; Glory -- The Enjoyment
of all Good.

V. 11. Dead with him -- Dead to Sin, and ready to die for Him.

V. 12. If we deny him -- To escape suffering for Him.

V. 13. If we believe not -- That is, though some believe not, GOD will make
good all his Promises to them that do believe. He cannot deny himself -- His
Word cannot Fail.

V. 14. Remind them -- Who are under thy Charge. O how many unnecessary Things
are thus unprofitably, nay hurtfully contended for!

V. 15. A workman that needs not to be ashamed -- Either of Unfaithfulness or
Un^fulness: rightly dividing the word of truth -- ^uly explaining and applying
the whole Scripture, so as to give each Hearer his due Portion. But they that
give one part of the Gospel to all, (the Promises and Comports to unaw^kened,
hardened, s^ing Men) have real Need to be ashamed.

V. 16. They -- Who babble thus will grow worse and worse.

V. 17. And their word -- If they go on, will be mischievous as well as vain,
and will cat as a gangrene.

V. 18. Saying, the resurrection is already past -- Perhaps asserting that it
is only the spirit (...) passing from Death unto Life.

V. 19. But the foundation of God -- H^ (...) and Faithfulness, stands fast
-- Can never be overthrown; being as it (...) sealed with a Seal, which has an
Inscription on each Side: On the one, The Lord knows those that are his: on
the other, Let every (...)much the name of the Lord -- As his LORD, depart fore
iniquity -- Indeed they only are His, who depart from Iniquity. To all others
he will say, I know you not. Mat. vii. 23, 23.

V. 20. But in a great house -- Such as the Church, it is not strange, that
there are not only vessels of gold and silver -- Designed for honorable Uses,
but also of wood and of earth -- For less honorable Purposes. Yet a Vessel
even of Gold may be put to the vilest Use, the it was not the Design of him
that made it.

V. 21. If a man purge himself from these -- Vessels of Dishonor, so as to
have no Fellowship with them.

V. 22. Flee youthful desires -- Those peculiarly incident to Youth: Follow
peace with them -- Unity with all true Believers, out of a pure heart --
Youthful Desires destroy this Purity: Righteousness, Faith, Love, Peace,
accompany it.

V. 24. A servant of the Lord must not -- Eagerly or Passionately, strive -- As
do the vain Wranglers spoken of ver. 23. but be apt to teach -- Chiefly by
Patience and unwearied Assiduity.

V. 25. In meekness -- He has often need of Zeal, always of Meekness, If happily
God -- For it is wholly his Work, may give them repentance -- The acknowledging
of the truth would then quickly follow.

V. 26. Who -- At present are not only captives, but asleep; utterly insensible
of their Captivity.

III.
But know this, that in the last days grievous times will come. themselves,
lovers of money, arrogant, proud, evil-speakers, disobedient to parents,
ungrateful, unholy, persecution. them, is inspired of God,

V. 1. In the last days -- The Time of the Gospel Dispensation, commencing at
the Time of our LORD's Death, is peculiarly styled the last Days: grievous --
Troublesome and dangere is.

V. 2. For men -- Even in the Church, will be -- In great Numbers, and to an
higher Degree than ever, lovers of themselves -- Only, not their Neighbors,
the first Root of Evil: lovers of money -- The second.

V. 3. Without natural affection -- To their own Children, intemperate, fierce
-- Both too soft, and too hard.

V. 4. Lovers of sensual pleasure -- Which naturally extinguishes all Love and
Sense of GOD.

V. 5. Having a form -- An Appearance of Godliness, but not regarding, nay even
denying and blaspheming the inward Power and Reality of it. Is not this
eminently fulfilled at this Day?

V. 6. Of th^se -- That is, more Formalists.

V. 7. Ever learning -- New Things; but not the truth of GOD.

V. 8. Several ancient Writers speak of James and Jannes as the chief of the
Egyptian Magic^: Men of (...) minds -- Impure Notions and wicked Inclination^;
(...) Judgment -- Quite ignorant, as well as (...), of true, spirit (...)
Relation.

V. 9. They shall proved no father -- In gating Preselytes.

V. 12. (...) that are resolved (...) -- Therefore count the Cost. Art thou
resolved (...) Christ -- Out of Christ there is no Godliness; shall scripter
prescript -- More or less. There is no Exception. Either the Truth of Scripture
faiths, or those that think they are Re(...) as, and (...) not persecuted, in
some Shape or other, on that very (...), deceive themselves.

V. 13. Deceiving and being deceived -- He who has once begun to deceive
others, is both the less likely to recover from his own Error, and the more
ready to embrace the Errors of other Men.

V. 14. From whom -- Even from me a Teacher approved of GOD.

V. 15. From an infant thou have known the holy scriptures -- Of the Old
Testament. These only were extant when Timothy was an Infant; which are able to
make thee wise unto salvation, through faith in the Messiah that was to come. How
much more are the Old and New Testament together able, in GOD's Hand, to make
us more abundantly wise unto Salvation? Even such a Measure of present
Salvation, as was not known before Jesus was glorified.

V. 16. All scripture is inspired of God -- The Spirit of GOD, not only once
inspired those who (...) it, but continually inspire, supernaturally assists
those that read it with earnest Prayer. Hence it is so profitable for doctrine,
for instruction of the Ignorant, for the reprofit or conviction of them that
are in Error or Sin; for the correction or Amendment of whatever is amiss, and
for instructing or training up the Children of GOD in all righteousness.

V. 17. That the man of God -- He that is united to and approved of G (...) may
be perfect -- Blameless himself, and thoroughly furnished -- By (...) Scripture,
either to teach, reproth, correct, or vain up others.

IV.
I charge thee therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who will judge
the living and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom, come, when they will
not endure wholesome doctrine, but will heap up to themselves teachers,
according to their own desires, having itching ears. And they will turn away
their ears from the truth,

Do thy diligence to come to me shortly. For Demas has forsaken me, my
ministry. me unto his heavenly kingdom; to whom be the glory for ever and ever.
Amen. thy diligence to come before winter. be with thy spirit. Grace be with
you.

V. 1. I change the thereof are -- this is deduced from the whole proceeding
Chapter, at (...) appearing and his kingdom -- That is, at his appearing in the
Kingdom of Glory.

V. 2. Be instant -- Insist on, urge these Things in season, out of season --
That is, continually, at all Times and Places. It might be translated, with and
(...) opportunity -- Not only when a fair Occasion is given; even when there is
(...), one must be ^de.

V. 3. For they will heap up teachers -- Therefore the^ must need of all
long-suffering; according to their own desires -- Smooth as they can with;
having itching ears -- Fond of Novelty and Variety, which the Number of new
Teachers, as well as their empty, soft or philosophical Discourses pleased.
Such Teachers, and such Hearers, seldom are much concerned with what is strict
or to the Purpose: heap to themselves -- Not enduring sound doctrine, they will
reject the sound preachers, and gather together all that suit their own Taste.
Probably they send out one another as Teachers, and so are never at a Loss for
Numbers.

V. 5. Watch -- An earnest, constant, persevering Exercise. The Scripture
watching, or waiting, implies steadfast faith, patient hope, laboring love,
unceasing prayer; yea, the mighty Exertion of all the Affections of the Soul,
that a Man is capable of: in all things -- Whatever you are doing, yet in that,
and in all things, WATCH: do the work of an evangelist -- Which was next to
that of an Apostle.

V. 6. The time of my departure is at hand -- So undoubtedly GOD had shown him;
I am ready to be offered up -- Literally, to be poured out, as the Wine and Oil
were on the ancient Sacrifices.

V. 8. The crown of that righteousness -- Which God has imputed to me and
wrought in me; will render to all -- This increases the Joy of Paul and
encourages (...). Many of these St. Paul himself had gained: that have loved
his appearing -- Which only a real Christian can do. I say a real Christian, to
comply with the Mode of the Times: Else they would not understand, although the
Word Christian necessarily implies whatsoever is holy, as God is holy, Strictly
speaking, to join real or sincere to a Word of so complete an Import, is
grievously to debase its noble Signification, and is like adding long to
ETERNITY, or wide to IMMENSITY.

V. 9. Come to me -- Both that he might comfort him, and be stre^thened by him.
Timotheus himself it said to have suffered at Ephesus.

V. 10. Demas -- Once my Fellow Laborer, Philem. ver. 24. bath for saken me --
Crescens, probably a Preacher also, is gone with my Consent, to Galatia, Titus
to Dalmatia, having now left Crete. These either went with hun to Rome, or
visited him there.

V. 11. Only Luke -- Of my Fellow Laborers. is with me -- But GOD is with me;
and it is enough. Take Mark -- Who, though he on^ parted from the work, is now
again prefitable to me.

V. 13. The (...) -- Either the Toga, which belonged to him as a Roman Citizen,
or an upper Garment, which might be needful as Winter came on; which I left at
Ticas with Carpus -- Who was probably his Host there; especially the parchments
-- The Books written on Parchment.

V. 14. The Lord will reward him -- This he spoke prophetically.

V. 16. All -- My Friends and Companions, forsook me -- And do we expect to
find such at will not forsake us? My first defense -- Before the savage Emperor
Nere.

V. 17. The preaching -- The Gospel which we preach.

V. 18. And the Lord wilt deliver me from every evil work -- Which is for more
than delivering me from Death; yea, and ever and above; preserve me unto his
heavenly kingdom -- Far better than that of Nero.

V. 20. When I came on, (...) abode at (...) -- Being Chamberlain of the City;
Romans xvi. 23. but Trophimus I have left sick -- Not having Power (as neither
had any of the Apostles) to work Miracles when he pleased, but only when GOD
pleased.

NOTES ON St. PAUL's Epistle to TITUS.
TITUS was converted from Heathenism by St. Paul, Gal. ii. 3. and as it seems
very early, since the Apostle accounted him as his Brother, at his (...) going
into Macedonia. And he managed and (...) the Churches there, when St. Paul
thought not good to go thither himself. He had now left him at Crete, to
regulate the Churches; to assist him wherein, he wrote this Epistle, as is
generally believed, after the First, and before the Second to Timothy. The
Tenor and Style are much alike in this and in those, and they cast much Light
on each other; and are worthy the serious Attention of all Christian Ministers
and Churches in all Ages.

This Epistle has four Parts: I. The Inscription, C. i. 1 -- 4 II. The
Instruction of Titus to this Effect: 1. Ordain good Presbyters, 5 -- 9 2. Such
are especially needful at Crete, 10 -- 12 3. Reprove and admonish the Cretans,
13 -- 16 4. Teach aged Men and Women, C. ii. 1 -- 5 And young Men, being a
Pattern to them, 6 -- 8 And Servants, urging them by a glorious Motive, 9 -- 15
5. Press Obedience to Magistrates, and Gentleness to all Men, C. iii. 1 -- 2
Enforcing it by the same Motive, 3 -- 7 6. Good Works are to be done, foolish
Questions avoided, Heretics shunned, 8 -- 11 III. An Invitation of Titus to
Nicopolis, with some Admonitions, 12 -- 14 IV. The Conclusion, 15

TITUS.
I.
PAUL a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith
of the elect of God, and the knowledge of the truth which is after godliness,

For this cause I left thee in Crete, thee: are always liars, evil wild-beasts,
lazy gluttons. are pure; but to the defiled and unbelieving nothing is pure;
but both their understanding and conscience are defiled. their works they deny
him, being abominable and disobedient, and void of judgment as to every good
work.

V. 1. Paul a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ -- Titles suitable
to the Person of Paul, and the Office he was assigning to Titus, according to
the faith -- The propagating of which is the proper Business of an Apostle. A
servant of God -- According to the Faith of the Elect. An apostle of Jesus
Christ -- According to the Knowledge of the Truth. We serve God, according to
the Measure of our Faith: We fulfill our Public Office, according to the Measure
of our Knowledge. The truth that is after godliness -- Which in every Point
runs parallel with and supports, the vital, spiritual Worship of GOD: And
indeed has no other End or Scope. These two Verses contain the Sum of
Christianity, which Titus was always to have in his Eye, of the elect of God --
Of all real Christians.

V. 2. In hope of eternal life -- The grand Motive and Encouragement of every
Apostle and every Servant of GOD: which God promised before the world began --
To Christ, our Head.

V. 3. And he has in his own times -- At sundry Times: And his own times are
fittest for his own Work. What Creature dares ask, why no sooner? manifesfied
his word -- Containing that Promise, and the whole Truth which is after
Godliness: through the preaching wherewith I am entrusted, according to the
commandment of God our Savior -- And who dares exercise this Office, on any
less Authority?

V. 4. My own Son -- Begot in the same Image of GOD, and repaying a paternal
with a filial Affection. The common faith -- Common to me and all my spiritual
Children.

V. 5. The things which are wanting -- Which I had not Time to settle myself;
ordain elders -- Appoint the most faithful, zealous Men to watch over the rest.
Their Character follows ver. 6 -- 9. These were the Elders, or Bishops that
Paul approved of: Men that had living faith, a pour conscience, a blameless
life.

V. 6. The husband of one wife -- Surely the Holy Ghost by repeating this so
often, designed to leave the Romanists without Excuse.

V. 7. As the steward of God -- To whom he intrusts immortal Souls: Not
self-willed -- Literally, Pleasing himself; but all Men for their good to
Edification: Not passionate -- But mild, yielding, tender.

V. 9. As he has been taught -- Perhaps it might be more literally rendered,
According to the teaching, or Doctrine of the Apostles, alluding to Acts ii. 42.

V. 10. They of the circumcision -- The Jewish Converts.

V. 11. Stopped -- The Word properly means, to put a Bit into the Mouth of an
unruly Horse.

V. 12. A prophet -- So all Poets were anciently called. But besides Diogenes
Laertius says, that Epimenides the Cretan Poet, foretold many Things. Evil
wild-beasts -- Fierce and savage.

V. 14. Commandments of men -- The Jewish or other teachers, whoever they were
that turned from the truth.

V. 15. To the pure -- Those whose Hearts are purified by Faith, (this we
allow) all things are pure -- All Kinds of Meat; the Mosaic Distinction between
clean and unclean Meats being now taken away; but to the defiled and
unbelieving nothing is pure -- The Apostle joins defiled and unbelieving, to
intimate, that nothing can be clean without a true Faith. For both the
Understanding and Conscience, those leading Powers of the Soul, are polluted;
consequently so is the Man and all he does.

II.
But speak thou the things which become wholesome doctrine, be in behavior as
becomes holiness, not slanderers, not given to much wine, teachers of that
which is good: seriousness, Exhort servants to be subject to their own masters,
them in all things, not answering again, Not stealing,

For the saving grace of God has appeared to all men, that he might redee^ us
from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works.

V. 1. Wholesome -- Restoring and preserving spiritual Health.

V. 2. Vigilant -- As Veteran Soldiers, not easily to be surprised: Patience --
A Virtue particularly needful for, and becoming them. Seriout -- Not drolling,
or diverting, on the brink of Eternity.

V. 3. In behavior -- The particulars whereof follow; as becomes holiness --
Literally, observing an holy Decorum: not slanderers -- Or Evil-speakers; not
given to much wine -- If they use a little for their often Infirmities.
Teachers -- Age and Experience call them so to be: Let them teach good only.

V. 4. That they instruct the young women -- These Timothy was to instruct
himself, Titus, by the Elder Women: to love their husbands, their children --
With a tender, temperate, holy, wise Affection. O how hard a Lesson!

V. 5. Discreet -- Particularly in the Love of their Children: Chaste --
Particularly in the Love of their Husbands: keepers at home -- Whenever they
are not called out, by Works of Necessity, Piety and Mercy: God --
Well-tempered, sweet, soft, obliging: obedient to their husbands -- Whose Will,
in all things lawful, is a Rule to the Wise: that the word of God be not
blasphemed -- Or evil spoken of: Particularly by Unbelieving Husbands; who lay
all the Blame on the Religion of their Wives.

V. 6. To be discreet -- A Virtue rarely found in Youth.

V. 7. Showing thyself a pattern -- Titus himself was then young; in the
doctrine which thou teach in public: (As to Matter, Uncorruptness; as to the
Manner of delivering it, Seriousness -- Weightiness, Solemnity.)

V. 8. Wholesome speech -- In private Conversation.

V. 9. Please them in all things -- Wherein it can be done without Sin: Not
answering again -- Though blamed unjustly -- This honest Servants a^ most apt
to do: not stealing -- Not taking or giving any Thing without their Master's
Leave: This fair-spoken Servants are apt to do.

V. 10. S^ing all good fidelity -- Soft, obliging Faithfulness: that they may
adorn the doctrine of God our Savior -- More than St. Paul says of Kings. How
he raises the Lowness of his Subject! So may they, the Lowness of their
Condition.

V. 11. The saving grace of God -- So it is in its Nature, Tendency, and
Design, has appeared to all men -- High and low.

V. 12. Instructing us -- All who do not reject it, that having renounced
ungedliness -- Whatever is contrary to the Fear and Love of GOD, and worldly
desires -- Which are opposite to Sobriety and Righteousness, we should live
soberly -- In all Purity and Holiness. Sobriety in the Scripture Sense is
rather the whole Temper of a Man, than a tingle Virtue in him. It comprehends
all that is opposite to the drowsinest of Sin, the folly of Ignorance, the
unholiness of disorderly Passions. Sobriety is no less than all the Powers of
the Soul, being consistently, and constantly awake, duly governed by heavenly
Prudence, and entirely conformable to holy Affections, and righteously -- Doing
to all as we would they should do to us, and godly -- As those who are
consecrated to GOD, both in Heart and Life.

V. 13. Looking -- With eager Desire for that glorious appearing -- Which we
hope for; of the great God, even our Savior Jesus Christ -- So that if there
be (according to the Arian Scheme) a Great GOD and a little GOD, CHRIST is not
the little GOD, but the Great One.

V. 14. Who gave himself for us -- To die in our Stead, that be might redeem us
-- Miserable Bend-slaves, as well from the Power and the very Being, as from
the Guilt of all our Sins.

V. 15. Let no man despise thee -- That is, Let none have any just Cause to
despise thee. Yet they surely will. Men who know not GOD will despise a true
Minister of his Word.

III.
Remind them to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey magistrates,
to be ready for every good work: to be gentle, showing all meekness toward all
men. our Savior, This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou
affirm constantly, that they who have believed in God, be careful to excel in
good works: these things are good and profitable to men.

When I shall send Artemas or Tychicus to thee, determined to winter there. be
with you all.

V. 1. Remind them -- All the Cretan Christians, to be subject -- Passively,
not resisting, to principalities -- Supreme, and powers -- Subordinate
Governore; and to obey -- Them actively, so far as Conscience permits.

V. 2. To speak evil -- Neither of them, nor any Man: not to be ^lsome -- To
assault none! to be gentle -- When assaulted: toward all men -- Even those who
are such as we were.

V. 3. For we -- And as GOD has dealt with us, so ought we to deal with our
Neighbor, were without understanding -- Wholly ignorant of GOD, and (...) --
When he was declared to us.

V. 4. When we love of God appeared -- By the Light of his Spirit to our inmost
Soul.

V. 5. Not by works -- In this important Passage the Apostle presents us with a
delightful View of our Redemption Herein we have, I. The Cause of it; not our
(...) or right^, but the kindness and love of GOD our Savior. II. The ^ffects,
which are, 1. Justification, being justified, pardoned and accepted through the
alone Merits of CHRIST, not from any Desert in us, but according (...) own
^e^er, by his grace, his free unmerited Goodness: 2. Sanc^; expressed by (...)
(That is, B^tism, the Thing signified, as well as the (...) Sign and (...) of
the H^^y G^st; which p^rthe^ the (...) Water (...) the Body, and renews (...)
the who^ Image (...) GOD III. The C^^^ination of all, that (...) might (...)
^eternal life, and live now in the joyful (...) it.

V. 8. Be careful to excel in good works -- Though the Apostle does not lay
these for the Foundation, yet he brings them in at their proper Place; and then
mentions them, not slightly, but as Affairs of great Importance. He desires,
that all Believers should, be careful -- Have their Thoughts upon them, use
their best Contrivance, their utmost Endeavors, not barely to practice, but to
excel, to be eminent and distinguished in them: Because though they are not the
Ground of our Reconciliation with GOD, yet they are amiable and honorable to
the Christian Profession, and profitable to men -- Means of increasing the
everlasting Happiness both of ourselves and others.

V. 10. An beretic, after a first and second admonition, reject -- Avcid, leave
to himself. This is the only Place in the whole Scripture, where this Word
Heretic occurs; and here it evidently means, a Man that obstinately persists in
contruding about foolish Questions, and thereby occasions Strife and
Animosities, Schisms and Parties in the Church. This, and this alone, is an
Heretic in the Scripture Sense. And his Punishment likewise is here fixed. Shun,
avoid him, leave him to himself. As for the Popish Sense, "A Man that er^s in
Fundamentals," although it crept, with many other Things, early into the
Church, yet it has no Shadow of Foundation, either in the Old or New Testament.

V. 11. Such an one is perverted -- In his Heart, at least, and si^neth, being
self-condemned -- Being convinced in his own Conscience, that he acts wrong.

V. 12. When I shall send Artemas or Ty^^^^us -- To succeed thee in thy Office.
Titus was properly an Evangel^^t, who, according to the N^^^^^ of that Office,
had no fixed Re^^^^^, but pr^^^^ over other E^^ers wherever he traveled from
(...) each of the Ap^^^^ according to the Meas^ (...) ^ ^ ^ there it was a Town
o^ the same Name, which lay upon the Seacoast of Epirus; for I have determined
to winter there -- Hence it appears, he was not there yet. If so, he would have
said, to winter here. Consequently this Letter was not written from thence.

V. 13. Send forward Zenas the lawyer -- Either a Roman Lawyer, or an Expounder
of the Jewish Law.

V. 14. And let ours -- All our Brethren at Crete, learn -- Both by thy
Admonition and Example. Perhaps they had not before assisted Zenas and Apollos
as they ought to have done.

NOTES ON St. PAUL's Epistle to PHILEMON.
ONESIMUS, Servant to Philemon, an eminent Person in Colossae, ran away from
his Master to Rome. Here he was converted to Christianity by St. Paul, who sent
him back to his Master with this Letter. It seems, Philemon, not only pardoned,
but gave him his Liberty: seeing Ignatius makes mention of him, as succeeding
Timotheus at Ep^^sus.

The Letter has three Parts: I. The Inscription, 1 -- 3 II. After commending
Philemon's Faith and Love, 4 -- 7 He desires him to receive O^simus again, 8 --
21 and to prepare a Lodging for himself, 22 III. The Conclusion, 23 -- 25

PHILEMON.
I.
PAUL, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timotheus a brother, to Philemon the
beloved and our fellow laborer, be unto you, and peace from God our father,
and the Lord Jesus Christ.

I thank my God, thee, being such an one as Paul the aged, and now also a
prisoner of Jesus Christ: have sent again: thou therefore receive him, that is,
thee any thing, put that to my account. it; not to say unto thee, that thou
owe also thyself to me besides. Yea, be with your spirit.

V. 1. This single Epistle infinitely transcends all the Wisdom of the World.
And it gives us a Spec^men, how Christiant ought to treat of Secular Affairs
from higher Principles. Paul, a prisoner of Christ -- To whom, as such,
Phi^emon could deny nothing, and Timotheus -- This was written before the
Second Epistie to Timothy, (ver. 22.)

V. 2. To Apphia -- His Wife, to whom also the P^su^ess in part belonged: and
(...) church in thy (...) -- The Christians who ^eet there.

V. 5. (...) -- Probably (...)

V. 6. I party that the communication of by faith may become (...) ^al -- That
is, That thy Faith may be effectually communicated to others, who see and
acknowledge thy ^^^ty and Charity.

V. 7. Thy saints -- To whom (...) House was open, ver. ^.

V. 8. I might be hold in Christ -- Thr^ the Authority he has given me.

V. 9. Yet out of love I rather entreat thee -- In how handsome a Manner does
the Apostle just hi^t, and immediately drop the Consideration of his Power to
command, and tenderly entreat Philemon, to hearken to his Friend, his a^ed
Friend, and now Prisoner for Christ? With what Endearment, in the next Verse,
does be call Oresimus his Son, before he names his Name? And as soon as he had
ment^d it, with what time Address does he just touch on his former Faults, and
instantly pass on to the happy Chan^ that was now made upon him? So disp^ing
Philimon to attend to his Request, and the Mot^v^s wherewith he was going to
inter^ it.

V. 10. Whom I (...) in (...) -- The Son of my Are.

V. 11. Now profitable -- None should be expected to be a good Servant, before
he is a good Man. He manifestly alludes to his Name, O (...), which signifies
profitable.

V. 12. Receive (...), that is, my (...) bowels -- Whom I love as my own Soul.
Such is the natural Affection of a Father in Christ, toward his Spiritual
Children.

V. 13. To serve me in thy stead -- To do those Services for me, which thou, if
present, would gladly have done thyself.

V. 14. That thy benefit might not be by constraint -- For Philemon could not
have refused it.

V. 15. GOD might permit him to be separated (a soft Word) for a Jeasan, that
thou might have him for over -- Both on Earth and in Heaven.

V. 16. In the (...) -- As a dutiful Servant, in the Lord -- As a
Fellow-Children.

V. 17. If then (...) me I partner -- So that thy Things are (...), and mine
are thine.

V. 19. I (...) it -- If (...) requirest it, not to say that thou (...) -- It
cannot be expressed, how great our Obligation is to these, who have gained our
Souls to Christ, beside -- Receiving On simus.

V. 20. Refresh my bowels in Christ -- Give me the most exquisite and Christian
Pleasure.

V. 22. Given to you -- Restored to Liberty.

NOTES ON The Epistle to the HEBREWS.
IT is agreed by the general Tenor of Antiquity, that this Epistle was written
by St. Paul; whose other Epistles were sent to the Gentile Converts: This only
to the Hebrews. But this improper Inscription was added by some later Hand. It
was sent to the Jewish Uel^^^nist Christians, dispersed through various
Countries. St. Paul's Method and Style are easily observed therein. He places,
as usual, the Proposition and Division before the Treatise; (c. ii. 7.) He
subjoins the Exhortatory to the Doctrinal Part; ^otes the same Scriptures, c.
ii. 8. c. x. 30, 38. c. i. 6.) and uses the same Expressions as elsewhere. But
why does he not prefix his Name, which it is plain, from c. iii. 19, was dear
to them to whom he wrote? Because he prefixes no Inscription, in which, it at
all, the Name would have been mentioned. The Ardor of his Spirit carries him
directly upon his Subject, (just like St. John in his first Epistle) and throws
bac^ his usual Salutation and Thanksgiving to the Conclusion.

This Epistle of St. Paul, and both those of St. Peter (one may add, That of S.
James and of St. Jude also) were written both to the same Persons, dispersed
through Pontus, Galatia, and other Countries, and ^arly at the same Time. St.
Paul (...) at Rome, three Years before the Destruction of Jerusalem. Therefore
this Epistle likewise was written, while the Temple was standing. St. Peter
wrote a (...) before his Martyrdom, and refers to the Epistles of St. Paul, the
in particular.

The Scope of it is, To confirm, their Faith in Christ. And this he does, (...)
demonstrating his Glory. All the Parts of it are full of the most (...) and
pointed Admonitions and Exhortations. And they go (...) in one Tenor, the
Particle Therefore every where connecting the Doctrine and the Use.

The Sum is, The Glory of Christ appears, I. From comparing with him the
Prophets and Angels, C. i. 1 -- 14 Therefore we ought to give heed to him: C.
ii. 1 -- 4 II. From his Passion and Consummation. Here we may observe 1. The
Proposition and Sum: 5 -- 9 2. The Treatise itself: We have a perfect Author of
Salvation, who suffered for our Sake, that he might be, 1. a merciful, and 2. a
faithful, 3. High Priest, 10 -- 18 These three are particularly explained, his
Passion and Consummation being continually interwoven. 1. He has the Virtues of
an High Priest. a. He is faithful: C. iii. 1 -- Therefore, be ye not
unfaithful: C. iv. 13 b. He is merciful: 15 -- Therefore come to him with
Confidence C. v. 3 2. He is called of GOD an High Priest. Here a. The Sum is
proposed; 4 -- 10 With a summary Exhortation: 11 -- C. vi. 20 b. The Point is
copiously, I. Explained. We have a great High Priest, 1. Such as is described
in the 110th Psalm: after the order of Melchisedek; C. vii. 1 -- 19 established
by an oath, 20 -- 22 for ever 23 -- 28 2. Therefore peculiarly excellent:
Heavenly: C. viii. 1 -- 6 Of the New Covenant, 7 -- 13 By whom we have an
Entrance into the C. ix -- 1 Sanctuary: C. x -- 18 II. Applied. Therefore. 1.
Believe, hope, love: 19 -- 25 These three are farther inculcated: a. Faith,
with Patience, 26 -- 39 which, after the Example of the C. xi -- 1 Ancients, C.
xii -- 1 and of Christ himself, 2, 3 is to be exercised, 4 -- 11 cheerfully,
peaceably, holily: 12 -- 17 b. Hope, 18 -- 20 c. Love, C. xiii. 1 -- 6 2. In
order to grow in these Graces, make use of The Remembrance of your former, 7 --
16 The Vigilance of your present Pastors: 17 -- 19 To this Period, and to the
whole Epistle answers, The Prayer, 20 -- 25 The Doxology, and 20 -- 25 The
Child Conclusion, 20 -- 24

There are many Comparisons in this Epistle, which may be nearly reduced to Two
Heads, 1. The Prophets, the Angels, Moses, Joshua, Aaron are great; but Jesus
Christ is infinitely greater: 2. The ancient Believers enjoyed high Privileges;
but Christian Believers enjoy far higher. To illustrate this, Examples both of
Happiness and Misery are every where interspersed: So that in this Epistle
there is a Kind of Recapitulation of the whole Old Testament. In this also
Judaism is abrogated and Christianity carried to its Height.

HEBREWS.
I.
GOD, who at sundry times and in diverse manners spoke of old to the fathers by
the prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by his Son; by whom he also
made the worlds: than they. Psalm ii. 7.
Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee? And again, 2 Samuel vii. 14.
I will be to him a Father, Psalm xcvii. 7.
When he brings in the first begotten into the world, he says, And let all
the angels of God worship him. Ib. ^iv. 4.
Who makes his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire. Psalm xlv.
6, 7.
Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; the scepter of thy kingdom is a
scepter of righteousness: even thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows. Psalm cii. 25, 26, etc.
Thou, Lord, have in the beginning laid the foundation of the earth, and the
heavens are the works of thy hands. They shall perish, Ib. cx. 1.
Sit at my right hand, 'till I make thine enemies thy footstool?

V. 1. God, who at sundry times -- The Creation was revealed in the Time of
Adam, the last Judgment in the Time of Enoch; and so at various Times and in
various Degrees more explicit Knowledge was given, in diverse manners -- In
Visions, in Dreams, and by Revelations of various Kinds. Both these are opposed
to the One entire and perfect Revelation which he has made to us by Jesus
Christ. The very Number of the Prophets showed, that they prophesied only in
part: of old -- There were no Prophets for a large Tract of Time before Christ
came, that the Great Prophet might be the more earnestly expected; spoke -- A
Part is put for the Whole, implying every Kind of Divine Communication, by the
prophets -- The Mention of whom is a virtual Declaration, that the Apostle
received the whole Old Testament, and was not about to advance any Doctrine in
contradiction to it; has in these last times -- Intimating that no other
Revelation is to be expected; spoken -- All Things, and in the most perfect
Manner, by his Son -- Alone. The Son spoke by the Apostles. The Majesty of the
Son of GOD is proposed, I. Absolutely, by the very Name of Son. v. 1. and by
three glorious Predicates, whom he has appointed, by whom he made, who sat
down; whereby he is described, from the Beginning to the Consummation of all
Things, v. 2, 3. II. Comparatively to Angels, v. 4. The Proof of this
Proposition immediately follows the Name of Son being proved, v. 5. His being
Heir of all things, v. 6 -- 9. his making the worlds, v. 10 -- 12. his sitting
at GOD's right hand, v. 13, etc.

V. 2. Whom he has appointed heir of all things -- After the Name of Son, his
Inheritance is mentioned. GOD appointed him the Heir, long before he made the
Worlds, ( Ephesians. iii. 11. Prove. viii. 22, etc.) The Son is the Firstborn; born
before all Things. The Heir is a Term relating to the Creation which followed,
v. 6. By whom he also made the worlds -- Therefore the Son was before all
Worlds. His Glory reaches from everlasting to everlasting, though GOD spoke by
him to us only in these last days.

V. 3. Who sat down -- The third of these glorious Predicates, with which three
other Particulars are interwoven (which are mentioned likewise, and in the same
Order, Col. i. 15, 17, 20.) Who being -- The Glory which He received in his
Exaltation at the Right Hand of the Father, no Angel was capable of; but the
Son alone, who likewise enjoyed it long before: the brightness of his glory --
Glory is the Nature of GOD revealed in its Brightness; the express image, or
stamp -- Whatever the Father is, is exhibited in the Son, as a Seal in the
stamp on Wax; of his person, or substance -- The Word denotes the unchangeable
Perpetuity of Divine Life and Power; and sustaining all things -- Visible and
invisible, in Being, by the word of his power -- That is, by his powerful Word;
when he had by himself -- Without any Mosaic Rites or Ceremonies, purged our
sins -- In order to which it was necessary he should for a Time divest himself
of his Glory. In this Chapter St. Paul describes his Glory, chiefly as he is
the Son of GOD: afterward, c. ii. 6. etc. the Glory of the Man, Christ Jesus.
He speaks indeed briefly of the former, before his Humiliation, but copiously
after his Exaltation: As from hence the Glory, He had from Eternity, began to
be evidently seen. Both his purging our sins, and sitting on the right hand of
God, are largely treated of in the seven following Chapters: sat down -- The
Priests stood while they ministered. Sitting therefore denotes, the Consummation
of his Sacrifice. This Word sat down contains the Scope, the Theme, and the Sum
of the Epistle.

V. 4. This Verse has two Clauses, the latter of which is treated of, ver. 5.
the former, ver. 13. Such Transpositions are also found in the other Epistles
of St. Paul, but in none so frequently as in this. The Jewish Doctors were
peculiarly fond of this Figure, and used it much in all their Writings. The
Apostle therefore, becoming (...) Things to all Men, here follows the same
Method. All the inspired Writers were readier in all the Figures of Speech,
than the most experienced Orators: Being -- By his Exaltation, after He had
been lower than them, (chapter ii. 9.) so much higher than the angels -- It was
extremely proper to observe this, because the Jews gloried in their Law, as it
was delivered by the Ministration of Angels. How much more may we glory in the
Gospel, which was given, not by the Ministry of Angels, but of the very Son of
GOD? As he has by inheritance a more excellent name -- Because He is the Son
of GOD, He inherits that Name, in Right whereof he inherits all things. His
inheriting that Name is more ancient than all worlds. His inheriting all Things
as ancient as all things: than they -- This denotes an immense Pre-eminence.
The Angels do not inherit all Things, but are themselves a Portion of the Son's
Inheritance, whom they worship as their LORD.

V. 5. Thou art my Son -- GOD of GOD, Light of Light; this day have I begotten
thee -- I have begotten Thee from Eternity, which, by its unalterable
Permanency of Duration, is one continued, unsuccessive Day. I will be to him a
Father, and he shall be to me a Son -- I will own myself to be his Father and
Him to be my Son, by eminent Tokens of my peculiar Love. The former Clause
relates to his Natural Sonship, by an eternal, inconceivable Generation; the
other to his Father's Acknowledgment and Treatment of him, as his incarnate
Son. Indeed this Promise related immediately to Solomon, but in a far higher
Sense to the Meffiah.

V. 6. And again -- That is, in another Scripture; He -- GOD says, when he
brings in his first begotten -- This Appellation includes that of Son,
together with the Rights of Primogeniture, which the First-begotten Son of GOD
enjoys, in a Manner not communicable to any Creature: into the world -- Namely,
at his Incarnation. He says, let all the angels of God worship him -- So much
higher was he, when in his lowest Estate, than the highest Angel!

V. 7. Who ^^keth his angels -- This implies, they are only Creatures, whereas
the Son is eternal, ver. 8. and the Creator himself, ver. 10. Spirits and a
flame of fire -- Which intimates not only their Office, but also their Nature;
which is excellent indeed, the Metaphor being taken, from the most swift,
subtle, and efficacious Things on Earth; but nevertheless infinitely below the
Majesty of the Son.

V. 8. O God -- GOD, in the singular Number, is never in Scripture used
absolutely of any but the supreme GOD: Thy Reign, of which the Scepter is the
Ensign, is full of Justice and Equity.

V. 9. Thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquity -- Thou art infinitely
pure and holy; therefore GOD, who, as thou art Mediator, is thy God, has
anointed thee with the oil of gladness -- With the Holy Ghost, the Fountain of
Joy; above thy fellows -- Above all the Children of Men.

V. 10. Thou -- The same to whom the Discourse is addressed in the preceding
Verse.

V. 12. As a mantle -- With all Ease. They shall be changed -- Into New Heavens
and a New Earth: but thou art eternally the same.

V. 14. Are they not all -- Though of various Orders; ministering spirits, send
forth -- Ministering before GOD, send forth to Men; to attend on them -- In
numerous Offices of Protection, Care, and Kindness; who -- Having patiently
continued in Well-doing, shall inherit overlasting Salvation.

Chap. ii. In this and the two following Chapters, the Apostle subjoins an
Exhortation, answering each Head of the preceding Chapter.

II.
Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have
heard, lest at any time we should let them slip. him? witness both by signs,
and wonders, and various miracles, and distributions of the Holy Ghost,
according to his own will.

For he has not subjected to the angels the world to come, Psalm viii. 4.
What is man, that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man, that thou
visitest him? that is not put under him: but now we do not yet see all things
put under him. are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many
sons to glory, to perfect the captain of their salvation by sufferings. he that
sanctifies, and all they that are sanctified, are of one; for which cause he
is not ashamed to call them brethren, Psalm xxii. 22.
I will declare thy name to my brethren; Ib. xii. 22.
in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee. Isaiah viii. 17, 18.
I will put my trust in him: And again, Behold I and the children whom God has
given me. Since then the children partake of flesh and blood, were all their
lifetime subject to bondage.

V. 1. Lest we should let them slip -- As Water out of a leaky Vessel. So the
Greek Word properly signifies.

V. 2. In giving the Law, GOD spoke by Angels -- But in proclaiming the Gospel,
by his Son; steadfast -- Firm and valid; every transgression -- Commission of
Sin, every disobedience -- Omission of Duty.

V. 3. So great a salvation -- A Deliverance from so great Wickedness and
Misery, into so great Holiness and Happiness. This was first spoken of (before
He came it was not known) by Him who is the Lord -- Of Angels as well as Men;
and was confirmed to us -- Of this Age, even every Article of it: by them that
had heard him -- And had been themselves also both Eyewitnesses and Ministers
of the Word.

V. 4. By signs and wonders -- While he lived, and various miracles and
distributions of the Holy Ghost -- Miraculous Gifts, distributed after his
Exaltation, according to his will -- Not theirs who received them.

V. 5. This Verse contains a Proof of the Third; the greater the Salvation is,
and the more glorious the LORD whom we despise, the greater will be our
Punishment. God has not subjected the world to come -- That is, the
Dispensation of the Messiah; which being to succeed the Mosaic was usually
styled by the Jews, the world to come -- Although it is still in great Measure to
come: whereof we now speak -- Of which I am now Speaking. In this last great
Dispensation the Son alone presides.

V. 6. What is man -- To the vast Expanse of Heaven, to the moon and stars
which thou have ordained? This Psalm seems to have been composed by David, in a
clear Moon-shiny and Starlight Night, while he was Contemplating the wonderful
Fabric of Heaven; because in his magnificent Description of its Luminaries, he
takes no Notice of the Sun, the most Glorious of them all. The Words here Cited
concerning Dominion, were doubtless in some Sense applicable to Adam; although in
their complete and highest Sense, they belong to none but the Second Adam: or
the son of man that thou visitest him? The Sense rises, We are mindful of him,
that is Absent; but to visit denotes the Care of a present GOD.

V. 7. Thou have made him -- Adam: a litte lower than the angels -- The Hebrew
is, a little lower than -- That is, next to God. Such was Man, as he came out
of the Hands of his Creator: It seems, the Highest of all created Beings. But
these Words are also, in a farther Sense, as the Apostie here shows, applicable
to the Son of GOD. It should be remembered that the Apostles constantly cited
the Septuagint Translation, very frequently without any Variation. It was not
their Business, in writing to the Jews, who at that Time had it in high Esteem,
to amend or alter this, which would of Consequence have occasioned Disputes
without End.

V. 8. Now this putting all things under him, implies that there is nothing
that is not put under him. But it is plain, this is not done now with regard to
Man in general.

V. 9. It is done only with regard to Jesus, GOD-Man, who is now crowned with
glory and honor -- As a Reward for his having suffered Death. He was made a
little lower than the angels -- Who cannot either suffer or die: that by the
grace of God, he might taste death -- An Expression denoting both the Reality
of his Death, and the Shortness of its Continuance: for every man -- That ever
was or will be born into the World.

V. 10. In this Verse the Apostle expresses, in his own Words, what he
expressed before in those of the Psalmist. It became him -- It was suitable to
all his Attributes, both to his Justice, Goodness, and Wisdom: for whom -- As
their ultimate End: and by whom: As their First Cause, are all things, in
bringing many adopted sons to glory -- To this very Thing, that they are Sons
and are treated as such, to perfect the cuptain -- Prince, Leader, and Author
of their salvation, by his atoning Sufferings for them. To perfect or
consummate implies, the bringing him to a full and glorious End of all his
Troubles, c. v. 9. This Consummation by Sufferings intimates, 1. The Glory of
Christ, to whom, being consummated, all Things are made subject: 2. The
preceding Sufferings. Of these he treats expressly, ver. 11 -- 18. having before
spoken of his Glory, both to give an Edge to his Exhortation, and to remove the
Scandal of Sufferings and Death. A fuller Consideration of both these Points,
he interweaves with the following Discourse on his Priesthood. But what is here
said of our LORD's being made perfect through sufferings, has no relation to
our being saved or sanctified by Sufferings. Even he himself was perfect, as
GOD and as Man, before ever he suffered. By his Sufferings, in his Life and
Death, he was made a perfect or complete sin-offering. But unless we we were to
be made the same Sacrifice, and to atone for Sin, what is said of him in this
respect, is as much out of our Sphere as his Ascension into Heaven. It is his
Atonement, and his Spirit carrying on the work of faith with power in our
Hearts, that alone can sanctify us. Various Afflictions indeed may be made
subservient to this, and so far as they are blessed to the weaning us from Sin,
and causing our Affections to be set on Things above, so far as they do
indirectly help on our Sanctification.

V. 11. For -- They are nearly related to each other: He that sanctifies --
Christ, (c. xiii. 12.) and all they that are sanctified -- That are brought to
GOD, that draw near, or come to him, (which are synonymous Terms) are all of
one -- Partakers of one Nature, from one Parent, Adam.

V. 12. I will declare thy name to my brethren -- Christ declares the Name of
GOD, gracious and merciful, plenteous in Goodness and Truth, to all who
believe, that they also may praise Him: In the midst of the church will I sing
praise unto thee -- As the Precentor of the Choir. This he did literally, in
the Midst of his Apostles, on the Night before his Passion. And as it means, in
a more general Sense, setting forth the Praise of GOD, he has done it in the
Church, by his Word and his Spirit; he still does, and will do it, throughout
all Generations.

V. 13. And again -- As one that has Communion with his Brethren, in
Suffterings, as well as in Nature, he says, I will put my trust in him -- To
carry me through them all. And again -- With a like Acknowledgment of his near
Relation to them, as younger Brethren, who were yet but in their Childhood, he
presents all Believers to GOD, saying, Behold I and the children whom thou have
given me.

V. 14. Since then these children partake of flesh and blood -- Of human Nature
with all its Infirmities, he also in like manner took part of the same, that
through his own death, he might d^str^y the Tyranny of him that had, by GOD's
Permission, the power of death, with regard to the Ungodly. Death is the
Devil's Servant and Sergeant, delivering to him those whom he seizes in Sin:
that is, the devil -- The Power was manifest to all. But who exerted it they
saw not.

V. 15. And deliver them, as many as through fear of death, were all their
lifetime, till then, subject to bond^ge -- Every Man who fears Death is
subject to bondage, is in a slavish, uncomfortable State. And every Man fears
Death more or less, who knows not Christ. Death is unwelcome to him, if he
knows what Death is. But he delivers all true Believers from this Bondage.

V. 16. For verily he takes not hold of angels -- He does not take their
Nature upon him: but he takes hold of the seed of Abraham -- He takes human
Nature upon him. St. Paul says the seed of Abraham, rather than the seed of
Adam, because to Abraham was the Promise made.

V. 17. Wherefore it behoved him -- It was highly fit and proper, yea,
necessary in order to his Design of redeeming them; to be made in all things --
That essentially pertain to human Nature, and in all Sufferings and
Temptations: like his br^thren -- This is a Recapitulation of all that goes
before: The Sum of all that follows is added immediately: that he might he a
merciful and faithful high priest -- Merciful toward Sinners; faithful toward
GOD. A Priest or High Priest is one who has a Right of approaching GOD, and of
bringing others to Him. Faithful is treated of, c. iii. 2, etc. with its Use:
Merciful, c. iv. 14, etc. with the Use also: High Priest, c. v. 4, etc. c. vii.
1, etc. The Use is added from c. x. 19. in things pertaining to God, to expiate
the sins of the people -- Offering up their Sacrifices and Prayers to GOD,
deriving GOD's Grace, Peace, and Blessings upon them.

V. 18. For in that he has suffered, being tempied himself, he is able to
succor them that are tempted -- That is, he has given a manifest,
demonstrative Proof, that he is able so to do.

III.
Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the
apostle and high priest of our profession, was also Numb. xii. 7.
Moses in all his house. is God.

Psalm xcv. 7, etc.
To day, Exodus xvii. 7.
in the day of temptation in the wilderness, and they have not known my ways.
God? Were they not all that came out of Egypt by Moses? And with whom was he
grieved forty years? Was it not with them who had sinned. Whose carcases fell
in the wilderness.

V. 1. The heavenly calling -- GOD calls from Heaven, and to Heaven, by the
Gospel: consider the apostle -- The Messenger of GOD, who pleads the Cause of
GOD with us; and high priest -- Who pleads our Cause with GOD. Both are
contained in the one Word Mediator. He compares Christ as an Apo^le with Moses;
as a Priest with Aaron. Both these Offices which Moses and Aaron severally
bore, he bears together, and far more eminently: of our profession -- The
Religion we profess.

V. 2. His house -- The Church of Israel, then the peculiar Family of GOD.

V. 3. He that has builded it has more glory than the house -- Than the
Family itself, or any Member of it.

V. 4. Now Christ, he that built not only this House, but all things, is God;
and so infinitely greater than Moses or any Creature.

V. 5. And Moses verily -- Another Proof of the Pre-eminence of Christ above
Moses: was faithful in all his house as a servant, for a testimony of the
things which were afterward to be spoken -- That is, which was a full
Confirmation of the Things which he afterward spoke concerning Christ.

V. 6. But Christ was faithful as a Son, whose house we are, while we hold
fast, and shall be unto the End, if we hold fast our corfidence in GOD, and
glorying in his Promises; our Faith and Hope.

V. 7. Wherefore -- Seeing he is faithful, be not ye unfaithful.

V. 8. As in the provocation -- When Israel provoked me by their Strite and
Murmurings: in the day of temp^ation -- When at the same Time they tempted me,
by distrusting my Power and Goodness.

V. 9. Where your fathers -- That hard-hearted and stiff-necked Generation. So
little Cause had their Descendents to glory in them: tempted me -- Whether I
could and would help them: proved me -- Put my Patience to the Proof, eve^
while they saw my glorious works, both of Judgment and Mercy, and that for
forty years.

V. 10. Wherefore -- To speak after the Manner of Men: I was grieved --
Displeased, offended with that generation; and said, they always err in their
hearts -- They are led astray by their stubborn Will and vile Affections. And
-- For this Reason, because Wickedness has blinded their Understanding: they
have not known my ways -- By which I would have led them like a Flock: into my
rest -- In the promised Land.

V. 12. Take heed l^st there be in any of you -- As there was in them: an (...)
heart of unbelief -- Unbelief is the Parent of all Evil, and the very ^^ssence
of Unbelief lies, in departing from God, as the living God -- The Fountain of
all our Life, Holiness, Happiness.

V. 13. Em -- To prevent it, exhort one another, while it is called today --
This today will not last for ever. The Day of Life will end soon, and perhaps
the Day of Grace yet sooner.

V. 14. For we are made partakers of Christ -- And we shall still partake of
Him, and all his Benefits, if we hold fast our faith unto the end. If -- But
not else: And a Supposs^on made by the Holy Ghost is equal to the strongest
Assertion. Both the Sentiment and the Manner of Expres^ion are the same as ver.
6.

V. 16. Were they not all that came out of Egypt? An awful Consideration! The
whole Elect People of GOD, (a very few excepted) provoked God presently after
their great Deliverance: continued to grieve his Spirit for forty Years, and
perished in their Sin!

V. 19. So we see, they could not enter in -- Though afterward they defired it.

IV.
Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest,
any of us should altogether come short of it. with faith in those that heard
it. Genesis ii. 2.
, And God rested on the seventh day from all his works: did from his. Let us
labor, is living and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing
even to the dividing asunder both of the soul and spirit, both of the joints
and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intentions of the heart. are
naked and opened to the eyes of him with whom we have to do.

Having therefore a great high priest, our profession, we are: without sin. Let
us therefore come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy and
find grace to help in time of need.

V. 2. But the word -- Which they heard, did not profit them -- So far from it,
that it increased their Damnation. It is then only when it is mixed with says,
that it exterts its saving Power.

V. 3. For we only that have believed, enter into the rest -- The Proposition
is, there remains a Rest for us. This is proved ver. 3 -- 11. thus: That Psalm
mentions a Rest: Yet it does not mean, 1. GOD's Rest from creating: For this
was long before the Time of Moses. Therefore in his Time another Rest was
expected; of which they who then heard fell short. Nor is it, 2. The Rest which
Israel obtained through Joshua: For the Psalmist wrote after him. Therefore it
is, 3. The eternal Rest in Heaven. As he said -- Clearly showing, that there is
a farther Rest than that which followed the finishing of the Creation: though the
works were finished -- Before: Whence it is plain, GOD did not speak of resting
from them.

V. 4. For -- Long after he had rested from his works -- He speaks again.

V. 5. In this Psalm, of a Rest yet to come.

V. 7. After so long a time -- It was above four hundred Years from the Time of
Moses and J^shua to David: as it was said before -- St. Paul here refers to the
Text he had just cited.

V. 8. The rest -- All the Rest which GOD had promised.

V. 9. Therefore -- Since he still speaks of another Day, there must remain a
farther, even an eternal Rest for the people of God.

V. 10. For they do not yet so rest. Therefore a fuller Rest remains for them.

V. 11. L^st any one should fall -- Into Perdition.

V. 12. For the word of God -- Preached, ver. 2. and armed with Threatenings,
ver. 3. is living and powerful -- Attended with the Power of the Living GOD,
and conveying either Life or Death to the Hearers; sharper than any two-edged
sword -- Peaetrating the Heart more than this does the Body: piercing -- Quite
through and laying open, the soul and spirit, joints and marrow -- The inmost
Recesses of the Mind, which the Apostle beautifully and strongly expresses by
this Heap of figurative Words: and is a discerner -- Not only of the thoughts
-- But also of the intentions.

V. 13. In his sight -- It is GOD, whose Word is thus powerful: It is GOD, in
whose sight every Creature is manifest, and of this his Word working on the
Conscience, gives the fullest Conviction; but all things are naked and opened
-- Plainly alluding to the Sacrifices under the Law, which were first flayed,
and then (as the Greek Word literally means) clest asunder through the neck and
Backbone; so that every Thing both without and within was exposed to open View.

V. 14. Having therefore a great high priest -- Great indeed, being the eter^^
Son of God, that is pass^d through the heavens -- As the Jewish High Priest
passed through the Veil into the Holy of Holies, carrying with him the Blood of
the Sacrifices, on the yearly Day of Atonement: So our great High Priest went
once for all through the visible Heavens, with the Virtue of his own Blood,
into the immediate Presence of GOD.

V. 15. He sympathixas with us, even in our innocent infirmities, Wants,
Weaknesses, Miseries, Dangers: yet without sin -- And therefore is indisputably
able to preserve us from it in all our Temptations.

V. 16. Let us therefore come boldly -- Without any Doubt or Fear, unto the
throne of GOD our reconciled Father, even his Throne of grace -- Grace erected
it, and reigns there, and dispenses all Blessings, in a Way of mere, unmerited
Favor.

V.
For every high priest, being taken from among men, is appointed for men in
things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins,
was Aaron. Psalm ii. 7.
, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. As he says also in another
place, Psalm cx. 1.
Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedek: Who in the days of
his flesh, Though he was a son,

Concerning whom we have many things to say, dull of hearing, are the first
principles of the oracles of God, and are become such as have need of milk and
not of strong meat. is unexperienced in the word of righteousness;

V. 1. For every high priest being taken from among men -- Is, till he is
taken, of the same Rank with them: and is appointed -- That is, is wont to be
appointed: in things pertaining to God -- To bring GOD near to Men, and Men to
GOD: that be may offer both gifts -- Out of Things inanimate, and animal
Sacrifices.

V. 2. Who can have compassion -- In Proportion to the Offense; So the Greek
Word signifies: on the ignorant -- Them that are in Error: and the wandering --
Them that are in Sin: seeing himself also is compassed with infirmity -- Even
with sinful Infirmity, and so needs the Compassion which he shows to others.

V. 4. The Apostle begins here to treat of the Priesthood of Christ. The Sum of
what he observes concerning it is, Whatever is excellent in the Levitical
Priesthood is in Christ, and in a more eminent Manner. And whatever is wanting
in those Priests is in him, and no one takes this honor -- The Priesthood, to
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron -- And his posterity, who
were all of them, called at one and the same Time. But it is observable, Aaron
did not preach at all: Preaching being no Part of the priestly Office.

V. 5. So also Christ glorified not himself to be an high priest -- That is,
did not take this Honor to himself; but received it from him, who said, Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee -- Not indeed at the same Time; for
his Generation was from Eternity.

V. 7. The Sum of the Things treated of in the 7th and following Chapters, is
contained ver. 7-10. and in this Sum is admirably comprised the Process of his
Passion, with its inmost Causes, in the very Terms used by the Evangelists: Who
in the days of his flesh -- Those two Days in particular, wherein his
Sufferings were at the Height, having offered up prayers and supplication --
Thrice, with strong crying and tears -- In the Garden, to him that was able to
save him from death -- Which yet he endured, in Obedience to the Will of his
Father, and being heard in that which he particularly feared -- When the Cup
was oftered him first, there was set before him that horrible Image of a
painful, shameful, accursed Death, which moved him to pray conditionally
against it; for if he had desired it, his heavenly Father would have sent him
more than twelve Legions of Angels to have delivered him. But what he most
exceedingly feared was, the Weight of infinite Justice; the being bruised and
put to grief by the Hand of GOD himself. Compared with this, every Thing else
was a mere nothing. And yet, so greatly did he even thirst to be obedient to
the righteous Will of his Father, and to lay down even his life for the sheep,
that he vehemently longed to be baptized with this baptism, (Luke xii. 50.)
Indeed his human Nature needed the support of Omnipotence, and for this he sent
up strong crying and tears; but throughout his whole Life, he showed that it
was not the sufferings he was to undergo, but the dishonor that Sin had done
to so holy a GOD, that grieved his spotless Soul. The Consideration of its
being the Will of GOD tempered his Fear, and afterward swallowed it up. And he
was heard, not so that the Cup should pass away, but so that he drank it
without any Fear.

V. 8. Though he were a Son -- This is interposed, lest any should be offended
at all these Instances of human Weakness. In the Garden how frequently did he
call GOD his Father? ( Matt. xxvi. 39. etc.) and hence it most evidently
appears, that his being the Son of GOD, did not arise merely from his
Resurrection; yet learned he -- The Word learned premised to the Word suffered,
elegantly shows how willingly he learned. He learned Obedience, when he began
to suffer, when he applied himself to drink that Cup: Obedience in suffering
and dying.

V. 9. And being perfected -- By Sufferings, (c. ii. 10.) brought through all
to Glory, he became the author -- The procuring and efficient Cause, of eternal
salvation to all that obey him -- By doing and suffering his whole Will.

V. 10. Called -- The Greek Word here properly signifies surnamed. His Name is,
The Son of God. The Holy Ghost seems to have concealed who Melchisedek was on
purpose, that he might be the more eminent Type of Christ. This only we know,
that he was a Priest, and King of Salem or Jerusalem.

V. 11. Concerning whom -- The Apostle here begins an important Digression,
wherein he reproves, admonishes, and exhorts the Hebrews. We -- Preachers of
the Gospel, have many things to say, and hard to be explained -- Though not so
much from the Subject Matter, as from your Slothfulness in considering, and
Dullness in apprehending the Things of GOD.

V. 12. Ye have need that one teach you again, which are the first principles
of Religion. Accordingly these are enumerated in the first Verse of the ensuing
Chapter. And have need of milk -- The first and plainest Doctrines.

V. 13. Every one that uses milk -- That neither desires, nor can digest any
Thing else (otherwise strong Men use Milk; but not Milk chiefly, and much less
that only): is unexperienced in the word of righteousness -- The sublimer
Truths of the Gospel. Such are all who desire and can digest nothing but the
Doctrine of Justification and imputed Righteousness.

V. 14. But strong meat -- These sublimer Truths relating to Perfection, (c.
vi. 1.) belong to them of full age, who by habit -- Habit, here signifies
Strength of spiritual Understanding, arising from Matority of spiritual Age:
By, or in consequence of this Habit, they exercise themselves in these Things,
with Ease, Readiness, Cheerfulness and Profit.

VI.
Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on to
perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, it
is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted the heavenly
gift, and been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, them again unto repentance,
seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open
shame. is rejected and nigh unto a curse, is to be burned. But, beloved, we are
persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany salvation, though we
thus speak. For God is not unrighteous, Genesis xxii. 17.
Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee. for
confirmation is to them an end of all contradiction. it was impossible for God
to lie, we might have strong consolation, who have fled to lay hold on the hope
set before us: hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast,
and which enters into the place within the veil, Whither Jesus our
forerunner is entered for us,

V. 1. Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ -- That is,
saying no more of them for the present, let us go on to perfection; not laying
again the foundation of repentance from dead works -- From open Sins, the very
first Thing to be insisted on, and faith in GOD, the very next Point. So St.
Paul in his very first Sermon at Lys^ra, ( Acts xiv. 15.) Turn from those
vanitics unto the living GOD. And when they believed, they were to be baptized
with the Baptism (not of the Jews, or of John, but) of Christ. The next Thing
was, To lay hands upon them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost: After
which they were more fully instructed, touching the Resurrection, and the
General Judgment, called Eternal, because the Sentence then pronounced is
irreversible, and the Effects of it remain for ever.

V. 3. And this we will do -- We will go on to Perfection: and so much the more
diligently, because

V. 4. It is impossible for these who were once enlightened -- With the Light
of the glorious Love of GOD in Christ, and have tasted the heavenly gift --
Remission of Sins, sweeter than Honey and the Honeycomb, and been made
partakers of the Holy Ghost -- Of the Witness and the Fruit of the Spirit.

V. 5. And have tasted the good word of God -- Have had a Relish for, and a
Delight in it, and the powers of the world to come -- Which every one tastes,
who has an Hope full of Immortality. Every Child that is naturally born first
sees the Light, then receives and tastes proper Nourishment, and partakes of
the Things of this World. In like Manner, the Apostle (comparing spiritual with
natural Things) speaks of one born of the Spirit, as seeing the Light, tasting
the Sweetness, and partaking of the Things of the world to come.

V. 6. And have fallen away -- Here is not a Supposition, but a plain Relation
of Fact. The Apostle here describes the Case of those, who have cast away both
the Power and the Form of Godliness; who have lost both their Faith, Hope, and
Love, (v. 10, etc.) and that wilfully. (c. x. 26.) Of these wilful, total
Apostates he declares, It is impossible to renew them again to repentance!
(Though they were renewed once) either to the Foundation, or any Thing built
thereon: seeing they crucify the Son of God afresh -- They use him with the
utmost Indignity, and put him to an open shame -- Causing his glorious Name to
be blasphemed.

V. 8. That which bears thorns and briars -- Only or chiefly, is rejected --
No more Labor is bestowed upon it: whose end is to be burned -- As Jerusalem
was shortly after.

V. 9. But, beloved -- In this one Place he calls them so. He never uses this
Appellation, but in exhorting; we are persuaded of you things that accompany
salvation -- We are persuaded you are now saved from your Sins: and that ye
have that Faith, Love, and Holiness, which lead to final Salvation, though we
thus speak -- To warn you, lest you should fall from your present Stedfastness.

V. 10. For -- Ye give plain Proof of your Faith and Love, which the righteous
GOD will surely reward.

V. 11. But we desire you may show the same diligence unto the end -- And
therefore we thus speak, to the full assurance of hope -- Which you cannot
expect, if you abate your Diligence. The full assurance of Faith relates to
present Pardon; the full Assurance of Hope, to future Glory. The former is, the
highest Degree of divine Evidence that GOD is reconciled to me in the Son of
his Love: The latter is, the same Degree of divine Evidence (wrought in the
Soul by the same immediate Inspiration of the Holy Ghost) of persevering Grace,
and of eternal Glory. So much, and no more, as Faith every moment beholds with
open face, so much does Hope see, to all Eternity. But this Assurance of Faith
and Hope, is not an Opinion, not a bare Construction of Scripture, but is given
immediately by the Power of the Holy Ghost; and what none can have for another,
but for himself only.

V. 12. Inherited the promises -- The promised Rest: Paradise.

V. 13. For -- Ye have abundant Encouragement, seeing no stronger Promise could
be made, than that great Promise which GOD made to Abraham, and in him to us.

V. 15. After he had waited -- Thirty Years, he obtained the promise -- Isaac,
the Pledge of all the Promises.

V. 16. Men generally swear by (...) who is infinitely greater than themselves,
and an oath for confirmation, to confirm what is promised or asserted, usually
puts an end to all contradiction. This shows that an Oath taken in a religious.
Manner, is lawful even under the Gospel: Otherwise the Apostle would never have
mentioned it with so much Honor, as a proper Means to confirm the Truth.

V. 17. God interposed by an oath -- Amazing Condescension! He who is greatest
of all, acts as if he were a middle Person, as if while he swears, he were less
than himself, by whom he swears! Thou that hear the Promise, do thou not
yet believe?

V. 18. That by two unchangeable things -- His Promise and his Oath, in either,
much more in both of which, it was impossible for God to lie, we might have
strong consolation -- Swallowing up all Doubt and Fear; who have fled -- After
having been tossed by many Storms, to lay hold on the hope set before us -- On
Christ, the Object of our Hope, and the Glory we hope for through him.

V. 19. Which hope in Christ we have as an anchor of the soul -- Entering into
Heaven itself and fixed there, within the veil -- Thus he slides back to the
Priesthood of Christ.

V. 20. A forerunner uses to be less in Dignity, than those that are to follow
him. But it is not so here; for Christ who is gone before us, is infinitely
superior to us. What an Honor is it to Believers, to have so glorious a
Forerunner, now appearing in the Presence of GOD for them!

VII.
For this Melchisedek King of Salem, priest of the most high God, Genesis xiv. 18,
etc.
who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him, of
all the spoils; being, by interpretation, first, king of righteousness, and
then king of Salem also, which is king of peace; was, tithes: but there, he, of
whom it is testified that he lives. was there that another priest should rise,
after the order of Melchisedek, and not be called after the order of Aaron? For
the priesthood being changed, it is evident, that our Lord sprang out of Judah,
of which tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning the priesthood. Melchisedek, art
a priest for ever, did, by which we draw nigh to God. he was not made a priest
without an oath: priests were made without an oath, but this with an oath, by
him that said unto him, The Lord swear and will not repent, Thou art a priest
for ever, after the order of Melchisedek:) continues for ever, has a
priesthood that passes not away. makes the son, who is consecrated for
evermore.

V. 1. The Sum of this Chapter is, Christ, as appears from his Type,
Melchisedek, who was greater than Abraham himself, from whom Levi descended,
has a Priesthood altogether excellent, new, firm, perpetual.

V. 2. Being first -- According to the Meaning of his own Name, king of
Righteousness, then -- According to the Name of his City, king of peace -- So
in him, as in Christ, Righteousness and Peace were joined. And so they are in
all that believe in Him.

V. 3. Without father, without mother, without pedigree -- Recorded, without
any Account of his Descent from any Ancestors of the Priestly Order: having
neither beginning of days, nor end of life -- Mentioned by Moses; but being --
In all these Respects, made like the Son of GOD -- Who is really without father
-- As to his Human Nature, without mother -- As to his Divine, and in this
also, without pedigree -- Neither descended from any Ancestors of the Priestly
Order: remains a priest continually -- Nothing is recorded of the Death or
Successor of Melchisedek. But Christ alone does really remain without Death and
without Successor.

V. 4. The Greatness of Melchisedek is described in all the preceding and
following Particulars. But the most manifest Proof of it was, That Abraham gave
him Tithes, as to a Priest of GOD and a Superior; though he was himself a
Patriarch, greater than a King, and a Progenitor of many Kings.

V. 5. The sons of Levi take tithes of their brethren -- Sprung from Abraham as
well as themselves. The Levites therefore are greater than they; but the
Priests are greater than the Levites; the Patriarch Abraham than the Priests,
and Melchisedek than him.

V. 6. He who is not from them -- The Levites, blessed -- Another Proof of his
Superiority, even him that had the promises -- That was so highly favored of
GOD. When St. Paul speaks of Christ, he says, the promise; promises refer to
other Blessings also.

V. 7. The less is blessed -- Authoritatively of the greater.

V. 8. And here -- In the Levitical Priesthood: but there -- In the Case of
Melchisedek: ^e of whom it is testified, that he lives -- Who is not spoken
of, as one that died for another to succeed him; but is represented only as
living, no Mention being made either of his Birth or Death.

V. 9. And even Levi, who receives tithes -- Not in Person, but in his
Successors, as it were, paid tithes -- In the Person of Abraham.

V. 11. The Apostle now demonstrates, that the Levitical Priesthood must yield
to the Priesthood of Christ, because Melchised^k, after whose Order he is a
Priest, 1. Is opposed to Aaron, v. 11 -- 14. 2. Has no end of life, ver. 15 --
19. but remains a priest continually. If now perfection were by the Levitical
priesthood -- If this perfectly answered all GOD's Designs and Man's Wants:
(for under it the people received the Law -- Whence some might inter, that
Perfection was by that Priesthood) what farther need was there, that another
priest -- Of a new Order, should be set up? From this single Consideration it
is plain, that both the Priesthood and the Law, which were inseparably
connected, were now to give Way to a better Priesthood and more excellent
Dispensation.

V. 12. For -- One of these cannot be changed without the other.

V. 13. But the Priesthood is manifestly changed from one Order to another, and
from one Tribe to another. For be of whom these things are spoken -- Namely
Jesus, pertains to another tribe -- That of Judah; of which no man was
suffered by the Law, to attend on, or minister at, the altar.

V. 14. For it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah -- Whatever
Difficulties have arisen since, during so long a Tract of Time, it was then
clear beyond Dispute.

V. 15. And it is still for more evident, that -- Both the Prieshood and the
Law are changed, because the Priest now raised up, is not only of another
Tribe, but of a quite different Order.

V. 16. Who is made -- A Priest, not after the law of a carnal commandment --
Not according to the Mosaic Law, which consisted chiefly of commandments, that
were carnal, compared to the Spirituality of the Gospel; but after the power of
an endless life -- Which he has in himself, as the eternal Son of GOD.

V. 18. For there is implied in this new and everlasting Priesthood, and in the
new Dispensation, connected therewith, a disannulling of the pr^ceding
commandment -- An Abrogation of the Mosaic Law, for the weakness and
unprofitableness thereof -- For its Insufficiency either to justify or to
sanctify.

V. 19. For the law -- Taken by itself, separate from the Gospel, made nothing
perfect -- Could not perfect its Votaries, either in Faith or Love, in
Happiness, or Holiness; but the bringing in of a better hope -- Of the Gospel
Dispensation, which gives us a better Ground of Confidence does: by which we
draw nigh to God -- Yea so high as to be one Spirit with him. And this is true
Perfection.

V. 20. And -- The greater Solemnity wherewith he was made Priest, farther
proves the superior Excellency of his Priesthood.

V. 21. The Lord swear and will not repent -- Hence also it appears, that his
is an unchangeable Priesthood.

V. 22. Of so much better a covenant -- Unchangeable, eternal, was Jesus made a
surety -- Or Mediator. The Word Covenant frequently occurs in the remaining
Part of this Epistle. The original Word means either a Covenant or a last Will
and Testament. St. Paul takes it sometimes in the sormer, sometimes in the
latter Sense; sometimes he includes both.

V. 23. There were many priests -- One after another.

V. 24. He continues for ever -- In Life and in his Priesthood; that passes
not away -- To any Successor.

V. 25. Wherefore he is able to save to the uttermost -- From all the Guilt,
Power, Root and Consequence of Sin, them who (...) -- By Faith, to God through
him -- As their Priest, seeing be (...) ^veth to make intercession -- That is,
he ever lives and intercedes. He died once. He intercedes perpetually.

V. 26. For such an high priest suited us -- Unholy, mischievous, defiled
Sinners: A blessed Paradox! Holy -- With respect to GOD, harmless -- With
respect to Men, undefiled -- With any Sin, in himself, s^parated from sinners
-- As well as free from Sin. And so he was, when he left the World, and made --
Even in his human Nature; higher than the heavens -- And all their Inhabitants.

V. 27. Who need^th not to offer up sacrifices daily -- (That is, on every
yearly Day of Expiation) for he offered once for all: not for his own sins; for
he then offered up himself without spot to God.

V. 28. The law makes men highpriests that have infirmity -- That are both
weak, merral, and sinful: but the oath which was since the law -- Namely in the
time of David, makes the son, who is consecrated for ^ver -- Who being now
free, both from Sin and Death, from natural and moral Infirmity, remains a
priest for ever.

VIII.
The sum of what has been spoken is, We have such an high priest, who is set
down at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens, man. every
high priest is ordained to offer up gifts and sacrifices; whence it was
necessary that this also should have somewhat to offer. Exodus xxv. 40.
See thou make all things according to the model which was showed thee in the
mount. Jer. xxxi. 31, etc.
Behold the days come, says the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the
house of Israel and with the house of Judah: Not according to the covenant
which I made with their fathers, their iniquities will I remember no more.
covenant, he has antiquated the first; now that which is antiquated and
decayed, is ready to vanish away.

V. 1. We have such an high priest -- Having finished his Description of the
Type in Melchisedek, the Apostle begins to treat directly of the Excellency of
Christ's Priesthood, beyond the Levitical; who is set down -- Having finished
his Oblation, at the right hand of the Majesty of GOD.

V. 2. A minister -- Who represents his own Sacrifice, as the High Priest did
the Blood of those Sacrifices once a Year, of the sanctuary -- Heaven, typifed
by the (...) of Holles, and of the tr^e tabernacle -- Perhaps his Human Nature,
of which the old Tabernacle was a Type: which the Lord has fixed -- For ever;
not man -- As Meses, fixed the Tabernacle.

V. 4. But if he were on earth -- If his Priesthood terminated here, he could
not be a priest -- At all, consistently with the Jewish Institutions, there
being -- Other, priests -- To whom alone this Office is alloted.

V. 5. Who serve -- The Temple, which was not yet destroyed, after the pattern
and shadow of heavenly things -- Of spiritual evangelical Worship, and of
everlasting Glory: The Pattern, somewhat like the Strokes pencilled out upon a
Piece of fine Linen, which exhibit the Figures of Leaves and Flowers, but have
not yet received their splendid Colors and curious Shades: and shadow, or
shadowy Representation, which gives you some dim and imperfect Idea of the
Body; but not the fine Features, not the distinguishing Air, none of those
living Graces which adorn the real Person. Yet both the Pattern and Shadow lead
our Minds to something nobler than themselves; The Pattern, to that (Holiness
and Glory) which complete it; the Shadow to that which occasions it.

V. 6. And now he has obtained a more excellent ministry -- His Priesthood as
much excels theirs, as the Promises of the Gospel, (whereof he is a Surety)
excel those of the Law. These better promises are specified, ver. 10, 11. Those
in the Law were mostly temporal Promises.

V. 7. For if the first had been faultless -- If that Dispensation had answered
all GOD's Designs and Man's Wants, if it had not been weak and unprofitable,
unable to make any Thing perfect, no place would have been for a second.

V. 8. But there is; for, finding fault with them -- Who were under the Old
Covenant, he says, I ma^e a new covenant with the ouse^ Israel -- With all the
Israel of GOD, in all Ages and Nations. It is new in many respects, (though not
as to the Substance of it,) 1. Being ratified by the Death of CHRIST; 2. Freed
from those burdensome Rites and Ceremonies: 3. Containing a more full and clear
account of Spiritual Religon: 4. Attended with larger Influences of the Spirit:
5. Extended to all Men, and 6. Never to be abolished.

V. 9. When I took them by the hand -- With the Care and Tenderness of a
Parent; and just while this was fresh in their Memory, they obeyed. But
presently after they shook off the Yoke, they continued not in my covenant, and
I regarded them not -- So that Covenant was soon broken in Pieces.

V. 10. This is the covenant I will make after those days -- After the Mosaic
Dispensation is abolished; I will put my laws in their minds -- I will open
their Eyes and enlighten their Understanding, to see the true, full, spiritual
Meaning thereof, and write them on their hearts -- So that they shall inwardly
experience whatever I have commanded: and I will be to them a God -- Their
all-sufficient Portion, and exceeding great Reward, and they shall be to me a
people -- My Treasure, my beloved, loving and obedient Children.

V. 11. And they -- Who are under this Covenant (though in other Respects they
will have need to teach each other to their Lives End, yet) shall not -- Need
to teach every one his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know
me -- All real Christians, from the least to the greatest -- Ia this Order the
saving Knowledge of GOD ever did, and ever will proceed, not first to the
greatest and then to the least. But the Lord shall save the tents, the poorest,
of Judah first, that the glory of the house of David, the royal Seed, and the
glory of the in^abitants of Jerusalem, the Nobles and the rich Citizens, do not
m^grisy themselves, Zech. xii. 7.

V. 12. For I will -- Justify them, which is the Root of all true Knowledge of
GOD. This therefore is GOD's Method. First a Sinner is p^rds^ed: Then, he knows
GOD, as gracious and merciful: Then GOD's Laws are witten on his Heart: He is
GOD's and GOD is his.

V. 13. In saying, a new covenant, be has antiquated the first -- Has shown
that it is disannulled and out of Date: now that which is antiquated, is ready
to vanish away -- As it did quickly after when the Temple was destroyed.

IX.
And verily the first covenant also had ordinances of worship and a worldly
sanctuary. was the candlestick, and the table, and the shewbread; which is
cailed The holy place. was a golden pot having the manna, and Aaron's rod that
blossomed, and the tables of the covenant: were the Cherubim of glory,
shadowing the mercy-seat; of which we cannot now speak particularly. is a
figure for the time present, in which are offered both gifts and sacrifices,
which cannot perfect the worshipper as to his conscience, for us. For if the
blood of bulis and goats, Numb. xix. 17, 18, 19.
ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the
flesh: were under the first covenant, they who are called might receive the
promise of the eternal inheritance. such a covenant is, there must also
necessarily be the death of him by whom the covenant is confirmed. dead;
whereas it is of no strength while he by whom it is confirmed lives. covenant
originally transacted without blood. Exodus xxiv. 7, 8.
, he took the blood of calves and of goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and
hyssop, and the book itself, ver. 8.
This is the blood of the covenant, which God has on-joined joined unto you.
It was therefore necessary, that the patterns of things in heaven should be
purified by these, but the heavenly things themselves by better sacrifices than
these. For Christ did not enter into the holy place made with hands, did he
enter,

V. 1. The first covenant had ordinances of outward worship and a worldly -- A
visible, material sanctuary or Tabernacle. Of this Sanctuary he treats ver. 2,
5: Of those Ordinances, ver. 6, 10.

V. 2. The first -- The outward Tabernacle, in which was the candlestick, and
the table, The shewbread, shown continually before GOD and all the People,
consisting of twelve Loaves, according to the Number of the Tribes, was placed
on this table in two Rows, fix upon one another in each Row. This Candlestick
and Bread seem to have typified the Light and Life, which are more largely
dispensed under the Gospel, by Him, who is the Light of the world, and the
bread of life.

V. 3. The Second veil -- Divided the Holy Place from the Most holy, as the
First veil did the Holy Place from the Courts.

V. 4. Having the golden censer -- Used by the High Priest only, on the great
Day of Atonement; and the ark or Chest of the covenant -- So called from the
tables of the covenant contained therein: wherein was the manna -- The Monumert
of GOD's Care over Israel: and Aaron's rod -- The Monument of the regular
Priesthood: and the tables of (...) covenant -- The two Tables of Stone, on
which the Ten Commandments were written by the Finger of GOD; the most
venerable Monument of all.

V. 5. And over it were the Cherubim of glory -- Over which the Glory of GOD
used to appear. Some suppose, each of these had four Faces, and so represented
the Three-one God, with the Manhood assumed by the Second Person: With
out-spread Wings shadowing the mercy-seat -- Which was a Lid or Plate of Gold
covering the Ark.

V. 6. Always -- Every Day: accomplishing their services -- Lighting the Lamps;
changing the Shewbread, burning Incense and sprinkling the Blood of the
Sin Offerings.

V. 7. Errors -- That is, Sins of Ignorance; to which only those Atonement
extended.

V. 8. The Holy Ghost evidently showing -- By this Token, that the way into the
Heltest -- Into Heaven, (...) not (...) manifest. -- Not so clearly revealed,
w^i^e the first tabernacle -- And its Service, (...) still subsisting -- And
remaining in force.

V. 9. Which -- Tabernacle, with all his Furniture and Services, is a (...), or
Type of good Things to come. Which cannot perfect the worshipper -- Neither the
Priest not him who brought the Offering. -- (...) his conscience -- So that he
should be no longer (...) of the Guilt or Power of Sin. Observe, the Templ^ was
a ye^-Standing.

V. 10. They could not so perfect him, (...) all their Tran. of (...) relating
to mea^ and (...), and (...), gro^ external (...) and were therefore imposed
only (...) of reformation -- Till Christ came*

V. 11. An ^ig^-priest of good things (...) come -- Described ver^ (...)
entered through a greater -- That is, a more noble and perfect tabernacle --
Namely, ^^s own Body: not of the creation -- Not framed by Man as that
Tabernacle wa^

V. 12. The (...) p^^^^ -- Heaven: for u^ -- All that believe.

V. 13. If the ashes of an beifer -- Consumed by Fire as a Sin-offering, being
sprinkled on them who were legally unclean, purified the flesh -- Removed that
legal Uncleanness, and readmitted them to the Temple and the Congregation:

V. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ -- The Merit of all his
Sufferings: who through the eternal Spirit -- The Work of Redemption being the
Work of the whole Trinity. Neither is the Second Person alone concerned even in
the amazing Condescension that was needful to complete it. The Father delivers
up the Kingdom to the Son: And the Holy Ghost becomes the Gift of the Messiah,
being as it were, sent according to his good Pleasure: offered himself --
Infinitely more precious than any created Victim, and that without spot to God:
purge our conscience -- Our inmost Soul, from dead works -- From all the inward
and outward Works of the Devil, which spring from spiritual Death in the Soul,
and lead to Death everlasting: to serve the living God -- In the Life of Faith,
in perfect Love and spotless Holiness?

V. 15. And for this end he is the mediator of a new covenant, that they who
are called -- To the Engagements and Benefits thereof: might receive the
eternal inheritance promised to Abraham: Not by mean of legal Sacrifices, but
of his meritorious Death: for the redemption of the transgressions that were
under the first covenant -- That is, for the Redemption of Transgressors, from
the Guilt and Funishment of those Sins, which were committed in the Time of the
Old Covenant. The Article of his Death properly divides the Old Covenant from
the New.

V. 16. I say, By means of death: so where such a covenant is, their must be
the death of him by (...) it is confirmed -- Seeing (...) is by his Death that
the Benefits of it are purchased. It seems beneath the Dignity of the Apostle,
to play upon the Ambiguity of the Greek Word, as the common Translation
supposes him to do.

V. 17. After he is dead -- Neither this, nor after men are dead is a literal
Translation of the Words. It is a very perplexed Passage.

V. 18. Whence neither was the first -- The Jewish covenant, originally
transacted without the blood of an appointed Sacrifice.

V. 19. He took the blood of calves -- Or Heifers, and of goats, with water,
and scarlet wool, and hyssop -- All these Circumstances are not particularly
mentioned in that Chapter of Exodus, but are supposed to be already known, from
other Passages of Moses; and the book itself -- Which contained all he had
said, and sprinkled all the people -- Who were near him. The blood was mixed
with Water to prevent its growing too stiff for sprinkling: Perhaps also, to
typify that blood and water John xix. 34.

V. 20. Saying, This is the blood of the covenant which God has enjoined me to
deliver unto you -- By this it is established.

V. 21. And in like manner he ordered the tabernacle -- When it was made, and
all its Vessels to be sprinkled with blood, once a Year.

V. 22. And almost all things -- (For some were purified by Water, or Fire:)
are according to the law, purified with blood -- Offered or sprinkled: and
according to the Law, there is no forgiveness of Sins, without shedding of
blood -- All this pointed to the Blood Christ, effectually cleansing from all
Sin, and intimated, there can be no Purification from it, by any other Means.

V. 23. Therefore -- That is, It plainly appears from what has been said, It
was necessary -- According to the Appointment of GOD, that the Tabernacle and
all its Utensils, which were patterns -- Shadowy Representations, of things in
heaven should be purified by these -- Sacrifices and Sprinklings; but the
heavenly things themselves -- Our Heaven-born Spirits: What more this may mean,
we know not yet; by better Sacrifices than these -- That is, by a better
Sacrifice, which is here opposed to all the Legal Sacrifices, and is expressed
plurally, because it includes the Signification of them all, and is of so much
more eminent Virtue.

V. 24. For Christ did not enter into the Holy place made with hands -- He
never went into the Holy of Holies at Jerusalem, the figure of the true
Tabernacle in Heaven, c. viii. 2. but into Heaven itself to appear in the
presence of God for us -- As our glorious High Priest and powerful Intercessor.

V. 26. For then he must often have suffered from the foundation of the world
-- This supposes 1. That by suffering once, he atoned for all the Sins which
had been committed from the Foundation of the World: 2. That he could not have
atoned for them without suffering: At the consummation of the ages -- The
Sacrifice of Christ divides the whole Age or Duration of the World into two
Parts, and extends its Virtue backward and forward, from this middle Point
wherein they meet, to abolish both the Guilt and Power of Sin.

V. 27. After this the judgment -- Of the Great Day: At the Moment of Death,
every Man's final State is determined. But there is not a Word in Scripture, of
a particular Judgment, immediately after Death.

V. 28. Christ having once died, to bear the sins -- The Punishment due to
them: of many -- Even as many as are born into the World: will appear the
second time -- When he comes to Judgment: without sin -- Not as he did before,
bearing on himself the sins of many but to bestow everlasting Salvation.

X.
For the law having shadow of good things to come, not the very image of the
things, can never with the same sacrifices which they offer year by year
continually, make the comers thereunto per(...) having a great high priest over
the house of God; Let us draw near with a true heart, is faithful that has
promised) And let us consider one another, one another to love and to good
works: is; but exhorting one another, and so much the more, the blood of the
covenant, by which he has been sanctified, an unholy thing, and done despite
to the Spirit of grace? Deuteronomy. xxxii. 35, etc.
Vengeance is mine; I will recompense: and again, It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God. Hab. ii. 3, etc.
Now the just shall live by faith; but if he draw back, my soul has no
pleasure in him. them who draw back to perdition, but of them that believe to
the saving of the soul.

V. 1. From all that has been said it appears, that the Law, the Mosaic
Dispensation, being a bare, unsubstantial shadow of good things to come -- Of
the Gospel Blessings, and not the substantial, solid Image

V. 22. Let us draw near -- To GOD, with a true heart -- In godly Sincerity:
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience -- So us to condemn us no
longer: and our bodies wasted with pure water -- All our Conversation spotless
and holy; which is far more acceptable to GOD than all the legal Sprinklings,
and Washings.

V. 23. The profession of our hope -- The Hope which we professed at our
Baptism.

V. 25. Not forsaking the assembling ourselves -- In public or private Worship,
as the manner of some is -- Either through Fear of Persecution, or from a vain
Imagination that they were above external Ordinances: but exhorting one another
-- To Faith, Love, and good Works: and so much the more, as ye see the day
approaching -- The Great Day is ever in your Eye.

V. 26. For when we -- Any of us Christians, sin wilfully -- By total Apostasy
from GOD, termed drawing back, ver. 38. after having received the experimental
knowledge of the Gospel truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins --
None but that which we obstinately reject.

V. 28. He that -- In capital Cases, despised -- Presumptuously transgressed,
the law of Mases died without mercy -- Without any Delay or Mitigation of his
Punishment.

V. 29. Of how much sorer punishment is he worthy, wh -- By wilful, total
Apostasy, (It does not appear that this Passage refers to any other Sin:) has,
as it were, tradden under foot the Son of God -- A Lawgiver for more honorable
than Moses, and counted the blood wherewish the better covenant was
established, an un^^^y, a comm^, worthless Thing. by which he has been sar^d
-- Therefore Christ died for him also, and he was, at least, justified once;)
and done despite to the Spirit of grace -- By rejecting all his Motions.

V. 30. The Lord will judge his people -- Yea, far more rigorously than the
Heathens, if they rebel against him.

V. 31. To fall into the hands -- Of his avenging Justice.

V. 32. Enlightened -- With the Knowledge of GOD and of is Truth.

V. 34. For ye sympathized with all your suffering Brethren, and with me in
particular; and received joyfully the Loss of your own Goods.

V. 35. Cast not away therefore this your confidence -- Your Faith and Hope;
which none can deprive you of, but yourselves.

V. 36. The promise -- Perfect Love, Eternal Life.

V. 37. He that comes -- To reward every Man according to his Works.

V. 38. Now the just -- The justified Person shall live -- In GOD's Favor, a
spiritual and holy Life, by faith -- As long as he retains that Gift of GOD.
But if he draw back -- If he make Shipwreck of his Faith, my soul has no
pleasure in him -- That is, I abhor him, I cast him off.

V. 39. We are not of them that draw back to perdition -- Like him mentioned
ver. 38. but of them that believe -- To the End, so as to attain eternal Life.

XI.
Now faith is the subsistence of things hoped for, the evidence of things not
seen. good testimony. were made of things which do not appear. it is impossible
to please him; for he that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he
is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Genesis xii. 1, 4, 5.
By faith Abraham, Genesis xvii. 8.
By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country,
dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the joint-heirs of the same promise.
For he looked for the city which has foundations, is God. Genesis xxi. 2.
Sarah also herself received power to conceive seed, even when she was past
age, because she accounted him faithful who had promised. a posterity as the
stars in heaven for multitude, and as the sand which is on the seashore
innumerable. them, and confessed that they were strangers and sojourners on the
earth. country, that is an heavenly: therefore God is not ashamed to be called
their God; For he has prepared a city for them. Genesis xxii. 1, etc.
Abraham, being tried, offered up Isaac; yea, he that had received the
promises, offered up his only begotten son, Genesis xxi. 12.
In Isaac shall thy seed be called: him from the dead; from whence also he did
receive him in a figure. Genesis xlviii. ^6.
blessed each of the sons of Joseph and Genesis xlvii. 31.
worshipped, bowing down on the top of his staff. be was a beautiful child, and
they were not afraid of the king's commandment. Exodus xiv. 15.
By faith he left Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king; for he endured as
seeing him that is invisible. By faith Exodus xii. 12 -- 18.
he celebrated the passover, 2 Samuel, vii. 1, etc.
subdued kingdoms, 1 Samuel viii. 9, xii. 3, etc.
wrought righteousness, obtained promises, Dan. vii. 22. iii. 27.
stopped the mouths of lions. Judge. xii. 3.
Quenched the violence of fire, Judge. xv. 19. etc. xvi. 28, etc.
escaped the edge of the sword, Judge. iv. 14, etc.
out of weakness was made strong, Judge. vii. 21.
became valiant in fight, 1 Kings xvii. 22.
put to flight armies of the aliens; 2 Kings iv. 35.
Women received their dead raised to life again: others were tortured, not
accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection. And others
had trial of mockings and scourging,

V. 1. The Definition of Faith given in this Verse, and exemplified in the
various Instances following, undoubtedly includes Justifying Faith; but not
directly as justifying. For Faith justifies only as it refers to, and depends
on Christ. But here is no Mention of Him, as the Object of Faith; and in
several of the Instances that follow, no Notice is taken of him or his
Salvation, but only of Temporal Blessings obtained by Faith. And yet they may
all be considered as Evidences of the Power of justifying Faith in Christ, and
of its extensive Exercise, in a Course of steady Obedience, amidst Difficulties
and Dangers of every Kind. Now faith is the subsistence of things hoped for,
the evidence or conviction of things not seen -- Things hoped for are not so
extensive as things not seen. The former are only Things future, and joyful, to
us; the latter are either, future, past, or present, and those either good or
evil, whether to us or others. The subsistence of things hoped for -- Giving a
kind of present Subsistence to the good Things which GOD has promised: the
divine, supernatural evidence exhibited to, the conviction hereby produced in,
a Believer of things not seen -- Whether past, future, or spiritual;
particularly of GOD and the Things of GOD.

V. 2. By it the elders -- Our Forefathers. This Chapter is a kind of Summary
of the Old Testament, in which the Apostle comprizes the Designs, Labors,
Sojournings, Expectations, Temptations, Martyrdoms, of the Ancients. The former
of them had a long Exercise of their Patience; the latter suffered shorter, but
sharper Trials: obtained a good testimony -- A most comprehensive Word. GOD
gave a testimony, not only of them but to them: And they received his
Testimony, as if it had been the Things themselves of which he testified (ver.
4, 5, 39.) Hence they also gave Testimony to others, and others testified of
them.

V. 3. By faith we understand that the worlds -- Heaven and Earth and all
Things in them, visible and invisible were made -- Forn^, fashioned, and
finished, by the word -- The sole Command, of God -- Without any Instrument, or
preceding Matter. And as Creation is the Foundation and Specimen of the whole
Divine Economy, so Faith in the Creation is the Foundation and Specimen of all
Faith: so that things which are seen -- As the Sun, Earth, Stars, were made of
things which do not appear -- Out of the dark, unapparent Cha^s, Genesis i. 2. And
this very Chaos was created by the Divine Power; for before it was thus
created, it had no E^istence in Nature.

V. 4. By faith -- In the future Redeemer, Abeloffered a more excellent
facrifice -- The Firstlings of his Flock, implying both a Confession of what
his own Sins deserved, and a Desire of th^ring in the Great Atonement: than
Cain -- Whose Offering testi^ed no such Faith, but a bare Acknowledgment of GOD
the Creator; by which Faith he obtained both Righteousness and a testimony of
it: God testifying -- Visibly, that his Gifts were accepted; probably, by
sending Fire from Heaven to consume his Sacrifice, a Token that Justice seized
on the Sacrifice, instead of the Sinner who offered it. And by it -- By this
Faith, being dead, he yet speaks -- That a Sinner is accepted only through
Faith in the great Sacrifice.

V. 5. Enoch was not any longer found among Men, though perhaps they sought for
him, as they did for Elijah, 2 Kings ii. 17. He had this testimony -- From GOD
in his own Conscience.

V. 6. But without faith -- Even some Divine Faith in GOD, it is impossible to
please him: For he that comes to God -- In Prayer, or any other Act of
Worship, must believe that be is.

V. 7. Noah being warned of things not seen as yet -- Of the future Deluge;
moved with fear, prepared an ark, by which open Testimony be condemned the
world -- Who neither believed, nor teared.

V. 9. By faith be so journed in the land of promise -- The Promise was made
before, Genesis xii. 7. dwelling in tents -- As a Sojourner, with Isaac and Jacob
-- Who, by the same Manner of Living, showed the same Faith. Jacob was born
fifteen Years before the Death of Abrabam: the joint-heirs of the same promise
-- Having all the same Interest therein. Isaac did not receive this Inheritance
from Abraham, nor Jacob from Isaac, but all of them from God.

V. 10. He looked for a city which has foundations -- Whereas a Tent has none:
whose builder and former is God -- Of which GOD is the sole Contriver, Former,
and Finisher.

V. 11. Sarah also herself -- Though at first she laughed at the Promise. Genesis
xviii. 12.

V. 12. As it were dead -- Till his Strength was supernaturally restored, which
continued for many Years after.

V. 13. All these -- Mentioned ver. 7 -- 11. died in faith -- In Death Faith
acts most vigorously: not having received the promises -- The promises
Blessings. Embraced -- As one does a dear Friend when he meets (...)

V. 14. They who speak thus, show plainly, that they seek their own country --
Thee they keep in View and long for their native Home.

V. 15. If they had been mindful of -- Their earthly Country, Ur of the
Chald^ans, they might have easily returned.

V. 16. But they (...) a better country, that is, an heavenly -- This is a
full, convincing Proof, that the Patriarchs had a Revelation and a Promise of
eternal Glory in Heaven. Therefore God is not ashamed to be called their God;
seeing he has prepared for them a city -- Worthy of GOD to give.

V. 17. By faith Abraham -- When GOD made that glorious Trial of him, offered
up Isaac -- The Will being accepted, as if he had actually done it: yea, he
that had received the promises -- Particularly that grand Promise, In Isaac
shall thy seed be called, offered up this very son; the only one he had by
Sarah.

V. 18. In Isaac shall thy seed be called -- From Him shall the blessed Seed
spring.

V. 19. Accounting that God was able even to raise him from the dead -- Though
there had not been any Instance of this in the World. From whence also -- To
speak in a figurative Way, be did receive him -- Afterward, Inatched from the
Jaws of Death.

V. 20. Blessed -- Genesis xxvii. 27. 39. Prophetically foretold the particular
Blessings they should partake of: Jacob and Esau -- Preserring the Elder before
the Younger.

V. 21. Jacob when dying -- That is, when near Death: howing down on the top of
his staff -- As he sat on the Side of his Bed.

V. 22. Concerning his bones -- To be carried into the Land of Promise.

V. 23. They saw -- Doubtless with a Divine Presage of Things to come.

V. 24. Refused to be called -- Any longer.

V. 26. The reproach of Christ -- That which he bore, for believing in the
Messiah to come, and acting accordingly: for be looked off -- From all those
perishing Treasures, and beyond all those temporal Hardships, unto the
recompense of reward -- Not to an Inheritance in Canaan: He had no Warrant from
GOD to look for this, nor did he ever attain it: But what his believing
Ancestors looked for, a future State of Happiness in Heaven.

V. 27. By faith he left Egypt -- Taking all the Israelites with him: not then
fearing the wrath of the king -- As he did many Years before. Exodus ii. 14.

V. 28. The pouring out of the blood -- Of the Paschal Lamb, which was
sprinkled on the Door-posts, lest the destroying angel should touch the
Israelites.

V. 29. They, Moses, Aaron, and the Israelites, passed the Red Sea -- It washed
the Borders of Edom, which signifies Red. Thus far the Examples are cited from
Gen^sis and Exodus: those that follow are from the former and the latter
Prophets.

V. 30. By the faith of Joshua.

V. 31. Rabah -- Though formerly, one not of the fairest Character.

V. 32. After Samuel, the Prophets are properly mentioned. David also was a
Prophet: but he was a King too: the prophets -- Elijah, Elisha, etc. including
likewise the Believers who lived with them.

V. 33. David, in particular, subdued Kingdoms: Samuel (not excluding the rest)
wrought Righteousness. The Prophets, in general, obtained promises, both for
themselves, and to deliver to others. Prophets also stopped the mouths of lions,
as Daniel, and quenched the violence of fire, as Shadrach, Mosbech, and
Abednego. To these Examples, whence the Nature of Faith clearly appears, those
more ancient ones are subjoined, (by a Transposition, and in an inverted Order)
which receive Light from these. Jephthah escaped the edge of the sword: Sampson
out of weakness was made strong: Barak became valiant in fight; Gideon put to
flight armies of the aliens. Faith animates to the most heroic Enterprises,
both Civil and Military. Faith overcomes all Impediments, effects the greatest
Things, attains to the very best, and inverts, by its miraculous Power, the
very Course of Nature.

V. 34. David, in particular, subdued Kingdoms: Samuel (not excluding the rest)
wrought Righteousness. The Prophets, in genera^, obtained promises, both for
themselves, and to deliver to others. Prophets also stopped the mouths of lions,
as Daniel, and quenched the violence of fire, as Shadrach, Mosbech, and
Abednego. To these Examples, whence the Nature of Faith clearly appears, those
more ancient ones are subjoined, (by a Transposition, and in an inverted Order)
which receive Light from these. Jephthah escaped the edge of the sword: Sampson
out of weakness was made strong: Barak became valiant in fight; Gideon put to
flight armies of the aliens. Faith animates to the most heroic Enterprises,
both Civil and Military. Faith overcomes all Impediments, effects the greatest
Things, attains to the very best, and inverts, by its miraculous Power, the
very Course of Nature.

V. 35. Women -- Naturally weak, received their dead Children; others were
tortured -- From those who acted great Things, the Apostle rises higher, to
those who showed the Power of Faith by Suffering, not accepting deliverance --
On sinful Terms: that they might obtain a better resurrection -- An higher
Reward, seeing the greater their Sufferings, the greater would be their Glory.

V. 36. And others -- The Apostle seems here to pass on to recent Examples.

V. 37. They were sawn asunder -- As, according to the Tradition of the Jews,
Isaiab was by Manasseh; were tempted -- (Torments and Death are mentioned
alternately) Every Way; by Threatenings, Reproaches, Tortures, the Variety of
which cannot be expressed: and again, by Promises and Allurements.

V. 38. Of whom the world was not worthy -- It did not deserve so great a
Blessing: they wandered -- Being driven out from Men.

V. 39. And all these -- Though they obtained a good testimony, ver. 2. yet did
not receive the Great Promise, the heavenly Inheritance.

V. 40. God having provided some better thing for us -- Namely, Everlasting
Glory, that they might not be perfected without us -- That is, that we might
all be perfected together in Heaven.

XII.
Wherefore, let us also, being encompassed with so great a cloud of witnesses,
lay aside every weight, and the sin which easily besetteth us, and run with
patience the race that is set before us, our faith; who, for the joy that was
set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the
righthand of the throne of God. Prove. iii. 11, etc.
My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art
rebuked of him. If ye endure chastening, them: Shall we not much rather be in
subjection to the father of spirits and live? us as they thought good: but he
for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness. Now all chastening
for the present is assuredly not joyous,

Wherefore Is. xxxv. 3.
Lift up the hands that hang down and the feeble knees; which no man shall see
the Lord: Looking diligently, you, there be any fornicator or profane person,
as Esau, who for one meal gave away his birthright:

For ye are not come to the mountain that could be touched, Ex^d. xix. 12, etc.
If even a beast touch the mountain, let it be stoned. And so terrible was the
appearance, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and tremble. that of Abel. ye
refuse not him that speaks: for if they escaped not who refused him that
delivered the oracle on earth, much more shall not we, who turn away from him
that speaks from heaven: Hag. it. 6.
, Yet once more I will shake, not only the earth, but also the heaven. word,
Yet once more, shows the removal of the things which are shaken, as being
made, that the things which are not shaken may remain. is a consuming fire.

V. 1. Wherefore, being encompassed with a cloud -- A great Multilude, tending
upward with an holy Swiftness, of witnesses -- Of the Power of Faith; Let us
lay aside every weight -- As all who run a Race take care to do. Let us throw
off whatever weighs us down, or damps the Vigor of our Soul, and the sin which
easily besetteih us -- As does the Sin of our Constitution, the Sin of our
Education, the Sin of our Profession.

V. 2. Looking -- From all other Things, to Jesus -- As the wounded Israelites
to the brazen Serpent. Our crucified LORD was prefigured by the lifting up of
this: Our Guilt, by the Stings of the fiery Serpents; and our Faith, by their
looking up to the Miraculous Remedy; the author and finisher of our faith --
Who begins it in us, carries it on, and perfects it; who, for the joy that was
set before him. -- Patiently and willingly endured the cross -- With all the
Pains annexed thereto, and is set down -- Where there is Fullness of Joy.

V. 3. Consider -- Draw the Comparison and think: The LORD bore all this: And
shall his Servants bear nothing? him that endured such contradiction from
sinners -- Such Enmity and Opposition of every Kind, lest ye be weary -- Dull
and languid, and so actually faint in your Course.

V. 4. Unto blood -- Unto Wounds and Death.

V. 5. And yet ye seem already to have forgotten the exhortation -- Wherein GOD
speaks to you with the utmost Tenderness, Despise not thou the chastening of
the Lord -- Do not slight or make little of it, do not impute any Affliction to
Chance or Second Causes; but see and revere the Hand of GOD in it: neither
faint when thou art rebuked of him -- But endure it patiently and fruitfully.

V. 6. For all springs from Love. Therefore neither despise not faint.

V. 7. Whom his father chasteneth not -- When he offends.

V. 8. Of which all Sons are partakers -- More or less.

V. 9. And we reverenced them -- We neither despised, nor sainted under their
Correction: shall we not much rather -- Submit with Reverence and Meekness to
the Father of Spirits, that we may live with him for ever? The Father of the
spirits of all flesh, who is the Author, Maintamer, and Perfecter of our
spiritual Life and Felicity, in Time and in Eternity; to accomplish which, all
his Chastisements tend.

V. 10. For they ^^rily for a few days -- How few are even all our Days on
Earth! chastened us as they thought good -- Though frequently they erred therein,
by too much either of Indulgence or Severity: bat he -- Always, unquestionably,
for our prost, that we may be partakers of his botiness -- That is, of Himself,
and his glorious Image.

V. 11. Now all chastening -- Whether from our Earthly or Heavenly Father, is
for the present grievous, yet it violdeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness
-- Holtnets and Happiness, to them that are exercised thereby -- That receive
this Exercise as from GOD, and improve it according to his Will.

V. 12. Wherefore lift up the hands -- Whether your own, or your Brethrens that
hang down -- Unable to continue the Combat, and the seeble knees -- Unable to
continue the Race.

V. 13. And make strait paths both for your own and for their feet. -- Remove
every Hindrance, every Offense: that the same -- They who are weak, searce able
to walk, be not turned out of the way -- Of Faith and Hofiness.

V. 14. Follow peace with all men -- This Second Branch of the Exhortation
concerns our Neighbors, the Third, GOD. And Holiness -- The not following
after all Holiness, is the direct Way to fall into Sin of Every Kind.

V. 15. Looking diligently, lest any one -- If he do not lift up the Hands that
hang down, fall from the grace of God: lest any root of bitterness -- Of Envy,
Anger, Suspicion, springing up, destroy the sweet Peace: lest any, not
following after Holiness, fall into Fornication or Profaneness. In general, any
Corruption either in Doctrine or Practice, is a root of bitterness, and may
pollute many.

V. 16. Esau was profane, for so slighting the Blessing which went along with
the Birthright.

V. 17. He was rejected -- He could not obtain it: for he found no place for
repentance -- There was no Room for any such Repentance, as would regain what
he had lost, though be sought it -- The Blessing of the birthright diligently
with tears -- He sought too late. Let us use the present Time!

V. 18. For -- A strong Reason this, why they ought the more to regard the
whole Exhortation drawn from the Priesthood of Christ: Because both Salvation
and Vengeance are now nearer at Hand; (...) are not come to the mountain that
could be touched -- That was of an earthly, material Nature.

V. 19. The sound of a trumpet -- Formed without Doubt by the Ministry of
Angels, and preparatory, to the words, that is, the Ten Commandments, which
were uttered with a loud voice. Deuteronomy. v. 22.

V. 20. For they could not bear -- The Terror which seized them, when they
heard those Word; proclaimed, If even a beast, etc.

V. 21. Even Moses -- Though admitted to so near an Intercourse with GOD, who
spoke to him as a man sp^aketh to his friend. At other Times he acted as a
Mediator between GOD and the People. But while the Ten Words were pronounced,
he stood as one of the Hearers. Ex^d. xix. 25. xx. 19.

V. 22. But ye -- Who believe in Christ, are come -- The Apostle does not here
speak of their Coming to the Church Militant, but of that glorious Privilege of
New Testament Believers, their Communion with the Church Triumphant. But this
is far more apparent to the Eyes of celestial Spirits, than to Ours which are
yet veiled. St. Paul here shows an excellent Knowledge of the Heavenly
Occonomy, worthy of him who had been caught up into the third Heaven, to mount
Sion -- A spiritual Mountain, to the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem -- All these glorious Titles belong to the New Testament Church, and
to an innumerable company -- Including all that are afterward mentioned.

V. 23. To the general assembly -- The Word properly signifies a stated
Convention on some Festival Occasion: And church -- The whole Body of true
Believers, whether on Earth or in Par^dise, of the first born -- The first born
of Israel were enrolled by Moses: But these are enrolled in heaven, as Citizens
there. It is observable, that in this beautiful Gradation, these Firstborn are
placed nearer to GOD than the Angels: (S^ James i. ^8.) and to God the judge of
all -- Propitious to you, adverse to your Enemies: And to the spirits -- The
separate Soul^, of just men -- It seems to mean, Of New Testament Believers.
The Number of these, being not yet large, is mentioned distinct from the
innumerable company of just men -- Whom their Judge has acquitted. These are
now made perfect in an higher Sense, than any who are still alive. Accordingly
St. Paul, while yet on Earth, denies that he was thus made perfect. Phil. iii.
^2.

V. 24. To Jesus the mediator -- Through whom they had been perfected, and to
the blood of sprinkling -- To all the Virtue of his precious Blood shed for
you, whereby ye are sprinkled from an evil Conscience. This Blood of Sprinkling
was the Foundation of our LORD's mediatorial Office. Here the Gradation is at
the highest Point. Which speaks better things than that of Ab^^ -- Which
cried for Vengeance.

V. 25. Refuse not -- By Unbelief, him that speaks -- And whose speaking even
now is a Prelude to the final Scene. The same Voice which spoke both by the Law
and in the Gospel, when heard from Heaven, will shake Heaven and Earth: For if
they escaped not -- His Vengeance, much more shall not we -- Those of us, who
turn from him that speaks from heaven -- That is, who came from Heaven to
speak to us.

V. 26. Whose voice then shook the earth -- When he spoke from Mount Sinai: but
now -- With regard to his next speaking, he has promised -- It is a joyful
Promise to the Saints, though dreadful to the Wicked, Yet once more I will
shake, not only the earth, but also the heaven -- These Words may refer in a
lower Sense, to the Dissolution of the Jewish Church and State. But in their
full Sense they undoubtedly look much farther, even to the End of all Things.
This universal Shaking began at the first Coming of Christ. It will be
consummated at his second Coming.

V. 27. The things which are shaken -- Namely, Heaven and Earth, as being made
-- And consequently liable to Change: that the things which are not shaken may
remain -- Even the new heavens and the new earth, Rev. xxi. 1.

V. 28. Therefore let us, receiving -- By willing and joyful Faith, a kingdom
-- More glorious than the present Heaven and Earth, hold fast the grace,
whereby we may serve God -- In every Thought, Word, and Work, with reverence --
Literally, with shame -- Arising from a deep Consciousness of our own
Unworthiness, and godly fear -- A tender, jealous Fear of offending, arising
from a Sense of the gracious Majesty of GOD.

V. 29. For our God is a consuming fire -- In the Strictness of his Justice,
and Purity of his Holiness.

XIII.
Genesis xviii. 2. xix. 1.
some have entertained angels unawares. and them that suffer adversity, is
honorable in all men, and the bed undefiled: but whoremongers and adulterers
God will judge. Let your disposition be without covetousness: be content with
the things that are present; for he has said Genesis xxviii. 15. Jos. i. 5. 1 Chronicles. xxviii. 20.
, No I will not leave thee: verily I will not forsake thee. Ps. cxviii. 6.
The Lord is my helper; I will not fear what man can do unto me.

Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, it is good, that the heart be stablished
with grace, not with meats, in which they that have walked have not been
profited. an altar, whereof they have no right to eat who serve the tabernacle.
our lips, giving thanks to his name.

Obey them that have the rule over you, is unprofitable for you.

Now the God of peace, be the glory for ever and ever. Amen.

I beseech you, our brother Timotheus is set at liberty, with whom, if he come
soon, I will see you.

Salute all them that have the rule over you, be with you all.

V. 1. Brotherly love -- Is explained i^ the following Verses.

V. 2. Some -- Abraham and Lot, have entertained angels unaware^ -- So may an
unknown Guest, even now, be of more Worth than he appears, and may have Angels
attending him, though unseen.

V. 3. Remember -- In your Prayers, and by your Help, them that are in bonds,
as being bound with them -- Seeing ye are Members one of another, and them that
suffer, as being yourselves in the body -- And consequently liable to the same.

V. 4. Marriage is honorable in, or for all Sorts of men, Clergy as well as
Laity: Though the Romanists teach otherwise; and the bed undefiled -- Consistent
with the highest Purity: Though many Spiritual Writers, so called, say it is only
licensed whoredom; but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge -- Though
they frequently escape the Sentence of Men.

V. 5. He -- GOD, has said -- To all Believers, in saying it to Jacob, Jostua,
and Solomon.

V. 7. Remember them -- Who are now with GOD, considering the happy end of
their conversation on Earth.

V. 8. Men may d^e. But Jesus Christ (yea and his Gospel) is the same from
everlasting to everlasting.

V. 9. Be not carried about with various doctrines -- Which differ from that
one Faith in our one unchangeable LORD; strange -- To the Ears and Hearts of
all that abide in him; for it is good -- It is both honorable before GOD, and
pleasant and profitable, that the heart be stablished with grace -- Springing
from Faith in Christ, not with meats -- Jewish Ceremonies, which ind^eed can
never stablish the Heart.

V. 10. On the former Part of this Verse, the 15th and 16th depend; on the
latter, the intermediate Verses. We have an altar -- The Cross of Christ,
whereof they have no right to eat -- To partake of the Benefits which we
receive therefrom, who serve the tabernac^e -- Who adhere to the Mosaic Law.

V. 11. For -- According to their own Law, the Sin Offerings were wholly
consumed, and no Jew ever are thereof. But Christ was a Sin-offering: Therefore
they cannot feed upon him, as we do, who are free from the Mosaic Law.

V. 12. Wherefore Jesus also -- Exactly answering those Typical Sinofferings,
suffered without the gate -- Of Jerusalem, which answered to the old Camp of
Israel: that he might sanctify -- Reconcile and consecrate to GOD, the people
-- Who believe in him, by his own blood -- Not those shadowy Sacrifices, which
are now of no farther Use.

V. 13. Let us then go forth without the camp -- Out of the Jewish
Dispensation, bearing his reproach -- All Manner of Shame, Obloquy, and
Contempt for his Sake.

V. 14. For we have here -- On Earth, no continuing city -- All Things here are
but for a Moment; and Jerusalem itself was just then on the Point of being
destroyed.

V. 15. The sacrifice -- The Altar is mentioned, ver. 10. Now the Sacrifices:
1. Praise, 2. Beneficence: with both of which God is well pleased.

V. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you -- The Word implies also, that
lead or guide you: namely in Truth and Holiness: and submit yourselves -- Give
up, (not your Conscience or Judgment, but) your own Will, in all Things purely
indifferent; For they watch over your souls -- With all Zeal and Diligence,
they guard and caution you against all Danger, as they that must give account
-- To the greats Shepherd for every Part of their Behavior toward you. How
vigilant then ought every Pastor to be! How careful of every Soul committed to
his Charge! That they may d^ this -- Watch over you with joy, and not with
groans -- He is not a good Shepherd, who does not either rejoice over them, or
groan for them. The Groans of other Creatures are heard: How much more shall
these come up in the Ears of GOD? Whoever answers this Character of a Christian
Pastor, may undoubtedly demand this Obedience.

V. 20. The everlasting convenant -- The Christian Covenant, which is not
Temporary, like the Jewish, but designed to remain for ever. By the Application
of that blood, by which this Covenant was established, may he make you, in
every Respect, inwardly and outwardly holy!

V. 22. Suffer the word of exhortation -- Addressed to you in this Letter,
which though longer than my usual Letters, is yet contained in few words,
considering the Copiousness of the Subject.

V. 23. If be came -- To me.

V. 25. Grace be with you all -- St. Paul's usual Benediction. GOD apply it to
our Hearts.

NOTES ON The General Epistle of St. JAMES.
THIS is supposed to have been written by James the Son of Alpheus, the
Brother, (or Kinsman) of our LORD. It is called a General Epistle, because
written not to a particular Person or Church, but to all the converted
Israelites. Herein the Apostle reproves that Antinomian Spirit, which had even
then infected many, who had perverted the glorious Doctrine of Justification by
Faith, into an Occasion of Licentiousness. He likewise comforts the true
Believers under their Sufferings, and reminds them of the Judgments that were
approaching.

It has three Parts: I. The Inscription, Chapter i. 1 II. The Exhortation, 1. To
Patience, enduring Outward, conquering Inward, Temptations, 2 -- 15 2.
Considering the Goodness of GOD, to be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to
wrath. And these three are, 16 -- 18 1. Proposed: 19 -- 21 2. Treated of at
large. a. Let Hearing be joined with Practice, 22 -- 26 particularly with
bridling the Tongue, 26 with Mercy and Purity, 27 without Respect of Persons,
C. ii. 1 -- 13 and so Faith universally with Works: 14 -- 26 b. Let the Speech
be modest: C. iii. 1 -- 12. c. Let Anger, with all the other Passions be
restrained, 13 -- C. iv. 1 -- 17 3. To Patience again: a. Confirmed by the
Coming of the Judge, in which draws near The Calamity of the Wicked, C. v. 1 --
6 The Deliverance of the Righteous, 7 -- 12 b. Nourished by Prayer, 13 -- 18
III. The Conclusion, 19, 20.

St. JAMES.
I.
JAMES a servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes
which are scattered abroad, greeting.

My brethren, its perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, driven with
the wind and tossed. is the man that endures temptation: his own desire and
enticed.

Do not err,

Wherefore, the law of liberty, and continues therein, this man being not a
forgetful hearer, but a doet of the work, this man shall be happy in his doing.
If any one be ever so religious, man's religion is vain. and to keep himself
unspotted from the world.

V. 1. A servant of Jesus Christ -- Whose Name the Apostle mentions but once
more in the whole Epistle, (c. ii. 1.) And not at all in his whole Discourse,
Acts xv. 14, etc. or c. xxi. 20 -- 25. It might have seemed, if he mentioned
him often, that he did it out of Vanity, as being the Brother of the LORD: to
the twelve tribes -- Of Israel; that is those of them that believe: which are
scattered abroad -- In various Countries: Ten of the Tribes were scattered ever
since the Reign of Hosea. And great Part of the rest were now dispersed through
the Roman Empire. As was foretold. Deuteronomy. xxviii. 25, etc. xxx. 4. Greeting --
That is, All Blessings, Temporal and Eternal.

V. 2. My brethren, count it all joy -- Which is the highest Degree of
Patience, and contains all the rest: when so fall into diverse temptations --
That is, Trials.

V. 4. Let patience have its perfect work -- Give it full Scope, under whatever
Trials befall you: that ye may be perfect and entire -- Adorned with every
Christian Grace: and wanting nothing -- Which GOD requires in you.

V. 5. If any want -- The Connection between the first and following Verses,
both here and in the fourth Chapter, will be easily discerned by him who reads
them, while he is suffering wrongfully. He will then readily perceive, why the
Apostle mentions all those various Affections of the Mind. Wisdom -- To
understand, whence and why Temptations come, and how they are to be improved.
Patience is in every pious Man already. Let him exercise this and ask, for
Wisdom. The Sum of Wisdom, both in the Temptation of Poverty and of Riches, is
described in the 9th and 10th Verses: who gives to all -- That ask aright: and
upbraideth not -- Either with their past Wickedness, or present Unworthiness.

V. 6. But let him ask in faith -- A firm Confidence in GOD. St. James also
both begins and ends with Faith: (chapter v. 15.) The Hindrances of which he
removes in the middle Part of his Epistle, He that doubts is like a wave of
the sea -- Yea, such are all who have not asked and obtained Wisdom: driven
with the wind -- From without; and tossed -- From within, by his own
Unstableness.

V. 8. A double-minded man -- Who has, as it were, two Souls, whose Heart is
not simply given up to GOD; is unstable -- Being without the true Wisdom,
perpetually disagrees both with himself and others, chapter iii. 16.

V. 9. Let the brother -- St. James does not give this Appellation to the Rich:
of low degree -- Poor and tempted: rejoice -- The most effectual Remedy against
Double-mindedness: in that be is exalted -- To be a Child of GOD, and an Heir
of Glory.

V. 10. But the Rich in that he is made low -- Is humbled by a d^p Sense of his
true Condition: because as the flower -- Beautiful, but transient; be shall
pass away -- Into Eternity.

V. 11. For the sun arose and withered the grass -- There is an unspeakable
Beauty and Elegance, both in the Comparison itself, and in the very Manner of
expressing it, intimating both the Certainty and the Suddenness of the Event.
So shall the rich fade away in his ways -- In the Midst of his various
Pleasures and Employments.

V. 12. Happy is the man that endures temptation -- Trials of various Kinds:
He shall receive the crown -- That fades not away: which the Lord has
promised to them that love him -- And his enduring proves his Love. For it is
Love only that endures all things.

V. 13. But let no man who is tempted -- To Sin, say, I am tempted of God --
GOD thus tempts no man.

V. 14. Every man is tempted, when -- In the Beginning of the Temptation, he is
drawn away, Drawn out of GOD, he strong Refuge, by his own desire -- We are
therefore to look for the Cause of every Sin, in (not out of) ourselves. Even
the Injestions of the Devil cannot hurt, before we make them our own. And every
one has Desires arising from his own Constitution, Tempers, Habits and way of
Life: and enticed -- In the Progress of the Temptation, catching at the Bait:
So the Original Word signifies.

V. 15. Then desire having conceived -- By our own Will joining therewith,
brings forth actual sin -- It does not follow that the Desire itself is not
Sin. He that begets a Man is himself a Man: and sin being perfected -- Grown up
to Maturity, which it quickly does, brings forth death -- Sin is born big
with Death.

V. 16. Do not err -- It is a grievous Error, to ascribe the Evil and not the
Good which we receive, to GOD.

V. 17. No evil but every good gift -- Whatever tends to Holiness, and every
perfect gift -- Whatever tends to Glory, descends from the Father of lights
-- The Appellation of Father is here used with peculiar Propriety. It follows,
He begat us. He is the Father of all Light, material or spiritual, in the
Kingdom of Grace and of Glory: with whom is no variableness -- No Change in his
Understanding, or shadow of turning -- In his Will. He infallibly discerns all
Good and Evil, and invariably loves one and hates the other. There is in both
the Greek Words a Metaphor taken from the Stars, particularly proper where the
Father of lights is mentioned. Both are applicable to any celestial Body, which
has a daily Vicissitude of Day and Night, and sometimes longer Days, sometimes
longer Nights. In GOD is nothing of this Kind. He is mere Light. If there is
any such Vicissitude, it is in ourselves, not in Him.

V. 18. Of his own will -- Most loving, most free, most pure, just opposite to
our evil Desire (ver. 15.) begat he us -- Who believe, by the word of truth --
The true Word, emphatically so termed; the Gospel: that we might be a kind of
first fruits of his creatures -- Christians are the chief and most excellent of
his visible Creatures; and sanctify the rest. Yet he says a kind of -- For
Christ alone is absolutely the first fruits.

V. 19. Let every man be swift to hear -- This is treated of from ver. 21. to
the End of the next Chapter: slow to speak -- Which is treated of in the Third
Chapter: slow to wrath -- Neither murmuring at GOD, nor angry at his Neighbor.
This is treated of in the Third, and throughout the Fourth and Fifth Chapters.

V. 20. The righteousness of GOD here includes all Duties prescribed by Him and
pleasing to Him.

V. 21. Therefore laying aside -- At a dirty Garment, all the filthiness and
superfluity of wickedness -- For however specious or necessary it may appear to
worldly Wisdom, all Wickedness is both vile, hateful, contemptible, and really
superflucus. Every reasonable End may be effectually answered, without any Kind
or Degree of it. Lay this, every known Sin aside, or all your Hearing is vain:
with ^eckness -- Constant Evenness and Serenity of Mind, receive -- Into your
Ears, your Hearts, your Life: the word -- Of the Gospel; ingrafted -- In
Believers, by Regeneration, (ver. 18.) and by Habit ( Heb. v. 14.) which is
able to save your souls -- The Hope of Salvation nourishes Meekness.

V. 23. Beholding his face in the glass -- How exactly does the Scripture-Glass
show a Man the Face of his Soul!

V. 24. He beheld himself and went away -- To other Business: and forgot -- But
such forgetting does not excuse.

V. 25. But he that looks diligently -- Not with a tranfient Glance, but
bending down, fixing his Eyes, and searching all to the Bottom, into the
perfect law -- Of Love as established by Faith. St. James here guards us
against misunderstanding what St. Paul says concerning the yoke and bondage of
the Law. He who keeps the Law of love is free, ( John viii. 31, etc.) He that
does not, is not free, but a Slave to Sin, and a Criminal before GOD, (chapter ii.
10.) and continues therein -- Not like him who forgot it and went away. This
man -- There is a peculiar Force in the Repetition of the Word, shall be happy
-- Not barely in hearing, but doing the Will of GOD.

V. 26. If any one be ever so religious -- Exact in the outward Offices of
Religion; and bridleth not his tongue -- From Backbiting Talebearing,
Evil-speaking, he only deceives his own heart, if he fancies he has any true
Religion at all.

V. 27. The only true Religion in the Sight of GOD, is this, to visit -- With
Counsel, Comfort, and Relief, the fatherless and widows -- Those who need it
most, in their affliction -- In their most helpless and hopeless State: and to
keep himself unspotted from the world -- From the Maxims, Tempers, and Customs
of it. But this cannot be done, till we have given our Hearts to GOD, and love
our Neighbor as ourselves.

II.
My brethren, hold not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory,
with respect of persons. them that love him? Lev. xix. 18.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself, Exodus xxiii. 3.
as transgressors. shall be to him that has showed no mercy: but mercy
glories over judgment.

What does it profit, that faith save him? which is without works is dead? Genesis
xv. 6. 2 chronicles. xx. 7.
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness: and he was
called the friend of God. is justified by works, which is without works is dead
also.

V. 1. My brethren -- The Equality of Christians intimated by this Name, is the
Ground of the Admonition: hold not the faith of our common Lord, the Lord of
glory -- Of which Glory all who believe in him partake: with respect of persons
-- That is, honor none, merely for being rich; despise none, merely for being
poor.

V. 2. With gold rings -- Which were not then so common as now.

V. 3. Ye look upon him -- With Respect.

V. 4. Ye distinguish not -- To which the most Respect is due, to the Poor or
to the Rich: but are become evil-reasoning judges -- You reason ill, and so
judge wrong. For fine Apparel is no Proof of Worth in him that wears it.

V. 5. Hearken -- As if he had said, Stay, consider, ye that judge thus. ^oes
not the Presumption lie rather in Favor of the poor Man? Has not God chosen
the po^ -- That is, Are not they whom GOD has chosen, generally speaking, poor
in this world; who yet are rich in faith, and beirs of the hingdom --
Consequently the most honorable of Men? And those whom GOD so highly honors,
ought not ye to honor likewise?

V. 6. Do not the rich often oppress you -- By open Violence; often drag you --
Under Color of Law?

V. 7. Do not they blaspheme that worthy name -- Of GOD and of Christ. The
Apostle speaks chiefly of rich Heathens. But are Christians, so called, a whit
behind them?

V. 8. If ye fulfill the royal law -- The supreme Law of the Great King, which
is Love; and that to every Man, poor as well as rich, ye do well.

V. 9. Being convicted -- By that very Law.

V. 10. Whosoever keeps the whole law, except in one point, he is guilty of
all -- Is as liable to Condemnation, as if he had offended in every Point.

V. 11. For it is the same Authority which establishes every Commandment.

V. 12. So speak and act -- In all Things, as they that shall be judged --
Without Respect of Persons, by the law of liberty -- The Gospel^ the Law of
Universal Love, which alone is perfect Freedom. For their Transgressions of
this, both in Word and Deed, the Wicked shall be condemned. And according to
their works, done in Obedience to this, the Righteous will be rewarded.

V. 13. Judgment without mercy shall be to him -- In that Day, who has showed
no mercy -- To his poor Brethren. But the m^ey of GOD to Believers, answering
to that which they have shown, will then glory over judgment.

V. 14. From chapter i. ver. 22. the Apostle has been enforcing Christian Practice.
He now applies to those, who neglect this, under the Pretense of Faith. St.
Paul had taught, That a man is justified by faith without the works of the law.
This some began already to wrest, to their own Destruction. Wherefore St. James
purposely repeating (ver. 21, 23, 25.) the same Phrases, Testimonies and
Examples which St. Paul had used, ( Romans iv. 3. Heb. xi. 17, 31.) refutes, not
the Doctrine of St. Paul, but the Error of those who abused it. There is
therefore no Contradiction between the Apostles: They both delivered the Truth
of GOD; but in a different Manner, as having to do with different Kinds of Men.
On another Occasion St. James himself pleaded the Cause of Faith ( Acts 1^.
13-21) And St. Paul himself strenuously pleads for Works, particularly in his
latter Epistles. This Verse is a Summary of what follows. What profits it, is
enlarged on, ver. 15-17: though a man say, ver. 18, 19: can that faith save him?
ver. 20. It is not Though he have faith; but, Though he say he has faith. Here
therefore true, living Faith is meant. But in other Parts of the Argument the
Apostle speaks of a dead, imaginary Faith. He does not therefore teach, that
true Faith can, but that it cannot subsist without Works. Nor does he oppose
Faith to Works, but that empty Name of Faith, to real Faith working by Love,
Can that faith which is without works save him? No more than it can profit his
Neighbor.

V. 17. So likewise that faith which has not works is a mere dead, empty
Notion; of no more Profit to him that has it, than the bidding the Naked be
clothed is to him.

V. 18. But one -- Who judges better, will say, -- To such a vain Talker, Show
me, if thou can, thy faith without thy works

V. 19. T^ believe there is one God -- I allow this. But this proves only,
that thou have the same Faith with the Devils. Nay, they not only believe, but
tremble -- At the dreadful Expectation of eternal Torments. So far is that
Faith from either justifying or saving them that have it.

V. 20. But art them willing to know -- Indeed thou art not: Thou would sain
be ignorant of it: O empty man -- Empty of all Goodness, That the faith which
is without works is dead? And so is not peoperly Faith, as a dead Carcass is
not a Man.

V. 21. Was not Abraham justified by works? St. Paul says, He was justified by
faith, Romans iv. 2, etc. Yet St. James does not contradict him. For he does not
speak of the same Justification. St. Paul speaks of that which Abraham received
many Years before Isaac was born, Genesis xv. 6. St. James of that which he did
not receive, till he had offered up Isaac on the altar. He was justified
therefore in St. Paul's Sense, that is, accounted righteous, by Faith
antecedent to his Works. He was justified in St. James Sense, that is, made
righteous, by Works consequent to his Faith. So that St. James's Jurtification
by Works, is the Fruit of St. Paul's Justification by Faith.

V. 22. Thou feast that faith -- For by faith Abraham offered him, ( Heb. xi.
17.) wrought together with his works -- Therefore Faith has one Energy and
Operation, Works another. And the Energy and Operation of Faith are before
Works, and together with them. Works do not give Life to Faith, but Faith
begets Works, and then is perfected by them. And by works was faith made
perfect. -- Here St. James fixes the Sense wherein he uses the Word ju^ified:
So that no Shadow of Contradiction remains, between his Assertion and St.
Paul's. Abraham returned from that Sacrifice perfected in Faith, and far higher
in the Favor of GOD. Faith has not its Being from Works, for it is before
them; but its Perfection. That Vigor of Faith which begets Works, is then
excited and increased thereby; as the natural Heat of the Body begets Motion,
whereby itself is then excited and increased. (See 1 John iii. 22.)

V. 23. And the Scripture -- Which was afterward written, was hereby ominently
fulfilled, Abraham believed God, and it was imputal to him for righteousness --
This was twice fulfilled, when Abraha -- first believed, and when he offered up
Isaac. St. Paul speaks of the former ^ulfilling, St. James of the latter. And
he was cali^ the friend of God -- Both by his Posterity, 2 Chronicles. xx. 7. and by
GOD himself, Isa. xli. 8. So pleasing to GOD were the Works he wrought in Faith.

V. 24. Ye see then that a Man it justified by wor^ and not by faith only --
St. Paul, on the other Hand, declares, a man^ justified ^y faith, and not by
works (Rom iii. 28.) And yet there is no Contradiction between the Apostles:
Because, 1. They do not speak of the same Faith; St. Paul speaking of living
Faith, St. James here of dead Faith. 2. They do not speak of the same Works:
(...) Paul speaking of Works antecedent to Faith, St. James, of Works
subsequent to it.

V. 25. After Abraham, the Father of the Jews, the Apostle cites Rahab, a
Woman, and a Sinner of the Gentiles; to show that in every Nation and Sex true
Faith produces Works, and is perfected by them; that is, by the Grace of GOD
working in the Believer, while he is showing his Faith by his Works.

III.
My brethren, be not many teachers, knowing that we shall receive greater
condemnation. is a perfect man, able also to bridle the whole body. is a fire,
a world of iniquity:) so is the tongue among the members, which defiles the
whole body, and sets on fire the course of nature, it is an unruly evil,
full of deadly poison. Therewith bless we God even the Father, water and
bitter? can a fountain yield salt water and fresh.

Who is a wise and knowing man among you? is earthly, animal, devilish; V. 16
For where bitter zeal and strife is, there is unquietness and every evil work.
partiality,

V. 1. Be not many teachers -- Let no more of you take this upon you, than GOD
thrusts out; seeing it is so hard not to ossend in speaking much: knowing that
we -- That all who thrust themselves into the Office: shall receive greater
condemnation -- For more Offenses. St. James here, as in several of the
following Verses, by a common Figure of Speech, includes himself. We shall
receive -- we offend -- we put bits -- we curse -- None of which (as common
Sense shows) are to be interpreted either of him, or of the other Apostles.

V. 2. The same is able to bridle the whole body -- That is, the whole Man. And
doubtless some are able to do this, and so are in this Sense (...).

V. 3. We -- That is, Men.

V. 5. Boasts great things -- Has great Influence.

V. 6. A world of iniquity -- Containing an immense Quantity of all Manner of
Wickedness: It defiles -- As Fire by its Smoke: the whole body -- The whole
Man: and sets on fire the course of nature the Passions, every Wheel of his
Soul.

V. 7. Every kind -- The Expression perhaps is not to be taken strictly.
Reptiles -- That is, creeping Things.

V. 8. But no man can tame the tongue -- Of another; no, nor his own, without
peculiar Help from GOD.

V. 9. Men made after the likeness of God -- Indeed we have now lost this
Likeness. Yet there remains from thence an indelible Nobleness, which we ought
to reverence both in ourselves and others.

V. 13. Let him show his Wisdom, as well as his Faith, by his works; not by
Words only.

V. 14. If ye have hitter zeal -- True Christian Zeal is only the Flame of
Love, even in your hearts -- Though it went no farther: Do not lie against the
truth -- As if such Zeal could consist with heavenly Wisdom.

V. 15. This wisdom which is consistent with such Ze^: is earthly -- Not
heavenly, not from the Father of Lights; animal -- Not spiritual; not from the
Spirit of GOD: devilish -- Not the Gift of Christ, but such ^s Satan breathes
into the Soul.

V. 17. But the wisdom from above is forced pure -- From all that is earthly,
natural, devilish; then peaceable -- True Peace attending Purity, it is quiet,
inoffensive; gentle -- Sost, mild, yielding, not rigid: easy to be in^reated --
To be persuaded, or convinced, not stubborn, sour, or morose; (...) geed f^^its
-- Both in the Heart, and in the Life, two of which are immediately specified:
without partiality -- Loving all, without Respect of Persons; embracing all
good Things, rejecting all evil: and without dissimulation -- Frank, open.

V. 18. And the Principle productive of this rightcousness, is sown, like good
Seed, in the peace of a Believer's Mind, and brings forth a plentiful Harvest
of Happiness, (which is the proper Fruit of Righteousness) for them that make
peace -- That labor to promote this pure and holy Peace among all Men.

IV.
From whence come wars and fightings among you? Is it not hence, from your
pleasures that war in your members? Eat he gives greater grace: Prove. iii. 34.
God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. Submit yourselves,
your hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double-minded. Be afflicted,
your joy into heaviness. Humble yourselves before the Lord,

Speak not evil one of another,

Come now, shall be on the morrow; for what is your life? It is a vapor that
appears for a little time and then vanishes away:

V. 1. From whence come wars and fightings -- Quarrels and Jars among you,
quite opposite to this Peace? Is it not from your pleasures -- Desires of
earthly Pleasures, which war -- Against your Souls, in your members? -- Here is
the first Seat of the War. Hence proceeds the War of Man with Man, King with
King, Nation with Nation.

V. 2. Ye kill -- In your Heart, for be that bateth his brother is a murderer.
Ye fight and war -- That is, furiously strive and contend. Ye ask not -- And no
marvel. For a Man full of evil Desire, of Envy or Hatred, cannot pray.

V. 3. But if ye do ask, ye receive not, because ye ask amiss -- That is, from
a wrong Motive.

V. 4. Ye adulterers and adulteresses -- Who have broken your Faith with GOD,
your rightful Spouse: know ye not that the friendship or Love of the world --
The Desire of the Flesh, the Desire of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, or
courting the Favor of worldly Men, is enmity against God? -- Whosoever
d^sireth to be a friend of the world -- seeks either the Happiness or Favor of
it, does thereby constitute himself an enemy of God -- And can he expect to
obtain any thing of him?

V. 5. Do you think, that the scripture says in vain -- Without good Ground.
St. James seems to refer to many, not any one particular Scripture. The Spirit
of Love that dwells in all Believers lusts against envy, (Gal. v. 17.) is
directly opposite to all those unloving Tempers, which necessarily flow from
the Friendship of the World.

V. 6. But he gives greater grace -- To all who shun those Tempers; therefore
it -- The Scripture: faith, God resists the proud -- And Pride is the great
Root of all unkind Affections.

V. 7. Therefore by humbly submitting yourselves to God, resist the devil --
The Father of Pride and Envy.

V. 8. Then draw nigh to GOD in Prayer, and be will draw nigh unto you, will
hear you; which that nothing may hinder, cleanse your bands -- Cease from doing
Evil, and purify your hearts -- From all spiritual Adultery. Be no more
double-minded, vainly endeavoring to serve both GOD and Mammon.

V. 9. Be afflicted -- For your past Unfaithfulness to GOD.

V. 11. Speak not evil one of another -- This is a grand Hindrance of Peace. O
who is sufficiently aware of it! He that speaks ^vil of another, does in
effect, speak evil of the law, which so strongly prohibits it. Thou art not a
doer of the law, but a judge -- Of it, thou set thyself above, and as it
were condemnest it.

V. 12. There is one lawgiver that is able -- To execute the Sentence he
denounces. But who art thou! -- A poor, weak, dying Worm.

V. 13. Come now, ye that say -- As peremptorily, as if your Life, (...) in
your own Hands.

V. 15. Instead of your saying -- That is, Whereas ye ought to say.

V. 17. Therefore to him that knows to do good and does it not -- knows what
is right, and does not practice it; to him it is sin -- Knowledge does not
prevent, but increase his Condemnation.

V.
Come now, ye rich, weep and howl for your miseries that are coming upon you.
sabbath. heaven, nor by the earth, nor by any other oath; but let your yea be
yea, and your nay nay, lest ye fall under condemnation.

Is any among you afflicted? your faults one to another, brethren, and pray one
for another, that ye may be healed: the fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much. it rained not on the land for three years and six months.

Brethren,

V. 1. Come now, ye rich -- The Apostle does not speak this so much for the
Sake of the Rich themselves, as of the poor Children of GOD, who were then
Groaning under their cruel Oppression. Weep and howl for your miseries which
are coming upon you -- Quickly and unexpectedly. This was written not long
before the Siege of Jerusal^m: During which, as well as after it, huge
Calamities came on the Jewish Nation, not only in Judea, but through distant
Countries. And as these were an awful Prelude of that Wrath, which was to fall
upon them in the World to come, so this may likewise refer to the final
Vengeance, which will then be executed on the Impenitent.

V. 2. The Riches of the Ancients consisted much in large Stores of Corn, and
of costly Apparel.

V. 3. The canker of them -- Your perishing Stores and moth-eaten Garments,
will be a testimony against you -- Of your having buried those Talents in the
Earth, instead of improving them according to your LORD's Will: and will eat
your slesh as fire -- Will occasion you as great Torment, as if Fire were
consuming your Flesh. Ye have laid up treasure in the last days -- When it is
too late; when you have no Time to enjoy them.

V. 4. The hire of your laborers cries -- Those Sins chiefly cry to GOD,
concerning which Human Laws are silent. Such are Luxury, Unchastity, and
various Kinds of Injustice. The Laborers themselves also cry to GOD, who is
just coming to avenge their Cause: Of sabbath -- Of Hosts or Armies.

V. 5. Ye have cherished your hearts -- Have indulged yourselves to the
uttermost, as in a day of sacrifice -- Which were solemn Feast-Days among the
Jews.

V. 6. Ye have killed the just -- Many just Men, in particular that Just one (
Acts iii. 14.) They afterward killed James, surnamed the just, the Writer of
this Epistle. He does not resist you -- And therefore you are secure. But the
LORD comes quickly, ver. 8.

V. 7. The bushandman waits for the precious fruit -- Which will recompense
his Labor and Patience: till he receive the former rain -- Immediately after
Sowing, and the latter -- Before the Harvest.

V. 8. Stablish your hearts -- In Faith and Patience; for the coming of the
Lord -- To destroy Jerusalem, is nigh -- And so is his last Coming to the Eye
of a Believer.

V. 9. Murmur not one against another -- Have Patience also with each other.
The judge stands before the door -- Hearing every Word, marking every Thought.

V. 10. Take the prophets for an example -- Once persecuted like you, even for
speaking in the name of the Lord -- The very Men that gloried in having
Prophets, yet could not bear their Message. Nor did either their Holiness, or
their high Commission screen them from Suffering.

V. 11. We count them happy that endured -- That suffered patiently. The more
they once suffered, the greater is their present Happiness. Ye have seen the
end of the Lord -- The End which the LORD gave him.

V. 12. S^ar not -- However provoked. The Jews were notoriously guilty of
common Swearing, though not so much by GOD himself as by some of his Creatures.
The Apostle here particularly forbids these Oaths, as well as all Swearing in
common Conversation. It is very observable how solemnly the Apostle introduces
this Command: above all things, swear not. As if he had said, Whatever you
forget, do not forget this. This abundantly demonstrates the horrible Iniquity
of the Crime. But he does not forbid the taking a solemn Oath, before a
Magistrate. Let your yea be yea, and your nay nay -- Use no higher
Asseverations in common Discourse. And let your Word stand firm. Whatever ye
say, take care to make it good.

V. 14. Having anointed him with oil -- This single, conspicuous Gift, which
Christ committed to his Apostles, ( Mark vi. 13.) remained in the Church long
after the other miraculous Gifts were withdrawn. Indeed it seems to have been
designed to remain always, and St. James directs the Elders, who were the most,
if not the only gifted Men, to administer it. This was the whole Process of
Physic in the Christian Church, till it was lost through Unbelief. That novel
Invention among the Romanists, Extreme Unction, practiced not for Cure, but
where Life is despaired of, bears no Manner of Resemblance to this.

V. 15. And the prayer offered in faith shall save the sick -- From his
Sickness, and if any Sin be the Occasion of his Sickness, it shall be forgiven
him.

V. 16. Confess your faults -- Whether ye are sick or in Health, to one another
-- He does not say to the Elders: (This may, or may not be done; for it is no
where commanded.) We may confess them to any who can pray in Faith. He will
then know how to pray for us, and be more stirred up so to do, and pray one for
another that ye may be healed -- Of all your spiritual Diseases.

V. 17. Elijah was a man of like passions -- Naturally as weak and sinful as we
are: and he prayed -- When Idolatry covered the Land.

V. 18. He prayed again -- When Idolatry was abolished.

V. 19. As if he had said, I have now warned you of those Sins, to which you
are most liable. And in all these Respects watch not only over yourselves, but
every one over his Brother also. Labor in particular to recover those that are
fallen. If any one err from the truth -- Practically by Sin.

V. 20. He shall save a soul -- Of how much more Value than the Body? ver. 14.
and hide a multitude of sins -- Which shall no more, how many soever they are,
be remembered to his Condemnation.

NOTES ON The First Epistle General of St. PETER.
THERE is a wonderful Weightiness, and yet Liveliness, and Sweetness, in the
Epistles of St. Peter. His Design in both is, To stir up the minds of those to
whom he writes, by way of remembrance (2 Pet. iii. 1. and to guard them, not
only against Error, but also against doubting chapter v. 12.) This he does by
reminding them of that glorious Grace, which GOD had vouchsafed them through
the Gospel, by which Believers are inflamed to bring forth the Fruits of Faith,
Hope, Love, and Patience.

The Parts of this Epistle are three:
I. The Inscription, C. i. 1, 2 II. The stirring up of them to whom he writes:
1. As born of GOD. Here he recites and interweaves alternately, both the
Benefits of GOD toward Relievers, and the Duties of Believers toward GOD. 1.
GOD has regenerated us to a living Hope, to an eternal Inheritance, 3 -- 12
Therefore hope to the End; 13 2. As obedient Children bring forth the Fruit of
Faith to your heavenly Father: 14 -- 21 3. Being purified by the Spirit, love
with a pure Heart, 2^ -- C. ii. 10 2. As Strangers in the World, abstain from
fleshly Desires: 11 And show your Faith by 1. A good Conversation, 12 a. I^
particular (...), 13 -- 17 Servants, after the Example of Christ, 18 -- 25
Wives, Chapter iii. 1 -- 6 Husbands; 7 b. In General, All: 8 -- 15 2. A good
Profession, a. By Readiness to give an Answer to every one, 15 -- 22 b. By
shunning evil Company C. iv. 1 -- 6 (This Part is enforced by what Christ both
did and suffered, from his Passion to his coming to Judgment) c. By the
Exercise of Christian Virtues, and by a due Use of miraculous Gifts, 7 -- 11 3.
As Fellow-heirs of Glory, sustain Adversity: Let each do this, 1. In General,
as a Christian, 12 -- 19 2. In his own Particular State, C. v. ^ -- 11 (The
Title Beloved divides the Second Part from the First, C. ii. 11. and the Third
from the Second, C. iv. 12.) III. The Conclusion: 12 -- 14

I. St. PETER.
I.
PETER an apostle of Jesus Christ to the sojourners scattered through Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia,

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead, which is much more precious than gold, (that perishes
though it be tried with fire) may be found unto praise, and honor, and glory,
at the revelation of Jesus Christ, Whom having not seen, him not, yet
believing, ye now rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory. of God toward
you, enquired and searched diligently, of Jesus Christ. Lev. xi. 44.
Be ye holy; as silver and gold, from your vain conversation delivered by
tradition from your fathers,

Having purified your souls by obeying the truth through the Spirit unto
unfeigned love of the brethren, Isa. xl. 6, etc.
all flesh is grass, and all the glory of it as the flower of grass: The grass
is withered, and the flower is fallen off;

V. 1. To the sojourners -- Upon Earth, the Christians, chiefly those of Jewish
Extraction, scattered -- Long ago driven out of their own Land (those scattered
by the Persecution mentioned Acts viii. 1. were scattered only through Judea and
Samaria, though afterward some of them traveled to Phettice, Cyprus, and
Antioch) through Pontu^, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia -- He names
these five Provinces in the Order wherein they occurred to him, writing from
the East. All these Countries lie in the Lesser Asia. The Asia here
distinguished from the other Provinces, is that which was usually called The
Proconsular Asia, being a Roman Province.

V. 2. According to the foreknowledge of GOD -- Speaking after the Manner of
Men. Strictly speaking there is no foreknowledge, no more than after-knowledge
with GOD: But all Things are known to him as present, from Eternity to
Eternity. This is therefore no other than an Instance of the divine
Condescension to our low Capacities. Elect -- By the free Love and Almighty
Power of GOD taken out of, separated from the World. Election, in the Scripture
Sense, is GOD's doing any thing that our Merit or Power have no Part in. The
true Predestination, or Fore-appointment of GOD is, 1. He that believes shall
be saved, from the Guilt and Power of Sin. 2. He that endures to the End,
shall be saved eternally. 3. They who receive the precious Gift of Faith,
thereby become the Sons of GOD: And being Sons, they shall receive the Spirit
of Holiness, to walk as Christ also walked. Throughout every Part of this
Appointment of GOD, Promise and Duty go Hand in Hand. All is free Gift; and yet
such is the Gift, that the final Issue depends on our future Obedience to the
heavenly Call. But other Predestination than this, either to Life or Death
eternal, the Scripture knows not of. Moreover, it is, 1. Cruel Respect of
Persons: An unjust Regard of one, and an unjust Disregard of another. It is
mere creature partiality, and not infinite Justice: 2. It is not plain
Scripture-Doctrine (if true:) but rather, inconsistent with the express written
Word, that speaks of GOD's universal Offers of Grace: His Invitations,
Promises, Threatenings, being all general. 3. We are bid to choose Life, and
reprehended for not doing it. 4. It is inconsistent with a State of Probation
in those that must be saved or must be lost. 5. It is of fatal Consequence; all
Men being ready, on very slight Grounds, to fancy themselves of the Elect
Number. But the Doctrine of Predestination is entirely changed from what it
formerly was. Now it implies neither Faith, Peace, nor Purity. It is something
that will do without them all. Faith is no longer, according to the modern
Predestinarian Scheme, a divine evidence of things not seen, wrought in the
Soul by the immediate Power of the Holy Ghost: Not an evidence at all; but a
mere nation. Neither is Faith made any longer a Means of Holiness; but
something that will do without it. Christ is no more a Savior from Sin; but a
Defense, a Countenancer of it. He is no more a Fountain of spiritual Life in
the Soul of Believers, but leaves his Elect inwardly dry, and outwardly
unfruitful; and is made little more than a Refuge from the Image of the
heavenly: even from Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost: through
sanctification of the Spirit -- Through the renewing and purifying Influences
of his Spirit on their Souls: unto obedience -- To engage and enable them to
yield themselves up to all holy Obedience, the Foundation of all which is, the
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ -- The (...) Blood of Christ, which was
typified by the Sprinkling of the Blood of Sacrifices under the Law; in
Allusion to which it is called the blood of sprinkling.

V. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ -- His Father,
with respect to his Divine Nature; his GOD, with respect to his Human; who has
regenerated us to a living hope -- An Hope which implies this spiritual Life,
which revives the Heart, and maker the Soul lively and vigorous; by the
resurrection of Christ -- Which is not only a Pledge of ours, but a Part of the
Purchase-Price. It has also a close Connection, with our rising from spiritual
Death, that as he lives, so shall we live with him. He was acknowledged to be
the Christ, but usually called Jesus till his Resurrection: Then he was also
called Christ.

V. 4. To an inheritance -- For if we are Sons, then Heirs; incorruptible --
Not like earthly Treasures, undefiled -- Pure and holy, incapable of being
itself defiled, or of being enjoyed by any polluted Soul; and that fades not
away -- That never decays in its Value, Sweetness, or Beauty, like all the
Enjoyments of this World, like the Garlands of Leaves or Flowers with which the
ancient Conquerors were wont to be crowned; reserved in heaven for you -- Who,
by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality.

V. 5. Who are kept -- The Inheritance is reserved; the Heirs are kept for it,
by the power of God -- Which works all in all, which guards us against all
our Enemies; through faith -- Through which alone Salvation is both received
and retained; ready to be revealed -- That Revelation is made in the last Day.
It was more and more ready to be revealed, ever since Christ came.

V. 6. Wherein -- That is, in being so kept, ye even now greatly rejoice, though
now for a little while -- Such is our whole Life, compared to Eternity; if need
be -- (For it is not always needful) If GOD sees it to be the best Means for
your spiritual Profit; ye are in heaviness -- Or Sorrow; but not in Darkness:
For they still retained both Faith (ver. 5.) Hope and Love: Yea, at this very
Time were rejoicing with Joy unspeakable, (ver. 8.)

V. 7. That the trial of your faith -- That is, your Faith which is tried,
which is much more precious than gold (for Gold, though it hear the fire, yet
will perish with the World) may be found -- Though it does not yet appear; unto
praise -- From GOD himself; and honor -- From Men and Angels; and glory --
Assigned by the Great Judge.

V. 8. Having not seen -- In the Flesh.

V. 9. Receiving -- Now already, salvation -- From all Sin into all Holiness,
which is the Qualification for, the Forerunner and Pledge of eternal Salvation.

V. 10. Of which salvation -- So far beyond all that was experienced under the
Jewish Dispensation, the very prophets who prophesied long ago of the grace of
God toward you -- Of his abundant, overflowing Grace to be bestowed on
Believers under the Christian Dispensation, enquired -- Were earnestly
inquisitive, and searched diligently, (like Miners searching after precious
Ore) after the Meaning of the Prophecies which they delivered.

V. 11. Searching what time -- What particular Period; and what manner of time
-- By what Marks to be distinguished; the glories that were to follow -- His
Sufferings: Namely, the Glory of his Resurrection, Ascension, Exaltation, and
the Effusion of his Spirit; the Glory of the last Judgment, and of his eternal
Kingdom: And also the Glories of his Grace, in the Hearts and Lives of
Christians.

V. 12. To whom -- So searching, it was revealed, that not for themselves, but
for us they ministered -- They did not so much by those Predictions serve
themselves, or that Generation, as they did us, who now enjoy what they saw
afar off: with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven -- Confirmed by the inward,
powerful Testimony of the Holy Ghost, as well as the mighty Effusion (...) his
miraculous Gifts; which things angels desire to look into -- A beautiful
Gradation: Prophets, righteous Men, Kings, desired to see and hear what Christ
did and taught. What the Holy Ghost taught concerning Christ, the very Angels
long to know.

V. 13. Wherefore -- Having such Encouragement, gird up the loins of your mind
-- As Persons in the eastern Countries were wont in traveling or running, to
gird up their long Garments, so gather ye up all your Thoughts and Affections,
and keep your Mind always disincumbered and prepared to run the Race which is
set before you; Be watchful -- As Servants that wait for their Lord: and hope
to the and -- Maintain a full Expectation of all the grace -- The Blessings
flowing from the free Favor of GOD, which shall be brought to you at the final
revelation of Jesus Christ: And which are now brought to you, by the revelation
of Christ in you.

V. 14. Your desires -- Which ye had while ye were ignorant of GOD.

V. 17. Who judges according to every man's work -- According to the Tenor of
his Life and Conversation: Pass the time of your sojourning -- Your short Abode
on Earth, in -- Humble, loving fear -- The proper Companion and Guard of Hope.

V. 18. Your vain conversation -- Your foolish, sinful Way of Life.

V. 19. Without blemish -- In himself, without spot -- From the World.

V. 21. Who through him believe -- For all our Faith and Hope proceed from the
Power of his Resurrection; in God -- that raised Jesus, and gave him glory --
At his Ascension; without Christ we should only dread GOD: Whereas through Him
we believe, hope and love.

V. 22. Having purified your souls by obeying the truth through the Spirit -- Who
bestows upon you freely, both Obedience and Purity of Heart and unfeigned love
of the brethren: go on to still higher Degre^ of Love; love one another
fervently -- With the most strong and tender Affection, and yet with a pure
heart -- Pure from any Spot of unholy Desire or inordinate Passion.

V. 23. Which lives -- Is full of Divine Virtue, and abides the same for ever.

V. 24. All flesh -- Every human Creature is transient and withering as grass;
and all the glory of it -- His Wisdom, Strength, Wealth, Righteousness; as the
flower -- The most short-lived Part of it. The grass -- That is, Man: the
flower -- That is his Glory, is fallen off -- As it were, while we are speaking.

II.
Wherefore laying aside all wickedness, and all guile, and dissimulation, and
envies, and all evil-speakings, as unto a living stone, and precious, Ye also
as living stones are built up, Isaiah xxviii. 16.
Behold I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious, and he that
believes on him shall not be confounded. he is precious; but as to them who
believe not, Psalm cxviii. 22.
The stone which the builders rejected is become the head of the corner. to
them who stumble, not believing the word, whereunto also they were appointed.
are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a purchased people, that
ye may show forth the virtues of him who has called you out of darkness into
his mavelous light: Who in time past were not a people, are the people of
God; who had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.

Beloved, you as sojourners and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly desires, which
war against the soul, your masters with all fear, not only to the good and
gentle, is thank worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, though
he suffer wrongfully. For what glory is it, is acceptable with God. Isa. liii.
9, 7, 4, 6.
Who did no sin, himself to him that judges righteously:

V. 1. Wherefore laying aside -- As inconsistent with that pure Love, all
dissimulation -- Which is the outward Expression of Guile in the Heart.

V. 2. Desire -- Always, as earnestly as new born babes do, chapter i. 3. the milk
of the word -- That Word of GOD which nourishes the Soul as Milk does the Body,
and which is sincere -- Pure from all Guile, so that none are deceived who
cleave to it, that you may grow thereby -- In Faith, Love, Holiness, unto the
full Statute of Christ.

V. 3. Since ye have tasted -- Sweetly and experimentally known.

V. 4. To whom coming -- By Faith, as unto a living stone -- Living from
Eternity, alive from the Dead. There is a wonderful Beauty and Energy in these
Expressions, which describe Christ as a spiritual Foundation, solid, firm,
durable; and Believers as a Building erected upon it, in Preference to that
Temple which the Jews accounted their highest Glory. And St. Peter speaking of
him thus, shows he did not judge himself, but Christ to be the Rock on which
the Church was built: rejected indeed by men -- Even at this Day, not only by
Jews, Turks, Heathens, Infidels; but by all Christians, so called, who live in
Sin, or who hope to be saved by their own Works: but chosen of God -- From all
Eternity, to be the Foundation of his Church: and precious -- In himself, in
the Sight of GOD, and in the Eyes of all Believers.

V. 5. Ye -- Believers, as living stones -- Alive to GOD through Him, are built
up -- In Union with each other, a spiritual house -- Being spiritual
yourselves, and an Habitation of GOD, through the Spirit; an holy priesthood --
Consecrated to GOD, and holy as He is holy: to offer up -- Your Souls and
Bodies, with all your Thoughts, Words, and Actions, as spiritual sacrifices to
God.

V. 6. He that believes, shall not be confounded -- In Time or in Eternity.

V. 7. To them who believe, he is become the head of the corner -- The chief
Cornerstone, on which the whole Building rests. Unbelievers too will at length
find him such to their Sorrow, Matt. xxi. 44.

V. 8. Who stumble, whereunto also they were appointed -- They who believe not,
stumble, and fall, and perish for ever: GOD having appointed from all Eternity,
He that believes not, shall be damned.

V. 9. But ye -- Who believe in Christ, are -- In an higher Sense than ever the
Jews were, a chosen or elect ^ace, a royal priesthood -- Kings and Priests unto
God, (Rev. i. 6.) As Princes, ye have Power with GOD, and Victory over Sin, the
World, and the Devil: As Priests, ye are consecrated to GOD, for offering
spiritual Sacrifices. Ye Christians are as one holy nation -- Under Christ your
King, a purchased people -- Who are his peculiar Property: that ye may show
forth -- By your whole Behavior, to all Mankind: the virtues -- The excellent
Glory, the Mercy, Wisdom and Power of him -- CHRIST, who has called you out of
the darkness -- Of Ignorance, Error, Sin, and Misery.

V. 10. Who in time past were not a people -- (Much less the People of GOD) but
scattered Individuals of many Nations. The former Part of the Verse
particularly respects the Gentiles; the latter, the Jews.

V. 11. Here begins the Exhortation drawn from the second Motive. Sojourners:
pilgrims -- The first Word properly means, Those who are in a strange House;
the second, those who are in a strange Country. You sojourn in the Body; you
are pilgrims in this World: Abstain from Desires of any Thing in this House, or
in this Country.

V. 12. Honest -- Not barely unblameable, but virtuous in every Respect. But
our Language sinks under the Force, Beauty, and Copiousness of the original
Expressions: that they by your good works which they shall behold -- See with
their own Eyes, may glorify God -- By owning his Grace in you, and following
your Example: in the day of visitation -- The Time when he shall give them
fresh Offers of his Mercy.

V. 13. Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man -- To every secular Power.
Instrumentally these are ordained by Men; but originally all their Power is
from GOD.

V. 14. Or to subordinate governors, or Magistrates.

V. 15. The ignorance -- Of them who blame you, because they do not know you: A
strong Motive to pity them.

V. 16. As free -- Yet obeying Governors, for GOD's Sake.

V. 17. Honor all men -- As being made in the Image of GOD, bought by his Son,
and designed for his Kingdom: Honor the king -- Pay him all that Regard both
in Affection and Action which the Laws of GOD and Man require.

V. 18. Servants -- Literally, Household servants: with all fear of offending
them or GOD: Not only to the good -- Tender, kind; and gentle -- Mild, easily
forgiving.

V. 19. For conscience toward God -- From a pure Desire of pleasing Him: grief
-- Severe Treatment.

V. 21. Hereunto are ye -- Christians, called -- To suffer wrongfully, leaving
you an example -- When he went to GOD, that ye might follow his steps -- Of
Innocence and Patience.

V. 22. In all these Instances the Example of Christ is peculiarly adapted to
the State of Servants, who easily Slide either into sin or guile, reviling
their Fellow Servants, or threatening them, the natural Result of Anger without
Power. He committed himself to him that judges righteously -- The only solid
Ground of Patience in Affliction.

V. 23. In all these Instances the Example of Christ is peculiarly adapted to
the State of Servants, who easily Slide either into sin or guile, reviling
their Fellow Servants, or threatening them, the natural Result of Anger without
Power. He committed himself to him that judges righteously -- The only solid
Ground of Patience in Affliction.

V. 24. Who himself bore our sins -- That is, the Punishment due to them, in
his afflicted, torn, dying body on the tree -- The Cross, whereon chiefly
Slaves or Servants were wont to suffer: that we being dead to sin -- Wholly
delivered both from the Guilt and Power of it: (Indeed without an Atonement
first made for the Guilt, we could never have been delivered from the Power)
might live to righteousness -- Which is One only. The sins we had committed and
He bore, were manifold.

V. 25. The bishop -- The kind Observer, Inspector, or Overseer of your souls.

III.
In like manner, ye wives, be subject to your own husbands, that if any obey
not the word, they also may, without the word, be won by the deportment of the
wives, deportment joined with fear: adorning of curling the hair, and of
wearing gold, or of putting on apparel, But the hidden man of the heart,
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God is of great
price. Genesis xviii. 12.
Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord, whose children ye are while ye do
well, and are not afraid with any amazement. In like manner, the woman, as the
weaker vessel; giving them honor, as being also joint-heirs of the grace of
life, that your prayers be not hindered.

Finally, Be ye all of one mind, sympathizing with each other, love as
brethren, be pitiful, be courteous: Psalm xxxiv. 13, etc.
let him that desires to love life and to see good days, refrain his tongue
from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile: are over the righteous, and
his ears are open to their prayer; but the face of the Lord is against them
that do evil. And who is he that will harm you, are ye; and fear ye not their
fear, neither be ye troubled, But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts: be
always ready to give an answer to every one that asks you a reason of the
hope that is in you, with meekness and fear: it is better, if the will of God
be so, to suffer for well-doing than for evil-doing. the water:

V. 1. If any -- He speaks tenderly: won -- Gained over to Christ.

V. 2. Joined with a loving fear of dispieasing them.

V. 3. Three Things are here expressly forbidden, curling the hair, wearing gold
(by Way of Ornament) and putting on costly or gay apparel. These therefore
ought never to be allowed, much less defended by Christians.

V. 4. The hidden man of the heart -- Complete inward Holiness, which implies a
meek and quiet spirit. A meek spirit gives no Trouble willingly to any: A quiet
spirit bears all Wrongs without being troubled: in the sight of God -- Who
looks at the Heart. All Superfluity of Dress contributes more to Pride and
Anger than is generally supposed. The Apostle seems to have his Eye to this by
substituting meekness and quietness in the Room of the Ornaments he forbids. "I
do not regard these Things;" is often said by those whose Hearts are wrapped up
in them. But offer to take them away, and you touch the very Idol of their
Soul. Some indeed only dress elegantly that they may be looked on: that is,
they squander away their LORD's Talent, to gain Applause: Thus making Sin to
beget Sin, and then plead one in Excuse of the other.

V. 5. The adorning of those holy women, who trusted in God -- And therefore
did not act thus from servile Fear, was, 1. Their meek Subjection to their
Husbands, 2. Their quiet spirit, not afraid or amazed, and 3. Their unblameable
Behavior, doing all Things well.

V. 6. Whose children ye are -- In a spiritual as well as natural Sense, and
entitled to the same Inheritance, while ye discharge your conjugal Duties, not
out of Fear, but for Conscience Sake.

V. 7. Dwell with the woman according to knowledge -- Knowing they are weak,
and therefore to be used with all Tenderness: Yet do not despise them for this,
but give them honor -- Both in Heart, in Word, and in Action, as those who are
called to be joint-heirs of that eternal Life which ye and they hope to receive
by the free Grace of GOD: that your prayers be not hindered -- On the one Part
or the other. All Sin hinders Prayer, particularly Anger. Any Thing at which we
are angry, is never more apt to come into our Mind than when we are at Prayer.
And those who do not forgive, will find no Forgiveness from GOD.

V. 8. Finally -- This Part of the Epistle reaches to chapter iv. 11. The Apostle
seems to have added the rest afterward. Sympathizing -- Rejoicing and
sorrowing together: love -- All Believers, as brethren, be pitiful -- Toward
the Afflicted; be courteous -- To all Men. Courtesy is, such a Behavior toward
Equals, and Inferiors, as shows Respect mixed with Love.

V. 9. Ye are called to inherit a blessing -- Therefore their Railing cannot
hurt you. And by blessing them you imitate GOD who blesses you.

V. 11. Let him seek -- To live peacebly with all Men, and pursue it -- Even
when it seems to flee from him.

V. 12. The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous -- For Good: Anger appears
in the whole Fac^: Love chiefly in the Eyes.

V. 13. Who is he that will harm your? -- None can.

V. 14. But if ye should suffer -- This is no Harm to you, but a Good: fear ye
not their fear -- The very Words of the Septuagint. Isa. viii. 12, 13^ Let not
that Fear be in you, which the Wicked feel.

V. 15. But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts -- Have an holy Fear and a
full Trust in his wife Providence: the ^ope -- Of eternal Life with meekness --
For Anger would hurt your Caufe as well as your Soul: and fear -- A filial Fear
of offending GOD, and a Jealousy over yourselves, lest ye speak amiss.

V. 16. Having a good conscience -- So much the more beware of Anger, to which
the very Consciousness of your Innocence may betray you. Join with a good
Conscience, Meekness and Fear, and you obtain a complete Victory: Your good
conversation in Christ -- That is, which flows from Faith in Him.

V. 17. It is infinitely better, if it be the will of God ye should suffer. His
permissive Will appears from his Providence.

V. 18. For -- This is undoubtedly best, whereby we are most conformed to
Christ. Now Christ suffered once -- To suffer no more, for sins -- Not his own,
but ours: the just for the unjust -- The Word signifies, not only them who have
wronged their Neighbors, but those who have transgressed any of the Commands
of GOD; as the preceding Word Just, denotes a Person who has fulfilled, not
barely social Duties, but all kind of Righteousness: that he might bring us to
God -- Now to his gracious Favor, hereafter to his blissful Presence, by the
same Steps, of Suffering and of Glory: being put to death in the flesh -- As
Man, but raised to life by the Spirit -- Both by his own Divine Power, and by
the Power of the Holy Ghost.

V. 19. By which Spirit he preached -- Through the Ministry of Noah, to the
spirits in prison -- The unholy Men before the Flood; who were then reserved by
the Justice of GOD as in a Prison, till he executed the Sentence upon them all:
And are now also reserved to the Judgment of the Great Day.

V. 20. When the long-suffering of God waited -- For an hundred and twenty
Years, all the Time the ark was preparing: During which Noah warned them all,
To flee from the Wrath to come.

V. 21. The antitype whereof -- The Thing typified by the Ark, even baptism,
now saves us -- That is, Through the Water of Baptism we are saved from the
Sin which overwhelms the World as a Flood: Not indeed the bare outward Sign,
but the inward Grace; a Divine Consciousness, that both our Persons and our
Actions are accepted, through him who died and rose again for us.

V. 22. Angels, and authorities, and powers -- That is, All Orders both of
Angels and Men.

IV.
Seeing then Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves also with
the same mind: (for he that has suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin)
That ye may no longer live the rest of your time in the flesh, you, Who shall
give account to him that is ready to judge the living and the dead. Prove. x. 12.
. so minister it one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.
If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God: If any man minister, let
him minister as of the ability which God supplieth, that God in all things may
be glorified through Jesus Christ, whose is the glory and the might for ever
and ever. Amen.

Beloved, are ye; for the Spirit of glory, and of God rests upon you: on
their part he is blasphemed, but on your part he is glorified. any suffer as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God on this behalf. is
come for judgment to begin at the house of God: but if it begin at us, what
shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God? Prev. xi. 31.
righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? to
him in well-doing, as unto a faithful creator.

V. 1. Arm yourselves with the same mind -- Which will be Armor of Proof
against all your Enemies: for he that has suffered in the flesh -- That has
so suffered as to be thereby made inwardly and truly conformable to the
Sufferings of Christ: has ceased from sin -- Is delivered from it.

V. 2. That ye may no longer live in the flesh -- Even in this mortal Body: to
the desires of men -- Either your own or those of others. These are various:
But the Will of God is one.

V. 3. Revellings, banquetings -- Have these Words any Meaning now? They had,
Seventeen Hundred Years ago. Then the former meant, Meetings to eat, Meetings,
the direct End of which was, To please the Taste; the latter, Meetings to
drink: Both of which Christians then ranked with abominable Idolatries.

V. 4. The same -- As ye did once: speaking evil of you -- As proud, singular,
silly, wicked, and the like.

V. 5. Who shall give account -- Of this as well as all their other Ways, to
him who is ready -- So says represents him now.

V. 6. For to this and was the gospel preached -- Ever since it was given to
Adam: to them that are now dead -- In their several Generations, that they
might be judged -- That though they were judged in the flesh according to the
manner of men -- With rash, unrighteous Judgment, they might live according to
the Will and Word of GOD, in the Spirit; the Soul renewed after his Image.

V. 7. But the end of all things -- And so of their Wrongs, and your
Sufferings, is at hand: be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer --
Temperance helps Watchfulness, and both of them help Prayer. Watch, that ye may
pray, and pray that ye may watch.

V. 8. Love covers a multitude of sins -- Yea, Love covers all things. He
that loves another, covers his Faults, how many soever they be. He turns away
his own Eyes from them; and, as far as is possible, hides them from others. And
he continually prays, that all the Sinner's Iniquities may be forgiven and his
Sins covered. Mean-time the GOD of Love measures to him with the same measure
into his bosom.

V. 9. One to another -- Ye that are of different Towns or Countries, without
murmuring -- With all Cheerfulness.

V. 10. As every one has received a gift -- Spiritual or Temporal, Ordinary or
Extraordinary (although the latter seems primarily intended:) so minister it one
to another -- Employ it for the common Good: as good stewards of the manifold
grace of God -- The Talents wherewith his free Love has entrusted you.

V. 11. If any man speak, let him -- In his whole Conversation, public and
private, speak as the oracles of God -- Let all his Words be according to this
Pattern, both as to Matter and Manner, more especially in public. By this Mark
we may always know who are, so far, the true or false Prophets. The oracles of
God teach that Men should repent, believe, obey. He that treats of Faith, and
leaves out Repentance, or does not enjoin practical Holiness to believers, does
not speak as the Oracles of GOD: He does not preach Christ, let him think as
highly of himself as he will. If any man minister -- Serve his Brother in Love,
whether in Spirituals or Temporals, let him minister as of the ability which
God gives -- That is, humbly and diligently, ascribing all his Power to GOD,
and using it with his Might: Whose is the glory -- Of his Wisdom, which teaches
us to speak, and the might -- Which enables us to act.

V. 12. Wonder not at the burning which is among you -- This is the literal
Meaning of the Expression. It seems to include both Martyrdom itself, which so
frequently was by Fire, and all the other Sufferings joined with or previous to
it; which is permitted by the Wisdom of GOD for your trial. Be not surprised at
this.

V. 13. But as ye partake of the sufferings of Christ, (ver. 1.) while ye
suffer for his Sake, rejoice in Hope of more abundant Glory. For the Measure of
Glory answers the Measure of Suffering; and much more abundantly.

V. 14. If ye are reproached for Christ -- Reproaches and cruel Mockings were
always one Part of their Sufferings: the Spirit of glory and of God rests
upon you -- The same Spirit which was upon Christ, Luke iv. 18. He is here
termed, the Spirit of glory: conquering all Reproach and Shame, and the Spirit
of God, whose Son, Jesus Christ is. On their part he is blasphemed, but on your
part he is glorified -- That is, While they are blaspheming Christ, you glorify
him in the Midst of your Sufferings, v. 16.

V. 15. Let none of you deservedly suffer, as an evil-doer -- In any Kind.

V. 16. Let him glorify God -- Who gives him the Honor so to suffer, and so
great a Reward for Suffering.

V. 17. The time is come for judgment to begin at the house of God -- GOD first
visits his Church, and that both in Justice and Mercy: What shall the end be of
them that obey not the gospel? -- How terribly will He visit them! The
Judgments, which are milder at the Beginning, grow more and more severe. But
good Men, having already sustained their Part, are only Spectators of the
Miseries of the Wicked.

V. 18. If the righteous scarcely be saved -- Escape with the utmost
Difficulty, where shall the ungodly -- The Man who knows not GOD, and the open
sinner appear -- In that Day of Vengeance? The Salvation here primarily spoken
of, is of a temporal Nature. But we may apply the Words to eternal Things, and
then they are still more awful.

V. 19. Let them that suffer according to the will of God -- Both for a good
Cause, and in a right Spirit, commit to him their Souls -- (Whatever becomes of
the Body) as a sacred Depositum, in well-doing -- Be this your Care, To do and
suffer well: He will take Care of the rest: as unto a faithful creator -- In
whose Truth, Love, and Power, ye may safely trust.

V.
The elders that are among you I exhort, who am a fellow-elder, and a witness
of the sufferings of Christ, and likewise a partaker of the glory which shall
be revealed. it not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy gain, but of a
ready mind, James iv. 6. Prove. iii. 34.
for God resists the pround, but gives grace to the humble.

Now the God of all grace, be the glory and the might for ever and ever. Amen.

By Silvanus, church that is at Babylon, elected together with you, saluteth
you, and Mark my son. be with you all that are in Christ.

V. 1. I who (...) a fellow-elder -- So the first, though not the Head, of the
Apostles appositely and modestly ^^^es himself: and a witness of the sufferings
of Christ -- Having seen ^i^ suffer and now suffering for him.

V. 2. Feed the flock -- Both by Doctrine and Discipline, not by constraint --
Unwillingly as a Burden, not for filthy gain -- Which, if it be the Motive of
Acting, is filthy beyond Expression. O consider this, ye that leave one Flock,
and go to another, merely "because there is more gain, a large Salary!" Is it
not astonishing, that Men "can see no harm in this?" That it is not only
practiced, but avowed all over the Nation?

V. 3. Neither as lording over the heritage -- Behaving in a haughty,
domineering Manner, as though you had Dominion over their Conscience. The Word
translated Heritage, is literally the Portions. There is One Flock, under the
one chief Shepherd; but many portions of this, under many Pastors: but being
examples to the flack -- This procures the most ready and free Obedience.

V. 5. Ye younger, be subject to the elder -- In Years, and be all -- Elder or
younger, subject to ^ach other -- Let every one be ready, upon all Occasions,
to give up his own Will. Be clothed with humility -- Bind it on (so the Word
signifies) so that no Force may be able to ^eat it from you.

V. 6. The hand of God -- Is in all Troubles.

V. 7. Casting all your care upon him -- In every Want or Pressure.

V. 8. But in the mean Time Watch. There is a close Connection between this, and
the duly cas^ing our care upon him. How deeply had St. Peter himself suffered
for want of Watching^ Be vigilant -- As if he had said, Awake and keep awake.
Sleep no more: Be this your Care. As a roaring lion -- Full of Rage, seeking --
With all Su^ty likewise, whom be may devour or swallow up -- Both Soul and Body.

V. 9. Be the more steadfast, as ye know the same kind of afflictions are
accomplished in -- That is, suffered by your brethren, till the Meature
allotted them is filled up.

V. 10. Now the God of all grace -- By which alone the whole Work is begun,
continued and finished in your Soul: after ye have suffered awhile -- A very
little while compared with Eternity: himself -- Ye have only to watch and
resist the Devil: The rest GOD will perform: perfect -- That no Defect may
remain: stablish -- That nothing may overthrow you: strengthen -- That ye may
conquer all adverse Power: and settle you -- As an House upon a Rock. So the
Apostle, being converted, does now strengthen his brethren.

V. 12. As I suppose -- As I judge, upon good Grounds, though not by immediate
Inspiration, I have written -- That is, sent my Letter by him, adding my
testimony -- To that which ye before heard from Paul, that this is the true
Gospel of the grace of GOD.

V. 13. The church that is at Babylon -- Near which St. Peter probably was,
when he wrote this Epistle; elected together with you -- Partaking of the same
Faith with you. Mark -- It seems the Evangelist, my son -- Probably converted
by St. Peter. And he had occasionally served him, as a son in the gospel.

NOTES ON The Second Epistle General of St. PETER.
THE Parts of this Epistle, wrote not long before St. Peter's Death, and the
Destruction of Jerusalem, with the same Design as the former, are likewise
Three: I. The Inscription: C. i. 1. 2 II. A farther shirring up of the Minds of
true Believers, in which 1. He exhorts them, having received the precious Gift,
to give all Diligence to grow in grace: 3-11 2. To this he incites them 1. From
the Firmness of true Teachers, 12-21 2. From the Wickedness of false Teachers,
C. ii. 1-22 3. He guards them against Impostors, 1. By confuting their Error,
C. iii. 1-9 2. By describing the Great Day, adding suitable Exhortations, 10-14
III. The Conclusion, in which he 1. Declares his Agreement with St. Paul, 15,
16 2. Repeats the Sum of the Epistle, 17, 18

II. St. PETER.
I.
SIMON PETER, a servant and an apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that have
obtained like precious faith with us, through the righteousness of our God and
Savior Jesus Christ, And to knowledge temperance, you neither slothful nor
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. you: showed me.

For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, Matt. xvii. 5.
; This is my beloved Son, in your hearts:

V. 1. To them that have obtained -- Not by their own Works, but by the free
Grace of GOD, like precious faith with us -- The Apostles. The Faith of those
who have not seen, being equally precious with that of those who saw our LORD
in the Flesh: through the righteousness -- Both Active and Passive, of our God
and Savior -- It is this alone by which the Justice of GOD is satisfied, and
for the Sake of which He gives this precious Faith.

V. 2. Through the -- Divine, experimental Knowledge of GOD and of Christ.

V. 3. As his divine power has given us all things -- There is a wonderful
Cheerfulness in this Exordium, which begins with the Exhortation itself, that
pertain to life and godlinese -- To the present natural Life, and to the
Continuance and Increase of spiritual Life, through that Divine Knowledge of
him -- Of Christ, who has called us by -- His own glorious Power, to eternal
Glory -- As the End, by Christian Virtue -- Or Fortitude, as the Means.

V. 4. Through which -- Glory and Fortitude, he has given us exceeding great
-- And inconceivably precious promises -- Both the Promises and the Things
promised, which follow in their due Season, that, sustained and encouraged by
the Promises, we may obtain all that he has promised: that, having escaped the
manifold corruption which is in the world -- From that fruitful Fountain, evil
desire: ye may become partakers of the divine nature -- Being renewed in the
Image of GOD, and having Communion with him, so as to dwell in GOD and GOD in
you.

V. 5. For this very reason -- Because GOD has given you so great Blessings,
giving all diligence -- It is a very uncommon Word, which we render giving. It
literally signifies, bringing in by the by, or over and above: Implying, that
GOD works the Work; yet not unless we are diligent. Our Diligence is to follow
the Gift of GOD, and is followed by an Increase of all his Gifts; add to -- And
in all the other Gifts of GOD. Superadd the latter, without losing the former.
The Greek Word properly means lead up, as in a Dance, one of these after the
other, in a beautiful Order. Your faith, that evidence of things not seen,
termed before the knowledge of God and of Christ -- The Root of all Christian
Graces; courage -- Whereby ye may conquer all Enemies and Difficulties, and
execute whatever Faith dictates. In this most beautiful Connection, each
preceding Grace leads to the following: Each following, tempers and perfects
the preceding. They are set down in the Order of Nature, rather than the Order
of Time. For though every Grace bears a Relation to every other, yet here they
are so nicely ranged, that those which have the closest Dependence on each
other, are placed together; and to your courage knowledge -- Wisdom, teaching
how to exercise it on all Occasions.

V. 6. And to your knowledge temperance, and to your temperance patience --
Bear and forbear; sustain and abstain. Deny yourself and take up your Cross
daily. The more Knowledge you have, the more renounce your own Will; indulge
yourself the less. Knowledge puffs up and the great Boasters of Knowledge
(the Gnostics) were those the (...) Grace of GOD into wantonness. But see that
your Knowledge be attended with Tempera^. Christian Temperance implies the
voluntary abstaining from all Pleasure which does not lead to GOD. It extends
to all Things inward and outward: the due Government of every Thought, as well
as Affection. It is using the world, so to use all outward, and so to restrain
all inward Things, that they may become a Means of what is spiritual; a
Scaling-Ladder to ascend to what is above. Intemperance is to abuse the World.
He that uses any thing below, looking no higher, and getting no farther, is
intemperate. He that uses the Creature only so as to attain to more of the
Creator, is alone temperate, and walks as Christ himself walked. And to
patience, godliness -- Its proper Support: A continual Sense of GOD's Presence
and Providence, and a filial Fear of and Confidence in him. Otherwise your
Patience may be Pride, Surliness, Stoicism; but not Christianity.

V. 7. And to godliness brotherly kindness -- No Sullenness, Sternness,
Moroseness: Sour Godliness, so called, is of the Devil. Of Christian Godliness
it may always be said, Mild, sweet, serene, and tender is her Mood,
Nor grave with Sternness, nor with Lightness free:
Against Example resolutely good,
Fervent in Zeal, and warm in Charity."


And to brotherly kindness, love -- The pure and perfect Love of GOD and of all
Mankind. The Apostle here makes an Advance upon the preceding Article,
brotherly kindness, which seems only to relate to the Love of Christians toward
one another.

V. 8. For these being really in you -- Added to your Faith, and abounding --
Increasing more and more, otherwise we fall short, make you neither slothful
nor unfruitful -- Do not suffer you to be faint in your Mind, or without Fruit
in your Lives. If there is less Faithfulness, less Care and Watchfulness, since
we were pardoned, than there was before, and less Diligence, less outward
Obedience, than when we were seeking Remission of Sin, we are both slothful and
unfruitful in the knowledge of Christ -- That is, in the Faith, which then
cannot work by Love.

V. 9. But be that wants these -- That does not add them to his Faith, is
blind -- The Eyes of his Understanding are again closed. He cannot see GOD, or
his pardoning Love. He has lost the Evidence of Things not seen: Not able to
see afar off -- Literally purblind. He has lost Sight of the precious Promises:
Perfect Love and Heaven are equally out of his Sight. Nay, he cannot now see
what himself once enjoyed: Having as it were forgot the purification from his
former sins -- Scarce knowing what he himself then felt, when his Sins were
forgiven.

V. 10. Wherefore -- Considering the miserable State of these Apostates,
brethren -- St. Peter no where uses this Appellation in either of his Epistles,
but in this important Exhortation, be the more diligent -- By Courage,
Knowledge, Temperance, etc. to make your calling and election firm -- GOD has
called you by his Word and his Spirit; he has elected you, separated you from
the World, through Sanctification of the Spirit. O cast not away these
inestimable Benesits! If ye are thus diligent to make your Election firm, ye
shall never finally fall.

V. 11. For if ye do so, an entrance shall be ministered to you abundantly into
the everlasting kingdom -- Ye shall go in full Triumph to Glory.

V. 12. Wherefore -- Since everlasting Destruction attends your Sloth,
everlasting Glory your Diligence, I will not neglect always to remind you of
th^se things -- Therefore he wrote another, so soon after the former Epistle.
though ye are siablished in the present truth -- That Truth which I am now
declaring.

V. 13. In this tabernacle -- Or tent. How short is our Abode in the Body! How
easily does a Believer pass out of it!

V. 14. Even as the Lord Jesus s^^^^d me -- In the Manner which he foretold,
John xxi. 18, etc. It is not improbable, He had also Showed him, That the Time
was now drawing nigh.

V. 15. That ye may be able -- By having this Epistle among you.

V. 16. These things are worthy to be always bad in remembrance. For they are
not cunningly devised fables -- Like those common among the Heathens; while we
made known to you the power and coming -- That is, the powerful Coming of
Christ in Glory. But if what they advanced of Christ was not true, if it was of
their own Invention, then to impose such a Lie on the World, as it was in the
very Nature of Things, above all human Power to defend, and to do this at the
Expense of Life and all Things, only to inrage the whole World, Jews and
Gentiles, against them, was no cunning, but was the greatest folly that Men
could have been guilty of; but were eyewitnesses of bls majesty -- At his
Transfiguration, which was a Specimen of his Glory at the last Day.

V. 17. For he received divine honor and inexpressible glory -- Shining from
Heaven, above the Brightness of the Sun, when there came such a voice from the
excellent glory -- That is, from GOD the Father.

V. 18. And we -- Peter, James and John. St. John was still alive: being with
him in the holy mount -- Made so by that glorious Manisestation, as Mount Horeb
was of old. Exodus iii. 4, 5.

V. 19. And we -- St. Peter here speaks in the Name of all Christians, have the
word of prophecy -- The Words of Moses, Isaiah, and all the Prophets, are one
and the same Word, every Way consistent with itself. St. Peter does not cite
any particular Passage, but speaks of their entire Testimony, more confirmed --
By that Display of his glorious Majesty; to which Word ye do well that ye take
heed, as to a lamp which shone in a dark place -- Wherein there was neither
Light, nor Window. Such anciently was the whole World, except that little Spot
where this Lamp shone, till the day should dawn -- Till the full Light of the
Gospel should break through the Darkness: As is the Difference between the
Light of a Lamp and that of the Day, such is that between the Light of the Old
Testament and of the New, and the morning star -- Jesus Christ, (Rev. xxii.
16.) arise in your hearts -- Be revealed in you.

V. 20. Ye do well, as knowing this, that no scripture proplecy is of private
interpretation. It is not any Man's own Word. It is GOD, not the Prophet
himself, who thereby interprets Things till then unknown.

V. 21. For prophecy came not of old by the will of man -- Of any mere Man
whatever, but the boly men of God -- Devoted to him, and set apart by him for
that Purpose, spoke, and wrote, being moved -- Literally carried. They were
purely passive therein.

II.
But there were false prophets also among the people, as there shall likewise
be false teachers among you, who will privately bring in destructive heresies,
even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift
destruction. For if God spared not the angels that sinned, them down to hell,
delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment, and
spared not the old world, person, a preacher of righteousness) bringing a flood
on the world of the ungodly; them into ashes, setting them as an example to
them that should afterward live ungodly: their unlawful deeds) The Lord
knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, their own corruption, the
son of Bosor, who loved the reward of unrighteousness. words of vanity, they
ensnare in the desires of the flesh, in wantonness, those that were entirely
escaped from them that live in error. entangled therein and overcome, their
last state is worse than the first. it, to turn from the holy commandment
delivered to them. Prove. xxvi. 11.
dog is turned to his own vomit, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing
in the mire.

V. 1. But there were false prophets also -- As well as true, among the people
-- Of Israel. Those that spoke, even the Truth, when GOD had not sent them; and
also those that were truly sent of him, and yet corrupted or softened their
Message, were false prophets, as there shall be false -- As well as true,
teachers among you, who will privately bring in -- Into the Church, destructive
ber^sits -- They first, by denying the LORD, introduced destructive (...), that
is, Divisions; or they occasioned first these Divisions; and then were given up
to a reprobate Mind, even to deny the LORD that bought them. Either the
Heresies are the Effect of denying the LORD, or the denying the LORD was the
Consequence of the Heresies, even denying -- Both by their Doctrine and their
Works, the Lord that bought them -- With his own Blood. Yet these very Men
perith everlastingly. Therefore Christ bought even them that perish.

V. 2. The way of truth will be evil spoken of -- By those who blead all, false
and true Christians together.

V. 3. They will make merchandise of you -- Only use you to gain by you, as
Merchants do their Wares. Whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not --
Was long ago determined, and will be executed speedily. All Sinners are
adjudged to Destruction; and GOD's punishing some, proves he will punish the
rest.

V. 4. Cast them down to bell -- The bottomless Pit, a Place of unknown Misery;
delivered them -- Like condemned Criminals to safe Custody, as if bound with
the strongest chains, in a Dungeon of darkness to be reserved unto the judgment
of the Great Day: Though still those chains do not hinder their often walking
^p and down, seeking whom they may devour.

V. 5. And spared not the old -- The Antediluvian world (but be preserved Noab
the eighth person -- That is Nuah, and seven others, a preacher, as well as
Practiser of righteousness) bringing a flood on the world of the ungodly --
Whose Numbers stood them in no Stead.

V. 9. It plainly appears from these Instances, that the Lord knows -- Has
both Wisdom, and Power, and Will, to deliver the godly out of all temptations,
and to punish the Ungodly.

V. 10. Chiefly them tha^ walk after the fi^sh -- Corrupt Nature, particularly
in the (...) uncleanness, and dis^ise government -- The Authority of their
Governors; dignities -- Pertons in Authority.

V. 11. Whereas angels -- When they appear before the Lord (Job. i. 6. ii. ^.)
to give an Account of what they have seen and done on the Farth.

V. 12. Savage as (...)-bea^^s, several of which in the present disordered
State of the World, seem born to be taken and distroyed.

V. 13. They count it pleasure to riot in the day time -- They glory in doing
it in the Face of the Sun. They are spots in themselves, blemisles to any
Church, sporting themselves with their own deceivings -- Making a Jest of those
whom they deceive, and even jesting, while they are deceiving their own Souls.

V. 15. The way of Balaam, the son of Bosor -- (So the Chaldcans pronounced
what the Jews termed Bear) namely, the Way of Covetousness; who loved --
Earnestly desired, though he did not dare to take the reward of unrighteousness
-- The Money which Balak would have given him, for cursing Israel.

V. 16. The beast -- Though naturally dumb.

V. 17. Fountains and clouds promise Water; so do these promise, but do not
perform.

V. 18. They ensnare in the desires of the flesh -- Allowing them to gratify so
he unholy Desire, those who were before entirely escaped from the Spirit, Cu to
a and Company of the a that live in error -- In Sin.

V. 19. While they promise them liberty -- From needless Restraints and
Scruples from the Bondage of the Law, (...) are slaves of corruption -- Even
Sin, the vilest of all Bondage.

V. 20. For if after they -- Who are thus ensnared, have escaped the (...) of
(...) world -- The Sins which pollute all who know not GOD, (...) the knowledge
of Christ -- That is through Faith in Him. (c. i. 3.) they are again intarglid
therein, and overcome, their last state is worse than the (...) -- More
inexcusable and causing a greater Damnation.

V. 21. The commardment -- The whole Law of GOD, once not only delivered to
their Ears, but written in their Hearts.

V. 22. Thed^g, the saw -- Such are a^l Men in the Sight of GOD before they
receive his Grace, and after they have made Shipwreck of the Faith.

III.
This second epistle, beloved, I now write to you, in both which I stir up your
pure minds by way of remembrance, they were from the beginning of the creation.
and in the water, Psalm xc. 4.
But, beloved, be not ye ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the
Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. to be in all holy
conversation and godliness, the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens
being on fire shall be dissolved and the elements shall melt with fervent heat?
Nevertheless we look for new heavens and a new earth, Isaiah lxv. 17. lxvi. 22.
promise, wherein dwells righteousness. Romans ii. 4.
, they do also the other scriptures, to their own destruction.

Ye, these things before, beware, lest ye also being led away by the error of
the wicked, in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: To him be
the glory both now and to the day of eternity! Amen.

V. 2. Be the more mindful thereof, because ye know scoffers will come first --
Before the LORD comes, walking after their own evil desires -- Here is the
Origin of the Error, the ^oot of Libertinism. Do we not see this eminently
fulfilled?

V. 4. Saying, Where is the promise of his coming -- To Judgment? (They do not
even deign to name him) We see no Sign of any such Thing. For ever since the
fathers -- Our first Ancestors, fell a^, all things -- Heaven, Water, Earth,
contin^ as they were from the beginning of the creation -- Without any such
material Change, as might make us believe they will ever end.

V. 5. For this they are willingly ignorant of -- They do not care to know or
cousider, that by the almighty word of God Which bounds the Duration of all
Things, so that it cannot be either longer or shorter; of old -- Before the
Flood, the aereal heavens were, and the earth -- Not as it is now, but standing
out of the water and in the water -- Perhaps the interior Globe of Earth was
fixed in the Midst of the Great Deep, the Abyss of Water; the Shell or exterior
Globe, standing out of the water, covering the Great Deep. This or some other
great and manifest Difference between the original and present Constitation of
the terriqueous Globe, seems then to have been so generally known, that St.
Peter charges their Ignorance of it totally upon their Wilfulness.

V. 6. Through which -- Heaven and Earth, the Windows of Heaven being opened,
and the Fou^tains of the great Deep broken up, the world that then was -- The
whole Antediluvian Race, being overflowed with water, perished -- And the
Heavens and Earth themselves, though they did not perish, yet underwent a great
Change. So little Ground have these Scoffers for saying, That all things
continue as they were from the creation.

V. 7. But the heavens and the earth that are now -- Since the Flood are
reserved unto fire, at the day wherein GOD will judge the World, and punish the
Ungodly with everlasting destruction.

V. 8. But be not ye ignorant -- Whatever they are, of this one thing -- Which
casts much Light on the Point in Hand, that one day i^ with the Lord as a
thousand ^ears, and a thousand years as one day. Moses had said, (Psalm. xc. 4.)
a thousand years in thy sight are as one day, which St. Peter applies, with
regard to the last Day; so as to denote both his Eternity, whereby he excee^s
all Measure of Time in his Essence and in his Operation: His Knowledge, to
which all Things paster to come are present every Moment: His Power, which
needs no long Delay, in order to bring its Work to Perfection: and his Long
suffering, which excludes all Impatience of Expectation and Desire of making
Hade. One day is with the Lord as a thousand years -- That is, In one Day, in
one Moment. He can do the Work of a thousand Years. Therefore He is not sl^: He
is always equally ready to fulfill his Promise: and a thousand years are a^ one
day -- That is, no Delay is long to GOD. A thousand Years are as one Day to the
eternal GOD. Therefore he is long-suffering; He gives us Space for Repentance,
without any Inconvenience to Himself. In a Word, With GOD Time passes neither
slower, nor swifter, than is suitable to Him and his Economy. Nor can there be
any Reason, why it should be necessary for Him, either to delay or hasten the
End of all Things. How can we comprehend this? If we could comprehend it, St.
Peter needed not to have added, With the Lord.

V. 9. The Lord is not slow -- As if the Time fixed for it were past, concerning
his promise -- Which shall surely be fulfilled in its Season: but his
long-suffering toward us -- Children of Men, not willing that any -- Soul
which He bath made should perish.

V. 10. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief -- Suddenly, unexpectedly,
in which the beavens shall pass away with a great noise -- Surprizingly expressed
by the very Sound of the Original Word, the elements shall melt with servent
beat -- The elements seem to mean, the Sun, Moon, and Stars: Not the Four,
commonly so called: for Air and Water cannot melt, and the Earth is mentioned
immediately after, the earth and all the works -- Whether of Nature or Art,
that are therein shall be burnt up -- And has not God already abundantly
provided for this? 1. By the Stores of subterranean Fire, which are so
frequently bursting out at Aetna, V^suvius, Heela, and many other burning
Mountains: 2. By the Ethereal (vulgarly called Electrical) Fire, diffused
through the whole Globe; which if the secret Chain that now binds it up, were
loosed, would immediately dissolve the whole Frame of Nature: 3. By Comets, one
of which if it touch the Earth in its Course toward the Sun, must needs strike
it into that Abyss of Fire. If in its Return from the Sun, when it is heated
(as a great Man computes) two thousand Times hotter than a red-hot Cannon-ball,
it must destroy all Vegetables and Animal, long before their Contact, and soon
after burn it up.

V. 11. Seeing then that all these things are dissolved -- To the Eye of Faith
it appears as done already. All these things mentioned before: All that are
included in that scriptural Expression, The heavens and the earth, that is, the
Universe. On the fourth Day GOD made the stars, (Genesis i. 16.) which will be
dissolved together with the Earth. They are deceived therefore who restrain
either the History of the Creation, or this Description of the Destrustion of
the World, to the Earth and lower Heavens, imagining the Stars to be mere
ancient than the Farth and to survive it. Both the ^istolution and Renovation
are ascribed, not to the one heaven which surrounds the Parth, but to the
heavens in general (ver. 10, 13.) without any Restriction or Limitation. What
persons ought ye to be, in all holy ^versation -- With Men, and godliness --
Toward your Creator?

V. 12. Hastening on -- As it were, by your earnest Desires and fervent Prayers,
the coming of the day of God -- Many Myriads of Days He grants to Men: One, the
last, is the Day of GOD Himself.

V. 13. We look for new heavens and a new earth -- Raised, as it were, out of
the Ashes of the Old: (We look for an entire New State of Things) wherein
dwells righteousness -- Only righteous Spirits. How great a Mystery!

V. 14. Labor -- That whenever he comes, ye may be found in peace -- May meet
him without Terror, being sprinkled with his Blood, and sanctified by his
Spirit, so as to be without spot and blameless.

V. 15. And account the long-suffering of our Lord salvation -- Not only
designed to lead Men to repentance, but actually conducing thereto; a precious
Means of saving many more Souls: At our beloved brother Paul also has written
to you -- This refers not only to the single Sentence preceding, but to all
that went before. St. Paul had written to the same Effect concerning the End of
the World, in several Parts of his Epistles, and particularly in the Epistle to
the Hebrews.

V. 16. As also in all hi^epistles -- St. Peter wrote this a little before his
own and St. Paul's Martyrdom. St. Paul therefore had now written all his
Epistles; and even from this Expression we may learn that St. Peter had read
them all, perhaps sent to him by St. Paul himself. Nor was he at all discusted
by what St. Paul had written concerning him, in the Epistle to the Galatians:
speaking of these things -- Namely, of the Coming of our LORD, delayed through
his Long suftering, and of the Circumstances preceding and accompanying it;
which Things the unlearned -- They who are not taught of GOD: and the unstable
-- Wavering, double-minded, unsettled Men, wrest -- As though Christ would not
come: as they do also the other scriptures -- Therefore St. Paul's Writings
were now Part of the Scriptures: to their own destruction -- But that some use
the Scriptures ill, is no Reason why others should not use them at all.

V. 18. But grow in grace -- That is, in every Christian Temper. There may be,
for a Time, Grace without Growth; as there may be natural Life without Growth.
But such fickly Life, of Soul or Body, will end in Death, and every Day draw
nigher to it. Health is the Means of both natural and spiritual Growth. If the
remaining Evil of our fallen Nature he not daily mortified, it will, like an
evil Humor in the Body, destroy the whole Man. But if ye through the Spirit do
mortify the deeds of the body (only so far as we do this) ye shall live the
Life of Faith, Holiness, Happiness. The End and Design of Grace being purchased
and bestowed on us, is to destroy the Image of the earthly, and restore us to
that of the heavenly. And so far as it does this, it truly profits us; and also
makes Way for more of the heavenly Gift, that we may at last be filled with all
the Fullness of GOD. The Strength and Well-being of a Christian depend on what
his Soul feeds on, as the Health of the Body depends on whatever we make our
daily Food. If we feed on what is according to our Nature, we grow: if not, we
pine away and die. The Soul is of the Nature of GOD, and nothing but what is
according to his Holiness can agree with it. Sin, of every Kind, starves the
Soul and makes it consume away. Let us not try to invert the Order of GOD in
his new Creation: We shall only deceive ourselves. It is casy to forsake the
Will of GOD and follow our own; but this will bring Leanness into the Soul. It
is easy to satisfy ourselves without being poffest of the Holiness and
Happiness of the Gospel. It is easy to call these frames and fe^lings, and then
to oppose faith to one and Corist to the other. Frames (allowing the
Expression) are no other (...) heavenly tempers, the mind that was in Christ:
Feelings are the divine consolations of the Holy Ghost, shed abroad in the
Heart of him that truly believes. And wherever Faith is, and wherever Christ
is, there are these blessed frames and feelings. If they are not in us, it is a
sure Sign that though the Wilderness became a Pool, the Pool is become a
Wilderness again: and in the knowledge of Christ -- That is, in Faith, the Root
of all: To him be the glory to the day of eternity -- An Expression naturally
flowing from that Sense which the Apostle had felt in h^ Soul throu hout this
whole Chapter. Eternity is a Day without Night, without Interruption, without
End.

NOTES ON The First Epistle of St. JOHN.
THE great Similitude, or rather Sameness both of Spirit and Expression, which
runs through St. John's Gospel, and all his Epistles, is a clear Evidence of
their being written by the same Person. In this Epistle he speaks not to any
particular Church, but to all the Christians of that Age, and in them to the
whole Christian Church in all succeeding Ages.

Some have apprehended, that it is not easy to discern the Scope and Method of
this Epistle. But if we examine it with Simplicity, these may readily be
discovered. St. John in this Letter, or rather Tract (for he was present with
Part of those to whom he wrote) has this apparent Aim, To confirm the happy and
holy Communion of the Faithful with GOD and Christ, by describing the Marks of
that blessed State.

The Parts of it are Three: I. The Preface, C. i. 1 -- 4 II. The Tract itself,
5 -- C. v. -- 12 III. The Conclusion, 13 -- 21

In the Preface he shows the Authority of his own Preaching and Writing, and
expressly points out (ver. 3.) the Design of his present Writing. To the Preface
exactly answers the Conclusion, more largely explaining the same Design, and
recapitulating those Marks, by we know thrice repeated (chapter v. 18, 19, 20.)

The Tract itself has Two Parts, treating, I. Severally, 1. Of Communion with
the Father, C. i. 5 -- 10 2. Of Communion with the Son, C. ii. 1 -- 12 With a
distinct Application to Fathers, young Men, and little Children, 13 -- 27
Whereunto is annex^, an Exhortation to abide in him. 28 -- C. iii. 1 -- 24 That
the Fruit of his Manifestation in the Flesh, may extend to his Manifestation in
Glory. 3. Of the Confirmation and Fruit of this abiding through the Spirit, C.
iv. 1 -- 21 II. Conjointly, Of the Testimony of the Father, and Son, and
Spirits On which Faith in Christ, the being born of GOD, Love to GOD and his
Children, the keeping his Commandments, and Victory over the World are founded,
C. v. 1 -- 12

The Parts frequently begin and end alike. Sometimes there is an Allusion in a
preceding Part, and a Recapitulation in the subsequent. Each Part treats of a
Benefit from GOD, and the Duty of the Faithful derived therefrom by the most
natural Inferences.

I. St. JOHN.
I.
THAT which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen
with our eyes, which we have beheld, and our hands have handled of the word of
life: it, and testify and declare to you the eternal life which was with the
Father, and was manifested to us:) is with the Father,

And this is the message which we have heard of him and declare to you, the
truth is not in us.

V. 1. That which was -- Here means, He which was the Word himself; afterward
it means. That which they had heard from him: which was -- Namely, with the
Father (v. 2.) before he was manifested: from the beginning -- This Phrase is
sometimes used in a limited Sense. But here it properly means from Eternity,
being equivalent with in the beginning, John i. 1. that which we -- The
Apostles, have not only heard, but seen with our eyes, which we have behold --
At^utively considered on various Occasions: of the word of life -- He is termed
the Word, John i. 1, the Life, John i. 4. as He is the living Word of GOD, who
with the Father and the Spirit, is the Fountain of Life to ill Creatures,
particularly of Spiritual and Eternal Life.

V. 2. For the life -- The living Word, was manifested -- In the Flesh, to our
very Senses: and (...) testify and declare -- We (...) by declaring, by
preaching and writing, (ver. 3.1.) Preaching (...) Foundation, (ver. 5 -- 1^)
Writing builds there ^: to you -- Who have not seen: the eternal life -- Which
always (...) and afterward appeared us. This is mention (...) in the (...) of
the Epistle, in the (...) of it is mentioned the same Eternal Life, which we
shall always enjoy.

V. 3. That which we have seen, and (...) -- Of Him and from Him, declare we to
you -- For this End, that (...) may have fellowship with us -- May enjoy the
same Fellowship which we enjoy: And truly our fellowship -- Whereby He is in us
and we in Him: is with the Father, and with the Son -- Of the Holy Ghost he
speaks afterward.

V. 4. That your joy may be full -- So our LORD also, ( John ^v. 11. xvi. 22.)
There is a Joy of Hope, a Joy of Faith, and a Joy of Love. Here the Joy of
Faith is directly intended. It is a concise Expression: your joy -- That is,
your Faith, and the Joy arising stone it: But it likewise implies the Joy of
Hope and Love.

V. 5. And this is the Sum of the message which we have heard of him -- The Son
of GOD: that God is light -- The Light of Wisdom, Love, Holiness, Glory. What
Light is to the natural Eye, that GOD is to the spiritual Eye: And in him is an
darkness at all -- No contrary Principle. He is pure, unmixt Light.

V. 6. If we say -- Either with our Tongue, or in our Heart, If we endeavor to
persuade either ourselves or others, we have fellowship with him -- While we
walk, either inwardly or outwardly, (...) darkness -- In Sin of any Kind; we do
not the truth -- Our Acti^ prove, that the Truth is not in us.

V. 7. But if we walk in the light -- In all Holiness, at God is (a deeper Word
than walk, and more worthy of GOD) in the light -- Then we may truly say, we
have fellowship one with another -- We who have seen, and you who have not
seen, do alike enjoy that Fellowship with GOD: The Imitation of GOD being the
only sure Proof of our having Fellowship with Him And the blood of Jesus Christ
his Son -- With the Grace purchased thereby: cleanses us from all sin -- Both
Original and Actual, taking away all the Guilt and all the Power.

V. 8. If we say -- Any Child of Man, before his Blood has cleansed us; we have
no sin -- To be cleansed from, instead of confessing our sins, ver. 9. the
truth is not in us -- Neither in our Mouth nor in our Heart.

V. 9. But if with a penitent and believing Heart, we confess our sins, be is
faithful -- Because He had promised this Blessing, by the unanimous Voice of
all his Prophets. Just -- Surely then He will punish: No, for this very Reason
He will pardon. This may seem strange; but upon the evangelical Principle of
Atonement and Redemption, it is undoubtedly true. Because, when the Debt is
paid, or the Purchase made, it is the Part of Equity to cancel the Bond, and
consign over the purchased Possession: both to forgive us our fins -- To take
away all the Guilt of them, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness -- To
purify our Souls from every Kind, and every Degree of it.

V. 10. Yet still we are to retain, even to our Lives End, a deep Sense of our
past Sins. Still if we say, we have not finned, we make him a liar -- Who
says, All have sinned: and his word is not in us -- We do not receive it; we
give it no Place in our Hearts.

II.
My beloved children, I write these things to you, that ye may not sin. But if
any one sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the righteous,
not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. because ye are
strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked
one. Love not the world, so even now there are many Antichrists, whereby we
know that it is the last time. were not of us: for if they had been of us, they
would have continued with us: but they went out, that they might be made
manifest, that they were not all of us. But the anointing which ye have
received of him abides in you,

And now,

V. 1. My beloved children -- So the Apostle frequently addresses the whole
Body of Christians. It is a Term of Tenderness and indearment, used by our LORD
Himself to his Disciples, ( John xiii. 33.) And perhaps many to whom St. John
now wrote, were converted by his Ministry. It is a different Word from that
which is translated little children, in several Parts of the Epistle, to
distinguish it from which, it is here rendered beloved children. I write these
things to you, that ye may not sin -- Thus he guards them beforehand against
abusing the Doctrine of Reconciliation. All the Words, Institutions, and
Judgments of GOD are levelled against Sin, either that it may not be committed,
or that it may be abolished. But if any one sin -- Let him not lie in Sin,
despairing of Help: we have an advocate -- We have for our Advocate, not a mean
Person, but Him of whom it was said, This is my beloved Son: Not a guilty
Person, who stands in Need of Pardon for himself; but Jesus Christ the
righteous; not a more Petitioner, who relies purely upon Liberality, but one
that has merited, fully merited, whatever he asks.

V. 2. And he is the propitiation -- The atoning Sacrifice, by which the Wrath
of GOD is appeased: for our sins -- Who believe: and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the whole world -- Just as wide as Sin extends, the
Propitiation extends also.

V. 3. And hereby we know that we truly and savingly know him -- As He is the
Advocate, the Righteous, the Propitiation: if we keep his commandments --
Particularly those of Faith and Love.

V. 5. But whosoever keeps his word -- His Commandments, verily in him the love
of God -- Reconciled to us through Christ, is perfected -- (...) perfectly
known: Hereby -- By our keeping his Word, we know that we are in him -- So is
the Tree known by its Fruits. To know him, to be in him, to abid in him, are
nearly synonymous Terms: Only with a Gradation: Knowledge, Communion, Constancy.

V. 6. He that says, he abides in him -- Which implies a durable State, a
constant, lasting Knowledge of, and Communion with Him: ought himself --
Otherwise they are vain Words, so to walk, even at he walked -- In the World.
As he, are Words that frequently occur in this Epistle. Believers having their
Hearts full of Him, easily supply his Name.

V. 7. When I speak of keeping his word, I write not a new commandment -- I do
not speak of any new one; but the old commandment, which ye had -- Even from
your Forefathers.

V. 8. Again, I do write a new commandment to you -- Namely, with regard to
loving one another. A Commandment, which though it also was given long ago, yet
is truly new in him and in you. It was exemplified in him, and is now fulfilled
by you, in such a Manner as it never was before. For there is no Comparison
between the State of the Old Testament-Believers, and that which ^e now enjoy:
The Darkness of that Dispensation is past away; and Christ the true light now
shines in your Hearts.

V. 9. He that says, he is in the light -- In Christ, united to him, and
hates his brother -- (The very Name shows the Love due to him) is in darkness
until now -- Void of Christ, and of all true Light.

V. 10. He that loves his brother -- For Christ's Sake, abides in the light
-- Of GOD, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him -- Whereas he that
hates his Brother, is an Occasion of stumbling to himself. He stumbles against
himself, and against all Things within and without: While he that loves his
Brother, has a free, disincumbered Journey.

V. 11. He that hates his brother -- And he must hate, if he does not love
him; there is no Medium; is in darkness -- In Sin, Perplexity, Intanglement. He
walks in darkness and knows not, that he is in the high Road to Hell.

V. 12. I have written to you, beloved children -- Thus St. John bespeaks all
to whom he writes. But from the 13th to the 27th Verse Ire divides them
particularly into fathers, young men, and little children: because your sins
are forgiven you -- As it he had said, This is the Sum of what I have now
written. He then proceeds to other Things, which are built upon this Foundation.

V. 13. The Address to Spiritual Fathers, young Men, and little Children, is
first proposed in this Verse, wherein he says, I write to you, fathers: I write
to you, young men: I write to you, little children: and then enlarged upon, in
doing which he says, I have written to you, fathers, ver. 14. I have written to
you, young men, ver. 14 -- 17. I have written to you, little children, ver. 18
-- 27. Having finished his Address to each, he returns to all together, whom he
again terms (as ver. 12.) Beloved children. Fathers ye have known him that is
from the beginning -- Ye have known the Eternal GOD, in a Manner wherein no
other, even true Believers, know Him. Young men, ye have overcome the wicked
one -- In many Battles, by the Power of Faith. Little children, ye have known
the Father -- As your Father, (though ye have not yet overcome) by the Spirit
witnessing with your spirit, that ye are the children of God.

V. 14. I have written to you, fathers -- As if he had said, Observe well what
I but now wrote. He speaks very briefly and modestly to these, who needed not
much to be said to them, as ^^ing that deep Acquaintance with GOD, which
comprises all necessary Knowledge. Young men, ye are strong -- In Faith, and
the word of God abides in you -- Deeply rooted in your Hearts, whereby ye have
often foiled your great Adversary.

V. 15. To you all, whether Fathers, young Men, or little Children, I say, Love
not the world -- Pursue your Victory, by overcoming the World. If any man love
the world -- Seek Happiness in visible Things, he does not love GOD.

V. 16. The desire of the flesh -- Of the Pleasure of the Outward Senses,
whether of the Taste, Smell, or Touch: the desire of the eye -- Of the
Pleasures of Imagination (to which the Eye chiefly is subservient;) of that
Internal Sense, whereby we relish whatever is Grand, New, or Beautiful: the
pride of life -- All that Pomp in Clothes, Houses, Furniture, Equipage, Manner
of Living, which generally procure Honor from the Bulk of Mankind, and so
gratify Pride and Vanity. It therefore directly includes the Desire of Praise,
and remotely, Covetousness. All these Desires are not from GOD, but from the
Prince of this World.

V. 17. The world passes away and the desire thereof -- That is, all that can
gratify those Desires passes away with it: but he that does the will of God --
That loves GOD, not the World, abides -- In the Enjoyment of what he loves,
for ever.

V. 18. My little children, it is the last time -- The last Dispensation of
Grace, that which is to continue to the End of Time, is begun: Ye have heard
that Antichrist comes -- Under the Term Antichrist, or the Spirit of
Antichrist, he includes all false Teachers, and Enemies to the Truth, yea,
whatever Doctrines or Men are contrary to Christ. It seems to have been long
after this, that the Name of Antichrist was appropriated to that grand
Adversary of Christ, the man of sin, (2 Thessalonians. ii. 3.) Antichrist, in St.
John's Sense, that is Anti christianism, has been spreading from his Time till
now; and will do so, till that great Adversary arises, and is destroyed by
Christ's coming.

V. 19. They were not (...) -- When they went: their Hearts were before
departed from GOD, otherwise they would have continued with us: but they went
out, that they might be made manifest -- That is, This was made manifest, by
their going out.

V. 20. But ye have an anointing -- A Chrism; perhaps so termed in Opposition
to the Name of Antichrist, an inward Teaching from the Holy Ghost, whereby ye
know all things -- Necessary for your Preservation from these Seducers, and for
your eternal Salvation. St. John here but just touches upon the Holy Ghost, of
whom he speaks more largely, chapter iii. 24. iv. 13. v. 6.

V. 21. I have written -- Namely, ver. 13. to you, because ye know the truth --
That is to confirm you in the Knowledge ye have already. Ye know that no lie is
of the truth -- That all the Doctrines of these Antichrists are irreconcilable
to it.

V. 22. Who is that liar -- Who is guilty of that Lying, but he who ^enies that
Truth which is the Sum of all Christianity: That Jesus is the Christ; that He
is the Son of GOD; that He came in the Flesh, is one undivided Truth; and he
that denies any Part of this, in effect denies the whole. He is Antichrist --
And the Spirit of Antichrist, who in denying the Son denies the Father also.

V. 23. Whosoever denies the Eternal Son of GOD, he has not Communion with
the Father, but he that truly and believingly acknowledges the Son, has
Communion with the Father also.

V. 24. If that -- Truth, concerning the Father and the Son, which ye have
heard from the beginning, abide -- Fixed and rooted in you, ye also shall abide
in that happy Communion with the Son and the Father.

V. 25. He -- The Son, has promised us -- If we abide in Him.

V. 26. These things -- From ver. 21. I have written to you -- St. John,
according to his Custom, begins and ends with the same Form, and having
finished a Kind of Parenthesis (ver. 20 -- 26.) continues ver. 27, what he said
in the 20th verse. Concerning them that would sedace you.

V. 27. Ye need not that any should teach you, save us that anointing teaches
you -- Which is always the same, always consistent with itself. But this does
not exclude our Need of being taught by them who partake of the same Anointing:
of all things -- Which it is necessary for you to know: and is no lie -- Like
that which Antichrist teaches. Ye shall abide in him -- This is added, both by
Way of Comfort and of Exhortation. The whole Discourse, from ver. 18. to this,
is peculiarly adapted to little children.

V. 28. And now, beloved children -- Having finished his Address to each, he
now returns to all in general: abide in him, that we -- A modest Expression:
may not be ashamed before him at his coming -- O how will ye, Jews, Socinians,
nominal Christians, be ashamed in that Day!

V. 29. Every one -- And none else, who practices righteousness -- From a
believing, loving Heart, is born of him -- For all his Children are like
Himself.

III.
Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the children of God; therefore the world knows us not, because it
knows not him. he is. of the devil: whosoever practices not righteousness is
not of God; neither he that loves not his brother. For this is the message
which ye have heard from the beginning, who was of the wicked one, and slew his
brother. And wherefore slew he him? of God, because he laid down his life for
us; and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. then have we
confidence toward God. And whatsoever we ask, has given us commandment.

V. 1. That we should be called -- That is, should be the children of God.
Therefore the world knows us not -- They know not what to make of us. We are
a Mystery to them.

V. 2. It (...) yet appear -- Even to ourselves, what we shall be -- It is
something ineffable, which will raise the Children of GOD to be in a Manner as
GOD Himself. But we know -- In general, that when he -- The Son of GOD, shall
appear, we shall be like him -- The Glory of GOD penetrating our inmost
Substance, for we shall see him as he is -- Manifestly, without a Veil. And
that Sight will transform as into the same Likeness.

V. 3. And every one that has this hope in him -- In GOD.

V. 4. Whosoever commits sin -- Thereby transgresses the holy, just and
good Law of GOD, and so sets his Authority at naught: for this is implied in
the very Nature of Sin.

V. 5. And ye know that he -- Christ, was manifested -- That he came into the
World for this very Purpose, to take away our sins -- To destroy them all, Root
and Branch, and leave none remaining. And in him is no sin -- So that He could
not suffer on his own Account, but to make us as Himself.

V. 6. Whosoever abides in Communion with him -- By loving Faith, sins not
-- While he so abides: Whosoever sins certainly sees him not -- The loving
Eye of his Soul is not then fixed upon GOD; neither does he then experimentally
know him -- Whatever he did in Time past.

V. 7. Let no one deceive you -- Let none persuade you, that any Man is
righteous, but he that uniformly practices righteousness: He alone is righteous
-- After the Example of his LORD.

V. 8. He that commits sin is a Child of the devil; for the devil sins
from the beginning -- That is, was the first Sinner in the Universe, and has
continued to sin ever since. The son of God was manifested to destroy the works
of the devil -- All Sin. And will he not perform this in all that trust in him?

V. 9. Whosoever is born of God -- By living Faith, whereby GOD is continually
breathing spiritual Life into his Soul, and his Soul is continually breathing
out Love and Prayer to GOD, does not commit sin. For the Divine Seed -- Of
loving Faith, abides in him: and -- So long as it does, he cannot sin, because
he is born of God -- Is inwardly and universally changed.

V. 10. Neither he that loves not his brother -- Here is the Transition from
the general Proposition to one Particular.

V. 12. Who was of the wicked one -- Who showed he was a Child of the Devil, by
killing his Brother. And wherefore slew be him? For any Fault? No, but just the
Reverse: for his Goodness.

V. 13. Marvel not, if the world hate you -- For the same Cause^

V. 14. We know -- As if he had said, We ourselves could not love our Brethren,
unless we were passed from spiritual death to (...), that is, born of GOD. He
that loves not his brother abides in death -- That is, is not born of GOD.
And he that is not born of GOD, cannot love his Brother.

V. 15. He, I say, abides in spiritual Death, is void of the Life of GOD. For
whosoever bateth his brother -- And there is no Medinor between loving and
hating him, is -- In GOD's Account, a murd^res: Every Degree of Hatred being a
Degree of the same Temper, which moved Cain to murder his Brother -- And no
murderer has eternal life abiding in him. But every loving Believer has. For
Love is the Beginning of eternal Life. It is the same, in Substance, with Glory.

V. 16. The Word GOD is not in the original. It was omitted by the Apostle just
as the particular Name is omitted by Mary, when she says to the Gardener, Sir,
If thou have borne him (...): And by the Church, when she says, Let him kiss me
with the kisses of his mouth, (Sol. Song i. 1.) in both which Places there is a
Language, a very emphatical Language, even in Silence. It declares how totally
the Thoughts were possessed by the blessed and glotions Subject. It expresses
also the superlative Dignity and Amiableness of the Person meant; as though He,
and He alone, was, or deserved to be, both known and adm^ed by all. Because be
laid down his life -- Not merely for Sinners, but f^r us in particular. From
this Truth believed, from this Blessing enjoyed, the Love of our Brethren takes
its Rise, which may very justly be admitted as an Evidence that our Faith is no
Delusion.

V. 17. But whose has this world's good -- Worldly Substance, far less
valuable than Life, and sees his brother have need -- (The very Sight of Want
knocks at the Door of the Spectator's Heart) and shuts up -- Whether asked
or not, his bowels of compassion from him, ^ow dwells the love of God in him?
-- Certainly not at all, however he may talk (ver. 18) of loving GOD.

V. 18. Not in word -- Only, but in deed -- In Action: not in (...) -- By empty
Professions, but in truth.

V. 19. And hereby we know -- We have a farther Proof, by this real, operative
Love, that we are of the truth -- That we have true Faith, that we are true
Children of GOD, and shall assure our hearts before him -- Shall enjoy the
Assurance of his Favor, and the Testimony of a good conscience toward God. The
Heart, in St. John's Language, is the Conscience. The Word, Conscience, is not
found in his Writings.

V. 20. For if -- We have not this Testimony, if in any Thing our heart -- Our
own Conscience, condemn us -- Much more does GOD, who is greater than our heart
-- An infinitely holier and a more impartial Judge, and knows all things --
So that there is no Hope of hiding it from Him.

V. 21. If our heart condemn us not -- If our Conscience duly enlightened by
the Word and Spirit of GOD, and comparing all our Thoughts, Words and Works
with that Word, pronounce, that they agree therewith, then have we confidence
toward God -- Not only our Consciousness of his Favor continues and increases,
but we have a full Persuasion, that whatsoever we ask, we shall receive of him.

V. 23. And this is his commandment -- All his Commandments in one Word, that
we should believe and love -- In the Manner and Degree which he has taught.
This is the greatest and most important Command that ever issued from the
Throne of Glory. If this be neglected, no other can be kept: If this be
observed, all others are easy.

V. 24. And he that keeps his commandments -- That thus believes and loves,
abides in him and God in him. And hereby we know that he abides in us, by the
Spirit which be has given us -- Which witnesses with our Spirits that we are
his Children, and brings forth his Fruits of Peace, Love, Holiness. This is the
Transition to the treating of the Holy Spirit, which immediately follows.

IV.
Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of
God, because many false prophets are gone out into the world. spirit of
Antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it comes; and now already it is in the
world. Beloved, to be the Savior of the world. our love made perfect, that we
may have boldness in the day of judgment, because as he is, so are we in this
world.

V. 1. Believe not every spirit -- Whereby any Teacher is actuated: but try the
spirits -- By the Rule which follows. We are to try all Spirits by the written
Word: To the Low and to the Testimony! If any Man speak not according to these,
the Spirit which actuates him is not of GOD.

V. 2. Every spirit -- Or Teacher which confesses -- Both with Heart and
Voice, Jesus Christ who is come in the flesh, is of God -- This his Coming
pre-supposes, contains, and draws after it the whole Doctrine of Christ.

V. 3. Ye have beard -- From our LORD, and us, that it comes.

V. 4. Ye have overcome these Seducers, because greater is the Spirit of Christ
that is in you, than the Spirit of Antichrist that is in the world.

V. 5. They -- Those false Prophets, are of the world -- Of the Number of those
that know not GOD: therefore speak they of the world -- From the same
Principle, Wisdom, Spirit, and of Consequence the world hears them -- With
Approbation.

V. 6. We -- Apostles, are of God -- Immediately taught, and sent by Him.
Hereby we know -- From what is said, ver. 2 -- 6.

V. 7. Let us love one another -- From the Doctrine he has just been defending,
he draws this Exhortation. It is by the Spirit, that the Love of GOD is shed
abroad in our Hearts. Every one that truly loves GOD and his Neighbor, is
born of God.

V. 8. God is love -- This little Sentence, brought St. John more Sweetness,
even in the Time he was writing it, than the whole World can bring. GOD is
often styled holy, righteous, wise; but not Holiness, Righteousness or Wisdom
in the Abstract: As he is said to be Love; intimating that this is his darling,
his reigning Attribute; the Attribute that sheds an amiable Glory on all his
other Perfections.

V. 12. If we love one another, God abides in us -- This is treated of ver. 13
-- 16. and his love is perfected -- Has its full Effect, in us -- This is
treated of ver. 17 -- 19.

V. 14. And in Consequence of this, we have seen and testify, that the Father
sent the Son -- These are the Foundation and the Criteria of our abiding in GOD
and GOD in us, the Communion of the Spirit, and the Confession of the Son.

V. 15. Whosoever shall -- From a Principle of loving Faith, openly confess --
In the Face of all Opposition and Danger, that Jesus is the Son of God, God
abides in him.

V. 16. And we know and believe -- By the same Spirit, the love that God has
to us.

V. 17. Hereby -- That is, by this Communion with GOD, is our love made
perfect; that we may -- That is, so that we shall have boldness in the day of
judgment -- When all the stout-hearted shall tremble^^ because as be -- Christ,
is -- All Love, so are we -- Who are Fathers in Christ, even in this world.

V. 18. There is no fear in love -- No slavish Fear can be where Love reigns:
but perfect, adult love casts out slavish fear; because such fear has
torment, and to is inconsistent with the Happiness of Love. A natural Man has
neither Fear, nor Love; one that is awakened, Fear without Love; a Babe in
Christ, Love and Fear; a Father in Christ, Love without Fear.

V. 19. We love him, because he first loved us -- This is the Sum of all
Religion, the genuine Model of Christianity. None can say more: Why should any
one say less? or less intelligibly?

V. 20. Whom he has seen -- Who is daily presented to his Senses, to raise his
Esteem, and move his Kindness or Compassion toward him.

V. 21. And this commandment have we from him -- Both GOD and Christ, that he
who loves God, love his brother -- Every one, whatever his Opinions or Mode of
Worship be, purely because he is the Child and bears the Image of GOD. Bigotry
is properly the Want of this pure and universal Love. A Bigot only loves those
who embrace his Opinions and receive his Way of Worship; and he loves them for
that, and not for Christ's Sake.

V.
Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God; and every one who
loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him. Hereby we know
that we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep his commandments,
For this is the love of God, even our faith. Who is he that overcomes the
world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? even Jesus Christ;
not by the water only, but by the water and the blood: and it is the Spirit who
testifies; because the Spirit is truth. Holy Ghost,

These things have I written to you who believe on the name of the Son of God,
which is not unto death, let him ask, and he will give him life for them that
sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death. one. even in his Son Jesus
Christ; this is the true God and eternal life.

V. 1. The Scope and Sum of this whole Paragraph, appears from the Conclusion
of it: (ver. 13.) These things have I written to you who believe, that ye may
know that ye who believe have eternal life. So Faith is the First and Last
Point with St. John also. Every one who loves God that begat, loves him also
that is begotten of him -- Has a natural Affection to all his Brethren.

V. 2. Hereby we know -- This is a plain Proof, that we love the children of
God -- As his Children.

V. 3. For this is the love of God -- The only sure Proof of it, that we keep
his commandments: and his commandments are not grievous -- To any that are born
of GOD.

V. 4. For whatsoever -- This Expression implies the most unlimited
Universality, is born of God, overcomes the world -- Conquers whatever it can
lay in the Way, either to allure or fright the Children of GOD from keeping his
Commandments. And this is the victory -- The grand Means of overcoming, even
our faith -- Seeing all Things are possible to him that believes.

V. 5. Who is be that overcomes the world? -- That is superior to (...)
worldly Care, Desire, Fear* Every Believer, and none else. The Seventh Verse
(usually so reckoned) is a brief Recapitulation of all which has been before
advanced concerning the Father, the Son, and the Spirit. It is cited, in
Conjunction with the Sixth and Eighth, by Tertullian, Cyprian, and an
uninterrupted Train of Fathers. And indeed what the Sun is in the World, what
the Heart is in a Man, what the Needle is in the Mariner's Compass, this Verse
is in the Epistle. By this, the Sixth, Eighth, and Ninth Verses are
indissolubly connected: As will be evident, beyond all Contradiction, when they
^ly considered.

V. 6. This is he -- St. John here shows the immovable Foundation of that
Faith that Jesus is the Son of GOD; not only the Testimony of Man, but the
firm, indubitable Testimony of GOD, who came -- Jesus is he of whom it was
promised that he should come: And who accordingly is come. And this the Spirit,
and the Water, and the Blood testify: Even Jesus -- Who coming by Water and
Blood, is by this very Thing demonstrated to be the Christ: not by the water
only -- Wherein he was baptized; but by the water and the blood -- Which he
shed when he had finished the Work his Father had given him to do. He not only
undertook at his Baptism to fulfill all righteousness, but on the Cross
accomplished what he had undertaken: In Token whereof, when all was finished,
Blood and Water came out of his Side. And it is the Spirit who likewise
testifies -- Of Jesus Christ, named by Moses and all the Prophets, by John the
Baptist, by all the Apostles, and in all the Writings of the New Testament. And
against his Testimony there can be no Exception, because the Spirit is truth --
The very GOD of Truth.

V. 7. What Bengelius has advanced both concerning the Transposition of these
two Verses, and the Authority of the controverted Verse, partly in his Gnomon,
and partly in his Apparatus Criticus, will abundantly satisfy any impartial
Person. For there are three that testify -- Literally, testifying or bearing
witness -- The Participle is put for the Noun witnesses, to intimate, That the
Act of testifying, and the Effect of it are continually present. Properly,
Persons only can testify: And that three are described testifying on earth, as
if they were Persons, is elegantly subservient to the three Persons restifying
in heaven, the Spirit -- In the Word, confirmed by Miracles, the water -- Of
Baptism, wherein we are dedicated to the Son, (with the Father and Spirit)
typifying his spotless Purity, and the inward purifying of our Nature, and the
blood -- Represented in the LORD's Supper, and applied to the Consciencies of
Believers. And these three -- harmoniously agree in one -- In bearing the same
Testimony, That Jesus Christ. is the divine, the complete, the only Savior of
the world.

V. 8. And there are three that testify in heaven -- The Testimony of the
Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, is by an eminent Gradation corroborated by
Three, who give a still greater Testimony, the Father -- Who clearly testified
of the Son, both at his Baptism, and at his Transfiguration, the Word -- Who
testified of himself, on many Occasions, while he was on Earth: And again, with
still greater Solemnity, after his Ascension into Heaven: ( Rev. i. 5. xix.
13.) And the Spirit -- Whose Testimony was added, chiefly after his
Glorification, (chapter ii. 27. John xv. 26. Acts v. 32. Romans viii. 16.) And these
three are one -- Even as those two, the Father and the Son are one, ( John x.
30.) Nothing can separate the Spirit from the Father and the Son. If He were
not one with the Father and the Son, the Apostleought to have said, The Father
and the Word (who are one) and the Spirit are two. But this is contrary to the
whole Tenor of Revelation. It remains, that these three are one. They are one
in Essence, in Knowledge, in Will, and in their Testimony.

It is observable, the Three in the one Verse are opposed not conjointly, but
severally to the Three in the other: As if he had said, not only the Spirit
testifies, but also the Father; ( John v. 37.) Not only the Water, but also the
Word: ( John iii. 11. x. 41.) Not only the Blood, but also the Holy Ghost. (
John xv. 26, etc.) It must now appear to every reasonable Man, how absolutely
necessary the eighth Verse is. St. John could not think of the Testimony of the
Spirit, and Water, and Blood, and subjoin The testimony of God is greater,
without thinking also of the Testimony of the Son and Holy Ghost, yea and
mentioning it in so solemn an Enumeration. Nor can any possible Reason be
devised, why without Three testifying in heaven -- he should enumerate Three,
and no more who testify on earth -- The Testimony of all is given on earth, not
in heaven, but they who testify are part on Earth, part in Heaven; the
Witnesses who are on Earth testify chiefly concerning his Abode on Earth,
though not excluding his State of Exaltation. The Witnesses who are in Heaven
testify chiefly concerning his Glory at GOD's Right Hand, though not excluding
his State of Humiliation.

The seventh Verse therefore, with the sixth, contains a Recapitulation of the
whole Economy of Christ, from his Baptism to Pentecost: The eighth, the Sum of
the divine Economy, from the Time of his Exaltation.

Hence it farther appears, That this Position of the seventh and eighth Verses,
which places those who testify on earth, before those who testify in heaven, is
abundantly pretetable to the other, and affords a Gradation admirably suited to
the Subject.

V. 9. If we receive the testimony of men -- As we do continually, and must do
in a thousand Instances, the testimony of God is greater -- Of higher Authority
and much more worthy to be received: Namely, this very testimony, which GOD the
Father, together with the Word and the Spirit, has testified of the Son, as
the Savior of the World.

V. 10. He that believes on the S^n of God, has the testimary -- The clear
Evidence of this, in himself: he that believes not God, in this, has made him
a liar, because. he supposes that to be salse which GOD has expressly testified.

V. 11. And this is the Sum of that testimony, that God has given us a Title
to, and the real Beginning of, eternal life: And that this is purchased by, and
treasured up in, his Son, who has all the Springs and the Fullness of it in
himself, to communicate to his Body the Church, first in Grace, and then in
Glory.

V. 12. It plainly follows, He that has the Son -- Living and reigning in him
by Faith, has this lif^: H^ that has not the Son of God, has not this life
-- Has no Part or Lot therein. In the former Clause the Apostle says simply
the Son; because Pelievers know Him: In the latter, The Son of God, that
Unbelievers may know how great a Blessing they fall short of.

V. 13. These things have I written -- In the Introduction (chapter i. 4.) he said,
I write; now, in the Close, I have written; that ye may know -- With a fuller
and stronger Assurance, that ye (...) eternal life.

V. 14. And we -- Who believe, have this farther confidence in him, that he
hears -- That is, favorably regards, whatever Prayer we offer in Faith,
according to his revealed will.

V. 15. We have -- Faith anticipates the Blessings, the petitions which we
asked of him -- Even before the Event. And when the Event comes, we know it
comes in answer to our Prayer.

V. 16. This extends to Things of the greatest Importance. If any one see his
brother -- That is, any Man, sin a sin which is not unto death -- That is, any
Sin, but total Apostasy from both the Power and Form of Godliness, let him ask,
and God will give him lise -- Pardon and spiritual Life, for that Sinner. There
is a sin unto death; I do not say, that he shall pray for that -- That is, let
him not pray for it. A sia unto death may likewise mean, one which GOD has
determined to punish with Death.

V. 17. All Deviation from perfect Holiness is Sin: but all Sin it not
unpardonable.

V. 18. Yet this gives us no Encouragement to sin. On the contrary, it is an
indisputable Truth, He that is horn of God -- That sees and loves GOD, sins
not -- So long as that loving Faith abides in him. He neither speaks nor does
any Thing which GOD has for^en. He keeps himself -- Watching unto Prayer:
and -- While he ^oes this, the wicked one touches him not -- So as to hurt him.

V. 19. We know that we are children of God -- By the Witness and the Truit of
his Spirit: (chapter iii. 24.) but the whole world -- All who have not his Spirit,
not only is touched by him, but by Idolatry, Fraud, Violence, Lasciviousness,
Impiety, all Manner of Wickedness: lies in the wicked one -- Void of Life,
void of Sense. In this short Expression the horrible State of the World is
painted in the most lively Colors: A Comment on which we have in the Actions,
Conversations, Contracts, Quarrels, and Friendships of worldly Men.

V. 20. And we know -- By all these infallible Proofs, that the Sore of God is
come -- Into the World. And he has given us a spiritual understanding, that we
may know him, the true one, the faithful and true witness: and we are in the
true one -- As Branches in the Vine, even in Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of
GOD. This Jesus is the only living and true God, together with the Father and
the Spirit, and the original Fountain of eternal life. So the Beginning and End
of the Epistle agree.

V. 21. Keep yourselves from Idols -- From all Worship of false Gods, from all
Worship of Images or of any Creature, and from every inward Idol; from loving,
desiring, fearing any Thing more than GOD. Seek all Help and Defense from Evil,
all Happiness in the true GOD alone.

NOTES ON The Second Epistle of St. JOHN.
The Parts of this Epistle (written to some Christian Matron and h^^ religious
Children) are Three: I. The Inscription, ver. 1 -- 3 II. An Exhortation to
persevere in true Faith and Love, ver. 4 -- 11 III. The Conclusion, ver. 12, 13

II. St. JOHN.
I.
THE elder unto the elect Kuria and her children, whom I love in the truth, and
not I only, and peace from God the Father, and from Jesus Christ, the Son of
the Father, in truth and love.

I rej^iced greatly that I found of thy children walking in the truth, you, and
bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God
speed. For he that bids him God speed,

Having many things to write to you, to write with paper and ink: but I trust
to come to you and speak face to face, that our joy may be full.

V. 1. The elder -- An Appellation suited to a familiar Letter, but upon a
weighty Subject, to the elect -- That is, Christian. Kuria is undoubtedly a
proper Name, both here and in v. 5. For it was not then usual to apply the
Title of Lady to any but the Roman Empress, neither would such a Manner of
speaking have been suitable to the Simplicity and Dignity of the Apostle; whom
-- Both her and her Children, I love in the truth -- With unfeigned and holy
Love.

V. 2. For the truth's sake, which abides in us -- As a living Principle of
Faith and Holiness.

V. 3. Grace takes away Guilt: Mercy, Misery: Peace implies the abiding in
Grace and Mercy. It includes the Testimony of GOD's Spirit, both that we are
his Children, and that all our Ways are acceptable to him. This is the very
Foretaste of Heaven itself, where it is perfected: in truth and love -- Or,
Faith and Love, as St. Paul speaks. Faith and Truth are here synonymous Terms.

V. 4. I found of thy children -- Probably in their Aunt's House, (ver. 13.)
walking in the truth -- In Faith and Love.

V. 5. That which we had from the beginning -- Of our LORD's Ministry. Indeed
it was in some Sense from the Beginning of the World: that we may love one
another -- More abundantly.

V. 6. And this is the Proof of true love, Universal Obedience, built on the
Love of GOD: This -- Love, is the great commandment which ye have beard from
the beginning of our Preaching.

V. 7. Carefully keep what ye have heard from the Beginning, for many seducers
are entered into the world, who confess not Jesus Christ that came in the flesh
-- Who disbelieve either his Prophetic, or Priestly, or Kingly Office.
Whosoever does this, is the seducer -- From GOD, and the Antichrist -- Fighting
against Christ.

V. 8. That we lose not the things which we have wrought -- Which every
Apostate does; but receive a full reward -- Having fully employed all our
Talents, to the Glory of Him that gave them. Here again the Apostle modestly
transfers it to himself.

V. 9. Receive this as a certain Rule. Whosoever transgresses -- Any Law of
GOD, has not God -- For his Father and his GOD. He that abides in the
doctrine of Christ -- Believing and obeying it, he has both the Father and the
Son -- For his GOD.

V. 10. If any come to you -- Either as a Teacher or a Brother, and bring not
this doctrine -- That is, advance any thing contrary to it, receive him not
into your house -- As either a Teacher or a Brother; neither bid him God speed
-- Give him no Encouragement therein.

V. 11. For he that bids him God speed -- That gives him any Encouragement,
is accessory to his evil deeds.

V. 12. Having many things to write, I was not minded to write now -- Only of
these; which were then peculiarly needful.

V. 13. The children of thy elect or Christian sister -- Absent, if not dead,
when the Apostle wrote this.

NOTES ON The Third Epistle of St. JOHN.
The Third Epistle has likewise Three Parts: I. The Inscription, 1, 2 II. The
Commendation of Caius, 3 -- 8 with a Caution against Diotrephes, 9 -- 11 and a
Recommendation of Demetrius, 12 III. The Conclusion, 13 -- 15

III. St. JOHN.
I.
THE elder unto the beloved Caius, whom I truly love.

For I rejoiced greatly when the brethren came, this, to hear that my children
walk in the truth. Beloved, has a good testimony from all men, and from the
truth itself: yea, we also hear testimony, and ye know that our testimony is
true.

I had many things to write; be to thee. Our friends salute thee. Salute the
friends by name.

V. 1. Caius was probably that Caius of Corinth, whom (...) Paul mentions Romans
xvi. 23. If so, either he was removed from (...) into Asia, or St. John sent
this Letter to Corinth.

V. 3. For -- I know thou usest all thy Talents to his Glory: the truth that is
in thee -- The true Faith and Love.

V. 4. I have no greater joy than this -- Such is the Spirit of every true
Christian Pastor: to hear that my children walk in the truth -- Caius probably
was converted by St. Paul. Therefore when St. John speaks of him, with other
Believers, as his Children, it may be considered as the tender Style of
paternal Love, whoever were the Instruments of their Conversion. And his using
this Appellation, when writing under the Character of the Elder, has its
peculiar Beauty.

V. 5. Faithfully -- Uprightly and sincerely.

V. 6. Who have testified of thy love before the church -- The Congregation
with whom I now reside: whom if thou send forward on their journey -- Supplied
with what is needful: thou shall do well -- How tenderly does the Apostle
enjoin this!

V. 7. They went forth -- To preach the Gospel.

V. 8. To receive -- With all Kindness, the truth -- Which they preach.

V. 9. I wrote to the church -- Probably that to which they came: but
Diotrephes -- Perhaps the Pastor of it: who loves to have the preeminence
among them -- To govern all Things according to his own Will: receives us not
-- Neither them nor me. So did the Mystery of Iniquity already work!

V. 10. He prateth against us -- Both them and me, thereby endeavoring to
excuse himself.

V. 11. Follow not that which is evil -- In Diotrephes, but that which is good
-- In Demetrius. He has not seen God -- Is a Stranger to Him.

V. 12. And from the truth itself -- That is, what they testify is the very
Truth. Yea, we also bear testimony -- I and they that are with me.

V. 14. Salute the friends by name -- That is, in the same Manner as if I had
named them one by one. The Word Friend does not often occur in the
New Testament, being swallowed up in the more endearing one of Brother.

NOTES ON The General Epistle of St. JUDE.
This Epistle has Three Parts: I. The Inscription, 1, 2 II. The Treatise, in
which 1. He exhorts them to contend for the Faith, 3 2. Describes the
Punishment and the Manners of its Adversaries, 4 -- 16 3. Warns the Believers,
17 -- 19 4. Confirms them, 20, 21 5. Instructs them in their Duty to others,
22, 23 III. The Conclusion, 24, 25

This Epistle greatly resembles the Second of St. Peter, which St. Jude seems
to have had in View while he wrote. That was written but a very little before
his Death; and hence we may gather that St. Jude lived some time after it, and
saw that grievous Declension in the Church, which St. Peter had foretold. But
he passes over some Things mentioned by St. Peter, repeats some, in different
Expressions, and with a different View, and adds others; clearly evidencing
thereby the Wisdom of GOD which rested upon him. Thus St. Peter cites and
confirms St. Paul's Writings, and is himself cited and confirmed by St. Jude.

St. JUDE.
I.
JUDE, a servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them that are
beloved of God the Father, and preserved through Jesus Christ, and called,

Beloved, our only Master and Lord, 2 Pet. ii. 4.
angels, who kept not their first dignity, but left their own habitation, he
has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness to the judgment of the great
day. 2 Pet. ii. 10.
despise authority, rail at dignities.

These are spots in your feasts of love, sea, foaming out their own shame;
wandering stars, for whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.

These are murmurers,

These are they who separate themselves, them out of the fire; on others have
compassion with fear, hating even the garment spotted by the flesh.

Now to Him who is able to keep them from falling, them faultless in the
presence of his glory with exceeding joy, be glory, and majesty, might and
authority, both now and to all ages, Amen.

V. 1. Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ -- The highest Glory which any, either
Angel or Man, can aspire to. The Word Servant, under the Old Covenant, was
adapted to the Spirit of Fear and Bondage that clave to that Dispensation. But
when the Time appointed of the Father was come, for the sending of his Son to
redeem them that were under the Law, the Word Servant (used by the Apostles
concerning themselves and all the Children of GOD) signified one that having
the Spirit of Adoption is made free by the Son of GOD. His being a Servant is
the Fruit and Perfection of his being a Son. And whenever the Throne of GOD and
of the Lamb shall be in the New Jerusalem, then will it be indeed that his
servants shall serve him, Rev. xxii. The brother of James -- St. James was the
more eminent, usually styled, the brother of the Lord: to them that are beloved
-- The Conclusion, ver. 21. exactly answers the Introduction: and preserved
through Jesus Christ -- So both the Spring and the Accomplishment of Salvation
are pointed out. This is premised, lest any of them should be discouraged, by
the terrible Things which are afterward mentioned: and called -- To receive
the whole Blessing of God, in Time and Eternity.

V. 3. When I gave all diligence to write to you of the common salvation --
Designed for all, and enjoyed by all Believers. Here the Design of the Epistle
is expressed; the End of which exactly answers the Beginning: it was needful to
exhort you to contend earnestly -- Yet humbly, meekly, and lovingly; otherwise
your Contention will only hurt your Cause, if not destroy your Soul: for the
faith -- All the Fundamental Truths, once delivered -- By GOD, to remain
unvaried for ever.

V. 4. There are certain mencrept in who were of old described before -- Even
as early as Enoch; of whom it was foretold, that by their wilful Sins they
would incur this condemnation: turning the grace of God -- Revealed in the
Gospel: into lascivionsness -- Into an Occasion of more abandoned Wickedness.

V. 5. He afterward destroyed -- The far greater Part of that very people whom
He had once saved. Let none therefore presume upon past Mercies, as if he was
now out of Danger.

V. 6. And the angels, who kept not their first dignity -- Once assigned them
under the Son of GOD, but voluntarily left their own habitation -- Then
properly their own, by the free Gift of GOD: he reserved -- Delivered to be
kept: in everlasting chains under darkness -- O how unlike their own
Habitation! When these fallen Angels came out of the Hands of GOD they were
holy (else GOD made that which was evil) and being holy, they were beloved of
GOD: (else He hated the Image of his own spotless Purity.) But now he loves
them no more; they are doomed to endless Destruction: (for if He loved them
still, He would love what is sinful) and both his former Love, and his present
righteous and eternal Displeasure toward the same Work of his own Hands, are
because He changes not: Because He invariably loves Righteousness, and hates
Iniquity.

V. 7. The cities who gave themselves over to fornication -- The Word here
means, unnatural Lusts: are set forth as an example, suffering the vengeance of
eternal fire -- That is, the Vengeance which they suffered is an Example or a
Type of eternal Fire.

V. 8. In like manner these dreamers -- Sleeping and dreaming all their Lives,
despise authority -- Those that are invested with it by Christ, and made by Him
the Overseers of his Flock: Rail at dignities -- The Apostle does not seem to
speak of worldly Dignities. These they had in admiration for the sake of gain;
(ver. 16.) but those holy Men, who for the Purity of their Lives, the Soundness
of their Doctrine, and the Greatness of their Labors in the Work of the
Ministry, were truly honorable before GOD and all good Men; and who were
grossly vilified by those who turned the Grace of GOD into Lasciviousness.
Probably they were the impure Followers of Simon Magus, the same with the
Gnostics and Nicolaitans, Rev. ii. 15.

V. 9. Yet Michael -- It does not appear, whether St. Jude learned this by any
Revelation, or from ancient Tradition. It suffices, that these Things were not
only true, but acknowledged as such by them to whom he wrote: the archangel --
This Word occurs but once more in the Sacred Writings, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 16. So that
whether there be one Archangel only, or more, it is not possible for us to
determine: when be disputed with the devil -- At what Time we know not:
concerning the body of Moses -- Possibly the Devil would have discovered the
Place where it was buried, which GOD for wife Reasons had concealed: durst not
bring even against him a railing accusation -- Though so far beneath him in
every Respect: but simply said, (so great was his Modesty!) the Lord rebuke
thee -- I leave thee to the Judge of All.

V. 10. But these -- Without all Shame: rail at the things of God, which they
know not -- Neither can know, having no spiritual Senses: and the natural
things, which they know -- By their natural Senses, they abuse into Occasions
of Sin.

V. 11. Woe unto them -- Of all the Apostles St. Jude alone, and that in this
single Place, denounces a Woe. St. Peter, to the same Effect, pronounces them
cursed children: for they have gone in the way of Cain -- The Murderer, and ran
greedily (literally, have been poured out, like a Torrent without Hanks) after
the error of Balaam -- The covetous false Prophet: and perished in the
gainsaying of Korah -- Vengeance has overtaken them as to did Korah, rising up
against those whom GOD had sent.

V. 12. These are spots -- Blemishes, in your feasts of love -- Anciently
observed in all the Churches, seeding themselves without fear -- Without any
fear of GOD, or Jealousy over themselves, twice dead -- In Sin, first by
Nature, and afterward by Apostasy, pluched up by the roots -- And so incapable
of ever reviving.

V. 13. Wandering stars -- Literally, Planets -- Which shine for a Time, but
have no Light in themselves, and will be soon cast into utter Darkness. Thus
the Apostle illustrates their desperate Wickedness, by Comparisons drawn from
the Air, Earth, Sea, and Heavens.

V. 14. And of these also -- As well as the Antediluvian Sinners, Enoch -- So
early was the Prophecy referred to ver. 4. the seventh from Adam -- There were
only five of the Fathers between Adam and Enoch. (1. Chron. i. 1.) The first
Coming of Christ was revealed to Adam; his second, glorious Coming to Enoch;
and the seventh from Adam foretold the Things which will conclude the Seventh
Age of the World. St. Jude might know this either from some ancient Book, or
Tradition, or immediate Revelation. Behold! As if it were already done, the
Lord comes!

V. 15. To execute judgment -- Enoch herein looked beyond the Flood, upon all
-- Sinners, in general, and to convict all the ungodly -- In particular, of all
the grievous things which ungodly sinners (a sinner is ^^d: but the ungodly who
sin without Fear, are worse) have spoken against him, (ver. 8. 10.) though they
might not think, all those Speeches were against him.

V. 16. These are murmurers -- Against Men, complainers -- (Literally,
complairers of their sat) against GOD, walking with reg^ to themselves, after
their own foolish and mischievous desires, ^^^ing men's persons in admiration
for the sake of gain -- admiring and commending them only for what they can get.

V. 17. By the apostles -- He does not exempt himself from the Number of
Apostles. For in the next Verse he says, they told you not us.

V. 19. These are they who separate themselves, sensual, not having the Spirit
-- Having (...) Senses and Understanding only. Let the Spirit of GOD: Otherwise
they could not separate. For th^^ it is a Sin, and a very heinous one, to
separate from the church, is out of all Question. But then it should be
observed, 1. That by the Church is meant, a Body of living Christians, who are
an habitation of God through the Spirit: 2. That by separating is understood,
Renouncing all religious Intercourse with them; no longer joining with them in
solemn Prayer, or the other Public Offices of Religion: and 3. That we have no
more Authority from Scripture, to call even this, Schism, than to call it
Murder.

V. 20. But ye, beloved -- Not separating, but building yourselves up in your
most holy faith -- Than which none can be more holy in itself, or more
conducive to the most refined and exalted Holiness: praying through the Holy
Spirit -- Who alone is able to build you up, as He alone laid the Foundation.
In this and the following Verse St. Jude mentions the Father, Son, and Spirit,
together with Faith, Love, and Hope.

V. 21. By these Means, through his Grace, keep yourselves in the love of God,
and in the confident Expectation of that eternal life, which is purchased for
you, and conferred upon you, through the mere mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ.

V. 22. Mean time watch over others, as well as yourselves, and give them such
Help, as their various Needs require. For Instance, 1. Some, that are wavering
in Judgment, staggered by others or by their own evil Reasoning, endeavor more
deeply to convince of the whole Truth as it is in Jesus. 2. Some snatch, with a
swift and strong Hand, out of the fire of Sin and Temptation. 3. On others show
compassion in a milder and gentler Way; though still with a jealous fear, l^st
yourselves be infected with the Disease you endeavor to cure. See therefore,
that while you love the Sinners, ye retain the utmost Abhorrence of their Sins,
and of any the least Degree of, or approach to them.

V. 24. Now to Him who alone is able to keep them from falling -- Into any of
these Errors or Sins, and to present them faultle^ss in the presence of his
glory -- That is, in his own Presence, when He shall be revealed in all his
Glory.

NOTES ON THE REVELATION OF JESUS CHRIST.
IT IS scarce possible for any that either love or fear GOD, not to feel their
Hearts extremely affected, in seriously reading either the Beginning, or the
latter Part of the Revelation. These, it is evident, we cannot consider too
much: but the intermediate Parts I did not study at all for many Years: As
utterly despairing of understanding them, after the fruitless Attempts of so
many wise and good Men; and perhaps I should have lived and died in this
Sentiment, had I not seen the Works of the great Bengelius. But these revived
my Hopes of understanding even the Prophecies of this Book: At least many of
them in some good Degree; for perhaps some will not be opened but in Eternity.
Let us however bless GOD for the Measure of Light we may enjoy, and improve it
to his Glory.

The following Notes are mostly those of that excellent Man; a few of which are
taken from his Gnomon Novi Testamenti, but far more from his Ekklarte
Offenbarung, which is a full and regular Comment on the Revelation. Every Part
of this I do not undertake to defend. But none should condemn him, without
reading his Proofs at large. It did not suit my Design to insert these: they
are above the Capacity of ordinary Readers. Nor had I Room to insert the entire
Translation of a Book which contains near twelve hundred Pages.

All I can do is, partly to translate, partly abridge the most necessary of his
Observations; allowing myself the Liberty to alter some of them, and to add a
few Notes where he is not full. His Text, it may be observed, I have taken
almost throughout, which I apprehend he has abundantly defended both in the
Gnomon itself, and in his Apparatus and Crisis in Apocalypsin.

Yet I by no means pretend to understand, or explain all that is contained in
this mysterious Book. I only offer what Help I can to the serious Enquirer, and
shall rejoice if any be moved thereby, more carefully to read and more deeply
to consider the Words of this Prophecy. Blessed is he that does this with a
single Eye. His Labor shall not be in vain.

The REVELATION.
I.
THE Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show his servants
the things which must shortly come to pass: and he sent and signified them by
his angel to his servant John, this prophecy, and keep the things which are
written therein; for the time is near.

John to the seven churches which are in Asia; be unto you, and peace from him
who is, and who was, and who comes, and from the seven Spirits that are before
his throne, Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the first begotten from the
dead, and the prince of the kings of the earth:

Behold he comes with clouds, him.

I John, God, I saw seven golden candlesticks, one, like a Son of man, clothed
with a garment down to the foot, and girt about at the breast with a golden
girdle. were white as white wool, as snow, and his eyes as a flame of fire, And
when I saw him, The mystery of the seven stars which thon saw in my right
hand, of the seven golden candlesticks. The seven stars are angels of the seven
Churches: and the seven candlesticks are seven churches.

V. 1. The Revelation -- Properly so called; for Things covered before, are
here revealed or unveiled. No Prophecy in the Old Testament has this Title: It
was reserved for this alone in the New. It is as it were a Manifesto, wherein
the Heir of all Things declares, That all Power is given Him in Heaven and
Earth, and that He will in the End gloriously exercise that Power, maugre all
the Opposition of all his Enemies. Of Jesus Christ -- Not, of John the Divine,
a Title added in latter Ages. Certain it is, that Appellation, the Divine, was
not brought into the Church, much less was it affixed to John the Apostle, till
long after the Apostolic Age. It was St. John indeed who wrote this Book; but
the Author of it is Jesus Christ. Which God gave unto him -- According to his
holy, glorified Humanity, as the Great Prophet of the Church. GOD gave the
Revelation to Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ made it known to his Servants. To show
-- This Word recurs, chapter xxii. 6. And in many Places the Parts of this Book
refer to each other. Indeed the whole Structure of it breathes the Art of GOD,
comprizing in the most finished Compendium, Things to come, many, various;
near, intermediate, remote; the greatest, the least; terrible, comfortable;
old, new; long, short; and these interwoven together, opposite, composite;
relative to each other at a small, at a great Distance; and therefore sometimes
as it were disappearing, broken off, suspended, and afterward unexpectedly and
most seasonably appearing again. In all its Parts it has an admirable Variety,
with the most exact Harmony, beautifully illustrated by those very Digressions
which seem to interrupt it. In this Manner does it display the manifold Wisdom
of GOD shining in the Economy of the Church through so many Ages. His servants
-- Much is comprehended in this Appellation. It Is a great Thing to be a Servant
of Jesus Christ. This Book is dedicated particularly to the Servants of Christ
in the seven Churches in Asia: But not exclusive of all his other Servants, in
all Nations and Ages. It is one single Revelation, and yet sufficient for them
all, from the Time it was written to the End of the World. Serve thou the LORD
Jesus Christ in Truth. So shall thou learn his Secret in this Book. Yea, and
thou shall feel in thy Heart, whether this Book be divine or not. The things
which must shortly come to pass -- The Things contained in this Prophecy did
begin to be accomplished shortly after it was given; and the whole might be
said to come to pass shortly, in the same Sense as St. Peter says, The end of
all things is at hand; and our LORD himself. behold I come quickly. There is in
this Book a rich Treasure of all the Doctrines pertaining to Faith and
Holiness. But these are also delivered in other Parts of Holy Writ; so that the
Revelation need not to have been given for the Sake of these. The peculiar
Design of this is, To show the things which must come to pass. And this we are
especially to have before our Eyes, whenever we read or hear it.

It is said afterward, Write what thou se^st: and again, Write what thou have
seen, and what is, and what shall be hereafter: But here where the Scope of the
Book is shown, it is only said, the things which must come to pass. Accordingly
the showing things to come, is the great Point in View throughout the whole.
And St. John writes what he has seen, and what is, only as it has an Influence
on, or gives Light to, what shall be. And be -- Jesus Christ, sent and
signified them, showed them by Signs or Emblems (so the Greek Word properly
means) by his angel -- Peculiarly called in the Sequel, The angel of God, and
particularly mentioned, chapter xvii. 1. xxi. 9. xxii. 6, 16. To his servant John
-- A Title given to no other single Person throughout the Book.

V. 2. Who has testified -- In the following Book, the word of God -- Given
directly by GOD, and the testimony of Jesus Christ -- Which he has left us, as
the faithful and true Witness, whatsoever things be saw -- In such a Manner as
was a full Confirmation of the Divine Original of this Book.

V. 3. Happy is be that reads, and they that hear the words of this Prophecy
-- Some have miserably handled this Book. Hence others are afraid to touch it.
And while they desire to know all Things else, reject only the Knowledge of
those which GOD has shown. They enquire after any thing rather than this: as
if it were written. Happy is be that does not read this Prophecy. Nay, but
happy is be that reads, and they that hear and keep the words thereof:
Especially at this Time, when so considerable a Part of them is on the Point of
being fulfilled.

Nor are Helps wanting whereby any sincere and diligent Enquirer may understand
what he reads therein. The Book itself is written in the most accurate Manner
possible. It distinguishes the several Things whereof it treats by seven
Epistles, seven Seals, seven Trumpets, seven Phials; each of which Sevens is
divided into Four and Three. Many Things the Book itself explains, as the seven
Stars; the seven Candlesticks; the Lamb, his seven Horns and seven Eyes; the
Incense; the Dragon; the Heads and Horns of the Beasts; the fine Linen; the
Testimony of Jesus. And much Light arises from comparing it with the ancient
Prophecies, and the Predictions in the other Books of the New Testament.

In this Book our LORD has comprised what was wanting in those Prophecies,
touching the Time which followed his Ascension, and the End of the Jewish
Polity. Accordingly it reaches from the Old Jerusalem to the New, reducing all
Things into one Sum in the exactest Order, and with a near Resemblance to the
ancient Prophets. The Introduction and Conclusion agree with Daniel; the
Description of the Man-Child and the Promises to Sion with Isaiah; the Judgment
of Babylon, with Jeremiah: Again, the Determination of Times with Daniel: the
Architecture of the Holy City, with Ezehiel; the Emblems of the Horses,
Candlesticks, etc. with Zechariab. Many Things largely described by the
Prophets are here summarily repeated; and frequently in the same Words. To them
we may then usefully have Recourse. Yet the Revelation suffices for the
explaining itself, even if we do not yet understand those Prophecies; yea, it
casts much Light upon them. Frequently likewise, where there is a Resemblance
between them, there is a Difference also; the Revelation as it were taking a
Stock from one of the old Prophets, and inserting a new Graft into it. Thus
Zechariah speaks of two Olive Trees. And so does St. John; but with a different
Meaning. Daniel has a Beast with Ten Horns. So has St. John; but not with quite
the same Signification. And here the Difference of Words, Emblems, Things,
Times ought studiously to be observed.

Our LORD foretold many Things before his Passion; but not all Things: For it
was not yet seasonable. Many Things likewise his Spirit foretold in the
Writings of the Apostles, so far as the Necessities of those Times required,
now be comprizes them all in one short Book; therein presupposing all the other
Prophecies, and at the same Time, explaining, containing, and perfecting them
in one Thread. It is right therefore to compare them; but not to measure the
Fullness of these by the Scantiness of those preceding.

Christ, when on Faith, foretold what would come to pass in a short Time;
adding a brief Description of the last Things. Here he foretells the
intermediate Things; so that both put together, constitute one complete Chain
of Prophecy. This Book is therefore not only the Sum, and the Key of all the
Prophecies which preceded, but likewise a Supplement to all; the Seals being
closed before. Of Consequence it contains many Particulars, not revealed in any
other Part of Scripture. They have therefore little Gratitude to GOD for such a
Revelation, reserved for the Exaltation of Christ, who boldly reject whatever
they find here, which was not revealed, or not so clearly in other Parts of
Scripture. He that reads and they that bear -- St. John probably sent this
Book by a single Person into Asia, who read it in the Churches, while many
heard. But this likewise in a secondary Sense refers to all that shall duly
read or hear it in all Ages. The words of this prophecy -- It is a Revelation
with regard to Christ who gives it, a prophecy with regard to John who delivers
it to the Churches. And keep the things which are written therein -- In such a
Manner as the Nature of them requires; namely, with Repentance, Faith,
Patience, Prayer, Obedience, Watchfulness, Constancy. It behooves every
Christian, at all Opportunities to read what is written in the Oracles of GOD;
and to read this precious Book in particular, frequently, reverently, and
attentively. For the time of its Beginning to be accomplished, is near -- Even
when St. John wrote. How much nearer to us is even the full Accomplishment of
this weighty Prophecy?

V. 4. John -- The Dedication of this Book is contained in the 4th, 5th, and
6th Verses: But the whole Revelation is a Kind of Letter. To the seven churches
which are in Asia -- That Part of the Lesser Asia, which was then a Roman
Province. There had been several other Churches planted here: but it seems
these were now the most eminent. And it was among these that St. John had
labored most during his Abode in Asia. In these Cities there were many Jews.
Such of them as believed in each were joined with the Gentile Believers in one
Church. Grace be unto you and peace -- The Favor of GOD with all temporal and
eternal Blessings, From him who is, and who was, and who comes, or who is to
come -- A wonderful Translation of the great Name JEHOVAH: He was of old, he is
now; he comes; that is, will be for ever. And from the seven Spirits which are
before his throne -- Christ is He who has the seven Spirits of God. The seven
Lamps which burn before the throne are the seven Spirits of God. The Lamb has
seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God. Seven was a
sacred Number. in th Jewish Church. But it did not always imply a precise
Number. It sometimes is to be taken figuratively, to denote Compleatness or
Perfection. By these seven Spirits, not seven created Angels, but the Holy
Ghost is to be understood: The Angels are never termed Spirits in this Book:
and when all the Angels stand up, while the four living Creatures and the four
and twenty Elders worship him that sits on the throne and the Lamb, the
seven Spirits, neither stand up nor worship. To these seven Spirits of God, the
seven Churches, to whom the Spirit speaks so many Things, are subordinate: As
are also their Angels, yea, and the seven Angels which stand before God. He is
called The seven Spirits, not with regard to his Essence, which is one, but
with regard to his manifold Operations.

V. 5. And from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the first begotten from the
dead, and the Prince of the kings of the earth -- Three glorious Appellations
are here given Him, and in their proper Order. He was the faithful witness of
the whole Will of GOD before his Death, and in Death, and remains such in
Glory. He rose from the dead, as the first fruits of them that slept: And now
has all Power both in Heaven and Earth. He is here styled a Prince. But by and
by He bears his Title of King; yea, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. This
Phrase, the kings of the earth, signifies their Power and Multitude, and also
the Nature of their Kingdom. It became the Divine Majesty to call them Kings
with a Limitation; especially in this Manifesto from his Heavenly Kingdom. For
no Creature, much less a sinful Man, can bear the Title of King in an absolute
Sense before the Eyes of GOD.

V. 6. To him that loves us, and -- Out of that free, abundant Love, has
washed us from -- The Guilt and Power of, our sins with his own blood; and has
made us kings -- Partakers of his Present, and Heirs of his Eternal Kingdom,
and priests unto his God and Father -- To whom we continually offer ourselves,
an holy living Sacrifice: To him be the glory -- For his Love and Redemption;
and the might -- Whereby he governs all Things.

V. 7. Behold -- In this and the next Verse is the Proposition, and the Summary
of the whole Book. Hecometh -- Jesus Christ. Throughout this Book, whenever it
is said, He comes, it means his glorious Coming. The Preparation for this
began at the Destruction of Jerusalem, and more particularly, at the Time of
writing this Book, and goes on, without any Interruption, 'till that grand
Event is accomplished. Therefore it is never said in this Book He will come,
but He comes. And yet it is not said, He comes again. For when he came before
it was not like himself, but in the form of a Servant. But his appearing in
Glory is properly his Coming, namely in a Manner worthy of the Son of GOD. And
every eye -- Of the Jews in particular, shall see him -- But with what
different Emotions, according as they had received or rejected him! And they
who have pierced him -- They above all, who pierced his Hands, or Feet, or
Side. Thomas saw the Print of these Wounds, even after his Resurrection. And
the same undoubtedly will be seen by all, when he comes in the Clouds of
Heaven. And all the tribes of the earth -- The Word Tribes in the Revelation
always means the Israelites; but where another Word, such as Nations or People,
is joined with it, it implies likewise (as here) all the Rest of Mankind, Shall
wail because of him -- For Terror and Pain, if they did not wail before by true
Repentance. Yea. Amen -- This refers to every eye shall see him. He that
comes, says Yea; He that testifies it, Amen. The Word translated Yea, is
Greek, Amen, is Hebrew; for what is here spokea respects both Jew and Gentile.

V. 8. I am the Alpha and the Omega, says the Lord God -- Alpha is the first,
Omega the last Letter in the Greek Alphabet. Let his Enemles boast and rage
ever so much in the intermediate Time, yet the LORD GOD is both the Alpha or
Beginning, and the Omega or End of all Things. GOD is the Beginning, as he is
the Author and Creator of all Things, and as he proposes, declares, and
promises so great Things. He is the End, as he brings all the Things which are
here revealed to a complete and glorious Conclusion. Again, the beginning and
end of a thing, is in Scripture styled the whole Thing. Therefore GOD is the
Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and the End, that is, One, who is all
Things, and always the same.

V. 9. I John -- The Instraction and Preparation of the Apostle for the Work
are described from the 9th to the 20th Verse: your brother -- In the common
Faith: and companion in the affliction -- For the same Persecution which
carried him to Patmos, drove them into Asia. This Book peculiarly belongs to
those who are under the Cross. It was given to a banished Man: and Men in
Affliction, understand and relish it most. Accordingly it was little esteemed
by the Asiatic Church, after the Time of Constantine; but highly valued by all
the African Churches; as it has been since by all the persecuted Children of
GOD. In the affliction, and kingdom, and patience of Jesus -- The Kingdom
stands in the Midst. It is chiefly under various Afflictions, that Faith
obtains its Part in the Kingdom. And whosoever is a Partaker of this Kingdom,
is not afraid to suffer for Jesus. 2 Timothy ii. 12. I was in the island Patmos --
In the Reign of Domitian and of Nerva. And there he saw and wrote all that
follows. It was a Place peculiarly proper for these Visions. He had over
against him at a small Distance Asia and the seven Churches; going on Eastward,
Jerusalem and the Land of Canaan, and beyond this, Antioch, yea the whole
Continent of Asia. To the West, he had Rome, Italy and all Europe, swimming as
it were in the Sea: To the South, Alexandria and the Nile with its Outlets,
Egypt and all Africa: And to the North, what was afterward called
Constantinople, on the Straits between Europe and Asia. So he had all the ^hree
Parts of the World which were then known, with all Christendom as it were
bes^^^ his Eyes; a large Theater, for all the various Scenes which were to pass
before him. As if this Island had been made principally for this End, to serve
as an Observatory for the Apostle. For preaching the word of God he was
banished thither, and for the testimony of Jesus; for testifying that he is the
Christ.

V. 10. I was in the Spirit -- That is, in a Trance, a Prophetic Vision: So
overwhelmed with the Power and filled with the Light of the Holy Spirit, as to
be insensible of outward Things, and wholly taken up with Spiritual and Divine.
What follows is one single, connected Vision, which St. John saw in one Day:
and therefore he that would understand it, should carry his Thought strait on
through the whole without Interruption. The other Prophetic Books are
Collections of distinct Prophecies, given upon various Occasions. But here is
one single Treatise, whereof all the Parts exactly depend on each other. Chapter
iv. 1. is connected with chapter i. 19. And what is delivered in the 4th Chapter,
goes on directly to the 22d. On the Lord's day -- On this our LORD rose from
the Dead. On this the Ancients believed he will come to Judgment. It was
therefore with the utmost Propriety, that St. John on this Day both saw and
described his Coming. And I heard behind me -- St. John had his Face to the
East: Our LORD likewise in this Appearance, looked Eastward toward Asia,
whither the Apostle was to write: a great voice as of a trumpet -- Which was
peculiarly proper to proclaim the Coming of the great King, and his Victory
over all his Enemies.

V. 11. Saying, what thou see -- And hear. He both saw and heard. This
Command extends to the whole Book. All the Books of the New Testament were
written by the Will of GOD; but none were so expressly commanded to be written:
in a book -- So all the Revelation is but one Book: Nor did the Letter to the
Angel of each Church, belong to him or his Church only, but the whole Book was
sent to them all: to the churches -- Hereafter named; and through them, to all
Churches, in all Ages and Nations. To Ephesus -- Mr. Thomas Smith, who in the
Year 1671, traveled through all these Cities, observes, that from Ephesus to
Smyrna is forty-six English Miles, from Smyrna to Pergamos, sixty-four, from
Pergamos to Thyatira forty-eight, from Thyatira to Sardis thirty-three, from
Sardis to Philadelphia twenty-seven, from Philadelphia to Laodicea about
forty-two Miles.

V. 12. And I turned to see the voice -- That is, to see him, whose Voice it
was, and being turned I saw -- It seems the Vision presented itself gradually.
First he heard a Voice, and upon looking behind he saw the golden candlesticks,
and then, in the Midst of the Candlesticks, which were placed in a Circle, he
saw one like a Son of man -- That is, in an human Form. As a Man likewise our
LORD doubtless appears in Heaven: though not exactly in this symbolical Manner,
wherein he presents himself as the Head of his Church. He next observed that
our LORD was clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt with a golden
girdle -- Such the Jewish Highpriests wore. But both of them are here Marks of
Royal Dignity likewise, girl about at the breast -- He that is on a Journey
girds his Loins. Girding the Breast was an Emblem of solemn Rest. It seems that
the Apostle having seen all this, looked up to behold the Face of our LORD; but
was beat back by the Appearance of his flaming eyes, which occasioned his more
particularly observing his Feet. Receiving Strength to raise his Eyes again, he
saw the Stars in his Right Hand, and the Sword coming out of his Mouth: But
upon beholding the Brightness of his glorious Countenance (which probably was
much increased since the first Glance the Apostle had of it) he fell at his
feet as dead. During the Time that St. John was discovering these several
Particulars, our LORD seems to have been speaking. And doubtless even his
Voice, at the very first, bespoke the GOD: Though not so insupportably as his
glorious Appearance.

V. 13. And I turned to see the voice -- That is, to see him, whose Voice it
was, and being turned I saw -- It seems the Vision presented itself gradually.
First he heard a Voice, and upon looking behind he saw the golden candlesticks,
and then, in the Midst of the Candlesticks, which were placed in a Circle, he
saw one like a Son of man -- That is, in an human Form. As a Man likewise our
LORD doubtless appears in Heaven: though not exactly in this symbolical Manner,
wherein he presents himself as the Head of his Church. He next observed that
our LORD was clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt with a golden
girdle -- Such the Jewish Highpriests wore. But both of them are here Marks of
Royal Dignity likewise, girl about at the breast -- He that is on a Journey
girds his Loins. Girding the Breast was an Emblem of solemn Rest. It seems that
the Apostle having seen all this, looked up to behold the Face of our LORD; but
was beat back by the Appearance of his flaming eyes, which occasioned his more
particularly observing his Feet. Receiving Strength to raise his Eyes again, he
saw the Stars in his Right Hand, and the Sword coming out of his Mouth: But
upon beholding the Brightness of his glorious Countenance (which probably was
much increased since the first Glance the Apostle had of it) he fell at his
feet as dead. During the Time that St. John was discovering these several
Particulars, our LORD seems to have been speaking. And doubtless even his
Voice, at the very first, bespoke the GOD: Though not so insupportably as his
glorious Appearance.

V. 14. His head and his hair -- That is, the hair of his Head, not his whole
Head, were white as white wool -- Like the Ancient of Days, represented in
Daniel's Vision (chapter vii. 9.) Wool is commonly supposed to be an Emblem of
Eternity, as snow -- Betokening his spotless Purity. And his eyes as a flame of
fire -- Piercing through all Things; a Token of his Omniscience.

V. 15. And his feet like fine brass -- Denoting his Stability and Strength, as
if they burned in a furnace -- As if having been melted and refined, they were
still red-hot, and his voice -- To the Comfort of his Friends, and the Terror
of his Enemies, as the voice of many waters -- Roaring aloud, and bearing down
all before them.

V. 16. And he had in his right hand seven stars -- In Token of his Favor and
powerful Protection. And out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword --
Signifying his Justice and righteous Anger, continually pointed against his
Enemies as a Sword, sharp, to stab, twoedged, to hew. And his countenance was
as the sun shines in his strength -- Without any Mist or Cloud.

V. 17. And I fell at his feet as dead -- Human Nature not being able to
sustain so glorious an Appearance. Thus was he prepared (like Daniel of old,
whom he peculiarly resembles) for receiving so weighty a Prophecy. A great
sinking of Nature usually precedes a large Communication of heavenly Things.
St. John, before our LORD suffered, was so intimate with him, as to lean on his
Breast, to lie in his Bosom. Yet now, near seventy Years after, the aged
Apostle is by one Glance struck to the Ground. What a Glory must this be! Ye
Sinners, be afraid. Cleanse your Hands. Purify your Hearts. Ye Saints, be
humble. Prepare. Rejoice. But rejoice unto him with Reverence. An Increase of
Reverence toward this awful Majesty can be no Prejudice to your Faith. Let all
Petulancy, with all vain Curiosity, be far away, while you are thinking or
reading of these Things. And he laid his right hand upon me -- The same wherein
he held the seven Stars. What did St. John then feel in himself? Saying, Fear
not -- His look terrifies, his Speech strengthens. He does not call John by his
Name (as the Angels did Zechariah and others) but speaks as his well-known
Master. What follows is also spoken to strengthen and encourage him. I am --
When in his State of Humiliation he spoke of his Glory, he frequently spoke in
the Third Person: (as Matt. xxvi. 64.) But he now speaks of his own Glory,
without any Veil, in plain and direct Terms. The First and the Lust -- That is,
the One, Eternal GOD, who is from everlasting to everlasting. Isai. xli. 4.

V. 18. And He that lives -- Another peculiar Title of GOD, and I have the
keys of death and of hades -- That is, the invisible World: In the intermediate
State, the Body abides in Death, the Soul in Hades. Christ has the Kays of,
that is, the Power over both, killing or quickening of the Body, and disposing
of the Soul, as it pleases him. He gave St. Peter the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven; but not the Keys of Death or of Hades. How comes then his supposed
Successor at Rome by the Keys of Purgatory?

From the preceding Description mostly, are taken the Titles given to Christ in
the following Letters, particularly the four first.

V. 19. Write the things which thou have s^en -- This Day: Which accordingly
are written, chapter i. 11 -- 18. and which are -- The Instructions relating to the
Present State of the seven Churches. These are written, chapter i. (...). chapter iii.
22. and which shall be hereafter -- To the End of the World; written chapter iv. 1,
etc.

V. 20. Write first the mystery -- The mysterious Meaning of the seven-stars --
St. John knew better than we do, in how many Respects these Stars were a proper
Emblem of those Angels: How nearly they resembled each other, and how far they
differed in Magnitude, Brightness, and other Circumstances. The seven stars are
angels of the seven churches -- Mentioned in the 11th Verse. In each Church
there was one Pastor or Ruling Minister, to whom all the Rest were subordinate.
This Pastor, Bishop, or Overseer, had the peculiar Care over that Flock: On him
the Prosperity of that Congregation in a great Measure depended: And he was to
answer for all those Souls at the Judgment Seat of Christ. And the seven
candlesticks are seven churches -- How significant an Emblem is this! For a
Candlestick, though of Gold, has no Light of itself: neither has any Church, or
Child of Man. But they receive from Christ the Light of Truth, Holiness,
Comfort, that it may shine to all around them.

As soon as this was spoken St. John wrote it down, even all that is contained
in this First Chapter. Afterward what was contained in the Second and Third
Chapters, was dictated to him in like Manner.

Chapter ii. of the following Letters to the Angels of the seven Churches it may be
necessary to speak first, in general, and then particularly.

In general we may observe, when the Israelites were to receive the Law at
Mount Sinai, they were first to be purified. And when the Kingdom of GOD was at
Hand, John the Baptist prepared Men for it by Repentance. In like Manner we are
prepared by these Letters for the worthy Reception of this glorious Revelation.
By following the Directions given herein, by expelling incorrigibly wicked Men,
and putting away all Wickedness, those Churches were prepared to receive this
precious Depositum. And whoever in any Age would profitably read or hear it,
must observe the same Admonitions.

These Letters are a Kind of sevenfold Preface to the Book. Christ now appears
in the Form of a Man (not yet under the Emblem of a Lamb) and speaks mostly in
proper, not in figurative Words. It is not all chapter iv. 1. that St. John enters
upon that Grand Vision which takes up the Residue of the Book.

There is in each of these Letters, 1. A Command to write to the Angel of the
Church; 2. A glorious Title of Christ; 3. An Address to the Angel of that
Church, containing A Testimony of his Mixed, or Good, or Bad State; An
Exhortation to Repentance or Stedfastness; A Declaration of what will be;
generally, of the LORD's Coming. 4. A Promise to him that overcomes, together
with the Exhortation, He that has an ear to hear, let him hear.


The Address in each Letter is expressed in plain Words, the Promise, in
figurative. In the Address our LORD speaks to the Angel of each Church which
then was, and to the Members thereof directly: Whereas in the Promise he speaks
of all that should overcome, in whatever Church or Age, and deals out to them
one of the Precious Promises, (by way of Anticipation) from the last Chapters
of the Book.

II.
To the angel of the church at Ephesus write, These things says he that
holds the seven stars in his right hand, that walks in the midst of the
seven golden candlesticks. them liars: its place,

And to the angel of the church at Smyrna write, who was dead and is alive.

And to the angel of the church at Pergamos write, These things says he who
has the sharp two-edged sword. is; and thou hold fast my name, and have not
denied my faith, in the days wherein Antipas was my faithful witness, who was
slain among you, where Satan dwells. But I have a few things against thee,
churches. To him that overcomes will I give of the hidden manna, and will give
him a white stone, and on the stone a new name written, which none knows, but
he that receives it.

And to the angel of the church at Thyatira write, to eat things sacrificed to
idols. will I give power over the nations,

V. 1. Write -- So Christ dictated to him every Word. These things says he who
holds the seven stars in his right hand -- Such is his mighty Power! Such his
Favor to them and Care over them, that they may indeed shine as Stars, both by
Purity of Doctrine and Holiness of Life! Who walks -- According to his
Promise, I am with you always, even to the end of the world: in the midst of
the golden candlesticks -- Beholding all their Works and Thoughts, and ready to
remove the candlestick out of its place -- If any being warned, will not
repent. Perhaps here is likewise an Allusion to the Office of the Priests in
dressing the Lamps, which was to keep them always burning before the LORD.

V. 2. I know -- Jesus knows all the Good and all the Evil, which his Servants
and his Enemies suffer and do. Weighty Word, I know! how dreadful will it one
Day sound to the Wicked, how sweet to the Righteous! The Churches and their
Angels must have been astonished, to find their several States so exactly
described, even in the Absence of the Apostle, and could not but acknowledge
the all-seeing Eye of Christ and of his Spirit. With regard to us, To every one
of us also he says, I know thy works! -- Happy is he that conceives less Good
of himself, than Christ knows concerning him! And thy labor -- After the
General, three Particulars are named, and then more largely described in an
inverted Order. 1. Thy Labor: 2. Thy Patience. 3. Thou can not bear evil
Men. 4. Thou have tried those who say they are Apostles and are not, and have
found them Liars. 5. Thou have Patience: 6. Thou have borne for my Name's Sake
and have not fainted:
And thy patience -- Notwithstanding which thou can not bear that
incorrigibly wicked men should remain in the Flock of Christ. And thou have
tried those who say they are apostles, and are not -- For the LORD has not
sent them.

V. 4. But I have against thee, that thou have left thy first love -- That Love
for which all that Church was so eminent, when St. Paul wrote his Epistle to
them. He need not have left this. He might have retained it entire to the End.
And he did retain it in part, or there could not have remained so much of what
was commendable in him. But he had not kept (as he might have done) the first
tender Love, in its Vigor and Warmth. Reader, Have thou?

V. 5. It is not possible for any to recover the first Love, but by taking
these three Steps, 1. Remember; 2. Repent; 3. Do the first works. Remember from
whence thou art fallen -- From what Degree of Faith, Love, Holiness, though
perhaps insensibly. And repent -- Which in the very lowest Sense implies, a
deep and lively Conviction of thy Fall. Of the seven Angels, Two, at Ephesus
and at Pergamos, were in a mixed State: Two, at (...) and at Laodicea, were
greatly corrupted. All these are exhorted to repent; as are the Followers of
Jezebel at Thyatira. Two, at Smyrna and Philadelphia, were in a flourishing
State, and are therefore only exhorted to Stedfastness.

There can be no State, either of any Pastor, Church, or single Person, which
has not here suitable Instructions. All, whether Ministers or Hearers, together
with their secret or open Enemies, in all Places and all Ages, may draw hence
necessary Self-Knowledge, Reproof, Commendation, Warning or Confirmation.
Whether any be as dead as the Angel at Sardis, or as much alive as the Angel at
Philadelphia: this Book is sent to Him, and the Lord Jesus has something to
say to him therein. For the seven Churches with their Angels represent the
whole Christian Church, dispersed throughout the whole World, as it subsists
not (as some have imagined) in one Age after another, but in every Age. This is
a Point of deep Importance, and always necessary to be remembered: That these
seven Churches are, as it were, a Sample of the whole Church of Christ, as it
was then, as it is now, and as it will be in all Ages. Do the first works --
outwardly and inwardly, or thou can never regain the first Love: But if not
-- By this Word is the Warning sharpened to those five Churches which are
called to repent: (for if Ephesus was threatened, how much more shall Sardis
and Laodicea be afraid!) And according as they obey the Call or not, there is a
Promise or a Threatening (chapter ii. 5, 16, 22. chapter iii. 3, 20.) But even in the
Threatening the Promise is implied, in case of true Repentance. I come to thee,
and will remove thy candlestick out of its place -- I will remove, unless thou
repent, the Flock now under thy Care to another Place, where they shall be
better taken Care of. But from the flourishing State of the Church of Ephesus
after this, there is Reason to believe he did repent.

V. 6. But thou have this -- Divine Grace seeks whatever may help him that is
fallen to recover his Standing: that thou hate the works of the Nicolaitans
-- Probably so called from Nicolas, one of the seven Deacons, ( Acts vi. 5.)
Their Doctrines and Lives were equally corrupt. They allowed the most
abominable Lewdness and Adulteries, as well as sacrificing to Idols; all which
they placed among Things indifferent, and pleaded for as Branches of Christian
Liberty.

V. 7. He that has an ear, let him hear -- Every Man, whoever can hear at all,
ought carefully to hear this. What the spirit says -- In these great and
precious Promises to the churches -- And in them to every one that overcomes:
that goes on from Faith, and by Faith to full Victory over the World, and the
Flesh and the Devil.

In these Seven Letters Twelve Promises are contained, which are an Extract of
all the Promises of GOD. Some of them are not expressly (...) again in this
Book, as the hidden manna, the Inscription o^ the name of the new Jerusalem,
the fitting upon the throne. Some resemble what is aftewards mentioned, as the
hidden name, (chapter xix. 12.) the ruling the nations (chapter xix. 15.) the morning
star, (chapter xxii. 16.) And some are expressly mentioned, as the tree of life,
(chapter xxii. 2.) Freedom from the second death, (chapter ix. 6.) the Name in the book
of life, (chapter xx. 12. xxi. 27.) the remaining in the temple of God, (chapter vii.
13.) the Inscription of the name of God and of the Lamb, (chapter xiv. 1. xiii. 4.)
In these Promises sometimes the Enjoyment of the highest Goods, sometimes
Deliverance from the greatest Evils is mentioned. And each implies the other,
so that where either Part is expressed, the whole is to be understood. That
Part is expressed which has most Resemblance to the Virtues or Works of him
that was spoken to in the Letter preceding. To eat of the tree of life -- The
first Thing promised in these Letters, is the last and highest in the
Accomplishment (chapter xxii. 2, 14, 19.) The tree of life, and the water of I se
go together (chapter xxii. 1, 2.) both implying, the living with GOD eternally: in
the paradise of my God -- The Word Paradise means a Garden of Pleasure. In the
earthly Paradise there was one Tree of Life: there are no other Trees in the
Paradise of GOD.

V. 8. These things says the First and the Last, who was dead and is alive --
How directly does this Description tend to confirm him against the Fear of
Death? (ver. 10, 11.) Even with the Comfort wherewith St. John himself was
comforted, chapter i. 17, 18. shall the Angel of this Church be comforted.

V. 9. I know thy affliction and poverty -- A poor Prerogative in the Eyes of
the World! The Angel at Philadelphia likewise had in their Sight but a little
strength. And yet these two were the most honorable of all, in the Eyes of the
LORD. But thou art rich -- In Faith and Love, of more Value than all the
Kingdoms of the Earth. Who say they are Jews -- GOD's own People, and are not
-- They are not Jews inwardly, not circumcised in Heart; but a synagegue of
Satan -- Who, like them, was a Liar and a Murderer, from the Beginning.

V. 10. The first and last Words of this Verse are particularly directed to the
Minister; whence we may gather, that his Suffering and the Affliction of the
Church were at the same Time, and of the same Continuance. Fear none of those
things which thou art about to suffer -- Probably by Means of the false Jews.
Behold -- This intimates the Nearness of the Affliction. Perhaps the ten days
began, on the very Day that the Revelation was read at Smyrna, or at least,
very soon after. The devil -- Who sets all Persecutors to Work; and these more
particularly: is about to cast some of you -- Christians at Smyrna; where, in
the first Ages, the Blood of many Martyrs was shed: into prison, that ye may be
tried -- To your unspeakable Advantage. (1 Pet. iv. 12-14.) And ye shall have
affliction -- Either in your own Persons, or by sympathizing with your
Brethren: Ten days -- (Literally taken) in the End of Domitian's Persecution,
which was stopped, by the Edict of the Emperor Nerva. Be thou faithful -- Our
LORD does not say, till I come, (as in the other Letters) but unto death --
Signifying that the Angel of this Church should quickly after seal his
Testimony with his Blood: Fifty Years before the Martyrdom of Polycarp, for
whom some have mistaken him. And I will give thee the crown of life -- The
peculiar Reward of them who are faithful unto death.

V. 11. The second death -- The lake of fire, The Portion of the fearful, who
do not overcome (chapter xxi. 8.)

V. 12. The sword -- With which I will cut off the Impenitent. ver. 16.

V. 13. Where the throne of Satan is -- Pergamos was above Measure given to
Idolatry: So Satan had his Throne and full Residence there. Thou hold fast
my name -- Openly and resolutely confessing me before Men: in the days wherein
Antipas -- Martyred under Domitian: was my faithful witness -- Happy is he, to
whom Jesus, the faithful and true Witness gives such a Testimony!

V. 14. But thou have there -- Whom thou ought to have immediately cast out
from the Flock: them that hold the doctrine of Balaam -- Doctrine nearly
resembling his: who taught Balak -- And the rest of the Moabites, to cast a
stumbling block before the sons of Israel -- They are generally termed the
children, but here the sons of Israel, in Opposition to the daughters of Moab,
by whom Balaam enticed them to Fornication and Idolatry: To eat things
sacrificed to idols -- Which in so idolatrous a City as Pergamas, was in the
highest Degree hurtful to Christianity: and to commit fornication -- Which was
constantly joined with the Idol-worship of the Heathens.

V. 15. In like manner, thou also -- As well as the Angel at Ephesus: have them
that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans -- And thou suffer them to remain
in the Flock.

V. 16. If not, I come to thee -- Who wilt not wholly escape, when I punish
Them: and will fight with them -- Not with the Nicolaitans, who are mentioned
only by the by; but the Followers of Balaam: with the sword of my mouth -- With
my just and fierce Displeasure. Balaam himself was first withstood by the Angel
of the LORD with his sword drawn, ( Numb. xxii. 23.) and afterward slain with
the sword, Numb. xxxi. 8.

V. 17. To him that overcomes -- And eats not of those Sacrifices: will I
give of the hidden manna -- Described John vi. The new Name answers to this: It
is now hid with Christ in God. The Jewish Manna was kept in the ancient Ark of
the Covenant. The Heavenly Arc of the Covenant appears under the Trumpet of
the Seventh Angel (chapter xi. 19.) where also the hidden manna is mentioned again.
It seems properly to mean, the full, glorious, everlasting Fruition of GOD. And
I will give him a white stone -- The Ancients, on many Occasions, gave their
Votes in Judgment by small Stones; by Black they condemned; by White ones they
acquitted. Sometimes also they wrote on small, smooth Stones. Here may be an
Allusion to both. And a new name -- So Jacob, after his Victory, gained the new
Name of Israel. Would thou know, what thy new name will be? The Way to this
is plain: Overcome. Till then all thy Enquiries are vain. Thou will then read
it on the white stone.

V. 18. And to the angel of the church at Thyatira -- Where the Faithful were
but a little Flock: These things says the Son of God -- See how great he is,
who appeared like a Son of man! (chapter i. 13.) Who has eyes as a flame of fire
-- Searching the reins and the heart, ver. 23. and his feet like fine brass --
Denoting his immense Strength. Job comprizes both these, his Wisdom to discern
whatever is amiss, and his Power to avenge it, in one Sentence, (chapter xlii. 2.)
No thought is hidden from him, and he can do all things.

V. 19. I know thy love -- How different a Character is this, from that of the
Angel of the Church at Ephesus? The latter could not bear the wicked, and hated
the works of the Nicolaitans; but had left his first love and first Works. The
former retained his first Love, and had more and more Works, but did bear the
wicked, did not withstand them with becoming Vehemence. Mixed Characters both:
Yet the latter, not the former, is reproved for his Fall, and commanded to
repent. And faith, and thy service, and patience -- Love is shown, exercised,
and improved by serving GOD and our Neighbor: So is Faith by Patience and Good
Works.

V. 20. But thou suffer that woman Jezebel -- Who ought not to teach at all,
(1 Timothy ii. 12.) to teach and seduce my servants -- At Pergamos where many
Followers of Balaam; at Thyatira, One grand Deceiver. Many of the ancients have
delivered, that this was the Wife of the Pastor himself. Jezebel of old led the
People of GOD so open Idolatry. This Jezebel (fitly called by her Name, from
the Resemblance between their Works) led them to partake in the Idolatry of the
Heathens. This she seams to have done by first enticing them to Fornication,
just as Balaam did: Whereas at Pergamos they were first enticed to Idolatry,
and afterward to Fornication.

V. 21. And I gave her time to repent -- So great is the Power of Christ: but
she will not repent -- So, though Repentance is the Gift of GOD, Man may refuse
it: GOD will not compel.

V. 22. I will cast her into a bed -- into great affliction -- and them that
commit either carnal or spiritual adultery with her, unless they repent -- She
had her Time before: of her works -- Those to which she had enticed them, and
which she had committed with them.

It is observable, the Angel of the Church at Thyatira, was only blamed, for
suffering her. This Fault ceased when GOD took Vengeance on her. Therefore he
is not expressly exhorted to repent, though it is implied.

V. 23. And I will kill her children -- Those which she has borne in Adultery,
and them whom she has seduced: with death -- This Expression denotes Death by
the Plague, or by some manifest Stroke of GOD's Hand. Probably the remarkable
Vengeance taken on her Children, was the Token of the Certainty of all the
rest. And all the churches -- To which thou now writest, shall know, that I
search the reins -- The Desires, and hearts -- Thoughts.

V. 24. But I say to you who do not bold this doctrine -- Of Jezebel: Who have
not known the depths of Satan -- O happy Ignorance! as they speak -- That were
continually boasting of the deep things which they taught. Our LORD owns they
were deep, even deep as Hell; for they were the very Depths of Satan. Were
these the same of which Martin Luther speaks? It Is well if there are not some
of his Countrymen, now in England, who know them too well! I will lay upon you
no other burden -- Than that you have already suffered from Jezebel and her
Adherents.

V. 25. What ye -- Both the Angel and the Church have.

V. 26. My works -- Those which I have commanded; To him will I give power over
the nations -- That is, I will give him to share with me in that glorious
Victory, which the Father has promised me over all the Nations who as yet
resist me. ( Psalm ii. 8, 9.)

V. 27. And he shall rule them -- That is, shall share with me when I do this:
with a rod of iron -- With irresistible Power, employed on those only, who will
not otherwise submit; who will hereby be dashed in pieces -- Totally conquered.

V. 28. I will give him the morning star -- Thou, O Jesus, art the
Morning Star. O give Thyself to me! Then will I desire no Sun, only Thee, who
art the Sun also. He whom this Star enlightens, has always Morning and no
Evening. The Duties and Promises here answer each other: The valiant Conqueror
has Power over the stubborn Nations. And he that after having conquered his
Enemies, keeps the Works of Christ to the End, shall have the Morning Star --
an unspeakable Brightness and peaceable Dominion in Him.

III.
And to the angel of the church at Sardis write, These things says he that
has the seven spirits of God, and the seven stars, I know thy works, that thou
have a name that thou live, but art dead. Be watchful, come up on thee,

And to the angel of the church at Philadelphia write, have not denied my name.
has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.

And to the angel of the church at Laodicea write, and repent.

V. 1. The seven spirits of God -- The Holy Spirit, from whom alone all
spiritual Life and Strength proceed: and the seven stars -- Which are
subordinate to Him: thou have a name that thou live -- A fair Reputation, a
goodly outside Appearance. But that Spirit sees through all Things, and every
empty Appearance vanishes before Him.

V. 2. The things which remain -- In thy Soul; Knowledge of the Truth, good
Desires, and Convictions; which were ready to die -- Wherever Pride, Indolence
or Levity revives, all the Fruits of the Spirit are ready to die.

V. 3. Remember how -- Humbly, zealously, seriously, thou did receive the
Grace of GOD once, and hear -- His Word; and hold fast -- The Grace thou have
received; and repent -- According to the Word thou have heard.

V. 4. Yet thou have a few names -- That is, Persons. But though few, they had
not separated themselves from the rest; otherwise the Angel of Sardis would not
have had them. Yet it was no Virtue of his, that they were unspotted; where it
was his Fault, that they were but few: who have not defiled their garments --
Either by spotting themselves, or by partaking of other Men's Sins: They shall
walk with me in white -- In Joy; in perfect Holiness; in Glory: they are worthy
-- A few Good among many Bad, are doubly acceptable to GOD. O how much happier
is this worthiness than that mentioned, chapter xvi. 6.

V. 5. He shall be clothed in white raiment -- The Color of Victory, Joy, and
Triumph: And I will not blot his name out of the (...) of life -- Like that of
the Angel of the Church at Sardis: but he shall live for ever. I will confess
his name -- As one of my faithful Servants and Soldiers.

V. 7. The Holy One, the True One -- Two great and glorious Names. He that has
the key of David -- A Master of a Family or a Prince has one or more Keys,
wherewith he can open and shut all the Doors of his House or Palace. So had
David a Key, (a Token of Right and Sovereignty) which was afterward adjudged
to Eliakim, Isaich xxii. 22. Much more has Christ, the Son of David, the Key of
the Spiritual City of David, the New Jerusalem; the supreme Right, Power, and
Authority, as in his own House. He opens this to all that overcome, and none
shuts -- he shuts it against all the fearful; and none opens. Likewise
when he opens a Door on Earth for his Works or his Servants, none can shut;
and when he shuts against whatever would hurt or defile, none can open.

V. 8. I have given before thee an open door -- To enter into the Joy of thy
LORD; and mean time to go on unhindered is every good Work. Thou have a little
strength -- But little outward be man Strength; a little, poor, mean,
despicable Company. Yet thou have kept my word -- Both in Judgment and Practict.

V. 9. Behold I -- Who have all Power; and they must then comply: I will make
them come and bow down before thy feet -- Pay thee the lowest Homage, and know
-- At length, that all depends on my Love, and that thou have a Place therein.
O how often does the Judgment of the People turn quite round, when the LORD
looks upon them! ( Job. xlii. 7.)

V. 10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience -- The Word of Christ is
indeed a word of patience: I also will keep thee -- O happy Exemption from that
spreading Calamity! from the hour of temptation -- So that thou shall not enter
into Temptation, but it shall pass over thee. The hour denotes the short Time
of its Continuance, that is, at any one Place. At every one it was very sharp,
though short, wherein the great Tempter was not idle, chapter ii. 10. which Hour
shall come upon the whole earth -- The whole Roman Empire. It went over the
Christians and over the Jews and Heathens; though in a very different Manner.
This was the Time of the Persecution under the seemingly virtuous Emperor
Trajan. The two preceding Persecutions, were under those Monsters, Nero and
D^mitian. But Trajan was so admired for his Goodness, and his Persecution was
of such a Nature, that it was a Temptation indeed, and did thoroughly try them
that dwelt upon the earth.

V. 11. Thy crown -- Which is ready for thee, if thou endure to the End.

V. 12. I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God -- I will fix him as
beautiful, as useful, and as (...) moveable as a Pillar in the Church of GOD:
And be shall go out no more -- But shall be holy and happy for ever. And I will
write upon him the name of my God -- So that the Nature and Image of GOD shall
appear visibly upon him. And the name of the city of my God -- Giving him a
Title to dwell in the New Jerusalem: and my n^w name -- A Share in that Joy
which I entered into, after overcoming all my Enemies.

V. 14. To the angel of the church at Laodicea -- For these St. Paul had had a
great Concern, Col. ii. 1. These things says the Auten -- That is, The True
One, the GOD of Truth; the beginning -- The Author, Prince, and Ruler, of the
creation of God -- Of all Creatures: The beginning, or Author, by whom GOD made
them all.

V. 15. I know thy works -- Thy Disposition and Behavior, though thou know it
not thyself: that thou art neither cold -- An utter Stranger to the Things of
GOD, having no Care or Thought about them: nor hot -- As boiling Water: So
ought we to be penetrated and heated by the Fire of Love. O that thou were --
This Wish of our LORD plainly implies that he does not work on us irresistibly,
as the Fire does on the Water which it heats: cold or hot -- Even if thou were
cold, without any Thought or Profession of Religion, there would be more Hope
of thy Recovery.

V. 16. So because thou art lukewarm -- The Effect of lukewarm Water is well
known: I will spue thee out of my mouth -- I will utterly cast thee from me;
that is, unless thou repent.

V. 17. Because thou say -- Therefore I counsel thee, etc. I am rich -- In
Gifts and Grace, as well as worldly Goods. And know not that thou art -- In
GOD's Account, wretched and pitiable.

V. 18. I counsel thee -- Who art poor, and blind, and naked, to buy of me --
Without Money or Price, gold purified in the fire -- True living Faith, which
is purified in the Furnace of Affliction: and white raiment -- True Holiness,
and eye salve -- Spiritual Illumination; the Unction of the Holy One, which
teaches all Things.

V. 19. Whomsoever I love -- Even thee, thou poor Laodicean! O how much has his
unwearied Love to do? I rebuke -- For what is past: and chasten -- That they
may amend for the Time to come.

V. 20. I stand at the door and knock -- Even at this Instant; while he is
speaking this Word: If any man open -- Willingly receive me: I will sup with
him -- Refreshing him with my Graces and Gifts, and delighting myself in what I
have given: and he with me -- In Life everlasting.

V. 21. I will give him to sit with me on my throne -- In unspeakable Happiness
and Glory. Elsewhere Heaven itself is termed the Throne of GOD. But this Throne
is in Heaven.

V. 22. He that has an ear, let him hear, etc. This stands in the three former
Letters before the Promise; in the four latter, after it; clearly dividing the
Seven into two Parts, the first containing three, the last, four Letters. The
Titles given our LORD in the three former Letters, peculiarly respect his Power
after his Resurrection and Ascension, particularly over his Church; Those in
the four latter, his Divine Glory, and Unity with the Father and the Holy
Spirit. Again, this Word being placed before the Promises in the three former
Letters, excludes the false Apostles at Ephesus, the false Jews at Smyrna, and
the Partakers with the Heathens at Porgamos, from having any share therein. In
the four latter being placed after them, it leaves the Promises immediately
joined with Christ's Address to the Angel of the Church; to show, that the
fulfilling of these was near; whereas the others reach beyond the End of the
World. It should be observed that the Overcoming or Victory, (to which alone
these peculiar Promises are annexed) is not the ordinary Victory obtained by
every Believer, but a special Victory over great and peculiar Temptations, by
those that are strong in Faith.

IV.
After these things I saw, and behold a door opened in heaven, and the first
voice which I had heard, as of a trumpet talking with me, said, Come up hither,
and I will show thee things which must be hereafter. on the throne. was round
about the throne, in appearance like an emerald. are four and twenty thrones,
and on the thrones four and twenty elders sitting, clothed in white raiment,
and upon their heads crowns of gold. are the seven Spirits of God. is a sea as
of glass, like crystal; and in the midst of the throne and round about the
throne four living creatures, is like a lion, and the second living creature is
like a calf, and the third living creature has a face as a man, and the fourth
is like a flying eagle. for ever and ever,

Chapter iv. We are now entering upon the main Prophecy: The whole Revelation may
be divided thus: The 1st, 2d, and 3d Chapters contain the Introduction; The 4th
and 5th, the Proposition; The 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th, describe Things which are
already fulfilled; The 10 -- 14, Things which are now fulfilling; The 15 -- 19,
Things which will be fulfilled shortly; The 20, 21, 22, Things at a greater
Distance.


V. 1. After these things -- As if he had said, after I had written these
Letters from the Mouth of the LORD. By the Particle and the several Parts of
this Prophecy are usually connected: By the Expression after these things, they
are distinguished from each other. (chapter vii. 9. xix. 1.) By that Expression,
and after these things, they are distinguished and yet connected, chapter vii. 1.
xv. 5. xviii. 1. St. John always saw and heard, and then immediately wrote
down, one Part after another. And one Part is constantly divided from another
by some one of these Expressions. I saw -- Here begins the Relation of the main
Vision, which is connected throughout, as it appears from The throne and him
that fitteth thereon, the Lamb (who hither to has appeared in the Form of a
Man) the four living Creatures, and the four and twenty Elders, represented
from this Place to the End. From this Place it is absolu^ly necessary to keep
in Mind the genuine Order of the Texts, as it stands in the preceding Table. A
door opened in heaven -- Several of these Openings are successively mentioned.
Here a door is opened: afterward the temple of God in heaven (chapter xi. 19. xv.
5.) and at last, blea^en itself. (chapter xix. 11.) By each of these St. John gains
a new and more extended Prospect: and the first voice which I^ad heard --
Namely, that of Christ, (afterward he heard the Voices of many others) said,
Come up hi^her -- Not in Body, but in Spirit; which was immediately done.

V. 2. And immediately I was in the Spirit -- Even in an higher Degree than
before (chapter i. 10.) And behold a throne was set in (...) -- St. John is to
write things which shall be. And in order thereto he is here shown, after an
heavenly Manner, how whatever shall (...), whether good or b^d, flows out of
invisible Pountains: and how after it is done on the visible Threatre of the
World and the Church, it flows back again into the invisible World, as its
proper and final Scope. Here Commentators divide: Some proceed Theologically,
others Historically: Whereas the right Way is, to join both together.

The Court of Heaven is here laid (...): and the Throne of GOD is as it were
the Center, from which every Thing in the visible World goes forth, and to
which every thing returns. ^ere also the Kingdom of Satan is disclosed: and
hence we may extract the most important Things, out of the most comprehensive
and at the same Time most secret History of the Kingom of Hell and Heaven. But
herein we must be content to know only, what is expressly revealed in this Book.
This describes not barely what Good or Evil is successively transacted on
Earth, but how each springs from the Kingdom of Light or Darkness, and
continually te^ds to the S^ce whence it sprung. So that no Man can explain all
that is contained therein, from the History of the Church Militant only.

And yet the Histories of past Ages have their Use, as this Book is properly
Prophetical. The more therefore we observe the Accomplishment of it, so much
the more may we praise GOD, in his Truth, Wisdom, Justice, and Almighty Power,
and learn to suit ourselves to the Time, according to the remarkable Directions
contained in the Prophecy. And one sat on the throne -- As a King, Governor and
Judge. Here is described GOD, the Almighty, the Father of Heaven, in his
Majesty, Glory and Dominion.

V. 3. And he that sat was in appearance -- Shone with a visible Luster, like
that of sparkling precious Stones, such as those which were of old on the
High-Priest's Breast Plate, and these placed as the Foandations of the New
Jerusalem, chapter xxi. 19, 20. It there is any Thing emblematical in the Colors
of these Stones, possibly the Jasper, which is transparent and of a glittering
White, with an I^ter mixture of beautiful Colors, may be a Symbol of GOD's
Purity, with various other Perfections, which thine in all his D^spensations.
The Sardine Stone, of a Blood-red Color, may be an Emblem of h^s Justice, and
the Ven^cance he was about to execute on his Enemies. An Emera^d. being Green,
may betoken Favor to the Good; (...) R^w, the everlasting Cevena^t. (See Genesis
ix. 9.) And th^s be (...) the whole Breadth of the Throne, fixed the Distance of
those who stood or sat round it.

V. 4. And round about the the -- In a Circle, are four and twenty th^es, and
on the thr^nes four and (...) -- The most holy of all the former Ages. ( Isa.
xxiv. 23. Heb. xii. 1.) representing the whole Body of the Saints: sitting --
In general; but talling down when they worship: c^athed in white (...) -- This
and their (...) C^wns show, that they had hardly finished their Course and
taken their Place among the Citizens of Heaven. They are never termed Souls,
and hence it is probable, that they had glorified Bodies already. Compare Matt.
xvii. 52.

V. 5. And out of be throne go so the lightnings -- Which affect the Sight;
v^ices -- Which affect the Hearing; thunderings -- Which cause the whole Body
to tremble. Weak Men account all this terrible; but to the Inhabitants of
Heaven it is a more Source of Joy and Pleasure, mixed with Reverence to the
Divine Majesty. Even to the Saints on Earth these convey Light and Protection,
but to their Enemies Terror and Destruction.

V. 6. And before the throne is a sea as of glass, like crystal -- Wide and
deep, pure and clear, transparent and still. Both the seven lamps of fire and
this Sea are before the throne: and both may mean the seven Spirits of God, the
Holy Ghost; whose Powers and Operations are frequently represented both under
the Emblem of Fire, and of Water. We read again, chapter xv. 2. of a sea as of
glass: where there is no Mention of the seven lamps of fire; but on the
contrary, the Sea itself is mingled with fire. We read also, chapter xxii. 1. of a
stream of water of life, clear as crystal. Now the sea which was before the
throne, and the stream which goes out of the throne, may both mean the same,
namely the Spirit of GOD. And in the midst of the throne -- With respect to its
Height: round about the throne -- That is, toward the four Quarters, East,
West, North, and South: were four living creatures -- (Not ^east^, no more than
Birds.) These seem to be taken from the Cherubim in the Visions of Isaiah and
Ezekiel, and in the Holy of Holies. They are doubtless some of the principal
Powers of Heaven; but of what Order it is not easy to determine. It is very
probable that the twenty four Elders may represent the Jewish Church. Their
Harps seem to insimate their having belonged to the ancient Tal^rracle Service,
where they were wont to be used. If so, the living ^atures may represent the
Christian Church. Their Number also is symboli^d of Universality, and agrees
with the Dispensation of the Gospel, which extended to all Nations under
Heaven. And the new Song which they all sing, saying, Thou last red^med us out
of every ^rdred, and tongue, and people, and na^, (chapter v. 9.) could not
possibly suit the Jewish, without the Christian Church. The first living
creature was like a lion -- To signify undaunted Courage; the second like a
calls or ox -- ( Ezekiel. i. 10.) to signify unwearied Patience; the third with the
face of a man -- To signify Prudence and Compassion; the fourth like an cagle
-- To signify Activity and Vigor: full of eyes -- To betoken Wisdom and
Knowledge; before -- To see the Face of Him that sits on the Throne; and
behind -- To see what is done among the Creatures.

V. 7. And the first -- Just such were the four Cherubim in Ezekiel, who
supported the moving Throne of GOD: Whereas each of those that ev^thad ^wed the
Mercy-Seat in the Holy of Holies, had all these four Faces: Whence a late great
Man supposes them to have been (...) of the Trinity, and the Incarnation of the
second Person. Aflying ^gle -- That is, with Wings expanded.

V. 8. Each of them has six wings -- ^s had each of the Seraphim in Isaiah's
Vision. Two covered his face -- In Token of Humility and Reverence: two his
feet -- Perhaps in Token of Readiness and Diligence for executing Divine
Commissions: round about and within they are full of eyes -- Round about, to
see every Thing which is farther off from the Throne than they are themselves:
and within -- On the inner Part of the Circle which they make with one another.
First, they look from the Center to the Circumference, then from the
Circumference to the Center. And they rest not -- O happy unrest! Day and night
-- As we speak on Earth. But there is no Night in Heaven, and say, Holy, holy,
holy -- Is the Three-One GOD.

There are two Words in the Original, very different from each oth^, both which
we translate Holy. The one means properly me^l; but the other, which occurs
here, implies much more. This Holiness is the Sum of all praise, which is given
to the Almighty Creator, for all that he does and reveals concerning himself,
till the new Song beings with it new Matter of Glory.

This Word properly signifies separated, both in Hebrew and other Languages.
And when GOD is termed Holy, it denotes that Excellence, which is altogether
peculiar to himself; and the Glory flowing from all his Attributes conjoined,
shining forth from all his Works, and darkening all Things besides itself,
whereby he is, and eternally remains, in an incomprehensible Manner separate
and at a Distance, not only from all that is impure, but likewise from all that
is created.

GOD is separate from all Things. He is, and works from himself, out of
himself, in himself, through himself, for himself. Therefore He is the First and
the Last, the only One and the Eternal, Living and Happy, Endless and
Unchangeable, Almighty, Omniscient, Wise and True, Just and Faithful, Gracious
and Merciful.

Hence it is, that Holy and Holiness mean the same as GOD and Godhead; and as
we say of a King, His Majesty, so the Scripture says of GOD, His Holiness.
(Heb. xii. 10.) The Holy Spirit is the Spirit of GOD. When GOD is spoken of, he
is often named, The Holy One. And as GOD swears by his Name, so he does also by
his Holiness, that is, by Himself.

This Holiness is often styled Glory; often his Holiness and Glory are
celebrated together. ( Lev. x. 3. Isaiah vi. 3.) for Holiness is covered Glory,
and Glory is uncovered Holiness. The Scripture speaks abundantly of the
Holiness and Glory of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. And hereby is the
Mystery of the Holy Trinity eminently confirmed.

That is also termed Holy, which is consecrated to Him, and for that End
separated from other Things. And so is that wherein we may be like GOD, or
united to him.

In the Hymn resembling this, recorded by Isaiah, chapter vi. 3. is added, The
whole earth is full of his glory. But this is deferred in the Revelation, till
the Glory of the LORD (his Enemies being destroyed) fills the Earth.

V. 10. And when the living creatures give glory -- the elders fall down --
That is, as often as the living creatures give Glory, immediately the Elders
fall down. The Expression implies, that they did so at the same Instant, and
that they both did this frequently. The living Creatures do not say directly,
Holy, Holy, Holy, art thou: but only bend a little, out of deep Reverence, and
say, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord. But the Elders, when they are fallen down,
may say, Worthy art thou, O Lord our God.

V. 11. Worthy art thou to receive -- This he receives not only when ^e is thus
praised, but also when he destroys his Enemies and glori^es himself anew: the
glory, and the honor, and the power -- Answering the thrice-holy of the living
Creatures, ver. 9. For thou have created all things -- Creation is the Cround
of all the Works of GOD. Therefore for this, as well as for his other Works,
will He be praised to all Eternity. And through thy will they were -- They began
to be. It is to the free, gracious, and powerfully-working Will of Him who
cannot possibly need any Thing, that all Things owe their first Existence. And
are created -- That is, continue in Being over since they were created.

V.
And I saw in the right hand of him that sat upon the throne a book written
within and without, sealed with seven seals. is worthy to open the book, open
the book, that sat upon the throne. the living creatures and the elders; and
the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of
thousands, is the blessing, and the honor, and the glory, and the strength,
for ever and ever.

Chapter v. ver. 1. And I saw -- This is a Continuation of the same Narrative; in
the right hand -- The Emblem of his all-ruling Power. He held it openly, in
order to give it to him that was worthy. It is searce needful to observe, that
there is not in Heaven any real Book of Parchment or Paper, or that Christ does
not really stand there, in the Shape of a Lion or of a Lamb. Neither is there
on Earth any monstious Beast, with seven Heads and ten Horns. But as there is
upon Earth something, which, in its Kind, answers such a Representation, so
there are in Heaven Divine Counsels and Transactions answerable to these
figurative Expressions. All this was represented to St. John at Patmos, in one
Day, by way of Vision. But the Accomplishment of it extends from that Time
throughout all Ages. Writings serve to inform us of distant and of future
Things. And hence Things which are yet to come, are figuratively said, to be
written in GOD's Book: So were at that Time the Contents of this weighty
Prophecy. But the Book was sealed. Now comes the opening and accomplishing also
of the great Things that are, as it were, the Letters of it. A book written
within and without -- That is, no Part of it blank, full of Matter, sealed with
seven seals -- According to the Seven Principal Parts contained in it, one on
the Outside of each. The usual Books of the Ancients were not like ours, but
were Volumes, or long Pieces of Parchment, rolled upon a long Stick, as we
frequently roll Silks. Such was this represented, which was sealed with seven
seals. Not as if the Apostle saw all the Seals at once; for there were seven
Volumes wrapped up one within another, each of which was sealed: So that upon
opening and unrolling the first, the second appeared to be sealed up, till that
was opened, and so on to the seventh. The Book and its Seals represent all
Power in Heaven and Earth given to Christ. A Copy of this Book is contained in
the following Chapters. By the trumpets (contained under the seventh seal,) the
Kingdom of the World is shaken, that it may at length become the Kingdom of
Christ. By the phials, (under the seventh Trumpet) the Power of the Beast, and
whatsoever is connected with it, is broken. This Sum of all we should have
continually before our Eyes: So the whole Revelation flows in its natural Order.

V. 2. And I saw a strong angel -- This Proclamation to every Creature, was too
great for a Man to make, and yet not becoming the Lamb himself. It was
therefore made by an Angel, and one of uncommon Eminence.

V. 3. And none -- No Creature: No, not Mary herself: in heaven, or in earth,
neither under the earth -- That is, none in the Universe. For these are the
three great Regions, into which the whole Creation is divided: was able to open
the book -- To declare the Counsels of GOD, nor to look thereon -- So as to
understand any Part of it.

V. 4. And I wept much -- A Weeping which sprung from Greatness of Mind. The
Tenderness of Heart which he always had, appeared more clearly, now he was out
of his own Power. The Revelation was not written without Tears; neither without
Tears will it be understood. How far are they from the Temper of St. John, who
enquire after any Thing rather than the Contents of this Book? Yea, who applaud
their own Clemency, if they excuse those that do enquire into them?

V. 5. And one of the elders -- Probably one of those who rose with Christ, and
afterward ascended into Heaven: Perhaps one of the Patriarchs; some think it
was Jacob, from whose Prophecy the Name of Lion is given him ( Genesis xlix. 9.)
The Lion of the tribe of Judah -- The victorious Prince who is, like a Lion,
able to tear all his Enemies in Pieces, the root of David -- As GOD, the root
and Source of David's Family ( Isai. xi. 1.10.) has prevailed to open the book
-- Has overcome all Obstructions, and obtained the Honor to disclose the
Divine Counsels.

V. 6. And I saw -- First Christ in or on the midst of the throne; Secondly,
the four living Creatures making the Inner Circle round him, and, thirdly, the
four and twenty Elders, making a larger Circle round Him and them, standing --
He lies no more; he no more falls on his Face; the Days of his Weakness and
Mourning are ended. He is now in a Posture of Readiness to execute all his
Offices of Prophet, Priest, and King: as if he had been slair -- Doubtless with
the Prints of the Wounds which he once received. And because he was slain, he
is worthy to open the Book (ver. 9.) to the Joy of his own People, and the
Terror of his Enemies. Having seven horns -- As a King, the Emblem of perfect
Strength; and seven eyes -- The Emblem of perfect Knowledge and Wisdom. By
these he accomplishes what is contained in the Book, namely, by his Almighty
and All-wise Spirit. To these seven Horns and seven Eyes answer the seven Seals
and the Sevenfold Song of Praise, ver. 12. In Zechariah likewise, chapter iii. 9.
iv. 10. Mention is made of the seven eyes of the Lord, which go forth over all
the earth: which -- Both the Horns and the Eyes, are the seven spirits of God,
sent forth into all the earth -- For the effectual working of the Spirit of GOD
goes through the whole Creation: and that in the natural, as well as spiritual
World. For could mere Matter act or move? Could it gravitate or attract? Just
as much as it can think or speak.

V. 7. And he came -- Here was Ask of me (Psalm ii. 8.) fulfilled in the most
glorious Manner, and look -- It is one State of Exaltation that reaches from
our LORD's Ascension to his coming in Glory. Yet this State admits of various
Degrees. At his Ascension, Angels, and principalities and powers were subjected
to him. Ten Days after, he received from the Father and sent the Holy Ghost.
And now he took the book out of the right hand of him that sat upon the throne
-- Who gave it him as a Signal of his delivering to him all Power in Heaven and
Earth. He received it, in Token of his being both able and willing to fulfill
all that was written therein.

V. 8. And when he took the book, the four living creatures fell down -- Now is
Homage done to the Lamb by every creature. These, together with the Elders,
make the Beginning, and afterward (ver. 14.) the Conclusion. They are together
surrounded with a Multitude of Angels (ver. 11.) and together sing the New
Song, as they had before praised GOD together (chapter iv. 8, etc.) Having every
one -- The Elders, not the living Creatures, an harp -- Which was one of the
chief Instruments used for Thanksgiving in the Temple-Service: a fit Emblem of
the Melody of their Hearts, and golden phials -- (...) or Censers, full of
incense, which are the prayers of the saints -- Not of the Elders themselves,
but of the other Saints, still upon Earth, whose Prayers were thus
emblematically represented in Heaven.

V. 9. And they sing a new song -- One which neither they nor any other had
sung before, Thou have redeemed us -- So the living Creatures also were of the
Number of the Redeemed: This does not so much refer to the Act of Redemption,
which was long before, as to the Fruit of it; and so more directly to those who
had finished their Course, who were redeemed from the earth (chapter xiv. 1.) out
of every tribe, and tongue, and people, and nation -- That is, out of all
Mankind.

V. 10. And have made them -- The Redeemed. So they speak of themselves also in
the third Person, out of deep Self-abasement, They shall reign over the earth
-- The new Earth: Herewith agree the golden Crowns of the Elders. The Reign of
the Saints in general follows, under the Trumpet of the seventh Angel:
particularly after the first Resurrection, as also in Eternity, chapter xi. 18. xv.
7. xx. 4. xxii. 5. Dan. vii. 27. Psalm. xlix. 15.

V. 11. And I saw -- The many Angels, and heard -- The Voice and the Number of
them, round about the elders -- So forming the third Circle. It is remarkable,
that Men are represented through this whole Vision, as nearer to GOD than any of
the Angels. And the number of them was -- At least two hundred Millions, and
two Millions over. And yet these were but a Part of the holy Angels: Afterward
(chapter vii. 11.) St. John heard them all.

V. 12. Worthy is the Lamb -- The Elders said (ver. 9.) Worthy art thou. They
were more nearly allied to him than the Angels. To receive the power, etc. This
sevenfold Applause answers the seven Seals, of which the four former describe
all visible, the latter all invisible Things, made subject to the Lamb. And
every one of these seven Words bears a Resemblance to the Seal which it answers.

V. 13. And every creature -- In the whole Universe, good or bad, in the
heaven, on the earth, under the earth, on the sea -- With these four Regions of
the World, agrees the fourfold Word of Praise. What is in Heaven, says
Blessing; what is on Earth, Honor; what is under the Earth, Glory; what is on
the Sea, Strength; is unto Him. This Praise from all Creatures begins before
the Opening of the first Seal; but it continues from that Time to Eternity,
according to the Capacity of each. His Enemies must acknowledge his Glory: But
those in Heaven say, Blessed be GOD and the Lamb.

This Royal Manifesto is, as it were, a Proclamation, showing how Christ
fulfils all Things, and every knee bows to him, not only on earth, but also in
heaven and under the earth. This Book exhausts all Things, (1 Cor. xv. 27, 28.)
and is suitable to an Heart enlarged as the Sand of the Sea. It inspires the
attentive and intelligent Reader with such a Magnanimity, that he accounts
nothing in this World great, no, not the whole Frame of visible Nature,
compared to the immense Greatness of what he is here called to behold, yea, and
in Part to inherit.

St. John has in View through the whole following Vision, what he has been now
describing, namely, the four living Creatures, the Elders, the Angels, and all
Creatures, looking together at the Opening of the seven Seals.

VI.
And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the
four living creatures saying as the voice of thunder, Come and see. And I saw,

And when he opened the second seal, that was red; and to him that sat thereon
it was given to take peace from the earth, that they should kill one another;
and there was given him a great sword.

And when he opened the third seal,

And when he opened the fourth seal,

And when he opened the fifth seal, the earth? were.

And I saw when he opened the sixth seal, by a mighty wind:

Chap. vi. The seven Seals are not distinguished from each other, by specifying
the Time of them. They swiftly follow the Letters to the seven Churches, and
all begin almost at the same Time. By the four former is shown, That all the
public Occurrences of all Ages and Nations, as Empire, War, Provision,
Calamities, are made subject to Christ. And Instances are intimated of the
First in the East, the Second in the West, the Third in the South, the Fourth
in the North and the whole World.

The Contents, as of the Phials and Trumpets, so of the Seals, are shown, by
the Songs of Praise and Thanksgiving annexed to them. They contain therefore
the power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing, which the Lamb received. The four former have a peculiar Connection
with each other; and so have the three latter Seals. The former relate to
visible Things, toward the four Quarters to which the four living Creatures
look.

Before we proceed, it may be observed, 1. No Man should constrain either
himself or another, to explain every thing in this Book. It is sufficient for
every one to speak, just so far as he understands. 2. We should remember, that
although the ancient Prophets wrote the Occurrences of those Kingdoms only with
which Israel had to do, yet the Revelation contains what relates to the whole
World, through which the Christian Church is extended. Yet, 3. We should not
prescribe to this Prophecy, as if it must needs admit or exclude this or that
history, according as we judge one or the other, to be of great or small
Importance. GOD sees not as a man sees. Therefore what we think great is
often omitted, what we think little inserted, in Scripture-History or Prophecy.
4. We must take care, not to overlook what is already fulfilled; and not to
describe as fulfilled what is still to come.

We are to look in History for the fulfilling of the four first Seals, quickly
after the Date of the Prophecy. In each of these appears a different Horseman.
In each we are to consider, first, The Horseman himself; secondly, What he does.

The Horseman himself, by an emblematical Prosopopoeia, represents a swift
Power, bringing with it either, 1. A slourishing State, or, 2. Bloodshed, or,
3. Scarcity of Provisions, or, 4. Public Calaraities. With the Quality of each
of these Riders, the Color of his Horse agrees. The fourth Horseman is
expressly termed Death; the First, with his Bow and Crown, a Conqueror. The
Second, with his great Sword, is a Warrior, or, as the Romans termed him, Mars:
The Third, with the Scales, has Power over the Produce of the Land. Particular
Incidents under this or that Roman Emperor, are not extensive enough to answer
any of these Horsemen.

The Action of every Horseman intimates farther, 1. Toward the East, wide
spread Empire and Victory upon Victory; 2. Toward the West, much Bloodshed; 3.
Toward the South, Scarcity of Provisions; 4. Toward the North, the Plague and
various Calamities.

V. 1. I heard one -- That is, the first, of the living creatures -- Who looks
forward toward the East.

V. 2. And I saw, and behold a white horse, and he that sat on him had a bow --
This Color, and the Bow shooting Arrows afar off, betoken Victory, Triumph,
Prosperity, Enlargement of Empire, and Dominion over many People.

Another Horseman indeed, and of quite another Kind, appears on a white Horse,
chapter xix. 11. But he that is spoken of under the first Seal must be so
understood, as to bear a Proportion to the Horsemen in the second, third, and
fourth Seal.

Nerva succeeded the Emperor Domitian at the very Time when the Revelation was
written, in the Year of our LORD 96. He reigned searce a Year alone; and three
Months before his Death, he named Trajan for his Colleague and successor, and
died in the Year 98. Trajan's Accession to the Empire seems to be the Dawning
of the seven Seals. And a crown was given him -- This, considering his Descent,
Trajan could have no Hope of attaining. But GOD gave it him by the Hand of
Nerva: and then the East soon felt his Power. And he went forth conquering and
to conquer -- That is, from one Victory to another. In the Year 108 the already
victorious Trajan went forth toward the East, to conquer not only Armenia,
Assyria, and Misopotamia, but also the Countries beyond the Tigris, carrying
the Bounds of the Roman Empire to a far greater Extent than ever. We find no
Emperor like him for making Conquests. He aimed at nothing else: He lived only
to conquer. Meantime in him was eminently fulfilled, what had been prophesied
of the fourth Empire; ( Dan. ii. 40. vii. 23.) That he should devour, tread
down, and break in pieces the whole earth.

V. 3. And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second living
creature -- Who looked toward the West, saying, Come -- At each Seal, it was
necessary to turn toward that Quarter of the World which it more immediately
concerned.

V. 4. There went forth another horse that was red -- A Color suitable to
Bloodshed. And to him that sat thereon it was given, to take peace from the
earth -- Vespasian in the Year 75, had dedicated a Temple to Peace. But after a
Time, we hear little more of Peace. All is full of War and Bloodshed, chiefly
in the western World, where the main Business of Men seemed to be, To kill one
another.

To this Horseman there was given a great Sword -- And he had much to do with
it. For as soon as Trajan ascended the Throne, Peace was taken from the earth.
Decebalus, King of Dacia, which lies westward from Patmos, put the Romans to no
small Trouble. The War lasted five Years, and consumed abundance of Men on both
Sides: yet was only a Prelude to much other Bloodshed, which followed for a
long Season. All this was signified by the great Sword, which strikes those who
are near, as the Bow does those who are at a Distance.

V. 5. And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature
toward the South, saying, Come -- And behold a black horse, a fit Emblem of
Mourning and Distress; particularly of black Famine, as the ancient Poets term
it. And he that sat on him had a pair of scales in his hand -- When there is
great Plenty, Men scarce think it worth their while to weigh and measure every
thing, ( Genesis xli. 49.) But when there is Scarcity, they are obliged to deliver
them out by Measure and Weight. Ezekiel. iv. 16. Accordingly these Scales signisy
Scarcity. They serve also for a Token, That all the Fruits of the Earth, and
consequently the whole Heavens, with their Courses and Influences, that all the
seasons of the Year, with whatsoever they Produce, in Nature or States, are
subject to Christ. Accordingly his Hand is wonderful, not only in Wars and
Victories, but likewise in the whole Course of Nature.

V. 6. And I heard a voice -- It seems from GOD himself, saying -- To the
Horseman, Hitherto shall thou come, and no farther. Let there be a measure of
wheat for a penny -- The Word translated, measure, was a Grecian Measure,
nearly equal to our Quart. This was the daily Allowance of a Slave. The Roman
penny (as much as a Labourer then earned in a Day) was about Seven-pence
Halfpenny English. According to this, Wheat would be near twenty Shillings per
Bushel. This must have been fulfilled, while the Grecian Measure, and the Roman
Money were still in Use: as also, where that Measure was the common Measure,
and this Money the current Coin. It was so in Egypt under Trajan. And three
measures of barley for a penny -- Either Barley was, in common, far cheaper
among the Ancients than Wheat; or the Prophecy mentions this as something
peculiar. And hurt not the oil and the (...) -- Let there not be a Scarcity of
every Thing. Let there be some Provision l^st, to supply the Want of the Rest.

This was also fulfilled in the Reign of Trajan, especially in Egypt, which lay
southward from Patmos. In this Country, which used to be the Granary of the
Empire, there was an uncommon Dearth at the very Beginning of his Reign: So
that he was obliged to supply Egypt itself with Corn from other Countries. The
same Scarcity there was in the thirteenth Year of his Reign, the Harvest
failing, for want of the Risings of the Nile: And that not only in Egypt, but
in all those other Parts of Africa, where the Nile uses to overflow.

V. 7. I heard the voice of the fourth living creature -- Toward the North.

V. 8. And I saw, and behold a pale horse -- Suitable to pale Death, his Rider:
And Hades -- The Representative of the State of separate Souls, follows even
with him -- The four first Seals concern living Men. Death therefore is
properly introduced. Hades is only occasionally mentioned as a Companion of
Death. So the fourth Seal reaches to the Borders of Things invisible, which are
comprised in the three last Seals. And power was given to him over the fourth
part of the earth -- What came single and in a lower Degree before, comes now
together, and much more severely. The first Seal brought Victory with it: In
the Second was a Great Sword; but here a Scimetar. In the Third was moderate
Dearth; here Famine, and Plague, and Wild Beasts beside. And it may well be,
that from the Time of Trajan downwards, the fourth Part of Men upon the Earth,
that is, within the Roman Empire, died by Sword, Famine, Pestilence, and Wild
Beasts. "At that Time, says Aurelius Victor, the Tyber overflowed much more
fatally than under Nerva, with a great Destruction of Houses; and there was a
dreadful Earthquake through many Provinces, and a terrible Plague and Famine,
and many Places consumed by Fire." By Death, that is, by Pestilence. Wild
Beasis have, at several times, destroyed abundance of Men. And undoubtedly
there was given them, at this Time, an uncommon Fierceness and Strength. It Is
observable, that War brings on Scarcity, and Scarcity Pestilence (through Want of
wholesome Sus^^nance;) and Pestilence, by depopulating the Country leaves the
few Survivors an easier Prey to the Wild Beasts. And thus these Judgments make
Way for one another, in the Order wherein they are here represented.

What has been already observed may be a four-sold Proof, That the four
Horsemen, as with their first Entrance in the Reign of Trajan (which does by no
means exhaust the Contents of the four first Seals) so with all their Entrances
in succeeding Ages, and with the whole Course of the World and of visible
Nature, are in all Ages subject to Christ, subsisting by his Power, and serving
his Will, against the Wicked, and in Defense of the Righteous. Herewith
likewise a Way is paved for the Trumpets, which regularly succeed each other.
And the whole Prophecy, as to what is future, is confirmed, by the clear
Accomplishment of this Part of it.

V. 9. And when he opened the fifth seal -- As the four former Seals, so the
three latter have a close Connection with each other. These all refer to the
invisible World; the fifth to the happy Dead, particularly the Martyrs; the
sixth to the Unhappy; the seventh to the Angels, especially these to whom the
Trumpets are given. And I saw -- Not only the Church warring under Christ, and
the World warring under Satan, but also the invisible Hosts both of Heaven and
Hell, are described in this Book. And it not only describes the Actions of both
these Armies upon Earth, but their respective Removals from Earth, into a more
happy or more miserable State, succeeding each other at several Times,
distinguished by various Degrees, celebrated by various Thanksgivings: And also
the gradual Increase of Expectation and Triumph in Heaven, and of Terror and
Misery in Hell; under the altar -- That is, at the Foot of it. Two Altars are
mentioned in the Revelation, the golden altar of incense, chapter ix. 13. and the
altar of burnt-offerings, mentioned here, and chapter vii^. 5. xiv. 18. xvi. 7. At
this the Souls of the Martyrs now prostrate themselves. By and by their Blood
shall be avenged upon Babylon: but not yet; whence it appears, that the Plagues
in the fourth Seal do not concern Rome in particular.

V. 10. And they cried -- This Cry did not begin now, but under the first Roman
Persecution. The Romans themselves had already avenged the Martyrs slain by the
Jews on that whole Nation, How long -- They knew their Blood would be avenged.
But not immediately; as is now shown them. O Lord -- The Greek Word properly
signifies the Master of a Family. It is therefore beautifully used by these,
who are peculiarly of the Household of GOD, T^^^ holy one and true -- Both the
Holiness and Truth of GOD require him to execute Judgment and Vengeance, d^st
thou not judge and avenge our blood? -- There is no impure Affection in Heaven.
Therefore this Desire of theirs is pure and suitable to the Will of GOD. The
Martyrs are concerned for the Praise of their Master, of his Holiness and
Truth. And the Praise is given him, chapter xix. 2. where the Prayer of the Martyrs
is changed into a Thanksgiving.

Thou Holy one and True: True and right are thy Judgments: How long do thou
not judge He has judged the great Whore, and avenge our Blood: and has
avenged the blood of his servants.

V. 11. And there was given to every one a white robe -- An Emblem of
Innocence, Joy, and Victory, in Token of Honor and favorable Acceptance, and
it was said to them -- They were told how long. They were not left in that
Uncertainty, that they should rest -- Should cease from crying. They rested
from Pain before, a time -- This Word has a peculiar Meaning in this Book, to
denote which we may retain the original Word Chrones. Here are two Classes of
Martyrs specified, the former killed under Heathen Rome, the latter under Papal
Rome. The former are commanded to rest, till the latter are added to them.
There were many of the former in the Days of John: the first Fruits of the
latter died in the thirteenth Century. Now a time or Chronos is 1111 Years.
This Chronos began A. C. 98, and continued to the Year 1209; or from Trajan's
Persecution, to the first Crusade against the Waldenses, Till -- It is not
said, Immediately after this Time is expired, Vengeance shall be executed: but
only, That immediately after this Time, their brethren and fellow servants will
come to them. This Event will precede the other, and there will be some Space
between.

V. 12. And I saw -- This sixth Seal seems particularly to point out GOD's
Judgment on the Wicked Departed. St. John saw, how the End of the World was
even set before those unhappy Spirits. This Representation might be made to
them, without any thing of it being perceived upon Earth. The like
Representation is made in Heaven, chapter xi. 18. And there was a great earthquake
or shaking, not of the Earth only, but the Heavens. This is a farther
Description of the Representation made to those unhappy Souls.

V. 13. And the stars fell to, or toward the earth -- Yea, and so they surely
will, let Astronomers six their Magnitude as they please, as a fig tree casts
its untimely figs, when it is shaken by a mighty wind -- How sublimely is the
Violence of that shaking expressed by this Comparison!

V. 14. And the heaven departed as a book that is rolled together -- When the
Scripture compares some very great with a little Thing, the Majesty and
Omnipotence of GOD, before whom great Things are little, is highly exalted.
Every mountain and island -- What a Mountain is to the Land, that an Island is
to the Sea.

V. 15. And the kings of the earth -- They who had been so, in their day, and
the great men and chief captains -- The Generals and Nobles, hid themselves --
So far as in them lay, in the rocks of the mountains -- There are also Rocks on
the Plains. But they were Rocks on high which they besought to fall upon them.

V. 16. To the mountains and the rocks -- Which were tottering already, (ver.
12.) hide us, from the face of him -- Which is against the ungodly. Ps. xxxiv.
17.

VII.
And after these things I saw four angels standing on the four corners of the
earth, holding the four winds, that the wind should not blow upon the earth,
nor on the sea, rising of the sun, having the seal of the living God; and he
cried with a loud voice to the four angels to whom it was given to hurt the
earth and the sea. were sealed twelve thousand, of the tribe of Ruben were
sealed twelve thousand, of the tribe of Gad were sealed twelve thousand, were
sealed twelve thousand, of the tribe of Napthali were sealed twelve thousand,
of the tribe of Manasseh were sealed twelve thousand, were sealed twelve
thousand, of the tribe of Levi were sealed twelve thousand, of the tribe of
Issachar were sealed twelve thousand. were sealed twelve thousand, of the tribe
of Joseph were sealed twelve thousand, of the tribe of Benjamin were sealed
twelve thousand.

After these things I saw, saying, be to our God for ever and ever. shall
hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them,

V. 1. And after these things -- What follows is a Preparation for the seventh
Seal, which is the weightiest of all. It is connected with the Sixth, by the
Particle and: whereas what is added, ver. 9. stands free and unconnected, I saw
four angels -- Probably evil ones. They have their Employ with the four first
Trumpets, as have other evil Angels with the three last, namely, the Angel of
the Abyss, the four bound in the Euphrates, and Satan himself. These four
Angels would willingly have brought on all the Calamities that follow without
Delay. But they were restrained till the Servants of GOD were sealed, and till
the seven Angels were ready to sound: Even as the Angel of the Abyss was not
let loose, nor the Angels in the Euphrates unbound, neither Satan cast to the
Earth, till the fifth, sixth, and seventh Angels severally sounded, standing on
the four corners of the earth -- East, West, South, North. In this Order
proceed the four first Trumpets, holding the four winds -- Which else might
have softened the fiery Heat, under the First, Second, and Third Trumpet, that
the wind should not blow upon the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree -- It
seems, that these Expressions betoken the several Quarters of the World: That
the earth signifies that to the East of Patmos, Asia; which was nearest to St.
John, and where the Trumpet of the First Angel had its Accomplishment. Europe
swims in the sea over against this; and is accordingly termed by the Prophets,
the islands. The third Part, Afric, seems to be meant (chapter viii. 7, 8, 10.) by
the streams of water, or the trees, which grow plentifully by them.

V. 2. And I saw another -- A good angel, ascending from the East -- The
Plagues begin in the East: so does the Sealing, having the seal of the only
living and true GOD: and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels -- Who
were hasting to execute their Charge -- to whom it was given to burt the earth
and the sea -- First, and afterward the trees.

V. 3. Hurt not the earth, till we -- Other Angels were joined in Commission
with him -- Have sealed the servants of our GOD on their foreheads -- Secured
the Servants of GOD of the twelve Tribes from the impending Calamities; whereby
they shall be as clearly distinguished from the rest, as if they were visibly
marked on their Foreheads.

V. 4. Of the children of Israel -- To these will afterward be joined a
Multitude out of all Nations. But it may be observed, this is not the Number of
all the Israelites who are saved from Abraham or Moses to the End of all
Things; but only of those who were secured from the Plagues which were then
ready to fall on the earth. It seems as if this Book had, in many Places, a
special View to the People of Israel.

V. 5. Judah is mentioned first, in respect of the Kingdom, and of the Messiah
sprung therefrom.

V. 7. After the Levitical Ceremonies were abolished, Levi was again on a Level
with his Brethren.

V. 8. Of the tribe of Joseph -- Or Ephraim, perhaps not mentioned by Name, as
having been with Dan, the most idolatrous of all the Tribes. It Is farther
observable of Dan, that it was very early reduced to a single Family: Which
Family itself seems to have been cut off in War, before the Time of Ezra. For
in the Chronicles, where the Posterity of the Patriarchs is recited, Dan is
wholly omitted.

V. 9. A great multitude -- Of those who had happily finished their Course.
Such Multitudes are afterward described, and still higher Degrees of Glory
which they attain, after a sharp Fight and magnificent Victory, chapter xiv. 1. xv.
2. xix. 1. xx. 4. There is an inconceivable Variety in the Degrees of Reward in
the other World. Let not any slothful one say, If I get to Heaven at all, I
will be content: Such an one may let Heaven go altogether. In worldly Things,
Men are ambitious to get as high as they can. Christians have a far more noble
Ambition. The Difference between the very highest and the lowest State in the
World, is nothing to the smallest Difference between the Degrees of Glory. But
who has Time to think of this? Who is at all concerned about it? Standing
before the throne -- In the full Vision of GOD, and palms in their hands --
Tokens of Joy and Victory.

V. 10. Salvation to our GOD -- Who has saved us from all Evil, into all the
Happiness of Heaven. The Salvation for which they praise GOD, is described ver.
15. that for which they praise the Lamb, ver. 14. and both in the 16th and 17th
Verses.

V. 11. And all the angels stood -- In waiting round about the throne, and the
elders, and the four living creatures -- That is, the living Creatures next the
Throne, the Elders round these, and the Angels round them both, and they fell
on their faces -- So do the Elders, once only, (chapter xi. 16.) The Heavenly
Ceremonial has its fixed Order and Measure.

V. 12. Amen -- With this Word all the Angels confirm the Words of the great
Multitude. But they likewise carry the Praise much higher -- the blessing, and
the glory, and the wisdom, and the thanksgiving, and the honor, and the power,
and the strength, be unto our God for ever and ever -- Before the Lamb began to
open the seven Seals, a sevenfold Hymn of Praise was brought him by many
Angels, (chapter v. 12.) Now he is upon opening the last Seal, and the seven Angels
are going to receive seven Trumpets, in order to make the Kingdoms of the World
subject to GOD, all the Angels give sevenfold Praise to GOD.

V. 13. And one of the elders -- What stands, ver. 13-17, might have
immediately followed the 10th Verse: but that the Praise of the Angels which
was at the same Time with that of the great Multitude, came in between,
answered -- He answered St. John's Desire to know, not any Words that he spoke.

V. 14. My lord -- Or my master: a common Term of Respect. So Zechariah
likewise bespeaks the Angel, chapter i. 9. iv. 4. vi. 4. thou know -- That is, I
know not; but thou do, These are they -- Not Martyrs; for these are not such
a Multitude as no Man can Number. But as all the Angels appear here, so do all
the Souls of the Righteous, who had lived from the Beginning of the World, who
come -- He does not say, Who did come. But who come now also: to whom likewise
pertain all who, will come hereafter, out of great affliction -- Of various
Kinds, wisely and graciously allotted by GOD to all his Children, and have
washed their robee -- From all Guilt, and made them white -- In all Holiness,
by the blood of the Lamb -- Which not only cleanses, but adorns us also.

V. 15. Therefore -- Because they came out of great affliction, and have washed
their robes in his blood, are they before the throne -- It seems, even nearer
than the Angels, and serve him day and night -- Speaking after the Manner of
Men, that is, continually, in his temple -- Which is in Heaven, And he shall
have his tent over them -- Shall spread his Glory over them as a Covering.

V. 16. Neither shall the sun light on them -- For GOD is there their Sun, nor
any -- Painful h^at, or Inclemency of Seasons.

V. 17. For the Lamb will feed them -- With eternal Peace and Joy, so that they
shall hunger no more, and will lead them to living fountains of water -- The
Comforts of the Holy Ghost, so that they shall thirst no more. Neither shall
they suffer or grieve any more: for GOD will wipe away all tears from their
eyes.

VIII.
And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven about
half an hour. trumpets were given them. it with the prayers of all the saints
upon the golden altar which is before the throne.

And the seven angels,

And the second angel sounded,

And the third angel sounded,

And the name of the star is called Wormwood, third part of the moon, and the
third part of the stars; so that the third part of them was darkened, and the
day shone not for the third part thereof, and the night likewise.

And I saw and heard an angel flying in the midst of heaven,

V. 1. And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven --
Such a Silence is mentioned but in this one Place. I^ ^as uncommon and highly
observable. For Praise is sounding in Heaven Day and Night. In particular,
immediately before this Silence, all the Angels, and before them the
innumerable Multitude, had been crying with a loud Voice: And now, all is still
at once; there is an Universal Pause. Hereby the Seventh Seal is very
remarkably distinguished from the Six preceding. This Silence before GOD shows
that those who were round about him were expecting with the deepest Reverence,
the great Things which the Divine Majesty ^ould farther open and order.
Immediately after, the seven Trumpets are heard, and a Sound more august than
ever. Silence is only a Preparation: the and Point is, the sounding the
Trumpets to the Praise of GOD. About half an hour -- To St. John in the Vision,
it might seem a common Half-hour.

V. 2. And I saw -- The Seven Trumpets belong to the Seventh Seal, as do the
seven Phials to the Seventh Trumpet. This should be carefully remembered, that
we may not confound together the Times which follow each other. And yet it may
be observed in general, concerning the Times of the Incidents mentioned in this
Book. It is not a certain Rule, that every Part of the Text is fully
accomplished, before the Completion of the following Part begins. All Things
mentioned in the Epistles are not fully accomplished before the Seals are
opened: Neither are all things mentioned under the Seals fulfilled, before the
Trumpets begin. Nor yet is the Seventh Trumpet wholly ^t, before the Phials are
poured out. Only the beginning of (...) Part goes before the Beginning of the
following. Thus the Ep^es begin before the Seals, the Seals before the
Trumpets, the Trumpets before the Phials. One Epistle begins before another,
one Seal before another, one Trumpet especially before another, one Phial
before another. Yet sometimes what begins later than another Thing, ends
sooner; and what begins earlier than another Thing, ends later. So the seventh
Trumpet begins earlier than the Phials, and yet extends beyond them all. -- The
seven angels which stood before GOD -- a Character of the highest Emmence, and
seven trumpets were given them -- When Men desire to make known openly a Thing
of public Concern, they give a Token that may be seen or heard far and wide:
and among such none are more ancient than Trumpets, ( Lev. xxv. 9. Numb. x. 2.
Amos iii. 6.) The Israelites in particular used them, both in the Worship of
GOD and in War, therewith openly praising the Power of GOD, before, after, and
in the Battle ( Josh. vi. 4. 2. Chron. xiii. 14, etc.) And the Angels here made
known by these Trumpets, the wonderful Works of GOD, whereby all opposing
Powers are successively shaken, till the Kingdom of the World becomes the
Kingdom of GOD and his anointed.

These Trumpets reach nearly from the Time of St. John. to the End of the
World: And they are distinguished by manifest Tokens. The Place of the four
first is specified, namely, East, West, South, and North successively: In the
three last, immediately after the Time of each, the Place likewise is pointed
cut.

The Seventh Angel did not begin to sound, till after the going forth of the
Second Woe: But the Trumpets were given to him and the other six together (as
were afterward the Phials to the seven Angels) And it is accordingly said of
all the Seven together, that they prepared themselves to sound. These therefore
were not Men, as some have thought, but Angels properly so called.

V. 3. And -- In the 2d Verse the Trumpets were given to the seven Angels, and
in the Sixth they prepared to found. But between these the Incense of this
Angel and the Prayers of the Saints are mentioned: the interposing of which
shows, That the Prayers of the Saints and the Trumpets of the Angels go
together. And these Prayers with the Effects of them, may well be supposed to
extend through all the Seven, Another angel -- Another created Angel. Such are
all that are here spoken of. In this Part of the Revelation, Christ is never
termed an Angel, but the Lamb, came and stood at the altar -- Of burnt
offerings, and there was given him a golden censer -- A Censer was a Cup on a
Plate or Saucer. This was the Token and the Business of the Office. And much
incense was given -- Incense generally signifies Prayer. Here it signifies the
Longing Desires of the Angels, that the holy Counsel of GOD might be fulfilled.
And there was much Incenses for as the Prayers of all the Saints in Heaven and
Earth are here joined together, so are the Desires of all the Angels, which art
brought by this Angel, that he might place it -- It is not said, offer it: for
he was discharging the Office of an Angel, not a Priest, with the prayers of
all the saints -- At the same time; but not for the Saints. The Angels are
Fellow Servants with the Saints, not Mediators for them.

V. 4. And the smoke of the incense came up before GOD, with the prayers of the
saints -- A Token that both were accepted.

V. 5. And there were thanderings, and lightnings, and voices, and an
earthquake -- These, especially when attended with fire, are Emblems of GOD's
dreadful Judgments, which are immediately to follow.

V. 6. And the seven angels prepared themselves to found -- That each, when it
should come to his Turn, might found without Delay. But while they do found,
they still stand before GOD.

V. 7. And the first founded -- And every Angel continued to found, till all
which his Trumpet brought was fulfilled, and till the next began. There are
Intervals between the three Woes, but not between the four first Trumpets. And
there was hall and she mingled with blood, and they were cast upon the earth --
The Earth seems to mean Asia; Palestine, in particular. Quickly after the
Revelation was given, the Jewish Calamities under Adrian began: yea, before the
Reign of Trajan was ended: And here the Trumpets begin. Even under Trajan in
the Year 114, the Jews made an Insurrection with a most dreadful Fury; and in
the Parts about Carene, in Egypt, and in Cyprus, destroyed four hundred and
sixty thousand Persons. But they were represt by the victorious Power of
Trajan, and afterward slaughtered themselves in vast Multitudes. The Alarm
spread itself also into Mesopotamia, where Lucius Quintius slew a great Number
of them. They rose in Judea again in the second Year of Adrian: but were
presently quelled. Yet in 133 they broke out more violently than ever, under
their false Messiah Bareachab; and the War continued all the Year 135, when
almost all Judea was desolated. In the Egyptian Plague also Hail and Fire were
together. But here Hail is to be taker ^^^^^^tively, as also Blood, for a
vehement, (...) hurtful Invasion; and Fire betokens the Revenge of an ^nraged
Enemy, with the Desolation therefrom. And they were cast upon the earth -- That
is, the Fire, and Hail, and Blood. But they existed before they were cast upon
the earth. The Storm sell, the Blood flowed, and the Flames raged round Cyrene,
and in Egypt and Cyprus, before they reached Mesopotamia and Judea, And the
third part of the earth was burnt up -- Fifty well-fortified Cities, and nine
hundred and eighty-five well-inhabited Towns of the Jews, were wholly destroyed
in this War. Vast Tracts of Land were likewise left desolate and without
Inhabitant, and the third part of the trees was burnt up, and all the green
grass was burnt up -- Some understand by the trees, Men of Eminence among the
Jews^ by the grass, the common People. The Romans spared many of the former.
The latter were almost all destroyed.

Thus Vengeance began at the Jewish Enemies of Christ's Kingdom; though even
then the Romans did not quite escape. But afterward it came upon them more and
more violently: The second Trumpet affects the Roman Heathens in particular;
the Third, the dead, unholy Christians; the Fourth, the Empire itself.

V. 8. And the second angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain burning
with fire was cast into the sea -- By the sea, particularly as it is here
opposed to the earth, me may understand the West or Europe; and chiefly the
middle Parts of it, the vast Roman Empire. A mountain here seems to signify a
great Force and Multitude of People, ( Jer. li. 25) So this may point at the
Irruption of the barbarous Nations into the Roman Empire. The warlike Goths
broke in upon it about the Year 230. And from that Time the Irruption of one
Nation after another never ceased, till the very Form of the Roman Empire, and
all but the Name, was lost. The fire may mean, the Fire of War, and the Rage of
those Savage Nations. And the third part of the sea became blood -- This need
not imply, that just a third Part of the Romans was slain. But it is certain,
an inconceivable Deal of Blood was shed in all these Invasions.

V. 9. And the third part of the creatures that were in the sea -- That is, of
all Sorts of Men, of every Station and Degree, died -- By those merciless
Invaders. And the third part of the ships were destroyed -- It is a frequent
Thing to resemble a State or Republic to a Ship wherein many People are
embarked together, and share in the same Dangers. And how many States were
utterly destroyed by those inhuman Conquerors? Much likewise of this was
literally fulfilled. How often was the Sea^^inged with Blood? How many of those
who dwelt mostly upon it were killed? And what Number of Ships destroyed?

V. 10. And the third angel sounded, and there fell from heaven a great star,
and it fell on the third part of the rivers -- It seems, Afric is meant by the
rivers, (with which this burning Part of the World abounds in an especial
Manner) Egypt in particular, which the Nile overflows every Year far and wide.
In the whole African History, between the Irruption of the barbarous Nations
into the Roman Empire, and the Ruin of the Western Empire, after the Death of
Valentinian the Third, there is nothing more momentous than the Arian Calamity,
which sprung up in the Year 315. It is not possible to tell how many Persons,
particularly at Alexandria, in all Egypt, and in the neighboring Countries,
were destroyed by the Rage of the Arians. Yet Afric fared better than other
Parts of the Empire, with regard to the barbarous Nations, till the Governor of
it, whose Wife was a zealous Arian, and Aunt to Genserie, King of the Vandals,
was, under that Pretense, unjustly accused before the Empress Placidia. He was
then prevailed upon to invite the Vandals into Afric; who under Genseric, in
the Year 428, founded there a Kingdom of their own, which continued till the
Year 533. Under these Vandal Kings the true Believers endured all Manner of
Afflictions and Persecutions. And thus Arianism was the Inlet to all Heresies
and Calamities, and at length to Mahometanism itself.

This great star was not an Angel, (Angels are not the Agents in the two
preceding or the following Trumpet) but a Teacher of the Church, one of the
stars in the right hand of Christ. Such was Arius. He sell from on high, as it
were from heaven, into the most pernicious Doctrines, and made in his Fall a
gazing on all Sides, being great, and now burning as a torch. He fell on the
third part of the revers: his Doctrine spread far and wide, particularly in
Egypt, and on the fountains of waters -- Wherewith Afric abounds.

V. 11. And the name of the star is called Wormwood -- The unparallelled
Bitterness both of Arius himself and of his Followers, show the exact Propriety
of his Title, and the third part of the waters became wormwood -- A very
considerable Part of Afric was intected with the same bitter Doctrine and
Spirit, and many men (though not a third Part of them) died -- By the Cruelty of
the Arians.

V. 12. And the fourth angel sounded, and the third part of the sun was smitten
(or struck) -- After the Emperor Theodosius died, and the Empire was divided
into the Eastern and the Western, the barbarous Nations poured in as a Flood.
The Goths and Hunns in the Years 403 and 405 fell upon Italy itself with an
impetuous Force; and the former in the Year 410 took Rome by Storm, and
plundered it without Mercy. In the Year 452 Attila treated the upper Part of
Italy in the same Manner. In 455 Valentinian the Third was killed, and Genseric
invited from Afric. He plundered Rome for fourteen Days together. Recimer
plundered it again 472. During all these Commotions, one Province was lost
after another, till in the Year 476 Odoacer seized upon Rome, deposed the
Emperor, and put an End to the Empire itself.

An Eclipse of the Sun or Moon is termed by the Hebrews, a Stroke. Now, as such
a Darkness does not come all at once, but by Degrees, so likewise did the
Darkness which fell on the Roman, particularly the Western Empire: For the
Stroke began long before Od^acer, namely, when the Barbarians first conquered
the Capital City, And the third part of the moon and the third part of the
stars; so that the third part of them was darkened -- As under the first,
second, and third Trumpets, by the earth, sea, and rivers, are to be understood
the Men that inhabit them, so here by the sun, moon, and stars, may be
understood the Men that live under them, who are so overwhelmed with Calamities
in those Days of Darkness, that they can no longer enjoy the Light of Heaven;
unless it may be thought to imply their being killed, so that the Sun, Moon,
and Stars shine to them no longer. The very same Expression, we find in Ezekiel
(chapter xxxii. 8.) I will darken all the lights of heaven over them -- As then the
fourth Seal transcends the three preceding Seals, so does the fourth Trumpet
the three preceding Trumpets. For in this not the third Part of the Earth, or
Sea, or Rivers only, but of all who are under the Sun are affected, and the day
shone not for a third part thereof -- That is, shone with only a third Part of
its usual Brightness, and the night likewise, the Moon and Stars having lost a
third Part of their Luster, either with Regard to those who being dead, saw
them no longer, or those who saw them with no Satisfaction.

The three last Trumpets have the Time of their Continuance fixed, and between
each of them there is a remarkable Pause: Whereas between the four former there
is no Pause, nor is the Time of their Continuance mentioned; but all together
these four seem to take up a little less than four hundred Years.

V. 13. And I saw and heard an angel flying -- Between the Trumpets of the
fourth and fifth Angel, in the midst of heaven -- The three Woes (as we shall
see) stretch themselves over the Earth from Persia eastward, beyond Italy
westward, all which Space had been filled with the Gospel, by the Apostles. In
the midst of this lies Pa^mos, where St. John saw this Angel, saying, Woe, woe,
woe, -- Toward the End of the Fifth Century, there were many Presages of
approaching Calamities, to the inhabitants of the earth -- All without
Exception. Heavy Trials were coming on them all. Even while the Angel was
proclaiming this, the Preludes of these three Woes were already in Motion.
These fell more especially on the Jews. As to the Prelude of the first Woe in
Persia, I^degard II. in 454, was resolved to abolish the Sabbath, till he was
by Rabbi Mar diverted from his Purpose. Likewise in the Year 474 Phiruz
afflicted the Jews much, and compelled many of them to apostatize. A Prelude of
the Second Woe was the Rise of the Saracens, who in 510 fell into Arabia, and
Palestine. To prepare for the third Woe, Innocent I. and his Successors, not
only endeavored to enlarge their Episcopal Jurisdiction beyond all Bounds, but
also their worldly Power, by taking every Opportunity of in^roaching upon the
Empire, which as yet stood in the Way of their unlimited Monarchy.

IX.
And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star falling from heaven to the
earth, and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit. the earth have
power: is as the torment of a scorpion, when he stingeth a man. are like horses
made ready for battle; and on their heads are as it were crowns like gold, and
their faces are as the faces of men. as the teeth of lions. was as the noise of
chariots of many horses running to battle. is to hurt men five months.

And the sixth angel sounded, God, was two hundred millions: are as the heads
of lions, and out of their mouths goes fire and smoke, are like serpents,
having heads, and with them they do hurt. nor walk:

V. 1. And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star -- Far different from that
mentioned, chapter viii. 11. This Star belongs to the invisible World. The Third Woe
is occasioned by the Dragon cast out of Heaven: the Second takes Place at the
loosing of the four Angels who were bound in the Euphrates. The first is here
brought by the Angel of the Abyss, which is opened by this Star, or Holy Angel,
falling to the earth -- Coming swiftly and with great Force, and to him was
given -- When he was come, the key of the bottomless pit -- A deep and hideous
Prison, but different from the lake of Fire.

V. 2. And there arose a smoke out of the pit -- The Locusts, who afterward
rise out of it, seem to be (as we shall afterward see) the Persians: Agreeable
to which this Smoke is their detestable Idolatrous Doctrine, and false Zeal for
it, which now broke out in an uncommon Paroxysm, as the smoke of a great
furnace -- Where the Clouds of it rise thicker and thicker, spread far and
wide, and press one upon another, so that the Darkness increases continually.
And the sun and the air were darkened -- A figurative Expression denoting heavy
Affliction. This Smoke occasioned more and more such Darkness over the Jews in
Persia.

V. 3. And out of the smoke -- Not out of the bottomless Pit, but from the
Smoke which issued thence, there went forth locusts -- A known Emblem of a
numerous, hostile, hurtful People. Such were the Persians, from whom the Jews
in the Sixth Century suffered beyond Expression. In the Year 540, their
Academies were stopped, nor were they permitted to have a President for near
fifty Years. In 589 this Affliction ended; but it began long before 540. The
Prelude of it was about the Year 455 and 474. The main Storm came on in the
Reign of Cabades, and lasted from 483 to 532. Toward the beginning of the Sixth
Century, Mar Rab Isaac, President of the Academy was put to Death. Hereon
followed an Insurrection of the Jews, which lasted seven Years before they were
conquered by the Persians. Some of them were then put to Death, but not many;
the rest were closely imprisoned. And from this Time the Nation of the Jews
were hated and persecuted by the Persians, till they had well high rooted them
out, The scorpions of the earth -- The most hurtful Kind. The Scorpions of the
Air have Wings.

V. 4. And it was commanded them -- By the secret Power of GOD, not to hurt the
grass, neither any green thing, nor any tree -- Neither those of low, middling,
or high Degree, but only such of them as were not sealed -- Principally, the
unbelieving Israelites. But many who were called Christians suffered with them.

V. 5. Not to kill them -- Very few of them were killed; in general, they were
imprisoned and variously tormented.

V. 6. The men -- That is, the Men who are so tormented.

V. 7. And the appearances -- This Description suits a People neither
thoroughly civilized, nor entirely savage. And such were the Persians of that
Age, of the locusts are like (...) -- With their Riders. The Persians excelled
in Horsemanship, and on their heads are as it were (...) -- Turbands, and their
faces are as the faces of men -- Friendly and agreeable.

V. 8. And they had ha^^ as the hair of women -- All the Persians of old
gloried in long Hair, and their teeth were as the teeth of lions -- Breaking
and ^earing all Things in Pieces.

V. 9. And the noise of their wings was as the noise of chariots of many horses
-- With their War-chariots drawn by many Horses, they, as it were, flew to and
fro.

V. 10. And they have tails like scorpions -- That is, each Tail is like a
Scorpion, not like the Tail of a Scorpion, to hurt the unsealed men five months
-- Five Prophetic Months, that is, seventy-nine common Years. So long did these
Calamities last.

V. 11. And they have over them a king -- One by whom they are peculiarly
directed and governed. His name is Abaddon -- Both this and Apollyon signify a
Destroyer. By this he is distinguished from the Dragon, whose proper Name is
Satan.

V. 12. One woe is past: behold there come yet two woes after these things --
The Persian Power, under which was the first Woe, was now broken by the
Saracens; from this Time the first Pause made a wide Way for the two succeeding
Woes. In 589, when the first Woe ended, Mahomet was twenty Years old, and the
Contentions of the Christians with each other were exceeding great. In 591
Chosroes II. reigned in Persia, who after the Death of the Emperor made
dreadful Disturbances in the East. Hence Mahomet found an open Door for his new
Religion and Empire. And when the Usurper, Phocas, had in the Year 606, not
only declared the Bishop of Rome, Boniface III. Universal Bishop, but also the
Church of Rom^, the Head of all Churches; this was a sure Step to advance the
Papacy to its utmost Height. Thus, after the passing away of the first Woe, the
second, yea, and the third quickly followed: As indeed they were both on the
Way together with it, before the first effectually began.

V. 13. And the sixth angel sounded -- Under this Angel goes forth the second
Woe, and I heard a voice from the four corners of be golden altar -- ^his golden
Altar is the heavenly Pattern of the Levitical Altar of Incense. This Voice
signified, That the Execution of the Wrath of GOD (me ^^^oned ver. 20, 21.)
should, at no Intercession, be delayed any longer.

V. 14. Loose the four angels -- To go every Way, to the four Quarters: These
were evil Angels, or they would not have been bound. Why, or how long they were
bound, we know not.

V. 15. And the four angels were loosed, who were prepared -- By loosing them,
as well as by their Strength and Rage, to kill the third part of men -- That
is, an immense Number of them, for the hour, and day, and month, and year --
All this agrees with the Slaughter which the Saracens made, for a long Time
after Mahomet's Death. And with the Number of Angels let loose agrees the
Number of their first and most eminent Caliphs. These were Ali, Abubeker, Omar,
and Osman. Mahomet named Ali, his Cousin and Son-in-law, for his Successor. But
he was soon worked out by the rest, till they severally died, and so made Room
for him. They succeeded each other, and each destroyed innumerable Multitudes
of Men. There are in a Prophetic Hour Eight common Days: Day 196 common Days:
Month fifteen common Years: and 318 common Days: Year 196 common Years: and 117
common Days:
in all 212 Years.

Now the second Woe (as also the Beginning of the third) has its Place, between
the ceasing of the Locusts, and the rising of the Beast out of the Sea; even at
the Time that the Saracens (who were chiefly Cavalry) were in the Height of
their Carnage; from their first Caligh Abub^ker, till they were repulsed from
Rome, under Leo IV. These 212 Years may therefore be reckoned from the Year 634
to 847. The Gradation in reckoning the Time, beginning with the hour and ending
with a year, corresponds with their small Beginning and vast Increase. Before
and after Mahomet's Death, they had enough to do, to settle their Affairs at
Home. Afterward Abub^ker went farther, and in the Year 634 gained great
Advantage over the Persians and Romans in Syria. Under Omar was the Conquest of
Mesopotamia, Palestine, and Egypt made. Under Osman, that of Afri^, (with the
total Suppression of the Roman Government in the Year 647) of Cyprus, and of
all Persia, in 651. After Ali was dead, his Son Ali Hasen, a peaceable Prince,
was driven out by M^^^ia* under whom and his Successors the Power of the
Saracens so increased, that within fourscore Years after Mahomet's Death, they
had extended their Conquests farther than the warlike Romans did in four
hundred Years.

V. 16. And the number of the ^orsemen was two hundred millions -- Not that so
many were ever brought into the Field at once, but (if we understand the
Expression literally) in the Course of the hour, and day, and month, and year.
So neither were the third part of men killed at once; but during that Course of
Years.

V. 17. And thus I saw the horses and them that sat on them in the vision --
St. John seems to add these Words in the vision, to intimate, that we are not
to take this Description just according to the Letter, Having breast-plates of
fire -- Fiery red, and hyacinth -- Dun-blue, and brimstone -- A faint yellow.
Of the same Color with the fire, and smoke, and brimstone, which go out of the
mouths of their horses, and the heads of their horses are as the heads of lions
-- That is, fierce and terrible, and out of their mouth goes fire, and smoke,
and brimstone -- This figurative Expression may denote, the consuming,
blinding, all-piercing Rage, Fierceness and Force of these Horsemen.

V. 18. By these three -- Which were inseparably joined, were the third part of
men in the Countries they overran, killed -- Omar alone in eleven Years and a
half took thirty-six thousand Cities or Forts. How many Men must be killed
therein?

V. 19. For the power of these horses is in their mouths and in their tails --
Their Riders fight retreating as well as advancing: So that their Rear is as
terrible as their Front, for their tails are like serpents, having heads -- Not
like the Tails of Serpents only. They may be fitly compared to the Amphisbena,
a Kind of Serpent, which has a short Tail, not unlike an Head; from which it
throws out its Poison, as if it had two Heads.

V. 20. And the rest of the men who were not killed -- Whom the Saracens did
not destroy. It is observable, the Countries they overran, were mostly those
where the Gospel had been planted, by these plagues -- Here, the Description of
the second Woe ends, yet repented not though they were called Christians, of the
works of their hands -- Presently specified, that they should not worship
devils -- The Invocation of departed Saints, whether true, or false, or
doubtful, or forged, crept early into the Christian Church, and was carried
farther and farther; and who knows, how many who are invoked as Saints, are
among evil, not good Angels? Or how far Devils have mingled with such blind
Worship, and with the Wonders wrought on those Occasions? And idols -- About
the Year 590 Men began to venerate Images; and though upright Men zealously
opposed it, yet by little and little Images grew into manifest Idols. For after
much Contention both in the East and West, in the Year 787, the Worship of
Images was established by the second Council of Nice. Yet was Image Worship
sharply opposed some Time after, by the Emperor Theophilus. But when he died,
in 842, his Widow, Theodora, established it again; as did the Council at
Constantinople in the Year 863, and again in 871.

V. 21. Neither repented of their murders, nor of their ^^ceries -- Whoever
reads the Histories of the seventh, eighth, and ninth Centuries, will find
numberless Instances of all these in every Part of the Christian World. But
though GOD cut off so many of these Scandals to the Christian Name, yet the
rest went on in the same Course. Some of them however might repent under the
Plagues which follow.

Chapter x. From the first Verse of this Chapter to chapter xi. 13. Preparation is made
for the important Trumpet of the seventh Angel. It consists of two Parts, which
run parallel to each other: the former reaches from the first to the seventh
Verse of this Chapter; the latter from the eighth of this to the thirteenth
Verse of the eleventh Chapter: Whence also the sixth Verse of this Chapter is
parallel to the eleventh Verse. The Period to which both these refer begins
during the second Woe, (as appears chapter xi. 14.) but being once begun, it extends
in a continued Course far into the Trumpet of the seventh Angel. Hence many
Things are represented here, which are not fulfilled till long after. So the
joyful Consummation of the mystery of GOD is spoken of in the seventh Verse of
this Chapter, which yet is not till after the consummation of the wrath of GOD,
chapter xv. 1. So the ascent of the ^east out of the bottomless pit, is mentioned
chapter xi. 7. which nevertheless is still to come, chapter xvii. 8. And so the
earthquake by which a tenth part of the great city falls, and the rest are
converted, chapter xi. 13. is ^^^ly later than that by which the same City is split
into three par^^, ch xvi 19. This is a most necessary Observation, whereby we
may escape many and great Mistakes.

X.
And I saw another mighty angel coming down from heaven, clothed with a cloud,
and a rainbow upon his head, and his face as the sun, and his feet as pillars
of fire. earth,

And the voice which I heard from heaven spoke with the again, and nations, and
tongues, and many kings.

V. 1. And I saw another mighty angel -- Another from that mighty angel
mentioned chapter v. 2. yet he was a created Angel* for he did not swear by
himself, ver. 6. c^a^hed with a cloud -- In token of his high Dignity, and a
rainbow upon his bead -- A lovely Token of the Divine Favor. And yet it is not
too glorious for a Creature: the Woman, chapter xii. 1. is described more glorious
still, and his face as the sun -- Nor is this too much for a Creature: for all
the Righteous shall shine forth as the sun, ( Matt. xiii. 43.) and his feet as
pillars of fire -- Bright as Flame.

V. 2. And he had in his hand -- His Left Hand; he swore with his Right. He
stood with his Right Foot on the Sea, toward the West; his Left on the Land,
toward the East; so that he looked Southward. And so St. John, (as Patmos lies
near Asia) could conveniently take the Book out of his Left Hand. This sealed
Book was first in the Right Hand of him that sat on the Throne. Thence the Lamb
took it and opened the Seals. And now this little book containing the Remainder
of the other, is given opened as it was to St. John. From this place the
Revelation speaks more clearly and less figuratively than before. And he set
his right foot upon the sea -- Out of which the first Beast was to come, and
his left upon the earth -- Out of which was to come the second. The Sea may
betoken Europe; the Earth, Asia; the chief Theaters of these great Things.

V. 3. And he cried -- Uttering the Words set down, ver. 6. and while he cried
-- Or was crying, at the same Instant, seven thunders uttered their voices --
In distinct Words, each after the other. Those who spoke these Words were
glorious, heavenly Powers, whose Voice was as the loudest Thunder.

V. 4. And I heard a voice from heaven -- Doubtless from Him, who had at first
commanded him to write, and who presently commands him to take the Book, namely
Jesus Christ -- Seal up those things which the seven thunders have uttered, and
write them not -- These are the only Things of all which he heard, that he is
commanded to keep secret. So something peculiarly Secret was revealed to the
beloved John, besides all the Secrets that are written in this Book. At the
same Time we are prevented from enquiring, what it was which these Thunders
uttered. Suffice that we may know all the Contents of the opened Book, and of
the Oath of the Angel.

V. 5. And the Angel -- This Manifestation of Things to come un^^^ the Trumpet
of the seventh Angel, has a twofold Introduction. First, the Angel speaks for
GOD, ver. 7. Then Christ speaks for himself, chapter xi. 3. The Angel appeals to
the Prophets of former Times; Christ to his own two Witnesses, When I saw
standing upon the earth and upon the sea, lifted up his right hand toward
heaven -- As yet the Dragon was in Heaven. When he is cast thence he brings the
Third and most dreadful Woe on the Earth and Sea: so that it seems as if there
would be no End of Calamities. Therefore the Angel comprizes in his Posture and
in his Oath, both Heaven, Sea, and Earth, and makes on the Part of the Eternal
GOD and Almighty Creator, a solemn Protestation, that he will assert his kingly
Authority against all his Enemies. He lifted up his right hand toward heaven --
The Angel in Daniel, chapter xii. 7. (not improbably the same Angel) lifted up both
his hands.

V. 6. And swear -- The six preceding Trumpets pass without any such Solemnity.
It is the Trumpet of the seventh Angel alone, which is confirmed by so high an
Oath, by him that lives for ever and ever -- Before whom a thousand Years are
but a Day, who created the heaven, the earth, the sea, and the things that are
therein -- And consequently has the sovereign Power over all: Therefore all his
Enemies, though they rage a while in Heaven, on the Sea, and on the Earth, yet
must give Place to him, that there shall be no more a time, but in the days of
the voice of the seventh angel, the mystery of GOD shall be fulfilled -- That
is, a time, a Chronos shall not expire, before that Mystery is fulfilled. A
Chronos ((...) Years) will nearly pass before then, but not quite. The Period
then which we may term a Non-chronos, (not a whole time) must be a little and
not much shorter than this. The Non-chronos here mentioned seems to begin in
the Year 800, (when Charles the Great instituted in the West a new Line of
Emperors, or of many kings) to end in the Year 1836: and to contain among other
Things, the short time of the third Woe, the three times and a half of the Woman
in the Wilderness, and the Duration of the Beast.

V. 7. But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel -- Who founded not
only at the Beginning of those Days, but from the Beginning to the End, the
mystery of GOD shall be fulfilled -- It is said, chapter xvii. 17. The word of GOD
shall be fulfilled. The word of GOD is fulfilled by the Destruction of the
Beast, the Mystery by the Removal of the Dragon. But these great Events are so
near together, that they are here mentioned as one. The Beginning of them is in
Heaven, as soon as the seventh Trumpet sounds: the End is on the Earth, and the
Sea. So long as the third Woe remains on the Earth and the Sea, the Mystery of
GOD is not fulfilled. And the Angel's swearing is peculiarly for the Comfort of
holy Men, who are afflicted under that Woe. Indeed the Wrath of GOD must be
first fulfilled, by the pouring out of the Phials: and then comes the joyful
fulfilling of the Mystery of GOD. As he has declared to his servants the
prophets -- The Accomplishment exactly answering the Prediction. The ancient
Prophecies relate partly to that grand Period, from the Birth of Christ to the
Destruction of Jerusalem; partly to the Time of the seventh Angel, wherein they
will be fully accomplished. To the seventh Trumpet belongs all that occurs from
chapter xi. 15. to chapter xxii. 5. And the Third Woe, which takes Place under the same,
properly stands, chapter xii. 12. chapter xiii. 1 -- 18.

V. 8. And -- What follows from this Verse to chapter xi. 13. runs parallel with
the Oath of the Angel, and with the fulfilling of the mystery of GOD, as it
follows under the Trumpet of the seventh Angel. What is said ver. 11.
concerning St. John's prophesying again, is unfolded immediately after: what is
said ver. 7. concerning the fulfilling the mystery of GOD, is unfolded chapter xi.
15 -- 19. and in the following Chapters.

V. 9. Eat it up -- The like was commanded to Ezekiel. This was an Emblem of
thoroughly considering and digesting it. And it will make thy belly bitter, but
it will be sweet as honey in thy mouth -- The Sweetness betokens the many good
Things which follow, chapter xi. 1. 15. etc. the Bitterness, the Evils which
succeed under the third Woe.

V. 11. Thou must prophecy again -- Of the Mystery of GOD; of which the ancient
Prophets had prophesied before. And he did prophecy, by measuring the temple,
chapter xi. 1. as a Prophecy may be delivered either by Words or Actions,
concerning people, and nations, and tongues, and many kings -- The people,
nations and tongues are cotemporary; but the Kings, being many, succeed one
another. These Kings are not mentioned for their own sake, but with a View to
the Holy City, chapter xi. 2. Here is a Reference to the great Kingdoms in Spain,
England, Italy, etc. which arose from the Eighth Century; or at least underwent
a considerable Change, as France and Germany in particular: To the Christian,
afterward Turkish Empire in the East; and especially to the various Potentates,
who have successively reigned at or over Jerusalem, and do now, at least
titularly, reign over it.

XI.
And there was given me a reed, like a measuring rod; and he said, Arise, and
measure the temple of God, and the altar, and sixty days, These are the two
olive trees and the two candlesticks, with them, shall be in the street of the
great city, which is called spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord
was crucified. some of the people, and tribes, and tongues, and nations, behold
their dead bodies three days and a half, and they shall not suffer their dead
bodies to be put in a grave. And they that dwell upon the earth rejoice over
them, there were slain in the earthquake seven thousand men, and the rest were
terrified, and gave glory to the God of heaven.

And the seventh angel sounded, the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and
he shall reign for ever and ever.

And the temple of God was opened in heaven,

C. xi. In this Chapter is shown, How it will fare with the holy city, till the
Mystery of GOD is fulfilled: In the Twelfth, what will befall the Woman, who is
delivered of the Man-child: In the Thirteenth, how it will be with the Kingdom
of Christ, while the two Beasts are in the Height of their Power. And there
was given me -- By Christ, as appears from the third Verse, and he said, Arise
-- Probably he was sitting to write, and measure the temple of GOD -- At
Jerusalem, where he was placed in the Vision. Of this we have a (...)
Description by Ezekiel, chapter xl -- xlviii. concerning which we (...) observe.

1. Ezekiel's Prophecy was not fulfilled at the Return from the Babylonish
Captivity. 2. Yet it does not refer to the New Jerusalem, which is far more
gloriously described. 3. It must infallibly be fulfilled even then when they
are ashamed of all that they have done, chapter xliii. 11. 4. Ezekiel speaks of the
same Temple, which is treated of here. 5. As all Things are there so largely
described, St. John is shorter and refers thereto.


V. 2. But the court which is without the temple -- The old Temple had a Court
in the open Air, for the Heathens who worshipped the GOD of Israel, cast out --
Of thy Account and measure it not -- As not being holy in so high a Degree, and
they shall tread -- Inhabit the holy city, Jerusalem, Matt. iv. 5. So they
began to do, before St. John wrote. And it has been trodden almost ever since,
by the Romans, Persians, Saracens, and Turks. But that severe Kind of treading
which is here peculiarly spoken of, will not be till under the Trumpet of the
seventh Angel, and toward the End of the troublous times. This will continue
but forty-two common Months, or twelve hundred and sixty common Days; being but
a small Part of the Non-chronos.

V. 3. And I -- Christ, will give to my two witnesses -- These seem to be two
Prophets, two select, eminent Instruments. Some have supposed (though without
Foundation) that they are Moses and Elijah, whom they resemble in several
respects, to prophecy twelve hundred and sixty days -- Common Days, that is, an
hundred and eighty Weeks. So long will they prophecy, (even while that last and
sharp treading of the holy City continues) both by Word and Deed, witnessing
that Jesus is the Son of GOD, the Heir of all Things, and exhorting all Men to
repent, and fear, and glorify GOD, clothed in sackcloth -- The Habit of the
deepest Mourners, out of Sorrow and Concern for the People.

V. 4. These are the two olive trees -- That is, as Zerubbabel and Joshua, the
two olive trees spoken of by Zechariah, chapter iii. 9. chapter iv. 10. were then the
two chosen Instruments in GOD's Hand, even so shall these be in their Season.
Being themselves full of the Unction of the Holy One, they shall continually
transmit the same to others also, and the two candlesticks, burning and shining
Lights, standing before the Lord of the earth -- Always waiting on GOD, without
the Help of Man, and asserting his Right over the Earth and all Things therein.

V. 5. If any would kill them -- As the Israelites would have done Moses and
Aaron, Numb. xvi. 41. he must be thus killed -- By that devouring Fire.

V. 6. These have power -- And they use that Power (see ver. 10.) to shut
heaven that it rain not in the days of their prophesying -- During those twelve
hundred and sixty Days, and have power over the waters -- In and near
Jerusalem, to turn them into blood -- As Moses did those in Egypt, and to smite
the earth with all plagues, as often as they will -- This is not said of Moses
or Elijah, or any mere Man besides. And how is it possible to understand this
otherwise, than of two individual Persons?

V. 7. And when they shall have finished their testimony -- Till then they are
invincible, the wild beast -- Hereafter to be described, that ascend th --
First out of the Sea, chapter xiii. 1. and then out of the bottomless pit, chapter
xvii. 8. shall make war with them -- It is at his last Ascent, not out of the
Sea, but the bottomless Pit, that the Beast makes War upon the Two Witnesses.
And even hereby is fixed the Time of treading the Holy City, and of the two
Witnesses. That Time ends after the Ascent of the Beast out of the Abyss, and
yet before the fulfilling of the Mystery, and shall conquer them -- The Fire no
longer proceeding out of their Mouth when they have finished their Work, and
kill them -- These will be among the last Martyrs, though not the last of all.

V. 8. And their bodies shall be -- Perhaps hanging on a Cross, in the street
of the great city -- Of Jerusalem, a far greater City, than any other in those
Parts. This is described both spiritually and historically: Spiritually, as it
is called Sodom ( Isa. 1.) and Egypt; on account of the same Abomination
abounding there at the Time of the Witnesses, as did once in Egypt and Sodom:
Historically; where also their Lord was crucified -- This possibly refers to
the very Ground where his Cross stood. Constantine the Great enclosed this
within the Walls of the City. Perhaps; on that very Spot will their Bodies be
exposed.

V. 9. Three days and a half -- So exactly are the Times set down in this
Prophecy. If we suppose this Time began in the Evening, and ended in the
Morning, and included, (which is no Way impossible) Friday, Saturday, and
Sunday, the weekly Festival of the Turkish People, the Jewish Tribes, (...) the
Christian Tongues; then all these together, with the Heathen Nations, would
have full Leisure to gaze upon and rejoice over them.

V. 10. And they that dwell upon the earth -- Perhaps this Expression may
peculiarly denote earthly-minded Men, shall make merry -- As did the
Philistines over Sampson, and send gifts to one another -- Both Turks, and
Jews, and Heathens, and false Christians.

V. 11. And great fear fell upon them that saw them -- And now knew, That GOD
was on their Side.

V. 12. And I heard a great voice -- Designed for all to hear, And they went up
to heaven, and their enemies behold them -- Who had not taken Notice of their
rising again; by which some had been convinced before.

V. 13. And there was a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell
-- We have here an unanswerable Proof, That this City is not Babylon, or Rome,
but Jerusalem. For Babylon shall be wholly burnt before the fulfilling of the
Mystery of GOD. But this City is not burnt at all: on the contrary, at the
fulfilling of that Mystery, a tenth Part of it is destroyed by an Earthquake,
and the other nine Parts converted, And there was slain in the earthquake seven
thousand men -- Being a tenth Part of the Inhabitants, who therefore were
seventy thousand in all, and the rest -- The remaining sixty-three thousand
were converted: a grand Step toward the fulfilling of the Mystery of GOD. Such
a Conversion we no where else read of. So there shall be a larger as well as
holier Church at Jerusalem, than ever was yet, were terrified -- Blessed
Terror! And g^^e glory -- The Character of true Conversion, Jer. xiii. 16. to
the God of heaven -- He is styled the Lord of the earth, ver. 4. when he
declares his Right over the Earth by the two Witnesses: But the GOD of heaven,
when he not only gives Rain from Heaven after the most afflicting Drought, but
also declares his Majesty from Heaven, by taking his Witnesses up into it. When
the whole Multitude gives Glory to the GOD of Heaven, then that treading of the
Holy City ceases. This is the Point so long aimed at, the desired fulfilling of
the mystery of GOD, when the Divine Promises are so richly fulfilled on those
who have gone through so great Afflictions. All this is here related together,
that whereas the first and second Woe went forth in the East, the rest of the
Eastern Affairs being added at once, the Description of the Western might
afterward remain unbroken.

It may be useful here, to see how the Things here spoken of, and those
hereafter described, follow each other in their Order.

1. The Angel swears: the Non-chronos begins: John eats the Book: the many
Kings arise. 2. The Non-chronos and the many Kings being on the Decline, that
Treading begins, and the Two Witnesses appear. 3. The Beast (after he has with
the ten Kings destroyed Babylon), wars with them and kills them. After three
Days and an half they revive and ascend to Heaven. There is a great Earthquake
in the Holy City. Seven thousand perish, and the rest are convert^^. The
treading of the City by the Gentiles ends. 4. The Beast, and the Kings of the
Earth, and their Armies are assembled to fight against the Great King. 5.
Multitudes of his Enemies are killed, and the Beast and the false Prophet cast
alive into the Lake of Fire. 6. While John measures the Temple of GOD and the
Altar with the Worshippers, the true Worship of GOD is set up. The Nations who
had trodden the Holy City are converted. Hereby the Mystery of GOD is
fulfilled. 7. Satan is imprisoned. Being released for a Time, he, with Gog and
Mag^g, makes his last Assault upon Jerusalem.


V. 14. The second woe is past -- The Butchery made by the Saracens ceased about
the Year 847, when their Power was so broken by Charles the Great, that they
never recovered it. Behold the third woe comes quickly -- Its Prelude came
while the Roman See took all Opportunities of laying claim to its beloved
Universality, and enlarging its Power and Grandeur. And in the Year 755 the
Bishop of Rome became a secular Prince, by King P^pin's giving him the
Exar^hat^ of Lombardy. The Beginning of the third Woe itself stands, chapter xii. 12.

V. 15. And the seventh angel sounded -- This Trumpet contains the most
important and joyful Events, and renders all the former Trumpets Matter of Joy
to all the Inhabitants of Heaven. The Allusion therefore in this and all the
Trumpets is to those used in festal Solemnities. All these seven Trumpets were
heard in Heaven: Perhaps the seventh shall once be heard on Earth also, 1 These.
iv. 16. And there were great voices -- From the several Citizens of Heaven. At
the opening of the seventh Seal, there was silence in heaven; at the sounding
of the seventh Trumpet, great voices. This alone is sufficient to show, that
the seven Seals and seven Trumpets do not run parallel to each other. As soon
as the seventh Angel sounds, the Kingdom falls to GOD and his Christ. This
immediately appears in Heaven, and is there celebrated with joyful Praise. But
on Earth several dreadful Occurrences are to appear first. This Trumpet
comprizes all that follows from these Voices to chapter xxii. 5. The kingdom of the
world -- That is, the Royal Government over the whole World and all its
Kingdoms, Zech. xiv. 9. is become the kingdom of the Lord -- This Province has
been in the Enemy's Hands: It now returns to its rightful Master. In the Old
Testament, from Moses to Samuel, GOD himself was the King of his own People.
And the same will be in the New Testament: He will himself reign over the
Israel of GOD, and of his Christ -- This Appellation is now first given him
(since the Introduction of the Book) on the mention of the Kingdom devolving
upon him, under the seventh Trumpet. Prophets and Priests were anointed, but
more especially Kings: Whence that Term. The Anointed, is applied only to a
King. Accordingly, whenever the Messiah is mentioned in Scripture, his Kingdom
is implied, I^ become -- In reality all Things (and so the Kingdom of the
World) are GOD's in all Ages. Yet Satan, and the present World with its Kings
and Lords, are risen against the Lord and against his Anointed. GOD now puts an
End to this monstrous Rebellion, and maintains his Right to all Things. And
this appears in an entirely new Manner, as soon as the seventh Angel sounds.

V. 16. And the four and twenty olders -- These shall reign over the Earth,
(chapter v. 10.) who sit before GOD on their thrones -- Which we do not read of any
Angel.

V. 17. The Almighty -- He who has all Things in his Power, as the only
Governor of them, who is, and who was -- GOD is frequently styled He who is,
and who was, and who is to come. But now he is actually come, the Words, who is
to come, are, as it were, swallowed up. When it is said, We thank thee that
thou have taken thy great power, it is all one as We thank the^ that thou art
come. This whole Thanksgiving is partly an Enlargement on the two great Points,
mentioned in the fifteenth Verse; partly a Summary of what is hereafter more
distinctly related. Here it is mentioned. How the Kingdom is the Lord's;
afterward how it is the Kingdom of his Christ. Thou have taken thy great power
-- This is the Beginning of what is done under the Trumpet of the Seventh
Angel. GOD has never ceased to use his Power: but he has suffered his Enemies
to oppose it, which he will now suffer no more.

V. 18. And the heathen nations were w^^th -- At the breaking out of the Power
and Kingdom of GOD. This Wrath of the Heathens now rises to the highest Pitch;
but it meets the Wrath of the Almighty and melts away. In this Verse is
described both the going forth and the End of GOD's Wrath, which together take
up several Ages. And the time of the dead is come -- Both of the Quick and
Dead, of whom those already dead are for the more numerous Part, that they be
judged -- This being infallibly certain, they speak of as already present, and
to give a ^^ward -- At the Coming of Christ (chapter xxii. 12.) but of Free Grace,
no^ of Debt, 1. To his servants the Prophets, 2. To his Saints, to them who
were eminently holy, 3. To them that f^^r his ^am^. These are the lowest Class.
Those who do not even ^ear GOD, will have ^o ^eward from him, small and great
-- All universally, young and old, high and low, rich and poor, and to (...)
that (...) -- The Earth was destroyed by the Gre^^ Whore in particular, (chapter
xix. 2. xvii. 2, 5.) But likewise (...) general by the open R^ge and (...) of
wicked Men against all that is good: by Wars and the various Destruction and
Desolation naturally flowing therefrom; by such Laws and Constitutions as
hinder much Good, and occasion many Offenses and Calamities; by public
Scandals, whereby a Door is opened for all Dissoluteness and Unrighteousness;
by Abuse of Secular and Spiritual Powers; by evil Doctrines, Maxims and
Counsels; by open Violence and Persecution, and by Sins crying to GOD to send
Plagues upon the Earth.

This great Work of GOD, Destroying the Destroyers, under the Trumpet of the
Seventh Angel, is not the Third Woe, but Matter of Joy, for which the Elders
solemnly give Thanks. All the Woes, and particularly the Third, go forth over
those who dwell upon the earth, but this Destruction, over those who destroy
the earth, and were also Instruments of that Woe.

V. 19. And the temple of GOD -- The inmost Part of it, was opened in heaven --
And hereby is opened a new Scene, of the most momentous Things; that we may see
how the Contents of the Seventh Trumpet are executed, and notwithstanding the
greatest Opposition, particularly by the Third Woe, brought to a glorious
Conclusion, And the Ark of the covenant was seen in his temple -- The Ark of
the Covenant which was made by Moses was not in the Second Temple, being
probably burnt with the first Temple by the Chaldeans. But here is the Heavenly
Ark of the everlasting Covenant, the Shadow of which was under the Old
Testament, Heb. ix. 4. The Inhabitants of Heaven saw the Ark before. St. John
also saw it now; for a Testimony, that what GOD had promised, should be
fulfilled to the uttermost. And there were lightnings, and voices, and
thunders, and an earthquake, and great hail -- The very same there are, and in
the same Order, when the Seventh Angel has poured out his Phial, (chapter xvi. 17
-- 21.) One Place answers the other. What the Trumpet here denounces in Heaven,
is there executed by the Phial upon Earth. First it is shown, What will be
done: and afterward it is done.

XII.
And a great sign was seen in heaven, a woman clothed with the sun, and the
moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars. And being with
child, And she brought forth a man child, and sixty days.

And there was war in heaven; warred and his angels: them before our God day
and night.

And when the dragon saw that he was cast to the earth, eagle, that she might
fly into the wilderness to her place, where she is fed for a time, and times,
and half a time,

Chap. xii. The great Vision of this Book goes straight forward, from the
Fourth to the Twenty-second Chapter. Only the Tenth, with part of the Eleventh
Chapter, was a kind of Introduction to the Trumpet of the Seventh Angel: After
which it is said, The Second Woe is past: behold the Third Woe comes quickly.
Immediately the Seventh Angel sounds, under whom the Third Woe goes forth. And
to this Trumpet belongs all that is related to the End of the Book.

V. 1. And a great sign was seen in heaven -- Not only by St. John, but many
heavenly Spectators represented in the Vision. A sign means something that has
an uncommon Appearance, and from which we infer, that some unusual Thing will
follow, A woman -- The Emblem of the Church of Christ, as she is originally of
Israel, though built and enlarged on all Sides by the Addition of Heathen
Converts; and as she will hereafter appear, when all her Natural Branches are
again grafted in. She is at present on Earth, and yet with regard to her Union
with Christ may be said to be in Heaven. ( Ephesians. ii. 6.) Accordingly she is
described as both assaulted and defended in Heaven, (ver. 4, 7.) clothed with
the sun, and the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars
-- These figurative Expressions must be so interpreted, as to preserve a due
Proportion between them. So in Joseph's Dream the Sun betokened his Father, the
Moon his Mother, the Stars their Children. There may be some such Resemblance
here. And as the Prophecy points out the power over all nations, perhaps the
sun may betoken the Christian World, the Moon the Mahometans, (who also carry
the Moon in their Ensigns) and the crown of twelve stars, the twelve Tribes of
Israel; which are smaller than the Sun and Moon. The whole of this Chapter
answers the State of the Church, from the ninth Century to this Time.

V. 2. And being with child, she cries, travailing in birth -- The very Pain,
without any outward Opposition, would constrain a Woman in Travail to cry out.
These Cries, Throes and Pains to be delivered, were the painful Longings, the
Sighs and Prayers of the Saints for the Coming of the Kingdom of GOD. The Woman
groaned and travailed in Spirit, that Christ might appear, as the Shepherd and
King of all Nations.

V. 3. And behold a great red dragon -- His fiery red Color denoting his
Disposition, having seven heads -- Implying vast Wisdom, and ten horns --
Perhaps on the seventh Head: Emblems of mighty Power and Strength, which he
still retained, and seven diadems on his heads -- Not properly Crowns, but
costly Bindings, such as Kings anciently wore. For though fallen, he was a
great Potentate still, even, the Prince of this World.

V. 4. And ^is tail -- His Falsehood and Subtlety, draws -- As a Train, the
third part, a very large Number, of the stars of heaven -- The Christians and
their Teachers, who before sat in heavenly Places with (...) Jesus, and casts
them to the earth -- Utterly deprives them of all those Heavenly Blessings.
This is properly a ^ort of the Description of the Dragon, who was not yet
himself on Earth, but in Heaven. Consequently this casting them down was
between the Beginning of the seventh Trumpet, and the Beginning of the third
Woe; or between the Year 847 and the Year 947: at which Time pestilent
Doctrines, particularly that of the Manichees in the East, drew abundance of
People from the Truth. And the dragon stood before the woman, that, when she
had brought forth, be might devour the child -- That he might hinder the
Kingdom of Christ from spreading abroad, as it ^^es under this Trumpet.

V. 5. And she brought forth a man-child -- Even Christ, considered not in his
Person, but in his Kingdom. In the ninth Age, many Nations with their Princes
were added to the Christian Church, who was to rule all nations -- When his
Time is come, and her child -- Which was already in Heaven, as were the Woman
and the Dragon, was caught up to GOD -- Taken utterly out of his Reach.

V. 6. And the woman fled into the wilderness -- This Wilderness is undoubtedly
on Earth, where the Woman also herself is now supposed to be. It betokens that
Part of the Earth, where, after having brought forth, she found a new Abode.
And this must be in Europe, as Asia and Afric were wholly in the Hands of the
Turks and Saracens: And in a Part of it where the Woman had not been before. In
this Wilderness GOD had already prepared a place, that is, made it safe and
convenient for her. The Wilderness is, those Countries of Europe, which lie on
this Side the Danube: For the Countries which lie beyond it, had received
Christianity before, that they may feed her -- That the People of that Place
may provide all Things needful for her, twelve hundred and sixty days -- So
many Prophetic Days; which are not (as some have supposed) twelve hundred and
sixty, but seven hundred and seventy-seven common Years. (This B^ng^lius has
shown at large in his German Introduction.) Th^se we may compute from the Year
847 to 1524. So long the Woman enjoyed a safe and convenient Place, in Europe,
which was chiefly Bohemia: where she was fed, t^l^ GOD provided for her more
plentifully at the Reformation.

V. 7. And there (...) in heaven -- Here Satan makes his grand Opposition to
the Kingdom of GOD. But an and is now put to his (...) the (...) GOD. The Cause
(...) against him. (ver. 1^, 11.) and (...) the Sentence. That M^chael is a
created Angel, appears (...) his not d^ring, in disputing with Satan, ( Jude
^.) to being a r^^^^ing Accusation, but only saying, The Lord rebuke thee. And
this Modesty is implied in his very Name; for Michael signifies, Who is like
God? Which implies also his deep Reverence toward GOD, and distance from all
self-exaltation. Satan would be like GOD. The very Name of Michael asks, Who is
like GOD? Not Satan: Not the highest Archangel. It is He likewise that is
afterward employed to seize, bind, and imprison that proud Spirit.

V. 8. And he prevailed not -- The Dragon himself is principally mentioned; but
his Angels likewise are to be understood. Neither was his place found any more
in heaven -- So till now he had a Place in Heaven. How deep a Mystery is this!
One may compare this with Luke x. 18. Ephesians. ii. 2. iv. 8. vi. 12.

V. 9. And the great Dragon was cast out -- It is not yet said unto the earth.
He was cast out of heaven. And at this the Inhabitants of Heaven rejoice. He is
termed the great dragon, as appearing here in that Shape, to intimate his
poisonous and cruel Disposition; the ancient serpent, in allusion to his
deceiving Eve in that f^rm. Dragons are a kind of large Serpent, who is called
the Devil and Satan -- These are Words of exactly the same meaning; only the
former is Greek, the latter Hebrew, denoting the Grand Adversary of all the
Saints, whether Jews or Gentiles, He has deceived the (...) -- Not only in
their first Parents, but through all Ages and in all Countries, into Unbelief
and all Wickedness, into the hating and persecuting Faith and all Goodness. He
was cast out unto the earth -- He was cast out of Heaven; and being cast out
thence himself came to the Earth. Nor had he been unemployed on the Earth
before, although his ordinary Abode was in Heaven.

V. 10. Now is come -- Hence it is evident, That all this Chapter belongs to
the Trumpet of the Seventh Angel. In the Eleventh Chapter, from the fifteenth
to the eighteenth Verse, are proposed the Contents of this extensive Trumpet;
the Execution of which is copiously described in this and the following
Chapters, the salvation -- Of the Saints, the might -- Whereby the Enemy is
cast out, the kingdom -- Here the Majesty of GOD is shown, and the power of his
Christ -- Which he will exert against the Beast. And when he also is taken
away, then will the Kingdom be ascribed to Christ himself, chapter xix. 16. xx. 4.
The accuser of our brethren -- So long as they remained on Earth. This great
Voice therefore was the Voice of Men only, who accused them before our GOD day
and night -- Amazing Malice of Satan and Patience of GOD!

V. 11. And they have overcome him -- Carried the Cause against him, by the
blood of the Lamb -- Which cleanses the Soul from all Sin, and so leaves no
room for accusing, and by the word of their testimony -- The Word of GOD, which
they believed and testified, even unto death. So for instance, died Olam, King
of Sweden, in the Year 900, whom his own Subjects would have compelled to
Idolatry; and upon his Refusal, slew as a Sacrifice to the Idol which he would
not worship. So did Multitudes of Bohemian Christians, in the Year 916, when
Queen Drahomi^e raised a severe Persecution wherein many loved not their lives
unto the death.

V. 12. Woe to the earth and to the sea -- This is the fourth and last
Denunciation of the Third Woe, the most grievous of all. The First was only, the
Second chiefly on the earth, Asia: The Third both on the Earth and the Sea,
Europe. The Earth is mentioned first, because it began in Asia, before the
Beast brought it on Europe. He knows he has but a little time -- Which
extends from his casting out of Heaven to his being cast into the Abyss.

We are now come to a most important Period of Time. The New-chronos hastens to
an End. We live in the little time wherein Satan has great Wrath; and this
little time is now upon the Decline. We are in the time, times, and half a
time, wherein the Woman is fed in the wilderness; yea, the last Part of it the
half time is begun. We are (as will be shown) toward the Close of the forty
two months of the Beast; and when his Number is fulfilled, grievous Things will
be.

Let him who does not regard the being seized by the Wrath of the Devil, the
falling unawares into the General Temptation, the being borne away by the most
dreadful Violence into the Worship of the Beast and his Image, and consequently
drinking the unmixt Wine of the Wrath of GOD, and being tormented Day and Night
for ever and ever in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone: Let him also who is
confident, that he can make his Way through all these, by his own Wisdom and
Strength, without Need of any such peculiar Preservative as the Word of this
Prophecy affords: Let him, I say, go hence. But let him who does not take these
Warnings for senseless Outcries and blind Alarms, beg of GOD, with all possible
Earnestness, to give him his heavenly Light herein.

GOD has not given this Prophecy, in so solemn a Manner, only to show his
Providence over his Church; but also that his Servants may know at all Times in
what particular Period they are. And the more dangerous any Period of Time is,
the greater is the Help which it affords. But where may we fix the Beginning
and End of the little time? Which is probably four-fifths of a Chronos, or
somewhat above 888 Years. This, which is the Time of the third Woe, may reach
from 947 to the Year 1836. For, 1. The short Interval of the second Woe (which
Woe ended in the Year 840) and the 777 Years of the Woman, which began about the
Year 84^, quickly after which followed the War in Heaven, fix the Beginning not
long after 864. And thus the third Woe falls in the tenth Century, extending
from 900 to 1000, called the Dark, the Iron, the uhappy Age. 2. If we compare
the Length of the third Woe, with the Period of Time which succeeds it in the
twentieth Chapter, it is but a little time to that vast Space which reaches
from the Beginning of the Non-chronos to the End of the World.

V. 13. And when the dragon saw -- That he could no longer accuse the Saints in
Heaven, he turned his Wrath to do all possible Mischief on Earth, he persecuted
the woman -- The ancient Persecutions of the Church were mentioned, chapter i. 9.
ii. 10. vii. 14. But this Persecution came after her Flight, (ver. 6.) just at
the Beginning of the Third Woe. Accordingly in the Tenth and Eleventh Centuries,
the Church was furiously persecuted by several Heathen Powers. In Prussia, King
Ade^bert was killed in the Year 997, King Brunus in 1008. And when King Stephen
encouraged Christianity in Hungary, he met with violent Opposition. After his
Death, the Heathens in Hungary set themselves to root it out, and prevailed for
several Years. About the same Time the Army of the Emperor, Henry the Third,
was totally overthrown by the Vandals. These and all the Accounts of those
Times show, with what Fury the Dragon then persecuted the Woman.

V. 14. And there was given to the woman the two wings of the great eagle, that
she might fly into the wilderness to her place -- Eagles are the usual Symbols
of great Potentates. So Ezekiel xvii. 3. by a great eagle means, the King of
Babylon. Here the great Eagle is the Roman Empire: the two wings, the Eastern
and Western Branches of it. A Place in the Wilderness was mentioned in the
sixth Verse also. But it is not the same which is mentioned here. In the Text
there follow one after the other, 1. The Dragon's waiting to devour the Child.
2. The Birth of the Child, which is caught up to GOD. 3. The fleeing of the
Woman into the Wilderness. 4. The War in Heaven, and the casting out of the
Dragon. 5. The Beginning of the third Woe. 6. The Persecution raised by the
Dragon against the Woman. 7. The Woman's flying away upon the Eagle's Wings.


In like Manner there follow one after the other, 1. The Beginning of the
twelve hundred and sixty Days. 2. The Beginning of the little time. 3. The
Beginning of the Time, Times, and half a Time. This third Period partly
co-incides, both with the First and the Second. After the Beginning of the 1260
Days, or rather of the third Woe, Christianity was exceedingly propagated, in
the Midst of various Persecutions. About the Year 948 it was again settled in
Denmark: In 965 in Poland and Silesia: In 980 through all Russia. In 997 it was
brought into Hungary; into Sweden and Norway both before and after.
Transylvania received it about 1000, and soon after, other Parts of Dacia.


Now all the Countries in which Christianity was settled between the Beginning
of the 1260 Days and the Imprisonment of the Dragon, may be understood by the
wilderness, and by her place in particular. This Place contained many
Countries; so that Christianity now reached in an uninterrupted Tract from the
Eastern to the Western Empire. And both the Emperors now lent their Wings to
the Woman, and provided a safe Abode for her, where she is fed -- By GOD rather
than Man, having little human Help, for a time, and times, and half a time --
The Length of the several Periods here mentioned, seems to be nearly this: 1.
The Non-chronos contains less than 1111 Years 2. The little Time 888 3. The
Time, Times and half a Time 777 4. The Time of the Beast 666

And comparing the Prophecy and History together, they seem to begin and end
nearly thus: 1. The Non-chronos extends from about 800 to 1836 2. The 1260 Days
of the Woman from 847 to 1524 3. The little time from 947 to 1836 4. The Time,
Times, and half from 1958 to 1836

5. The Time of the Beast is between the Beginning and End of the three Times
and an half. In the Year 1^58 the Empires had a good Understanding with each
other, and both protected the Woman: The Bishops of Rome likewise, particularly
Victor II. were duly subordinate to the Emperor. We may observe, the 1260 Days
of the Woman, from 847 to 1524, and the three Times and a half, refer to the
same Wilderness. But in the former Part of the 12^0 Days, before the three
Times and an half began, namely, from the Year 847 to 1058, she was fed by
others, being little able to help hers^^f: Whereas from 1058 to 1524, she is
both fed by others, and has food herself. To this the Sciences, transplanted
into the West from the Eastern Countries, much contributed; the Scriptures, in
the Original Tongues, brought into the West of (...) the Jews and Greeks much
more; and most of all the Reformation grounded on those Scriptures.

V. 15. Water is an Emblem of a great People; this water of the Turks in
particular. About the Year 1060 they overran the Christian Part of Asia.
Afterward they poured into Europe, and spread farther and farther till they had
overflowed many Nations.

V. 16. But the earth helped the woman -- The Powers of the Earth; and indeed
she needed Help through this whole Period. The time was from 1058 to 1280:
during which the Turkish Flood ran higher and higher, though frequently represt
by the Emperors, or their Generals, helping the woman. The (two) times were
from 1280 to 1725. During these likewise the Turkish Power flowed far and wide.
But still from Time to Time the Princes of the Earth helped the woman, that she
was not carried away by it. The half time is from 1725 to 1836. In the
Beginning of this Period, the Turks began to meddle with the Affairs of Persia,
wherein they have so entangled themselves, as to be the less able to prevail
against the two remaining Christian Empires. Yet this Flood still reaches the
Woman in her place; and will, till near the End of the half-time; itself will
then be swallowed up, perhaps by means of Russia, which is risen in the Room of
the Eastern Empire.

V. 17. And the dragon was wroth -- Anew, because he could not cause her to be
carried away by the Stream, and he went forth -- Into other Lands, to make war
with the rest of her seed -- Real Christians, living under Heathen or Turkish
Governors.

XIII.
And I stood on the sand of the sea, and saw a wild beast, coming up out of the
sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten diadems, and upon
his heads a name of blasphemy.

And the wild beast which I saw was like a leopard, were as the feet of a bear,
and his mouth as the mouth of a lion; and the dragon gave him his power, and
his throne, and great authority. And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded
to death; wild beast, is like the wild beast; and tongue, and nation.

And I saw another wild beast coming up out of the earth, he spoke like a
dragon: to receive a mark on the right hand, or on the forehead,

V. 1. And I stood on the sand of the sea -- This also was in the Vision. And I
saw -- Soon after the Woman ^lew away, a wild beast coming up -- He comes up
twice, first from the Sea, then from the Abyss. He comes from the Sea, before
the seven Phials; the great (...) comes after them.

O Reader, this is a Subject, wherein we also are deeply concerned; and which
must be treated, not as a Point of Curiosity, but as a solemn Warning from GOD.
The Danger is near. Be armed both against Force and Fraud, even with the whole
Armor of GOD. Out of the sea -- That is Europe. So the three Woes (the first
being in Persia, the second about the Euphrates) move in a Line from East to
West. This Beast is the Romish Papacy, as it came to a Point Six Hundred Years
since, stands now, and will for some Time longer. To this, and no other Power
on Earth agrees the whole Text, and every Part of it, in every Point: As me may
see with the utmost ^^^dence, from the Propositions following.

Prop. 1. It is one and the same Beast, having seven Heads, and ten Horns,
which is described in this and in the xviith Chapter. Of Consequence his Heads
are the same, and his Horns also.

P. 2. This Beast is a spiritually-secular Power, opposite to the Kingdom of
Christ. A Power not merely Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, nor merely Secular or
Political; but a Mixture of both. He is a Secular Prince; for a Crown, yea and
a Kingdom are ascribed to him. And yet he is not merely Secular. For he is also
a false Prophet.

P. 3. The Beast has a strict Connection with the City of Rome. This clearly
appears from the xviith Chapter.

P. 4. The Beast is now existing. He is not past: for Rome is now existing: And
it is not till after the Destruction of Rome, that the Beast is thrown into the
Lake. He is not altogether to come. For the second Woe is long since past, after
which the third came quickly. And presently after it began, the Beast rose out
of the Sea. Therefore, whatever he is, he is now existing.

P. 5. The Beast is the Romish Papacy. This manifestly follows from the Third
and Fourth Propositions; the Beast has a strict Connection with the City of
Rome; and the Beast is now existing. Therefore either there is some other Power
more strictly connected with that City, or the Pope is the Beast.

P. 6. The Papacy or Papal Kingdom began long ago.

The most remarkable Particulars relating to this, are here subjoined; taken so
high as abundantly to show the Rise of the Beast, and brought down as low as
our own Time, in order to throw a Light on the following Part of the Prophecy.

A. D. 1033. Benedict the Ninth, a Child of eleven Years old, is Bishop of
Rome, and occasions grievous Disorder for above 20 Years.

A. D. 1048. Damascus II. introduces the Use of the triple Crown.

A. D. 1058. The Church of Milan is, after long Opposition, subjected to the
Roman.

A. D. 1073. Hild^brand, or Gregory VII. comes to the Throne.

A. D. 1076. He deposes and excommunicates the Emperor.

A. D. 1077. He uses him shamefully and absolves him.

A. D. 1080. He excommunicates him again, and sends a Crown to Rod^lph his
Competitor.

A. D. 1083. Rome is taken. Gregory flees. Clement is made Pope, and crowns the
Emperor.

A. D. 1085. Gregory VII. dies at Salarno.

A. D. 1095. Urban II. holds the First Popish Council (at Clerm^nt) and gives
rise to the Crusades.

A. D. 1111. Paschal II. quarrels furiously with the Emperor.

A. D. 1123. The First Western General Council in the Lateran. The Marriage of
Priests is forbidden.

A. D. 1132. Innocent II. declares the Emperor to be the Pope's Liege-man or
Vassal.

A. D. 1143. The Romans set up a Governor of their own, independent on Innocent
II. He excommunicates them, and dies. Celestine II. is, by an important
Innovation, chosen to the Pope-dom without the Suffrage of the People; the
Right of choosing the Pope is taken from the People, and afterward from the
Clergy, and lodged in the Cardinals alone.

A. D. 1152. Eugene II. assumes the Power of Canonizing Saints.

A. D. 1155. Adrian IV. puts Arnold of Brixia to Death, for speaking against
the Secular Power of the Papacy.

A. D. 1159. Victor IV. is elected and crowned. But Alexander the the third
conquers him and his Successor.

A. D 1168. Alexander III. excommunicates the Emperor, and brings him so low,
that

A. D. 1177. He submits to the Pope's setting his Foot on his Neck.

A. D. 1204. Innocent III. sets up the Inquisition against the Vandois.

A. D. 1208. He proclaims a Crusade against them.

A. D. 1300. Bonniface VIII. introduces the Year of Jubilee.

A. D. 1305. The Pope's Re^idence is removed to Avignon.

A. D. 1377. It is removed back to Rome.

A. D. 1378. The fifty Years Schism begins.

A. D. 1449. Felix V. The last Antipope, submits to Nicholas V.

A. D. 1517. The Reformation begins.

A. D. 1527. Rome is taken and plundered.

A. D. 1557. Charles V. resigns the Empire; Ferdinand I. thinks the being
crowned by the Pope superfluous.

A. D. 1564. Pius IV. confirms the Council of Trent.

A. D. 1682. Doctrines highly derogatory to the Papal Authority are openly
taught in France.

A. D. 1713. The Constitution Unigenitus.

A. D. 1721. Pope Gregory VII. canonized anew.

He who compares this short Table with what will be observed ver. 3. and chapter
xvii. 10. will see that the Ascent of the Beast out of the Sea, must needs be
fixed toward the ^eginning of it: and not higher than Gregory VII. nor lower
than Alexander III.

The secular Princes now favored the Kingdom of Christ* but the Bishops of
Rome vehemently opposed it. These at first were plain Ministers or Pastors of
the Christian Congregation at Rome, but by Degrees they rose to an Eminence of
Honor and Power over all their Brethren: Till, about the Time of Gregory VII.
(and so ever since) they assumed all the Ensigns of Royal Majesty: yea of a
Majesty and Power far superior to that of all other Potentates on Earth.

We are not here considering their false Doctrines, but their unbounded Power.
When we think of those, we are to look at ^hfalse Prophet, who is also termed a
wild B^ast at his Ascent out of the Earth. But the First Beast then properly
arose when, after several Preludes thereto, the Pope raised himself above the
Emperor.

P. 7. Hildebrand or Gregory VII. is the proper Founder of the Papal Kingdom.
All the Patrons of the Papacy allow, that he made many considerable Additions
to it: And this very Thing constituted the Beast, by completing the Spiritual
Kingdom: the New Maxims and the New Actions of Gregory, all proclaim this. Some
of his Maxims are, 1. That the Bishop of Rome alone is Universal Bishop: 2.
That he alone can depose Bishops, or receive them again: 3. That he alone has
Power to make new Laws in the Church: 4. That he alone ought to use the Ensigns
of Royalty: 5. That all Princes ought to kiss his Foot: 6. That the Name of
Pope is the only Name under Heaven; and that his Name alone should be recited
in the Churches. 7. That he has a Power to depose Emperors. 8. That no General
Synod can be convened but by Him: 9. That no Book is Canonical without his
Authority: 10. That none upon Earth can repeal his Sentence, but he alone can
repeal any Sentence: 11. That he is subject to no Human Judgment: 12. That no
Power dare to pass Sentence on one who appeals to the Pope: 13. That all
weighty Causes every where ought to be referred to Him: 14. That the Roman
Church never did, nor ever can err: 15. That the Roman Bishop canonically
ordained, is immediately made Holy, by the Merits of St. Peter: 16. That he can
absolve Subjects from their Allegiance.


These, the most eminent Romish Writers own to be his genuine Sayings. And his
Actions agree with his Words. Hitherto the Popes had been subject to the
Emperors, though often unwillingly. But now the Pope began himself, under a
Spiritual Pretext, to act the Emperor of the whole Christian World: the
immediate Dispute was about the Investure of Bishops, the Right of which each
claimed to himself. And now was the Time, for the Pope either to give up or
establish his Empire for ever. To decide which, Gregory excommunicated the
Emperor Henry IV. "having first, says Platina, deprived him of all his
Dignities." The Sentence ran in these Terms: "Blessed Peter, Prince of the
Apostles, incline I beseech thee, thine Ears, and hear me thy Servant -- in the
Name of the Omnipotent GOD, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, I cast down the Emperor
Henry from all Imperial and ^egal Authority, and absolve all Christians, that
were his Subjects, from the Oath whereby they used to swear Allegiance to true
Kings. And moreover, because he had despised (...) yea, thy Admonitions, I bind
him with the Bond of an (...)."

The some Sentence he repeated at ^ome in these Terms. "Blessed (...), Prince
of the Apostles, and thou Paul, Teacher of the Gentiles, (...) beseech you,
your Ears to me, and graciously hear me -- Henry, whom they call Emperor, has
proudly lifted up his Horns and his Head against the Church of GOD -- who came
to me, humbly imploring to be absolved from his Excommunication -- I restored
him to Communion, but not (...) Kingdom, -- neither did I allow his Subjects to
return to their Allegiance. Several Bishops and Princes of Germany, taking this
Opportunity, in the Room of Henry, justly deposed, chose Rodulph Emperor: Who
immediately sent Ambassadors to me, informing me -- That he would rather obey
me, than accept of a Kingdom; and that he should always remain at the Disposal
of GOD and us -- Henry then began to be angry, and at first entreated us, to
hinder Rodulph from seizing his Kingdom. I said, I would see to whom the Right
belonged -- and give Sentence, which should be preferred. Henry forbad this --
Therefore I bind Henry and all his Favorers with the Bond of an Anathema, and
again take from him all Regal Power. I absolve all Christians from their Oath
of Allegiance, forbid them to obey Henry in any Thing, and command them to
receive Rodulph as their King. Confirm this therefore by your Authority, ye
most holy Princes of the Apostles, that all may now at length know, as ye have
Power to bind and loose in Heaven, so we have Power to give and take away on
Earth, Empires, Kingdoms, Principalities, and whatsoever Men can have."

When Henry submitted, then Gregory began to reign without control. In the
same Year 1077, on September;, he fixed a new Era of Time called the Indiction;
used at Rome to this Day.

Thus did the Pope claim to himself the whole Authority over all Christian
Princes. Thus did he take away or confer Kingdoms and Empires, as a King of
Kings. Neither did his Successors fail to tread in his Steps. It is well known,
the following Popes have not been wanting to exercise the same Power, both over
Kings and Emperors. And this the later Popes have been so far from disclaiming,
that three of them have sainted this very Gregory, namely, Clement VIII. Paul
V. and B^nedict XIII. Here is then the Beast, that is, the King: in Fact such,
though not in Name; according to that remarkable Observation of Cardinal
Bellarmine, "Antichrist will govern the Roman Empire, yet without the Name of
Roman Emperor." His spiritual Title prevented his taking the Name, while he
exercises all the Power. Now Gregory was at the Head of this Novelty. So
Aventine, himself, " Gregory VII. was the first Founder of the Pontifical
Empire."

Thus the Time of the Ascent of the Beast is clear. The Apostasy and Mystery of
Iniquity gradually increased, till he arose, who opposes and exalts himself
above all. (2 These. ii. 3.) Before the seventh Trumpet the Adversary wrought
more secretly. But soon after the Beginning of this, the Beast openly opposes
his Kingdom to the Kingdom of Christ.

P. 8. The Empire of Hildebrand properly began in the Year 1077. Then it was,
that upon the Emperor's leaving Italy, Gregory exercised his Power to the full.
And on the 1st of September, in this Year, he began his famous Epoch.

This may be farther established and explained by the following Observations.

Observe. 1. The Beast is the Romish Papacy, which has now reigned for some
Ages. Obs. 2. The Beast has seven Heads and ten Horns. Obs. 3. The seven Heads
are seven Hills, and also seven Kings. One of the Heads could not have been as
it were mortally wounded, had it been only a Hill. Obs. 4. The Ascent of the
Beast out of the Sea is different from his Ascent out of the Abyss: the
Revelation often mentions both the Sea and the Abyss; but never uses the Terms
promiscuously. Obs. 5. The Heads of the Beast do not begin before his Rise out
of the Sea, but with it. Obs. 6. These Heads, as Kings, succeed each other.
Obs. 7. The Time which they take up in this Succession, is divided into three
Parts. Five of the Kings signified thereby are fallen: One is: the other is not
yet come. Obs. 8. One is: Namely, while the Angel was speaking this. He places
himself and St. John in the middlemost Time: that he might the more
commodiously point out the first Time as past, the second as present, the ^rd
as future. Obs. 9. The Co^^^^^ance of the Beast is divided in the same Manner.
The Beast was: is not: will ascend out of the abyss, chapter xvii. ver. 8. and 11.
Between these two Verses, that is interposed as parallel with them, Five are
fallen: one is: the other is not yet come. Obs. 10. Babylon is Rome. All Things
which the Revelation says of Babylon, agree to Rome, and Rome only. It
commenced Babylon, when it commenced The Great. When Babylon sunk in the East,
it arose in the West. And it existed in the Time of the Apostles, whose
Judgment is said to be avenged on her. Obs. 11. The Beast reigns both before
and after the Reign of Babylon. First, the Beast reigns, chapter xiii. 1, etc. then
Babylon, chapter xvii. 1, etc. and then the Beast again, chapter xvii. 8, etc. Obs. 12.
The Heads are of the Substance of the Beast: the Horns are not. The Wounds of
one of the Heads, is called the wound of the Beast itself, ver. 3. but the
Horns, or Kings, receive the Kingdom with the Beast, chapter xvii. 12. That Word
alone, The horns and the beast, chapter xvii. 16. sufficiently shows them to be
something added to him. Obs. 13. The forty-two Months of the Beast fall within
the first of the three Periods. The Beast rose out of the Sea in the Year 1077.
A little after^ Power was given him for forty-two Months. This Power is still
in being. Obs. 14. The Time when the Beast is not, and the Reign of Ba^^^^^ are
together. The Beast when risen out of the Sea raged viol^^tly, till his ^ingdom
was darkened by the fifth Phial. But it was a Kingdom still, and the Beast
having a Kingdom, though darke^^d, was the Beast still. But it was afterward
said, the beast was, (was the Beast, that is, reigned) and is not: is not the
Beast; does not reign, having lost his Kingdom. Why? Because the woman sits
upon the beast, who sits a queen, reigning over the Kings of the Earth: Till
the Beast rising out of the Abyss, and taking with him the ten Kings, suddenly
destroys her. Obs. 15. The Difference there is between Rome and the Pope, which
has always subsisted, will then be most apparent. Rome distinct from the Pope,
bears three Meanings, the City itself, the Roman Church, and the People of
Rome. In the last Sense of the World, Rome with its Duchy, which contained
Part of Tuscany and Campania revolted from the Greek Emperor in 726, and became
a free State, governed by its Senate. From this Time the Senate, and not tho
Pope, enjoyed the Supreme Civil Power. But in 796 Leo III. being chosen Pope,
sent to Charles the Great, desiring him to come and subdue the Senate and
People of Rome, and constrain them to swear Allegiance to him. Hence arose a
sharp Contention between the Pope and the Roman People, who seized and thrust
him into a Monastry. He escaped and fled to the Emperor, who quickly sent him
back in great State. In the Year 800 the Emperor came to Rome, and shortly
after, the Roman People, who had hitherto chosen their own Bishops, and looked
upon themselves and their Senate as having the same Rights with the ancient
Senate and People of Rome, chose Charles for their Emperor, and subjected
themselves to him, in the same Manner as the ancient Romans did to their
Emperors. The Pope crowned him and paid him Homage on his Knees, as was
formerly done to the Roman Emperors: And the Emperor took an Oath "to defend
the Holy Roman Church in all its Emoluments." He was also created Consul, and
styled himself thenceforward Agustus, Emperor of the Romans. Afterward he gave
the Government of the City and Duchy of Rome to the Pope, yet still subject to
himself.
What the Roman Church is, as distinct from the Pope, appears, 1. When a
Council is held before the Pope's Confirmation; 2. When, upon a Competition,
Judgment is given which is the true Pope; 3. When the Sea is vacant; 4. When
the Pope himself is suspected by the Inquisition.


How Rome, as it is a City, differs from the Pope, there is no Need to show.

Obs. 16. In the First and Second Period of his Duration, the Beast is a Body
of Men, in the Third, an Individual. The Beast with seven Heads is the Papacy
of many Ages: The Seventh Head is the Man of Sin, Antichrist. He is a Body of
Men from chapter xiii. 1. to xvii. 7. He is a Body of Men and an Individual, chapter
xvii. from the Eighth to the Eleventh Verse. He is an Individual, from chapter
xvii. 12. to chapter xix. 20. Obs. 17. That Individual is the Seventh Head of the
Beast, or, the other King after the five and one, himself being the Eighth,
though one of the Seven. As he is a Pope, he is one of the Seven Heads. But he is
the Eighth, or not a Head, but the Beast himself, not, as he is a Pope, but as
he bears a new and singular Character, at his coming from the Abyss. To
illustrate this by a Comparison. Suppose a Tree of seven Branches, one of which
is much larger than the rest. If those six are cut away, and the Seventh
remain, that is the Tree. Obs. 18. He is the wicked one, the Man of Sin, the
Son of Perdition, usually termed Antichrist. Obs. 19. The ten Horns, or Kings,
receive power as kings with the wild Beast one hour, chapter xvii. 12. With the
Individual Beast, who was not. But he receives his Power again, and the Kings
with it, who quickly give their new Power to him. Obs. 20. The whole Power of
the Roman Monarchy, divided into ten Kingdoms, will be conferred on the Beast,
chapter xvii. 13, 16, 17. Obs. 21. The ten Horns and the Beast will destroy the
Whore, ver. 16. Obs. 22. At length the Beast, the ten Horns, and the other
Kings of the Earth, will fall in that great Slaughter, chapter xix. 19. Obs. 23.
Daniel's fourth Beast is the Roman Monarchy, from the Beginning of it, till the
throned are set. This therefore comprizes both the Apocalyptic Beast, and the
Woman, and many other Things. This Monarchy is like a River which runs from its
Fountain in one Channel, but in its Course sometimes takes in other Rivers,
sometimes is itself parted into several Streams, yet is still one continued
River. The Roman Power was at first undivided. But it was afterward divided
into various Channels, till the Grand Division into the Eastern and Western
Empires, which likewise underwent various Changes. Afterward the Kings of the
Heru^^, Goths, Lombards, the Exarchs of Ravenna, the Romans themselves; the
Emperors, French, and German, besides other Kings, seized several Parts of the
Roman Power. Now whatever Power the Romans had before Gregory VII. that
Daniel's Beast contains. Whatever Power the Papacy has had from Gregory VII.
this the Apocalyptic Beast represents. But this very Beast, (and so Rome with
its last Authority) is comprehended under that of Daniel. And upon his heads a
name of blasphemy -- To ascribe to a Man what belongs to GOD alone is
blasphemy. Such a Name the Beast has, not on his Horns, nor on one Head, but on
all. The Beast himself bears that Name, and indeed through his whole Duration.
This is the Name of Papa or Pope; not in the innocent Sense wherein it was
formerly given to all Bishops, but in that high and peculiar Sense wherein it
is now given to the Bishop of Rome, by himself, and his Followers: A Name which
comprizes the whole Pre-eminence of the highest and most Holy Father upon
Earth. Accordingly among the above cited Sayings of Gregory, those two stand
together, that his Name alone should be recited in the Churches: and that it is
the only Name in the World. So both the Church and the World were to name no
other Father on the Face of the Earth.
V. 2. The three first Beasts in Daniel are like a Leopard, a Bear, and a Lion.
In all Parts, except his Feet and Mouth, this Beast was like a Leopard or
female Panther; which is fierce as a Li^n, or Bear, but is also swift and
subtle. Such is the Papacy, which has partly by Subtlety, partly by Force,
gained Power over so many Nations. The extremely various Usages, Manners and
Ways of the Pope, may likewise be compared to the Spots of the Leopard. And his
feet were as the feet of a bear -- Which are very strong, and armed with sharp
Claws. And as clumsy as they seem, he can therewith walk, stand upright^ climb,
or seize any Thing. So does this Benst seize and take for his Prey whatever
comes within the Reach of his Claws; and his mouth was as the mouth of a lion
-- To roar, and to devour. And the dragon -- Whose Vassal and Vicegerent he is,
gave him his power -- His own Strength and innumerable Forces, and his throne
-- So that he might command whatever he would, having great, absolute
authority. The Dragon had his Throne in Heathen Rome, so long as Idolatry and
Persecution reigned there. And after he was disturbed in his Possession, yet
would he never wholly resign, till he gave it to the Beast in Christian Rome so
called.

V. 3. And I saw one -- Or the first, of his heads as it were wounded -- So it
appeared as soon as ever it rose. The Beast is first described more generally,
then more particularly, both in this and in the xviith chap. The particular
Description here, respects the former Parts: there, the latter Parts of his
Duration: Only that some Circumstances relating to the former, are repeated in
the xviith chap.

This deadly Wound was given him on his first Head by the sword, (ver. 14.)
that is, by the bloody Resistance of the secular Potentates, particularly the
German Emperors. These had for a long Season had the City of Rome, with her
Bishop, under their Jurisdiction. Gregory determined to cast off this Yoke from
his own, and to lay it on the Emperor's Shoulders. He broke loose and
excommunicated the Emperor, who maintained his Right by force, and gave the
Pope such a Blow, that one would have thought the Beast must have been killed
thereby, immediately after his coming up. But he recovered and grew stronger
than before. The first Head of the Beast extends from Gregory VII. at least to
Innocent III. In that Tract of Time the Beast was much wounded by the Emperors.
But notwithstanding, the wound was healed.

Two deadly Symptoms attended this Wound, 1. Schisms and open Ruptures in the
Church. For while the Emperors asserted their Right, there were from the Year
1080 to the Year 1176 only, five open Divisions, and at least as many
Antipopes, some of whom were indeed the rightful Popes. This was highly
dangerous to the Papal Kingdoms. But a still more dangerous Symptom was, 2. The
rising of the Nobility at Rome, who would not suffer their Bishop to be a
secular Prince, particularly over themselves. Under Innocent II. they carried
their Point, re-established the ancient Commonwealth, took away from the Pope
the Government of the City, and left him only his episcopal Authority. "At
this, says the Historian, Innocent II. and C^lestine II. fretted themselves to
Death: Lucius II. as he attacked the Capitol wherein the Senate was, Sword in
Hand, was struck with a Stone, and died in a few Days: Engenius III. Alexander
III. and Lucius III. were driven out of the City: Urban III. and Gregory VIII.
spent their Days in Banishment Atlength they came to an Agreement with Clonent
III. who was himself a Roman." And the whole earth -- The whole Western World,
wondered after the wild beast -- That is, followed him with Wonder, in his
Councils, his Crusades, and his Jubilees. This refers not only to the first
Head, but also to the four following.

V. 4. And they worshipped the dragon -- Even in worshipping the Beast,
although they knew it not, and worshipped the wild beast -- Paying him such
Honor as was not paid to any merely secular Potentate. That very Title "Our
most holy LORD," was never given to any other Monarch on Earth, saying, Who is
like the wild beast? -- Who is like him? is a peculiar Attribute of GOD. But
that this is constantly attributed to the Beast, the Books of all his Adherents
show.

V. 5. And there was given him -- By the Dragon, through the Permission of GOD, a
mouth speaking great things and blasphemy -- The same is said of the little
Horn on the fourth Beast in Daniel. Nothing greater, nothing more blasphemous,
can be conceived, than what the Popes have said of themselves, especially
before the Reformation. And authority was given him forty-two months -- The
Beginning of these is not to be dated immediately from his Ascent out of the
Sea, but at some Distance from it.

V. 6. To blaspheme his name -- Which many of the Popes have done explicitly,
and in the most dreadful Manner, and his tabernacle, even them that dwell in
heaven -- (For GOD himself dwells in the Inhabitants of Heaven:) Digging up
the Bones of many of them, and cursing them with the deepest Execrations.

V. 7. And it was given him -- That is, GOD permitted him, to make war with his
saints -- With the Waldenses and Albigenses. It is a vulgar Mistake, that the
Waldenses were so called from Peter Waldo of Lions. They were much more ancient
than him; and their true Name was Vallenses or Vaudois, from their inhabiting
the Valleys of Lucerne and Angrogne. This Name, Vallenses after Waldo, appeared
about the Year 1160, was changed by the Papists into Waldenses, on Purpose to
represent them as of modern Original. The Albigenses were originally People of
Albigeois, Part of Upper Languedoc, where they considerably prevailed, and
possessed several Towns in the Year 1200. Against those many of the Popes made
open War. Till now the Blood of Christians had been shed only by the Heathens
or Arians, from this Time by scarce any but the Papacy. In the Year 1208
Innocent III. proclaimed a Crusade against them. In June 1209 the Army
assembled at Thoulouse; from which Time abundance of Blood was shed, and the
second Army of Martyrs began to be added to the first, who had cried from
beneath the altar. And ever since the Beast has been warring against the
Saints, and shedding their Blood like Water. And authority was given him over
every tribe and people -- Particularly in Europe. And when a Way was found by
Sea into the East Indies, and the West, these also were brought under his
Authority.

V. 8. And all that dwell upon the earth will worship him -- All will be
carried away by the Torrent, but the little Flock of true Believers. The Name
of these only is written in the Lamb's book of life. And if any even of these
make shipwreck of the faith, he will blot them out of his book: Although they
were written therein from (that is, before) the foundation of the world, chapter
xvii. v. 8.

V. 9. If any man have an ear, let him hear -- It was said before, He that has
an car, let him hear. This Expression, if any, seems to imply, that scarce will
any that has an ear be found. Let him hear -- With all Attention the following
Warning, and the whole Description of the Beast.

V. 10. If any man leads into captivity -- Go ^will in due Time repay the
Followers of the Beast in their own Kind. Mean while here is the patience and
faithfulness of the saints -- Exercised: Their Patience, by enduring Captivity
or Imprisonment: their Faithfulness, by resisting unto Blood.

V. 11. And I saw another wild beast -- So he is once termed to show his
Fierceness and Strength; but in all other Places The false Prophet. He comes to
confirm the Kingdom of the first Beast, coming up -- After the other had long
exercised his Authority, out of the earth -- Out of Asia. But he is not yet
come: though he cannot be far off. For he is to appear at the End of the
forty-two Months of the first Beast. And he had two borns like a lamb -- A
mild, innocent Appearance, but be spoke like a dragon -- Venomous, siety,
dreadful: go do those who are ^ealous for the Beast.

V. 12. And he exercises all the authority of the first will beast --
Described in the 2d, 4th, 5th, and 7th Verses, before him -- For they are both
together, whose deadly wound was healed -- More thoroughly healed by means of
the second Beast.

V. 13. He makes fire -- Real fire, to come down -- By the Power of the Devil.

V. 14. Before the wild beast -- Whose usurped Majesty is confirmed by these
Wonders, saying to them -- As if it were from GOD, to make an image to the wild
beast -- Like that of Nebuchadnezzar, whether of Gold, Silver or Stone. The
original Image will be set up where the Beast himself shall appoint. But
abundance of Copies will be taken, which may be carried into all Parts, like
those of Diana of Ephesus.

V. 15. So that the image of the wild beast should speak -- Many Instances of
this and have been already among the Papists as well as the Heathens, and as
many as will not worship -- When it is required of them; as it will be of all
that buy or sell, shall be killed -- By this the Pope manifests that he is
Antichrist, directly contrary to Christ. It is Christ, who shed his own Blood.
It is Antichrist, who sheds the Blood of others. And yet it seems, his last and
most cruel Persecution is to come. This Persecution, the neverse of all that
preceded, will, as we may gather from many Scriptures, fall chiefly, on the
outward-court worshippers, the formal Christians. It is probable, that-few
real, inward Christians shall perish by it: on the contrary, those who which
and pray always shall be accounted worthy to escape all these things, and to
stand infore the Son of man, Luke xxi. 36.

V. 16. On their forehead -- The most^zealous of his Followers will probably
chause this. Others may receive it on their hand.

V. 17. That no man might buy or sell -- Such Edicts have been published long
since against the poor Vaudois, but he that had the mark, namely, the name of
the first beast, or the number of his name -- The Name of the Beast is that
which he bears through his whole Duration, viz. That of Papa or Pope. The
number of his name is the whole Time during which he bears this Name. Whosoever
therefore receives the mark of the beast, does as much as if he had said
expressly, "I acknowledge the present Papacy, as proceeding from GOD:" or, "I
acknowledge that what St. Gregory VII. has done according to his Legend
(authorized by Benedict XIII.) and what has been maintained in Virtue thereof,
by his Successors to this Day, is from GOD." By the former, a Man has the name
of the beast, as a Mark; by the latter, the number of his name. In a Word, To
have the name of the beast is, To acknowledge his Papal Holiness: to have the
number of his name is, To acknowledge the Papal Succession. The second Beast
will enforce the receiving this Mark, under the severest Penalties.

V. 18. Here is the wisdom -- To be exercised. The patience of the saints,
availed against the Power of the first Beast: The wisdom GOD gives them, will
avail against the Subtlety of the Second. Let him that has understanding --
Which is a Gift of GOD, subservient to that Wisdom, count the number of the
wild beast -- Surely none can be blamed, for attempting to obey this Command,
for it is the number of a man -- A Number of such Years, as are common among
Men, And his number is six hundred sixty-six Years -- So long shall he endure
from his first Appearing.

XIV.
And I looked, and behold the Lamb standing on mount Sion, and with him an
hundred forty-four thousand having his name and the name of his Father written
on their foreheads. was as of harpers harping on their harps.

And I saw another angel flying in the midst of heaven, and tribe,

And another angel followed,

And a third angel followed them; his mark on his forehead or on his hand,

And I heard a voice out of heaven,

And I looked and behold a white cloud,

And another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven; it into the great
wine press of the wrath of GOD.

Chap. xiv.
ver. 1. And I saw on mount Sion, the heavenly Sion, an hundred forty-four
thousand -- Either those out of all Mankind who had been the most eminently
holy, or the most holy out of the twelve Tribes of Israel, the same that were
mentioned, chapter vii. 4. and perhaps also chapter xv. 2. But they were then in the
World, and were sealed in their foreheads, to preserve them from the Plagues
that were to follow. They are now in Safety, and have the name of the Lamb, and
of his Father written on their for cheads, as being the Redeemed of GOD and of
the Lamb, his now unalienable Property. This Prophecy often introduces the
Inhabitants of Heaven as a Kind of Chorus with great Prophecty and ^legance.
The Church above making suitable Redections on the grand Events, which are
foretold in this Book, greatly serves to raise the Attention of real
Christians, and to teach the high Concern they have in them. Thus is the Church
on Earth instructed, animated, and encouraged, by the Sentiments, Temper, and
Devotion of the Church in Heaven.

V. 2. And I heard a sound out of heaven -- Sounding clearer and clearer;
first, at a Distance, as the sound of many waters or thunders; and afterward,
being nearer, it was as of harpers harping on their harps. It sounded vocally
and instrumentally at once.

V. 3. And they -- The hundred forty-four thousand, sing a new song: and none
could learn that song -- To sing and play it in the same Manner, but the
hundred forty-four thousand who were redeemed from the earth -- From among Men;
from all Sin.

V. 4. These are they who had not been defiled with women -- It seems that the
deepest Defilement, and the most alluring Temptation, is put for every other,
They are virgins -- Unspotted Souls: such as have preserved universal Purity.
These are they who follow the Lamb -- Who are nearest to him. This is not their
Character, but their Reward, First Fruits -- Of the glorified Spirits. Who is
ambitious to be of this Number?

V. 5. And in their mouth there was found no guile -- (Part for the Whole)
nothing untrue, unkind, unholy. They are without fault -- Having preserved
inviolate a Virgin-Purity both of Soul and Body.

V. 6. And I saw another angel -- A second is mentioned, ver. 8. a third, ver.
9. These three denote great Messengers of GOD with their Assistants; three Men
who bring Messages from GOD to Men. The first exhorts to the Fear and Worship
of GOD, the second proclaims the Fall of Babylon, the third gives Warning
concerning the Beast. Happy are they who make the right Use of these Divine
Messages! flying -- Going on swiftly, in the midst of heaven -- Breadthways,
having an everlasting gospel -- Not the Gospel, properly so called; but a
Gospel, or Joyful Message, which was to have an Influence on all Ages, to
preach to every nation, and tribe, and tongue, and people -- Both to Jew and
Gentile, even as far as the Authority of the Beast had extended.

V. 7. Fear GOD and give Glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come --
The joyful Message is properly this, that the hour of GOD's judgment is come.
And hence is that Admonition drawn, Fear GOD and give Glory to him; They who do
this will not worship the Beast, neither any Image or Idol whatsoever, and
worship him that made -- Whereby He is absolutely distinguished from Idols of
every Kind, the heaven, and the earth, and the sea, and fountains of water --
And they who worship him shall be delivered, when the Angels pour out their
Phials on the Earth, Sea, Fountains of Water, on the Sun, and in the Air.

V. 8. And another angel followed -- saying, Babylon is fallen -- With the
Overthrow of Babylon, that of all the Enemies of Christ, and consequently
happier Times are connected. Babylon the great -- So the City of Rome is called
upon many Accounts. Babylon was magnificent, strong, proud, powerful. So is
Rome also. Babylon was first, Rome afterward, the Residence of the Emperors of
the World. What Babylon was to Israel of old, Rome has been both to the
literal and spiritual Israel of GOD. Hence the Liberty of the ancient Jews was
connected with the Overthrow of the Babylonish Empire. And when Rome is finally
overthrown, then the People of GOD will be at Liberty.

Whenever Babylon is mentioned in this Book, the Great, is added; to teach us,
That Rome then commenced Babylon, when it commenced the Great City; when it
swallowed up the Grecian Monarchy and its Fragments, Syria in particular; and
in consequence of this, obtained Dominion over Jerusalem, about sixty Years
before the Birth of Christ. Then it began, but it will not cease to be Babylon,
fill it is finally destroyed. Its Spiritual Greatness began in the fifth
Century, and increased from Age to Age. It seems it will come to its utmost
Height, just before its final Overthrow.

Her fornication is, Her Idolatry, Invocation of Saints and Angels, Worship of
Images, Human Traditions, with all that outward Pomp, yea, and that fierce and
bloody Zeal wherewith she pretends to serve GOD. But with spiritual
Fornication, as elsewhere, so in Rome. Fleshly Fornication is joined
abundantly. Witness the Stews there, licensed by the Pope, which are no
inconsiderable Branch of his Revenue. This is fitly compared to Wine, because
of its intoxicating Nature.

Of this Wine she has indeed made all Nations drink, more especially by her
later Missions. We may observe this making them drink is not ascribed to the
Beast but to Babylon. For Rome itself, the Roman Inquisitions, Congregations,
and Jesuits, continually propagate their idolatrous Doctrines and Practices,
with or without the Consent of this or that Pope, who himself is not secure
from their Censure.

V. 9. And a third angel followed -- At no great Distance of Time, saying, if
any one worship the wild beast -- This Worship consists, partly in an inward
Submission, a Persuasion that all who are subject to Christ, must be subject to
the Beast, or they cannot receive the Influences of Divine Grace: or, as their
Expression is, "there is no Salvation out of their Church." Partly in a
suitable Outward Reverence to the Beast himself, and consequently to his Image.

V. 10. He shall drink -- With Babylon (chapter xvi. 19.) and shall be tormented --
With the Beast, (chapter xx. 10.) In all the Scripture there is not another so
terrible Threatening as this. And GOD by this greater Fear arms his Servants
against the Fear of the Beast, The wrath of GOD, which is poured anmixt --
Without any mixture of Mercy, without Hope, into the cup of his indignation --
And is no Real Anger implied in all this? O what will not even wise Men assert,
to serve an Hypothesis!

V. 11. And the smoke -- From the Fire and Brimstone wherein they are tormented
-- ascends for ever and ever -- GOD grant thou and I may never try, the
strict, literal Eternity of this Torment!

V. 12. Here is the patience of the saints -- Seen; in suffering all things
rather than receive this Mark, who keep the commandments of GOD -- The
Character of all true Saints, and particularly the great Command, To believe in
Jesus.

V. 13. And I heard a voice -- This is most seasonably heard, when the Beast is
in his highest Power and Fury, out of heaven -- Probably from a departed Saint,
Write -- He was at first commanded to write the whole Book. Whenever this is
repeated, it denotes something peculiarly observable. Happy are the dead ( from
henceforth particuliarly) 1. Because they escape the approaching Calamities, 2.
Because they already enjoy so near an Approach to Glory, who die in the Lord --
In the Faith of the Lord Jesus, for they rest -- No Pain, no Purgatory follows;
but pure, unmixt Happiness, from their labors -- And the more laborious their
Life was, the sweeter is their Rest. How different this State from that of
those, (ver. 11.) who have no rest day or night? Reader, which will thou
choose? Their works -- Each one's peculiar works, follow -- Or accompany them:
that is, the Fruit of their Works. Their Works do not go before, to procure
them Admittance into the Mansions of Joy; but they follow them when admitted.

V. 14. In the following Verses, under the Emblem of an Harvest and a Vintage,
are signified two General Visitations: First, many Good Men are taken from the
Earth by the Harvest; then many Sinners, during the Vintage. The latter is
altogether a Penal Visitation; the former seems to be altogether gracious. Here
is no Reference in either to the Day of Judgment, but to a Season which cannot
be far off. And I saw a white cloud -- An Emblem of Mercy, -- and on the cloud
sat one like a son of man -- An Angel in an human Shape, sent by Christ, the
Lord both of the Vintage and of the Harvest, having a golden crown on his head
-- In token of his high Dignity, and a sharp sickle in his hand -- The sharper,
the welcomer to the Righteous.

V. 15. And another angel came out of the ^emple (which is in heaven) ver. 17.
Out of which came the Judgments of GOD in the appointed Seasons.

V. 16. Crying, by the Command of GOD, Thrust in thy sickle, for the harv^st is
ripe -- This implies an high Degree of Holiness in those good Men, and an
earnest Desire to be with GOD.

V. 18. And another angel from the altar -- Of Burnt-offerings; from whence the
Martyrs had cried for Vengeance, who had power over fire -- As the angel of the
waters, chapter xvi. 5. had over water, cried, saying, Lop off the clusters of the
vine of the earth -- All the wicked are considered as constituting one Body.

V. 20. And the wine press was trodden -- By the Son of GOD, chapter xix. 15.
without the city, Jerusalem. They to whom St. John writes, when a Man said, The
City, immediately understood this, and blood came out of the wine press even to
the horses bridles -- So deep, at its first flowing from the wine press, one
thousand six hundred furlongs -- So far: at least two hundred Miles, through the
whole Land of Palestine.

XV.
And I saw another sign in heaven great and wonderful, seven angels having the
seven last plagues; for by them the wrath of GOD is fulfilled. the harps of
God. are thy works, Lord God Almighty; righteous and true are thy ways, art
gracious: for all the nations shall come and worship before thee: for thy
judgments are made manifest.

And after these things I looked, heaven:

V. 1. And I saw seven -- Holy -- angels, having the seven last plagues --
Before they had the Phials, which were as Instruments whereby those Plagues
were to be conveyed. They are termed The last, because by them the wrath of GOD
is fulfilled. Hitherto GOD had borne his Enemies with much Long-suffering, but
now his Wrath goes forth to the uttermost, pouring Plagues on the Earth from
one End to the other, and round its whole Circumference. But even after these
Plagues, the holy Wrath of GOD against his other Enemies does not cease, chapter
xx. 15.

V. 2. The Song was sung, while the Angels were coming out with their Plagues,
who are therefore mentioned both before and after it, ver. 1.6. And I saw as it
were a sea of glass, mingled with fire -- It was before clear as crystal, chapter
iv. 6, but now mingled with fire -- Which devours the Adversaries, and them
that gained, or were gaining, the victory over the wild beast -- More of whom
were yet to come. The mark of the beast, the mark of his name, and the number
of his name, seem to mean here nearly the same Thing, standing at the sea of
glass -- Which was before the Throne, having the harps of GOD -- Given by him,
and appropriated to his Praise.

V. 3. And they sing the song of Moses -- So called, partly from its near
Agreement with the Words of that Song which he sung after passing the Red Sea,
( Exodus xv. 11.) and of that which he taught the Children of Israel a little
before his Death: ( Deuteronomy. xxxii. 3, 4.) But chiefly because Moses was the
Minister and Representative of the Jewish Church, as Christ is of the Church
Universal. Therefore it is also termed The Song of (...). It consists of six
Parts, which answer each other:

1. Great and wonderful are thy Works, Lord GOD Almighty; 2. For thou only
(...) 3. Just and true are thy Ways, O King of the Nations; 4. For all the
Nations shall come and worship before thee: 5. Who would not fear thee, O Lord,
and glorify thy Name? 6. For thy Judgments are made manifest.
We know and acknowledge, that all thy works in and toward all the Creatures
are great and wonderful: that thy ways with all the Children of Men, good and
evil, are just and (...): For thou only art g^acious -- And this Grace is the
Spring of all those wonderful Works, even of his destroying the Enemies of his
People. Accordingly in the cxxxvith Psalm, that Clause, for his mercy endures
for ever, is subjoined to the Thanksgiving for his Works of Vengeance, as well
as for his delivering the Righteous. For all the nations shall come and worship
before thee -- They shall serve thee as their King with joyful Reverence. This
is a glorious Testimony of the future Conversion of all the Heathens. The
Christians are now a little Fleek; they who do not worship GOD, an immense
Multitude. But all the nations shall come, from all Parts of the Earth, to
worship him, and glorify his name. For thy judgments are made manifest -- And
then the Inhabitants of the Earth will at (...) learn to fear him.

V. 5. After these things the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony -- The
holiest of all was opened -- Disclosing a new Theater, for the coming forth of
the Judgments of GOD, now made manifest.

V. 6. And the seven angels came out of the temple -- As having received their
Instructions from the Oracle of GOD himself. St. John saw him in Heaven (ver.
1.) before they went into the Temple. They appeared in Habits like those the
High Priest wore, when he went into the most holy Place to consult the Oracle.
In this was the visible Testimony of GOD's Presence, clothed in pure white
linen -- Linen is the Habit of Service and Attendance, pure -- Unspotted,
unsullied, white -- Or bright and shining, which implies much more than bare
Innocence, and having their breasts girt with golden girdles -- In token of
their high Dignity and glorious Rest.

V. 7. And one of the four living creatures gave the seven angels -- After they
were come out of the Temple, seven golden phials -- Or Bowls. The Greek Word
signifies Vessels broader at the Top than at the Bottom, full of the wrath of
GOD, who lives for ever and ever -- A Circumstance which adds greatly to the
Dreadfulness of his Wrath.

V. 8. And the temple was filled with smoke -- The Cloud of Glory was the
visible Manifestation of GOD's Presence in the Tabernacle and Temple. It was a
Sign of Protection at erecting the Tabernacle and at the Dedication of the
Temple. But in the Judgment of Korah, the Glory of the LORD appeared, when he
and his Companions were swallowed up by the Earth. So proper is the Emblem of
Smoke from the Glory of GOD, or from the Cloud of Glory, to express the
Execution of Judgment, as well as to be a Sign of Favor. Both proceed from the
Power of GOD, and in both he is glorified, and none -- Not even of those who
ordinarily stood before GOD, could go into the temple -- That is, into the
in^^est Part of it, till the seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled
-- Which did not take up a long Time, like the seven Trumpets, but swiftly
followed each other.

XVI.
And I heard a loud voice out of the temple, saying to the seven angels, Go,
pour out the seven phials of the wrath of God upon the earth. And the first
went and poured out his phial upon the earth, the blood of a dead man, and
every living soul in the sea died. blood to drink. another from the altar,
saying, Yea, Lord God Almighty; true and righteous are thy judgments. And the
fourth poured out his phial upon the sun; Euphrates, and the water of it was
dried up, that the way of the kings from the east might be prepared. shame).
split into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell, and Babylon the
Great was remembered before GOD, to give her the cup of the wine of the
fierceness of his wrath.

V. 1. Pour out the seven phials -- The Episties to the seven Churches are
divided into Three and Four; The seven Seals, and so the Trumpets and Phials,
into Four and Three. The Trumpets gradually, and in a long Tract of Time,
overthrow the Kingdoms of the World: the Phials destroy chiefly the Beast and
his Followers, with a swift and impetuous Force. The four first affect the
Earth, the Sea, the Rivers, the Sun; the rest fall elsewhere, and are much more
terrible.

V. 2. And the first went -- So the second, third, etc. without adding Angel,
to denote the utmost Swiftness; of which this also is a Token, that there is no
Period of Time mentioned in the pouring out of each Phial. They have a great
Resemblance to the Plagues of Egypt, which the Hebrews generally suppose to
have been a Month distant from each other. Perhaps so may the Phials; but they
are all yet to come, and poured out his phial upon the earth -- Literally
taken, and there came a grievous ulcer -- As in Egypt, Exodus ix. 10, 11. on the
men who had the mark of the wild beast -- All of them, and them only. All these
Plagues seem to be described in proper, not figurative Words.

V. 3. The second poured out his phial upon the sea -- As opposed to the dry
Land, and it became blood as of a dead man -- Thick, congealed, and putrid, and
every living soul -- Men, Beasts, and Fishes, whether on or in the Sea, died.

V. 4. The third poured out his phial on the rivers and fountains of water --
Which were over all the Earth, and they became blood -- So that none could
drink thereof.

V. 5. The Gracious one -- So he is styled, when his Judgments are abroad; and
that with a peculiar Propriety. In the Beginning of the Book he is termed The
Almighty. In the Time of his Patience, he is praised for his Power, which
otherwise might then be less regarded. In the Time of his taking Vengeance, for
his Mercy. Of his Power there could then be no Doubt.

V. 6. Thou have given them blood to drink -- Men do not drink out of the Sea,
but out of Fountains and Rivers. Therefore this is (...) added here. They are
worthy -- Is subjoined with a beautiful Abruptness.

V. 7. Yea -- Answering the Angel of the Waters, and affirming of GOD's
Judgments in general, what he had said of one particular Judgment.

V. 8. The fourth poured out his phial upon the sun -- Which was likewise
affected by the fourth Trumpet. There is also a plain Resemblance between the
first, second and third Phials, and the first, second, and third Trumpet, and
it was given him -- The Angel, (...) scorch the men -- Who had the Mark of the
Beast, with fire -- As well as with the Beams of the S^^. So these four Phials
affected Earth, (...).

V. 9. (...) GOD, who had power over these (...). They could not but
acknowledge the Hand of GOD, yet did they harden themselves against him.

V. 10. The four first Phials are closely connected together, the fifth
concerns the Throne of the Beast, the ^^^th the Ma^^metans, the seventh chiefly
the Heathens. The four first Phials and the four first Trumpets go round the
whole Earth: the three last Phial^ and the three last Trumpets go lengthways
(...) the Earth in a straight Line.

The fifth poured out his phial upon the throne of the wild beast -- It is not
said, on the beast and his throne. Perhaps the Sea will then be vacant, and his
kingdom was darkened -- With a lasting, not a transient Darkness. However the
Beast as yet has his Kingdom. Afterward the Woman (...) upon the Beast, and
then it is said, The wild beast is not. (chapter xvii. 3, 7, 8.)

V. 11. And they -- His Followers, gnawed their tongues -- Out of furious
Impatience, because of their pains, and because of their ulcers -- Now
mentioned together, and in the plural Number, to signify that they were greatly
heightened and multiplied.

V. 12. And the sixth poured out his phial upon the great river E^phrates --
Affected also by the sixth Trumpet, and the water of it -- And of all the
Rivers that flow into it, was dried up -- The far greater Part of the Turkish
Empire lies on this Side the Euphrates. The Romish and Mohammedan Affairs ran
nearly parallel to each other for several Ages. In the seventh Century was
Mahomet himself, and a little before him Bonisace III. with his Universal
Bishopric. In the eleventh both the Turks and Gregory VII. carried all before
them. In the Year 1300, Boniface appeared with his two Swords at the
newly-erected Jubilee. In the self same Year arose the Ottoman Port; yea, and
on the same Day. And here the Phial, poured out on the Throne of the Beast, is
immediately followed by that poured out on the Euphrates, that the way for the
kings from the east might be prepared -- Those who lie East from the Euphrates,
in Persia, India, etc. who will rush blindfold upon the Plagues which are ready
for them, toward the Holy Land, which lies West of the Euphrates.

V. 13. Out of the mouth of the dragon, the wild beast, and the false prophet
-- It seems, the Dragon sights chiefly against GOD, the Beast against Christ,
the false Prophet against the Spirit of Truth; and that the three unclean
Spirits which come from them and exactly resemble them, endeavor to blacken
the Works of Creation, of Redemption, and of Sanctification, The false prophet
-- So is the second Beast frequently named, after the Kingdom of the first is
darkened. For he can then no longer prevail by main Strength, and so works by
Lies and Deceit. Mahomet was first a false Prophet, and afterward a powerful
Prince. But this Beast was first powerful, as a Prince; afterward a false
Prophet, a Teacher of ^^es; like frogs -- Whose Abode is in Fons, Marshes, and
other unclean Places, to the kings of the whole world -- Both M^hometan and
Pagan, to gather them -- To the Assistance of their three Principals.

V. 15. Behold I come as a thief -- Suddenly, unexpectedly. Observe the
beautiful Abruptness. I -- Jesus Christ. Hear him! Happy is he that watches --
Looking continually for him that comes quickly, and keeps on his garment --
Which Men use to put off when they sleep, lest be walk naked, and they see his
shame -- Lest he lose the Graces, which he takes no Care to keep, and others
see his ^in and Punithment.

V. 16. And they gathered them together to Armageddon -- Mageddon or Megiddo is
frequently mentioned in the Old Testament. Armageddon signifies the city or the
mountain of Megiddo, to which the Valley of M^giddo adjoined. This was a Place
well known in ancient Times, for many memorable Occurrences: in particular, the
Slaughter of the Kings of Canaan, related Judge. v. 19. Here the N^rative breaks
off. It is resumed chapter xix. 19.

V. 17. And the seventh poured out his phial upon the air -- Which encompasses
the whole Earth, This is the most weighty Phial of all, and seems to take up
more Time than any of the preceding. It is done -- What was commanded ver. 1.
The Phials are poured out.

V. 18. A great earthquake, such as had not been since men were upon the earth
-- It was therefore a literal, not figurative Earthquake.

V. 19. And the great city -- Namely, Jerusalem, here opposed to the Heathen
Cities in general, and in particular, to Rome; and the cities of the nations
fell -- Were utterly overthrown, and Babyl^n was remembered before GOD -- He
did not forget the Vengeance which was due to her, though the Execution of it
was delayed.

V. 20. Every Island and Mountain was moved out of its place, chapter vi. 14; but
here they all fle^ay. What a Ch^nge must this make in the Face of the
terraqueous Globe! And yet the End of the World is not come.

V. 21. And a great hail f^^th (...) of (...) -- From which there was no
Defeact. From the En^ Men would by into the Fields. But here also they we met
by the (...). Nor were they secure if they returned into the Houses, when each
Hall-stone weighed sixty Pounds.

XVII.
And there came one of the seven angels who had the seven phials, and talked
with me, saying, Come hither, I will show thee the judgment of the great whore,
that sits upon many waters: With whom the kings of the earth have committed
fornication, was arrayed in purple and scarlet, and adorned with gold, and
precious stone, and pearls, having in her hand a golden cup, full of
abomination and filthiness of her fornication:

And the angel said to me, and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go
into perdition; and they that dwell on the earth, (whose names are not written
in the book of life from the foundation of the world) shall wonder when they
behold the wild beast, that he was, and is not, is the mind that has wisdom.
And the wild beast that was, wild beast. are with him are called, and chosen,
and faithful.

And he says to me, it into their hearts, to execute his sentence, and to
agree and to give their kingdom to the wild beast, till the words of God shall
be fulfilled.

V. 1. And there came one of the seven angels, saying. Come hither -- This
Relation concerning the great Whore, and that concerning the Wife of the Lamb,
(chapter xxi. 9, 0.) have the same Introduction in token of the exact Opposition
between them. I will show thee the judgment of the great whore -- Which is now
circumstantially described, that sits as a queen -- In Pomp, Power, Ease,
and Luxury, upon many waters -- Many People and Nations, ver. 15.

V. 2. With whom the kings of the earth -- Both ancient and modern, for many
Ages, have committed fornication -- By partaking of her Idolatry and various
Wickedness, and the inhabitants of the earth -- The common People, have been
made drunk with the wine of her fornication -- No Wine can more thoroughly
intoxicate those who drink it, than false Zeal does the Followers of the great
Whore.

V. 3. And be carried me away -- In the Vision, into a wilderness -- The
Campagna di Roma, the Country round about Rome is now a Wilderness compared to
what it was once, and I saw a woman -- Both the Scripture and other Writers
frequently represent a City under this Emblem, sitting upon a scarlet wild
benst -- The same which is described in the thirteenth Chapter. But he was
there described, as he carried on his own Designs only: Here, as he is
connected with the Whore. There is indeed a very close Connection between them,
the seven heads of the Beast being seven hills on which the woman sits. And
yet there is a very remarkable Difference between them; between the Papal
Power, and the City of Rome. This Woman is the City of Rome, with its Buildings
and Inhabitants; especially the Nobles. The Beast, which is now
scarlet-colored, (bearing the bloody Livery, as well as the Person of the
Woman) appears very different from before. Therefore St. John says at first
Sight, I saw a beast, not the beast full of names of blasphemy -- He had before
a name of blasphemy upon his head, (chapter xiii. 1.) now he has many. From the
Time of Hildebrand the blasphemous Titles of the Pope have been abundantly
multiplied, having seven head -- Which reach in a Succession from his Ascent
out of the Sea, to his being cast into the Lake of Fire, and ten horns -- Which
are cotemporary with each other, and belong to his last Period.

V. 4. And the woman was arrayed -- With the utmost Pomp and Magnificence, in
purple and scarlet -- These were the Colors of the Imperial Habit; the Purple,
in Times of Peace; and the Scarlet, in Times of War, having in her hand a
golden cup -- Like the ancient Babylon, Jer. li. 7. full of abominations -- The
most abominable Doctrines as well as Practices.

V. 5. And on her forehead a name written -- Whereas the Saints have the Name
of GOD and the Lamb on their Foreheads, Mystery -- This very Word was inscribed
on the Front of the Pope's Mitre, till some of the Reformers took public Notice
of it. Babylon the G^ -- ^^nedict XIII. in his Proclamation of the Jubilee, A.
D. (...), explains this sufficiently. His Words are, (...) To this holy City,
^ous for the Memory of so many holy Martyrs, run with religious Alacrity.
Hasten to the Place which the Lord has chose. Ascend to this New Jerusalem,
whence the Law of the Lord and the Light of Evangelical Truth has flowed forth
into all Nations, from the very first Beginning of the Church: the City most
rightfully called The Palace, placed for the Pride of all Ages, the City of the
Lord, the Sion of the Holy One of Israel -- This Catholic and Apostolical P^man
Church, is the Head of the World, the Mother of all Believers, the faithful
Interpreter of GOD and Mistress of all Churches." But GOD somewhat varies the
Style, the mother of harlots -- The Parent, Ringleader, Patroness, and
Nourisher of many Daughters, that closely copy after her, and abominations --
Of every Kind, spiritual and fleshly, of the earth -- In all Lands. In this
Respect she is indeed Catholic or Universal.

V. 6. And I saw the woman drunk with the blood of the saints -- So that Rome
may well be called, The slaughterhouse of the martyrs. She has sh^d much
Christian Blood in every A^e; but at length she is even drunk with it, at the
Time to which this Vision refers. The ^itnesses of Jesus -- The Preachers of
his Word. And I wond^red exceedingly -- At her Cruelty and the Patience of GOD.

V. 7. I will tell thee the mystery -- The hidden Meaning of this.

V. 8. The beast which thou saw^st (namely, ver. 3.) was, etc. This is a very
observable and punctual Description of the Beast, ver. 8, 10, 11. His whole
Duration is here divided into three Periods, which are expressed in a fourfold
Manner.

I. He, 1. was, 2. and is not, 3. and will ascend out of the bottomless Pit,
and go into Perdition.

II. He, 1. was, 2. and is not, 3. and will be again.

III. The seven Heads are seven Hills and seven Kings. 1. Five are fallen, 2.
One is, 3. The other is not come: and when he comes, he must continue a short
Space.

IV. He, 1. was, 2. and is not, 3. even he is the Eighth, and is one of the
Seven, and goes into Perdition.

The First of these three is described in the thirteenth Chapter. This was past
when the Angel spoke to St. John. The Second was then in its Course, the Third
was to come, And is not -- The fifth Phial brought Darkness upon his Kingdom:
the Woman took this Advantage to sent herself upon him. Then it might be said,
He is not. Yet shall he afterward ascend out of the bottomless pit -- Arise
again with Diabolical Strength and Fury. But he will not reign long. Soon after
his Ascent he goes into perdition for ever.

V. 9. Here is the Mind that has wisdom -- Only those who are wise will
understand this. The seven heads are seven hills.

V. 10. And they are seven kings -- Anciently there were royal Palaces, on all
the seven Roman Hills. These were the Palatine, Capit^line, Calian, Ex^uiline,
Viminal, Quirinal, Aventine Hills. But the Prophecy respects the seven Hills at
the Time of the Beast, when the Palatine was deserted and the Vatican in use.
Not that the seven Heads mean Hills dictinct f^^m Kings; but they have a
C^^pound Meaning, implying both together.

Perhaps the First Head of the Beast is the Coelian Hill, and an it the Lateran
with Gregory VII. and his Successors: The Second the Vatican, with the Church
of St. Peter, chosen by Boniface VIII: The Third, the Quirinal, with the Church
of St. Mark, and the Qu^val Palace built by Paul II. and the Fourth the
Exquiline Hill, with the Temple of St. Maria Maggiore, where Paul V. reigned.
(The ^th will be added hereafter). Accordingly in the Pap^ Register, four
Periods are observable since Gregory VII. In the first, almost all the Bulls
made in the City, are da^ed in the Lateran; in the second at St. Peter's; in
the third at St. Mark's, or in the Q^al; in the fourth, at St. Maria Maggiore.
But no fifth, sixth, or seventh Hill, has yet been the Residence of any Pope.
Not that one Hill was deserted, when another was made the Papal Residence; but
a new one was added to the other sacred Palaces.

Perhaps the Times hitherto mentioned might be fixed thus: 1058. Wings are
given to the Woman. 1077. The Beast ascends out of the Sea. 1143. The forty-two
Months begin. 1810. The forty-two Months end. 1832. The Beast ascends out of
the bottomless Pit. 1836. The Beast finally overthrown.


The Fall of those five kings seems to imply, not only the Death of the Popes
who reigned on those Hills, but also such a disannulling of all they had done
there, that it will be said, The Beast is not: the Royal Power, which had so
long been lodged in the Pope, being then transferred to the City -- One is, the
other is not yet come -- These two are remarkably distinguished from the five
preceding, whom they succeed in their Turns. The former of them will continue
not a short Space, as may be gathered from what is said of the latter; the
former is under the Government of Babylon; the latter is with the Beast.

(...) Period. One is, at the same Time that the Beast is (...) there will be a
Pope; though not with the Power (...) had. And he will reside on one of the
remaining Hills, leaving the seventh for his Successor.

V. 11. And the wild beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth -- When
the Time of his not being is over. The Beast consists as it were, of Eight
Parts. The seven Heads are seven of them; and the eighth is his whole Body, or
the Beast himself. Yet the Beast himself, though he is in a Sense termed the
Eighth, is of the Seven, yea contains them all. The whole Succession of Popes
from Gregory VII. are undoubtedly Antichrist. Yet this hinders not, but that
the last Pope in this Succession, will be more eminently the Antichrist. The
man of Sin; adding to that of his Predecessors a peculiar Degree of Wickedness
from the bottomless Pit. This individual Person, as Pope, is the seventh Head
of the Beast; as the Man of Sin, he is the Eighth, or the Beast himself.

V. 12. The ten horns are ten kings -- It is no where said, That these Horns
are on the beast, or on his heads. And he is said to have them, not as he is
one of the Seven, but as he is the Eighth. They are ten secular Potentates,
contemporary with, not succeeding each other, who receive authority as kings
with the beast, probably in some Convention, which, after a very short Space,
they will deliver up to the Beast. Because of their short Continuance, only
Authority as kings, not a Kingdom is ascribed to them. While they retain this
Authority together with the Beast, he will be stronger than ever before; but
far stronger still, when their Power is also transferred to him.

V. 13. In the 13th and 14th Verses is summed up what (...) afterward
mentioned, concerning the Horns and the Beast, in this and the two following
Chapters. These have one mind and give -- They all, with one Consent, give
their warlike Power and royal Authority to the wild Beast.

V. 14. These -- Kings with the Beast -- He is Lord of lord -- Rightful
Sovereign of all, and ruling all Things well; and King of kings -- As a King he
fights with, and conquers all his Enemies. And they that are with him --
Beholding his Victory, are such as were, while in the Body, called, by his Word
and Spirit, and chosen -- Taken out of the World, when they were enabled to
believe in him, and faithful -- Unto Death.

V. 15. People, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues -- It is not said
tribes; for Israel has nothing to do with Rome in particular.

V. 16. And shall eat her flesh -- Devour her immense Riches.

V. 17. For God has put it into their hearts -- Which indeed no less than
Almighty Power could have effected, to execute his ^ntence, till the words of
God -- Touching the overthrow of all his Enemies, should be fulfilled.

V. 18. The woman is the great city, which reigns -- Namely while the Feast
is not, and the Woman sits upon him.

XVIII.
And after these things I saw another angel coming down out of heaven, having
great power, and the earth was enlightened with his glory. And he cried
mightily with a loud voice,

And I heard another voice out of heaven saying, Reward her even as she has
rewarded, is the Lord God who judges her. buyeth their merchandise any more:
merchandise of horses and of chariots, and of bodies and souls of men. cried
when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, city was like the great city?
And they cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and mourning, saying,
Alas, alas! The great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the
sea, by reason of her magnificence; for in one hour she is made desolate.

And a mighty angel took up a stone, it into the sea, saying, Thus with
violence shall Babylon, the great city, be thrown down, and shall be found no
more at all. stone shall be heard no more at all in thee.

V. 1. And I saw another angel coming down out of heaven, termed another, with
respect to him who came down out of heaven chapter x. 1. and the earth was
enlightened with his glory -- To make his Coming more conspicuous. If such be
the Luster of the Servant, what Images can display the Majesty of the Lord, who
has thousand thousands of those glorious Attendants ministering to him, and ten
thousand (...) standing before him?

V. 2. And he cried, Babylon is fallen -- This Fall was mentioned before, chapter
xiv. 8. but is now declared at large, and is become an habitation, a free
Abode, of devils, and an hold, a Prison, of every unclean spirit -- Perhaps
confined there where they had once practiced all Uncleanness, till the Judgment
of the Great Day. How many horrid Inhabitants has desolate Babylon? Of
invisible Beings, Devils, and unclean Spirits: Of visible, every unclean Beast,
every filthy and hateful Bird. Suppose then Babylon to mean Heathen Rome. What
have the Romanists gained? Seeing from the Time of that Destruction, which they
say is past, these are to be its only Inhabitions for ever.

V. 4. And I heard another voice -- Of Christ, Whose People secretly scattered
even there, are warned of her approaching Destruction, that ye be not partakers
of her sins -- That is, of the Fruits of them.

What a remarkable Providence it was, that the Revelation was printed in the
midst of Spain, in the Great Polyglot Bible, before the Reformation? Else how
much easier had it been for the Papists, to reject the whole Book, than it is
to evade these striking Parts of it?

V. 5. Even to heaven -- An Expression which implies the highest Guilt.

V. 6. Reward her -- This GOD speaks to the Executioners of his Vengeance, even
as she has rewarded, others; in particular, the Saints of GOD, and give her
double -- This, according to the Hebrew Idiom, impiles only a full Retaliation.

V. 7. As much as she has glorified herself -- By Pride, and Pomp, and
arrogant Boasting, and lived deliciously -- In all kinds of Elegance, Luxury,
and Wantonness, so much torment give her -- Proportioning the Punishment to the
Sin. Because she says in her beart -- As did ancient Babylon, ( Isai. xlvii.
8, 9.) I sit -- Her usual Style. Hence those Expressions, The Chair, the Sea of
Rome: He sat so many Years, as a Queen -- Over many Kings, "Mistress of all
Churches; the Supreme; the Infallible; the only Spouse of Christ; out of which
there is no Salvation," and am no (...) -- But the Spouse of Christ, and shall
see no sorrow -- From the Death of my Children, or any other Calamity, for GOD
himself will defend -- "The Church."

V. 8. Therefore, as both the natural and judicial Consequence of this proud
Security, shall her plagues come -- The death of her Children, with an
Incapacity of bearing more: sorrow of every Kind, and famine -- In the Room of
luxurious Plenty; the very Things from which she imagined herself to be most
safe; for strong is the Lord God w^^ judges be -- Against whom therefore all
her Strength, great as it is, will not avail.

V. 10. Then strong city -- Rome was anciently termed by its Inhabitants.
Valentia, that is, Strong. And the Word Rome itself in Greek signifies
Strength. This Name was given it by the Greek Strangers.

V. 12. Merchandise of gold, etc. Almost all these are still in Use at Rome,
both in their idolatrous Service, and in common Life, fine linen -- The Sort of
it mentioned in the Original is exceeding costly, Thyine wood -- A sweet
smelling Wood not unlike Citron, used in adorning magnificent Palaces --
vesseis of most precious wood -- Ebony in particular, which is often mentioned
with ivory: the one excelling in Whiteness, the other in Blackness, and both in
uncommon Smoothness.

V. 13. Amomum -- A Shrub whose Wood is a fine Perfume -- and beasts -- Cows
and Oxen, and of chariots -- A purely Latin Word is here inserted in the Greek.
This St. (...) undoubtedly used on Purpose, in describing the Luxury of Rome --
and of bodies -- A common Term for Slaves, and souls of men -- For these also
are continually bought and sold at Rome. And this of all others is the most
gainful Merchandise to the Roman Traffickers.

V. 14. And the fruits -- From what was imported they proceed to the Domestic
Delicacies of Rome; none of which is in greater Request there, than the
particular Sort which is here mentioned. The Word properly signifies, Pears,
Peaches, Nectarines, and all of the Apple and Plumb Kinds, and all things that
are dainty -- To the Taste, and splendid -- To the Sight; as Clothes,
Buildings, Furniture.

V. 19. And they cast dust on their heads -- As Mourners. Most of the
Expressions here used in describing the Downfall of Babylon, are taken from
Ezekiel's Description of the Downfall of Tire. (chapter xxvi. and xxvii.)

V. 20. Rejoice over her thou heaven -- That is, all the Inhabitants of it, and
more especially, ye saints: And among the Saints still more eminently, ye
apostles and prophets.

V. 21. And a mighty angel took up a stone, and threw it into the sea -- By a
like Emblem Jeremiah fore-shewed the Fall of the Chaldean Babylon, chapter li. 63,
64.

V. 22. And the voice of harpers -- Players on stringed Instruments, and
musicians -- Skilful Singers in particular, and pipers -- Who played on Flutes,
chiefly on mournful, whereas Trumpeters played on joyful Occasions, shall be
heard no more in thee, and no artificer -- Arts of every Kind, particularly
Music, Sculpture, Painting, and Statuary, were there carried to their greatest
Height. No, nor even the sound of a millstone shall be heard any more in thee
-- Not only the Arts that adorn Life, but even those Employments without which
it cannot subsist, will cease from thee for ever. All these Expressions denote
absolute and eternal Desolation. The voice of harpers -- Music was the
Entertainment of the Rich and Great; Trade, the Business of Men of middle Rank:
preparing Bread and the Necessaries of Life the Employment of the lowest
People; Marriages, in which Lamps and Songs were known Ceremonies, are the
Means of peopling Cities, as new Births supply the Place of those that die. The
Desolation of Rome is therefore described in such a Manner, as to show that
neither Rich nor Poor, neither Persons of middle Rank, nor those of the lowest
Condition, should be able to live there any more. Neither shall it be repeopled
by new Marriages, but remain desolate and uninhabited for ever.

V. 23. For thy merchants were the great men of the earth -- A Circumstance
which was in itself indifferent, and yet led them into Pride, Luxury, and
numberless other Sins.

V. 24. And in her was found the blood of the prophets and saints -- The same
Angel speaks still, yet he does not say in thee, but in her, now so sunk as not
to hear these last Words, and of all that had been slain -- Even before she was
built. See Matthew. xxiii. 35. There is no City under the Sun which has so clear
a Title to Catholic Blood-guiltiness as Rome. The Guilt of the Blood shed under
the Heathen Emperors, has not been removed under the Popes, but hugely
multiplied. Nor is Rome accountable only for that which has been shed in the
City, but for that shed in all the earth. For at Rome under the Pope, as well
as under the Heathen Emperors, were the (...) and Edicts given: And wherever
the Blood of holy (...) ^ed, there were the grand Rejoicings for it. And what
immense Quantities of Blood have been shed by her Agents! Charles IX. of
France, in his Letter to Gregory XIII. boasts, that in and not long after the
Massacre of Paris, he had destroyed seventy thousand Hugonets. Some have
computed, that from the Year 1518 to 1548, fifteen Millions of Protestants have
perished by the Inquisition. This may be overcharged; but certainly the Number
of them in those thirty Years, as well as since, is almost incredible. To these
we may add innumerable Martyrs, in ancient, middle, and late Ages, in Bohemia,
Germany, Holland, France, England, Inland, and many other Parts of Europe,
Afric, and Asia.

XIX.
After these things I heard a loud voice of a great multitude in heaven,
saying, Hallelujah: The salvation, and the glory, and the power to our GOD. are
his judgments: for he has judged the great whore, who corrupted the earth with
her fornication, and has avenged the blood of his servants at her hand. (And
again they said Hallelujah) and her smoke ascends for ever and ever. the
marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready.

And he says to me, are they who are invited to the marriage supper of the
Lamb. And he says to me, These are the true sayings of God. thou do it not: I
am thy fellow servants, and of thy brethren that keep the testimony of Jesus.
Worship God. The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.

And I saw the heaven opened, and makes war. are a flame of fire, and upon his
head are many diadems, and he has a name written, which none knows but
himself. And he is clothed in a vesture dipped in blood, voice, saying to all the
birds that fly in the midst of heaven, Come, and gather yourselves together to
the great supper of GOD. out of his mouth; and all the birds were satisfied
with their flesh.

V. 1. I heard a loud voice of a great multitude -- Whose Blood the great Whore
had shed, saying, Hallelujah -- This Hebrew Word signifies Praise ye Jah, or
Him that is. GOD named himself to Moses, EHEIEH, that is, I will be; (Exodus ii.
14.) and at the same Time Jehovah, that is, He that is, and was, and is to
come: During the Trumpet of the seventh Angel, he is styled, He that is and
was, (chapter xvi. 5.) and not He that is to come: Because his long expected Coming
is under this Trumpet actually present. At length he is styled Jah, He that is,
the Past together with the Future being swallowed up in the Present, the former
Things being no more mentioned, for the Greatness of those that now are. This
Title is of all others the most peculiar to the everlasting GOD: The salvation
is opposed to the Destruction which the great Whore had brought upon the earth.
His power and glory appear from the Judgment executed on her, and from the
setting up his Kingdom to endure through all Ages.

V. 2. For true and righteous are his judgments -- Thus is the Cry of the Souls
under the Altar changed into a Song of Praise.

V. 4. And the four and twenty olders, and the four (...) creatures f^ll down
-- The living creatures are nearer the Throne than the olders. Accordingly they
are mentioned before them with the Praise they render to GOD, chapter iv. 9, 10.
chapter viii. 14. in as much as there the Praise moves from the Center to the
Circumference. But here, when GOD's Judgments are fulfilled, it moves back from
the Circumference to the Center. Here therefore the four and twenty elders a^^
named before the living creatures.

V. 5. And a voice came forth from the throne -- Probably from the four living
Creatures, saving, Praise our GOD -- The Occasion and Matter of this Song of
Praise follow immediately after, ver. 6, etc. GOD was praised before, for his
Judgment of the great Whore, ver. 1 -- 4. Now (...) that which follows it: for
that the Lord God, the Almighty, takes the Kingdom to himself, and ^ven^es
himself on the rest of his Enemies. Were all these Inhabitants of Heaven
^^staken? It no, there is (...) you and terrible Anger in GOD.

V. 6. And I heard the (...) of a great (...) -- So all his servants did praise
him, The Almighty reigns -- More ^^^nently and gloriously than ever before.

V. 7. (...) of the Lamb is come -- Is near at Hand, to be (...) speedily. What
this implies, none of the Spirits of just Men, even in Paradise, yet know. O
what Things are those which are yet behind! And what Purity of Heart should
there be, to meditate upon them! And his wife has made herself ready -- Even
upon Earth: but in a far higher Sense, in that World. After a Time allowed for
this, the New Jerusalem comes down, both made ready and adorned, (chapter xxi. 2.)

V. 8. And it is given to her -- By GOD -- The Bride is, all holy Men, the
whole Invisible Church, to be arrayed in fine linen, white and clean -- This is
an Emblem of the righteousness of the saints -- (...) of their Justification
and Sanctification.

V. 9. (...) -- The Angel, says to me, Write -- St. John seems to have been to
amazed at these glorious Sights, that he needs to be reminded of this, Happy
are they who are invited to the marriage supper of the Lamb -- Called to Glory,
and he says -- After a little Pause.

V. 10. And I fell before his feet to worship him -- It seems, mistaking him
for the Angel of the Covenant, but he says, See thou do it not -- In the
Original, it is only, see not, with a beautiful Abruptness. To pray to, or
worship the highest Creature, is flat Idolatry. I am thy fellow servants, and of
thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus -- I am now employed as your
Fellow Servants to testify of the Lord Jesus, by the same Spirit which inspired
the Prophets of old.

V. 11. And I saw the heaven opened -- This is a new and peculiar Opening of
it, in order to show the magnificent Expedition of Christ and his Attendants
against his great Adversary, and behold a white horse -- Many little regarded
Christ, when he came meek, riding upon an ass. But what will they say, when he
goes forth upon his white horse, with the Sword of his Mouth? White -- Such as
Generals use in solemn triumph, And he that sits on him, called Faithful --
In performing all his Promises, and True -- In executing all his Threatenings,
and in righteousness -- With the utmost Justice, he judges and makes war --
Often the Sentence and Execution go together.

V. 12. And his eyes are a flame of fire -- They were said to be as or like a
Flame of Fire before, (chapter i. 14.) An Emblem of his Omniscience, and upon his
head are many diadems -- For he is King of all Nations, and he has a name
written, which none knows but himself -- As GOD, he is incomprehensible to
every Creature.

V. 13. And he is clothed in a vesture dipped in blood -- The Blood of the
Enemies he has already conquered, Isa. lxiii. 1, etc.

V. 15. And he shall rule them -- Who are not slain by his Sword, with a rod of
iron -- That is, if they will not submit to his Golden Scepter, And he treads
the wine-p^^ss of the wrath of GOD -- That is, he executes his Judgments on the
ungodly.

This Ruler of the Nations was born (or appeared as such) immediately after the
seventh Angel began to sound. He now appears, not as a Child, but as a
victorious Warrior. The Nations have long ago felt his iron rod, partly while
the Heathen Romans, after their savage Persecution of the Christians,
themselves groaned under numberless Plagues and Calamities, by his righteous
Vengeance: Partly, while other Heathens have been broken in Pieces by those who
bore the Christian Name. For although the Cruelty, for Example, of the
Spaniards in America was unrighteous and detestable, yet did GOD therein
execute his righteous Judgment on the unbelieving Nations. But they shall
experience his iron rod as they never did yet. And then will they all return to
their rightful Lord.

V. 16. And be has on his vesture and on his thigh -- That is, on the Part of
his Vesture which is upon his Thigh, a name written -- It was usual of old, for
great Personages in the Eastern Countries to have magnificent Titles affixt to
their Garments.

V. 17. Gather yourselves together to the great supper of GOD -- As to a great
Feast, which the Vengeance of GOD will soon provide; a strongly figurative
Expression, (taken from Ezekiel, chapter xxxix. 17.) denoting the Vastness of the
ensuing Slaughter.

V. 19. And I saw the kings of the earth -- The ten Kings mentioned chapter xvii.
12. who had now drawn the other Kings of the Earth to them, whether Popish,
Mohammedan, or Pagan, gathered together (...) him that sat on the horse -- All
Beings, good and (...), will be concerned in this grand Contest. See Zech. xiv.
1, etc.

V. 20. The false (...) ^ght the miracles before him -- And therefore shared in
his Punishment, these two ungodly Men, were cast alive -- Without undergoing
bodily Death, into the lake of fire -- And that before the Devil himself, chapter
xx. 10. Here is the last of the beast. After several repeated Strokes of
Omnipotence, he is gone alive into Hell. There were two that went alive into
Heaven: Perhaps there are two that go alive into Hell. It may be, Enoch and
Elijah entered at once into Glory, without first waiting in Paradise. The Beast
and the false Prophet plunge at once into the extremest Degree of Torment,
without being reserved in Chains of Darkness, till the Judgment of the great
Day. Surely, none but the Beast of Rome would have hardened himself thus
against the GOD he pretended to adore, or refused to have repented under such
dreadful, repeated Visitations! Well is he styled a Beast, from his carnal and
vile Affections; a wild Beast, from his savage and cruel Spirit! The rest were
slain -- A like Difference is afterward made between the Devil, and Gog and
Magog, (chapter xx. 9, 10.)

V. 21. Here is a most magnificent Description of the overthrow of the Beast
and his Adherents. It has, in particular, one exquisite Beauty, that, after
exhibiting the two opposite Armies, and all the Apparatus for a Battle (ver. 11
-- 19.) then follows immediately (ver. 20.) the Account of the Victory, without
one Word of an Engagement or Fighting. Here is the most exact Propriety; for
what Struggle can there be between Omnipotence, and the Power of all the
Creation united against it! Every Description must have fallen short of this
admirable Silence.

XX.
And I saw an angel descending out of heaven, having the key of the bottomless
pit, and a great chain in his hand. Satan, him up, and set a seal upon him,
that he might deceive the nations no more, 'till the thousand years should be
fulfilled. After this he must be loosed for a small time.

And I saw ^ones, I saw the souls of them who had been beheaded for the
testimony of Jesus, and for the word of God, and those who had not worshipped
the wild beast nor his image, neither had received the mark on their forehead
or on their hand; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. This
is the first resurrection. is he that has a part in the first resurrection:
over these the second death has no power; but they shall be priests of God and
of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.

And when the thousand years are fulfilled, and the beloved city: and fire came
down from God out of heaven and devoured them. are: and they shall be tormented
day and night for ever and ever.

And I saw a great white throne, opened: and another book was opened which is
the book of life: Mal. iii. 16, etc.
and the dead were judged out of the things that were written in the books,
according to their works.

Chap. xx.
ver. 1. And I saw an angel descending out of heaven -- Coming down with a
Commission from GOD. Jesus Christ himself overthrew the Beast: The proud Dragon
shall be bound by an Angel: Even as he and his Angels were cast out of Heaven,
by Michael and his Angels, having the key of the bottomless pit -- Mentioned
before, chapter ix. 1. and a great chain in his hand -- The Angel of the bottomless
pit was shut up therein, before the Beginning of the First Woe. But it is now
first that Satan, after he had occasioned the Third Woe, is both chained and
shut up.

V. 2. And he laid hold on the dragon -- With whom undoubtedly his Angels were
now cast into the bottomless Pit, as well as finally into everlasting fire,
Match. xxv. 41. And bound him a thousand years -- That these thousand do not
precede, or run parallel with, but wholly follow the Times of the Beast, may
manifestly appear, 1. From the Series of the whole Book, representing one
continued Chain of Events: 2. From the Circumstances which precede. The Woman's
bringing forth is followed, by the casting of the Dragon out of Heaven to the
Earth. With this is connected the Third Woe, whereby the Dragon through, and
with the Beast, rages horribly. At the Conclusion of the Third Woe the Beast is
overthrown and cast into the lake of five. At the same Time the other grand
Enemy, the Dragon, shall be bound and shut up. 3. These thousand Years bring a
new, full, and lasting Immunity from all outward and inward Evils (the Authors
of which are now removed) and an Affluence of all Blessings. But such a Time
the Church has never yet seen. Therefore it is still to come. 4. These thousand
Years are followed by the last Times of the World, the letting loose of Satan,
who gathers together Gog and Magog, and is thrown to the Beast and false
Prophet in the lake of fire. Now Satan's accusing the Saints in Heaven, his
Rage on Earth, his Imprisonment in the Abyss, his seducing Gog and Magog, and
being cast into the Lake of Fire, evidently succeed each other. 5. What occurs
from chapter xx. 11. to chapter xxii. 5. manifestly follows the Things related in the
xixth Chapter. The thousand Years came between: whereas if they were past,
neither the Beginning nor the End of them would fall within this Period. In a
short Time those who assert, that they are now at hand, will appear to have
spoken the Truth. Mean Time let every Man consider, what Kind of Happiness he
expects therein. The Danger does not lie, in maintaining, that the thousand
Years are yet to come, but in interpreting them, whether past or to come, in a
gross and carnal Sense. The Doctrine of the Son of GOD is a Mystery. So is his
Cross: And so is his Glory. In all these he is a Sign that is spoken against.
Happy they who believe and confess him in all.

V. 3. And set a seal upon him -- How far these Expressions are to be taken
literally, how far figuratively only, who can tell? That he might deceive the
nations no more -- One Benefit only is here expressed, as resulting from the
Confinement of Satan. But how many and great Blessings are implied? For the
grand Enemy being removed, the Kingdom of GOD holds on its uninterrupted Course
among the Nations, and the great Mystery of GOD, so long foretold, is at length
fulfilled: Namely, when the Beast is destroyed and Satan bound. This Fulfillment
approaches near^ and nearer, and contains Things of the utmost Importance, the
knowledge of which becomes every D^y more distinct and easy. In the mean Time
it is highly ^cessary to guard against the present Rage and Subtilty of the
Devi). Quickly he will be bound: when he is loosed again, the Martyrs will live
and (...) with Christ. Then follow his coming in Glory, the New Heaven, New
Earth, and New Jerusalem. The bottomless pit is propetly the Devil's Prison:
Afterward he is cast into the Lake of Fire. He can deceive the Nations no
more, till the thousand years mentioned before, ver. 2. are fulfilled. Then be
must be loosed -- So does the mysterious Wisdom of GOD permit, for a small time
-- Small comparatively: Though upon the whole it cannot be very short, because
the Things to be transacted therein (ver. 8, 9) must take up a considerable
Space. We are very shortly to expect, one after another, the Calamities
occasioned by the second Beast, the Harvest and the Vintage; the pouring out of
the Phials, the Judgment of Babylon: the last raging of the Beast and his
Destruction; the Imprisonment of Satan. How great Things these! And how short
the Time! What is needful for us? Wisdom, Patience, Faithfulness, Watchfulness.
It is no Time to settle upon our Lees. This is not, if it be rightly
understood, an acceptable Message to the Wise, the Mighty, the Honorable of
this World. Yet that which is to be done, shall be done. There is no Counsel
against the Lord.

V. 4. And I saw thrones -- Such as are promised the Apostle, Matt. xix. 28.
Luke. xxii. 30. and they -- Namely, the Saints whom St. John saw at the same
Time ( Dan. vii. 22.) sat upon them; and judgment was given to them (1 Cor. vi.
2.) Who and how many these are, is not said. But they are distinguished from
the Souls, or Persons, mentioned immediately after; and from the Saints already
raised. And I saw the souls of them who had been beheaded, with the axe; so the
original Word signifies. One Kind of Death, which was particularly inflicted at
Rome, is mentioned for all, for the testimony of Jesus, and for the word of GOD
-- The Martyrs were sometimes killed for the word of GOD in general, sometimes
particularly for the testimony of Jesus: the one, while they refused to worship
Idols; the other, while they confessed the Name of Christ, and those who had
not worshipped the wild beast nor his image -- These seem to be a Company
distinct from those who appeared, chapter xv. 2. Those overcame, probably, in such
Contests as these had not. Before the Number of the Beast was expired, the
People were compelled to worship him, by the most dreadful Violence. But when
the Beast was not, they were only seduced into it, by the Craft of the false
Prophet, and they lived -- Their Souls and Bodies being reunited, and reigned
with Christ -- Not on Earth, but in Heaven. The reigning on earth, mentioned
chapter xi. 15. is quite different from this, a thousand years -- It must be
observed, That two distinct thousand Years, are mentioned throughout this whole
Passage. Each is mentioned thrice; the thousand wherein Satan is bound, ver. 2,
3. 7. the thousand wherein the Saints shall reign, ver. 4, 5, 6. The former end
before the End of the World; the latter reach to the General Resurrection. So
that the Beginning and End of the former thousand, is before the Beginning and
End of the latter. Therefore as in the second Verse, at the first Mention of
the former, so in the fourth Verse at the first Mention of the latter, it is
only said a thousand Years: in the other Places, the thousand (ver. 3. 5. 7.)
that is, the thousand mentioned before. During the former, the Promises
concerning the flourishing State of the Church (chapter x. 7.) shall be fulfilled.
During the latter, while the Saints reign with Christ in Heaven, Men on Earth
will be careless and secure.

V. 5. The rest of the dead lived not till the thousand years -- Mentioned ver.
4. were ended. The thousand Years which Satan is bound, both begin and end much
sooner.

The small time, and the second thousand Years begin at the same Point,
immediately after the first Thousand. But neither the Beginning of the first,
nor of the second Thousand will be known to the Men upon Earth, as both the
Imprisonment of Satan and his loosing are transacted in the invisible World.

By observing these two distinct thousand Years, many Difficulties are avoided.
There is Room enough for the fulfilling of all the Prophecies, and those which
before seemed to clash are reconciled: Particularly those which speak on the
one hand, of a most flourishing State of the Church as yet to come; and on the
other, of the fatal Security of Men, in the last Days of the World.

V. 6. They shall be priests of GOD and of Christ -- Therefore Christ is GOD,
and shall reign with him -- With Christ, a thousand years.

V. 7. And (...) the former thousand years are fulfilled, Satan shall be loosed
out of his prison -- At the same Time that the first Resurrection begins. There
is a great Resemblance between this Passage and chapter xii. 12. At the casting out
of the Dragon, there was Joy (...). But there was Woe upon Earth. So at the
loosing of Satan* the (...) begin to reign with Christ; but the Nations on
Earth are ^ived.

V. 8. And shall go forth to deceive the nations in the four corners of the
earth -- (That is in all the Earth) the more diligently, as he has been so
long restrained, and knows he has but a small Time, Gog and Magog -- Magog,
the second Son of Japhet, is the Father of the innumerable nor them Nations
toward the East. The Prince of these Nations, of which the Rulk of that Army
will consist, is termed Gog by Ezekiel also, chapter xxxviii. 2. Both Gog and Magog
signify High, or Lifted up, a Name well suiting both the Prince and People.
When that fierce Leader of many Nations shall appear, then will his own Name be
known, to gather them -- Both Gog and his Armies. Of Gog little more is said,
as being soon mingled with the rest in the common Slaughter. The Revelation
speaks of this the more briefly, because it had been so particularly described
by Ezekiel. Whose number is as the sand of the sea -- Immensely numerous, a
proverbial Expression.

V. 9. And they went up on the breadth of the earth, or the land, filling the
whole Breadth of it, and surrounded the camp of the saint^ Perhaps the Gentile
Church, dwelling round about Jerusalem, and the beloved city -- So termed
likewise Ecclus. xxiv. 11.

V. 10. And they -- All these, shall be tormented day and night -- That is,
without any Intermission. Strictly speaking, there is only Night there. No Day,
no Sun; no Hope!

V. 11. And I saw -- A Representation of that great Day of the Lord, a great,
white throne -- How great, who can say? White with the Glory of GOD, of Him
that sat upon it, Jesus Christ. The Apostle does not attempt to describe him
here, only adds that Circumstance, far above all Description, From whose face
the earth and the heaven fled away -- Probably both the aereal and the starry
Heaven; which shall pass away with a great noise: and there was found no place
for them -- But they were wholly dissolved, the very Elements melting with
servent Heat. It is not said, They were thrown into great Commotions, but they
fled intrely away; not, they started from their Foundations, but they fell into
dissolution; not, they removed to a distant Place, but there was found no place
for them; they ceased to exist; they were no more. And all this, not at the
strict Command of the LORD JESUS; not at his awful Presence, or before his
fiery Indignation, but at the bare presence of his Majesty, sitting with
severe, but adorable Dignity on his Throne.

V. 12. And I saw the dead, great and small -- Of every Age and Condition. This
includes also those who undergo a Change equivalent to Death: (1 Cor. xv. 51.)
And the Books -- Human Judges have their Books written with Pen and Ink. How
different is the Nature of these Books! were opened -- O how many hidden Things
will then come to light! And how many will have quite another Appearance, than
they had before, in the Sight of Men! With the Book of GOD's Omniscience, that
of Conscience will then exactly tally. The Book of Natural Law, as well as of
Revealed, will then also be displayed. It is not said The Books will be read:
The Light of that Day will make them visible to all. Then particularly shall
every Man know himself, and that with the last Exactness. This will be the
first true, full, impartial, universal History. And another book -- Wherein are
enrolled all that are accepted through the Beloved; all who lived and died in the
Faith that works by Love, which is the book of life, was opened -- What
Manner of Expectation will then be, with regard to the Issue of the whole?

V. 13. Death and Hades gave up the dead that were in them -- Death gave up all
the Bodies of Men, and Hades, the Receptacle of separate Souls, gave them up,
to be reunited to their Bodies.

V. 14. And Death and Hades were cast into the lake of fire. -- That is, were
abolished for ever. For neither the Righteous nor the Wicked were to die any
more: their Souls and Bodies were no more to be separated. Consequently neither
Death nor Hades could any more have a Being.

XXI.
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first
earth were passed away: and there was no more sea. And I heard a loud voice out
of heaven saying, shall be with them, and be their God. And he shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes, shall be to me a son. is in the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

And there came one of the seven angels that had the seven phials full of the
seven last plagues, jasper stone, the names of the twelve tribes of the
children of Israel: the gates thereof, reeds, the measure of a man, that is, of
an angel. And the building of the wall thereof was jasper, was of pure gold,
was a jasper, the second a sapphire, the third a chalcedony, were twelve
pearls, was pure gold, Lamb are the temple of it. is the lamp thereof. makes a
lie, but they who are written in the Lamb's book of life.

Chap xxi.
ver. 1. And I saw -- So it runs, chapter xix. 11. chapter xx. 1, 4, 11. in a
Succession. All these several Representations follow one another in order. So
the Vision reaches into Eternity, a new heaven and a new earth -- After the
Resurrection and general Judgment. St. John is not now describing a flourishing
State of the Church, but a new and eternal State of all Things: for the first
heaven and the first earth -- Not only the lowest Part of Heaven, not only the
solar System, but the whole ethereal Heaven, with all its Host, whether of
Planets or fixed Stars ( Isai. xxxiv. 4. Matt. xxiv. 29.) All the former Things
will be done away, that all may become new (ver. 4, 5. 2 Pet. iii. 10, 12.) are
passed away -- But in the fourth Verse, it is said are gone away. There the
stronger Word is used: for Death, mourning, and sorrow, go away altogether; the
former Heaven and Earth only pass away, giving place to the New Heaven and the
New Earth.

V. 2. And I saw the holy city -- The New Heaven, the New Earth, and the New
Jerusalem are closely connected. This City is wholly new, belonging not to this
World, not to the Millennium, but to Eternity. This appears from the Series of
the Vision, the Magnificence of the Description, and the Opposition of this
City to the second Death, chapter xx. 11, 12. chapter xxi. 1, 2, 5, 8, 9. chapter xxii. 5.
Coming down -- In the very Act of Descending.

V. 3. They shall be his people, and GOD himself shall be with them and be
their GOD -- So shall the Covenant between GOD and his people be executed in
the most glorious Manner.

V. 4. And Death shall be no more -- This is a full Proof that this whole
Description belongs not to Time, but Eternity: neither shall sorrow, or crying,
or pain be any more; for the former things are gone away -- Under the former
Heaven and upon the former Earth, there was Death, and Sorrow, Crying and Pain,
all which occasioned many Tears. But now Pain and Sorrow are fled away, and the
Saints have everlasting Life and Joy.

V. 5. And he that sat upon the throne said -- Not to St. John only. From the
first Mention of him that sat upon the throne, chapter iv. 2. this is the first
Speech which is expressly ascribed to him. And be -- The Angel, says to me,
Write -- As follows, these sayings are faithful and true -- This includes all
that went before The Apostle seems again to have ceased writing, being overcome
with Ecstasy at the Voice of Him that spoke.

V. 6. And be -- That sat upon the Throne, said to me, It is done -- All that
the Prophets had spoken; all that was spoken, chapter iv. 1. We read this
Expression twice in this Prophecy; first (chapter xvi. 17.) at the fulfilling of
the wrath of GOD, and here at the making all things now: I am the Alpha and the
Omega, the Beginning and the End -- The latter explains the former, the
everlasting; I will give to him that thirsts -- The Lamb says the same, chapter
xxii. 17.

V. 7. He that overcomes -- Which is more than he that thirsts, shall
inherit these things -- Which I have made new. I will be his GOD, and he shall
be my Son -- Both in the Hebrew and Greek Language, in which the Scriptures
were written, what we translate shall and will are one and the same Word. The
only Difference consists in an English Translation, or in the want of Knowledge
in him that interprets what he does not understand.

V. 8. But the fearful and unbelieving -- Who, through want of Courage and Faith,
do not overcome, and abominable -- That is, Sodomites, and whoremongers, and
sorcerers, and idolaters -- These three Sins generally went together, their
part is in the lake.

V. 9. And there came one of the seven angels that had the seven phial: --
Whereby Room had been made for the Kingdom of GOD, saying, Come, I will show
thee the bride -- The same Angel had before showed him Babylon (chapter xvii. 1.)
which is directly opposed to the New Jerusalem.

V. 10. And he carried me away in the Spirit -- The same Expression as before
(chapter xvii. 3.) and showed me the holy city Jerusalem -- The old City is now
forgotten, so that this is no longer termed The New, but absolutely Jerusalem.
O how did St. John long to enter in! But the Time was not yet come. Ezekiel
also describes the Holy City, and what pertains thereto; (chapter xl -- xlviii.)
but a City quite different from the Old Jerusalem, as it was either before or
after the Babylonish Captivity. The Description of the Prophet and of the
Apostle agree in many Particulars. But in many more they differ. Ezekiel
expressly describes the Temple, and the Worship of GOD therein, closely
alluding to the Levitical Service. But St. John saw no Temple, and describes
the City for more large, glorious and heavenly than the Propher. Yet that which
he describes is the same City; but as it subfisted soon after the Destruction
of the Beast. This being observed, both the Prophecies agree together, and one
may explain the other.

V. 11. Having the glory of GOD -- For her Light (ver. 23. Isai. lx. 1, 2.
Zech. ii. 5.) Her window -- There was only one which ran all round the City.
The Light did not come in from without through this. For the Glory of GOD is
within the City. But it shines out from within to a great Distance, ver. 23, 24.

V. 12. Twelve angels -- Still waiting upon the Heirs of Salvation.

V. 14. And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them the names
of the twelve apostles of the Lamb -- Figuratively showing, that the
Inhabitants of the City had built only on that Faith which the Apostles once
delivered to the Saints.

V. 15. And he measured the city twelve thousand furlongs -- Not in
Circumference, but on each of the four Sides. Jerusalem was thirty-three
Furlongs in Circumference: Alexandria thirty in Length, ten in Breadth. Nineveh
is reported to have been four hundred Furlongs round; Babylon, four hundred and
eighty. But what inconsiderable Villages were all these, compared to the New
Jerusalem? By this Measure is understood the Greatness of the City, with the
exact Order and just Proportion of every Part of it: To show figuratively, that
this City was prepared for a great Number of Inhabitants, how small soever the
Number of real Christians may sometimes appear to be: and that every Thing
relating to the Happiness of that State, was prepared with the greatest Order
and Exactness.

The City is twelve thousand furlongs high: the Wall, an hundred and forty-four
reeds. This is exactly the same Height, only expressed in a different Manner.
The twelve thousand Furlongs, being spoken absolutely, without any Explanation,
are common, human Furlongs: The hundred forty-four Reeds are not of common,
human Length; but of angelic, abundantly larger than human. It is said, the
measure of a man, that is, of an angel, because St. John saw the measuring
Angel in an human Shape. The Reed therefore was as great as was the Stature of
that human Form in which the Angel appeared. In treating of all these Things, a
deep Reverence is necessary, and so is a Measure of spiritual Wisdom; that we
may neither understand them too literally and grossly, nor go too far from the
natural Force of the Words. The Gold, the Pearls, the precious Stones, the
Walls, Foundations, Gates, are undoubtedly figurative Expressions; seeing the
City itself is in Glory, and the Inhabitants of it have spiritual Bodies: Yet
these spiritual Bodies are also real Bodies, and the City is an Abode distinct
from its Inhabitants; and proportioned to them who take up a finite and a
determinate Space. The Measures therefore abovementioned are real and
determinate.

V. 18. And the building of the wall was jasper -- That is, the Wall was built
of Jasper, and the city -- The Houses, was of pure gold.

V. 19. And the foundations were adorned with precious stones -- That (...)
beautifully made of them. The precious Stones on the High-priest's Breast Plate
of Judgment were a proper Emblem to express the Happiness of GOD's Church, in
his Presence with them, and in the Blessing of his (...). The like Ornaments on
the Foundations of the Walls of this City, may express the perfect Glory and
Happiness of all the Inhabitants of it, from the most glorious Presence and
Protection of GOD. Each precious Stone was not the Ornament of the Foundation,
but the Foundation itself. The Colors of these are remarkably mixed. A Jasper
is of the Color of white Marble, with a light Shade of green and of red; a
Sapphire is of a Sky-blue, speckled with Gold; a Chalcedony, or Carbuncle, of
the Color of red-hot Iron; an Emerald, of a Grass-green.

V. 20. A Sardonyx is red streaked with white; a Sardius, of a deep red; a
Chrys^^ite, of a deep yellow; a Beryl, Seagreen; a Topaz, pale yellow. A
Chrysoprose is greenish and transparent, with Gold Specks; a Jacinth, of a red
purple; an Amethyst, Violet-purple.

V. 22. The Lord GOD and the Lamb are the temple of it -- He (...) the new
Heaven and the new Earth. He surrounds the City and sanctifies it, and all that
are therein. He is all in all.

V. 23. The glory of GOD -- Infinitely brighter than the shining of the Sun.

V. 24. And the nations -- The whole Verse is taken from Isa. lx. 3. shall walk
by the light thereof -- Which throws itself outward from the City far and hear,
and the kings of the earth -- Those of them who have a Part there, bring their
glory into it -- Not their old Glory, which is now abolished: but such as
becomes the New Earth, and receives an immense Addition by their Entrance into
the City.

V. 26. And they shall bring the glory of the nations into it -- It seems a
select Part of each Nation; that is, all which can contribute to make this City
honorable and glorious shall be found in it; as if all that ^as rich and
precious throughout the World, was brought into one City.

V. 27. Common -- That is, unholy, but th^se who are written in the Lamb's book
of life -- True, holy, persevering Believers. This Blessedness is enjoyed by
those only, and as such they are registered among them, who are to inherit
eternal Life.

XXII.
And he showed me a river of the water of life clear as crystal, proceeding out
of the throne of God and of the Lamb. is the tree of life, bearing twelve sorts
of fruits, yielding its fruit every month, and the leaves of the tree are for
the healing of the nations. And there shall be no more curse; shall be on their
foreheads.

And he said to me, are faithful and true: the Lord, the God of the spirits of
the prophets has sent his angel, to show his servants the things which must be
done shortly. is he that keeps the words of the prophecy of this book. it was
I John, who heard and saw these things; and when I had heard and seen, I fell
down to worship at the feet of the angel who showed me these things. thou do it
not: I am thy fellow servants, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them who
keep the sayings of this book; is with me, to render to every one as his work
shall be.

Happy are they that do his commandments, are dogs, and sorcerers, and
whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and every one that loves and
makes a lie.

I Jesus have sent my angel to testify to you,

I testify to every one that hears the words of the prophecy of this book,
GOD shall add to him the plagues that are written in this book.

He that testifies these things says,

The grace of the Lord Jesus be with all.

Chap. xxii.
ver. 1. And he showed me a river of the water of life -- The ever-fresh and
fruitful inffluence of the Holy Ghost. See Ezekiel. xlvii. 1 -- 12. where also the
Trees are mentioned which bear fruit every month, that is, perpetually,
proceeding out of the throne of GOD and of the Lamb, All that the Father has,
says the Son of GOD, is mine -- Even the Throne of his Glory.

V. 2. In the midst of the street -- Here is the Paradise of GOD, mentioned chapter
ii. 7. is the tree of life Not one Tree only but many, every mouth -- That is,
in inexpressible Abundance. The Variety likewise, as well as the Abundance of
the Fruits of the Spirit, may be intimated thereby; And the leaves are for the
healing of the nations -- For the continuing their Health, not the restoring
it; for no Sickness is there.

V. 3. And there shall be no more curse -- But pure Life and Blessing. Every
Effect of the Displeasure of GOD for Sin being now totally removed, but the
throne of GOD and the Lamb shall be in it -- That is, the glorious Presence and
Reign of GOD, and his servants -- The highest Honor in the Universe, shall
worship him -- The noblest Employment.

V. 4. And shall see his face -- Which was not granted to Moses. They shall
have the nearest Access to, and thence the highest Resemblance of him. This is
the highest Expression, in the Language of Scripture, to denote the most
perfect Happiness of the heavenly State, 1 John iii. 2. And his name shall be
on their foreheads -- Each of them shall be openly acknowledged as GOD's own
Property: And his glorious Nature most visibly shine forth in them had they
shall (...) -- But who are the Subjects of these Kings? the other Inhabita^ of
the New Farth. For there must needs be an everlasting Difference (...) those
who when on Earth excelled in Virtue, and those comparatively slothful and
unprofitable Servants, who were just saved as by Fire. The Kingdom of GOD is
taken by Force. But the Prize is worth all the Labor. Whatever of high,
lovely, or excellent is in all the Monarchies of the Earth, is all tog^ (...)
not a Grain of Dust, compared to the Glory of the Children of GOD. GOD is not
ashamed to be called their GOD, for whom he has prepared this City. But who
shall come up into this holy Place? They who keep his commandments, ver. 14.

V. 5. And they shall reign for ever and ever -- What Encouragement is this to
the Patience and Faithfulness of the Saints? That whatever their Sufferings
are, they will work out for them an eternal weight of glory. Thus ends the
Doctrine of this Revelation, in the everlasting Happiness of all the Faithful.
The mysterious Ways of Providence are cleared up, and all Things issue in an
eternal Sabbath, an everlasting State of perfect Peace and Happiness, reserved
for all who endure to the End.

V. 6. And be said to me -- Here begins the Conclusion of the Book, exactly
agreeing with the Introduction (particularly ver. 6, 7, 10. with chapter i. 1, 3.)
and giving Light to the whole Book, as this Book does to the whole Scripture.
These sayings are faithful and true -- All the Things which you have heard and
seen shall be faithfully accomplished in their Order, and are infallibly true.
The Lord, the GOD of the holy prophets -- Who inspired and authorized them of
old, has (...) his angel, to show his servants -- By thee, the things which
must be done shortly -- which will begin to be performed immediately.

V. 7. Behold, I come quickly -- Says our Lord himself; to accomplish these
Things, happy is he that keeps -- Without adding or diminishing (ver. 18,
19.) the words of this book.

V. 8. I fell down to worship at the feet of the angel -- The very same Words
which occur chapter xix. 10. The Reproof of the Angel likewise, See thou do it not;
for I am thy fellow servants, is expressed in the ver^ (...) Terms as before.
May it not be the very same Incident, which is here related again? Is not this
far more probable, than that the Apostle should commit a Fault again, of which
he had been so solemnly warned before?

V. 9. See, thou do it not -- The Expression in the Original is short and
eliptical, as is usual in showing vehement Aversion.

V. 10. And he says to me -- After a little Pause, Seal not the sayings of
this book -- Conceal them not, like the Things that are sealed up. The time is
nigh, wherein they shall begin to take Place.

V. 11. He that is unrighteous -- As if he had said, The final Judgment is at
hand; after which the Condition of all Mankind will admit of no Change for
ever. Unrighteous -- Unjustified, filthy -- Unsanctified, unholy.

V. 12. I, Jesus Christ, come quickly -- To judge the World, and my reward is
with me -- The Rewards which I assign both to the Righteous and the Wicked are
given at my Coming, to give to every man according as his work -- His whole
inward and outward Behavior shall be.

V. 13. I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last -- Who exist from
everlasting to everlasting. How clear, incontestable a Proof, does our Lord
here give of his Divine Glory?

V. 14. Happy are they that do his commandments -- His, who says. I come. He
speaks of himself, that they may have right -- (...) his ^ it. When Adam broke
his Commandment, he was driven from we tree of life. They who keep his
Commandments, shall eat thereof.

V. 15. Without are dogs -- The Sentence in the Original is abrupt, as
expressing Abhorrence. The Gates are ever open; but not for dogs: fierce, and
rapacious men.

V. 16. I Jesus have sent my angel to testify these things -- Primarily to you,
the seven Angels of the Churches; then to those Churches, and afterward to all
other Churches in succeeding Ages. I, as GOD, am the root and source of David's
Family and Kingdom; as Man, am descended from his Loins. I am the star out of
Jacob (Number. xxiv. 17.) like the bright morning star, who put an end to the
Night of Ignorance, Sin, and Sorrow, and usher in an eternal Day of Light,
Purity, and Joy.

V. 17. The Spirit and the Bride -- The Spirit of Adoption in the Bride, in the
Heart of every true Believer, say, with earnest Desire and Expectation, Come,
and accomplish all the Words of this Prophecy, and let him that thirsts, come
-- Here they also who are farther off are invited; and whosoever will, let him
take the water of life -- He may partake of my spiritual and unspeakable
Blessings, as freely as he makes use of the most common Refreshments; as freely
as he drinks of the running Stream.

V. 18. I testify to every one, etc. From the Fullness of his Heart the Apostle
(...) this Testimony, this weighty Admonition, not only to the Churches of
Asia, but to all who should ever hear this Book. He that adds, all the Plagues
shall be added to him: he that takes from it, all the Blessings shall be taken
from him. And doubtless this Guilt is incurred by all those, who lay Hindrances
in the Way of the Faithful, which prevent them from hearing their LORD's I
come, and answering, Come, Lord Jesus. This may likewise be considered as an
awful Sanction, given to the whole New Testament; in like Manner as Moses
guarded the Law, ( Deuteronomy. iv. 2. and xii. 32. and as GOD himself did ( Mal. iv.
4.) in closing the Canon of the Old Testament.

V. 19. I testify to every one, etc. From the Fullness of his Heart the Apostle
(...) this Testimony, this weighty Admonition, not only to the Churches of
Asia, but to all who should ever hear this Book. He that adds, all the Plagues
shall be added to him: he that takes from it, all the Blessings shall be taken
from him. And doubtless this Guilt is incurred by all those, who lay Hindrances
in the Way of the Faithful, which prevent them from hearing their LORD's I
come, and answering, Come, Lord Jesus. This may likewise be considered as an
awful Sanction, given to the whole New Testament; in like Manner as Moses
guarded the Law, ( Deuteronomy. iv. 2. and xii. 32. and as GOD himself did ( Mal. iv.
4.) in closing the Canon of the Old Testament.

V. 20. He that testifies these things -- Even all that is contained in this
Book, says, for the Encouragement of the Church in all her Afflictions, Yea --
Answering the Call of the Spirit and the Bride, I come quickly: to destroy all
her Enemies, and establish her in a State of perfect and everlasting Happiness.
The Apostle expresses his earnest Desire and Hope of this, by answering, Amen:
(...) Lord Jesus!

V. 21. The grace -- The free Love of the Lord Jesus, and all its Fruits, be
with all who thus long for his appearing!

It may be proper to subjoin here a short View of the whole Contents of this
Book.
In the Year of the World, 3940. Jesus Christ is born, three Years before the
common Computation. In that which is vulgarly called, the Thirtieth Year of our
Lord, Jesus Christ dies: rises: ascends. A. D. 90. The Revelation is given: the
Coming of our Lord is declared to the seven Churches in Asia, and their Angels.
Rev. i. ii. iii. 97, 98. The seven seals are opened, and under the fifth the
Chronos is declared. C. iv. -- vi. (...) Trumpets are given to the seven
Angels, C. vii. viii. Century, 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, the Trumpet of the 1st, 2d,
3d, 4th Angel, C. viii. 5^ -- 589 The first Woe, Chapter ix. 589 -- 634 The Interval
after the first Woe, Chapter ix. 634 -- 840 The second Woe, Chapter ix. 800 The Beginning
of the Non-chronos: many Kings, Chapter ix. x. 840 -- 947 The Interval after the
second Woe, Chapter ix. x. 847 -- 1521 The 1260 Days of the Woman, after she had
brought forth the Man-child, Chapter xii. 6. 947 -- 1836 The third Woe, ver. 12.
1058 -- 1836 The Time, Times, and half a Time, and within that Period, the
Beast, his forty-two Months, his Number 666, to Chapter xiii. 5. 1209 War with the
Saints: the End of the Chronos, v. 7. 1614 An everlasting Gospel promulged, C.
xiv. 6. 1810 The End of the forty-two Months of the Beast; after which, and the
pouring out of the Phials, he is not, and Babylon reigns Queen, C. xv. xvi.
1810 The End of the forty-two Months of the Beast; after which, and the pouring
out of the Phials, he is not, and Babylon reigns Queen, C. xv. xvi. 1832 The
Beast ascends from the bottomless Pit, C. xvii. xviii. 1836 The End of the
Non-chronos, and of the many Kings; the fulfilling of the Word, and of the
Mystery of GOD; the Repentance of the Survivors in the great City: the End of
the little Time, and of the three Times and an half: the Destruction of the
Beast: the Imprisonment of Satan, C. xix. xx. Afterward The loosing of Satan
for a small Time; the Beginning of the 1000 Years Reign of the Saints; the End
of the small Time, C. xx. The End of the World; all Things new, C. xx. xxii.

(...) from the Time of St. John's being (...), down to the present Time, may,
according to the chief Incidents mentioned in the Revelation, be distinguished
thus: Age II. The Destruction of the Jews by Adrian, C. viii. ver. 7. III. The
Inroads of the barbarous Nations, ver. 8. IV. The Arian Bitterness, ver. 10. V.
The End of the Western Empire, ver. 12. VI. The Jews tormented in Persia, C.
ix. 1. VII. The Saracen Cavalry, ver. 13. VIII. Many Kings, C. x. 11. IX. The
Ruler of the Nations born, C. xii. 5. X. The third Woe, ver. 12. XI. The Ascent
of the Beast out of the Sea, C. xiii. 1. XII. Power given to the Beast, ver. 5.
XIII. War with the Saints, ver. 7. XIV. The Middle of the third Woe, XV. The
Beast in the midst of his Strength, XVI. The Reformation; the Woman better fed,
XVII. An everlasting Gospel promulged, C. xiv. 6. XVIII. The Worship of the
Beast and of his Image, ver. 9.

O GOD, whatsoever stands or falls, stands or falls by thy Judgment. Defend thy
own Truth. Have Mercy on me and my Readers! To thee be Glory for ever!


