MR. WILLIAMS' Farewell-Sermons.

TWO SERMONS, DELIVERED AT THE FIRST PARISH IN METHUEN, AUGUST 21, 1791, BY THE
REVEREND SIMON FINLEY WILLIAMS, B. A. OCCASIONED BY HIS DISMISSION FROM THAT
PEOPLE. PUBLISHED BY DESIRE OF MANY OF THE HEARERS.

Can two walk together, except they be agreed! PROPHET AMOS. NEWBURYPORT:
PRINTED BY JOHN MYCALL. 1791.

SERMON I.
ACTS XX. 29, 30, 31. For I know this, that after my departing sball grievous
wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock.

Also of your own selves sball men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw
away disciples after them.

Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years. I ceasal not
to warn every one night and day with tears.


SAINT Paul was eminent for serving the Church of Christ, not only by his
doctrine, but also, by establishing Churches in order, and appointing proper
officers to take the charge and care of them; insomuch that he styles himself a
spiritual Father; as when writing to the Corinthians, I Cor. iv. 14, 15. -- "As
my beloved sons, I warn you, for though you have ten thousand instructors in
Christ, yet ye have not many Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you
through the gospel." But, having so great a charge, it was not possible for him
to continue constantly at one place, neither was it for the welfare of Christ's
kingdom that he should. He preached the kingdom of God, both to Jews and
Gentiles, and held forth the same God, and way of salvation, to both, decaring
it was one God who should justify the circumcision by faith, and the
uncircumcision through faith; and that his doctrines had no tendency to make
void the law, but to establish the law. Romans iii.

PAUL is now, by our text, discharging one part of his ministry to the Church
at Ephesus; having called the Elders together, and informed them that he was
about to leave them, for some weighty reasons, as he says, I go bound to
Jerusalem: Before he departs, he gives to the pastors, and doubtless to the
people, some of the best advice; reminding them, what his life and doctrine had
been among them; and also the many trials and temptations which had befallon
him by the lying in wait of the Jews; by the uneasiness and dissimulation of
some, who were inimical to the doctrines he delivered.

BUT that which was the Apostle's support, must be that which will afford
comfort to all his followers; I mean the sweet approbation of conscience, that
in simplicity and Godly sincerity, he had his conversation among them,
discharged the duty incumbent on him, to the best of his knowledge and ability,
testifying daily repentance toward God, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ:
Thus, by his sincere and impartial dealings in the great things of Christ's
kingdom, that not only God and his own conscience acquit him, but even they
themselves, that is, the people among whom he had been preaching, were
witnesses, that he was pure from the blood of all men. He had so plainly
delivered to them the counsel of God, and pressed the necessity of
gospel-obedience on their consciences, that should they never see him more, in
the body, at judgment they could not say, they were not sufficiently warned of
those things. I know that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom
of God, shall see my face no more: Wherefore, I take you to record this day,
that I am pure from the blood of all men, for i have not shunned to declare to
you all the counsel of God. Though he had done this, he could not leave them
'till he had strictly charged them to great care and watchfulness: Being fully
acquainted with the state and dangers to which they were exposed, caused him to
speak with the greatest confidence -- " I know this, that after my departing,
shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock." He was so
fully acquainted with the temper of that people, and the many enemies which
surrounded them, who, by every artful stratagem, entering among them, under the
appearance of friends, but not having friendly intents, would be grievous
wolves, who would not spare the flock, and that they were not only exposed to
wolves from without, but from the best of his knowledge, some of their worst
enemies should arise from among themselves, who would gain a party by speaking
perverse things.

This a melancholy truth, that the worst enemies of Zion, will always have some
followers and that such take the opportunity to work, when the Church is in the
weakest condition, when the watchman is off the walls. This we find has been
the method in which the great enemy of man has made in roads upon Zion, in
various ages; that is, when a people were left destitute of a pastor:
Notwithstanding we may be sensible, that this will really be the case, yet
there may be reasons sufficient to justify a separation between a pastor and
people: For, as two cannot walk together except they be agreed -- Amos. iii. 3.
-- If unhappy difficulties once take place' so as to destroy that love which is
the band of union, that notwithstanding the report may be given by the
watchman, and yet the people will not take the alarm; such cannot in the least
be benefited by all his watchfulness and care; but often are more apt, by a
spirit of resentment, to fall away with those who would zealously affect them,
but not well.

As this, Sirs, is the melancholy state of this Church and people, that you are
destitute of a pastor's care, the grounds of our separation being so well
known, it would be untimely to mention them at present; permit me to say with
the Apostle, though I pretend not with that degree of assurance -- " that I
know this, that after my departing, shall grievous wolves enter in among you,
not sparing the flock." As the Apostle had a knowledge that this had been the
case in many instances, and from the state and temper of the Church at Ephesus,
he was persuaded this would be the case with them: I have no other way to
account for my fears, on this affair, but by the like way of argument, that the
like difficulties, which I pray a compassinate God to avert -- will attend you
in your present broken state. You are not only in danger in common with the
rest of the Churches, to the assaults of the sower of sedition, but you are in
an uncommon danger, from many unhappy circumstances. But as ye, among whom I
have been preaching the kingdom of God, will see my face no more as your
minister, I still hope you will not turn a deaf ear to these my last addresses;
while I shall I. ATTEMPT to show that this is the dangerous situation of a
people on the removal of their pastor, to wit, exposed to grievous wolves. --
And, II. IN imitation of the Apostle, exhort all to watchfulness and
remembrance.


First. THAT they are exposed to grievous wolves.

FROM the first establishment of religion, Zion has ever had her enemies; the
great adversary, like a roaring lion, goes about seeking whom he may destroy:
He ranged paradise, having leaped the peaceful walls, till he finds his prey;
and man, poor innocent man, becomes a victim to his rage and malice, but thanks
be to Heaven, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, engages for man, appears as his
Deliverer, and rescues him from the power of the infernal prince: And,
notwithstanding, by the atonement of the Son of God, the Church is redeemed
from her enemies; and, by virtue of his engagements with the Father, the Father
has engaged to raise up a Church, and that the gates of hell shall not finally
prevail against it; yet the adversary is not so closely confined, but that the
Church is subject to receive from his spite grievous wounds, which may all be
consistent with that divine sentence against the serpent, Genesis iii. 15 -- I
will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed:
It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. These bruises on the
heel, the Church has in all ages received. For wise ends satan is permitted to
range at certain limits, and though he may, by guile, bring mortals into the
most deplorable circumstances, yet, as he had no power to compel the first
happy pair to sin, neither has he now: Hence says St. John 1. iv.4, -- Greater
is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. Thus he is styled the
tempter -- 1 These. iii. 5. -- because his warfare is carried on by guile and
stratagem; knowing that by open violence and force of arms, he never can
greatly strengthen his party, or weaken the Church of Christ. Our spiritual
enemies are ever on their watch, and are never more careful, than when men are
careless, and off their guard -- Mat. xiii. 25 -- while men slept, his enemy
came and sowed tares, and the servants of the householder came, and said unto
him, Sir, did not thou sow good seed in thy field? From whence then has it
tares? And he said to them, an enemy has done this. This parable is opened by
our Savious, wherein the tares are said to be the children of the wicked one,
who were influenced to all impiety, and to injure the wheat, that is, God's
children, and that these were sent forth by their father, the prince of
darkness.

WHEN the watchmen of Zion stand on the walls attentive to the approach of the
enemy, and the people attentively waiting for their alarm, they are then not
only in the way, in which they may expect the special aids of Heaven, but are
more fitly prepared by union of force, to withstand the fiery assaults, and
fight, with the whole armor of God: But when, either the people grow
inattentive to the call, or the watchman is removed from the tower, satan
instantly seizes the opportunity, and marches in the swiftness of his might,
with all his attendants, to waste and destroy: His watchfulness to evil, we may
see described Rev. xii. -- where he is represented as the red dragon, standing
before the woman, ready to be delivered of the manchild, to devour the child as
soon as it was born. Moses is only absent for a short time, being on the mount
with God, and the adversary seizes that opportunity, to urge the people on to
idolatry; that the Lord says to Moses, "Go get thee down, for thy people which
thou broughtest up out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves, they
have turned aside quickly out of the way -- Exodus xxxii.

IN like manner, when Israel is represented as being in a broken state, and
guilty of high immoralities, this reason is given, as in Judges xvii. 6. -- In
those days there was no king in Israel, and every man did that which was right
in his own eyes -- they were destitute of any head and leader; and while this
was the case the religious institutions were mostly thrown aside; various
irregular modes and customs of worship took place, as each one fancied: This,
doubtless, made Micah so gladly receive the Levite of Beth-lebem-judab, and say
to him, dwell with me, and be to me a father, and a priest -- Judges xvii.

BUT further, we find that not only satan him. self has been influencing the
hearts of men to fall away from their profession: But even of ourselves have
men arisen speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them; that
false Christ's and false prophets have arisen, to do his service. For as there
were false prophets under the old testament, who labored against the prophets
of God; so, says he Divine Savior, Mat. xxiv. 24. -- There shall arise false
Christ's, and behold, I have told you before. -- So he tells us, Mat. vii. 15.
-- They will come in sheep's clothing, but inwardly be ravening wolves, but ye
shall know them by their fruits. This was the voice, not only of the Lord
himself, but of his disciples also -- 2 Timothy iii. -- In the last days, perilous
times shall come; men shall come forth, having a form of godliness, but denying
the power, who will creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with
diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth.

SUCH as these are actually now in the world, and in what danger do people
stand of being seduced by them, when brought into a broken state; such are the
societies they will frequent, and this is the time they will work; by an
extraordinary appearance of godliness steel the affections, creep into the
heart, and so lead away the simple, and the unguarded. Divisions are the
loudest calls for these wolves to come and seize the prey; the horrid cries of
contention is music to their ears; and when the members are at variance, they
will more readily gain the affections of some, by espousing their cause: --
Hence said Saint Paul, Gal. iv. 17. -- They zealously affect you, but not well;
who would depend on the fond appearance of a wolf? No more dependence is to be
put on those who enter into the fold of Christ, but not by the door, they sow
the seeds of all sedition among a people.

It Is too much the unhappy case, that, when a society gets thus divided, every
one as it were, appears to have some particular notions of their own; and they
will have no one for their minister, unless he is in every thing of their mind,
even if all the rest are agreed in him: The spirit of division is often a
spirit of resentment, and to answer some selfish view; some paying no regard to
the general good and peace, pay not the least attention to purity of doctrine,
or conformity of manners, but open the door with their own hands, to introduce
the wolf among their tender lambs.

THIS has an immediate tendency to set up parties and when strength is divided,
the largest body becomes weak; and the society which, while united, might have
stood in defense of pure religion, now becomes a receptacle of all religions,
sects, parties and inconsistencies, yea, a source of all confusion and impiety;
and what sport is this, my dear Sirs, to the enemy of all good!

THIS was, in some measure, for a while, the state of Corinth, while one said,
I am of Paul, I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ; but says the
Apostle is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you, or were ye baptized in
the name of Paul? I Cor. i. 13, 14. -- for which reason he says they are yet
carnal.

ON the removal of a minister, the stated order of worship, among that people,
in some measure ceases, and though they have from time to time, various
dispensers of the word, yet of how large a part are they entirely destitute?
God's house is forsaken -- his Sabbaths are forgotten -- his precepts are
presently unknown, and all holy exercise becomes a burden -- and thus to
division will be coupled the most fatal ignorance, which is ever an inlet to
all error: Men, who are the least qualified to be judges of doctrine, will
arise up, and be teachers, as the text says, "speaking perverse things;" he
will have his disciples, inculcate things they understand not themselves, and
so will ignorantly be scattering poison on the table before their tender
offspring: It behooves every scribe in the kingdom of God, to be well
instructed, who can bring from his treasure things new and old -- Mat. xiii. 15.

ON the removal of the gospel from the Jews, how great and many were the errors
and sins into which they fell, insomuch that the divine Immanuel weeps over
their situation, as deplorable, when their house was to be left desolate --
Luke xix. 22. -- For the days shall come upon thee that thine enemy shall cast
a trench about thee, and compass thee, and keep thee in on every side: Though
this may not be the unhappy case, with all societies thus divided, yet they are
exposed to it, by the daily assaults of surrounding enemies; neither need we
suppose there is no danger of being disturbed by these seducers -- there are
some in almost every society, who are qualified for, and disposed to it; who
pay no attention to any principles; others who are possessed of erroneous ones
themselves; and each of these may be strongly engaged to bring in vice and
ruin: Therefore we have from Saint John I. iv. I. this exhortation: Beloved,
believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, and see whether they are of God,
because many false prophets are gone out into the world. -- Which brings me,

Secondly. In imitation of the Apostle, to exhort all to watchfulness and
remembrance. --

WATCH and remember, I ceased not to warn you against both divisions and errors
-- both have the most dangerous tendency; division opens the door for error,
and error for division: Hence Paul advises, that there should be no schism in
the body -- I Cor. 12. -- but that the members should have the same care one
for another; and whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it. How
many and sharp were the reproofs the Apostle gave against such divisions, and
how did he give charge to observe the causes of them. Romans xvi. 17. -- Now I
beseech you brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to
the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. Those who once cause
divisions, people are much to blame if they are deceived by them a second time;
there should a mark be set on such, as the Lord set a mark on Cain, when he
caused blood and division in the first church and family on earth.

PERSONS who once divide a people, know not where it will end. to them, says
Saint Jude, for they have gone in the way of Cain; they are to be so marked,
that they (...) never have an opportunity to do the like again for they serve
not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by their good words and
(...) speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. Schismatics are often
described this way; one who is of a soft, smooth, insinuating turn, can do
infinitely more damage, than he who is all fury and spite; the latter
presently betrays himself, and falls into contempt; while the former, lies
undiscovered -- his voice appears as harmony, a found of peace -- his very
appearance, as it were, speaks friendship; and thus he deceives us, like the
fly Adder, that approaches us insensibly -- whereas the open, furious serpent,
is often instantly slain in his first attacks. The wise man, who well knew the
disguises of the human heart, gives us this advice -- Prove. xxvi. 24, 25. -- He
that hates, dissembleth with his lips, and lays up deceit within him, when
he speaks fair, believe him not -- for there are seven abominations in his
heart. Thus the adulterous woman, Prove. vii. betrayed the young man void of
understanding, with her much fair speeches, she caused him to yield, with the
flattering of her lips she forced him: -- Of such, a people in an unsettled
state, are in great danger. But watch, Sirs, you cannot observe them, unless
you do -- and remember I ceased not to warn you.

SUCH, in part, is the character of the wolves mentioned in our text. Our
Savior tells us, they will come in sheep's clothing: What creature is
esteemed so innocent, so harmless, as the sheep: Hence believers are called
sheep, and Christ's tender ones are called his lambs: Now how dangerous is it,
when wolves put on this appearance; that is, when fly, subtle men, to gain a
party, will appear in God's Church, as followers of the meek and lowly Jesus,
but at the same time, are of corrupt doctrine, impure hearts, and profane
lives; but, blessed be God, our Divine Jesus has given us a mark whereby to
know them -- by their fruits -- Mat. vii. 16.

NOTWITHSTANDING this is the case, that by exact and serious observation, they
may be known, yet how many are so deceived by them, as to take from them the
greatest errors and inconsistencies in doctrine, and also to put up with the
grossest immoralities in their conduct; many sad instances in this and the
neighboring States, evince the truth of this: But are such the followers of
Christ? Is this the effects of that wisdom which comes from above, and is first
pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, without hypocrisy -- James iii. 17.

THERE is great danger of your being imposed upon by men of corrupt doctrine*
to avoid this, take the Revelation of God for your standard. Isa. viii. 20. --
To the law and the testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them. He who departs from the revealed will of
God, and is ever-meddling in the secret things of Heaven, cannot bring any
thing of importance to your view, but betrays his ignorance. God has plainly
told us by revelation, who they are, who shall inhabit his holy hill; he has
described the temper of their heart, and the manner of their life, and that,
whosoever will, may come and partake of the waters of life freely. But if any
are so presumptuous as to pass by this, and say the secret will of God is
otherwise -- which has determined all our states, tempers and actions, before
ever the mountains were brought forth, or the foundations of the earth were
laid; that the secret decree of Heaven, has, without any respect to virtue or
vice, from all eternity, immutably fixed the state of all mankind, and that he,
whom Heaven has decreed, must, from a necessity of action, be holy of unholy;
and that, though a Savior is provided, at infinite cost, and offered to all
men, and they as earnestly requested by the revelation of God, to accept by
faith and repentance, declaring that he who believes shall be saved; but he who
believes not shall be damned; yet, that the secret decree of Deity has put a
fatal bar in the way, that only a few can accept; for this was his intentions,
that only a few should be benefited by that great sacrifice. Is not this to
make all the offers, promises, invitations, exhortations and threatenings of
Heaven, a piece of imposition? Yea, what better does it represent them, than a
solemn piece of mockery!

THE revealed will of Deity, is for our instruction. Romans xv. 4. -- Whatsoever
things were written aforetime, were written for our learning: But O the depth
of the riches, both of the knowledge and wisdom of God? how unsearchable are
his judgments, and his ways past finding out! Who then, of mortals, has known
the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor, that they should pretend
to know his secret will or decree!

THAT doctrine, which represents God as the author of all sin, though perhaps
that term may be denied, and they use the term "efficient cause of all moral
evil;" and that sin is for his glory -- this, in my opinion, falls but little,
if any thing, short of blasphemy: When the Lord says of sin, O do not this
abominable thing that I hate, Jer. xiiv. 4. -- And will God work or produce
that in us which he hates, which his soul loathes, and which he declares is the
only cause of eternal damnation. Thou are not a God that has pleasure in
wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee -- thou hate all workers of
iniquity -- 5th Psalm.

THAT doctrine, which has a tendency to destroy the atonement of the Lord Jesus
Christ, denying the imputation of guilt and righteousness, has an immediate
tendency to rip up the covenant of grace, and represent the sacrifice of the
Messiah, as a piece of needless cruelty in God the Father, and not a
manifestation of his love: Whereas Christ says, John iii. -- God so loved the
world, as to give up his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him,
should not perish, but have everlasting life; and that God sent not his Son
into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be
saved; and to effect this, he says, I lay down my life for the sheep, John x.
16. Any who discourage your attendance on the means of grace, certainly have a
tendency to destroy the flock of God, and open the door to all licentiousness,
they will undoubtedly cause divisions and endless debates among you.

WATCH, therefore, I earnestly entreat you, and remember I ceased not to warn
you against these things; and, though many difficulties may have arisen to me
on this very account, yet they shake not my stedfastness; none of these things
move me, neither count I my life dear to me, if so be that I may finish my
course with joy. I am not ashamed of that gospel which I have preached unto
you; I have not knowingly kept back any thing that was profitable to you, but
have taught you publicly, and from house to house, repentance toward God, and
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ: I have often, and now tell you that faith, if
not coupled with love, is vain: and repentance, if not followed with works meet
for repentance, is ineffectual; for our faith must be that which purifies and
enlarges the heart -- and our repentance, be that which reforms the life, that
upon it, we become followers of God as dear children.

BUT watch, and remember I now leave you my last testimony, against those
things of which I have these few Ordained December 13, 1786 -- Dismissed
August, 1791.
years of my ministry, most earnestly warned you; that is, that you be careful
both to principle and practice -- that you take your principles from the gospel
of the Lord Jesus, from the bible of God; and that your practice is in
conformity to the divine law, in imitation of our blessed Redeemer; and that,
in order to be happy with him, it is absolutely necessary you be his friends
and followers here, for without holiness, no man shall see the Lord: That it is
immediately necessary for us to be renewed by the spirit, and not be conformed
to this world, but transformed by the renewing of our mind, that we may prove
what is that good, acceptable and perfect will of God. There are some who would
trouble you, and pervert the gospel of Christ; but if I, or an angel from
Heaven, should preach another gospel to you, let him be accursed -- Gal. i. 8.

WATCH not only their doctrine, but also their manner of entrance: He who comes
not in by the door, but climbs up some other way, the same is a thief and a
robber: To introduce men of infamous characters, and reprobate lives, into the
sacred order, is introducing an enemy to wound the Lord Jesus, in the house of
his friends. Be careful of those who run before they are sent. Be careful of
strangers, who come without a testimony, or with one you know not from whom:
How many wounds has religion received by such, and how has the Church of God
been made to bleed and stagger, by reason of men being taken from the plough,
and put immediately into the desk -- which now grows fashionable! Not that I
would be understood as speaking degrading of that necessary order of honest
husbandmen, but against their leaving that employment, and without further
qualifications than is necessary for that calling, that even the most
unlearned, the most unqualified of them, should assume to treat in the great
things of Zion, not considering, that in scripture, there are things hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest to their
destruction.

OUR Apostle may have reference to such, when he says, Of your own selves also
shall men arise, speaking perverse things, when some will start up notions from
their own head, and by daily conversing upon them, with the most weak and
simple, they will have disciples, and error will spread. Thus in I Kings, xii.
it is charged as sin against Jeroboam, that he made priests of the lowest of
the people, which were not of the sons of Levi, and this thing became sin to
the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face
of the earth."

How careful should people be concerning those who enter among them, as
dispensers of the word: Look, Fathers, I entreat you; yea, I charge you, in the
name of the living God, see who they are who teach, and what are the doctrines
held forth to your rising offspring, to those tender babes, which are just
rising up, and with whom I once expected to live, and with whom I wished to die.

YOUR charge and care is now doubled, strive together for the faith of the
gospel: The gospel bears you a precious treasure, but if you part with this,
where are you? -- where are your offspring? -- where are your souls? If through
your neglect, posterity is defrauded of this precious legacy from Heaven, how
can you stand before the bar of an impartial God, and answer for such injustice
done to a suffering world! Heaven, with watchful eyes, looks to your goings,
and stands ready to be your counselor, if sought to: The treasury above is
open, from whence you may receive all needful supply.

STAND fast in the Lord, dearly beloved, give not up that privilege on which
your Heaven, your all depends, but be valiant for the faith, and careful at the
very first appearance of error, for a little leaven will presently leaven the
whole lump.

REMEMBER that you are now in the forest, where there are wolves ranging for
prey, and you know not how near they may be, seeing they can assume the
appearance of the lamb. -- Make no dependence on tales of extraordinary
experiences and enthusiastic revelations; but search the scriptures, and see
whether these things are so. Be not desirous after, nor pleased with novelty;
but stand ye in the ways and see; ask for the old paths, where is the good way
and walk therein, and ye shall find rest to your souls, Isa. vi. 16.

THE Lord has set you a way, an high way, it shall be called a way of
holiness, the unclean shall not pass over it; the wayfaring men, though fools,
shall not err therein." So that if some come, saying to you, contrary to what
you find in this word, lo here is Christ, and lo there is Christ, believe them
not; Christ Jesus is only to be sought and found in his own word and way --
Cant. i. 8. If thou know not, O thou fairest among women, go thy way forth, by
the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy kids beside the Shepherd's tents. --
Learn of him who says, if any man will do his will, he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether he speak of himself.

Now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is
able to build you up, and give you an inheritance among them who are sanctified.

Even so grant, LORD JESUS.

AMEN.
SERMON II.
DELIVERED AFTERNOON, August 21, 1791.
2 COR. xiii. II. Finally, Brethren, farewell; Be perfect, be of good comfort,
be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you.
THE Church at Corinth, was greatly favored by Heaven, with gospel light; it
was, for a long time, favored with the chief of Apostles; one whose greatest
glory and aim was to build them up in holiness, and wished even their
perfection.

BUT, notwithstanding all his care and diligence, he could, by no means,
prevail on some of them, to be such as he earnestly wished, but they would even
stand out, and insist on further proof of his authority, and divine mission;
though, if any man might plead, he was sent from God, to treat in the great
things of Zion, surely saint Paul might, who received his commission in so
extraordinary a manner, as he says, Gal. i. -- I certify to you, Brethren, the
gospel which is preached of me, is not after man, for I neither received of
man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ.

No people ever had more repeated warnings against divisions, than the
Corinthians had from Paul; and these divisions of the most dangerous nature; to
wit, about religion, about the various preachers with which they had been
favored: Some of them having a peculiar attachment to saint Paul, would reject
all others, and even contend with the brethren, if they did not; others were
for Apollos, others for Cephas, and others for Christ: but the Apostle would
have them to know this was nothing but a vain spirit of contention, for each of
them were followers of Christ, and dispensers of his word, and that it was
wrong for them to contend about names or empty titles.

It Is good to be zealously affected in a good cause, and though our religion is
nothing, unless attended with an holy, rational, well-timed, well-governed
zeal, yet the Church of Christ has been caused grievously to bleed, by means of
the zeal even of those who would be her friends. -- For as all are not
qualified to be judges of all religious disputes, they never can do the Church
a greater service than by their entire silence; but when every one will take it
upon them, to be zealous disputants in the holy law, no wonder if various
opinions come forth, and many of them inconsistent and contradictory: Hence
saint James gives this advice -- "Let every man be swift to hear -- flow to
speak -- flow to wrath. -- It Is too frequently the case, the more any who are
zealously attached to their own peculiar notions, the more fixed they will be
by opposition.

RELIGION, which is a plan adopted of infinite wisdom, to unite the hearts of
men, in the worship of the one living and true God, is often turned from its
natural current, and held to be nothing more than the dispute of parties; and,
instead of its answering the great end of its adoption, it is substituted to
the bases ends -- has shed fountains of innocent blood -- rendered a cause of
division and hatred -- a veil to cover the most infamous conduct, but still the
religion of God stands the same, however corrupted in the minds of men, and
however various their opinions; it is not for the saysos of men, to alter truth
in the eye of Deity, or ever to erase any of the divine precepts from the
eternal mind: The same truth which was at first delivered to the saints, will
be found the same at judgment, notwithstanding the various attempts to coin --
'till heaven and earth pass away, one jot or tittle shall in no wise pass from
the law, 'till all be fulfilled -- Mat. v. 18. This law -- this religion, is
but one -- we have but one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God, and Father of
all; and though mortals may differ in sentiment, about various modes and
circumstantials in religion, it may not be unaccountable, according to their
various capacities -- yet a disagreement in the essentials, is dangerous and
gloomy. -- Heaven has drawn the line so plain, that the most essential parts of
the divine precepts are intelligible to every common capacity; and as he who
cannot swim, is safest where the waters are shallow, so weak minds had better
be contented with the knowledge and practice of plain truths; for, perhaps
religion has never more suffered, than by the deep researches of some, who
would spend the whole of their time and talents, in vain endeavors to sathom
and reveal the deep, dark and secret things of God.

REVELATION has long ceased, and saint John, sensible that it contains, and
plainly holds forth, every thing sufficient to make the serious enquirer, the
man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work, closes the sacred
canon -- testifying to every man that hears the words of the prophecy of this
book. If any man shall add to these things, God shall add to him the plagues
written in the book; and if any man shall take away from the words of the
prophecy of this book, God shall take away his part out of the book of life,
and out of the holy city, and out of the things written in this book -- Rev.
xxii. So that a departure from the scripture truths of God, will ever be
attended with the most dangerous consequences -- truth cannot be stifled --
error, or heresy, be lifted up, without a hazard of life; and, though some may
think, that disputing about religion, is a sign of religion -- it is so far from
it, that our Lord, and his Apostles, have ever discouraged it, and enjoined,
that foolish and unlearned questions ought to be avoided, knowing that they
gender strifes -- a Tim. ii. 23. -- This the Apostle labors in our text --
that as some in Corinth had spent their time in that way, he feared they had
yet the same mind; he wishes them to take timely warning -- to abandon all
those sins and follies, which had been the cause of division among them, and
that they should be perfect. -- The words are his parting salutation -- as in
the phrase -- Farewell -- or, may it be well and happy with you -- and then
shows them in what their welfare consists -- be perfect -- be of good comfort
-- be of one mind -- live in peace. -- What a golden chain is here! What beauty
appears in every word! And for their encouragement, he annexes this glorious
reward -- and the God of love and peace shall be with you -- with you who thus
live -- as your support -- your guide and minister -- to afford you his grace
-- to conduct you in the way -- to comfort you in trouble -- to defend you from
danger, and to build you up in the knowledge of our God and Savior Jesus
Christ. Let us I. Consider the several expressions in the text, and see their
import. And, II. Enquire into the benefit of adhering to this advice.


First. BE perfect. -- This is, undoubtedly, the perfection of the Church as a
body, the Apostle has reference to; for the Church had become greatly broken,
and divided, not only as some of them were against the Apostle, but this caused
divisions among themselves; he would therefore advise, that every breach of
this nature should be healed; he would have them remain as one perfect body.

A CHURCH, though composed of many members, is but one -- all being parts of
Christ the Head; and as there must be pain in the human frame, if any one
member is out of joint, and if it continues so for any time, the part affected
grows callous, brings on lameness to such a degree, that the whole body feels
the blow; and often, to give relief to the body, a member thus shattered, when
a cure cannot be made, is to be cut off, lest the whole be destroyed: So it is
with the Church, when any one of the members fall away, by continuing in that
broken state, there is danger of a great hardness taking place between that
member and the body, insomuch that the whole Church, by reason of one, all get
into divisions, as if not related -- and, perhaps, nothing will restore peace,
but the most severe methods of discipline; therefore says Paul, I write these
things being absent, lest being present, I should use sharpness; and in like
manner, when writing to the Ephesians, iv. -- that we henceforth be no more
children, tossed to and fro, carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the
sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. --
As love is that which unites a society, this should always be kept pure and
perfect; and when any, by any particular disgust, or because they are not
gratified in every respect, whether in doctrine or government; if they begin to
grow uneasy, let them remember, there are other members in the body beside
themselves, and that they are not to be singled out, as the only one to be
regarded, but the perfection of the whole Church; doctrines are not to be
suited to the humors of men, but men must conform to doctrine.

Secondly."Be of good comfort." -- Comfort is that which is to be enjoyed by
peace and harmony: Every one who yields obedience to the divine precepts, who
practice the mutual offices, signalize themselves to be true disciples of
Christ, John xiii.35 -- by this shall all men know that you are my disciples,
if ye love one another: -- This must be matter of comfort, when we have this
evidence in our hearts, and so live, that our lives do not contradict our
profession; but let us appear ever so smooth, and make ever such professions of
friendship, yet if we are not reconciled in heart, we cannot have comfort; but
this evil temper, like an inward fever, preys on the heart -- and, as a person
in a fever is ever thirsting, so such persons as vehemently thirst to satisfy
their minds against their fellow creatures, for ever envious of their
happiness, and watchful for their halting, that if by any means, they may have
an opportunity to vent the secret fires of their heart. -- The Apostle would
dissuade against this dreadful temper -- so he would wish them to be comforted
under all the disagreeable scenes of life, under all disappointments and trials
-- he wished them this, more immediately, inasmuch as he was absent from them.
-- His dear friends regretted his absence; he was dear to them as their
Spiritual Father, who had begotten them through the gospel. When God is pleased
to confer any spiritual benefit on us by the instrumentality of any particular
person, we must be void of feeling, if we have not a particular regard for
such, as the gospel enjoins -- 1 Thessalonians v.^ We beseech you, brethren, to know
them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you,
and to esteem them very highly in love, for their work's sake. When we find men
deeply engaged to bring us to the enjoyment of that, which is the great desire
of our souls -- when we lose them, we are apt to be sorrowful. -- This was the
case when Paul parted with the Ephesians at Miletus, in order to go to
Jerusalem -- it was like the parting of a loving pair, coupled by the tenderest
tie -- they all wept sore, and fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him, sorrowing
most of all for the words which he spoke, that they should see his face no more
-- Acts xx. -- And when he came to Cesarea, there were many of his friends to
whom he was dear, yet he could not tarry with them, though they besought him
with tears; and when no arguments would prevail on them to desist, he breaks
forth -- What mean ye to weep and break mine heart, for I am ready not to be
bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. At
such a time as this, people want something to comfort them -- they should
remember they are not parting, for ever to be asunder, and though they see each
other no more in this world, yet this is short, and if they can but take
comfort in God, through the consolations of the Holy Spirit, the hour will
quickly arrive, in which they shall meet in a world free from divisions.

ANY people, on the removal of their pastor, who has been dear to any of them,
should not be comfortless -- remembering they are but men, but pray to the
great Lord of the harvest, that their wants may be supplied; neither should
they bear it ill in their minds against those whom they conceive to be the
means of their loss, but forgive and exhort one another daily, remembering that
at judgment all these things must be accounted for, and that God will do
justice to every one. But says the text,

Thirdly. Be of one mind" -- in the things of religion; for as there is but one
true religion, he would have them all, without exception, to prosess and
practice this. -- They should all have one end in view, God's glory, and their
own salvation; and if they all desired this, that with one accord, they should
seek it together. -- A Church and society assembled together(if they are right)
are a company, all enquiring for, and traveling to Zion; and how vain is it
for persons, traveling together, to fall our by the way, if one takes more
steps than the rest, he must not quarrel with them who advance as fast as
himself, because they don't take just as many steps.

THE desire of the true unity, must center in the glory of God, and the general
good, it should be sought on terms of equity. -- Wherever self is the center of
that union we desire to maintain, and when we would have it accomplished on our
own terms, and every one have a method of his own, this has an immediate
tendency to destroy the whole; to be of one mind, is to be regulated according
to the rules of the gospel. Offenses will come, but woe to him through whom
they come -- Luke xvii. It Is to be feared, he who divides the minds of a
people, little thinks on what he is about, when he is destroying that body for
whom Christ died; he who causes difference of sentiment, unless it is to bring
men from error, lays a foundation for all confusion -- and, to answer some
selfish end, blows up the spark of strife, 'till a final separation takes
place, has matter of infinitely serious consideration. But says the text,

Fourthly. "Live in peace;" free from all those contentions to which you have
been long addicted -- don't quarrel about religion as you have done. --
Romansxii.18. -- If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceable with
all men; with some it is morally impossible to live peaceable, if you have any
thing to do with them; with such be little concerned, always stand ready to do
them a favor; if thine enemy hunger, feed him -- if he thirst, give him to
drink: If we cannot have dealings with a man but to our own disadvantage, and
the disadvantage of society, on the account of his uneasy restles temper, let
him alone; such is the case with busy bodies and tattlers -- note such, and
have no communion with them, that they may be ashamed -- yet count them not as
enemies, but admonish them as brethren. When any are once discovered to be
disturbers of the peace, it is best never to put it in their power to do the
like again -- let them walk alone -- put them into no office -- entrust them
with no services for the society; let them be thus signalized, that if any
enquire why they are so neglected, it may readily be answered, they are
quarrelsome, mischievous, troublesome persons, who wish not to serve the
general good, but their own private interest; this will be the best way to
quell their temper, and bring them over to the love of peace. -- Every one
should strive for peace -- if there is not a general desire for it, it is hard,
it is difficult to obtain it.

2. Show the benefit of adhering to the Apostle's advice. --

First. That such as profess godliness, should live in peace, and the practice
of gospel duties, is the most ready way to have influence over an infidel
world, and bring them to the embraces of christianity, is a granted
proposition; but to extend our views no farther -- this is the strength of
every society -- to be defective in this, is like a defection on the lungs, a
consumption of the whole body is in danger. It is this that stands as a guard
against the assaults of enemies, and when attacked, will enable us to make the
more forcible opposition; hence, says Jesus Christ, Mat.xii.25. -- Every
kingdom divided against itself, is brought to desolation, and every city or
house divided against itself shall not stand* (...) this a matter to be tristed
with? To give up all society -- to let go all religious privileges -- to
abandon all worship of God -- all care for heaven, and all regard to posterity
-- for these things must inevitably go, if, instead of love, there is hatred --
instead of peace, there is strife -- if, instead of one general enquiry for the
way that leads to Zion, nothing is to be heard but vain dispute about empty
terms, and instead of performance of mutual kind offices, there is nothing but
wrath, envy and dissimulation?

DIVISIONS tend to the destruction of all civil and religious privileges: When
persons are enveloped in this confusion, they are actuated by so blind a zeal,
that they finally would sacrifice every thing that is near and dear, rather
than not to gratify and perverse inclination -- though in a few months after,
perhaps, they would regret it, as it were, with tears of blood. The
disadvantages arising from divisions are almost innumerable; it casts such a
stigma on a town, that it discourages persons of sober, quiet and peaceable
lives, from ever gaining a residence in such a place, and all on the account of
a few hasty, unthinking mortals, who, when they begin a quarrel, know not, but
within a few hours, they may be called to the tribunal of a just God.

Love and harmony render any society amiable in the sight of Deity itself, when
built on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ Jesus himself
being the chief corner stone, in whom all the building sitly framed together,
grows up to an holy temple in the Lord -- Ephesians.ii. 20, 21. -- It is this
christian spirit that will make the Church of Christ beautiful as Tirzah --
comely as Jerusalem -- terrible as an army with banners -- amiabel in the eye
of nature -- venerable and terrible to the eyes of malice: When all its members
are animated with one zeal, worshipping the same God, with one heart and voice,
all governed by the same rule, possessed of the same nature, all striving to
build up one interest, all supported by the same hope, all singing one song of
praise -- such a sight as this, is sufficient to penetrate the most infidel,
heart, and force it to say, "surely this is the singer of God." Whatever
specious pretenses men may make about their religion -- one crying up truth,
another holiness, and another order, to justify their envying and strife, that
hereby they may blind men's eyes; what will all this avail, if their actions do
not agree -- for them to have smooth voices, while the poison of asps is under
their tongues; how unlike are they to the true flock of Christ, while they thus
bite and devour each other!

CHRISTIAN peace and harmony is the very life of religion, and he who sights
against it is a murderer -- for whosoever hates his brother, is a murderer, says
saint John; he will cause the holy city to sit solitary, and her that was
famous among the nations, to become as a widow; he will cause the ways of Zion
to mourn, because none come to her solemn feasts; all her gates to be desolate,
her priests to sigh, her virgins to be afflicted, and be in bitterness. -- What
desolations have been made from time to time, in the Church of God, by this
spirit of diffension! By this pastors are removed, and the sheep scattered on
the mountains.

ANY, who are at any times, accessory to such scenes as this, what injustice do
they commit, both on the present and future generations -- by what means can
they repair the damage, or by what arguments justify their conduct? Now, some
of such characters, there have been in the world, it behooves every one to put
the important question, Lord, is it I? Lord, is it I? It is a matter of so deep
a stain, that every guilty conscience must accuse, and if our hearts condemn
us, God is greater than our hearts, and knows all things; but only let men act
sincerely before God, and remember, that for all these things God will brings
us to judgment.

As you, Sirs, are brought into this broken state, by many unhappy
circumstances, remember, I beseech you, that we are all in danger of being
called in question for this day's uproar, there being no real cause whereby we
may give an account of this confusion -- Heaven, with watchful eyes, has seen
the whole, and a just God has impartially noted each one's conduct; all this
trouble would not have fallen upon Israel, unless there was an Achan in the
camp.

BUT, as we must now part, for the last time bear with me, perhaps we shall
never meet again, till we all meet with an assembled universe, being cited to
appear by the angel of God.

AFTER all I have received from some of you, think not that I am become your
enemy. -- No, Sirs, heaven forbid. -- I stand your friend, and forgive the
whole; and as I have often appeared with you in joint request before the Lord,
you do now, and ever shall, share in my servent intercessions at the throne of
grace -- and I pray God, that nothing may be laid to your charge.

You know how there is a division among the people at this time, and inasmuch
as this is the cause for which I must this day bid you a long farewell, suffer
me to address myself to each of you in this respect.

AND first, to you who have long appeared dissatisfied, Those dissatisfied,
were the minority of the parish, whose names may any time be seen, by applying
to the author, who has them as they were taken at the last parish-meeting, on
the subject, by years and nays.
and at this time have, till the last rejected all thoughts and offers of peace
with me, it I should stay with you: From what view you have acted, God and your
own consciences know best -- or by what arguments can you make it appear, you
have acted the part enjoined in the text.

WHETHER you have acted from a sincere view to the public good, or from some
selfish considerations, driven forward by the force of prejudice, these are
things, Sirs, which will be determined in a lawful assembly. -- I have ever
been with you in plainness of speech -- and have not, as opportunity served,
shunned to declare to you, the whole counsel of God; and in faithfulness to my
Master, and your own souls, have warned you against error and sedition, and
wherein I have wearied thee, testify against me, and to my God I must answer
for it; whether on the most serious search of heart, your consciences will not
accuse some of you for having grossly departed from the spirit of our text, and
by these means have proved a stumbling block and trap to others, blinding the
eyes of them who would wish to see, and stopped the ears of them who would
hear; or whether you can so have the approving will of heaven, as to say to you
for this conduct, Well done good and faithful servants; these are questions;
which time will clear up, and God at judgment decide; but remember, we are all
bound on for his tribunal, and how quickly shall we arrive! And shall this
division erase from your minds all the solemn truths I have endeavored, with
study and sweat, to press upon you: Think not that I will accuse you to the
Father, yet we must be witnesses for God; and all the warnings against vice and
error -- all the invitations to Jesus -- all the exhortations, for you to
comply with the calls and offers of the gospel, stand recorded; if you forget
them, and depart from them, at the resurrection of the just, you will see the
weight of them; but if you have profited, let me exhort you to press forward,
till the full accomplishment of your warfare on earth, and by acting sincerely
with God, your own souls, and your fellow-men, may you at last obtain a
residence in the regions of peace and eternal joy.

BUT, as many of you as have been satisfied under my ministry, and must now
give up that which you esteemed a privilege, let me exhort you to be of good
comfort; if you lament your disappointment, and shudder at the thought of being
as sheep without a shepherd, and grieve that your offspring should, in so great
a measure, be deprived of the benefits of the gospel, I trust my God will
supply all your need, according to his riches in glory by Jesus Christ: Look to
him who is the great Shepherd: It was a but a short time, beloved, that we
could have continued together, at the longest; we are all subject to
disappointments, but let not these discourage your attempts to retain the
gospel among you -- give it not up, stand out to the last, against error and
vice -- be of one mind -- remember how posterity must be injured, or benefited,
according to your present endeavors: Lay up nothing of ill will against those
who have injured you in this affair, but forgive them in love -- only for time
to come, watch against the cunning crastiness of men -- don't be contrary
because they have been so -- this will never restore the gospel to you, but
strive to be at peace -- don't break off through discouragement, from the
parish, and give up all care for this Church and society -- My bowels yearn for
you and your offspring -- those precious, tender little ones, whom I have
endeavored to lead to Zion -- those tender ones, whom I have from time to time
received, as it were, into my arms with joy, and baptized them in the name of
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost: Though I must leave you, my warmest love still
remains with you. -- Therefore, my brethren, dearly beloved and longed for, my
joy and crown, so stand fast in the Lord, dearly beloved, I shall never desire
a greater joy, than to hear that you all walk in the truth.

BRETHREN of this Church -- bear in mind the days in which we took sweet
counsel together, in which we have eaten of the bread of life at the same table
-- but I am distressed for you -- your walls are shattered, the enemy stand
ready -- danger surrounds you -- yet remember the covenant, that ye have sworn
to the Lord to be his, and engaged, though all men forsake him, yet ye will
not. Jesus, Israel's Shepherd, observes your walk -- walk in love, as brethren
of the same family -- purge out the old leaven -- and beware of the leaven of
error -- walk in love, as Christ also loved his Church, and gave himself for it
-- How much the welfare of this society depends on you, I hope you are sensible
-- a steady well-governed Church, is the strength of a society -- but if you
are tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine, sickle and inconstant, you
may do that damage that can scarcely be repaired: Though it is not probable we
shall eat together again, or drink of the fruit of the vine, on earth, may God
grant that we may surround the celestial board above, and partake at the
marriage supper of the Lamb; for should I, through grace, obtain a seat at the
right hand of my Lord, how shall it infinitely add to my joy, to find you, once
a special charge, there to meet me in the company of Angels.

But before I leave you, let my young friends receive a part in these my last
addresses --

THOUGH you are no more to look to me as your minister, yet you may ever look
to me as your sure, steadfast friend. Bear in mind, my dear youth, what from
time to time, I have taught you from this sacred desk -- with what joy have I
seen your attentive eyes often toward me for instruction. -- O let my last
words never be forgotten. -- I again exhort you to be sober minded -- let not
your minds be stained with the tincture of division and party; how soon will
time bring you forward into the standing of Fathers, while they shall slumber
in the dust! Therefore now set out for God -- the care of society must
presently be your care. -- Get yours hearts prepared by love -- shun those
rocks against which so many have undergone shipwreck: Though perhaps, you may
now be destitute for some time, of the public orders of religion, yet retain
the regard of it in your minds -- remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy --
study the Bible of God -- there take your principles -- there form your
manners, and be followers of God as dear children; remember that I shall meet
you at judgment: O let it not be the unhappy case, that all my endeavors for
your happiness should be lost -- or that all my prayers and entreaties, with
and for you, shall only serve at that day, as a witness for God, that I am
clear of your blood, while you are not benefited by them: Renounce, I beseech
you, all youthful follies, and show yourselves men, that by your firmness for
society, your stedfastness for the gospel, your prayerful, and succesful
endeavors to build up the broken walls of Zion, in this place, generations yet
unborn, shall arise and call you blessed, when reaping the effects of your
virtues.

LET me now entreat one and all of you, to, look to religion: Though you are
now, Sirs, destitute of one to take you by the hand, look to Israel's Shepherd
for a supply -- guard for time to come, against that which has brought on this
separation -- guard against contention: Let not this be a root of bitterness in
any of your breasts, so as to hold resentment against any; and should it please
an infinitely wise God, to favor you with the re-settlement of a gospel
minister, I shall ever rejoice to hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in
one spirit, of one mind, striving together for the faith of the gospel, and in
nothing terrified by your adversaries: But, beware, I again entreat you, beware
of false teachers -- receive none who enter not at the door -- hear none who
are not sufficiently recommended -- you may be deceived -- ask the advice of
the neighboring clergy, with whose faith you are acquainted and on whose
advice you may depend. -- Forget the many disputes which have been of so long
standing among you -- these are not the life, but destruction of all religion
and real piety, they tend to gender strife -- surely you have held them long
enough, and have this day seen their dreadful effects: Shun all party names --
call no man your father on earth, for their is but one Father, even God; take
your principles not from men, but the divine word -- exercise faith in Jesus,
an offered Savior -- imitate his holy life -- love his divine character --
practice his sacred precepts -- look to him whom you have pierced, and mourn;
mourn, mourn sincerely before God, for all sin; fly, each soul, to the covenant
of grace -- close in with God.

I MUST leave you, my friends -- I can no longer carry; but weep not for me,
but let me weep for you -- and indulge me in a flood of tears, for your
beloved, young and tender babes. -- I leave you with a compassionate God: Fly
to the great. Physician, for the balm of Gilead, for your wound is grievous. --
Should you never see me more -- O prepare, prepare -- each soul. -- I warn you
-- I entreat you -- I beseech you, by all the endearing love of the Lord Jesus,
and by every tender tie, as upon my bended knees, that you prepare for
judgment. -- Attend to the compassionate calls of God, who says, Return ye
backsliding children and I will bed your backslidings, and receive you
graciously.

SET out afresh for heaven -- resolve to be steady -- Examine yourselves,
whether you be in the faith, and continue therein with a steadfast perservance.
-- Heaven, with all its joys, are before you -- which can be obtained, if you
comply with the offers of the gospel; and if any withstand so reasonable terms
of entering into rest, I can say no more -- but at the just bar of an impartial
Judge, you must answer for it.

WHO then is wise, let him understand these things; and whosoever is prudent, let
him know them. Farewell, Sirs. -- May you all, henceforth, walk in the ways of
Zion, with undivided, undiverted affections. -- This is my last request and "if
there be any consolation in Christ -- if any comfort of love -- if any
fellowship of the spirit -- if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that
ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind."

FINALLY, BRETHREN, FAREWELL -- BE PERFECT -- BE OF GOOD COMFORT -- BE OF ONE
MIND -- LIVE IN PEACE, AND THE GOD OF LOVE AND PEACE SHALL BE WITH YOU.

AMEN AND AMEN.

