THE DUTY OF CHRISTIANS, IN SINGING THE PRAISE OF GOD, EXPLAINED.

A SERMON.

BY JOHN BLACK, PASTOR OF THE UPPER PRESBYTERIAN CONGREGATION OF MARSH-CREEK,
PENNSYLVANIA.

Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has
made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory and dominion
forever and ever. Amen.

Rev. 1. 5, 6. YORK: PRINTED BY JOHN AND JAMES EDIE. 1792.

TO THE READER.
WHEN the following sermon was composed and delivered, the author had not the
most distant intention, nor expectation that it would ever undergo the press.
It was delivered on different sabbaths, that is, as two sermons, though
composed as one: and the author had just the same simple intention in it, as
all his other ministrations to his flock, viz. to promote the cause of truth,
piety and virtue among those to whom he ministers. Some time after, he received
the following address,

REVEREND SIR.
WE the subscribers under your pastoral charge, having attended your discourses
on psalmody, delivered at Upper Marsh-Creek, on the 14th and 21st days of
September last: and being impressed with an opinion that the printing of the
same would have an effectual tendency to remove prejudices and mistakes with
regard to that subject, and convince honest enquirers of the necessity as well
as propriety of introducing a system of psalmody more suitable to the gospel
dispensation than that which we now make use of: It is therefore our earnest
wish that you will; as soon as convenient, prepare a copy for the press, which
will be gratefully acknowledged by us.


This address was signed by a very respectable number of the authors
congregation -- and on receiving it, he concluded, it would be an instance of
false modesty to refuse -- The notes were added since -- and now the whole is
submitted to the candid examination of the christian world.

If the cause of the truth as it is in Jesus, and the edification of his Body,
the Church, shall, by this feeble essay, be advanced, it will rejoice

THE AUTHOR.
Marsh Creek, February 17th, 1789.
ON PSALMODY.
COL. 3, 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching
and admonishing one another in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, finging
with grace in your hearts to the Lord.


IT is, I presume, the indispensible duty of all rational creatures, to praise
God in that manner to which the powers of their nature, respectively, enable
them. And I presume also, that among all the ranks of rational creatures of
which we have any knowledge, and who have either retained their innocence, or
have returned to God after offending him, it will be found, that praise maks a
principle part of their devotion. Thus Jehovah says, that when he laid the
foundations of the earth, "the morning stars sang together, and the sons of God
shouted for joy." Job. 38, 7.
And from the visions which the Apostle John had of the heavenly world, it
plainly appears, that angels and the spririts of just men made perfect are
chiefly employed in the pleasing exercise. Rev. 5, 9. -- 1^., 3. -- 15, 3, and
many other place.


With regard to the church on earth, it is evident, that compositions in praise
of God, were made and used in the early periods of it; some of which, on great
and singular occasions, are transmitted down to us; Exodus, 15 chap.
and in after times, when the church was more fully organized, a large
collection of such compositions was used in Divine Worship, formed chiefly by
David, the sweet Psalmist of Israel. Under the gospel dispensation the duty of
the church, and of individuals, in this, as in other respects, is still more
clearly revealed. Christ the Lawgiver and Pattern of his Church, sung an hymn
with his disciples after he had instituted and celebrated the ordinance of his
supper: and his Apostle expressly enjoins it upon all, not only in my text, as
you have heard, but also in his epistle to the Ephesians, in these words, "And
be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the spirit;
speaking to yourselves in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and
making melody in your heart to the Lord." Ephesians, 5. 18, 19.
Moreover, comparing this passage with the text, it will appear, that praising
God is an act of worship which should be performed both in public and in
private: for as in the one we are commanded to teach and admonish one another,
so in the other to speak to ourselves in psalms, hymns, etc.

But it may be enquired -- Do all these expressions, psalms, hymns and
spiritual songs, signify one and the same thing; and particularly, do they mean
the Book of Psalms contained in the old Testament, exclusive of all others?

The solution of this is of considerable importance -- And to it I answer, that
these terms neither mean one and the same thing originally, nor have we any
reason to conclude that they reser to any one system or collection of
compositions whatever, which was extant in the Apostles days for praising God,
and exclusive of all others.

The word psalm originally means a composition of musical notes, tune or air
performed upon an instrument of music, and was not necessary to be accompanied
with either words or voice. It is derived from a root which signifies, to
strike gently, or more with a certain agitation; because the strings of musical
instruments require to be struck or moved with the fingers or other instrument
for that purpose. David was finely skilled in instrumental music, as well as in
poetry: and it is undeniable that throughout the Jewish dispensation,
especially in his time, instruments of music were used in the worship of God.
On this account it was, that the compositions of David, and of others, which
were used by the Jewish Church, were called psalms, because whilst the choir
and others sung the words, the musicians always performed the tune upon some
instrument. Hence it is that we find them directing their compositions to the
musician, to be performed on such or such an instrument. And hence also it is,
that they so frequently call upon the church to praise God with timbrel,
psaltery, harp, organ, etc.

A hymn is a poetical composition, or verses, made to celebrate some person, or
action, or to bewail some mournful event; without any regard to music. It is
designed to be read or recited; and although it may be accompanied with ^n
instrument, or the voice, yet these are not necessary to its origmal design.

The meaning of the term song, is universally known -- it is always designed
for the voice -- to be sung with an air suited to the measure of the verse. But
the Apostle directs that the songs of christians should be of a particular
kind, as to their subject matter, viz. spiritual; that is to say, songs on
spiritual subjects -- subjects calculated to give religious instruction, and to
raise, or quicken devotion in the soul.

I well know there are many who suppose, that the Apostle, by all those various
terms, meant nothing more, nor less than the Book of Psalms contained in the
Old Testament. But this is mere opinion: nor have I ever seen, or heard any
thing in support of it, but opinion, or bare assertion. -- There are no
authentic records, sacred or profane, which prove that the psalms of David bore
these various titles, or were denominated by them. To be satisfied respecting
the truth of this sentiment, the candid reader may consult those writers,
ancient and modern, who have treated this subject expressly, such as
Theophylact and Hierom among the ancients -- Calvin and Edwards among the
moderns. Their own opinions and conjectures, or the opinions and conjectures of
others equally destitute of authority, is all the evidence they produce to
prove that the Apostle here means the psalms of David, exclusive of all others.
And it is very observable, that, however they agree in this opinion, no two of
them agree as to which of these compositions were called psalms, which of them
hymns, which of them spiritual songs; -- nor why they obtained these different
epithets. Hierom says psalms contain moral subjects which we ought to practice.
In direct opposition to him, Doctor Edwards says, it is a term of great
latitude, and is used for all those songs which contain in them the praises of
God and set forth his sacred attributes and perfections, and in any way express
devotion, or contribute to piety and holiness. And Calvin, differing from both,
alleges that these compositions which were accompanied with a musical
instrument, were called psalms -- Again, Hierom asserts, that an hymn has for
its subject sacred things, such as we ought to contemplate and meditate upon.
Dr. Edwards says that those compositions, which were more complete than psalms,
were called hymns; being of a more singular and peculiar strain. And Calvin
defines it thus, "a song of praise whether sung with a high voice or
otherwise." Once more, Hierom concludes, that spiritual songs belong to natural
things which we ought to debate and disenss. Dr. Edwards explains them as being
still more perfect compositions than even hymns; and as having for their
subject matter the perfections of God as they respect us; flow from a spiritual
frame and to be sung with great emotion of spirit. And still differing from
these, Calvin says, that spiritual songs are such psalms as not only contain
praises, but exhortations, and other arguments. As vague and unsatisfactory is
the conjecture of those who allege that the Apostle used these different terms
in conformity to the Hebrew distinction of the book of psalms, by the terms
Mizmorim, Tehillim, and Shu^im. For, if it should be even granted, that such a
distinction was authoritative and general among the Jews, yet neither will this
prove that the Apostle meant the same thing; nor, indeed, do all the various
and contradictory expositions which are given of these words, accord with his
phrases. Some say, the Mizmorim were psalms which treated of various subjects
-- others, that they were such as were attended with instruments. Some, that
the Tehillim only mentioned the praises of God -- others, that they (...)
prayers generally sung. Some, that the Shurim were (...) artfully composed, and
sung with the help of (...) ^^^ent -- others, that they were songs containing
(...) ^roper and immediate acts of devotion addressed (...) but also moral and
religious instruction. Thus (...) ^^^rious and contradictory opinions, founded
on co^j^^^^ and fancy, like the iron race of Cadmus, rise up and devour each
other.


On the contrary, we know that whenever Christ and his Apostles quote that part
of scripture, they do it under the title psalms -- never hymns or spiritual
songs. Thus the Savior quotes that book in the following passages, "As David
himself says in the book of psalms." Luke 20, 42.
"All things must be fulfilled which were written concerning me in the law of
Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the psalms." Luke 24, 44.
Thus also Peter, "For it is written in the book of psalms." Acts 1, 20.
And thus too Paul, "As it is written in the second psalm" Acts 13, 33.
-- On the other hand, when the term hymn is used in the New Testament, there
is no circumstance to make it so much as probable that the sacred writer had
any reference to the book of psalms, or to any composition in it. The only
places where the word is used, are my text -- the fifth chapter and nineteenth
verse of the Epistle to the Ephesians, and Marks and Matthews Gospels, where
they record that Christ sung an hymn with his disciples, after the institution
and celebration of his supper. Matt. 26, 30 -- Mark 14* 26.
Now in all these places, there is no one consideration from the scope of the
context, or otherwise, to make it certain, or even so much as likely, that the
Old Testament psalms were meant by it. Some, indeed, have alleged that what
Christ sung, after the celebration of his supper, was the Jewish Hallel,
beginning with the 113th and ending with the 118th psalm. But this is still
opinion -- an opinion, too, very slenderly founded: for the only reason
assigned is, that the Jews always sung this portion of the psalms when they
celebrated their passover feast. And surely it is very extraordinary reasoning,
to conclude, that because the Jews sung this on that occasion, therefore the
Savior sung the same, when he had set that ordinance entirely aside, and had
instituted a quite different one in its room. -- It is just such reasoning as
if one were to say, the premises are different, therefore the conclusion must
be the same. Divine wisdom has not seen it fit to record particularly, what the
Savior sung on that occasion; but as he had then instituted a new ordinance,
of which there is no hint in the Old Testament, I leave it with every one to
judge for himself whether it be not most probable that he himself composed the
hymn he sung; especially as none of the psalms directly apply to that
ordinance; and especially, too, as the Evangelists who record the transaction,
call it, uniformly, an hymn.

Upon the whole, -- as these terms originally signify different things -- and
as there is no evidence that the book of psalms, used by the Jews, ever
obtained, or was known by these various titles; but that, on the contrary,
indeed, the title, psalms, was appropriate to it: it will be obvious to
conclude, that the Apostle did not, by all these terms, mean that book,
exclusive of all others; nor, indeed, any one system, or collection of
compositions then extant. The plain, easy, natural, unsophisticated sense of
the words is, every kind of sacred poetry, whatever denomination it might come
under, whether psalm, or hymn, or spiritual song; and not only those which were
then composed and in use in the christian Church, but also those which, from
the fullness of the word of Christ dwelling in believers, they might be
enabled, from time to time, to compose for their mutual edification, and the
glory of God. -- And agreeably to this, I shall submit the following paraphrase
of the whole verse, "Let the word of Christ, the glorious gospel, When this
discourse was composed, I thought it was not necessary to say a single word to
prove that the word of Christ, signifies the Gospel, particularly; this sense
of it being so obvious, so natural, and so agreeable, to the uniform language
of the New Testament. I find, however, since, that it has been interpreted as
meaning the whole of Divine Revelation; with a view to strengthen the opinion,
that the Apostle, by the terms, psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, meant the
book of psalms exclusively. Let it, therefore, be observed, that this phrase in
the plain and native import of the words, has so express a reference to what
God has revealed to us in these last times, by his SON, as distinguished from
what he revealed by the Prophets under former dispensations (see Heb. 1.1, 2.)
that one should certainly have some very clear and unequivocal proof, before
any other sense be admitted. None such, however, has been, and I presume, none
such can be given. At any rate, it is no proof, to assert roundly, that it
means the whole of Divine Revelation; and then exercise the invention to find
reasons why it may have, instead of proving that it actually has this meaning.
-- The truth is, not only the native sense of the words, but almost innumerable
parallel places, both in the context, and elsewhere (compare, among many
others, Mark 8, 38) Luke 9, 26. John 5, 24; 8, 31. Acts 13, 26. Romans 10, 8. 2.
Cor. 5, 19. Ephesians. 4, 20, 21. Col. 1, 5. Heb. 2, 3. prove that such phrases
always refer to the discoveries made under the gospel, as contradistinguished
from those made under the Jewish dispensation -- consequently, that is a mere
arbitrary interpretation to extend it any further here. (...) ^uppose it should
be even granted, that this phrase means the whole of Divine Revelation, yet
this would not affect the doctrine exhibited in the following pages -- for if
it includes the Gospel discoveries at all, (which, I believe, is allowed by
all) it will support what I plead for, viz. that our psalmody should contain
these discoveries, otherwise we cannot, by it, teach them to one another, as
the apostle directs. But this will appear more sully in the sequel.
to the knowledge of which you have been happily brought, and which discovers
life and immortality, and all things pertaining to life and godliness with a
fullness and clearness for surpassing all former revelations, dwell in you
richly in all wisdom; treasure it up in your memory, let your understandings be
plentifully stored with its precious contents, meditate upon it frequently, and
improve it wisely; be often teaching one another its pure and holy doctrines,
and admonishing one another concerning its duties; and that, not only in the
usual way of sermonizing or prose discourse, but also, in all kinds of sacred
poetry, whether it may be called psalms, hymns, or spiritual songs, and whether
already in use among you, or you may be enabled to compose hereafter, in
agreeableness to the fullness and clearness of the revelation which you enjoy.
And content not yourselves with reading or reciting these poetical
compositions, but accompany them with your voice -- sing them to suitable airs;
yet see to it that this external exercise be attended with grace in the heart
-- with souls attuned to the matter of the song; for as it is addressed to the
Lord who knows every sentiment of the heart, it will not be acceptable to him
unless accompanied with inward devotion.

What I farther design, upon this occasion, is -- to show in what manner we
should perform the duty of praising God -- the subject matter of our praises --
the end we should have in view when we praise the Most High -- I shall also lay
down some principles for the regulation of our conduct in reference to this
important part of worship -- and remove any difficulties, or objections which
may seem to lie against what shall be said.

First. With regard to the manner of performing this duty, I shall not trouble
you with the controversy, whether instruments of music should be used in
christian worship, or not. Perhaps this is but a matter of doubtful
disputation; and the propriety or impropriety of it, may depend much upon the
sentiments of the worshipping assembly. We certainly know it was practiced
under former dispensations, with the Divine approbation; and the new Testament
does not forbid, neither does it command it. But this is certain, that we
should praise God with the voice, in an air or tune adapted to the measure of
the verse. The melody of the heart -- the joyful frame of the spirit -- or any
inward exercises whatever, will not come up to the ordinance nor answer its end
without the sound of the voice. Nothing can be more evident than this, both
from the Old and New Testament. Many are the places where David exhorts to sing
to God; yea, to sing loud Psalm 4^, 6, 66, (...)
-- Christ and his disciples sung Matthew ^6, (...).
-- all that followed him as he approached Jerusalem, just before his
sufferings, sung his praise as they descended the Mount of Olives Luke 19,
(...).
-- and the Apostle in my text, and in Ephesians 5, 19, commands to sing.

But although the sound of the voice is necessary to the performance of this
duty, yet the exercise of grace in the heart, which the Apostle, elsewhere,
terms the melody of the heart, is as necessary. For unless those devout
affections and gracious dispositions that are correspondent to the subject, be
awakened, and in exercise, we shall only be drawing near to God with our
mouths, and honoring him with our lips, whilst our hearts are far from him.

We must also sing with understanding and judgment. This indeed, is necessary
in every part of religious worship -- The rational offspring of the
All-intelligent Father, must serve him in a way proper to the capacity be has
given them: and we may just as well pray to him in an unknown tongue, as sing
his praise in words or phrases which we do not understand. A piece of sounding
brass or tinkling cymbal is not more worthless, in the divine estimation, than
we shall be, if we offer him a blind, unmeaning service, which, from the nature
of things must also be unprositable to ourselves. And therefore the Apostle
declares, that although he would sing with the spirit, ye^ it should be with
the understanding also, 1. Co^^ (...).


Once more, our praises as well as prayers, should be offered in the name of
the Lord Jesus Christ. Our souls should directly rely upon, and have express
reference to him, as the only way for perishing sinners to approach God, and as
the only meritorious cause of our acceptance with him. We should be exercised
toward him according to the discoveries which we have respecting his person --
his character -- his offices; and particularly make use of his NAME as our
great plea with God. That is, that new manner of approaching the Most High, by
that new and living way which Christ has consecrated through the vail of his
flesh, which is peculiar to the christian dispensation -- which saints under
the law were not instructed in -- and which is not to be found in their prayers
or praises. All this is evident from the following scriptures -- "And
whatsoever ye shall ask in my name," faith the Savior, "that will I do; that
the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I
will do it." John 14, 13, 11.
Again he says, "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained
you, that you should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should
remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father, in my name, he may give it
you." 15, 16.
And again, "Verily verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father
in my name, he will give it you. Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name:
ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. These thing, have I
spoken unto you in parables: the time comes when I shall no more speak unto
you in parables, but I shall show you plainly of the Father. At that day ye
shall ask in my name." (...) 23, 2^, 25, 26.


These are remarkable passages, declaring the duty, and the privilege of
christians, beyond what was discovered to the Jews, or even to Christ's own
disciples before that time. "Hitherto," says he, "ye have asked nothing in my
name." This was the case in the Jewish worship, and is so still with them. "But
the time comes when I shall show you plainly of the Father." The time referred
to here, was very probably the day of Penticost. "At that day," adds he, "ye
shall ask in my name." And it is very remarkable that the Apostle in the verse
following my text, expressly applies this command to singing the praise of God,
as well as to other religious exercises; for having enjoined this duty he
immediately adds, "And whatsoever ye do in word or in deed, do all in the name
of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks unto God and the Father by him."

Second. We are to enquire into the subject matter of the praise we offer to
God. This, indeed, is so various and manifold, that a particular detail of it,
is not to be expected. In the general we may observe, that as God alone is the
object of all religious adoration and praise, the matter thereof should consist
of those things which have respect to HIM, either considered in himself, or in
his dispensations to ourselves or to others. But as God has made various
discoveries of himself to fallen man, with gradually increasing light and
fullness, the matter of our praise should be conformable to the clearness and
fullness of the revelation which we enjoy. This, indeed, I take to be
self-evident -- Hence many things become the matter of the christians praise,
which were not, and indeed could not be a subject to the faints under former
dispensations, because they were not revealed. As an example of this, take the
hymn which the apostle John addressed to the Savior, "Unto him that loved us,
and washed as from our sins in his own blood, and has made us kings and
priests unto God and his Father, unto him be glory and dominion forever and
ever. Amen." Rev. (...), 5, (...).
Where do you find such a subject of praise before the Gospel Dispensation? --
The truth is, little of the real and spiritual glory of God -- the doctrine of
the Trinity -- the eternal device of man's salvation -- the manner of
accomplishing it in the incarnation, life, actions, doctrines, sufferings and
death, resurrection, ascension, intercession and mediatorial kingdom of the
Savior -- his final coming to judge the world -- the form of process in that
awful scene -- the future state of the righteous and the wicked -- the
dispensation of the Holy Spirit -- his perfection, grace, and saving influence.
-- I say, little of these things, and of many more that might be mentioned, was
discovered to mankind before the birth of Christ, in comparison of what was
afterward revealed. If any one has read the scripture so inattentively, as to
need a particular proof of this; let him consider the following passages, 1
Cor. 2 chapter, from the 7th to the 13th verse. Here the Apostle calls the
Gospel, in general, a mystery, hidden till that time; and that those things
which eye had not seen, ear heard, and of which it had not so much as entered
the heart of man to conceive, before that time, were then revealed to the
Apostles by the Spirit, and by them declared plainly to men, that they might
know the things which were freely given them of God. In like manner he declares
(2 Timothy 1, 10.) that it is by the Gospel life and immortality are brought to
light. And to mention no more, Christ, after having promised to send the
Comforter, tells his Disciples, (John 16, 12, 13, 14,) that when he should
come, he would lead them into all truth -- and show them the things of Christ.
But if all necessary truth, and the things of Christ had been revealed before,
this extraordinary dispensation of the Spirit to the Apostles would have been a
very useless thing.
And all these are proper matter for christian praise according to the state of
the church -- of families -- and of individual persons from time to time.

Thirdly. The end we should have in view, in singing the praises of God, is
twofold, viz, respecting God, and respecting ourselves -- As it respects God,
(which is the primary end) we should have in view to extol and honor him -- to
show forth his glory in the most exalted strains -- to magnify his great name,
which deserves to be exalted above heaven and earth -- to acknowledge and
declare his supreme perfection, his absolute dominion, his universal agency;
and particularly, to celebrate his matchless wisdom, love and grace in the
decree of man's salvation.

As it respects ourselves, the design is, to elevate our affections -- enliven
our graces -- express and promote our spiritual joy -- and to compose the
distractions of a troubled spirit. To this, the exercise has a native tendency;
especially when in concert, we have the pleasure of harmony, and the enlivening
sound of many voices united. It is natural, too, when the heart is full of joy,
to give it vent this way, and accordingly the Apostle exhorts, "Is any merry
let him sing psalms James 5, 16.
. Moreover, the Apostle, in my text, mentions another end with regard to
ourselves and others, viz. instruction, "teaching and admonishing one another,
says he, in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs." To this purpose also, the
ordinance is naturally suited. Moral and religious truths, and indeed, any
matter whatever, thrown into plain and agreeable verse, generally makes a more
lasting impression on the memory, than prose compositions; and when they are
frequently repeated, or sung, the effect will be proportionally more lasting
and strong.

Fourthly. I shall now proceed to lay down some principles for the regulation
of our conduct in this important part of worship. And

First. All christians should endeavor to attain as much skill in church
music, as their capacity, their opportanities, and other duties will admit. It
would surely be monstrous confusion, if every one, in a worshipping assembly
were to sing an air different from all the rest; and as mankind are not taught
by nature to sing, all, any one air, it is therefore necessary, that they who
sing together, should previously qualify themselves for it by learning. It is
also as evident, that if we are to sing at all, the more we are skilled in the
art, the better, shall we be qualified, other ^^ings being equal, to perform
the duty. Inattention to this principle, has almost ruined our psalmody; it has
rendered that part of divine worship, which, in its own nature, is the most
exalted and pleasurable, in fact, the most dull and unedyfying. Many persons,
and some of them, perhaps, truly religious, either through mistake and
prejudice, or laziness and indolence, persuade themselves that if the heart be
devout, it is no matter what the found of the voice is. But surely David was of
a very different opinion when he exhorted thus, "sing unto him a new song, play
skilfully with a loud noise" Psalm 33.3.
. -- There is certainly as much propriety in making any sort of founds with an
instrument, when that is used in divine worship, as in making any sort of
sounds with the voice, when we sing his praise: and the same reasons which
plead for skilfullness in the one case, will also plead for it in the other. We
have observed, that singing was designed to aid and promote, as well as to
express the feelings of the heart: consequently, the more exquisite the music
is, the more powerful, to this purpose, will its influence be. To be convinced
of this, you need only consult your own frame, as it is the workmanship of God.
The author of our being has constitued us so, that we naturally and indeed,
necessarily perceive and relish harmony in sounds, and are offended with
discords, just as we taste sweetness in honey, bitterness in gall -- smell an
agreeable odor from the rose: an offensive one, from a putrid carcass. If you
give this consideration its proper weight, I presume, it will persuade you,
that we should cultivate church music to such a degree, as to carry it on in
concert, that is to say, in different parts and various sounds so set together
as to produce harmony. This is the perfection of music -- and the capacity to
perform it, and the taste to relish it when performed, is peculiar to man. The
creator has given to some other animals a power to sing; but none of them
discover any capacity for harmony: never has any choir of them been heard to
perform any thing like it. In this, man stands as really distinguished from the
lower creation, as in the power of speech, or any other faculty. -- I ask now,
shall this pleasing, this distinguishing capacity never be called forth to
exercise? Is this part of the divine workmanship useless and vain? It not,
where and when shall it be employed? Shall it be only in folly and vanity, or
mere amusement? Or rather, should it not be consecrated to the service of that
Being whose workmanship it is? I will venture to leave it with every one
heartily to decide.

Let us, therefore, cultivate church music ourselves, and promote the
cultivation of it in our children. The earlier in life any one begins, the
greater progress he will make; and hence, those societies are certainly to be
commended, who make it a part of school education, and have their children
trained to sing, at the same time they are taught to read; nor do I expect to
see this art flourish as it ought, until this practice becomes general. In the
mean time, the usual mode of schools for grown persons should be kept up, under
proper regulations, and capable teachers.

Secondly. It is the duty of all to sing the praises of God. This is evident,
both from reason and scripture. The Supreme Majesty of Heaven and Earth is
infinitely worthy to be praised by every rational creature; and no person on
earth can be in such a situation, or stand in such a relation to his Maker, as
not to be under obligations to praise him. Even under the Jewish dispensation,
although particular choice of singing men and singing women were appointed, yet
David himself calls upon all, without exception, to praise, "Let the people
praise thee, O God, let all the people praise thee." Psalm (...)
Under the gospel dispensation, the duty is still farther inculcated, in terms
which equally apply to all, as in my text, and in the epistle to the Ephesians
already quoted. It is therefore wickedness to neglect a duty so exalted; so
pleasing, and to which we are under so many endearing obligations. -- And it is
certainly shameful, for a professor of christianity to be silent, when others
are singing the praises of God around him; as if he had no more concern in this
sublime act of worship, than to amuse himself. -- Such conduct betrays a heart
very insensible of the divine goodness, if not totally destitute of real piety.
The spirit of true religion breathes thus, "It is good to give thanks unto the
Lord, and to sing praises unto thy name, O Most High." Psalm 92, (...)
If we have tasted that the Lord is gracious, we will delight to sing his
praise, and think that we have sustained a loss, both as to profit and
pleasure, if at any time we have been absent, when his part of divine worship
has been performed, whether in the family or church.

Thirdly. We ought to sing in a continued air: and not interrupt the music by
parcelling out the psalm or hymn, or spiritual song, line by line. This is
really so unnatural a mode, that I am persuaded nothing but dire necessity
could have suggested, or introduced ^t into the church. In the middle denturies
of the christian era, learning was almost entirely banished from Europe:
scarcely a trace of it was to be found but in the monasteries, and among the
clergy. When after this learning began to revive, so rare a thing was it to
find, among the common ranks of men, a person who could read, and so highly was
it esteemed, that, although one had been convicted of a capital crime, yet if
he could read, he was acquitted -- his council urged in his behalf, this plea,
"legit ut clericus," he reads as a clergyman, and if, upon trial, it was sound
true, the court absolved him from punishment. In this situation matters were
when the reformation took place, and for a considerable time after; so that the
officers of the church were obliged to have recourse to this expedient, viz. to
appoint a clerk, who could read, to parcel out the psalm, line by line, to the
illiterate congregation, in order that all might join in this important part of
divine worship. But behold the force of custom, and its prevalence even over
reason and common sense. We adhere to this mode still, although the necessity
which introduced it, and which alone could justify it, is long since ceased.

Many evils attend this mode of singing -- It consumes time unnecessarily --
prevents the pleasure and advantage of singing a larger portion of a psalm than
that, to which, in this way, we are obliged to consine curselves -- it, in a
great measure, destroys the music, and consequently, mars the effect it is
designed to have on the heart, and unless we have the composition by memory, it
leaves us often to sing without knowing what, until the next line comes out to
given us the sense -- It is surely high time for us to lay aside this childish
mode of praising God -- Let each one, or at most, every two or three, bring a
psalm book to the worship of God, that so, having the subject before our eyes,
we may sing without interruption, and drop that unnatural mixture of reading
and singing which now mars and disgraces our psalmody.

Fourthly. We, whose great advantage it is to live under the Gospel
dispensation, ought not to confine ourselves to that system of psalmody which
was framed for, and exactly suited to that dispensation of divine grace under
which the Jews were placed, and which was, comparatively, obscure and imperfect.

This principle I shall establish by the text itself -- by necessary
consequence from other parts of scripture -- and by the difference of the two
dispensations from each other.

The language of my text is very strong to this purpose. The Apostle enjoins it
upon christians, that they be richly furnished, or extensively acquainted with
the word of Christ -- those important discoveries which the Gospel makes; and
that this rich furniture of Gospel knowledge should not be, in them, a useless
treasure, as a spring shut up or fountain sealed, but that it should be
communicated, and flow out for the instruction and edification of one another;
and particularly, that it should be thus employed in their songs of praise and
other poetical compositions. Now, my brethern I with you to consider, how it is
possible to practice this injunction, while we confine ourselves to the Jewish
psalmody. Were you to undertake to instruct any person in the way of salvation
for perishing sinners, which God has appointed: and would lead him to a (...)
acquaintance with those things which pertain to ^^fe and godliness -- to faith
and the practice of a christian: would you take this system of psalmody for
your rule; or would you use the New Testament for that purpose; and that
whether the instruction was to be delivered in poetical, or prose composition?
Indeed, we not only grant, we maintain in the fullest manner that there are
many prophesies of, and references to the Savior, in the book of psalms; but
at the same time we must also maintain, that, instead of learning (...) Gospel
by these, it is by the light of the Gospel we understand them, and learn how to
apply them. Let us suppose a person, who knew not what religion we professed,
were to come into our worshipping assemblies, week after week, yea, year after
year, and hear our songs of praise: -- would he, by them, learn the word of
Christ? Would he, at least, conclude, that that word dwelt in us richly? Or
rather, would he not, from this part of our religious service, form the same
opinion of us, that he would of an assembly of worshipping Jews? From our
sermons and our prayers, indeed, he might learn our profession, and the word of
Christ; but the Apostle enjoins, that we should teach this particularly in our
praises. I therefore ask again, how can we teach one another the glorious
discoveries of the Gospel, or evidence that it dwells in us richly, by our
songs and praise, when yet these songs contain not these discoveries, but must
themselves, be understood by a previous knowledge of the word of Christ: and
when yet the subject matter of our psalms, and our mode of expressing it, is
precisely the same as theirs, who reject the Gospel altogether? The principle
may also be supported by necessary consequence from other parts of scripture.
To this purpose, let me lead your attention, particularly, to the fourteenth
chapter of Paul's first epistle to the Corinthians. The professed design of the
apostle, in this chapter, is to regulate the Corinthian church in the exercise
of their spiritual gifts. Among these he mentions the gift of dictating a psalm
to be sung in public worship (compare verses 15, and 26.) Now, if christians
should sing no compositions in the worship of God, but those contained in the
Book of psalms used by the Jews, there could be no need, nay, there could be no
room for a spiritual gift, i. e. extraordinary inspiration, to enable them to
propose a psalm to be sung in divine worship; for upon this supposition, every
composition they should use, was written for them long before. But it is as
evident as words can well declare, that there was in the first age of
christianity, such a gift, and various christians were divinely inspired to
utter a psalm in the public assembly; from which it necessarily follows, that
the christian church was not confined to the Jewish system of psalmody in the
apostles days; and if it was not then, I would wish to know by what authority
it is confined to that system now. I have scarcely ever met with a more gross
and palpable perversion of the scripture, than that which represents the
apostle, in the above cited chapter, as condemning and correcting the
Corinthians for introducing new psalms at all into divine worship. The passage
particularly chosen to support this miserable interpretation, is the 26th
verse, where the apostle says, "How is it, brethren? When ye come together,
every one of you has a psalm, has a doctrine, has a tongue, has a
revelation, has an interpretation." The judicious reader will immediately see,
that if the apostle meant to reprove the Corinthians for practicing any the of
these things, he reproves them for the whole; for they are all mentioned
together in the same point of view: and where, then, will the censure
ultimatels fall? It will ^^shudder to write it) fall upon the Holy Spirit, by
whose extraordinary influence they were, and by which alone, indeed, they could
be enabled to speak with tongues they had never learned and to utter
revelations. This single consideration is sus^^cient to prove that the apostle
is not censuring the use of these extraordinary gifts. The preceding and
subsequent parts of the chapter show, that it was the abuse of them -- the
disorderly mode of exercising them, which prevailed in the Corinthian church,
that he here sets himself to correct -- and the disorder was plainly this --
Whilst one was delivering a psalm to be sung in the public assembly, with which
he had been inspired, another rose up and delivered a doctrine which had, in
the same manner, been dictated to him, -- a third, perhaps, would speak in an
unknown tongue, -- a fourth, relate a revelation with which he had been
favored, and so on. Hence, two or three, perhaps four or five persons would be
speaking at the same instant of time, which not only produced consusion, but
prevented all edification. Therefore the Apostle directs, that they should
exercise these gifts, and deliver the things with which they were respectively
changed, whether psalm, doctrine, tongue, revelation, etc. in turn, or, as he
expresses it, by course (compare ^erses 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33): --
observing that they might all have an opportunity, in this orderly manner, one
after another, of delivering ^natever they were favored with; and that they
were not under any necessity of breaking through the rules of the strictest
regularity, for says he, "The spirits of the prophets, are subject to the
prophets," that is to say, the inspiration of the Holy Spirit is not a blind
and wild impulse, which sorces a person to utter whatever is communicated to
him, at the moment he receives it; on the contrary, it leaves him master of
himself, so as that he can wait the proper time of discovering it. Upon the
whole, this passage of sacred writ establishes, beyond all contradiction, that,
under the administration of the Apostles, and by the immediate inspiration of
the Holy Spirit, the Church of Christ was directed to use other psalms than
those of David, in Divine worship. And it is more than probable that christians
continued in this practice for, at least, three hundred years after the first
plantation of Christianity. Doctor Mosheim, one of the most accurate and
credible ecclesiastical historians, asserts that it was not till in the fourth
century, that the psalms of David were introduced into christian worship; and
that even then they were only used among other hymns that had been in practice
Mosh. Eccles. Hist. on the fourth century.
And I am more inclined to believe this, because I find, that the most zealous
advocates for using the psalms of David alone in christian worship, are not
able to produce one testimony to their purpose, earlier than the fourth century.
Woreover, the principle may be inferred from the practice of the inspired
Apostle John, "unto him who loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood; and has made us Kings and priests unto God and his Father; unto him be
glory and dominion forever and ever, Amen" Rev, (...) 5, 6.
This hymn of praise, which he addressed to the Redemer, is certainly new, i.
e. it is not to be found in the Book of psalms. And to mention no more, those
scriptures which teach us to pray and praise, and, indeed, to do all our acts
of religious worship in the name of Christ, in such a manner as our Lord
himself expressly tells his disciples they had never done before, most
evidently show that christians should not confine themselves to the forms of
worship used under the former dispensation; but that, in prayer, praise, etc.
they should have, according to the light and fullness of the Gospel, a more
express reference to the name, the person, and offices of the Lord Jesus
Christ, than is to be found in any discoveries, or compositions under the Law
John 14.13, 14 -- 15, 16 -- 16, 23, 24, 25, 26. Col. 3.17. As a corroberating
circumstance here, I shall mention a passage in one of the epittle, of Pliny
the younger (lib. x. Ep. 97.) to the Emperor Tragan, in which he info^^^ that
Prince, "that the christians sung a hymn to Christ as to a God." Upon this
passage I would remark, that if the christians in this first age of the Church,
had sung nothing but the psalms of David, neither Pliny himself, nor any spies,
which might creep into christian assemblies, could have known that their hymns
were addressed to Christ as to God, because there is not, in these psalms, any
such express mention made of his Name or of those distinguishing
characteristics by which Jesus of Nazareth could be generally known, as to make
heathens think, that those who sung them were thereby celebrating the Divine
glories of that crucisied One. I therefore conclude, that in the psalms, or
hymns used by the first christians, there was such a plain, express and literal
mention made of the name, and other distinguishing characters of Jesus Christ,
as that every one who heard and understood the language, must immediately
perceive that HE was the object of their praise and adoration. And such, I
contend, should be the general strain of christian hymns still be.
.

Once more, this principle may be established by the consideration of the
difference of the two dispensations (the Jewish and the Christian) from each
other. This is a topic on which the Apostle Paul, especially, dwells much. He
expressly terms the Jewish dispensation, the ministration of death, and, of
condemnation 2. Cor. 3.7, 9.
-- a state of bondage, and servitude Gal. 4.3, 7, 9.
-- says that it contained only the shadow of good things to come Heb. 10, 1.
--
and that the ritual of religious worship instituted under it, was weak and poor
elements, a worldly sanctuary, and carnal ordinances Heb. 9.1, 10 -- Gal. 4.9.
. But in the passages just now referred to, he terms the gospel dispensation,
the ministration of the spirit -- the ministration of life, and, of
righteousness -- a state of freedom and sonship. Our Lord and Savior himself
represents the gospel dispensation and the worship which should be performed
under it, spirit and truth, in contradistinction to the Jewish ^^conomy and its
worship, which consisted so much in types and shadows, but had not the very
image or reality it self 4, 23.
.

Now, it must be particularly observed that the Jewish system of psalmody, was
exactly suited to the dispensation under which that people were placed; and
that many of them have such express reference to the peculiarities of the
Jewish worship -- have those ordinances of it which the Apostle calls, worldly,
weak, poor, etc. so interwoven with their very subject matter, that they
cannot, universally, suit the gosp dispensation which is so widely different
from the Jewish, as we have heard; and under which these ordinances are
entirely abolished It is a striking mark of unerring wisdom which appears in
all the works and ways of God, both in the natural and moral world, that he
adjusts one thing exactly to another, according to the time, place, relation,
connection, and other circumstances of men and things, and the end he designs
to accomplish. This is evident in the psalms of David when viewed as a system
for the Jewish dispensation: -- for that, they were perfect and complete: but,
on this very account, they are not suitable, as a system or liturgy, for New
Testament worship, Some have been censured, as having used contemptuous and
diminutive epethets when speaking of the psalms of David. If any have really
done so, i. e. if they have used other phrases than they are warranted in by
the sacred scriptures, or with a view to pour contempt upon any part of the
oracles of God, let them receive all that censure and reproach that can be
heaped upon them. All such consures, I hope, I shall escape, as, in
representing the difference between the two dispensations, I have exactly usued
the language of the Holy Spirit in the scripture.


. I beseech christians seriously to consider with what propriety they can now
call upon one another to praise God with the harp, the psaltery, the timbrel
and dance, with stringed instruments, organs, and loud sounding cymbals -- and
to blow up the trumpet in the new moon; when at the same time, they mean not at
all to do any such thing? -- Upon what principles can we now entreat God to do
good to Zion which this declaration in our mouths, that then he should be
pleased with whole burnt offerings and bullocks which the church would offer
upon his altar? -- Under the Jewish dispensation, such offerings were proper --
they were Divine ordinances -- and the pious worshippers not only expressed
them in words, but intended, and actually performed them; but no christian
believes he should present such offerings, or if he did, that they would be
pleasing to God. Can we, consistently with truth, say, in our songs of praise,
that sparrows and swallows build by the altar of God -- and that they are
blessed who travel through the dry valley of Baca, dig wells in it, and collect
the rain in pools to supply themselves with drink, whilst they are coming from
a distant part of Judea, to celebrate the annual festivals at Jerusalem? Whilst
the Jewish ^^economy lasted, this could be sung with truth; but now it cannot
-- these things exist no more Psalms, 81.2, 3 -- 98. 5, 6. -- 150.3, 4, 5. --
51, 18, 19 -- 66.13, 14, 15. -- 84.3, 4, 5.
. Many similar instances might be produced; but these are sufficient to
illustrate the truth I am establishing. If it should be said, that we ought not
now to sing these, and such like psalms in their literal meaning, but should
gospelize them; and that many do actually thus paraphrase and expound before
they sing them: -- then I reply, that this, in reality, gives up the point, and
establishes the very principle I am pleading for. It is a tacit acknowledgment
that some of the psalms at least, in their plain and literal sense -- the sense
in which, it is certain, they were used under the former dispensation, are not
suited to gospel times. And, methinks, the most zealous contenders for the
propriety of singing these psalms without exception should consider a moment,
whether they themselves sing them in reality, when they drop any part of their
original meaning, and substitute their own notions in its room. Certainly, mere
words neither constitute prayer nor praise -- They both mainly consist in the
ideas of the mind and sentiments of the heart: and if these be different from
the original meaning of the composition we use, it is not that composition, but
something else which, in truth, we offer to God. But notwithstanding that
praise does not consist in mere words, yet when we have words enough to express
our meaning plainly and pertinently, it must be very absurd, if not a kind of
mockery, to approach the Most High with expressions in our mouths to which we
have either no meaning at all, or one very different from their obvious sense,
and that which they were originally intended to convey.

But beside all this, and supposing there was not a single reference to the
ceremonies of the Law, in the psalms of David, yet I presume every one must
grant they are far short of the fullness and clearness of the Gospel: and from
this consideration I plead, that christians should not confine themselves to
them. The difference between the discoveries made under the Jewish, and under
the christian dispensation, maybe fifty illustrated by the imperfect knowledge
we have of a person who has always appeared veiled to us, in comparison of that
which we have when all the teatures and lineaments of his face are clearly
reslected to our eye from the brightest mirror. This ^l^stration, the Apostle
himself uses.

It is necessary that prophecy should we obscure -- if it were not, the moral
agency of man must be destroyed, in order to the accomplishment of the
predicted events. And it is the nature of an introductory dispensation to be,
comparatively, imperfect. This, in truth, is the fact, in the case before us;
for, as I have already proved, there are many objects of knowledge, and
subjects of praise discovered in the gospel, which are not to be found in any
part of the Old Testament. So that, if we confine ourselves to the psalms of
David, we shall exclude from our songs of praise, the distiaguishing glories of
the gospel, and still hold the vail upon the lovely face of the redeemer -- we
shall ungratesully reject the light, and resolutely continue in the obscurity
of the former dispensation.

And now, probably, you will be ready to enquire, what shall christians sing;
and what shall be the rule of their direction in this important part of
religious worship? To this I answer, just as your shorter catechism answers the
question, What rule has God given for our direction in prayer? In like manner,
the whole word of God is of use to direct us in praise; but the special rule of
direction is the Gospel -- the New Testament. Or, more particularly, thus,
Although we ought not to confine ourselves to the psalms of David, as I hope I
have proved to your satisfaction, yet there are many of them, and other parts
also of the Old Testament, which so excellertly express the exercises of a
pions and devout heart, and so sublimely extol the Most High, without any
reference to the peculiarities of that dispensation which is now abolished,
that they contain matter peoper to be sung to the end of the world. To these
should be added those glorious subjects of praise which the Gospel alone
reveals. And there are christians qualified to form all these into plain and
agreeable verse. It is then the business of the, Church, that is to say, the
Supreme judicatory thereof to examine and judge of these compositions; and,
having selected such of them as they shall deem proper and sufficient, appoint
them to be used in public worship. This same collection may also serve,
generally, for family, and even the most secret praise. I say, generally; for I
openly declare, that in private, a christian is not bound to confine himself to
any collection of such compositions; but that, if he has a capacity to compose
a psalm, hymn, or spiritual song, he has a right so to do, and to sing it in
praise, just as he has a right to use his own words in prayer. And when any
person shall disprove the one, I will also, from the same principles disprove
the other. I proceed,

Fifth. To remove any difficulties or objections which may seem to lie against
the preceding view of the subject. To some, this branch of the subject may,
very possibly, seem quite unnecessary: and, indeed, from the manner in which I
have treated it, I presume, an answer may be found, either directly, or by easy
consequence, to any objection that can be raised against it. Nevertheless,
least any one should be perplexed with difficulties speciously proposed, I
shall state those which I have not so directly obviated.

First. It is said, that if we do not sing all the psalms of David, or
introduce any others into the worship of God, we shall weaken the authority of
that sacred book, and aid the cause of deism.

Is it so then, my brethren, that we weaken the authority of all that scripture
which we do not practice as it was once done? Then, indeed, we must observe all
the laws and ordinances respecting the distinction between clean and unclean
beasts -- washings -- sacrisices -- circumcision -- the passover -- and in one
word, all the ceremonial and judicial law of the Jews, which constitutes a
considerable part of sacred scripture. -- These were all divine institutions --
binding upon, and actually practiced by the church of old. And yet, after all,
I presume, the objectors themselves would deem it an abomination to practice
some, at least, of these things now. With what face then can it be said, that
we weaken the authority of the psalms of David, merely because we do not use
them as a system of psalmody in gospel times, as they were appointed to the
Jews? Let it he observed also, that there are many songs recorded in the Old
Testament, and sung by the church then, which are not to be found in the book
of psalm; such as the song of Moses on passing the red sea Exodus 1^.
-- the song of Hezekiah Isai. ^8, 10, ^0
-- of Habakkuk, which he particularly directs to the chief musician Hab. 3.
-- the song which Jeremiah composed on the death of Josiah, the singing of
which, he made a statute in Israel a Chron. 35, ^5.
, and more that might be mentioned. Is the authority of these weakened because
neither Jews nor christians sing them now? I presume, not, This is the very
objection in effect, which was bro't by the Jews and judaizing teachers against
the Apostles of Christ, when they taught that the Jewish ritual of worship and
all their ceremonial ordinances were abolished. But, I think, there is no
christian now, who believes they were guilty of the charge. And if they were
not, I beseech you to consider seriously, how it can lie against any, merely
for singing those psalms which have so direct and immediate a reference to
those ordinances -- have so much of that abolished ritual interwover with the
very subject matter of them, that if the one ceases to exist, the other
necessarily ceases with it, i. e. as to its fitness and obligation to be
practiced in gospel times. Nay, my brethren, we revere the sacred scripture in
all its parts -- the Old as well as the New Testament; and regard it as the
oracles of the only living and true God. But we desire to regard and use it
according to its true end and design; not confounding and mixing together those
things which God has separated -- not blending Judaism with christianity; but
by giving every thing its proper place, both as to faith and practice,
according as it respects the dispensations that have ceased, or as it regards
that last and best, under which we live, and which alone declares the worship
and ordinances which the King and head of the Church has appointed for his
followers, now The above objection, in substance, has been advanced in another
form, thus, "Whatever is sit to be read, is fit to be sung; if therefore we may
not sing all the psalms of David, neither must we read them, and thus we shall
reject them entirely." Nothing can be more weak and absurd than this cavil.
Reading and singing are quite dictinct ordinances in their nature, and often in
their object and end. Singing in praise of God, is, in its nature a direct and
immediate act of religious worship and adoration; reading is not so. -- In
singing praises, God is the immediate object, and the primary end, is to
celebrate his supreme glory and perfection, in himself and in his works and
ways; in reading, the primary end is instruction and edification. Singing is a
natural, and an appointed mean of expressing our spiritual joy; reading is not
so; and hence, when one is in this frame, the Apostle does not enjoin it upon
him to read, but to sing psalms (Jam. 5.13). From this, it is easy to see, that
many things may be sit matter for reading, which would be very improper to be
sung in praise to God. I shall illustrate this by an example -- It is
undoubtedly proper to read every part of scripture; but suppose a person were
to take the first chapter of the first book of Chronicles, for instance, and
sing, as an act of religious worship and praise to God, the genealogical line
of descent from Adam to Noah, from thence to Abraham, -- then trace the line
through Ishmael a little, -- then turn to Esau, trace the line through him a
while, and conclude with a list of the Kings and Dukes of Edom. Or, suppose he
were to take the second chapter of the book of Ezra, and sing in like manner,
the numbers of these who returned with Zerubbabel from the Babylonish captivity
-- together with the names of the towns and districts to which they
respectively belonged, and the number of the horses, camels, asses, and knives
This particular is in chapter 1, 9.
which they brought with them to Jerusalem -- What would you think of the
exercise? Or what opinion would you conceive of the performer? You would surely
conclude, that he was divested of reason, or that he intended to turn the duty
of singing the praises of God, into ridicule.


Second. It is objected, that the plan I have pled for, is substituting human
composures in the room of Divine inspiration, and will be attended with many
dangerous consequences.

This objection arises from an entire mistake of the point. There is an
essential difference between the matter and the form of every subject. Hence,
the subject matter of a psalm may be divine, i. e. by divine inspiration: and
the form of it, merely human: -- and this is actually the case in that system
and version of psalms, which the objectors themselves contend for. By the form
of a psalm, I mean the phrases chosen to express the sense -- the manner and
order of arranging the words and sentences -- and the measure of the verse.
Now, supposing that God had dictated to David, Asaph, and others, all this, as
well as the ideas or subject matter of the psalms, yet this would only be the
case in the original language in which the revelation was made: so soon as ever
they were translated, the form was changed, and became human. This is still
further evident in the poetical version which we have hitherto used; many of
the words and phrases are even different from those used in the prose
translation, and the form is merely human; unless we suppose Rouse was divinely
inspired when he versified the psalms, and that the Holy Spirit dictated to him
the very phrases and measure of his verse; which, I am sure, no man of sober
sense ever believed. It is evident, therefore, to a demonstration, that the
form of David's psalms, as they stand in our version, is human, although the
subject matter of them is divine. Now, this is precisely the case in the
psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs formed from suitable parts of scripture in
general, and particularly from the New Testament, as I have mentioned before:
the form -- the composition, will be human; but the subject matter, divine. For
surely every christian believes, that the gospel is from heaven -- that it is
given by divine inspiration, in as high a sense as the book of psalms, or any
other part of scripture. And it is certain, that the subject matter of it is
much more clearly and fully discovered, than the matter of David's psalms; for
many of them were prophetic, which is always obscure; and many of them typical,
which it is often difficult to unfold.

As for dangerous consequences there are none attending this mode, more than
any other, in which imperfect creatures are concerned. Certainly the sense, the
mind of the Holy Spirit in the New Testament, can be as faithfully preserved
and expressed in a poetical, as in a prose translation or discourse. And I
leave it with every one heartily to judge, whether there is not much more
danger of mingling our own fancies, and mistaken notions with the matter of our
praise, when we expound the psalms of David for ourselves, or depend upon the
exposition of every preacher; -- than when we have the subject in so plain a
dress as not to need an exposition -- when we have it constantly in possession,
so that we can leisurely compare it with the unerring standard -- and when too,
it has received the approbation of the supreme judicatory of the church.

Third. It is said, that Christ and his disciples used the psalmody of the
Jewish church -- And that if he had deemed it unfit for the gospel
dispensation, he would have given his church a new system.

The first part of this objection has no force, because Christ and his
disciples during his abode on earth, were under the Jewish dispensation, to
which that psalmody was suited. Hence they observed the ceremonial law, but
this does not oblige us to observe it. The point here is not, what was proper
under the law, but what is so under the gospel. Beside, it can never be proved
that the Savior confined himself to that system: and as I have already
observed, it is more than probable he composed an hymn at the celebration of
his own supper.

The other part of the objection, viz. that if he had deemed the Jewish
psalmody unfit for the christian dispensation, he would have given his church a
new system, I totally deny; and for this plain reason, because it was not
necessary. And that it was not necessary, I hope the following considerations
will satisfy you.

The gracious Savior has provided and left in his word, and by the ordinary
influences of his Holy Spirit, sufficient furniture of light, gifts, and
graces, for all the parts of religious worship, without leaving a system or
liturgy, in the precise words of which, we should either pray, or praise, or
preach. Indeed, in the first age of the christian church, when as yet the full
revelation of all things which pertain to life and godliness was not made, nor
the canon of New Testament scripture collected together; extraordinary aid was
necessary, and was accordingly afforded in every part of divine worship,
whether praying, praising, or preaching. This is evident from many parts of the
New Testament, particularly from the 12th and 14th chapters of Paul's first
epistle to the Corinthians, already referred to. But when the canon of
scripture was completed, with a fullness and clearness so great, that he who
runs may read and understand, this extraordinary aid ceased; and even those
inspired prayers, hymns, and sermons, are not recorded, And can we need a more
satisfactory proof, that liturgies composed for these purposes, are not
necessary now? Let not christians depreciate their privileges, nor think meanly
of their advantages: If you do, you will neither improve them wisely, nor feel
that gratitude to your God and Savior for them, to which you are under so many
endearing obligations. I repeat it, therefore, the church now, and individuals,
have furniture provided for them, in the ordinary way, for all the worship they
are called respectively to perform -- a furniture rich, abundant, and
overflowing. The Gospel reveals the subject matter in the fullest and clearest
manner -- the Holy Spirit, as a spirit of hight, of sanctification, and of
comfort, is more abundantly communicated, than under former dispensations --
insomuch, that the weakest true christian now, has a more complete knowledge of
Gods merciful purpose and device for the salvation of fallen man -- the method
of accomprishing it -- and the acceptable way of a sinners approach to the Most
High, than the greatest Old Testament prophet. Probably, by some, this will be
thought ^old language^ yet it is not bolder than I am warranted to use, both by
the Old and New Testament. To prove this, observe the strong language of the
prophet Isaiah, "Moreover the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the
sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days,
in the day that the Lord binds up the breach of his people and heals the
stroke of the wound." Isai. 30, 26.
Nothing can be more evident, from the whole preceding context, than that this
refers to gospel times, and is a prophetic description of the happy
circumstances of the Jews when they should embrace the gospel; and as light,
when the term is used figuratively, almost universally means knowledge and
understanding, the obvious sense of the passage is, that when they should be
converted to christianity, their knowledge would as far exceed what they, under
the law, possessed, as the light of the sun exceeds the light of the moon, or
as the light of seven days or seven suns collected, exceeds the light of a
single one (b). Still more strong is the language of Zechariah, "In that day
shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is This passage
has been interpreted as if by the moon, was meant the type, and by the sun the
antitype -- that both are to be kept in immediate view under the gospel -- and
that both will thus be better understood. -- For, say these expositors, on this
plan we shall have the type and the antitype mutually shining upon and
illustrating each other, like the sun and the moon. And all this is said to
prove, that we should use the typical language and ceremonial references of the
book of psalms, in christian worship. This is, truly, as strange an
interpretation as one could well imagine. Sure I am, the holy spirit never used
such an unnatural figure, as upon the above hypothesis, this would be. For, let
me ask, did any person ever see it, or is it a truth, that the moon shines upon
the sun, and adds to his light and splendour? No surely. On the contrary, her
faint rays are all borrowed from him -- when he appears in our horizon, she is
immediately eclipsed, disappears in the blaze of his refulgent orb, and becomes
useless to us in point of communicating light -- It is only in his absence that
she is, or can be beneficial in this respect. It is just so in the other case.
When the glorious SUN of righteousness has arisen, and is shining upon as with
meridian brightness, types and shadows should slay away -- they may injure, but
profit us they cannot -- and like the moon, which, by being interposed, hides
something of the sun's light, even so these, so far as they are made the
immediate objects of our contemplation, will obscure our views of the redeemer.
feeble among them at that day, shall be as David; and the house of David shall
be as God, as the angel of the Lord before them." Zech. 12, 8.
It will not be disputed, I presume, that this refers to spiritual and
religious advantages under the gospel; advantages so far superior to what were
enjoyed under the law, that the feeble, the weakest christian among the Jews
when converted to the faith, will be as David, in point of religious
seize -- and the house of David, the more advanced christians among them,
as the angel of God in comparison of David. The language of the New Testament
is still more express to this purpose. Our Lord spoke to his disciples thus,
"For I tell you, that many prophets and Kings have desired to see those things
which ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear those things which ye hear,
and have not heard them." Luke 10, 24.
If this was the case with regard to his disciples, long before the full
display of gospel light, and when, as yet, they were but babes in christian
knowledge; how much more must it be so with those who enjoy the noon day light
of the Gospel. In another place our Lord thus declares, "for I say unto you,
among those that are born of woman there is not a greater prophet than John the
Baptist: but he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he." Luke
7, 28.
-- The kingdom of God, or, the kingdom of Heaven, as Matthew, in a parallel
passage, record it, Matt, 11, 11, 12.
is but another expression for the gospel dispensation, which is evident, both
because our Lord almost always uses it in this sense, and because the following
verse in Matthews's gospel confines it thereto. John the Baptist neither
wrought miracles, nor predicted future events to any such degree as many
prophets that had arisen before him; consequently, the only point in which he
was superior to them all, was his superior knowledge of gospel mysteries, and
if the least in the kingdom of God, the weakest true christian under the full
light of the gospel, be greater than John, it must be in the same sense, that
is to say, he is acquainted with many things in the plan of salvation which
were not revealed to John himself; and therefore, such a christian knows much
more of these glorious things than the greatest Old Testament prophet. These
scriptures will, I hope, satisfy you that I have not asserted too much. And if
such be the furniture of the christian church, and of its weakest members --
such their transcendent advantages beyond what was enjoyed under any former
dispensation -- can it be true that they have not sufficient means for praising
God, without having a liturgy composed for them in an extraordinary way; or
without having recourse to that system of psalmody, which, in comparison of the
discoveries and light of the gospel, is but as the dusky twilight to the
perfect day? Judge ye.

Fourth. It is objected by some, that it is so difficult to attain sufficient
skill in music, to sing in the manner I have pled for, that the bulk of each
congregation will be prevented from joining in the public praise of God -- that
part of worship, must be committed to a select choir -- and, we will become so
fond of the music as to neglect the exercise of grace in the heart.

My brethern, if any one of these things necessarily attended the mode I have
recommended, I would give it up at once. But sure I am, this is not the case.
-- I well know that mankind are prone to extremes, as well on the one side, as
on the other. This is actually the case with us now, and we have sunk to one
extreme in our mode of performing this duty: for I can scarcely conceive in
what more miserable manner we could perform it, supposing us to sing at all.
And must we not attempt a reformation and seek to do right, for fear of running
into the opposite extreme? It is always fallacious to reason against the use of
any thing, from the abuse of it. That some may pay more attention to the music
than to the frame of their heart, I readily grant, but surely the music is not
the cause of this; on the contrary, as I have shown, it is designed and
calculated to aid and promote these gracious frames. We may also err by
introducing such a variety of tunes into public worship, and in such quick
succession, that the greatest part of the congregation cannot be acquainted
with them. But it is easy to guard against this evil -- there is no necessity
for changing our airs every month, nor every year -- Yea, and supposing us
never to change them, yet this should not prevent us from singing, with
propriety, those we do use. And I must farther maintain, that to learn to sing
thus with propriety, neither requires uncommon talents, nor extraordinary pains
-- It is as easy, as the mode we use, provided we adopt the proper method of
learning, and the teacher understands his business; and in this, I speak from
certain knowledge. To sing, as I have mentioned various parts must, indeed, be
performed together: but it is not necessary that those who sing one part,
should be able to sing the others -- to that one, if they please, they may
confine themselves to every tune -- and it is as easy to learn one part as
another. To some, indeed, this mode will be much easier than the present, when
all are confined to one part: for as there is a variety in the parts suited to
different voices, as they are fine or course, high or low, there is an
opportunity of a choice according to the natural tone of the voice; in
consequence of which, the performing of it will be more easy and pleasurable.
And now, where is the extraordinary difficulty in all this? There is none. --
Moreover experience and facts prove the practicability of it. I do not
recollect that I ever heard a congregation, or even private family of Germans
singing the praises of God, but they sung in concert, and made harmony -- Are
we so dull and stupid that we cannot learn to do the same? I am sure, we are
not. But the truth is the prejudice of education, or the want of proper
disposition to the duty lies at the bottom of the objection. Had we that
delight in singing the praises of God, and that desire to qualify ourselves in
the best manner for the performance of the duty, that many of us have in
learning, empty, silly songs, or other as unprofitable things, we would not
make mountains of molehills; we would cheerfully devote some of that time to
the acquisition of the skill, which many trifle away in such pursuits as will
fill them with unutterable anguish when they are called to render their final
account.

And now, to conclude -- Let every one receive, with reverence, the word of
exhortation, and conscientiously apply himself to carry the apostle's direction
into practice. If you believe the gospel to be divine, you will certainly own,
that the treasures of it are incomparably superior to all the treasures of
earth -- that they will enrich and make you happy, when the other will vanish
like an empty pageant, or amusing dream whem one awaketh. Let us all exercise
ourselves daily in learning more and more of the word of Christ, which is able
to make us wise unto salvation, and to furnish us abundantly, through the
influences of the Holy Spirit, for every word and work. Particularly, let us
use it for our direction and edification, in singing the praises of our God and
Savior, as furnishing us with matter for the most exalted strains the church,
on earth, can raise. Let us be much employed in this delightful exercise -- let
the voice of praise be heard in our habitations, as well as in the church --
and let us not grudge to spend a little time and pains to qualify ourselves for
singing skilfully, with an harmonious noise.

Let us be ready to fall in with, and promote every attempt to improve our
psalmody, in agreeableness to the word of Christ. If the principles I have laid
down be true, certainly our psalmody needs improvement. In this sentiment I am
not singular. Many pious, and enlightened christians have long wished for
psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, more in the style, the spirit, and light of
the gospel, than the psalms framed for the Jewish dispensation. At length Dr.
Watts arose, and gave the world an imitation of David's psalms, in the language
of the New Testament; as also a number of hymns, and spiritual songs, formed on
other parts of scripture, especially the gospel. His performance was highly
esteemed by many; and as much condemned by others; not, so far as I have
learned, because there was any thing heterodox in it, but because the author
had advanced, and attempted to bring into practice, the principles I have
endeavored to establish. His compositions, however, were soon used, in
religious worship, public and private, by many christians as well of our own,
as of other denominations; although the supreme judicatory of our church had not,
as yet, given an express sanction to them. At length our Synod took up the
matter judicially, and appointed a committee to examine the different versions
of the book of psalms, to which they could have access, and from them to select
such a collection as they should judge best; and to lay it before Synod at a
future meeting, for their consideration. In pursuance of this appointment, the
committee proceeded on the business, and after a considerable time, reported to
this purpose, that having compared such versions as they could obtain, they did
not apprehend any so well calculated for christian worship, as that of Dr.
Watts, as amended by Mr. Barlow, of New England. The version, thus amended, was
then laid before Synod for their consideration, who, after mature deliberation,
gave it their judicial sanction, as you may see in a printed extract from their
minutes, bound up with the said version. The committee had also added a book of
hymns to this version; but it was laid aside, not because Synod disapproved of
the thing in itself, but because ^ome parts of the collection appeared to them
exceptionable. Very probably a collection of this kind will yet be added -- and
indeed, my brethren, so many are the peculiar and interesting discoveries of
the gospel -- so many the passages which contain the most fit and excellent
matter for christian praise, that until we have hymns and spiritual songs
formed upon them, I am clearly persuaded, and I trust, by this time, so are
you, our psalmody will be incomplete.

In the mean time, as we have the opportunity now, of advancing a considerable
step in the improvement of our psalmody, let us cheerfully and thankfully
embrace it, and walk in the light and liberty wherewith our divine Lord has
made us free, to the honor of his precious name, and our own greater
edification. Let us endeavor to divest ourselves of prejudice and prepossession
-- and give the version a fair and candid examination. This is surely the least
that, in reason and conscience, you can do, whether you view the matter with
regard to Synod, or to yourselves; for although Synod has not pretended to force
this version on any congregation or individual, yet, methinks, some respect is
due to the judgment of that body to which we profess subjection in the Lord.
And then, remember that you are deeply and personally interested in this
matter, as accountable to God. For if, after you have been favored with the
clearest discoveries of the way of a sinner's approach to God, and acceptance
with him, you are found not walking according to the gospel, and especially, if
after being warned and admonished, you obstinately reject, or carelessly
neglect the opportunity of improving, you will not be able to answer for it to
your final Judge.

In examining the version now recommended, I hope you will keep in view the
things you have now heard. But, above all, seek by earnest prayer, the
direction of the Holy Spirit, whose office it is to take of the things of
Christ, and show them unto us -- that he would lead you in the path of duty --
and teach you, and the whole church on earth, the truth as it is in Jesus.

And now unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood;
and has made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; unto him be glory
and dominion forever and ever, Amen. Yea, unto God the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, be undivided honors and eternal praises. Amen.

FINIS.

