THE CASE OF Robert M'Knight, A Bankrupt, Written by himself in Prison at
Philadelphia, 1792.
^OM the month of August 1780, until March 1782, I was in partnership (...)
Hampton Rownd, on the close of which, it appeared that the profits were (...)
17 -- one half of which was mine. During this partnership, William Alli^ of the
executors of John Mease, had frequently called on me to assist him (...) ^ating
his account for that estate. This I did, and, had a good deal of my (...) then
taken up with that business -- no satisfaction for which has ever been (...)
nor for any writings performed by me for him since.

A suit had been brought against him before the orphans court in 1774,
respecting the commissions allowed by the register general on an account of
that estate to September 1773. Matthew Mease and other legatees were
dissatisfied with the sum of L2,420 commissions allowed to the executors, and
their account was laid before auditors, who reduced the commissions to L1,500.
This, William Allison, the acting executor demurred to, and a hearing was to
have been had before the orphans court in 1775: but by reason of the departure
of Matthew Mease to Eu^ the latter end of 1774, and soon after that of his
lawyer R. Tilghman to the (...) Indies, no further step was taken in this
business until the late war was pretty (...) advanced, during which time the
courts were not much troubled with civil ^ters. But in the year 1780, on the
arrival of Matthew Mease from Europe, ^tation issued to William Allison to
appear before the orphans court with his ^ccount, which was done in December of
that year. On this business I attended with William Allison to explain the
account. Several meetings were had and in the spring 1781 the court gave a
decision so as to allow L58 more for commissions ^han the auditors did. This
decision respected the transactions of the estate so far only as September
1773. Another account was called for, of the transactions which had taken place
from 1773 to 1781. This was drawn out by me and con^rd of a full quire of
paper, and when presented to the court was referred to ^tors. I had to attend
them several times and a great deal of my time was tak^ in drawing a statement
of the case, which was somewhat complex, owing ^he receipt of continental
money, a variety of calculations, and other circum^ances, not now necessary to
relate. The report of these auditors was not satisfactory, either to William
Allison or the legatees, and an appeal was had to the supreme court; where if
the advice of the writer had been followed, Wm. Allison would have saved some
thousand pounds; but by suffering the cause to go to referees, the legal ground
was lost and the referees decided in such manner as to do great injury to
William Allison.

It may seem trite and not at all pertinent to introduce the affairs of John
(...) into a vindication of my conduct, but it appeared necessary to the writer
to in what manner the partnership of Allison and M'Knight arose, because (...)
been asserted that I was under great obligations to William Allison, when (...)
verse is the truth: for it was in consequence of the frequent applications
(...) William Allison made for my assistance in writing during the partners^
M'Knight and Rownd, that he took a favorable opinion of my attention ^siness,
and of the safety of a capital should he employ one in a partnership, (...)
revolved in mind to be proposed. Early in 1782, I had resolved to close the
par^ship of M'Knight and Rownd, and in several conversations with William A^
prior to its dissolution, I thought I could perceive that he had a desire to
join (...) in trade: this was as I then thought a more promising view than any
I could expect b^ remaining the partner of Rownd. I had lived as a clerk to
William Allison (...) 1766 and 1767 and knew him then to be a man who had
considerable wealth, a^ believed that from that time, by the sugar baking
business he had acquired (...) more considerable property. I therefore
concluded that such a partner would (...) very valuable one, but in this I have
found my mistake. On the same day (...) Rownd and I had resolved to part,
William Allison proposed himself as a pa^ and asked me if L2,000 in cash would
not be sufficient capital for him to b^ I told him I had upwards of L1,500
myself in trade, and that I thought with (...) sum he mentioned a clever trade
might be supported in the retail way, as at (...) time little or no credit was
given. On the night of this same day John She mentioned to me that he
understood that Rownd and me had parted, and he a (...) me if I would have a
partner. I told him it was too late for I had engaged: (...) did not say with
whom, for it was the wish expressed by William Allison that the business should
be conducted under my name only, nor did it appear otherwise until September
1783 when a store was opened at his house in Front Street. When the partnership
commenced, the shop in Second Street was in want of printed goods, which I
mentioned to William Allison and told him Mr. Woodward had an invoice, it would
answer to purchase, amounting to near L400, on which could have a month's
credit. The purchase was agreed upon, and late in Ap^ called on William Allison
for the money to pay for this and other parcels whi^ were bought at vendue: he
gave me L600, and while I was writing a receipt for it, he said "perhaps I
might not like to be concerned in the goods you have on hand." The receipt was
nearly finished when this observation was made, I therefore added words to this
effect, that if a loss should obtain on the goods I had on hand at the
commencement of the partnership, such loss should be charged to me. With this
he was satisfied.

In the summer of 1782, two parcels of goods arrived from France, in which
William Allison was interested. These were brought by him into the partnership;
but they consisted for a great part in Marseiles quilting for men's wear,
dimittys and other goods by no means saleable, many of which remained on hand
several years after the peace and were sold at vendue to a loss: these two
parcels amouted to about L1,600. A further sum of L150 in cash was put into the
capital by William Allison this year. The business was chiefly conducted in
1782 and 1783 until the peace by purchases of invoices and at vendue, to amount
of L400^ and the sales were very promising to amount of L6000 and upwards, and
although the peace caught us with a considerable value on hand and reduced that
value at least to one half, yet on a rough statement in December 1783 and on a
low valua^ the goods then on hand, a profit appeared of L2000 supposing them
sold at ^ow valuation. While John Moylan was clothier General and when it was
^lt to procure funds by the government to pay the people who worked up the ^ng.
I called on him with a friend and offered to supply those people to whom
^derable amount was due, goods at retail prices, on his orders, provided he
(...) to me the amount in notes of the financier, this he agreed to and I (...)
and 1783 before the news of peace arrived to the amount of about which enabled
the company to meet the fall in value of goods, much bet^ would otherwise have
been the case, had not this speculation offered.

^n summer of 1783 when I was at vendue buying such goods as I knew to be go^
off low, a message was brought to me from William Allison by his son, to de^
from purchasing any more at vendue. This I was chagrined at, because I knew
first cost to be considerably above the prices I was buying at, and that we
were ^o vend the goods to a profit by retail. I however desisted, though at
this (...) my own name only appeared in the business.

(...) August of this year three regiments of Massachusetts troops were ordered
^hiladelphia, who had been paid three months pay for January, February ^arch of
that year -- one month in cash and two months in the notes of the ^ier. The
officers and privates had drawn orders on their regimental paymast^r other
months in that year, and it was expected by the officers, that though the ^y
would be settled with up, and paid to the 1st of January 1783, with notes of
(...) paymaster General -- yet that their future pay would be in money or the
finan^ notes. Some of the officers and privates had passed their orders for
goods ^th several shopkeepers, and it was suggested to me by John Lisle sen*
that ^erhaps it would be a good speculation. On hearing this I called on Peter
White^ of whom I had bought goods to a considerable amount to be paid for with
the notes to be received from John Moylan, and I asked Whiteside's opinion: he
said it seemed to be a good speculation, and gave me some goods to sell in that
way, (...) did Stephen Austin also. Whiteside promised to ask one who could
give the best ^formation. I was sitting at my door at night, when Samuel
Caldwell was go^ home and I mentioned it to him -- he did not discourage it,
but signified that (...) called on him early in the morning, he would walk out
with me to the en^pment and consult major Gibbs. I called, we went out, and
Gibbs gave it as (...) opinion and as the expectation of the army, that their
pay from January, would (...) paid in cash and notes of the financier -- but
that some delay might take place. ^mmediately begun a sale, to the officers and
soldiers of these regiments and con^ued it during five days to amount of 6000
dollars and upwards. In this (...) I (...) been frequently to enquire whether
the speculation was safe, but not until the fifth ^y did Whiteside signify it
was dubious. I then stopped further sales, and in the ^llowing year procured
the paymaster General's notes for the goods sold. It may (...) be improper to
add, that the goods were sold at fair retail prices such as I had (...) selling
at for cash, having had a good opinion that the money was safe, though ^ht not
be very soon obtained. And to prevent the least reflection that might (...) on
this business, I would not sell to the privates but in presence of a Captain
^baltern, who staid to see that the men took no articles but such as were pro^
for apparel. They were therefore marched into town in companies under care of
commissioned officers. The paymaster General's notes were exchanged for
treasury notes and equally divided one half in the name of William Allison and
the ^ther half in my name -- his half was delivered to his executor John
Bleakley, on ^e 10th of March, 1789. The drawing of such a sum out of a small
capital, was no doubt a heavy inconvenience -- but I contend it was with the
most upright vie^ and at worst can be termed an unfortunate speculation.

In September 1783, William Allison signified that he could wish to go into
(...) whole sale business; that he had a good store unoccupied at his house in
(...) Street; that he expected several sums of money paid in, that were out at
int^^ and he would be in time prepared to make remittance for goods to be imp^^
from England -- intimating also, that if we could not punctually remit, the
(...) would only draw 5 per cent, and that borrowing here was not easily done
(...) per cent. I was no doubt pleased with a prospect of increasing wealth,
hav^^ then a growing family to provide for. Accordingly the uncut goods on hand
at my dwelling in Second Street were moved to his house in Front Street to
amount of L3000 and upwards, and purchases were made of invoices to amount of
L5000, and in the fall of that year he applied to Jeremiah Warder for a letter
of introduction to his brother John then in London to supply to my order a
quantity of dry goods (...) exceeding L4000 sterling. The order was sent and
goods shipped per the Co^merce Captain Truxton to amount of L1349 sterling and
per the Prince of (...) Captain All to amount of L1367 sterling. Those by the
Commerce arrived (...) spring 1784 to good sales -- but those by the Prince of
Liege were unfor^^ carried to Fayal and left there until the ship Merchant came
from Lond^ (...) took them on board for Philadelphia. It was about September
they arrived to a glutted market, and entirely out of time for the intended
spring and summer sales* Here was a disagreeable situation, little money
collected toward remittance, no hope of immediate or early sight of money for
the certificates, which induced us to think of making no importation for one
year at least. At this time it was my opinion that the whole stock of goods
should be sold off at public sale and the money thence arising laid out in
balloon certificates, but William Allison would not hear of it. That kind of
certificates were then about 2s9 to 3s in the pound, not counting the interest
due on them, and in fact there was more interest due, than the purchase money
would amount to. This speculation would have been attended with uncommon
success, for,

In the fall of 1784, Francis Allison (nephew of Captain Allen formerly of the
British navy, who died leaving his estate to be equally divided among the
children of his three sisters, one of whom Francis Allison was) applied to
William Allison to assist him in the recovery of his legacy. This was done by
application to Mier^ Fisher who prepared the papers necessary for the
identification of the person (...) Francis Allison, and the house of Allison
and M'Knight transmitted them to Warder and Co. of London to obtain the legacy.
While the writings were drawing, it was considered, that as the sum was
expected to be about L6000 sterling and that the Fishers house wanted L2000 in
England, they would give a conditio^al bond for that sum to Francis Allison for
so much to be placed to their cre^^ there -- and pay him here, as he might have
occasion for the money. It was there^^ concluded that the remaining L4000
should be placed to the credit of Allison an^ M'Knight with Warder and Co. and
a like conditional bond given and paymen^ made to Francis Allison, when
knowledge was received of the application. Things being in this train, but a
few small sums would have been necessary for our purposes here, had a sale and
investment taken place such as I proposed. Instead (...) which some years
elapsed, with the goods on the shelves, no sales could be mad^ of much amount,
owing to the -- then languishing state of the dry goods trade.

(...) the year 1786, it became necessary to make provision for payment of the
seve^^ drafts of Francis Alison, which came on fast from Virginia -- we were
there^^re under the disagreeable necessity of making sale, indeed of
sacrificing conside^^ble parcels of goods at vendue. These, w^ile William
Allison lived were sold ^^der the name of George Seneff, because William
Allison would not have them ^nown as ours. With the money thence arising and
sums borrowed from the (...) of David Caldwell and John Bleakley, those drafts
were paid. In this year (...) consent of William Allison, the remaining goods
were brought from his (...) to mine, where I had kept a few to sell by retail.
Some were sold in this ^ay, and much more sent to vendue -- and to amount of
L770 0 9 were sold to John M'Henry and Co. of Baltimore, which it is believed
will with other claims of William Allison against the heirs of David Caldwell,
extinguish any claim of that estate from his.

John Bleakley, in the year 1783, before his departure to Europe, appointed
William Allison his attorney in fact, who at that time owed him as a balance of
a former account L816. During his absence, the rent of Bleakley's Island and
his other estates were received, money and bills remitted. Part of this
business pas^^ through -- the books of Allison and M'Knight, and appear therein
when the (...) ^^fections took place -- other part of this business was done by
William Allison, ^^o about a fortnight before his death (which happened
suddenly on the 11th of ^^me 1787) told me, that he was pressed by John
Bleakley for an account between them from 1783 to 1787. I accordingly drew out
from the company books all that had come to my knowledge -- this I furnished,
but it was not satisfactory. Then William Allison put his cash account for this
estate into my hands, to draw out a full account of all the moneys of Bleakley,
had and paid by William Allison. This I did -- and of course all the items of
the account drawn from the books of the company, were included in this last
account of William Allison, as the attorney in fact, for John Bleakley, the
balance of which was L2518, in his favor: and to make the books of the company
conform with this account, the balance of Bleakley's account in them was
carried to the credit of William Allison. In the said ^ccount William Allison
makes a charge for commissions on the business done* of ^^71. -- no part of
which ever came as a credit to the company; therefore, the ^hole was considered
by me as a transaction which took place between William Alliso^ and John
Bleakley, and in this light it will be viewed now, as it was when the account
was drawn out, because it is impossible to prevent the estate of William
Allison from being liable to the estate of Bleakley, for the balance. Yet this
debt of William Allison, has been claimed from me, and suit brought in the year
1790 -- to which special bail was given.

In March 1787, I was appointed a Justice of the peace, for Walnut w^rd: the
^ecessary attention to the duties of which office, I soon found would employ
the ^^eater part of my time and the emoluments, I expected would prevent my
d^^w^^ out of the funds of the company, any sum of consequence. I had no hope
^^m the deranged situation of the partnership, to expect to do more than close
the ^^ounts in the best manner possible -- which was well known to William
All^son. (...) April or May of this year, Levi Hollingsworth and Miers Fisher,
who had ^een appointed trustees for Francis Alison, urged a meeting to take
place relative ^o his affairs. William Allison and myself went from his house,
and on the way ^he told me, that should a mortgage be required on his house in
Front street -- he ^ould not refuse it. I then replied, that sooner than his
real estate should be en^umbered, I would consent to the sale of all (...)
goods at vendue, although it would be inevitable ruin to me. The conversation
with Fisher and Hollingswo^^ ended in this -- that we would in the quickest
manner obtain money to pay the debt -- and on our return from Fisher's house,
William Allison expressed his pleasure with the interview and could not account
for how he got over giving a ^^gage. It may not be impertinent here to note,
that when it was known (...) ^^ladelphia, how much Francis Allison was to
receive, viz. L8000 inste^^ (...) L6000 sterling, he made a deed of gift to his
daughter of L1500 currency, (...) a like sum was to be secured for his wife.
One of these was to remain with A^^son and M'Knight, on interest at 6 per cent.
per annum. The sum applied (...) our credit in London, of Francis Allison's
legacy, was L5773 sterling, all (...) which has been paid or drawn for in
favor of him, or his trustees, excepting only the L1500 -- with some interest
and a part of a few notes.

The pressing demands for money, induced William Allison to ride into Bucks
County on the 11th of June, 1787, to obtain payment of L800 long due -- and to
settle other matters. He left town in his usual good health, but died suddenl^
before night, in walking from one plantation to another. He was removed (...)
town, and after his funeral, a rough statement of the partnership effects was
^^nished to his executors: some days after, John Caldwell expressed his fea^
(...) John Bleakley as executor, would take the company claim against John M'^^
and Co. in payment of the claim of Bleakley against William Allison's (...) and
Caldwell seemed pleased, that I had got back the rough statement which (...)
had furnished. Soon after, a particular inventory of the goods remaining on
hand; was drawn out, and the goods were valued by John Smith and Joseph Swift.
Hollingsworth and Fisher, being pressing for payment of all but the L1500, I
was constrained to dispose of the goods by public sale, with the privity of
William Allison, Junior, the only male heir of my late partner, then about
twenty years of age. He took some of the goods to vendue himself, and paid the
proceeds to Levi Hollingsworth. In October or November 1787, William Allison
the younger died, after a short illness, and I continued making sale of the
goods, principally at vendue, to make the necessary payments. Toward the end
of this year, I settled the account of Francis Allison, with his trustees
Fisher and Hollingswort^ by giving a variety of notes, payable at several times
in 1788 -- the most of which were paid -- some remained unpaid in the hands of
Levi Hollingsworth -- on which partial payments were made, until September
1789. At this time, suit was brought by Fisher and Hollingsworth -- against me,
on the bond for L4000 sterling and judgment was had in Ju^y term 1790, with
stay of execution until the 15th of September in that year.

Several applications had been made by the executor of William Allison, for a
settlement of the partnership accounts, but it was impossible to render any
sati^factory account, until the whole of the goods were sold and such debts
collecte^ as there was a probability of being good -- but an expectation I had
of borrowin^ such sum as I might be found to owe the company, and a wish to
procrastinate^ settlement, until I was enabled to make payment -- as also
waiting for the appr^ciation of the value of my share of the certificates, were
motives that governe^ and to me appeared insuperable barriers to the effecting
such settlement. Besid^ the executor was the creditor, of my late partner --
and his claim was great. I was fearful that the few lands I had purchased for
my children, would be sold from them -- and I was certain that the landed
property belonging to the heirs of my ^^tner, would be sacrificed. I therefore
wished to procrastinate the settlement, (...) order that not only my own
certificates, but also those of the heirs -- should ^^preciate -- for I knew my
partner had a little before his death, at least 5000 dol^^ in the public funds,
which with 3000 of his in my hands and afterward de^^red his executor -- was an
object worth striving to save -- his real estate in ^^delphia, though valuable,
could not have been sold at the time, at any thing (...) its real worth:
neither could his plantations in Chester county -- nor his un^^ed lands in
Westmoreland and Northumberland counties. However, because (...) could not name
a precise day, when the accounts should be settled -- after the ^^it was
brought by Fisher and Hollingsworth -- John Caldwell, brought an action (...)
account render against me. This chagrined me much, because I had sacri^^ced a
great part of my share of the goods of the partnership to prevent the estate ^f
the heirs from loss: and was striving and did prevent suit being brought for
more than two years after the death of my partner; whereas had I opened up the
business at his death, more loss to his heirs would have taken place, because
his (...) estate and certificates as well as the goods on hand, must have been
sold at a (...) value.

(...) may be objected that my share of the certificates obtained for the goods
sold to (...) Massachusetts line, were not applied to pay the partnership
debts: to this I answer, that it was my desire to retain them until they should
be worth 20s. in the pound -- but unfortunately for me I employed John
Caldwell, to defend an action, which the Bank of North America brought against
me, as the drawer of two lent notes, one to Mease and Caldwell for 250 dollars
-- the other to Samuel Caldwell, after the death of James Mease, for 250
dollars to take up the former, both of which were left unpaid at Bank, by
Samuel Caldwell, although he promised they should be taken up -- and the
president, while I was at Bank -- on other business, was shown these notes by
one of the clerks, when he told the clerk not to mind, for that Mr. Caldwell
promised to settle them. John Caldwell neglected to acquaint me of the day of
trial, until the day before it, though he knew well that I wished every legal
delay to take place, and I suppose from the delicacy of ^^se, which I wished
opened in court, he declined speaking to it. I then told ^im I would employ
another lawyer, which I did with his approbation, who I ^elieve did all he
could to put it off, but was obliged to confess judgment, though ^e said he
could have procrastinated it, had he been earlier employed. This is
^ufficiently confirmed by the management of another suit brought by the bank,
against Allison and M'Knight, at the same time with that against me, which that
lawyer kept off until April 1792 -- when judgment was given for L384 odd,
whereas the other judgment was obtained in 1789: after which a fieri facias,
issued which obliged me to sell a certificate of 2500 dollars, to make payment
of about ^^00 dollars -- the amount of the notes interest and costs, which I
paid to William ^^wis. I sold the certificate to Matthew M'Connel; to whom I
also sold the ^^mainder afterward. Although suit was brought against me by the
Bank for ^^ese notes -- I considered that I was by no means liable to pay them,
especially (...) Mease and Caldwell had two shares of Bank stock, which the
directors had it (...) their power to apply in payment of them. They were lent
notes and should have been taken up by Samuel Caldwell, for although I had an
unsettled account ^ith Mease and Caldwell -- it is my belief that house on a
fair settlement, will be found in my debt. The first note lent was for 1000
dollars, which was taken up at maturity, and another lent, for 800 -- this was
taken up and another lent for 600 which was taken up and another lent for 400,
this was also taken up, and another ^ent for 250 which was not taken up, but
another lent to take it up with; neither of which were paid until judgment was
obtained against me, when I was ob^ to pay them with near L.900 of my
certificates, which, together with one hal^ the losses in the partnership, will
constitute the sum which will be found to be ^ greater part of my debt to the
company. When Samuel Caldwell assigne^ effects to James Miller and Robert
Millegan, in the list and opposite to the (...) stock, he writes -- that if on
a settlement of account between Mease and Cal^ and Robert M'Knight -- they
should fall in his debt -- this stock should be a^ to the payment of th^se
notes -- or words to this effect, as well as I can remem^ the said list being
left some time in my custody. But lately I have been infor^ that the Bank had
set off the stock of Mease and Caldwell, against some indo^ment of theirs for a
friend.

On the 16th of September 1790, Miers Fisher and Levi Hollingsworth as tr^tees
of Francis Allison had me taken on a casa -- this I understood at the time
(...) by the persuasion of the executor of William Allison, (which has been
confirm^ by a note lately received from Miers Fisher,) although it has been
asserted o^wise. Since that day I have been confined in prison; a great deal of
slander (...) hear has been passed upon me; no advantage has been obtained by
my comment, without it be thought an advantage to oppress a man who has done
(...) was in his power to procrastinate the day of payment by the ^eirs of
William ^son -- for had suit been brought immediately on his death the estate
would no^ sold for one half, nay a third of what it will now sell for, the
certificates belon^ to it, if held to this time, are above par, and much less
difficulty has arisen to (...) heirs by the management of the company effects,
th^n would have taken place (...) an earlier knowledge of the business of the
partnership, and had I not had go^ reason to hope to obtain a loan sufficient
to enable me to pay my debt to the company, I undoubtedly would have shown such
statement of the accounts as was i^ my power. That other motives than those of
prudence governed those who ca^sed my confinement, to the taking that step, is
evident from this, that my ch^tels if taken on a f^ri faci^s would have paid
part of the debt, that a levari faci^ might then be had for my lands in
Pennsylvania, and in case that they proved (...) ^sufficient, a ca sa (should
it be thought necessary) might still have been had t^ I was under special bail
for L.1200, and that every sentiment of honor must (...) left me, before I
would do any act, to prejudice the gentleman who was my (...) that I had a tie
that would prevent my absconding (which my persecutors ha^ p^ended to suppose)
a wife and five children, who could alone depend on (...) for support -- one of
whom by their inhumanity I was precluded a ^ight of, wh^ dying, although it was
much desired by the child, a boy of near nine years o^ every offer that could
be made at the time proved nugatory, to the unfeeling persons I had to do with,
though no advantage would have been taken on my part.

A few days after my confinement some of my friends wished me to make o^tures,
which I did in writing to this effect, that if all the suits were withdraw
(...) would state the accounts charging each partner with his share of
outstanding d^ and bonds as also the real estate of the company, that then on a
fair investigat^ whatever sum should be found due by me to the partnership I
would give my be^ for, to the heirs of William Allison, to be paid by
installments, and in the (...) time I would assign all my share of the debts,
bonds and lands, as a security to t^ heirs. -- But this offer was contemned. In
August 1791, Doctor M'Henry calle^ to see me a little before the death of Mrs.
Allison, he seemed inclined to do e^er^ good office to obtain my enlargement,
to whom I made this offer, that I w^ engage to pay two thirds of any salary I
might obtain in any office, annually, (...) (...) the extinguishment of
whatever balance might be found due by me. But (...) the Do^tor took some pains
in this business as he told me, yet the final an^ was, that nothing short of an
assignment of all my effects would satisfy. This ^ould not consent to, because
I considered that the landed property I had would (...) than pay all my debts
if time was given and I did believe that I could not be (...) a bankrupt, my
case in strictness not coming within the bankrupt acts. On (...) ^th of
September 1792, John Lisle, Jan. called to acquaint me of an adver^ent which
appeared that morning in Dunlap's paper, for an accountant i^ the (...) of
North America. This being an office which I could fill in (...). ^d Mr. Lisle
to call on John Bleakley and acquaint him that should (...) would apply two
thirds of the salary to the payment of my debt and wrote him in ^hese words.
Sir, I understand that the bank of North America has adverti^ed for a complete
accountant, this office I am able to fill and if I should obtai^ it, I engage
to let two thirds of the salary go in extinguishment of the claim (...) the
heirs of Captain Allison or yourself may have against me, on (...) ^ment of the
partnership accounts, which will not depend on me totally, (...) must be
established before the Supreme Court. The judgment against (...) of the bank
will be looked for from the heirs: which may be prevented by (...) industry of
Robert M'Knight. On the 7th not having had any commu^ion with John Bleakley,
and fearing the place in the bank might be fil^ by ^other, I wrote the
President in these words. Sir, Having seen an advertisement in Dunlap's paper
for a complete accountant, for the bank of North America, and being conscious
of my capacity of filling that office with advantage to the institution and
with honor to myself, and more especially being anxious for an exoneration by
payment of the debt due to the bank for which judgment was obtained against me
in April last -- I offer my services to fill that office. I have signified my
intention to John Bleakley the executor of Captain Allison my late partner, and
offered to apply two thirds of the salary toward the extinguishment of such
balance as may be found against me, on a decision of the Supreme Court. As yet
I have not received his full determination -- but I suppose should no obstacle
prevent my approval by the directors -- Mr. Bleakley will accept the proposed
terms, and relieve me from a long, unprofitable and unnecessary confinement. As
to my fidelity I have no doubt of giving full security. In the afternoon of
this day ^ohn Cadwell and John Lisle Junior, called on me, when I made an of^er
which (...) will be found, had it been accepted, would be more beneficial to
the ^irs of William Allison, than will take place by making me a bankrupt. I
offered to mortgage above 2000 acres in Northumberland county, as also my half
of the company lands in Virginia and Kentucky, for such balance as should be
found against me, on the action of account render, which balance was to be of
(...) auditors and their judgment approved by the Supreme Court: that I would
^y two thirds of such salary as I should get from the Bank or otherwise, and
^st, that the interest of my debt to the heirs should be paid annually -- and
(...) requested was, that my lands should not be liable to sa^e for ten year^,
pro^ed this stipulation was complied with Here follows a sketch of a covenant I
expected would me^t the approbation of John Bleakley.

Whereas a co-partnership did exist from the year 1782, by and ^tween the late
Capt. William Allison and Robert M'Knight both of the city of Philadelphia, and
whereas, by several accidents in (...), considerable ^ns of money remain due
and owing by the s^ld partnership, and there are also several debts outstanding
and due unto the said partnership, also certain lands in the state of ^tucky
and Virginia belonging to the said co-partnership, and whereas, John ^ley
executor to the estate of the said William Allison and the said Robert M'K^
surviving partner, being willing to establish by a just and fair account and
^oning the affairs of the said co-partnership, and to do away all cause of ^shy
whatever relative thereto, have consented and agreed that the said (...)
Bleakley, shall procure the enlargement of the said Robert M'Knight, now ^^ined
in the debtor's appartment in Philadelphia: and exonerate him the (...) Robert
from all claims relative to the said co-partnership, other than the jud^ment
which may be had on the account render hereafter mentioned. A^ the said Robert
immediately after his enlargement agrees and engages to (...) an adjustment of
the partnership accounts, and as it is supposed that the said (...) on such
adjustment, will become indebted to the heirs of the said Will (...) the said
Robert agrees to mortgage certain lands of his own in the (...) of
Northumberland, and his half share of other certain lands in Kentucky (...)
Virginia* for the full amount of such sums of money as may be established (...)
balance due by the said Robert to the heirs of the said William, with (...)
p^ticular reservation that no sale whatever, shall be made of the said lands d^
the space of ten years from the date of the judgment to be obtained against it
(...) Robert, on an action of account render now depending in the supreme (...)
of Pennsylvania, provided that he the said Robert pays yearly the interest
which may be^ome due on the said judgment. And for the more certain and effe^
payment of the said interest, the said Robert agrees to pay out of such yearly
s^lary as he may obtain in any public office or otherwise, two third parts of
the same, toward the extinguishment of the said judgment, and until it be
finall^ paid, and whereas a judgment was had against the said Robert, as
survivin^ partner of William Allison in the supreme court of Pennsylvana, at
the suit (...) the Bank of N^ America. -- And it is believed that the said
Rober^ (...) ^tain the office of accountant therein, having offered to the
directors to set^ (...) the said judgment, against so much of such salary as
may be allowed for hi^ (...) vices in the said office, it is agreed that the
payment of the said judgment by the said Robert, shall be considered as
interest on the judgment, to be establ^ against him on the account render
aforesaid, so far forth as interest may be (...) thereon, in order to prevent
any sale of the lands to be mortgaged for the ^pa^ of ten years as before
mentioned: and the said Robert on his liberation from confinement, hereby
engages to assign and set over to the said John Bleakley, all (...) share of
the said Robert, in the remaining outstanding debts due unto the (...)
co-partnership of Allison and M'Knight, and on the recovery of the said (...)
or part thereof, the same shall be applied to the credit of the said judgment
(...) the account render aforesaid. And the said John and Robert for the faith^
performance of the covenants above mentioned, (which they mutually give (...)
accept) bind themselves their heirs, executors and administrators, each unto
(...) other, in the sum of L.10,000 money of Pennsylvania, witness, their hands
(...) seals this -- day of September 1792.

If John Bleakly should not approve of the foregoing, and is willing to ta^
Robert M'Knight for the claim, he has against the heirs secured by the mortgage
above mentioned, so far as the balance may be due by Robert M'Knight it will be
perfectly agreeable to Robert M'Knight.


. From the fairness of this offer, I had reason to expect an agreement to take
place -- but because I did not make such closure of my effects as pleased John
Caldwell, things were left in a loose (...) (...) the 18th of September, when I
wrote to him in the following words. Sir, ^ver^l days have elapsed since our
last conversation, without any ^ituation ^m you as to what Mr. Bleakley has
decided on respecting me. I (...) you ^w, because I hear from a friend, who has
been assured by one of the directors (...) the Bank, that a conversation was
had, relative to the office for which I applied, ^d that there was the highest
probability that it would be given me, was I not (...) confinement. I am well
convinced that it will be for the benefit of the heirs of ^n Allison, if my
proposal be accepted -- but as you signified that Mr. Bleak^ would not bind
himself by any covenant -- to obviate which objection, I offer (...) this way
-- that two thirds of such salary as I may obtain in any public or private
office, on my liberation, shall be faithfully applied toward the
extinguish^ent of such balance, as may be found due by me to the heirs* on the
decision of the action of account render, and that if it shall appear that I
had a certificate to the value of one dollar, at the time of my confinement, or
have had any since, save about 65 dollars got for prizes in the United States
lottery which (...), mere accident I was informed since my confinement, could
(...) for ^ch prizes -- that then the lands offered on mortgage, may be sold
(...) (...) years -- and if the two thirds of such salary, be not sufficient to
(...) annually, of what I may be found in debt to the heirs the (...) may be
liable to sale, notwithstanding the reservation. I (...) an answer, if possible
to day, for if my liberation be delay^d until (...) ^fice in view be filled by
another -- it will retard the payment to the (...) may be in the power of
Robert M'Knight. Notwithstanding the (...) on my part, the managers for the
heirs of William Allison, (...) ^cept it. On the 26th of September, I wrote
John Bleakley (...) Sir, I did expect you would have called on me yesterday,
with Mr. (...) well, when we might have talked over matters, for the (...) of
the h^ Captain Allison. I think I could convince you, that the harthness of my
^finement, has produced no good to the heirs; but a temporary injury to them,
and a very heavy loss to me. Two years confinement, from the (...) of my
industry, for a family, who depend on me for support, is not a (...) ^nience.
But setting aside every other consideration but that of the (...) of the heirs
of Captain Allison, by my liberation -- I assure you it was from that motive,
more particularly than any other that I addressed you (...) in order to fill an
office in the Bank, which would prevent the heirs (...) called upon for payment
of the judgment obtain^d ag^ (...) of the firm of Allison and M'Knight -- than
(...) it was (...) as well as the Bank, that I should fill the ^mploy (...) eye
to my own advantage, I could not even suppose, you (...) ^tention to any
overture of mine, since you took the harsh (...) my ^finement under a ca sa --
especially when you knew that I was (...) specia^ (...) to an action of your
own for L1200, and that sentiments of prop^y (...) I hope will never leave me)
would have prevented my (...) or its neighborhood. In the conversation had
with Mr. Ca^w^ll (...) he seemed to expect a personal security, for the
se^ement of the (...) my liberation in a reasonable time, and that the debt
found ag^ (...) be secured by other security than my own -- to the first
clause, I am (...) concerned, but I could find it, although I have not as yet
(...) to the last clause -- I do not know any to (...). I am sorry to (...) the
heirs injured, by the latter stipulation -- because I have (...) pay every just
claim, and have done so, as far as I have been (...) the accounts of the
partnership come to be closed, my actions will (...) in a favorable rather
than a contrary light. What do I offer but thi^ (...) the sum sound against me
-- not my own statement of it, but that first scru^ by auditors, and afterward
reviewed and adjudged by the Supreme Cour^ on this sum, I will continue to pay
two thirds of such salary as may be (...) me, in a public or private office, or
at least the interest of the debt (...) paid, or in failure thereof, to suffer
the lands mortgaged to be so^ ask is, that by complying with the payments
stipulated, the lands (...) for ten years. Every one knows that nothing near
their value, can no^ ^tained for them, and that if any accident should happen
to me, they will ^tually belong to the heirs. But this as I understand cannot
be complied with unless a settlement of the partnership accounts take place
first: this ho^ cannot be done with precision, until the present ca sa against
me be satisfied, (...) is supposed to be satisfied. If I am to be confined
until I find funds for the payment, it may be a considerable time before I can
find a friend, to advanc^ them, and then the heirs will be chargeable with the
half thereof. But if it (...) paid by them, I will be chargeable with one half
of what they pay. If (...) Bank think proper to employ me, the heirs will be
chargeable with on^ what I answer to the Bank -- So it will follow with all
other debts, w^ partnership owes. As for those debts owed to it -- each partner
is (...) one half, and when received (if assigned to the heirs) credit should
be g^ to me, for my half of such sum received. The losses will be charged in
equal portions to each partner, and what the partnership owes to one, the other
partner will owe to it, or in other words, the balance of both partners
accounts will be the same, only on different sides of the account. These
principles of settlement will meet the conviction of every mind, and a
settlement on those p^ples will not bring me indebted to the heirs (as I think)
so great a sum a (...) balance due to you by Captain Allison, as stated by him
in the account, he furnish^ed you May 28, 1787, which was L 251872 and which
comprised every receipt and payment for you, which came within the partnership,
as well as the sums he used for his own purposes. I have understood indirectly,
that you would (...) have kept me confined one minute on your own account -- if
this is truly rep^ you have it in your power to take me for that balance, if I
should be for much in debt to the heirs, secured by a mortgage as above
mentioned, (...) the claim of the heirs should be established above that sum;
which I much que^tion, such excess may be secured by the same real estate;
which I am confident is more than sufficient to secure every just claim against
me -- especially as (...) industry is also bound. This latter subject being
within your power, and (...) less than I would do if our situations were
changed -- which is the only apol^gy I can offer for mentioning it, for Mr.
Caldwell, seemed disinclined through (...) to mention any thing to you, that
might any way lessen a responsibili^ of the heirs, for the sums particularly
chargeable to them by you. I know (...) claim you have against them, is better
secured than I can make it -- but (...) censure in any respect you may be
induced to take -- those lands of (...) than contribute to the further
confinement of Robert M'Knight. The^ are but two purposes I can suggest for
your wishing a separate account of the ^inct charges and credits respecting the
partnership, and that of Captain Al^ -- one is favorable and would lead me to
believe you inclined to take me, (...) of the heirs, should the amount answer
your expectation -- the other^ the contrary and on principles of humanity, I
will not suppose -- because peradventure it would produce a continuance of my
confinement. As Mr. Caldw^ll (...) me I could not expect to know the motive --
it is impossible to decide. ^owever if neither of my offers can be accepted, I
know I must feel the harsh ^ects of the law. In reply to this Letter, on the
28th I received the following from John Bleakley. Sir, Your favor under date
26th instant, was han^ me last evening about six o'clock. It is impossible for
me to determine what (...), while every transaction relative to the partnership
is kept so much out of (...) even the lands proposed to be mortgaged and which
you confidently (...) be more than an adequate fund, for payment of any sum,
which may (...) against you. When furnished with more facts, I can be more
explicit. (...) you will believe me, when I assure you that no one deplored the
necessity (...) compelled the measure of confinement more than myself. To the
note (...) the following answer. Sir, Yours of this day reached me about 1
o'clock, (...) of yesterday I find, was dated one day earlier by mistake.
Though y^u may have been urged by other than your own feelings to cause my
(...) ^ent, I think that after its continuance for upwards of two years, you
me^ ^w^edge it has produced no good, but great loss to me, and pr^nted my (...)
make payment to the heirs. The accounts would have (...) ^he balance paid, had
I not been disa^pointed in the loan (...) ^ble prospect of borrowing. The
settlement will however (...) ^ebt for which the ca sa was taken, is satisfied
-- while I am in my (...) ^tuation, the settlement can be made only on
suppositions that may never (...) ^duced to facts -- and on facts alone, can
the settlement be made. But when it is made, immediate payment cannot be
expected, of a man however willing to exercise his industry, who has been so
long precluded from that exercise, and whose character has, as he hears,
suffered from the telling of one side of a story, only. To himself, being
conscious of rectitude, such stories will not be felt -- though they have too
much weight in the minds of those, who will not take the trouble to hear the
whole matter. The necessity for my confinement, I cannot see -- the interest of
the heirs of Captain Allison, would be more promoted by the endeavors of those
concerned, to obtain me such post, from the emoluments of which I might be
enabled to make payment -- rather than by a hindrance of the exercise of such
talents as I possess, and would have employed for two years back, -- for that
purpose. And notwithstanding the error commit^ed by my confinement and the
consequent loss that has taken place, I still hope to see the day, that I will
be able to satisfy every debt by payment. I cannot tell how many years may be
considered as necessary to keep me in a prison, in order to pay my debts -- but
I believe very few will suppose, that a continuance of the present harsh
treatment, can hasten the wished for event. I rather suppose that as the error
is committed, it is continued, to keep up an appearence of consistency -- but I
know, if I had committed such an error, I would as early (...) possible, take
such measures as are feasible to make things as easy as possible. The facts
within your knowledge are, that since the death of Captain Allison, (...) have
paid debts of the partnership above L1300, that I paid yourself 3000 dollars in
certificates -- that the partnership owed two debts, on both of which judgments
have been had -- that because you thought it would be advantageous to the
heirs, you persuaded Hollingsworth to confine my person, by a casa for one of
them, -- that although two years have elapsed no payment has been made by me,
that the settlement of the partnership accounts must depend on facts -- that
those facts cannot be ascertained while my confinement continues -- that I have
certain lands in Northumberland county Pennsylvania, which I am willing to
mortgage as well as my half of others in Virginia and Kentucky, if it is agreed
to accept them in a way safe for myself, and not unsafe for the heirs -- the
there was a probability of obtaining a good office in the Bank, and in o^ pay
the whole of a debt against the partnership, I made such overtures (...) as
almost any distinterested person will say were proper, because you as ^tor can
be accountable for no more than does reach your hands -- that tho^ might have
scruples as an executor, yet the estate being in your debt, to a^^erable amount
-- you can without the least blame, take a debtor of the (...) instead of the
heirs [yet I don't urge this, because I do not cons^ ^pert as being as fully
sufficient as theirs] -- that I had an equal sum in (...) with those delivered
you -- that I was obliged to sell the greater part of (...) pay a judgment
obtained by the Bank for notes given to -- that I did (...) until a fieri
facias was out against me, and this at a time I had hopes very (...) borrow as
much as would pay the balance against me, in the partnership -- should a
settlement be made in prison, while under the present ca sa, it may ^tinued
until another take its place -- this I mention because you act or scen^ act
from the influence or persuasion of others rather than from your own se^ments,
and I am not to suppose that those who urged so cruel a step as my ^finement,
will be very willing, even if their interest was against it -- to confes^
error. Let me now draw a few inferences from those facts, as well (...) which
perhaps you are not so well acquainted with, in order to (...) ^ter in the
light in which it ought to be viewed. Upwards of L5700 (...) was placed to the
credit of Allison and M'Knight in London, (they had ^sion for only L3300) every
farthing of which has been paid or drawn for, favor of the attorneys of
Francis Allison, excepting L1500 currency with for interest, and a few notes
not totally paid to Hollingsworth -- how it has be^ worked up to more than
L1900 I know not. L1700 sterling of this mo^ might have been drawn for and
applied to the purchase of certificates, w^ had I done would certainly deserve
censure -- though it would have been succe^ful. Warder on a disputed balance of
the account, offered me L110 sterlin^ which I might have applied in the same
way -- but I assigned the partnership claim against him to Fisher and
Hollingsworth -- for I never considered that (...) company had a right to
account with Francis Allison for more than was (...) to its, credit for its own
purposes. The L1300 currency paid since the dex^ Captain Allison, might have
been laid out in certificates also, and altho^ was my opinion that money laid
out in that way, would be the most adva^ous -- yet as I had none of my own to
spare; I never applied any in that way -- if I had, I would now be called a
second Daniel. My wish was, in fall (...) to sell off the whole stock at public
sale, and invest the proceeds in certifica^ 2s. 9d. to 3s. in the pound, as I
knew some others were doing -- because the goods business then, was in a
languishing way, and it was dangerous to (...) goods or procure good prices for
them -- but this Capt. Allison would not ^sent to -- therefore it was not done,
though I was advised to do it. (...) Pierce's notes were obtained, for the
goods sold in 1783, to the Massach^ line, I had them exchanged at the treasury
of the United States, in two (...) portions, thinking they should be divided in
that manner, because of the (...) price they bore at the time, and that they
must eventually be charged to (...) partner at 20s. in the pound. My share I
kept as long as I could, the other ^ delivered you, without the least
reluctance as you may remember. The (...) in Northumberland, were divided in
like manner, as by copy of a letter I re^ to Mr. Caldwell appears, and which I
suppose he informed you of. At the times I did apprehend that no loss would
a^crue -- nor would there, if my advi^ had been followed. The loss took place
at vend^e, before, as well as s^ ^aptain Allison's death, because of the
pressing demands for money, and (...) of funds to carry on an^ importation
business on hopes only -- for it cannon ^posed that I would have consented to
give up a retail trade, that was promi^, without the hope of a larger capital
being put into the company, by Capt. ^son. My own was all in. I was rather
averse to begin a foreign trade and ^ted out the inconvenience to him in his
own house -- but he thought he had (...) good store unoccupied and to my
misfortune, I agreed to his views: for he (...) several sums then due him,
which I am sure he believed to be able to (...) ^hortly. The debt that will be
found against me, will appear to arise ^ally from losses in the partnership --
not of my making: therefore I con^ all the censure that I hear has passed upon
me, as a robber of the widow and fatherless -- to be entirely unfounded, and as
I before mentioned, as long as I can view my conduct in that unbiassed light, I
do -- I am careless of and above censure. My views in a settlement on the other
side of Schuylkill, are innocent and not at the cost of the heirs, as I have
understood is said. My industry in prison, (...) raised funds to get an abiding
place for my family, should it be my hard lot (...) be longer continued in
confinement -- there my children will learn industry (...) get their bread in
the most quiet and honorable way by agriculture: if I (...) procure employment
where I am, I will continue to exert all my abilities (...) ^^ir advantage --
and when it shall please the guardians of the heirs of Capt. (...) to perfer
their interest, to considerations foreign to it -- I may be rendered in such
situation, as to make full payment in a reasonable time -- which perhaps may
never be in my power, if a prison must be my portion many years longer. From
the whole, I think this conclusion may be fairly drawn -- that it is more for
the interest of the heirs and all those concerned to accept my offer, by which
something will be got, if not immediately in money, yet with a feasible
prospect of obtaining full satisfaction of every farthing that may be legally
established against me -- whereas the contrary must produce temporary
inconvenience to the heirs, and much loss to me, which no doubt will retard my
exertions in their favor. Besides, if I was at liberty to look after business,
it may be shortly in my power still, to find a friend to lend me what will be
due to the heirs; which anticipation be assured would be most agreeable to,
Sir, your most humble servant, Robert M'Knight. Some days elapsed, before I had
an inter^ ^th John Bleakley and John Caldwell, which interview I have reason to
^ve was with intention of finding out by my conversation, whether I would (...)
to be^e a bankrupt -- and on my saying I certainly would not -- John Cald^
plum^d himself in the discovery and said, come away Bleakley -- soon after ^ch
they retired. I considered my case is such, as did not strictly come within
(...) bankrupt act: for the debt due to Fisher and Hollingsworth, arose from
trans^ons prior to its passing -- and the debt due to Bleakley, was properly
that of ^lliam Allison as his attorney in fact. Besides it was rather straining
of the (...) to make me a trader under it: however it is done and I shall
submit, though (...) I money to spare to fee council, I could have contended
and succeeded too. (...) ^he 16th of October, I sent my books and papers, with
the deeds of my lands ^he bankrupt office, and on the 18th conformed before the
commissioners in (...), because the same harshness was continued, as had caused
my confinement. ^et I thought that having taken all my property -- my person
might have been liberated, and the commissioners saved the trouble of calling
upon me in prison. For this purpose I wrote to John Bleakley -- but he informed
John Lisle, Junior, he could not interest himself in my liberation,
Hollingsworth and Fisher, ^ere the persons to whom application should be made:
I then wrote to (...) Fisher who sent me a verbal message that he informed
Clement Biddle the day before that if John Bleakley would send a note
signifying his (...) sent, they would discharge me. I then wrote John B^^akley
the follo^^ note. Sir, I have received a line from Mr. Lisle since I w^^te you
this mor^^ informing me that you called on him and told him you could not
interest y^^ self in my liberation and that Fisher and Hollingsworth were the
persons to (...) application should be made. In consequence of which I have
written to (...) Fisher, and he informed the bearer of my letter that if you
would apply to (...) for a discharge, they would approve by signing it this
night, how you w^^ in this business I know not, but if your profession^ in the
last letter I had (...) you is to be explained in a favorable manner, I think
you have humanity enough to do all in your power to relieve my person, as you
have taken all (...) property from Robert M'Knight. My son carried this and
Bleakley told (...) he could not do it, because it would make him liable to the
heirs of Captain A^^son, and John Caldwell advised Bleakley not to do it. On
the 19th October, (...) wrote to Miers Fisher in these words. Sir, It is very
disagreeable to me to (...) troublesome to you, but as I have made application
to Mr. Bleakley and (...) averse to write to you on the subject I could wish to
know if any other st^^ necessary to be taken in order to release my person from
confinement. He (...) John Caldwell say it will make Mr. Bleakley liable to the
heirs of Capt^ ^^son, but surely as you have had judgment against them as well
as me, (...) is bound for payment thereof. Cannot I be relieved on an habeas
corpus (...) showing that I have complied with the Bankrupt act. The spirit of
the ^^stitution is that on delivery of the property, the person of a debtor
shall not (...) confined. If there is no way by which I can be liberated but
with the con^^ of Mr. Bleakley, I fear nothing will be done by him, bu^ if
there be any, so th^^ the claim may be secured I hope you will point it out to
sir your humble serva^^ Robert M'Knight. To this I received the following
reply. My friend, the is no kind of doubt in my mind but that the trustees of
F. Allison could dischar^ thee from custody upon the casa at our suit without
prejudice to our claim again Captain Allison's estate on the judgment against
his executors and so I have ^^peatedly mentioned both to Bleakley and Caldwell:
but doubts are entertai^^ by them or their counsel on the subject, and it does
not become us as truste^ (...) enter into any doubtful disputation -- I
therefore proposed that if they as ex^^tors of Captain Allison would direct a
note to us requesting thy liberation, (...) even acquiesing in it, so that no
dispute should be raised about it; we wou^^ immediately sign an order for it.
If they will sign such a paper we are ready (...) all times to do what is
necessary on our part: if they refuse to do it, they (...) thy detainers, not
we; for the casa was issued at their request, for their bene^^ and has always
been under their command, we are not responsible for the ha^^ship in any moral,
civil or christian sense of the business, we being mere ins^^ments having no
will of our own, though we should be glad to receive directi^^ to relieve thee
-- thy respectful friend Miers Fisher. Wishing to obtain my (...) lease, in
order to attend at the Bankrupt office, to prepare a state of my case, wh^^ I
could have constant access to my books and papers, I applied to the inspectors
(...) the Debtors Apartment for an allowance of seven cents a day, my case
being stri^^ly within a late act for the relief of poor debtors, because I had
delivered up all my property -- and thinking that the spleen of my persecutors
would not continue (...) as to make the necessary weekly payment, by neglect of
which after ten days notice -- the inspectors might discharge my person from
prison -- but in this I have been mistaken. The same invet^y shows itself in
the punctual payment of the forty nine cents per week, which they solicited
Miers Fisher to allow them to pay. (...) offered to enter special bail to the
action which Bleakley brought against ^ut this has been hurried on to judgment
in the common pleas within a few though I had ordered it to be removed into the
Supreme Court and paid the (...) of an habeas corpus so long ago as July 1791.
How this has been managed (...) -- (...) having seen my lawyer since I was
declared a bankrupt.

(...) proper to show in what manner I became possessed of the real estate
(...) ^ve delivered up. In April 1784, Charles Gillespie who had been con^ ^he
taking up land in Northumberland county with William Allison be^^ war -- came
to town and applied to him to purchase the share obtained for ^^overy and
trouble. This was agreed to, as the payment was to be made in ^^d^ to amount of
L343, which were charged to William Allison. At this ^^llespie shown us a draft
for 2037 acres which he said was a blind survey made (...) the war by a
surveyor since dead -- and he offered to take payment of the ^^ery partly in
dry goods -- accordingly an agreement was made and the land (...). When
conveyances were to be made, he sent down John Painter ^or (...) and the
following is an extract of the letter wrote to him on the subject (...) 1^85.
We have sent by him eight blank conveyances as you directed (...) you to divide
the whole tract into two equal parts as near as may be, (...) the best division
to be by the line which cuts the draft from east to (...). those in the names
of Wilkinson, Foster, O'Hara and Jackson, to be ^^yed to one of us, and the
remaining ones of Newman, Witherspoon, Dix^^ Lampton to the other, If it should
so happen that any preference in this ^^sion may obtain, give either of us the
chance by lot and complete the con^^yance of four tracts to William Allison and
the other four to Robert ^'Knight. The conveyances were accordingly made,
patents obtained and I ^^ered to William Allison his four, reserving my own,
which together amount ^^18 acres of land. When John Painter got the blank
conveyances, he told ^f a discovery he had of between 800 and 1000 acres, and
offered it to me, for ^o in goods which I agreed for -- at that time having by
me a few depreciation ^ficates which I received from John Snell in payment of a
debt he owed me be^^ the partnership of Allison and M'Knight commenced. With
these I paid the ^^se money -- and I had the land patented, the quantity being
868 acres. In ^^ber 1784 Samuel Young called upon me and signified that
himself, Doctor (...) Joseph North and Richard Renshaw were about sending out
Benjamin Ste^^ into Kentuckey and each to have 10,000 acres surveyed. The
expense to each (...) to be only 300 dollars, one hundred of which was to be
paid immediately for (...) land warrants another by a draft from Kentuckey
abo^^ the time the surveyors (...) going out and the remainder when the patents
were delivered. I had sold (...) L400 worth of goods to James Watt, who was to
have paid for them in ^^rch 1784, but he had run off to Kentuckey where I heard
he was, and in hopes ^etting some or all the money by Stevens, I engaged him to
apply to Watt, and (...) he obtain the money there I was to have recourse on
the persons h^re who ^^yed him. I therefore agreed for taking up 10,000 acres
for 300 dollars on (...) terms with Young, etc. -- but did not get the patents
for a considerable time ^^wards. I however recovered part of the money which
Stevens obtained from ^^t and have his bond -- so that the whole can be secured
that he received, which ^he said was 300 dollars. In April 1785, Isaac Sidman
sailed and I was chosen (...) assignee with John Shields, William Key, and
others. Sidman had (...) William Stuart to have 80,000 acres of land surveyed
for him in Virginia, and (...) ^greement was -- that Stuart was to have one
third of the land he should (...) that it should be patented for him -- clear
of any expense. The assignees met Stuart, when he offered us three the whole of
his share for 1000 dollars, which (...) agreed for -- 9000 acres each for 333
1/^; dollars -- payable one half on his setting (...) for Richmond with the
surveys to lodge them in the office six months, in orde^ obtain patents -- and
the other half when the patents were delivered -- which (...) complied with,
and all the writings drawn under the direction of Miers (...) after the death
of William Allison, I applied to Myer Heart to know if h^ (...) make any further
payment of his bond. He assured me it was out of his (...) but that Smith his
partner had a right to donation lands in Pennsylvania -- (...) had his power of
attorney to sell them, and that he would let me have the^ (...) current price,
which was at the time about eight dollars for 200 acres. I agre^ (...) them and
had them patented and took the deed of Myer Heart and gave (...) Heart and Smith
for six pounds the value of 400 acres. The only remaining ^^culation in land in
feesimple, is that of a lot of ground in the town of Montgom^ry. (...) arose in
this way, Thomas Proctor was sued before me for a small deb^* He then had a
lottery on foot and rather than issue an execution against an old a^quaintance
I settled the debt and took from him a ticket in his lottery, in which (...)
drew a prize of that lot.

In July 1790 fearing that judgment would be confessed against me, in (...)
brought by Hollingsworth and Fisher, and knowing that it would be di^^ (...) to
purchase goods for sale, as they might be levied on to the prejudice of tho^^
(...) who might be willing to sell to me on credit, I declined to go into any
mercan^^ transactions -- for at this time few or no emoluments were obtained
from my offic^ as a justice of the peace -- I applied to John Shields to
purchase a place of a hundre^ acres on the other side of Schuylkill. We went
out in his chair to see the land (...) there was no dwelling house on the
premises such as I could expect my family (...) occupy -- yet I thought that if
I could exercise the duties of my office in the cou^^t^y, I could erect a
dwelling -- for at that time I did not know that the place w^^ in Montgomery
County, the deeds which I saw being expressed as in the count^ of Philadelphia.
The price was to be L300. About this time Captain Feariss ha^ resolved to
accept the award of referees in four actions he brought against Andre^
Caldwell, and as I had assisted him in stating his claims, without the hope or
(...) reward save only a sum of money sufficient to pay my company debts, whi^^
would have secured to him by a mortgage of my lands -- and as the award fell
^^ry short of my expectations, I thought that he might advance so small a su^^
would purchase this place. I asked him and he agreed -- but when Mr. Shie^^ put
the papers into my hands to draw a deed from, I found that William Tu^^bull had
given power to sell -- but not until January 1791, of course all that cou^^ be
done was to draw an agreement, Feariss to purchase and John Shields (...)
convey, for it never was my purpose to have the fee simple in me until I could
pa^^ (...) purchase money. This agreement was completed, and I expected (...)
would ^^er me to cut down the wood and sell it in the winter, in ord^^ to pay
(...). But this he would not agree to, as John Shields told him he wo^ bring an
^ction of waste. However, Feariss continued to assert that he would (...) for
the place when he got his money from Andrew Caldwell, which when he ^^ceived ^e
excused himself from doing. This obliged Shields to bring an act^^ against
Feariss, on the agreement -- and as I understood that, should Feariss be --
obliged to pay for the place, he would take the deed in his son's name, and
tha^ therefore my view in s^tting down my family there, would be defeated -- I
was no doubt very much discon^^rted. In this dilemma, Richard Neave the elder
and Richard Neave the younger, without the smallest expectation on my part,
gene^^ offered to purchase the place: I acquainted John Shields hereof, and
after (...) ^^eeks, the purchase money was paid, a deed was made to them, by
Willi^^ ^^enbull -- and John Shields received the money, because the place was
^^aged to him* I gave my note of hand to John Shields for fifteen pounds, (...)
the inter^st of the money, which had been kept from him over the time, (...)
payment should be made. To raise funds to begin a dwelling house after (...)
^^ment, in the fall of 1790, I sold such articles of my household furni^^ I
^^ought I could spare: with the money thence arising and with some (...) ^^y
Feariss -- which I had lent him -- I laid out for the purpose, as far as (...)
^^anced season of the year would allow the masons to work. The stone work (...)
ground story is built and part of the outside walls, about half another story
(...) the frames of the windows in, and no more done since that year, except
(...) ^^ng out the cellar and getting the sashes and inner doors made: those I
(...) heard are ready to be used and would have been in the house, could I have
^^ed a loan of money which I expected. As this has not taken place, noth^^ ^ure
has been done to the house. I have had wood cut last wint^r -- so^e of (...) I
sold -- the rest lies ready to bring to town, when it may bring the l^st (...)
Francis Lee had bought some dry goods from John Shields, who wished (...) ^^ge
me by taking paym^nt in scantling for my building. Lee delivered on (...), the
first floor of joists, it no^ lies piled up near the house on the pla^e, (...)
^eing had in time for the masons to build in with the walls. Lee drew an (...)
on me and Feariss, which we accepted -- but it was protested for non-pay^^t:
the order was for about thirty pounds, which was supposed what the whole (...)
of scantling would amount to, for a house 40 feet by 50, two stories high in
(...) and three stories in the rear. Alexander Steel a carpenter, took about
L33 ^^th of bo^rds and scantling for window frames, etc. from William Brown,
which Feariss engaged to pay, and which I have credited him with, in an account
(...) be settled -- the balance of which will, or ought to be in my favor. As
to the ^^op in the ground, I have it not in my power to say much, because I
have not had ^^fficient information on that head. There is a cart and a (...)
belonging to me (...), as also a shovel and a spade. I directed the man who
lives on the p^ace, to ^^ld himself a log house, the one formerly used being
too bad to dwell in, is ^^erted into a stable.

On an examination of my cash account, since my confinement, it will be found
(...) I have received but about L200 of the partnership (...) in money -- and
by ^^pection of the same account, it will appear, that the expenses of mysel^
in pr^^^ and of my wife and children amounts to L^^ and upwards. That although
expended near L270 on the place over the river Schuyl^i^l -- yet I received for
^ritings done in jail and otherwise to amount of L2^^ and upwards; therefore
^ollows, that the sums laid out on that place, did not arise from the
partnership ^cts, but from funds created by my industry, since my confinement.

The partnership lands consist of an undivided share of 5^000 acres, in
Harrison ^^enty Virginia, assigned by Sidman, as also of 59^9^ ac^^s in
Kentucky; con^^yed to me, by deed by John Moylan, in li^u of his debt. With
respe^^ to the (...), it may not be improper to observe* that I wrote to J^mes
H^ron of Richmond, (...) enquire if the warrants had been lodged in the office,
in order that p^^ents ^ight issue in due time -- and that if such had been the
case, I could wish that a ^^tent should be made for one half of such land in my
name and that another should issue in the names of the heirs of William Allison
my late partner -- for which see my letter book under date of the 28th July
1789.

To give a proper idea of the business carried on by Allison and M'Kni^
reference to the books of that company must be had, wherein it appears, tha^
total amount of purchases at the shop in Second Street, including the goods
(...) I had on hand at the commencement in March 1782, exceeds L24,000 (...)
the amount of the merchandise account, in the books kept at the store i^ (...)
Street, exceeds L15.000. The cash received at the shop from April 1782 to (...)
11th 1787, was L14.185 11 3 and at the store from October 1783, was L1^^ 1^ 4
making together L31.581 4 7 every farthing of which is accounted* That the
account with the Bank of North America, amounted to 32.04^ ^^ dollars in about
ten months. That the profits on the goods sold at the store ^^posing those
removed to the shop to have sold for first cost were, L1565 11 ^^ that the
profits on the merchandise sold at the shop, until the death of Will^^ Allison,
supposing the goods then on hand to have sold for first cost, was L^^ 4 1, and
this notwithstanding the sacrifices made at vendue before his death which, had
he been that wealthy man I had supposed him, would not have ^^pened -- because
a small advance of money would have prevented the hea^y (...) W. Allison was
averse to do any business with the Bank; but what we did, (...) amounted to
L11.725 16 4 in notes -- prevented an earlier and greater (...) would have
taken place without. The goods which remained on (...) death, amounted to L2754
6 9 which were appraised by John Smith and (...) Swift at L1892 9 4. They were
the remains of a dry goods store, of more (...) four years standing, and every
man of business in that line knows, must (...) been unsaleable and dissorted.
They however were sold for L1300 and upward^ mostly cash -- and the loss hereby
occasioned, will, with the loss by certificate^ constitute the greater part of
my debt to the heirs of William Allison, when the^ have paid all the company
debts. The company cash received since his deed^ amounts to L1966 11 4 and the
debts of the company paid is L1418 13 8 -- ^^ing the sum of L537 17 8 to be
accounted for. Of which it has been already observed that L200 and upwards has
been received and used by me and my family sin^e I have been confined under the
casa. The remainder was used in my family b^^ that occurrence took place, and
made but a small part of my (...) expenses since the death of William Allison:
for it appears by a particular a^count of my daily, monthly and yearly
expenses, that from his death until m^ confinement, a space of three years and
three months, that I had expended (...) money to amount of L812 2 0: so that
the money I received for fees in my office as a Justice of peace which amount
to L298 1^ 11 -- the balance of the prod^e of my certificates, after satisfying
the debt of Samuel Caldwell to the Ban^^ b^ing L17^ 11 8 and some tri^les I
sold, when necessity urged it, such as silve^ so^p ladle and gold stock buckle
-- make up the rest of the money expended in the necessary care of a family,
consisting of myself, a wife and five children.

That I have not been unsolicito^s of employment, during my confinement, will
appear from a letter written by me to Judge Wilson on the 6th of February, 179^
in the following words. Sir, in a conversation with my friend Mr. J^ Shields
about a fortnight ago, I mentioned my desire of being employed in doing any
writing, while I remain in this place, to enable me to support myself, a wife
and four children -- and more especially to prevent the necessity of my selling
a property belonging to the firm of Allison and M'Knight, which will in a (...)
years completely pay all our debts, as I think. Much undeserved censure, (...)
been passed upon me as I hear, which I am well able to refu^e by
incontrover^ib^^ facts. The partnership was unfortunate and entirely owing to
the very (...) deference which I paid to the opinion of Captain Allison -- for
had my (...) obtained, which was to sell off the stock at public rate, and
invest the proceeds (...) certificates, -- the latter end of 1784, when at 2s
9d to 3s in the pound -- no ^^jury but a very great advantage would have
accrued. This opinion of mine (...) operated to my disadvantage, because it is
supposed that I carried it into act had on the supposition I am confined, as I
have heard). So far from that ^^ing the ^ase -- the very goods which I wanted
sold in 1784 at vendue, were ^^terwards in 1786 and 1787, with the consent of
Captain Allison sold at publ^c (...), to raise money to pay off pressing
demands. And since his death, I (...) obliged to sell the remainder in the same
manner, and for the same purpose, a great part of which was with the knowledge
of his son. Since the death of Captain Allison, I have paid debts to the amount
of L1^00 and upwards, which if I had laid out in certificates, instead of
paying the debts, would have now produced more than sufficient to pay off all
claims against the partnership -- for as to personal debts of my own L100 would
extinguish them: and th^se have mostly accured since my confinement. But if I
had invested the L1300 in certificates, a much earlier application would have
been made by the creditors and the estate of Captain Allison been sold when it
would not produce half as much as it will now. Perhaps a greater misfortune
could not have hap^^ed me, than a partnership with him, as I can easily
demonstrate. It was with a view of being able from the emoluments of the office
of Justice of the peace, and to prevent my drawing out of the funds of the
partnership, that I accepted that office -- this was well known to Captain
Allison -- for he exerted himself very much to obtain it for me, which can be
averred by the freeholders of Walnut ward. Mr. Bleakley the executor of Captain
Allison, called on me sometime after his death, and asked me for Captain
Allison's share of certain certificat^s for which some goods were sold in 1783
-- which I gave him without the least reluctance -- they exceeded 3000 dollars.
My own share I was under the disagreeable necessity to sell to Mr. Matthew
M'Connell, to raise money to pay a judgment obtained by the Bank of North
America against me, as indorser of two notes for a friend, who sometime ago
failed. When I was put here, I had not one certificate, nor have I any now,
although I hear it has been confidently asserted that I have. When Docter
M'Henry was in town, last summer, he interested himself in my behalf -- but Mr.
Bleakley would do nothing without consulting Mr. Sargent, who advised (as the
Doctor told me) to take an assignment before my liberation. This I cannot think
of doing, because (...) believe time will enable me to pay every person, and
have something left for myself and my children -- but this I offered, that if I
was liberated I would state the accounts of the partnership and submit them to
auditors, and whatever sum might be ^ound due by me to the heirs of Captain
Allison, I would assign my half share of the partnership property if they
t^ought fit, or give my bond payable by instalments and interest on each
payment -- this is refused, and nothing short of an assignment in prison will
satisfy. As I have it not in my power immediately, to raise money sufficient to
pay off the claim for which I am confined under a ca sa -- I must remain here,
as contented as I can, until some occurence turns up to put it in my power to
exonerate myself from debt. I mentioned to Doctor M'Henry, that if I could
obtain any post under the government, that I would allot two thirds of the
income toward the extinguishment of my debt -- but my being here precludes, my
obtaining an employment to further my wishes. I have however done a
considerable quantity of writing, perhaps to amount of 450 to 500 dollars,
during my confinement, and could wish to do as much at would fill my whole time
-- which is the intention of my addressing you at this time -- for yesterday
Mr. Shields told me, he mentioned me to you, and it was your desire that I
should write to you on the occasion. I hope (...) will pardon this long letter
-- but it appeared necessary to me, to state my (...) on facts, in order to
remove the undeserved censure cast upon, Sir, your (...) humble servant Robert
M'Knight. To this letter I have received not (...) answer than this -- that Mr.
Shields enquired if Mr. Wilson had any w^^ in readiness for me to be employed
about, and that he understood there (...) none ready. However, lately I have
heard that Colonel Nichola under^^ that some person in a high public office
would have employed me, if my ch^ter had not been represented in so bad a
light. This I attribute to the ^^lence of those uninformed implacable men, with
whom I have had to do. (...) it will appear to every disinterested mind on a
cool review of the foregoing (...) that so far from deserving censure as being
the cause of loss to the heirs of Willi^^ Allison -- that a more unfortunate
circumstance could not have happened to (...) than that of a connection in
trade with such a man as him -- one of reputed (...) wealth, who as I thought,
could have brought into stock a large capital -- wh^^ under the management of a
man of some knowledge in trade -- could be im^^ed to mutual advantage. Instead
of which, the reverse was the case -- a (...) capital with great designs. Some
misfortunes, its true were sustained -- b^^ not having resolution to make the
best of contingencies, has in effect (...) loss to me of ten years, of the most
precious part of my life -- and a capita^ (...) L1500 at least -- on which had
I not joined him, I would most certainly have ^^quired an handsome independance
-- being ever a man cautious of taking cred^^ ^^somuch so, as to be found fault
with by my particular friends. Had I been fin^^ in trade -- and any misfortune
happened, I might by a composition have m^^ terms with my creditor: but by
being the partner of a man of reputed (...) wealth -- nothing but money would
be taken as payment. And if my council (...) been adopted no loss at all could
have happened; I would now be worth L20,00^ in certificates at least; the
estate of William Allison would be proportionably a^vantaged; -- the
partnership accounts would be closed, and I might have gone i^^ the brokerage
or other business on my own account, which would no doubt ha^^ been beneficial
to myself and my family -- instead of which, I was tied down t^ (...) con^exion
I could not shake off -- the unnecessary cruelty of my enemies would (...) be
evidenced in a confinement of my person, upwards of twenty six months (...) the
loss of twenty five thousand acres of land; to my children, have happened*

It will no doubt be objected, that I did not settle the partnership accounts
on t^ demise of William Allison -- that I did not apply the certificates to the
payment (...) partnership debts -- and that I did not accept the offer of
Doctor M'Henry -- th^^ of taking the goods at the appraisement and his
engagement to pay Francis All^son. To the two first I have already replied in
this narrative -- to the last I answ^^ that L^^00 was all that was offered for
what stood us in L2700, that at the ti^^ I had a hope to raise more money in
cash for them -- that some had already be^^ sent to vendue -- and that the sums
to be paid to Levi Hollingsworth I was constantly dunned for -- and had I not
made payments from time to time as I did. (...) suit would have been instituted
and the property of the heirs as well in lands, etc* as the certificates would
have been sacrificed -- and I thought less loss would (...) occasioned by sale
of the goods -- though this has proved greatly to my disadvantag^^

In order to show truly the funds which William Allison had in the partnership
(...) it is sufficient to exhibit a statement of this account from the books,
by which (...) appears that at the commencement there was due to him.

L178 3 10 Cash he put in April and May 1782. 750 His, or rather his Caldwell
and Bleakley's share of sales A* 14 10 11 Goods chiefly of the estates of do.
in July and August, 1782. 1617 2 5 Share of Sales A. to August 1785. 8 7 Goods
from John Barclay and Co. to balance James Moylan's debt, in which Bleakley and
Caldwell were interested, I believe. -- 695 16 0 Cash in September and
November, 1786. 213 13 10 Share of sales A. to December 1785. 7 14 2 Balance of
Bleakley's account transferred. 406 6 8 Cash Nov. 5th 1783, to pay John Field.
290 12 6 Dec. 24th do. Robert Gray, 150 0 0 Feb. 16th 1784, Tench Coxe, 150 0 0
Do. do. rent of Bleakley's Island, 325 0 0 July 3d Rundle -- part Gilmor's
bond, 200 0 0 24th. Rittenhouse notes, 1019 dollars, 382 2 6 Aug. 23d. do. for
Tax from S. Murdock, 3 0 0 Oct. 12th. do. per Caldwell's estate, 27 17 4 June
11th. 1785, Paper money to pay duties, 50 0 0 Oct. 1st. he paid Francis
Allison, 100 0 0 Nov. 14th. borrowed, 30 0 0 Feb. 1st. 1786, to pay an order of
F. Allison, 30 0 0 March 8 and 18, do. do. 056 5 and L245 7 ^ 301 12 0 July 1
and 27, do. do. 75 and L37 10 112 10 0 Total of money he put into stock. L6044
2 9

He drew out of stock as follows Goods, etc. had by John Caldwell at the shop
to 11th June 1787, L149 6 3 Do. - Margaret Caldwell, 40 9 2 Do. sent John
M'Henry and Co. from shop charged to Caldwell's estate, 485 11 3 Had by his own
family to June 1787, 372 13 9 Do. do. at store and to pay Gi^espie for his own
lands, etc. 817 13 6 Do. do. by M'Henry and Co. Logan and M'Eldry. 359 5 6 John
Caldwell acct. at store charged to his estate. 166 6 4 Doctor M'Henry's do. -
do. 71 19 8 His half of the cost of 2037 acres in Northumberland County. 122 10
1 James Armstrong's debt for which W. A. got his note discounted, 77 12 6 Goods
and cash had since his death, by the family. 11^6 ^ 3 3856 1 3 Neat stock in
the partnership. L2188 1 6

Now as William Allison by an account delivered by him to John Bleakley on the
28th of May 1787, (only fourteen days before his death) did owe a balance of
L2518 7 2 to Bleakley: it follows, that he had less stock in the partnership by
upwards of L300 than this debt -- and therefore he had no money of his (...)
stock in the company -- for credit is given to William Allison for every fart^^
which the company received of Bleakley's money, which will appear by inspe^^on
of the said account which shows the balance of L2518 7 2. To lessen his (...)
to the estate of David Caldwell, I was very willing to sell the goods to
M'Hen^^ and happy for the company it would have been could that house have
found (...) for more of them -- but money could not be raised with these -- for
very lit^^ ever remitted from M'Henry, but as William Allison was indebted to
C^^ estate -- those goods answered him as well as cash. Could they have been
(...) here for money -- it would be most certainly my advantage to have paid
off (...) to Francis Allison -- but this could not be done in any other way
than at public (...).

That the estate of William Allison will be liable for the debts of the company
a^ well as that to Bleakley will follow -- because I am in capacitated to pay
any p^^ save what my lands may bring at public sale -- the proceeds of which
must (...) ^^vided in proportion among my personal creditors, as well as to the
heirs aft^^ have paid off the debts of the partnership -- which they can have
no clai^ (...) ^^fore. Contrast this with my offer of mortgaging the lands in a
way safe (...) heirs and not (as I thought) unsafe or dishonorable to me --
because, shou^ (...) been helped by the interest of their friends to such
office as I am able to fi^ (...) one I mean as would require constant
application -- not a sinecure (which I have (...) reason to expect) it would
give me pleasure to save from injury the heirs of a (...) who has injured me,
though I believe without the least design.

To show the impracticability of stating precisely the just sum which the heirs
(...) William Allison will have against me, it is only necessary to observe,
that all deb^ due by the company must first be paid, that the partnership lands
must be sold -- that those of Sidman cannot be even known until decision of an
amicable actio^ instituted or agreed to be instituted in the Supreme Court,
between the assigne^ under the first assignment and those under the second --
for the pleading to w^^ several lawyers are retained. That a question of law
may arise relative to the ^^nies received by me since the death of William
Allison, for the creditors of (...) Wallace and Isaac Sidman, as to how far the
heirs are concerned in those ^a^^ions -- and perhaps there may be others not
now recollected by.

ROBERT M'KNIGHT
November 1792
It is ^ut right, that some apology should be made to the Gentlemen, whose
names appear in the foregoing pages, without their proper titles of
distinction. The writer aimed at co^ciseness to save expense in the printing,
which is the true reason for the omission -- a^^ (...) hopes it will be
considered as a sufficient apology. His wish was, to represent in the ^est
diction, a clear narrative of his transactions -- and if any person who reads
this ca^ will communicate any objection whatever, in writing, respecting any
part thereof -- (...) writer will cheerfully give every satisfaction in his
power.


