THE VOYAGES AND ADVENTURES OF Captain ROBERT BOIL, IN SEVERAL PARTS OF THE
WORLD. INTERMIXED WITH THE STORY of Mrs. VILLARS, An ENGLISH LADY, with whom he
made his surprising Escape from BARBARY. LIKEWISE INCLUDING The HISTORY of an
ITALIAN CAPTIVE, and the LIFE of Don PEDRO AQUILIO, etc. Full of various and
amazing Turns of Fortune.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by JOHN W. FOLSOM, No. 30, Union-Street near the
Market, M,DCC,XCII.

To the Right Honorable SIR WILLIAM YOUNG, One of the LORDS of the Treasury,
AND KNIGHT of the Most Hon. Order of the BATH.
SIR,
THE great and noble of all ages, have, and ever will be marked out by writers
of every degree to patronize their labors; and as public fame (though sparing
of her favors) has distinguished you in an Age of Politeness, Wit, and
Learning, among other eminent virtues that exalt the mind, and dignify human
nature; I am sufficiently justified to the world in the choice of my patron*
but must depend on your known candor, for thus presuming, without your leave.
Yet I have this for my excuse, exalted merit is free to the consideration of
all men, and where excellencies shine, every man has a right to admire.

Though praise is the just due of merit, and all the world join with me while I
grow warm in yours, yet as I know your nature more inclined to deserve than
receive it, I shall case you of that pain, and, in silence wonder where words
must fail.

The people of Mexico, every year, offered something to their emperor in token
of vassalage; and frequently, among things worthy the notice of a king, he
received even sacks of common earth, from those persons who could not afford a
nobler offering: But they, like me, did what was in their power, with an
expression in their language, which signified, I would it were more worthy of
your acceptance. I am assured from your goodness to find pardon for this
freedom, though I add to my presumption, by subscribing myself,

Your most obedient Humble Servant.

THE ADVENTURES OF Captain ROBERT BOIL, etc.
I WAS born at a seaport called Boston, in Lincolnshire. My father was captain
and owner of a merchant ship that traded to the West Indies, but was cast away
(homeward bound) upon the rocks of Scilly, and but one man saved of his whole
crew. My mother and I were at an aunt's in London when the unhappy news of my
father's death arrived.

I was too young to feel my loss; but my mother's grief soon broke her heart,
and left me a poor helpless orphan not ten years of age. It Is true, I had a
tender aunt that was in pretty good circumstances, who took care of my
education. I soon learnt to read, and write a good hand; I understood a little
Latin, and was perfect master of the French tongue, which I had been learning
from my infancy. My mother was born at Paris, where my father married her very
young, and brought her to reside at Boston.

By that time I had reached fourteen years of age, my (...) told me it was time
for me to think of some trade, desiring me to choose what I liked best, and she
would provide for me accordingly. Said she, if I might advise you, I would have
you study the law, under the tuition of your uncle -- but I told her I did not
much care for any calling that must owe its prosperity to the misfortune of
others: And at last I chose that of a watch-maker, as imagining myself to have
a good mechanical head. Accordingly I went upon liking (as they call it), and
my master and I agreeing very well, I was bound with the usual forms, and found
civil usage from him, in respect of my birth and the misfortunes of our family.

My aunt paid forty guineas, (which was reckoned, at that time a great price;
but he was one of the top of his business) and besides, to find me in clothes
and other necessaries, during seven years apprenticeship.

The first half-year we agreed very well; but within that time, my master had
married a wife of a pretty good fortune, and a large share of ill nature. In a
month's time she began to tyrannize over my master as well as me, and soon
proved, as the saying is, The gray mare to be the better horse. She brought it
to that pass at last, that I was obliged to go on all her halfpenny errands*
and carry her book to church of a Sunday after her. I bore this tolerably well,
but not without complaining to my aunt, who advised me to make myself as easy
as I could, for she feared speaking would (...) no good.

I went on this way for a whole year, and then, to complete my misfortunes, my
poor aunt died of a dropsy. This, indeed, was the greatest shock of all my
life; for while she lived I felt no want of father or mother: She left me 800l*
and my uncle -- to be my guardian. I shall forbear mentioning his name, not out
of regard to him, but of his children, who have proved a sweet grafting from a
sour stock, and as good as he was base.

My shrew of a mistress continued her ill nature to me, and one accident made
her prove outrageous.

My master had a vast trade, and vented a great many watches beyond sea. One
day he had a large parcel of them to go on board a ship bound for Lisbon; the
vessel lay at Deptford, and my master was pleased to take me along with him in
the boat.

Before we were got to Limehouse, my master called to mind that he had forgot a
silver watch that he had purposely made for the captain of the ship. He landed
me at Ratcliff cross, and desired I would be expeditious in, (for the tide
running downwards, I could get to the Exchange sooner on foot than by water
against the stream) then to take boat at Billingsgate and follow him to the
ship.

I ran almost all the way, and I believe got to the Exchange in half an hour.
When I came home, I found no body in the shop but my fellow-prentice, who
informed me my mistress was above. I went immediately up stairs for the watch,
(for my master told me he had left it in his own room, seeing he had wore it
several days to prove the going of it) bu^ found the door shut. Standing a
moment to consider, I heard a man's voice speaking to my mistress in a low key,
and I soon understood by their dialogue that love was the subject they talked
of. I listened some time, till I found they had left-off discoursing, and were
entered upon action.

Now at the head of the stairs, the maid had left a step-ladder that she had
used in the morning, in nailing up some vall^n^ to the windows in the
dining room, and there being a glass over the chamber door, I had a great mind
to see who it was that was doing my master's business in his absence. Thereupon
I fi^t the ladder very softly against the wainscot by the door, and up I got:
but leaning toward the window in order to see into the ^oom, my weight made
the ladder s^^p, and the top sliding against the door, burst it open, and in I
fell into the room, ladder and all, with no little noise.

The loving couple were mightily surprised you may be sure, and were in such a
fright that they had forgot what they were a doing. But I saw enough to
convince me that my master was in a fair way to get to heaven purely upon my
mistress' account.

After our surprise was over, and every thing put in order again between the
gentleman and madam, I ventured to tell her my errand; she gave me the watch
with a hearty good box on the ear, and told m^^ she wondered how I had the
assurance to come up without knocking; but, added she, I believe you rather
came upon some knavish design, and had intended to rob your master, if I had
not been in the room with my physician, that came in purposely to see how I did.

It was plain enough what physic she was taking, yet I made my excuse to her,
that I went to remove the ladder, and it fell out of my hand against the door
and burst it open; but I told her I was sorry I had disturbed her, made my
honors and walked off, taking no notice that I had seen any thing. I took
water at Billingsgate, and followed my master.

In the boat I began to ruminate with myself, whether I had best keep this
accident a secret, or disclose it to my master. At last, with many pros and
cons with myself, I resolved to acquaint him with it; partly to be revenged on
my mistress for the blow she struck me, and on the other side, not to let my
honest master be kept in ignorance of her usage of him.

When I came on board, the captain commanded me (with my master's leave) to sit
down at table with them. We dined heartily, the wine and punch went merrily
round, and my master, the captain, with two more that were passengers, began to
be in high mirth; when word was brought that the captain's lady, (as the
messenger called her) would be on board in an hour to take her leave of him. My
master upon this message, began to be merry with the captain. I wonder, said
he, that you seafaring men will venture upon wives. Why so? replied the
captain. Why so? returned my master, because in my opinion it should put you in
mind of Cuckolds' Point as you went by water; your absence give them such a
convenience, that I believe few let slip the opportunity. Why, answered the
captain, may not your wife, even now, be doing you the fav^^^? has she not time
enough, do you imagine? The thing's soon done; and if they have an inclination,
watching and restraint will do no good; many an Alderman has been ^ornuted
while upon Change; and I knew a parson's wise that seldom we it to church, but
took time by the for^lock, and while the husband (good man) was taking care of
his flock, the good woman at (...) was at her occupation with her gallant, a
rich young farmer. But the p^^son o^^ afternoon being taken suddenly ill with a
(...) in his h^a^, was conveyed home before he had begun his work, and there
soon found the occasion of his pain^ for he had been breeding horns, as
children breed ^^^th, a little u^kindly. But, however, the parson having
witnesses ^^ou^h of h^^ promotion in the herd of cuckolds, went to l^w with the
farmer, and recovered (...) damages; and yet he has been heard often to say,
that his wife's tenement was never the worse.

This story occasioned some others much to the same purpose; at last my master
and I (the tide being turned) took our leave of the company, and wished them a
good voyage. Coming by Cuckold's Point, my master cried, Robin, why don't you
pull off your hat to the gentleman in the window yonder? I pulled off my hat
very orderly, but saw nobody; at which my master fell into a great fit of
laughter, and cried, I have been very courteous to the horns. I then,
understanding his meaning, told him, that it was only for married men to show
their complaisance that way; and, being a little piqued at the affront I
thought put upon me, said, I believe most married men were, or would be in the
lift of cuckkolds. Why, how now, firrah! replied my master, do you think I am, or
shall be a cuckold? Why truly, said I, Sir, I have but little reason to believe
my mistress a saint more than any other woman; and to inform you farther of
what I have seen to day, I beg you would be pleased to go to some public house,
that we may not be observed by the watermen. My master's color began to
change upon this; and, being very impatient to be informed of what I knew,
ordered the watermen to land at Ratcliff-cross, and wait a while.

We went to the Ship-Tavern and had a private room, where I declared to him the
whole truth. After many questions and answers between us, I soon found he
believed all that I told him, for he turned as pale as ashes, and the tears
stood in his eyes. I then was sorry I had disclosed it to him, remembering the
inimitable Shakespeare, He that is robbed, not wanting what is stole,
Let him not know it, and he is not robbed at all.


After some time being silent, my master broke into many extravagant words, and
threatening actions; and at last, I ventured to tell him, I thought him in the
wrong to grieve at what could not be called back, and (...) wondered the world
should unjustly cast upon the man, the ignomy which was due to the woman for
her licentiousness.

After some time he began to be more calm, and made me this compliment; Robin,
said he, I have observed in thee a more than common understanding: Pray do tell
me in what manner I shall behave myself in this affair. I thank you, Sir, said
I, for your good opinion of me, and, were it my own case, I would not take any
notice of it till I found her in the fact, or such circumstances that even she
herself could not deny; and for these two reasons* First, Whenever it comes to
an open rupture, you will have but an uneasy living: Secondly, That she may take
it into her head to deny it, and then the whole weight of her anger will fall
upon me; and truly, said I, I have too much of her ill nature already to bear
any more with any manner of patience.

My master could not imagine who this gallant should be by description, for I
had never seen him before. We went to our boat and so home. When we came in, my
mistress asked my master if Robin (meaning me,) had been telling him any
stories. Stories, child! answered my master, what stories? he has told me
nothing. Nay, no great matter, said my mistress, but I gave him a box on the
ear this morning, when he came back for the watch you had forgot, and I did not
know but he had made some complaint; but I am sorry for it, and will make him
amends one time or other. This she said so loud that I might hear.

The next day, when my master was gone to 'Change, she came up into the
workhouse, as we called it, up three pair of stairs, and and took an occasion
of sending my fellow-prentice on some concerted errand. When he was gone out,
she sat down upon his chair, and looked me in the face for some time. Well,
Robin, said she, I am very much obliged to you, that you did not take any
notice of the accident that happened yesterday to your master, and to make you
amends for your silence, I give you this broad piece to buy you a pair of
gloves, with this promise, that you and I will never disagree again. I received
her money, and told her I should never take any farther notice of it. She
called me good lad, and left me.

My master had not always an opportunity of talking with me at home, so he
appointed me every Sunday after sermon in the evening at some tavern or other,
that we might talk about the matter. At our first meeting. I told him the story
of the broad piece, and the discourse my mistress and I had together. I showed
him the money, and he soon knew it to be his wife's, from the particular
fairness of it, being the same he had some time ago given her for a
pocket-piece.

Now, said he, Robin, I am fully convinced of the infidelity of my wife; for
notwithstanding your former story, I had some faint hopes it might have been a
tale of thine, raised out of malice to thy mistress, from her indifferent usage
of thee. But now, to and out this spark, that I may wreak my vengeance on him
first; for, to my own folly, Robin, I must tell (...) I cannot find I shall ever
be able to hate this ungrateful woman.

Some time after, my master was pretty well convinced that his wife had been
with her spark to the Mulberry Garden, and my master had discovered who he was;
he proved to be a young attorney of Clifford's Inn. The next thing we consulted
about at our weekly meeting was how to give them an opportunity of pursuing
their amor at home. In order to this, my master gave out to my mistress, that
he should be obliged to go as far as St. Margaret's in Kent, to look after some
goods that were landed there, in order to avoid paying custom for them, and he
feared the affair would not be so well managed if he was not present.

The Tuesday following was chose for the day of his setting out. My master gave
me public orders to go to several places in his absence, to look after the
workmen, (for there are several trades belonging to the making of a watch.) On
Tuesday morning my master got on horseback, in order (as my mistress, and the
rest of the family thought) to pursue his journey; but he went no farther th^n
Islington, and returned, putting up his horse again; and went up straight to
the place of our rendezvous.

As soon as my master was gone, my mistress called me up to her, and asked me
if I had time to step a little way for her. I told her 'twas impossible, seeing
I had s^^e work to finish, that I was obliged to carry out immediately. Then
she begged, I would call her a po^^^^, which I did, and one of my particular
acquaintance, one well to pass in the world; for (...) porter in those days was
a beneficial employment, there being then no penny post office. I told him what
he should do, that he must go to my mistress and receive the letter, and then
to an adjacent ale house, and wait till I came to him. Accordingly, he received
the letter, and went to the place I appointed. I did not let him wait long, but
ordered my matters, as if I was going about my master's business, and went to
the porter. From thence I took him along with me to my master, where we opened
the letter, and found it as follows; -- "Dear Tom, it is an age since last I saw
you; the cuckold's gone out of town for a week, therefore meet me at the old
place by six this evening." Here we were at a stand, for we could not imagine
where the old place was, unless the Mulberry Garden. At last, we resolved to
send the porter to the spark, and bring the answer to us, to see if that would
give us more light in the affair. Accordingly (...) and returned with his
billet. We made bold to open it, and found it contained these words: -- "My
life, I don't think the old place convenient, seeing a brother lawyer has
discovered something of our intrigue: therefore, I Will wait on you before the
time, that we may concert measures accordingly. I am glad your beast is out of
town: we'll add another antler to adorn his brow, as soon as I have the
happiness to see her who shall eternally command yours." --

When my master perceived that the scene was to be opened at his own house, he
began to demur: But, after keeping silence a little time, he spoke to me to
this purpose; Robin, this letter has in some sort confounded our design, for
what I intended to act, I would not, if it could be avoided, put in execution
at home, for fear it should make too much noise: for, added he, smiling, though
a man has the misfortune to be a cuckold, yet he would not have all the world
know it. I told him, I was glad to see him so merry upon the occasion, but
begged he would not keep the porter any longer, for fear of some accident. He
thanked me for my care, sealed up the letter again, and sent him away with it.
When the porter was gone, my master ordered me to go home again, and observed
how matters went there, and as soon as ever the spark came, to send the porter
back to him with this notice, "That the work was ready to carry home, whenever
I thought fit."

I had not been at home a quarter of an hour ere my gentleman came in a coach;
he went up stairs, but did not stay a moment, came down again, whispered the
coachman, and drove into Cheapsi^e. I was at a loss how to behave myself, but
my mistress ordered another coach to be called. When I found out that, I sent
for the porter, and told him secretly, that he must dog that coach, let it go
where it would, and be expeditious in bringing me word. My mistress came down
in her hood, and mask in her hand, and went off in the coach. I looked after
her, as far as I could see her, and observed the porter to jump up behind the
coach. I immediately went to my master, and acquainted him of the business. He
hurried me home again, for fear the porter should wait for me, and ordered me
to bring him, when he came, to the Pope's-Head tavern, because he would be
nearer home.

The porter did not return in two hours: he told me that the coach drove to
York-stairs, in York buildings, and there they got out and took a pair of ours;
he went in another, and followed them till they landed at Lambeth, and dogged
them into the White-lion inn. There he staid some time, to see if they intended
to go from thence; he walked into the kitchen and drank a mug of ale, and in a
little time one of the waiters came in, and told the cook, the gentleman and
his wife had bespoke a roasted fowl, and some fish for their dinner, and had
ordered clean sheets to be put to air, for as soon as they had dined they
designed to go to bed, seeing the stage-coach was to call them up at one the
next morning.

I did not think it altogether so proper to take the porter to the Pope's-Head
to my master, but went alone, where I found him with another gentleman, a
stranger to me. When I had given him an account, we took coach all together and
drove (...) Horse-ferry, Westminster, took boat and landed at Lambeth. We all
went into the White-lion the back way, and I went to the drawer, (as we had
before concerted) and asked if there was not a gentleman and a lady that
designed to lie there all night for a stage coach in the morning; he answered
in the affirmative, but added* they were that moment gone to bed, that they
might be the better able to rise in the morning. I asked him which room they
lay in, for that I had business of great consequence to communicate to him.
Why, that room up one pair of stairs, answered the drawer, and pointed at the
door. Well, said I, fetch me a pint of wine, I Will drink a glass, and then go
and wait on them.

The drawer ran down for the wine, and in the mean-time, I beckoned to my
master: up stairs he went, I sat my foot against the door, burst it open, and
there we soon perceived the loving couple playing at Rantum Scantum. I shut too
the door again, and stood guard, that no one should enter. My master laid first
hold of my naked gentleman, and, with the assistance of his friend, threw him
upon his back, clapped a pistol to his breast, and swore he would shoot him, if
he offered to stir or cry out. Then my master's friend took out a box of
instruments, and, with a pair of scissars for that purpose, soon deprived him
of what Senesino and several Italian singers want as well as our spark. The
thing was done so suddenly, that I believe my gentleman hardly knew his loss
till he felt the blood trickle down about his legs. He made several attempts to
get up, but to no purpose. My master told him he had better be quiet, for fear
he should be worse served, (but in my opinion that could ^^^dly be.) The
surgeon (for it proved my master's friend was no other) had all his implements
about him; he managed his needle, his plasters, and salves, and finished my
gentleman, and would have had him gone home something lighter than he came, but
he proved so weak with loss of blood and the pain together, that he fainted
away.

My mistress had hid herself behind the curtain, and did not so much as say one
word; but in all her concern, she took care to dress herself; and when she had
done, she sat upon the bedside next the wall, and seemed to be in deep
discontent.

We had got my gentleman to himself again by the help of the drawer, who soon
found how matters went. When we had done, my master said to his wife, Madam, I
must confess, I was ^o blame to disturb you in your diversion, but I own my
fault, and will endeavor to mend it, by leaving you together to solace
yourselves, and so I take my leave.

Upon this, we marched down stairs, paid for our wine, and went to our boat
that waited for us, and landed at the Steel-yard. My master was very uneasy all
the way home, and we could not get one word out of him. He went up stairs,
looked himself in his room, and remained alone several hours. I would have been
willing to have diverted his melancholy, but did not well know how I should go
about it.

Near seven o'clock in the evening, he called me up stairs, and asked me if I
had heard any thing of his wife. I told him, No. Nay, said he, if she has any
shame left, she will hardly attempt to come again in haste. After some time, he
went out, and did not come home again till twelve o'clock. He asked me still
after my mistress, and understanding we had no news of ^er, went to bed.

The next morning he ordered me to send the porter to Lambeth, to learn how
they behaved themselves when we had less them. He returned and told my master,
that the gentlewoman went away as soon as she found (...) were gone, and left
the gentleman there, who was so weak, that he remained there still, and had
sent for several of his acquaintance.

In the afternoon my mistress' mother came to my master, and they had a long
discourse, and afterward went out together. But I was never more surprised in
my life* when he came home the ^ame evening with his wi^e and mother. He
vouchsafed to tell me the next day that his wife resolved never to be guilty of
any fault again, and by her submission, and the entreaties of her mother, he
had resolved to take her home once more. Sir, said I, if you can forgive her,
no one else has any thing to do with it. But, added I, I fear I shall feel the
effects of her displeasure. No, answered my master, that was one of my
conditions with your mistress, that she should take no notice of past
transactions. And truly she kept her word, for she would not so much as look at
me.

She continued very reserved for a great while, and never went out but to
church of a Sunday.

In the latter end of the same year, my master began to be out of order, and
the physician advised him to go into the country for the (...); accordingly he
took lodgings at Hampstead, when my mistress used to go twice or thrice every
week to see him; and my master told me when I went of a Sunday to wait upon
him, to give him an account of the business of the shop, that his wife had been
so tender of him in his illness, that he verily believed he should never have
occasion to blame her conduct again. I told him, I was as well pleased as he
was.

About a week afterward, my mistress went in and out very often, and seemed to
be very busy, giving orders to my fellow-prentice for taking her a place in the
Hampstead coach as usual. This happened on the Tuesday, and I saw her no more
that week.

When I went to my master on the Sunday following, he asked me if my mistress
was out of order, seeing he had not seen her since the Monday l^st. Nor I since
Tuesday, said I, but I thought she had been with you, for the took a place in
the coach in order to come to you that day, and sent out several bundles to be
carried, as she usually did when she was going to wait on you.

My master was so confounded with what I told him, that he did not offer to
speak for some time, and the sweat ran down his face like drops of rain. At
last, said he, Robin, I fear all is not well! My wife has certainly undone me.
Come, hope for the best, said I.

Well, my master resolved, weak as he was, to go for London immediately. We
took a coach, and soon got home; and there to my great sorrow, found my
mistress had robbed my master to the value of five thousand pounds in
bank-notes and money, with six and thirty gold watches and seventeen silver
ones, besides her own wearing clothes. My master at this loss, sunk down upon
his bed. I went and fetched some of his neighbors and friends to comfort him,
while I ran up and down like a madman, to see if I could get any tidings of the
thief.

I went to give orders at the bank to stop payment, but to my great sorrow
found the money had been received four days before. I came back to acquaint my
master with my ill success, and found him alone and gone to bed. When I told
him I could not hear any tidings of my mistress, and that the money had been
received, he cried Robin, it is not the money that grieves me, but the ill
usage of my wife; it is that has got to my heart, and never to be removed till
death. I sat up with him a great while, till he told me he began to be sleepy,
and ordered me to retire; but as I was going from him, he took me by the hand
and bid me good night. I found by his pulse, that he was in a strong fever, and
begged I might call a physician; but he said, he should be better in the
morning, if not, he would send for one. Finding him willing to rest, I left him
and went to bed.

As soon as I waked in the morning, I put on my gown, and went to see how he
did; but found him so weak and faint, that he had not strength enough to lift
up his head. I was immediately running to fetch a physician that lived hard by
our house, but my master called me back, and told me that it was too late, for,
said he, I feel my last moment approaching. He ordered me to sit upon the bed
by him, he took my hand in his, which burnt like f^re, and said, Robin, my wife
has killed me: I could have borne any other misfortune with temper: if thou
ever should see her, tell her from me, that I forgive her, and that I beg she
would reform her life; but also, let her know that she was the death of me. I
told him, I would not have him talk of dying for an ungrateful woman that did
not deserve the least regard, but to cheer up his spirits, and let me go for a
physician. No, said he, all physic or counsel comes too late; I Have that within
which baffles all their art,
Sure means to make the soul and body part,
A burning fever, and a broken heart.
He had no sooner repeated those lines, but his speech failed him, his eyes
closed, and he expired only with a sigh.

I must confess I was inwardly shocked, and the spirit of revenge rose in my
soul against the barbarous cause of his end.

When I had a little recollected my scattered thoughts, I went to a cousin of
my master's, that lived in Cheapside, and desired he would come and take care
of his affairs. For my own part, I could not compose myself for* two or three
days: At last, I went to my uncle, and desired he would let me have twenty
pounds to buy me mourning, (for I did intend to wear black; that my melancholy
outside might conform with what I felt within,) out of respect to my master's
memory. Mourning, Bob? answered my uncle, why, if thy master's friends will not
give it thee, it is my opinion, thou ought not to think on it. Yes, Sir, added
I, I think it my duty, for though my mistress used me ill, my master always was
civil to me. But my uncle told me, in plain terms, that I should not have a
farthing. I told him, I wanted but my own; but he replied, when he thought I
was of years enough, to manage my money myself, perhaps, I might be trusted
with at, but at present he would take care of it for me.

I was very uneasy at this affair, for it began to look, as if he intended to
cheat me of it, and I did not stick to tell him my sentiments in a civil
manner, but to no purpose. I left him with a very heavy heart, and came home. I
went to bed in the utmost confusion of thought; yet, notwithstanding my
discontent, slept till morning. I got up about six o'clock; with a scurvy idea
of my future fortune. About eight, my uncle's man brought me a letter from him,
in which he begged my pardon, and told me, it was only to try my temper. The
man gave me ten guineas by his order, and further told me, that his tailor
would be with me immediately to take my directions; and accordingly, before the
fellow was gone, he came, took measure of me, and told me, he would be sure to
bring my clothes home by twelve o'clock the next day; and he kept his word with
me.

In the mean time, I had provided myself with every thing else with the money
my uncle had sent me; and the same evening waited on him to return him thanks.
Bob, said he, I had only a mind to try your temper, and I find, thou art thy
father's own child, a chip of the old blo^k.

He would have me stay to sup with him; an^, among other discourse, he asked
me, what I did intend to do, now my master was dead, for he did not suppose I
was master of my trade enough to follow it. I replied, I knew enough to
recommend myself to any other master without paying any more money. My uncle
replied, I needed not be in such haste, but take some time to consider of it,
and, in the mean while, I should live with him, and be heartily welcome. And to
make his actions agree with his words, he gave me five guine^^ more for
pocket-money, and gave directions for me to be with one of his clerks, a
good-natured young fellow, that was a school-fellow of mine.

I was very glad of the occasion, living with my uncle in great tranquillity
the space of a month, and all the time he seemed to be very fond of me, never
denying me any thing that I asked him.

One Sunday morning, before church-time, he called me to him, and (after many
professions of friendship) asked me, if ever I had done any business for my
master out of the watch-making trade. I pretty well guessed at what he meant,
and answered him in the affirmative. Very well, said he, I must send you as far
as Gravesend tomorrow about the same affair; and if I executed my commission
dexterously, he told me, it should be the better for me.

The next morning, I got up, and my uncle sent me with a letter into Pall Mall
to a client of his, and returning with an answer, found him taking his leave of
a gentleman that looked like a sea-officer. As soon as their compliments were
over, my uncle dispatched me away to Billingsgate, and gave me instructions
what to do. I was to enquire for a ship called the Success, Captain Stokes
commander, at Gravesend, and then to follow his directions.

As I was talking with my uncle, my bedfellow thrust a book into my pocket,
and told me, that would divert me in the boat, if I had not company that I
liked. I did nor much regard what he said, but went about my business, got into
the Gravesend boat, which put off upon the instant, and had the fortune to
light of good company, and one young man, that was going to the same ship as I
was.

We were very merry all the way with little stories we told among ourselves. We
got on board the Success about two o'clock in the afternoon, and the first
person I saw, was the same man that I found with my uncle in the morning. He
took me by the hand and carried me into the cabin, and set a piece of ship-beef
before (...). When I had dined, he informed me my things would be on bo^^d
immediately. I told him it was very well, not suspecting any thing. Afterward
the captain went out and left me alone in the cabin: I got up, and looking out
of the cabin window, found the ship was under sail. At first I began to be
surprised, but yet was so ignorant that I thought we were sailing up the river.
While I was ruminating on the matter the captain came and told me, my things
were ready for me whenever I would. I went out; but how was I surprised, when I
saw my trunk that I left at my uncle's, with all my clothes in it! I was in
such confusion, that I had not power to utter one word for some time. At last,
recovering out of my surprise, I asked him the meaning of what I saw! Meaning,
child! replied the captain; why, what is the matter? would you go such a voyage
as we are upon, without necessaries? What voyage? returned I. Why, to Virginia,
replied the captain. At that answer, I sat me down upon my chest and burst into
tears, and had such a combat in my mind that bereaved me of the power of
thinking for some time. The captain indeed did all he could to comfort me: At
last, I fancied it might only be a jest; but to my sorrow, found, by all their
discourse, it was but too much in earnest.

The captain declared that my uncle had bargained with him for my passage, and
that I was to be delivered to a relation I had in Charlestown, upon the
continent of America, I asked the name, but he told me one th^^ I had never
heard of before.

When I found I was certainly betrayed by my barbarous uncle, I fell upon my
knees, and begged the captain to put me on shore, and I would find some means
to pay the sum he was to have for my passage. He answered, he was too well paid
already, to let me go on shore again: and further added, I had nothing to do
but to make myself easy, for I was not likely to set my foot in Europe, till I
had first seen America.

I found it was to no purpose to entreat any farther; It is true, I had no
aversion to the sea, but rather an inclination; and if my uncle had made any
proposals to me concerning such a voyage, and properly prepared, it is ten to
one if I had not accepted it. But in this manner to be kidnapped, (for it was
no better,) and then the dread of being parted with as a slave when I came
t^ither, shocked me prodigiously. But being naturally of an easy temper, eight
or ten days pretty well wore off my apprehensions, and I began to be contented
with my wretched fate. I set myself with all my diligence to learn the
mathematics, as also the work of a sailor, and quickly attained to some
knowledge. I soon ingratiated myself with most of the crew, who instructed me
in all they knew.

I mentioned a book my uncle's clerk put in my pocket as I left the chambers
the morning I was trepanned, which, for the first three or four days I did not
remember: but putting my hand in my pocket to feel for something else, I took
it out, and found in it a letter directed for me, which was as follows:

DEAR BOB,
WHEN you went to St. James's this morning, (supposing* I would have read it
the day I received it) I overheard my master discoursing with the captain of a
ship, and learnt he intends to send you to Virginia. I could not understand the
particulars, but enough to know the bargain is made. My friendship to you, and
the barbarity of your uncle, obliges me to give you this (I hope) timely
notice. I shall leave the management to you: but whatever steps you take, I am
not to be in the question; and I thought of this way to acquaint you with it,
fearing I should not have the opportunity of speaking to you. Farewell, till I
see you again, which I hope in God will not be long.

A. M.


This letter made me curse my fate again; for if I had had the good fortune to
have read it before I was on shipboard, I might have prevented my uncle's
design: But it was my destiny, and therefore I submitted to it.

We met with nothing in our voyage till we came near the Canaries: When one
evening we heard several cannons fired, as we supposed two leagues from us. Our
captain altered his course, in order to avoid a re^counter with an enemy; for
our ship carried but ten guns and twenty men, besides passengers. But
notwithstanding the captain's care, as soon as ever the morning dawned, and the
fog was cleared up, we found ourselves within half a mile of a rover of
Barbary. We were all mightily surprised, for the galley made up to us with
sails and oars, being to windward of us. Our captain advised us to surrender
immediately, but the sailors were for fighting, and were confirmed in their
opinion upon sight of another vessel bearing down upon us, whom they knew to be
Spanish by their colors. All our guns were immediately brought to the
starboard side, and every body ready to engage, passengers and all who were
willing to preserve their liberty.

The rover by this time was just on our starboard bow, and prepared to board
us. We had some hand-grenadoes on board, with several other stores for our fort
at Charlestown, and a gunner as one of our passengers. He ordered several men
into our maintop with grenadoes, and followed himself; as soon as ever the
galley came near enough, our men at the helm bore away, and fired our guns upon
him, which raked them fore and aft, and did much execution. Our gunner above in
the top threw in upon them with his grenadoes, which we could perceive put them
into much confusion. But all this would not have availed, if they had not
perceived the Spanish man of war bearing upon us. They did not make any farther
attempts to board us, but they fired their cannon, and galled us with their
small arms.

I had gotten a musket on board, and discharged it as I thought, for it flashed
in the pan, and the noise of the other pieces deceived me. I charged again, but
then found by the rammer, that my piece had not gone off; However, I was
resolved to fire it: I stood upon the larboard gunnel, just upon the
forecastle, to be as far from the enemy as I could, and fired my piece; but
being double charged, and a stubborn jade, gave me such a bang that threw me
over the side of our ship; my foot hung in the forechains for some time, but
struggling (with my head downwards) to raise myself up, my foot disentangled,
and I fell plump into the sea.

Although I had learnt to swim in England, yet the fright, the smoke, and
altogether, took away my understanding and I found by my struggling, that I had
got within ten yards of the rover, and she that instant, bearing away before
the w^^d* they did me the favor to stun me with a stroke of one of their oars,
and took me on board with them.

They rowed with all their strength, and the wind being in their stern, they
insensibly left the Success, who flatted their fails, and laid by till the
Spanish ship came up with her, and then we could perceive them both making
after the ^ove^.

The captain of the corsair was an Irish renegado, and as soon as he was out of
danger, he sent for me into the cabin, and asked me several questions
concerning our ship, where she was bound, and who I was (for he took me for
more than a common sailor, seeing I was not in a sailor's habit.) I told him my
story as I have related in the foregoing sheets. He shook his head, and, with a
smile, said I was very ready at a lie. Sir, said I, I am so far from lying,
that I jumped overboard on purpose to come to your vessel rather than to stay
with them, choosing to be a slave nearer home, than to go I don't know where
with the knave that trepanned me: And to convince your honor of the truth (I
honored him much) here is the letter which my uncle's clerk slipped into my
pocket in a book (for by good fortune I had the letter and book in my pocket
when I fell overboard.) At reading the letter he was convinced, he said, of my
sincerity: and thou shall see, added he, notwithstanding the bad opinion is
held of us renegadoes, that you shall fare the better for your confidence in
us. Sir, returned I, this accident may convince you that I thought very well of
your honor, for as soon as I saw your honor upon deck giving cammand, I
thought you had the look of a gentleman; (though by the bye he had a damned
Tyburn face.)

I clarkt him so well (with your honor) that he began to fancy himself a hero
indeed. He ordered my chains to be taken off, (for they had done me the favor
to provide me some as soon as ever they had got me on board) and told me that
if I would turn. Mohammedan I should have command under him. I answered him, I
hoped he would give me some time to consider of it. Ay, ay, time, thou shall
have half-a-year's time to consider of it, returned the captain. He carried me
out upon deck, and told my story to his crew, who were mightily pleased with
the relation, and saluted me after the Moorish manner, by bowing their heads,
and clapping their hands across upon their breasts.

There were several other English renegadoes that were officers in the galley,
but most of the common sailors were natural Moors. The captain told me that he
did design to make for Sallee with all the expedition he could, for he engaged
with a Spanish man of war the night before, and had suffered very much in both
his vessel and crew: but he told me he would soon be out again, for he had
another vessel ready in Sallee-road to put out to sea. We had before night lost
sight of the Success, and Spanish man of war that had so luckily freed her from
the infidel's clutches; and we steered for Sallee.

Ten days after, we discovered the African shore, within five leagues west of
Sallee-road: and the wind favoring us, we anchored in the harbor by six in
the evening. The captain went on shore, but ordered me to remain on board till
the next day.

I must confess I began to have some hopes of seeing my own country again, ^^t
yet did not know how to bring it about; however, I resolved to trust providence.

The next morning my master sent for me on shore, by a young renegado sailor
born at London, whose Christian name (I learnt) was Francis Corbert, but had
exchanged it for Mustapha; a good intelligent young fellow, and one that was
perfect master of the mathematics. The reason why he did not accompany the
captain in this voyage, was a violent fever when he set sail. I asked him why
he could forget the Savior of the world to turn Mohammedan? he told me, that he
was only one from the teeth outward, and he thought it better to trust God with
his soul, than than those barbarous wretches with his body. I thought it was a
pretty free declaration to one that was an utter stranger to him.

As soon as we were landed, I had the whole town of Sallee staring at me; for
the captain of the rover had taken care to spread my story among them, and I
had as much respect shown by the people of the town as he had. He took me home
to his own house, and used me with much civility for a week or ten days; during
that time, he had carried me twice or thrice to his country house, about six
miles up the river. It was a very pleasant place, situated in a little wood,
with a river running round it, and no approaching to it but over a drawbridge.
At this house his wives lived, for I was informed he had several.

Observing his garden, I told him it was but indifferently kept. He answered,
it was for want of a gardener, none of his slaves understanding that art. I
offered my service, but told him I did not pretend to be a gardener, but I was
assured I could soon make amendment to it, with the help of some of his
servants. He ordered me to take as many as I thought fit, and, added he,
because I am impatient to see it in a better condition, I Will leave you here, I
told him I begged to be excused now, because I should want several things for
my designs. If it be tools, said he, or seeds of all sorts, I have them here.
Upon which he carried me into a little house, meant for a green-house, where I
found every thing that was wanting, with a large quantity of European seeds and
roots. I told him I was satisfied, there was every thing that I should want.
The captain ordered me a bed to be made in the green-house, and an old eunuch,
that understood French very well, to wait on me, with a strict order that I
should have every thing I asked for, but I was not to approach the house in his
absence upon any account. I told him I had no curiosity that way, and did not
doubt but I would show him something that would please him the next time he
came, which was to be in twenty days.

As soon as he was gone, I went to work, (for gardening was what I always took
delight in, both theory and practice.)

I drew out plans, ordered my workmen, and in six days time brought it into
some form. I perceived in the middle of the garden a puddle of water, which I
gave directions to be drained, and found that it had been formerly a fountain,
but was only choked up with filth by neglect. I asked the old eunuch if he had
ever known it to play, and he answered in the negative, neither did they
imagine it to be any such t^^ng: for his master had bought the estate of an old
Spanish renegado four years before, and he told him it had been a fish pond. I
examined about the river, and found the head of the pipes stopped with rubbish,
which I cleared, and by degrees the water worked through into the fountain, and
out again through another conveyance. I observed that there had been figu^^^
upon it, by the pipes: I asked my eunuch if he had ever seen any such things?
he told me there were several lying in a back-yard on the other side of the
house. I went with him, and found four small figures of Tritons, and a Neptune
in his chariot drawn by sea-horses. I ^^dered them to be brought to the
fountain, and fi^t them on, (fi^^t slopping the water, and then letting it
loose again) and finished my fountain, which played admirably out of the shells
of the Tritons, (which they seemed to blow with) from the nostrils of the
horses and the trident of the Neptune. The workmen were astonished to see with
what expedition I had completed it, and imagined I had dealt with the devil.

The next morning the (...) came to me before I w^^ up, and desired I Would give
him the key of my chamber, and be contented to be a prisoner till he came to me
again. I was a little surprised, and asked him the reason: He told me he could
not give me any, that being beyond his commission. Accordingly he locked me in
and went away. I began to ruminate about this accident, but could not imagine
the cause: I had no way to look toward the garden, because the windows of the
green-house looked over the river into the wood, and the back, which fronted
the house, had only painted windows for ornament, not use. In about two hours
my e^nuch came and released me, and we dined together. I used all the rhetoric
I was master of to find out the secret, but to no purpose: he only added, that
I must be in the same condition again the next morning. This was still more
surprising, and I began to think by degrees I should entirely lose my liberty.
The old eunuch imagining my thoughts, assured me there was no harm meant to me.
This afternoon was my last day's work, and in three days more I expected the
captain. About an hour before night, I perceived another eunuch of the house
talking earnestly with him that used to attend me, who immediately came to me,
and told me he must beg me to retire to my chamber that instant; upon which I
readily obeyed, knowing it was to no purpose to contend.

I was upon the tent^rs to know the reason of my confinement; whilst I was
employing my thoughts about it, I heard the voices of women. It surprised me at
first, but I soon found that was the reason of my being made a prisoner. When
the eunuch came to bring me my supper, I told him he need not have made such a
secret of what I was locked up for, for I had found it out; and then told him
that I had heard women's voices in the garden. Did you? (said he, surprised,)
I Will take care they shall keep their tongues within their teeth for the future.
He said no more, but immediately went out, and soon returned, and told me I
should hear no more of them. I was confounded with this odd proceeding, and my
curiosity began to be more and more raised.

When I was left alone, I began to examine my room where I was, to see if I
could find ever a peep-hole, and by good fortune found one made by time and ill
weather under the pent-house. I, upon the instant of my dis^^^ering, made all
the use I could of it, and soon perceived three ^^men in the wall with their
backs toward me. They were in a Turkish undress, with their necks hare: one of
them above the ^est secured to me to have a better shape and air than commonly
the women of Morocco have. I don't know what came over me, but I (...)
imp^^^ently to expect their nearer approach. At last my desires were answered;
for as soon as they had spent some time at my new fountain, they directed their
steps toward my confinement, and when they were near enough, I could
distinguish them to be three handsome women: but one of them that seemed to be
very melancholy, surpassed the other two, at least in my opinion. She seemed to
be about twenty, fair to a miracle, and much like an English woman. She did not
seem to converse with the other two, but followed them with an air of
contemplation; and I could observe her sigh often. I never till this moment had
the least regard to any of the female sex, no more than good manners and
decency required; but I sound myself in a moment full of aching tenderness for
this strange woman. Though I had no time for thought till the ladies were
retired, I then began to reason with myself, and found love, like destiny, was
not to be avoided; and the more I thought, the more I was plunged in this
tormenting, yet pleasing passion. Yet I thought it was very odd to fall in
love, considering my circumstances. I had nothing to hope, and all to fear: I
was poor, a prisoner, and a stranger; far from my native country, in want of
necessaries, and to complete my misery, sunk in one hour an age in love. Every
new thought seemed a thorn to torment me: yet notwithstanding all these
difficulties, a beam of hope would now and then shine through the thick clouds
of despair, and encourage me to love on. From this though^ I began to think
with reason (if a lover can be called a reasonable creature) how I should
manage my passion. I began to reflect the Moors were jealous of their women
even to a degree, and did not in the least doubt but my Irish renegado had
learnt that part of their manners. At last I pitched upon an odd expedient: I
determined to show to my captain an utter detestation of all females (and in
truth the usage my poor master met with from his wife very much lessened the
regard I owed the sex) and try what that would do. This thought seemed to give
me some satisfaction, and as soon as the eunuch came to release me, I begged he
would sup with me that evening. I^^ accordingly promised me, and came
immediately with my supper, and brought under his garment a bottle o^ excellent
Gree^^ wire. I must confess I (...) surprised and pleased; for, as I kn^w the
Moors are restrain^^ from wine, I did not expect any there. -- The eunuch told
me, s^ailing, that he had brought me that ^^^dial to make me amend for the loss
of my liberty: For though, added he, M^ss^lmen are not allow^d to d^^^^ w^^^,
we very well know you Europeans seldom cat without it; and our (...) (meaning
the captain) i^ not so strict a M^ss^l^^^ but (...) himself, and procures
privately, great quantities for his own use. I told him, thought Mahomet
ordered his followers to abstain from wine, because an immoderate use of it
generally turned to immoderate passions; but to take it sparingly, gives health
and vigor to the body, and cheerfulness to the spirits. He agreed with me in my
sentiments, and showed he approved of them by drinking to me. --
Notwithstanding my endeavors to hide the trouble of my spirits, my kind eunuch
took notice of a concern in my countenance, and cheered me up with repeated
glasses; and imagining my confinement caused that alteration, told me he would
not have me take to heart the small abridgement of my liberty, for as soon as
his master arrived, I should not be restrained any more, for the case would
cease, by the confinement of the ladies to their several apartments. I told him
with a seeming joy, that I should be mightily pleased, when that should happen,
for I abhorred the fight of them; women were my utter aversion, and had been
from my infancy; and that aversion was aggravated by the knowledge of their
perfidy; and I thought it the greatest curse could fall upon that noble
creature man not to be born without them. Upon this I told him the story of my
master and mistress, and several extravagant tales of my own invention, and
painted that beautiful part of the creation in the color of the devil. My
companion praised me for slighting the sex, and backed my stories with as many
of his own knowledge. Between our familiar talk and our Greek wine, he began to
be very loquacious: He told me, his master, after the mode of the Moors, had
several wives, besides a captive that he had lately taken, that seemed averse
to his passion, and all the rhetoric he was master of could not prevail. He did
not know, he said, what country woman she was, but she spoke very good French.
I imagined this could be no other than ^^^t sweet creatreature I had seen: I
changed color; but to put it off, said, a pox take all the sex, don't let us
talk of them any more. I am afraid, said he, you love to converse with the men,
and that makes you slight the women. I did not immediately understand him, but
he soon explained upon it, and then I was no longer ignorant. I told him it was
of such a beastly, nature that I was of opinion that those persons that used it
should be treated worse than beasts. Why, replied he, it is so common here,
that it is reckoned only a piece of gallantry. -- Well, said I, I hate that
action even worse if it be possible than the sight of the female sex. --

The old man and I parted like two friends; but before he went, I told him he
need not give himself any great trouble to lock me in for the future, for I
would take care of myself. -- Well, well, said he, and shook his head, I
believe I may trust you. As soon as he was gone, I went to bed, not to sleep,
for I had thoughts enough about me to keep me waking. I began to conceive a
great deal of hopes from my dissimulation. I spent the whole night in thinking
of a thousand experiments to forward my designs, till I had thought of so many
that they were all confused like a skein of silk pulled the wrong way. At last
with the fatigue of thought I fell asleep till sunrising, nor awaked till I
heard voices in the garden. I ran immediately and barred my door in the inside,
for fear of being discovered at my peep-hole, huddled on my clothes, and ran
up; where I saw my lovely charmer reading in a book, walking by herself in the
alley that led to my prison. The other women were got about the fountain,
admiring the playing of the water. She drew nearer me; but what was my pleasing
surprise when I heard her repeat the following lines in English! -- My grief
lies all within,
And those external manners of laments
Are merely shadows to the unseen grief
That swells with silence in my tortured soul.


I must confess, the transports I felt were beyond expression: she had such a
soft^^ss in her voice, and yet so musical, that it made my blood thrill through
my veins. In short, during the time I beheld her, I was in such an ecstacy,
that all my cares were forgot. She turned up the walk again, but I followed her
with my longing eyes till she was out of sight: I then turned them into my
imagination, and there behold her still.

I was convinced she was an English woman, and kept in her restraint against
her will. I soon resolved with myself to find some expedient to let her know I
would serve her all that lay in my power, if she was disposed to accept of it.

I had staid so long fixed at my peep-hole, that the old cu^^^^ knocked at my
door, which soon roused me from my plea^^^^ thoughts, and put me upon another
task, which was, to dissemble I suffered him to knock twice or thrice before I
let him in; (...) last I opened the door when he had called to me to give me
(...) know who it was: as soon as he was entered, I began to exclaim against
him in a friendly manner; said I, You promised me yesterday that I should not
be troubled with the tongues of those female devils, and I have been so plagued
with them for an hour together, that I was obliged to shut my door, and run up
stairs to be free from the sound. He smiling, told me, the fumes of the wine
which he drank over night had drove it out of his thoughts, but he would be
sure to give them a caution to hold their tongues for the time to some: But
then, added I, I may be surprised by them when I little expect them. No, said
he, I Will take care to send, or bring you word when they are disposed to walk in
the garden again. I thanked him for his caution. He told me he did design to
come and dine with me that day, For, added he, I shall not have another
opportunity a great while, for the captain has sent word he will be here
tomorrow without fail. Accordingly he came with a roasted pheasant and some
boiled rice, attended with another bottle of Greek wine.

Notwithstanding my new passion, I ate and drank heartily; but my eunuch got
almost tipsy, and the fumes of the wine getting up into his head, he desired he
might repose himself on my bed for a while, which I granted him, well knowing,
if he had been found out, we might both have suffered for tasting the juice of
the grape. I had much rather he had gone within the house to have slept, for I
could not even think to the purpose while he was there; but he soon got into a
found sleep, which I found out by his snoring. I then ventured to take pen and
ink, and wrote the following lines.

To the ENGLISH LADY.
MADAM,
I HAVE observed your melancholy air, and other circumstances speak you a
prisoner here. The person that writes this is your countryman, and though in
the same distress, yet has a heart and hand to do you service. I flatter myself
it will one time or other be in my power to effect our liberty. If you have no
thoughts that way, I am persuaded you have too much genrosity to do one a
prejudice that would venture any thing to serve you. You know the consequence
if this note should be discovered, therefore I be you would destroy it as soon
as you have perused it: and if you will favor me with an answer, with your
sentiments of what I have wrote, you will find a string hanging on the north side
of the garden house, to which if you fix your letter, I shall be ready to
prevent discovery of what may hurt you, and him whom you may freely command.


I had not the convenience of sealing-wax or wafer, therefore folded it up, and
directed it, To the ENGLISH LADY. When I had finished, I began to have odd and
confused notions of the, success of it: Perhaps, said I to myself, she may be
contented with her fortune, or be afraid to hazard any attempt toward her
liberty: She may also imagine I am set on purpose to betray her, and therefore,
to show her innocence, may discover me to the captain. I was in a hundred
minds: Sometimes I resolved to burn the letter; but at last love prevailed upon
all my reasons to the contrary, and I resolved to try the success of it the
first opportunity.

In reasoning with myself, and writing my letter, I had spent three hours, and
therefore thought it high time to awake my eunuch, who started up frighted out
of his senses. When he had recovered himself, he thanked me for breaking his
rest, for he was assured he was wanted within. And he nicked his time to a
hair, for before he was got half way to the walk (for I immediately got up to
my peep-hole) I saw the ladies at the further end. He talked to them some time,
and then left them, to go into the house.

They sauntered about the garden a good while, till at last two of them sat
down by the fountain, and the English lady continued her walk toward my
apartment. Now my blood ran its swift course, and the whole frame of my body
felt violent emotions. I thought this was a fair opportunity, and yet was
fearful to make use on it. But mustering all my spirits, I ventured, and when
she was within twenty paces of the green-house, I d^^ed the letter, and by good
fortune it fell in the middle of the gravel walk, so that it was almost
impossible to miss o^^t, but had it happened otherwise, I had time enough to
run down and take it up before any one else could discover it. She continued
her walk, and when she came at it, she kicked it with her foot once or twice,
and at last took it up. She was reading in a book, as she was the day before: I
could perceive her open it, and spread the note upon her book, so that no one
could tell but that she was reading. It is impossible to express the anxiety I
lay under all this while: but I began to be a little more composed, when I
observed her ^earing the letter into very small pieces, and scattering them in
several parts of the garden. She had not walked far, but she returned, and
viewed the green-house with a great deal of regard, and, to my imagination,
^anted to come to the north side of it, as mentioned in the note, yet seemed
fearful; often looking back, and not fully confirmed in her resolution, at last
went unwillingly to the rest of the ladies. This gave me some hopes that she
received the letter kindly, and that I should hear from her soon.

I observed she sat upon the fountain very intent upon her book, which did not
much please me. In about a quarter of an hour she go^^ up, and came toward the
green-house again. When I saw her coming, I ran down stairs and fixed a
pack-thread to the top of the window, for fear, if she should take courage, and
come to that side, no^ seeing the pack-thread, she might be startled, and
persuade herself there was nothing in it. I had placed it and got up to my
peep-hole before she had reached the south side. But coming close to the wall,
I could not see by reason the smallness of the hole cut off my sight. But in
less than a minute I discovered her walking back again, and sometimes turning
to view the place of my retirement. As soon as she had got to the top of the
walk, (for I had not power to stir before) I went down, and pulling in the
pack-thread, found a piece of paper tied to it. I ^^^tied it with a great deal
of expectation and impatience, and sound these words wrote with a pencil, upon
a clean leaf of a book, (which, I suppose she had torn from what s^e had been
reading in.)

I WAS much surprised when I perused a note I found in the walk of the garden,
as believing it directed to me. I confess I am a person in distress, but know
not how to take the word of a stranger, and one I never saw, who perhaps is no
more than a spy upon my ^^^ions, and what the note contained, may be by order
of him who pretends to tyrann^^e (...) because I am in his power; and seeks
this way to find ^^t my inclination, for pretenses to use me worse. Therefore
I Will expect a farther assurance in half an hour, from the some place; and I Will
take an opportunity to convey my real sentiments back again.

The joy I felt at reading this note, cannot be expressed in words. I sat me
down, and wrote the following answer.

MADAM,
TO tell you the motive to serve you, may convince you of my sincerity, which
I Will let alone till I have the favor of speaking to you, if ever I am so
happy. You have heard, no doubt, of the person that the master of this house
brought from Sallee, who is the same that is willing and proud to serve you. By
him that died upon the cross for our sins, I am sincere in what I write to you;
and if I cannot serve you, it will be the greatest grief can happen to one who
shall ever be yours.

R. B.


When I had wrote this, I went to the usual place, and saw my charmer very near
me. I threw it down as before: she readily took it up, and walked back again,
tearing the note when she had read it, as she did the former, and went into the
house. Just as she was got within the gate, the other eunuch came out, (not my
friendly eunuch) and as he was walking along, I observed him picking up the
pieces of the torn notes. If any one had observed my countenan^e at this
action, they might have discovered the utmost confusion there. I thought we
were certainly undone, and could not tell how to behave myself. I sometimes
repented of the affair, but yet I always found my concern was more for her whom
I loved, than for myself. As soon as he had picked up all he could find, he
returned with my hearty curse, and wishes that he might be obliged to swallow
them down his throat for a penance.

I don't know when I should have recovered out of my fit of confusion, if the
sight of my bliss had not done it. She went to the fountain, sat her down upon
the margin, and spent some time there, th^n rose and made to my apartment: she
took two or three turns with a book in her hand, but at last went out of sight,
as before. I staid till I saw her in the walks again, and then ran down, where
I found another wait with ink, as follows:

I AM convinced of your sincerity, and shall wholly rely upon your endeavors
to help me. If we succeed, and get our liberty, I have it in my power to reward
you when we arrive in England. As we are two unhappy persons, I should not be
displeased to see the man that I owe an obligation to, even in his intention to
serve me. I have liberty enough, I mean as far as my bounds, and am not
over-closely watched. The captain who took me prisoner has hitherto used me
very civilly, and is only troublesome when he tells me he loves me. I have kept
him from being too violent, by showing him a little civility sometimes, but how
long he will continue within the limits of modesty I cannot tell. It Is that
makes me dread his presence, and the sooner I am out of his power, the sooner I
shall breathe the air of content, which is the wish of,

Your humble Servant.


At the reading of this paper, my heart ran over with contentment: and had it
not been for the fear of what would happen about the pieces of the letter that
were picked up by the cursed eunuch, I would not have known how to have
maintained my transports; but the thoughts of that, like water on fire, dampt
my joy. I passed my time between hopes and fears, till my eunuch came to sup
with me. I had torn my letter into many pieces, and had disposed of all the
fragments that had any writing on it: but two or three small bits of plain
paper lay under foot. As soon as ever my eunuch spied them, he picked them up,
and said I did not not do well to tread upon paper; For, added he, if Achmet
had seen you, (meaning the other eunuch) he would have been in a strange
passion. He has chid the lady that my master brought home last, very severely,
for throwing pieces of paper about the garden, well knowing in could be only
she that had done it, because the rest were all Mahometans, and knew the virtue
of it. I asked the reason of all this bu^^le about a thing we Europeans put to
the most servile uses. He told me with some entreaty at last, that all true
Mussulmen have a great deal of regard for bits of paper, because the name of
God, or their prophet, may be wrote upon it; and they have a tradition, that
when they are called out of purgatory at the day of judgment, to be inhabitants
of the ever-blessed mansions, there will be no other way to come to their
prophet Mahomet, but over (...) large red-hot iron grate, which they must walk
over barefoot* And therefore, upon the instant as they are going to step upon
the grate, all the pieces of paper they have picked up during their residence
in this world, will run and place themselves of their own accord under their
feet, so that they will be enabled to get to their prophet without much
difficulty.

This whimsical story set my heart at rest, and we supped cheerfully, emptied
our flask of wine, which held two quarts, and took our leave. I went to bed,
and felt such a calm in my mind, that I did not lie long awake, but continued
sleeping till ten o'clock the next day. I was surprised and vexed I had rested
so long, when I considered perhaps that I had lost the sight of my love. I
dressed myself, and took a walk in the garden, finding the coast clear, as I
thought. The sun being pretty warm, I retired to a little shade made by a few
laurel-trees; but was much surprised to find her that was ever in my thoughts,
fitting under the shade, in a thoughtful posture. She turned her head at the
noise I made in approaching her, and was ^^^ning away. I pluck up (with much
ado) courage enough to speak to her; Madam, said I, I would not have you be
under any apprehensions. If I had known you had been here, I would not have
disturbed you. I will only inform you, that I am the person, that has vowed to
serve you to the utmost of my power. Sir, answered the, I am not at all
displeased at this interview, which is merely chance; on the contrary, I am
pleased to see the person whom I over hope to be obliged to for my liberty, and
wish we could often (...), that we might consult about the means. Madam,
answered I, if you will condescend so far, I don't doubt but to (...)
opportunities enough. I told her of my plot with the eunuch, and I had some
hopes it might produce something. She approved of my design, and my conduct
hitherto. She added, that she would take hold of all opportunities to walk in
the garden (where I had informed her I could see her without being seen) and so
we parted for fear of being discovered. She went into the house, and I went
back to my dwelling, and in less than half an hour the captain arrived. He came
to ^^etch me to dinner, and told me I had worked by magic, or I ^ould never
have done what I did. He told me, he thought himself much obliged to me, and
that I should find it. I answered him, I was convinced it was but my duty to
serve him with every thing in my power, and that, if he pleased, I should make
farther improvements. He made me a great many compliments in his way* and
declared he would leave it to my better judgment.

By this time, dinner was ready, and I was ordered to sit down at table with
him. (for though he had turned Mohammedan, yet he ^at as we do in Europe, not on
the ground upon carpets as the Asiaticks and Africans do. We had our linner
dressed after the English fashion, and we drank plentifully of his Greek wine.
He told me ^he had a dispensation from the Mufti to drink wine, and smiled. I
answered I (...) the crime was pardonable by Mahomet, if it was thank with
moderation. For my part, I don't think, said I, religion con^^l, in castigation
and penance; and I am convinced that an upright man, let him be Jew, Turk, or
Christian, may find his way to heaven. We had several discourse, at dinner
about religion, but I soon discovered the captain knew very little of any; and
I am of the opinion that very (...) of the renegadoes think of religion; their
motive to change, is case and interest. But this is a digression.

When dinner was over, we walked in the garden, and I showed the captain what
improvements I had designed to make. He approved of every thing I said, and
informed me that he heard from Mirza, the eunuch, my abhorrence of women. But
he advised me to keep my sentiments secret, for when you abjure, said he, the
Moorish women will make you feel their resentment. But it is ^^^d continued he,
that one of your youth and make should take such an aversion (...) the female
sex. I told him I had very good reasons for my hatred, and even my mother was
odious to me, though (...) brought me into the world. Well, but, added the
captain, (...) and a fair face may make great alterations. I told him I was
very well assured I should carry my resentment to the grave. I (...) he, I have
a^ English woman, a slave of mine, that I have lately taken, would make you
change your sentiments if you saw her. Sir, answered I. I would be glad to
stand the trial to convince you to the contrary, though I would as soon look
upon a serpent with my will. Well, said he, I have not learned the strictness
of the Moo^s, in keeping women without being seen; or if I had, your aversion
to them would convince me I had not much to fear. He desired me to walk a while
in the garden, and he would be with me again immediately. Upon this he left me,
and went into the house, and returned in five minutes. Come, said he, I have
ordered my women to walk in the garden, and you and I will abscond behind these
laurels, where we may see them and not be seen. We had not sat long before we
could perceive three women (...) us. The two first were very handsome, a little
inclining to fat; one seemed to be about thirty, and the other twenty-own
according to my guess, and not so fai^ as our English women: but the third was
she I looked for. All my circumspection could (...) a sudden flow of my blood
rise into m^ f^^^, wh^^h m^ captain observed. Well, said he, (when they were
walked out of hearing) I have taken notice of your (...) aversion is
unsurmountable, which I am not sorry for, seeing it will add to your liberty. I
have no o^^^sion (...) have (...) confined when they walk in the garden, for I
(...), (...) he, laughing, you will shun them fast enough Just, answered I, as I
would a creeping snake, unless it were to destroy them, and that the regard I
have for you would prevent. The last, said the captain, is your country-woman,
one that I took in a ship (my last voyage but one) bound for the island of
Zant. I liked her so well, that I refused her ransom that amounted to five
hundred pounds, and her charms have overcome me so much, that I would willingly
enjoy her with her own consent, for compulsion palls the joy. I have given her
twenty days to consider on it, and when that time's expired, if she will not
consent, I am resolved to force her.

Lord, (said I in a seeming passion) how can you take such an extraordinary
trouble for a thing that does not deserve the least regard. If the rest of the
world were of your mind, (said my captain) the women would have but a scurvy
time on it. Now it is to me amazing (replied I) that men should take pains, live
hard, and run all hazards to come home, and spend all the fruits of their
labor on such trifles, that perhaps have not the least tenderness for them,
especially in those hot countries where women are given to be amorous, and yet
have but one man to sometimes a dozen of them and more; when perhaps a dozen
men would hardly satisfy one woman. Why (replied the captain) that is the reason
they are so strictly guarded, we pretty well know what they expect. Now, if I
had not this aversion to women (I returned) I have a secret without witchcraft,
to make a woman dote upon a man. How, said the captain, have you such a secret?
If you will let me know it, I will not only give you your liberty, but amply
reward you besides. Sir, said I, I thank you; but as for disclosing the secret,
it is what I never can do; yet it is in my power to prepare you a chemical
liquid, which, put into white wine, will do the business, though it will take
up a great deal of time, and be very expensive. As for the expense, replied the
captain, I shall not value it. But in how long time can it (...) done? not under
one hundred days after projection, answered I. Upon this he paused some time^^
a hundred days is a great while, yet I think it is better to wait for her
consent than to force her. So far (laid I) I think you a^^ in the right; and
farther, (added I) you may continue her affection at long as you think fit, by
now and then adding some of the chemical drops into any liquid she shall drink,
after she has taken the first prescription.

The contain seemed (...) pleased with my project, and asked me what the (...)
would ^e I answered, I feared it would be about two hundred pounds in this
country, though it would be much cheaper in England, where the things that I
should want were easier to be had; but I told him I could not give him a just
account of the charge, till I saw the prices of the things I should want. I
told him I should find it a difficult thing to get a still, for that was the
first thing I should want. He answered me, he did not question but I should
easily procure every thing I wanted for money, and he would take care I should
not stand in need of that. He further told me that several Jews in Sallee had
all manner of drugs, and he belived every thing else I should want. (For fear
of the worst) I told him I should not want my drugs these fifty days, though I
should want the still immediately, and liberty to go into the neighboring woods
in the nightime, seeing there were several herbs that I must gather by moon
light, and when the moon was in its full, in the increase, or decrease,
according to the nature of the herb I wanted. He told me I should have all the
liberty I required, not doubting I would make any wrong use of it. I told him,
to be more secure, he might send who he thought fit to guard me. No, returned
he, I leave you to yourself. But you may take who you will with you of my
servants, if you want their assistance. I told him I should stand in need of
some of them sometimes. Well, said he, you shall go up with me and take what
money you have occasion for. So accordingly we went into a little closet, where
was strong box, which he opened, and took out two hundred and fifty Spanish
pistoles; said he, if there is not enough, you may have more. I told him, I was
assured there was too much. Well, said he, we'll reckon after the affair is
over. And because it will be so long, I will even take another cruising voyage,
that I may not think the time tedious. I was very glad to hear him say so,
because I should have a better opportunity to work my design. Though I
dissembled my joy, and told him I be sorry for that, for I should often have
something or other to give the woman he designed me to work upon. Well (said
he) Mirza shall take your directions. Upon saying this (...) called Mirza to
us; Mirza, said the captain, you must observe this person's orders; whatever he
commands you to do, you must obey with as much exactness as if you were serving
of me. This he told him in the Moorish tongue, but explained it to me in
English. Mirza also told me in French, the commission his master had given him,
and farther added, he hoped I would often command him to visit the wine-cellar.
I told him we would not want. I advised the captain to let me go to town, to
enquire for the still as soon as possible, and to be known to those people that
sold drugs. Why, if you will (replied the captain) we'll go immediately, upon
which I consented. He ordered a horse to be saddled for me, an^ I went into the
green-house to prepare myself; and luckily for me I did, for I found a note
fixed to the string which my fair correspondent had taken opportunity of
leaving, when she walked in the garden by the captain's order. The contents
were as follows:

SIR,
I TAKE this opportunity to acquaint you that the tyrant captain is arrived,
and has given me twenty days to consent to his abominable love. I hope you will
believe me when I tell you it has almost taken away my senses. The time I fear
is too short for us to effect our liberty; and if we do not succeed before she
fatal day, I shall be the most miserable wretch the earth contains. Let me hear
from you, and if you can give me the least glimpse of hope to lull my sorrows,
fail not to cheer the heart of

Yours.


How lucky was it for me to find this note! it might have fallen into the
captain's hands, and then we had been in a fine condition. I had time to write
but a short answer, which I threw on the ground, and pulled in my string; it
was this, "Hope every thing: write no more till tomorrow." I locked my door,
and took the key with me.

When we were on horseback, our chief discourse was concerning charms,
philters, and witchcraft. I convinced him there was not any such thing in the
world; and my compound was the only thing that could do what was desired. He
asked me if I myself had ever tried the experiment: I told him more than once;
and related the following tale to him off-hand.

There lived in our neighborhood, a rich old man, and ve^^ amorous, but
deformed to the last degree: He was round-shouldered, broad-faced, blear-eyed,
short-nosed, and his mouth as with as his face was broad: a pretty object at
one should see. Th^^ old gentleman fell in love with a very pretty woman, a
merc^^^ daughter over against him, but she secured to be the very offsp^^^^ of
pride, and thought nothing less than a lord worthy to be (...) husband, being
well assured her charms would conquer every one that looked upon her. She could
not bear the thoughts of the old gentleman, and whenever he talked of his
passion, treated him so ill that he was almost distracted. I went to visit him
one day, as I often used to do, for before his love fit he was wont to be very
good company, and would make as free with his deformity as any body else would
do; but I found him now in such a condition that I began to pity him. I used
all the arguments I was capable of to bring him to reason, but it was the same
thing as to stem a torrent. At last I called to mind this elixir, which I had
never tried before this occasion; I was pretty well convinced of its virtue
from what I saw it was composed of, though the chief ingredient is calcined
gold.

This wonderful arcanum was found out by an uncle of mine, that had studied the
secrets of nature sixty years. When he was dying, he called me to him, and gave
it me in writing, with the most solemn conjuration that I should never reveal
it, nor cause it to be wrote till I thought my last hour near, and to destroy
that which he gave me, in ten days, for fear it should be found by accident;
and that ten days would be sufficient to imprint it in my memory: I give it
into your hands, said my dying uncle, because I find thy understanding exceeds
thy years, and thy aversion for women will never let thee make an ill use of
the valuable secret; and further added, that the charge would deter me from
doing it upon any slight occasion. I took it from him, with a sacred promise
not to disclose it, till on my death bed; for if my uncle had recovered. I must
have delivered it up to him again. But he expired in half an hour.

I so far pitied the old gentleman (and also having a desire to try the
experiment) that I told him I had it in my power to make the lady as fond of
him as love could wish, if he would go to the charge. He told me he did not
value the expense, but he had no faith in charms. I convinced him at last, went
to work, and accomplished my affair. The quantity I made would serve a hundred
years, and I had a little in my trunk when I was trepanned aboard, which if you
had the good fortune to have taken, would have saved you time and money.

When I had brought my old gentleman a bottle of my stuff, he seemed even then
to have little faith in it; but I bade him have patience till the trial. All he
had to do was to convey about forty drops into a glass of white wine fasting.
That, he said to me, will be a difficult thing, for I know she hates me,
neither will she stay in the company where I am. However, I told him I would do
my endeavo^^ to find an opportunity: so I ordered him to keep a small bottle in
his breeches pocket, (for it must be warmed naturally with the heat of the
person's body that is to give it); and in two or three days I prevailed upon a
relation of mine to invite the lady to drink tea with her; I acquainted my old
lover that he should come in as by accident, and bring a pint of white wine as
a taste of a parcel he was to dispose of. Every thing happened as desired; the
old gentleman came in, and got an opportunity of conveying some of the drops
into a glass of wine, and I had the satisfaction of seeing her drink it. This
passed off, and we parted: But the poor woman in less than ten days, was
distractedly in love with the old gentleman, who took his opportunity, enjoyed
her, and after despised her.

Now the nature of this elixir is, that if the dose is not renewed every time
the moon is in its full, the object (...) loved will sink into dull
indifference again.

My captain told me he thought I might have made my fortune by such a secret. I
replied, I had forgot to tell him, that my uncle made that one of his articles,
that I should never sell a drop of it, and I assured him I would always keep my
promise.

Our story brought us to town, and I was very much pleased, for I was both
tired of inventing lies to amuse him and ^id^^^, (...) the Moorish manner, with
one's knees almost to o^^'s mouth; and there is no altering the stirrups.

We alighted at the captain's house; he s^^t about the town, and in an hour
bought a complete still. He went with me to the Jew's that disposed of drugs,
and by good fortune, and a good memory, I remembered the names of a great many
(...). I laid out some money then, and told him I should want a great many
other sorts, and large quantities. Of th^^ Jew I (...) (through the captain's
interesty to much the gold (...) I told him. The things were ordered
immediately to the country house. The captain desired I would make no delay. so
I return (...) just by sunset. I immediately ra^ to my (...) piece of paper
was there, but I found it was (...)

I went to bed and rose early in the morning, and seemed to be very busy about
the garden. I sent for my eunuch out of the house, and told him what I had
undertaken for the captain; but I farther added if he did not sometimes attend
me with a bottle of the juice of the grape, I could not possibly go through my
undertaking. He answered me, smiling, that he had orders from his master not to
disobey me in any thing. But, added I, I have a harder task than all this, for
I am compelled to have some discourse with the woman I am to work upon, to find
out her temper; for according to her disposition, I am to add or diminish
several of my ingredients. Nothing could have prevailed upon me, continued I,
to have undertaken this hateful task, but the hopes I have of liberty; for that
is the agreement between the captain and me, if I succeed in my design, which I
am in no doubt of. I should be glad, returned the eunuch, you might meet with
what you desire, yet I should be sorry to lose your good company. I shall, with
some regret, answered I, part with you; but desire of liberty, and indeed of
revenging myself on my unkind uncle, which is natural to us mortals, will make
me as expeditious as I can in my work. I ordered him to let me have a couple of
servants, to go with me into the fields that night to carry the herbs I should
gather: and he told me they should attend me.

I now began to think of acquainting the lady with some part of my design, and
therefore wrote her a note to this effect.

MADAM,
I HOPE to have the honor of conversing with you without fear, and even with
the consent of your tyrant. I have laid a scheme for our liberty, that, with
the blessing of God, I hope will succeed. You Will smile when I tell you I am to
understand natural magic; but I shall think nothing difficult, if, in the end,
I can serve one who may ever command

Yours.


In less than an hour, I saw the ladies coming down the walk; I ran immediately
up to my peep-hole, and observed the mistress of my heart sauntering the way
she used to go. As soon as I had discovered her in the walks again, I ran down,
and ^ound a note in the room of mine; (at first I was uneasy, imagining she had
not (...) mine away) which contained to this purpose.

SIR,
I AM something revived at your short sentence I found upon the ground
yesterday. I learnt your going to town with the captain, by a discourse between
Achmet and Mirza; for I understand the Morisco tongue enough to pick out the
sense of what they say; yet I had not ventured to write, for fear my note
should have miscarried; if I had not seen you talking to Mirza out of my
window. Only consider my time is very short, and if there is no other way to
avoid the captain, I must fly to death as my only refuge. Think of it, and
farewell. Let me have an answer the soonest, for doubt and expectation are but
lingering torments.

yours.


I wrote her the following answer.

MADAM,
I WILL write you no more, and beg the favor you would desist from giving
yourself any further trouble. I will have the pleasure of talking to you openly
tomorrow, and let you into the whole scheme I have laid for your liberty. But
let me beg you to be cheerful, though reserved in your countenance when we
meet, for fear we should be observed.

yours.


She came to the old place in an hour after she had brought the last, with
another note (as she told me afterward) but, reading mine, she did not leave
it behind her.

After my eunuch and I had dined, I went into a neighbou^ing wood with two of
the captain's slaves that were blacks: I leaded them with herbs of several
sorts, any thing I could lay my hand on, and ordered them to carry them into
the garden. I had taken care to tie every particular herb with a string, so
that there was no danger of mixing; these I hung in bundles upon the branches
of several trees in the garden, and out we went again. In short, I gathered a
good horse-load of different sorts, and some I laid upon the banks, and others
I covered with earth, that it looked as if I was about business. I could hardly
forbear smiling sometimes, when alone, notwithstanding my anxiety for the
success of my design, to think how soon I drew in the credulous captain. Then I
began to be in a thousand fears of his discovering my intention to some of the
Moorish physicians, for, though generally ignorant, yet they would soon have
found I was but an impostor.

While I was amidst my fears the captain arrived, whose sight gave me some
trouble. He came up to me, looking about him at what I had done; why this looks
like work, said he, Yes, Sir, said I, I am willing to begin that I may make an
end the sooner: but, Sir, I must intrea^ one favor, that you would not impart
the secret to any one of your family but Mirza, nor to no one else upon any
account whatsoever: if they seem inquisitive, tell them I am only distilling
some simple waters for your closet. I like your advice, answered the captain,
and will be sure to follow it: The reason of my coming down now was to take my
leave of you, for I design to set sail tomorrow morning early, for I am
informed of a rich vessel that will be in our latitude in ten days, from a
prisoner that is lately taken, belonging to Spain: I cannot tell how long I shall
be out, but I hope by that time I come back, I shall find every thing in
readiness Sir, I replied, I don't fear but to accomplish my design before you
come back. Well, said he, do you think you shall want any thing else? I told
him, nothing but now and then a gallon of seawater. Well, said he, I shall
leave Mustapha behind me in town, who shall obey you in whatever you shall
command. Well, said he, farewell (and shook me by the hand) I Will just go in and
give them a fresh charge concerning you, and then to town again. I was very
glad to hear him say so; and he was as good as his word, for in half an hour he
took horse. He shook his hand at me as he went by me, and I heartily wished it
might be the last time we might see one another; not as I could complain of my
treatment, for he had used me very handsomely; and if it had not been in regard
to the business of my love, I should not have wished him ill.

Mirza came to me, and told me his master had given them so strict a charge to
observe my directions, that if I had a mind to dispose of his estate, 'twas his
own fault, for, added he, we must not disobey you. Yes, answered I, if ever you
find me requiring any thing foreign to this affair, I Will give you leave to deny
me; but there is one thing I must command you, since I have the power, and that
is to come and sup with me, and bring some of the nectar along with you, for I
am really fatigued with stooping and walking in the sun when I gathered those
herbs. Well, answered Mirza, I believe I shall not find much difficulty in
obeying your commands; and I have only one favor to beg of you, which is, that
you will use your injunctions on Achmet, that he may partake. Said I, not
today, Mirza, another time with all my heart. Nay, replied Mirza, it is not
out of love to Achmet that I desire it, but that he may be as deep in sin as
myself; for if he should ever discover me, I cannot tell the consequence. Well,
returned I, we'll find an opportunity.

The hour of supper being come, Mirza, arrived with a couple of flasks. We eat
and drank so heartily, that Mirza was incapable of helping himself; but was so
inebriated with wine, that I began to repent of my plying him so fast. I was
forced to drag him, and lay him on my bed. But how to conceal it from Achmet
was my greatest care; for I did not doubt but he would be wanted; and
accordingly it so fell out: For about twelve o'clock at night he came, and
knocked at my door. I was up, and thinking of my design. I opened the door, and
understood by his signs that he wanted Mirza. I let him know by signs, that I
had sent him to gather me some herbs by moonlight. He was satisfied and went
back again. Now Mirza kept the key of the gate, so that my story was sensible
enough.

About four o'clock in the morning, Mirza waked, but frightened out of his wits
to find it morning; though I soon composed him, by letting him understand how I
had managed Achmet. He returned me a thousand thanks, and told me, he should
never be able to make me amends. I asked him, how I should order it to see this
woman, for I could not go to work till I had conversed with her: And yet, by
heaven and paradise, said I, I shall be more concerned at the interview than at
any thing which ever, happened to me; (and that was but truth, for my mind was
perplexed between hope and fear, joy and anxiety.) I pity you indeed, said
Mirza, and I wish I could any way ease you of the trouble. Well, said I, then
let her come alone into the garden, as I am sprinkling my herbs by and by; for
I think one woman is enough to plague a man. Oh, said Mirza, all men are not of
your mind. But I Will leave you, and hope to find you in better humor when I see
you again.

I had ordered a slave to bring me some water, (...) a large quantity of salt,
to mix with it, only to amuse them. With this I sprinkled the herbs I had
gathered, and I was very busy about nothing.

I saw presently after, the idol of my soul, and Mirza running before her. When
he was near enough to me to be heard, he said, I must beg you to excuse my
waiting on you for a little while; for my not being in the house last night, as
usual, has let my business so increase upon my hands, that I must make use of
all opportunities to regain lost time time. I told him I would not be his
hindrance, but was very sorry I could not have his presence upon this occasion,
for I should be in a very great dilemma. He made no answer, seeing the lady was
within hearing, but returned into the house.

As soon as the coast was clear, I accosted her with a great deal of temerity.
Madam, said I, the happy time is come, that I may tell you, without fear or
danger, how much you may command me. Sir, answered ^e, I am convinced of your
sincere desire to serve me; and as I have written to you in one of my notes, if
Heaven prospers our wishes, and we arrive safely in England, I hope it will be
in my power to reward you. Madam, said I, the success will amply reward me for
all my trouble; and as one climate gave us birth, it is my duty to do all I can
to serve you, if I had no other motive. But if you please, let us consult, now
we have time by the forelock, how we shall order our affairs.

Sir, replied the lady, I am convinced your understanding wants not to be
instructed; and, if you please, I Will be ruled by you in every thing. Madam,
said I, have you any objection to be disguised in the habit of a man? for,
added I, we may so a^compour liberty with more ease. I have (...) objection to
it, answered the lady; but how will you (...) Please leave that to me, I
replied, and in less than ten days I hope we shall be out of danger. I then
informed her of the (...) I had laid, which she mightily approved, and told me
she thought my understanding outwent my years. I told her some (...) life
new-edged our thoughts, and if we succeeded, the inspiration came from her. I
observe the blushed at my dicourse, yet did not look as if she took ill what I
had said. But I was much concerned to see her change the discourse. I did not
think it proper to declare myself any further, hoping, when I had effected her
liberty, gratitude would befriend me in her heart. I observed, by her
conversation, she had a large share of understanding, and a happy turn of wit.
In short, this interview had fixed my heart entirely hers. I had several times
thought of enquiring into her fortune, and how she was brought into her unhappy
slavery, but desisted, till we had more leisure. She told me, she feared we
should make our conversation to long: Not, said she, (with a look that shot
through my heart) that I am oppressed with your company, but for fear we may be
observed. I told her, I believed we should not have many more opportunities;
therefore I begged her to be ready in a few days to leave this hateful place.
She answered me, that she should wait with some impatience my commands, and any
hour should find her in readiness. She farther added, that she wished she might
be as ready and as willing at her last call. I begged her to cast off all
melancholy thoughts, and trust to providence. Upon which we parted; with this
her answer, that she was ever resigned to the will of heaven; and whatever
should happen, she would do her endeavor to make herself easy, even if it was
the miscarriage of our design.

When she was gone, I soon found the sight of her increased my passion (if it
was possible for love like mine to suffer augmentation.) But it was love alone
that worked miracles of old; it was love that roused me from supine slavery;
for I must own once more, if it had not been for this fated passion, I should
never have attempted any thing to regain my liberty. But even my love slumbered
now and then, that industrious diligence might wake, and I was resolved to put
the design in execution with all the expedition imaginable, for fear of
accidents. I went on amusing the house with variety of works for my
preparation; and (...) was continually ordering the slaves to town, for one
thing or other, to strengthen their opinion.

Mirza came to me soon after. At his approach, I did my endeavor to put on a
countenance with little satisfaction of mind, but I am apt to believe I did it
but aukwardly. For, as the face is the index of the mind, I am of opinion a
person of nice judgment and observation may discover a false passion, with as
much ease as a jeweller would distinguish the different species of stones, (if
we may call them so.) Well, said Mirza, your fiery trial is over; but I
perceive by your countenance, your chagrin would willingly wear off, if you would
but suffer it. Why truly, said I, I have two different passions struggling in
my mind, that is joy and grief. I am pleased to (...). I shall succeed in the
affair I have undertaken; and yet grieved that I must (...) compelled to suffer
the torment I endure to help the operation. Consider the reward, replied Mirza,
that is to follow. I changed the discourse, that I might not be put to the
trouble to speak against my conscience any longer. I told him I should be
obliged to go to town for salt water out of the sea, and other necessaries,
that I should stay for. Why, replied Mirza, you may send for salt water without
being at the trouble of going yourself. I told him I was obliged to go in
person, because I was to take it out of the sea when the sun was in a
particular altitude. Nay, returned Mirza, I am only concerned upon my own
account, for I have engaged Achmet to dine with you today, with a great deal
of trouble. Well, answered I, I will not disappoint you. I Will stay one day
longer to oblige you. He returned me many thanks for my condecsension, and went
into the house to prepare things accordingly.

All the while he was absent, I was contriving my scheme.

When dinner was ready, Mirza brought it in, accompanied with Achmet. He had
taken care (...) several times to bring wine, and had it placed in a vault in
the green-house. Achmet made his Moorish honors, and we all sat down, Mirza
begged I would call the wine a cordial, that the captain had given me. But I
might have called it what name I would, for Achmet did not understand me; for
Mirza was my interpreter, and with much persuasion we prevailed on him to taste
it. But when he had drank one glass, he seemed to like it mightily, and soon
asked for another; and, in short, plied his hand to his head so often, that he
was obliged to get up, and played such pranks, danced, and sung, and rolled
about, that it put us in a fright, for fear some one should hear the noise he
made; which to remedy, I made him drink more, till at last he dropped down, and
fell asleep. We laid him upon my bed, and did not intend to disturb him.

I told Mirza, (...) we had accomplished this great affair, I had a mind to go
town even then, for the sun stone, and it might not the next day, and I was
willing to take the first favorable opportunity. He told me he would do what I
pleased, now the job was done. Accordingly I took horses and slaves, and went
for Sallee. When I came to town, I found Mustapha at home, who congratulated me
with the favor I had received from his master, and farther added, that he had
given him full charge to obey me in whatever I should command. I told him I
should want his assistance immediately with a small boat, only he and I, and I
begged him to take his quadrant with him, for I should want his art a little.
We took the boat he had provided me, and rowed out of the bay till we came to a
small promontory, where I desired him to take the elevation of the pole. When
he had so done, we laved water into a vessel we brought for that purpose, and
went home again. From thence I want to the Jew's, and begged he would furnish
me with a Moorish habit for my present wear: For the people of the country do
so stare at me, said I, being in a different dress from them, that it makes me
ashamed. He provided me a very handsome one, which I packed up carefully, that
no one should observe what it was I bought several trifles of him that I had no
occasion for, and (...) several times other rich habits; but one thing
particularly, that I hoped I should want, which was a pint of liquid Laudanum.

I went to Mustapha, and ordered my things to be got ready* while that w^^
doing, I endeavored to found him to know whether he had any thoughts about his
liberty, for I remembered at our first meeting, he declared himself, as I
thought, very frankly: But in all his discourse now, I found him of a wavering
uncertain temper, and therefore I thought it the wise way to keep my design to
my myself, and go another way (...) work. I took my leave of him and went home.
I unloaded my horses, and took particular care of my bundle of thing. My
salt water, I put into shallow pans in the sun, which in a day's time produced
small quantities of salt. I did not (...) to try experiments, yet I was pleased
to see the operations.

I began to set my still on work the next day, but was (...) interrupted by the
hasty arrival of Mirza. Said he. We (...) brought a fine house upon our head*
vonder's Achmet, (...) will not be contented wit^^^^ more of the (...) cordial.
((...) Moors call all Europeans Francis.) I asked him how he ^^dered him when
he wa^^d after I had left them; He told (...) he was so (...) after the
previous liquor, that he drained (...) empty bottles; and he (...) Mahomet
himself had m^^^ him a visit, and (...) bottle to (...) ^^ose, be (...) him
welcome till he had seen the b^ttom. We^^ ^^^d I you know the (...) is not
mine, but (...) stand by (...) the consumption of (...). W^ll, ^s ^^u please
then, said (...) out company tonight. With (...) my heart, (...) I, (...)
together. Mirza (...) added, that the ladies had a mind to see my still at
work. I told him they might do as they thought fit, but I would get out of the
way: and accordingly he went to fetch them. The Moorish women came down the
walk in a hasty manner to observe it, but the English lady came alone as usual.
I had got on the other side of the laurel-trees, and took care to appear in her
sight. As soon as she saw me, she cautiously approached me, and told me softly
she wanted to have a little talk with me. I answered her, we had an opportunity
very favorably; and then let her know how the other women were employed,
besides we had the laurel walk between us, and I was out of sight from every
body else. She told me she had something particular to mention to me: she said,
we should certainly want money to accommodate us with many necessaries in our
dangerous voyage. I told her what money I had saved for our design, but that we
would certainly have occasion for more, if we were obliged to go to Spain. That
was one of the reasons, said she, why I wanted to confer w^^^ you: it is in my
power (...) procure a considerable sum, and though it is not so much as I have
lost by the captain, yet I have even a scruple to take clandestinely from him
what I may say is my own justly. I soon removed her scruples, and then she
farther told me, what was in her power to take was chiefly in jewels, which
would be better for concealment and carriage than money. By this time she
observed the other ladies coming toward her, which she informed me of: upon
that I took my leave and absconded. When they were gone off the walks, Mirza
came to me to tele^se me, as he called it, and told me the ladies were mighty
well pleased with the view of my work and materials. I told him, I hoped they
would not give me that trouble often: he answered, he would take care for the
future.

Now the crisis of my project was very near. I went to the town the next day,
and took Mustapha for more water; and farther added, I should want him a night
or two hence to procu^e water by moonlight. He wondered at my proceeding, but
his master told him that I was something very extraordinary, and suspected me
of magic; but he also informed him that I was using my art for his benefit. I
told him I had several materials to wash in the seawater in the ^^ll of the
moon, (which was at that time) and then I should give him no farther trouble.

From them thence I went to my Jew's again, and privately procured several
sorts of dried provisions, as ^eats' tongues, biscuits, dried fish, wine and a
small puncheon of water, and several other necessaries, all to be ready at a
moment's warning.

When I had provided every thing, I went home again, and got an opportunity the
same day to speak with my mistress. I desired she would be ready about twelve
o'clock at night, with every thing she has a mind to take with her. She told me
she could not tell how to escape the vigilance of the eunuch; for said she,
they lock me up every night when they go to bed* Nay, every day when they are
not with me. I desired her to leave that to me.

I invited Mirza and Achmet to sup with me that night, for I told them I was
obliged to sit up to watch my work, seeing it was coming to a head, and that I
was to go to town before day. They complied with my request with a great deal
of joy; and the hour drawing near, they locked up the doors (...) the house,
and came with a great deal of contentment in (...) looks. We sat down, and I
plied them with wine till they thought they had enough. For the finishing
stroke, I desired them to drink one cup of a liquor of my own distilling, whi^^
they soon complied with. I went and fetched a bottle (...) brandy that I had
procured on purpose, in which I had conveyed a large quantity of Laudanum, to
be ready for this occasion. I gave them each a large cup, which they swallowing
but did not very well like the taste. I told them I had (...) tilled that
liquor on purpose to keep the fumes of the (...) (or cordial as Achmet would
have it) out of the need. Th^^^ were very well pleased if it would have that
effect, yet desire another glass of wine to put the taste out of their mo^^^,
which I complied with. The liquor soon had its desired (...) sect, and a
profound sleep locked up all their senses. I (...) some fear took the keys out
of Achmet's pocket, and (...) directly to the house, and at last found the
right key that opened the place where my treasure was reposed. Though she (...)
herself at liberty, yet she shook with ^unorou^ apprehensions. I encouraged her
all I could, and brought her the disguise, which I had provided for her. While
she was getting re^dy. I retired out of decency, and (...) horses, and (...)
Italian slave, whom I had two or three (...) taken to (...) with me: He
understood a little French, and I had observed something (...) his countenance
that (...) him worthy of a better fate. I had not (...) him any thing of my
project, for fear of (...) ordered him to be ready to go with me that night.
When I came back, I found my mistress ready, and something impatient. I
informed her she must submit to another disguise. She asked me what that was: I
took out a paper of Ombre, and told her she must permit me to rub it over her
face and hands; which I did: but the pleasure of touching her flesh in that
gentle manner perfectly put me in an ecstasy, which she observed, for I could
not help softly squeezing her h^^d. She did not seem displeased at my
transport, but yet I thought the occasion she had to make use of me made her
bear with me. As soon as we were ready we went out, but I first locked the
doors and left them as I found them. My mind was confused between hope, fear,
joy, and terror, and I did not doubt but the lady was in a worse condition; but
all my task was to comfort her. When I had helped her up on horseback, I called
for the Italian slave, and we both mounted, for I would not let him walk on
fo^t as usual.

When we were got safe from the house I began to ask the Italian slave several
questions, as, where he was born, how long he had been a slave, and so sorts. I
found by his answers that he had no hopes of liberty, for he had sent several
letters to his friends in Italy, and never could receive any answer. Then I
began to come nearer the matter, and gave him some hint of our design, but with
this addition, even death should not deter me from the execution. He had hardly
patience to hear me out, but begged he might share the same f^^e with me, and
if he got his liberty through my means, he should never forget the obligation,
but I might be master of that life I should be the means of saving; for, added
he, to live in slavery is but to be always dying the worst of deaths. I soon
found by his manner of expressing himself, that he was sincere in what he said.
At last I told him all my design, which he mightily approved of, and said every
thing was so well concerted, that with the blessing of God it could not
miscarry.

When we arrived at the captain's townhouse, we found Mustapha wating for me.
I had considered we could not do without him, yet I would not venture to
mention our escape, till we had him safe upon the sea. I ordered every thing
into the boat, and to hide my disguised lady, I told Mustapha that is was a
young gentleman that had been bit by a mad dog, and I had brought him to dip
him in the sea, by the desire ^his friends that lived in the neighborhood in
the co^^try, which was allowed to be the only cure.

When we had gained the main sea, I began to open my design to Mustapha, but
was something surprised to hear him cal^out for help. I immediately drew a
pistol out of my pocket, (for I had procured several pair) held it to his
breast, and threatened him with death that moment, if he offered to open his
mouth. I added, that we had gone too far to stop now (...) and I believe if he
had made any resistance, I should certainly have dispatched him. When he found
resistance would signify nothing, he sat him down and wept bitterly. I was
really sorry to see him so much afflicted, and comforted him all (...) could;
and, to encourage him, I told him, as soon as we arrived at Magazan, (a strong
port belonging to the Portugues^ on the Afric coast, where I had designed to
steer our course) he should not only have his liberty, but I would reward him
with fifty pistoles for the pains he should be at. I farther added, I would not
have given him this trouble, if I could have found a possibility of doing
without him. He seemed to be satisfied, and promised us all the help he could.
I told him we would make the best of our way to Magazan, not being above twenty
leagues south of Sall^e: He seemed very much pleased our voyage was to be so
short, for the wind (...) fair, and we hoped to arrive at Magazan in two days
at (...) farthest. I had provided every thing that was necessary (...) much
longer voyage, and when we had directed our co^^^^ and were settled in our way,
I desired the lady to take (...) refreshment, and compose her unse^^led
thoughts, for we we^^ now out of all manner of danger. I said this only to
comfort her, for I was even in fear of the captain's ship, or (...) other
Moorish vessel, meeting us by chance; and the Itali^^^ put into my head another
fear, that as I had declared I w^^ never at Magazan, nor did I know where it
was situated, (...) was not sure but Mustapha might steer his course to so^^^
place that was possessed by the Moors. I gave Mustapha (...) hint of it, with a
promise of quick dispatch if he betrayed us (...) but he assured me there was
never another port between (...) and Magazan. After we had refreshed ourselves,
I intrea^^^^ the lady to acquaint us how she came into the power of the
captain. Now we are something at case, said she obligingly* I shall inform you
with pleasure.

THE HISTORY OF MISS VILLARS.
MY father's name was Villars, an eminent merchant of the city of Bristol. My
mother died when I was very young, so that I could never know ^he loss of her.
The care of my father atoned for the want of my mother; he gave me all the
education* that was proper to our sex: but before I was sixteen years old, my
father died. The grief and sorrow I felt for his death was recompensed by an
estate of two thousand pounds a year, which he left entirely at my own
disposal; besides several valuable jewels of my mother's. My fortune, I
suppose, brought me many admirers; but as I was a stranger to love, I had no
inclination to marry: yet being pestered so much with their company and
courtship, I retired to a country house near the seaside; and as I did not
care to see any of my suitors, so whenever they came, I always left word I was
gone abroad, or out of order; and in a little time got clear of their
impertinence.

I had the misfortune to be a woman of business, though young; for my father
had several vessels at sea. The captain of one of the ships that traded to
Turkey ^rought me a hill of lading, and I happened to please him, (though more
than knew ^ill afterward.) In short, he fell desperately in love with me, but
hearing my aversion to matrimony, never declared his passion to me; yet by
bribes and presents, gained over to his interest a maid that lived with me, who
for a hundred pounds had placed him in a closet in my bedchamber. I came and
undressed myself as usual, and went to rest: but I had not been long laid, ere
I found a person pulling down the clothes, and attempting to come to bed to
me. I was prodigiously surprised and frightened, as any one would imagine. I
called for help, but no one came to my assistance; for the maid had taken care
of that. I got out of bed with much ado, and attempted to open the door, (...)
found I was locked in. I used entreaties to the wretch, (who was disguised in
such a manner that I could not know him, for he had got a mask on) but all to
no purpose: he seized me, as I was so faint with struggling that he was very
near accomplishing his barbarous design, when another closet door flew open,
(for I had one at each end of the room) and there came out another man
disguised. My fear could not be well increased; but I was in such a terror th^^
I (...) not well know whether I was really alive.

The person who came out last seized immediately on the other, who let me go to
defend himself. I ^^n to the door, and fear adding to my strength, I burst it
open; but how, or which way, I cannot remember. I ran to the maid's chamber,
and the noise and confusion we were in, alarmed the menservants. I had slipped on
a gown; and when I had got all the men together, I told them the reason of this
alarm. They immediately armed themselves, and (...) up to my chamber, but the
persons were both gone. In searching the room (...) found a piece of a mask on
the ground, and a handkerchief marked L. K. with stains of blood in several
parts of the room. We could not imagine who they were (...) I did not examine
into the bottom of it that night* but went (...) bed in another room very ill
with the fright; though not before I had given orders to two of my menservants
to watch at my chamber door.

I searched the closets of that other room, and under the bed, before I would
venture. And it being a room where my father used to lie, it had a bar on the
inside, so I and (...) maid went to bed. Notwithstanding my fatigue, frights,
and fears, I fell asleep, and when I waked in the morning, found myself very
well. I began then to think reasonably of my last night's adventure, and easily
judged, that one or both of my maids must be in the confederacy, for my door
never used to be locked on the outside before. I sent for all my servants up,
men and maids, and related to them the night's adventure. But they brought me
word that Miss Susan was not to be found. I sent to examine her room, but I was
informed all her things were gone. We all concluded that she was the occasion
of the last night's plot. I did not think fit to send after here, rejoicing I
had escaped such a base conspiracy; till going up into my own chamber, I found
a diamond necklace, a ring, my gold watch, and about sixty guineas in money,
taken away; my escrutiore broke open, and a bill of five hundred pounds that
was due taken away. I immediately sent to Bristol to stop payment, but was
told, that my maid had come, as from me, ^or the money, and had received it
several hours before. We made the strictest search we could for her, but all to
no purpose: So I gave it all for lost.

Six weeks passed on and no news concerning my maid.

One morning, as I was wa^king in my garden, a sailor brought me a letter which
was to this purpose.

MADAM;
I HEARTILY repent of my infidelity to you. When I committed that base action*
I took shelter on board of a ship that belongs to my brother, and now lies
about six miles off, where the bearer will conduct your ladyship, if you will
be so good as to come away immediately. The reason of my repentance and ^^rrow
(though a sincere one) is at the approach of death, by the accident of a fall
down the hold of the ship, where I broke my left leg, and fractured my skull,
so that I have been senseless for two days. But God granting me my senses again
(though with the information that I cannot live four and twenty hours) has,
through his mercy convinced me, that to expect pardon from him, is to restore
what (...) yours, with a sincere confession of the fatal night's adventures,
that corrupted my honesty, and will be the cause of my death. And farther, if
heaven will grant me the blessing of seeing you, I may put you in (...) way to
prevent something of ill that may happen to you.

Your repenting servant, SUSAN P. RITCHARD.
P. S. I beg you to keep it private: And to (...) your servants that you bring
with you, you may tell (...) you are going on board the Turkey ship* to see the
present the Turkey merchants are sending to the Emperor of Constantinople. The
bearer will conduct you.




Now I had heard of one of the Turkey fleet, that was obliged to put into the
road by a violent storm; and that it had a sedan made of looking-glass, of a
very curious workmanship* designed for a present to the Turkish emperor. I
asked the sailor several questions concerning the letter, and he answered me
bluntly (...) could not tell any thing about it; but the^^ was a you (...)
woman, who had fell down their hold, and had almost killed herself; and that
they did not expect she could ever recover. I resolved to go along with him,
but to take two menservants and a maid with me. I walked to the waterside
which was about a quarter of a mile from my house, and there I found a ship's
boat with eight oars, and very handsome. I slept into it with my servants
without any hesitation, and (...) off. In about an hour and a half we came
along side of the vessel, they manned the side for me, and I was handed up, and
led into the cabin, where I found my maid upon a pullet bed in one corner of
it. As soon as she saw me, she attempted (...) rise, but seemed not to have
strength enough, and fell down again. I desired she would not put herself to
any, pain, (...) compose her thought* that the might be the better able to
inform me of what she had promised me in her letter; O, madam, she cried, (with
hesitations, sighs, and ready to saint every moment) you do not know what I
feel at the sight of you^ You bring into my remembrance the transaction of that
fearful night, but I hope your goodness will forgive me. I shall put into your
hands what I have wickedly robbed you of; and since I am going (...) of this
world, I am assured your good nature will prevail for my pardon. I told her I
forgave her freely, and I hope^. Heav^^ would do so too. She thanked me, but
said, she found herself so ill, that she entreated leave to rest from speaking,
a minute or two, to gather a little breath.

I waited with some impatience, but she remained so long silent, that I really
thought she was expired. Upon that supposition, I called to her, and she
answered me but faintly. Well, madam, said she, as I find you are impatient to
know what I have promised you, I will tell you as well as I am able.

Captain Bourn had for many months a great passion for you, but finding you
averse to matrimony, he tampered with me, and offered me such large sums of
money, that beat down all my guard of honesty, and overcame it quite. He gave
me a hundred pounds, besides other valuable presents, to admit him into your
closet, before you went to bed; which accordingly (dazzled with the lu^^re of
the gold) I did. You know what followed, and if he had not been prevented by
the sudden appearance of another person out of the other closet, would have
compassed his design. Said I, eagerly, pray do you know who the other person
was? Yes, (...) returned the wench, it was Mr. Lawrence Kendrick, your former
suitor and guardian, conveyed there for the same base intent by your ladyship's
woman. How! cried I, amazed, are you sure of that? Madam, pursued she, when you
got out of door, Mr. Kendrick seized upon Mr. Bourn, and they struggled
together some time; but Mr. Kendrick's mask falling off, Captain Bourn knowing
him, cried is it you? In short, they soon came to an ^cl^ir^illement, and went
down stairs unperceived by any of us in the hurry; where he declared to the
captain, that he had prevailed upon Mrs. Ellis, your woman, for a good (...) of
money, to con^^^ him into the closet, which she did unperceived of any. Thus,
said I, may ill intentions be ever frustrated!

When she had finished, she begged me to have a little more patience, while she
got a little more strength, and she would restore me my money and jewels. I was
unwilling to wait long, yet thought fifteen hundred pounds too much to lose*
see my necklace, ring, and watch, were valued by my father at a thousand
pounds. I believe I had been full three hours on board, and wanted to be at
home again; and after she had kept silent some time, I made bold to disturb her
once more. I called to her, and told her I had a great way to (...), and I was
afraid of catching cold. She begged I would ring a bell that hung by my hand,
which I did, and the sailor came in that brought me the letter. Pray, said the
maid, is my brother ready to come in? Yes, answered he, and has been on board
this half hour. It Is very well, said she. Upon that, she raised her hand and
unpinned a (...), that fell down, and let light enough into the cabin, which
was dark before; but I thoug^^ her illness was the reason of that. But, to my
eternal ama^^ment. I saw her (...) from the pallet as well as ever I (...) her
in my life. Before I had power to speak, captain Bo^^^^ entered. I could not
presently dive into this mystery. I hope captain, said I, at last, that you
repent of your rash and bold attempt. Yes madam, answered he, that I did not
succeed in it, but I hope I have it now in my power to finish my design. I asked
him what he meant. He told me I should soon be informed, and if I would not
consent to his embrace he would certainly ravish me that very night. Upon th^^
treatment, I began to call to my servants; but the faithless. Susan told me
they were taken care of, and safe ashore. Yes, madam, (...) the captain, they
are twelve miles behind us by this tim^; and desired I would look out of the
cabin* window, which they had just before opened. I cast my ever behind me, and
too soon perceived that we were a consider^ble distance from the land. I did
not look long, for the sight soon took away my senses, and I fell down in a
swoon, and when I came to myself it was far in night; but I was so saint and
ill that my feeble limbs would not support my body. Grief attacked me so
violently, that i^ was thought by every body it would soon overcome me. By next
morning, a strong fever seized me, and all that I remembered for six weeks,
was, that I was put to bed, with the wretch that betrayed me to attend me. But
the condition I was in really wrought upon her, and produced a true conversion.
She lamented more than I, and cursed herself a thousand times.

When I had recovered my senses, I was wore away to a skeleton. And sure never
(...) my condition found any relief but death. But it pleased the Divine Being
to work another miracle, and insensibly (...) me to my former health of body,
but a mind involves in the most cruel torture, past imagination.

When I (...) repentance real, I freely forgave her ^he captain in all the time
had never come near me, but only to enquire after my health, as Susan informed
me. But when he perceived I had regained my former health and beauty, as he
called it, I was tormented with his beastly addresses. He told me, if I would
consent to marry him and forgive the crime he was guilty of, he would
immediately steer for England, which he would reach in a few days. I considered
I was in a wretch's power, who, by what he had done already, would stick at
nothing to gain his ends; I therefore resolved to flatter him, by the advice of
my maid; whom notwithstanding she had brought me into these distresses, I had
taken into my former favor. In one of his troublesome visits I told him if he
would immediately restore me to liberty, I would upon the instant make him my
husband, when we could procure a proper person to tie the knot. He answered me,
that the only way to secure it to him, was to have possession of me beforehand;
and, continued he, if you think the action criminal, I Will soon cure your
conscience, by the license of the hu^ch. For, said he, if you intend what you
propose, you will easily comply; and nothing else will convince me of your
sincerity. I Will give you one day to consider on it: but, continued the wretch,
if you refuse to submit by fair means, tomorrow by force I will enjoy you. So
I leave you to consider on it; and saying this, l^^t us in the cabin. I ^ad
desired Susan to conceal our reconcilement from the captain, which she artfully
had done; and in the discourse, would often throw in a word or two in his
behalf.

When we were alone, I gave myself over to my sorrows (...) thought of nothing
for several hours but my unhappy circumstances. We both continued silent (...)
considerable time. Nor indeed had I power to speak, though Heaven had endued me
with that fortitude, that I had sooner resolved to die, than to submit to his
curled proposals. I told Susan, that I had determined to put an end to all my
sorrows by death; and when that fatal hour arrived of his limited time* I would
plunge a knife, I had concealed for that design, into my bosom. This resolution
once more renewed our griefs, and we mingled tears together. We wept so much
that the fountains of our eves were dry, and we again remained silent. At last
Susan broke it with a speech to this purpose.

Madam* in the confusion of my thoughts, I have chose out one that has some
probability of success: but it (...) at least convince you of my repentance,
and the desire I have to restore you to that peace I have barbarously broke.
The captain yet thinks me in his interest, and, if we can contrive it, I Will
submit to his loathed embraces in your room, which shall be managed in this
manner: You shall treat with him upon it tomorrow morning. The articles shall
be these. First, That he come in the dark, and stay no longer tha^ one hour
with you; and, last, That he shall not repeat (...) familiarity, till you are
joined by the priest.

I must confess, this proposal gave me a dawn of hope (...) and if we could but
succed in it, I should not fear his fa^ther passion, when we were landed. For I
knew it was (...) to find protection, when once on shore in England, and (...)
thought the contrivance sensible enough; for we were mu^^ of the same age, and
no perceived difference in our ma^^ at least in the dark.

She left it to me to manage: and I resolved to put on a more composed
countenance at the captain's next visit, which was soon after, though he had
given me longer time to consider. When he come in, he begged my pardon for
interrupting me, but he came to make me a present, he said* and, put a little
box in my hand, desiring I would open it, which I did, where I found my jewels
and money. I restore you that, madam, continued he, and would not willingly be
obliged to you for any thing but your person and even all your fortune shall be
at your own disposal, and the moment you consent to my desires, I Will deliver
you a paper that shall oblige me to sign whatever terms you shall think fit to
make me. I paused a short time, but indeed it was to think what my tongue
should utter so foreign to my heart.

Captain, said I, you take the only way to gain your point and I must confess
this show of generosity, though it is in your power to force them from me again,
seems a little to lesson the ill opinion I have reason to bear against you; if
you please to allow me one half hour to think a little. I Will give you my final
answer tonight. He seemed very much overjoyed (...) my discourse, and showed
it in an extravagant unpolite manner, thanked me, and went out.

I did not want that time to prepare what I had to say, but I thought it was
better than to come into it on a sudden. The time expired, the captain came in
with an expecting face. I bade him sit down, which I found by his countenance
he took as (...) good prologue. Sir, said I, I have fully considered every
thing, and if you will comply with a few articles, you shall have possession of
what you desire, tonight. Articles, madam, I Will sign to a blank, replied the
brute, if you please. I told him they were only verbal ones: First, said I,
I Will have no light in the room; secondly, You shall stay with me but an hour;
and lastly, Never to expect any more savours till we are lawfully married.
Madam, returned the captain, you so overjoy me that I don't know where I am:
I Will comply with all your articles, and you have made me the happiest of
mankind. He said a great deal more fulsome stuff that was as nauseous to my
ears as a plague sore to the sight. He left us with a hope I would not long
defer his happiness. It was well I was in a dark corner of the cabin; for had I
been in the light, he would have perceived the confusion in my countenance.

The hated hour drew near, and Susan, with a sincere grief, and tears running
down her cheeks, laid herself in the captain's loathed bed. I was really
grieved at the sacrifice she was going to make me, for I was convinced she had
no loose desires about her. The captain entered in the dark, and was as happy
as a false imagination could make him. I must confess, I was in a thousand
frights and fears, lest the girl should have been discovered; but every thing
succeeded too well, and the captain rose within his limited time, and went out.

As soon as he was gone, the poor creature got up from her guilty scene. Well,
madam, said she, all drowned in tears, I hope I have convinced you, though to
my eternal cost, of my repentance and sincerity; but I hope Heaven will pardon
me, and not lay the crime to me or you, when fatal necessity was the only
cause. I gave her all the comfort I was capable of, and told her, I did not
think it impossible to oblige him to marry her, when we had him in our power on
sh^re, and that formality would obliterate all melancholy thoughts. How!
replied Susan, no, madam! though I have done all this, yet it was only to serve
you; and before I would be his wife, or indeed any man's wife, I would submit
to the most servile offices of life to support it: and if the captain knew how
we had deceived him, and would offer to marry me to atone for his fault, I
could not consent, for I loathe the very thoughts of him. Well then Susan, said
I, when we have overcome all difficulties, and worn off the remembrance of our
sufferings, I will settle a competency of life, that shall put thee above all
fear of want. Madam, replied Susan, that is all I shall desire, and then I Will go
to some corner of the world, live retired, and repent of all my past crimes and
follies. I told her, she need not do that, she might, notwithstanding what was
past, live with me. No, madam, that can never be, replied Susan; or you must of
necessity, to clear your own reputation, divulge the secret, and then with what
confidence shall I be able to look upon any one? I told her it would be
esteemed as an action wholly virtuous, without one spot or blemish. All I was
capable of saying could not alter her resolution; but she persisted in retiring
from the world, and living in a recluse, and I desisted from speaking any more
upon the subject.

It had been much happier for us both, if we had never entered upon the
argument; for we had not remained silent a moment, before the captain entered,
with a light in his hand, and the utmost fury in his countenance. Thou devil!
said he to Susan, and have thou betrayed me, wretch? after what I have done for
thee? but I shall study some way to have ample vengeance on thee: and for you,
madam, I shall give still the same terms and time I first proposed; but that
past, expect not the least hope, for I will enjoy you, though the moment after,
death should seize me. When he had* done speaking, he went out: But it was a
considerable time ere we came out of our surprise.

We were convinced that he had listened and overheard all our discourse, though
we spoke but softly; and we feared to utter our thoughts to one another, as
imagining he would overhear us still. But Susan at last broke out in these
words* Good Heaven! I hope the punishments I am bound to suffer will atone for
all my offenses: if it will make my peace with thee, ^'ll undergo all the
torments in the world in that blessed hope! I had not words to comfort her, for
the thoughts of my own condition tied up my tongue; but the pain of thinking,
nothing could exceed. I prayed to God to bring me out of this misfortune, or
give me strength of reason to suffer with patience a dissolution from this
world. When Susan heard me, she told me she could see no path to lead us
through this labyrinth of misfortunes, but through the gate of death; and,
added she, since we must die once, the sooner we leave this troublesome world,
the sooner we shall find rest.

Death still bore to me a frosty sound, however I soon resolved upon it; but the
manner of it was what most confounded me. At last we both thought of drowning,
and had resolved, whenever the captain came to accomplish his wicked intent, to
throw ourselves out of the cabin-window. Will you so? said the captain, (who
had overheard us again, for grief had taken all caution from us) but I Will (...)
prevent that. He immediately took a hammer and nails, and nailed the shutters
so close that it was not in our power to undo them. After he was gone, we spent
the night in prayer; and just before the morning dawned, we understood by the
rocking of ^he ship, the noise of the sailors, and the loudness of the wind,
that we were in a prodigious storm. This gave us hopes that the ship would be
cast away, and that God had heard our prayers, and would not let us lay violent
hands upon ourselves. Nay, deceiving hope was ready to enter our thoughts, that
we might be cast away upon some shore, and receive assistance when we least
expected it. The storm lasted the whole day, and part of the next night; but as
it insensibly abated, so our fears increased. The captain gave us another
visit: Well, said he, Madam, I hope you have had sufficient time to consider of
my proposals, and I am now come for my ^^^al answer. Said I, Heaven has given
you an answer by raising the storm; and if you have the least notion of a
Divinity, you will find 'twas his voice that spoke to you in that tempest to
desist from such a base attempt. Nay, Madam, if you imagine you can preach me
from my design, preach on in God's name. Wretch that thou art! said I, how
can thou mention that sacred name, and yet have such thoughts as he abhors? I
fancy, Madam, replied the brute, your ladyship feels the influence of the moon,
and for fear I should catch the infection. I Will leave you for a while; but with
a word by the bye, if you don't consent the next time I come, by hell! (since
you will not let me mention heaven) I Will not only ravish you, but every sailor
in the ship shall do so too, if they think fit; and I believe they are sharp
enough set to fall to upon worse food than I shall set before them.

He said a great many more gross things, that would only become his mouth to
utter: And to convince you, Madam, that I will do what I say, said he, I shall
begin with Miss Susan: Come, Mistress, said he to her, now I have had the first
cut of you, I Will let my sailors go to dinner. With this he forced us both on
the quarter deck, and called all the seamen about him. Here my lads, said he, I
have but two dainty bits, and I Will give you one among you, that you mayn'^
think I am over greedy. The sailors stared upon one another, and did not well
know what he meant, till he told them in terms plain enough, with promises of
reward to him that should prove the greatest rogue. Susan fell upon her knees,
and entreated them not to take pattern from their barbarous captain, but to
pity a poor unfortunate woman, reduced to the fatal necessity of living no
longer. Some of the sailors made sport with her misery, while others began to
pity her. One blunt fellow cried, Damn it! I love a woman well ^^ough, but
don't care to have her forced upon me: it is like eating against one's own
stomach. Besides, said another, I suppose there is some reason of the captain's
liberality, or he would (...) part with her. I observed one of them that stood
at some (...), taking notice of what was done, without seeming pleased. I
thought I knew his face too, and he appeared above (...) common sailor by his
looks and cleanliness. I had not till now appeared publicly. I was determined
to speak to him, and to crave his assistance. As soon as he saw me, he seemed
amazed, and cried, Bless me, Madam (...) how came you here? I told him I was
betrayed by the captain. I was informed, said he, that he had two ladies
passengers for Zant, but I little thought you were one of them, for I was not
on board till an hour after you arrived. I begged he would take me under his
protection; which he swore with a great oath that ^e would, or the captain
should cut his throat. Madam, added he. I am mate of this vessel, put in by
your honorable father; and had been captain, if it had not been for the tricks
of that rascal; pointing to the captain.

The sailors were so divided between themselves, that they had not proceeded to
any violence with Susan; and she remained leaning upon the side of the ship,
all drowned in tears. The captain had all this time been laughing at the
disputes of the sailors; but perceiving the mate in conference with me, came up
to him, and with a saucy tone, asked him what business he had with me. I have
no other business answered the mate, but to protect her from your ill usage.
You impertinent coxcomb, cried the captain, I Will teach you to intermeddle with
my affairs; and upon saying this, he lifted up his hand and struck him: But the
mate soon returned his blow with interest, and knocked him down upon the deck.
The sailors came and parted them; but the captain swore that blow should cost
him his life. He upon the instant ran into the cabin for some instrument to
dispatch him, as was supposed* but the mate followed him close, and, knowing
his violent temper, barred the door of the cabin, so that the captain remained
a prisoner.

The mate took from his own cabin (which was near the captain's) a cutlass, and
put himself against the door, and swore he would be the death of him that first
attempted to release him; and bade none of them offer to stir, till they heard
what he had to say.

The sailors had cast off all thoughts from Susan, to hear what the mate could
say; who declared who I was, and by what means I was betrayed on board. When
the sailors found I was their mistress, and owner of the ship, they soon began
to repent of what they were going about, and declared they would serve me with
their lives. When I found I had gained most of them on my side, I told them* my
story (...) length, only concealing Susan's affair with the captain* and they
seemed all prodigiously amazed, and stood gaping upon me like so many statues.

The captain in the cabin was all this time swearing, cursing and making a
noise at his restraint. I told the mate, if he thought fit we would release
him. Yes, Madam, if you please, said he, out of the great cabin, but we must
confine him some where else; well knowing his turbulent spirit will never be
easy. I told him I would be guided by him, and if he pleased to accept of the
command of the vessel (if it was my power to give it him) it was at his
service. He returned me a great many thanks, and told me he would be very
faithful in his commission. We released the captain out of the cabin, but as
soon as he came upon deck, he was seized, with a great deal of difficulty,
iron'd, and confined to another cabin. He raged like a madman at this
treatment, but all to no purpose. I told him he should want nothing but his
liberty, neither would I prosecute him as his crimes deserved, when we arrived
in England.

I desired the mate to make for Bristol with all the expedition imaginable:
with a promise that I would recompense every common sailor with double the
wages they expected for their voyage. They all huzza'd at the news, and one and
all promised to serve me with their lives. The mate told me the wind was
against us in our course, but that he would ply it to windward (as they call
it) in expectation of its changing. I asked him where we were, and he told me
very near the Streights of Gibraltar, and should have been at Zant by that
time, but that they were hindered by contrary winds, and drove back by the late
storm. I told him how the captain had deceived me, in telling me were not six
days from the English coast.

Susan's joy cannot be expressed at our happy deliverance; and you may be
assured I was as well pleased as she was, though it did not appear outwardly so
much: besides, I considered the mutability of the things of this world: and we
were soon taught by experience, the uncertainty of human affairs,; for, before
the evening, we were chased by a rover, who soon came up with us, and took us
after an obstinate resistance; though we did not lose one man, but the
barbarous captain, who was killed in the place of his confinement, without
being in the action.

The captain of the rover was the same we have now made our escape from. He
would never tell me what became of Susan and the crew. Madam, said Mustapha. I
can inform you: She and all the crew were ransomed for a thousand pounds, and
their ship given them again. They did their endeavor to ransom you, but to no
purpose, for they could never learn what was become of you.

Miss Villars thus ended her relation; only added, that the captain fell
desperately in love with her, and would never hear of her ransom; ^^ough he
treated* her with decency, allowing her every thing but liberty; with the
convenience of a study of books, which the captain had procured by his piracy;
and even left in her closet, her jewels and other things of value, that he had
taken out of the ship.

When Miss Villars had finished her story, I returned her thanks for the
trouble I had given her. Sir, replied she, thanks will not recompense me for
the pains I have taken. I told her, I should readily obey her commands; but I
begged leave to give her relation in French, that our Italian might partake;
for I design, with your leave, to insist on the same from him. Sir, answered
the lady, I would have related my unhappy story in that language, if you had
given me the least hint. But however, I Will go once more over again, if you
please, in French; at least the chief circumstances, that we may the more
engage the person to declare how he has shared the same fate with us. I begged
she would give me leave to take that trouble, if it were only to let her see I
had imprinted in my memory what concerned her so strongly, that I could repeat
every circumstance. She gave me leave to proceed, on which I told her story
over again in French to the Italian. When I had finished, she gave me thanks
for the pains I had taken. Though I had not been so long in the relation, yet I
made up the time in descanting upon the danger and hard fate, that a lady of
her birth, beauty and estate, should be so far forsaken by fortune, as to be
reduced to wretched slavery.

I then began my own story from my birth to our present (...). Though in what
related to my passion for the lady, I did not directly explain; yet I gave her
hints enough to understand she was the idol of my soul, and, though love, like
hope, does often deceive us, I thought my obscure declaration did not displease
her.

We then desired the Italian to proceed in his relation. He ^^ghing, told us,
he was too much obliged to me to refuse me any thing, though it would call to
his remembrance transactions that would bring tears into his eyes. After some
pause he began to the following effect.

THE HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN SLAVE.
I WAS born at the city of Rome, renowned for its grandeur and antiquity; and I
may say, without boasting, of a noble family, but had the misfortune to come
last into the world, and the youngest of five sons and two daughters. My father
had a plentiful fortune, but, before his death, he had much weakened it, in
giving dowries to my two sisters, who were both married far above their
fortunes, though not equal to their birth. But riches now balance every thing,
and weigh down birth and humble virtue, and he that has most gold is the
greatest man.

We lost our mother in our early days; and my father followed, before I was ten
years old, having settled all his estate on his eldest son, to keep up the
grandeur of the name, and left three brothers of us to depend on him.

My father, in his lifetime, gave us an education suitable to our birth and
family; and my brother, to give him his due, completed us. Two of my brothers
he procured posts in the army for, who both lost their lives in one glorious
campaign. The other died young.

It was imagined by every body that had the privilege to think for me, that
their death would be of no small advantage to me; and it had for some years the
appearance of it.

My brother had attained to his thirtieth year, without once thinking of
marriage. But an advantageous match being proposed, it was thought convenient
for him to pursue it. The lady that was designed for him, he had never seen;
but he was informed she was young, rich and beautiful. He was brought to the
sight of her, and fell violently in love with her at the first visit, and his
passion increased every moment. The day was fixed for their nuptials by the
father of the lady, which was to be the Easter following. I had attained to my
eighteenth year, and no provision made for me; and it was thought that this
match would not bring me the least advantage.

One day my brother told me, he had procured me the post of captain of the
Pope's guards; and though it was beneath my birth, yet I was pleased with it,
that I might have the means to subsist, without being subject to the caprice of
fortune, and the dependence of a brother of an uncertain temper. My brother
having some urgent affairs, that called him hastily out of town, he gave me a
letter to deliver to his mistress, which was to excuse his sudden departure.

As soon as he was gone, I went to execute his commission, and being known to
be the brother of the intended husband, had the liberty of presenting the
letter to the lady's own hands. But what misfortunes did that interview cost
me! I no sooner saw her, but I lost my heart, and the regard I owed my brother
was of no force against her charms. I observed she peiused the letter with
indifferency, which did not displease me. Yet I so far overcame my growing
passion, as to add something to the excuse my brother had wrote. I observed in
our conversation, that the promised alliance was not very pleasing to her; and
she at last frankly told me, duty, more than inclination, would make her comply
with it. I told her, were my brother's condition mine, and I had been
acquainted with her sentiments. I should not have the fortitude to support my
ill fortune; vet should have so much regard to her, whatever were my troubles,
not to be obliged to duty but inclination.

She told me, with a rising blush, those ^spousals never prospered, where the
hand could not bestow the heart. I agreed with her sentiments; but added, I
feared her heart was already given where she could not bestow her hand.

Sir, said she, I have ever been a friend to plain dealing, and truth appears
so amiable to me, that I neither will, nor can deny it to you. O happy man,
cried I, whoever thou art! Fortune has shed her happiest influence on thee, and
it is not in her power to make thee miserable when blessed with so much
consenting beauty. Sir, returned the lady, the person you esteem so happy, is
ignorant of my inclinations for him, and fear will make me conceal the secret.
And the chief reason why I disclose it to you, is, that you would inform your
brother; for, added she, with tears, if I am forced to wed him, I shall be
forever miserable. Her grief touched me to the heart, and she observed the
sorrow in my face. I perceive, said she, the love you bear your brother affects
your breast. Madam, said I, since you have made this frank declaration, I also
will be free, and utter all my heart. The grief you see rising in my face, is
owing to the torments of my soul. The very moment I beheld your charms, love
shot me with his sharpest pointed dart, and all the hope I have is cold
despair. She observed my declaration with a great deal of satisfaction, and
remained silent some time viewing me steadfastly. Upon which I cast my eyes upon
the ground. Sir, said she, (with an unconfirmed voice) I hope you are sincere
in what you say, for the supposition of it will draw another secret from me,
which is this: the reason why I cannot love your brother is, that I have long
since given my heart to -- you: The first time I saw your face, it left its
peaceful mansion of repose, and fled for shelter to a stranger's breast.

The joy I felt at this free declaration so transported me, that I kn^w not
whether I dreamt or no; but being convinced of the reality, I threw myself at
her (...), and uttered all my tongue could express, flowing from a sincere
heart. She told me she had resolved on death before she would* consent to wed
my brother: and informed me also, that her passion had been increasing upwards
of two years. The first time she saw me, I was taking leave of my brothers,
when they were going to that campaign, from which they never returned. In
short, we were as much in love, as ever any two were.

We agreed to meet the next day at the same place, where I had the liberty of
coming as her brother-in-law that was to be.

I was impatient for the next day, imagining time to have no wings. But the
happy moment came at last. We talked of nothing for several hours, but our
mutual love; at last we fell on the ungrateful subject of the approaching
nuptials, and how we should prevent them. I proposed to her running away, and
tying ourselves fast by the sacred bond of wedlock. Though, said she, I never
will be any one but yours, yet we must consider of futurity: I know your
fortune is but small, and mine, though a large one, depends upon my father:
I Will find some means to defer the marriage; you may do your endeavor to
dissuade your brother, for I fancy fortune more than beauty has gained his
heart. I assured her to the contrary, that he was very much in love with her.
We both wished it had been otherwise, but resolved to love on. We parted,
though we had not resolved on any thing, and appointed to meet the next day at
a private corner of the town, at an acquaintance of mine, that I could confide
in; though I would not trust him with the secret, well knowing a ma^^er of
importance inslaves the person that discloses it. I told him I had an intrigue
with a person of quality, that I must be obliged to carry on at his house;
which he consented to very willingly. We met according to our appointment, but
an hour before the time prefixed, not willing one should be before the other.
She came alone too, for she would not trust any of her servants. We met there
every day; and one time above the rest, love being pregnant in both our eyes, I
took the happy opportunity, and was blessed in the possession of all I wished
on earth: but enjoyment was so far from palling my desires, that it rather
increased them. We live^ in all the delight of love for a month, but then came
the bitte^ to all our sweets. My brother arrived, and the fatal day (...)
pointed for the marriage approached. We had given ^^^selves up so entirely to
love, that we did not think of what was to come; or if the intruding thought
did creep in, (...) would immediately l^ll it to rest like a froward child.

When we parted, it was with such a regret and sorrow, that foreboded our ill
fortune. The father of my mistress had ordered every thing for the nuptial
solemnity, with the greatest magnificence; but two days before it was to be
solemnized, it was reported all over Rome, that Don Antonio Grimaldi's only
daughter (who was my mistress) was taken dangerously ill. I was not displeased
at the rumor, as guessing her designs. My brother was never from her, and I
was pretty well assured the sight of him gave her a great deal of pain. One day
finding my brother very melancholy, I asked him if it was the indisposition of
Grimaldi's daughter that occasioned the gloom I observed in his countenance. He
replied she was the cause of what he felt: he farther added, that he thought
her sickness counterfeit, only to avoid him; and that he had many reasons to
believe she had given her heart to another. I used many arguments with him to
leave her, and that she was not worthy of his farther thought. But he assured
me it was not in his power to hate her. I began to reflect with reason on the
conduct of my love, and found I had involved myself in a very dangerous and
troublesome affair: but notwithstanding all my reasonings, I found myself more
and more in love; and absence, which cures a light passion, added strength to
mine; for I had not seen her in fifteen days. I was resolved at last to visit
her, and ^ook the opportunity, when my brother was with the Pope in his closet.
I found it no difficulty to gain admittance, they knowing who I was: but,
notwithstanding all my endeavors, could not get an opportunity of speaking to
her; there being a great many visitants. I took an occasion of feeling her
pulse, and we had the happiness of moulding our hands for a moment. I durst not
slay long, for fear my brother should come while I was there; and yet I had
resolved to inform him of my visit, which I did the first time of our meeting;
but added, that it was curiosity, and ^o oblige him, that I gave myself that
trouble. He thanked me, and asked me what I thought of her indisposition. I
told him I could not answer for the state of her heart, but I was assured that
her body was in a violent fever. This I said a little to undece^^e him; for
since he could not be persuaded to abandon her, I thought it would be more to
our advantage to make him believe it was a real indisposition. He went to make
her a visit that evening, and at his return, told me I had given him true
information, for the physicians had ordered her to be let blood, and that she
was in a dangeroua fever, and her father designed to send her into the country
the next day. I was mightily pleased that he was deceived as well as the
father, and I did not doubt but she had persuaded the physicians to favor the
deceit.

Accordingly the next day she was conveyed in a litter, to a country house of
her father's, two leagues from Rome, upon the River Tyb^r. I flattered myself,
that her being in the country would give me a fairer opportunity of conversing
with her: but though I tried all the methods imaginable, I could not find the
least glimpse of hope in above six weeks time. I was perfectly like a mad
creature, and all my friends, particularly my brother, took notice of my
uneasiness. But I kept the cause of it entirely to myself.

Any one that is a judge of love, and has ever been in my circumstances; may
guess at what I felt. All I could learn of my mistress was, that she continued
very ill. My mind was tortured with a thousand imaginations; sometimes I
thought her false, and that it was her own desire which kept me from seeing
her, at other times I fancied she was really indisposed.

A month more slipped away, and I was as unlikely to see her then as at first.
One morning my brother came into my chamber, before I was dressed. He seemed over
complaisant to me, and expressed a concern for the alteration of my temper. I
fancy, said he, brother, that love has forced itself into your breast; and that
the object of your passion has no regard to the torments you endure. I excused
myself to him, that love had no concern in my humor, but rather an inward
indisposition of body. He said many kind things upon that occasion, promised to
assist me all he could, and left me.

As soon as he was gone, I dressed myself and got on horseback, in order once
more to try my fortune; and I had taken a resolution to see my mistress,
whatever hazard (...) should run.

When I came upon the s^irt of a wood, within half a league of the place where
I was going, I was surrounded by a dozen of men on horseback, who,
notwithstanding the resistance I made, got me down, bound me, and carried me
into the wood. I imagined them to be thieves by their proceeding; but they
never once attempted to take any thing from me, which altered my opinion, and I
began to think they had a design upon my life.

The state and uncertainty of my love, made death look like a friend.

They kept me in the wood till the dusk of the evening, then clapped me into a
litter, and traveled hard all night. The next morning I was put into a boat,
and hurried on board a vessel that lay a league off at sea. As soon as they had
received me, they weighed and set sail; the person that seemed to have command
in the boat, proved to be the captain of the vessel.

They carried me bound into the cabin. When we were alone, he gave me a paper,
which I soon knew to be my brother's handwriting; and in it an open letter,
whose hand I could not tell by the direction. [Upon this the Italian took them
both out of his bosom. See, said he, the fatal scroll, which has robbed me of
all joy in this life, and which I have kept during my captivity.

The first letter he read was to this effect.]

I WILL not call thee by the name of brother; that thou have basely forfeited.
But know the hand of Heaven hangs over thee, to punish thy unfaithful dealing
with one, who thinks it the greatest curse on earth that our parents should be
the same. The enclosed letter came into my hands by the honesty of her that was
commissioned to bring it to thee; who, abhorring thy guilty commerce with her
ungrateful mistress, has discovered thy scene of villainy. Know, after thou
have read this, to prepare to suffer for thy ingratitude. An hour's space is
the length of thy life, and I think death too small a revenge for the wrongs
thou have committed against

HERNANDO ALVARES.


[The other was as follows:]

To ANTONIO ALVARES.
LIFE of my life^ I have resolved to hazard every thing to let you know the
state of my body and mind. Though body, life, and heart, are entirely thine,
yet I fear death will rob thee of them. My counterfeit illness that day you saw
me, (without having the happiness of speaking to each other) brought a real
distemper upon me, and my fever took away my understanding. I hope I have not
in my ravings declared the secrets of my soul. The sight of your brother
retards my health, and the hopes I have of my recovery, is once more to see
thee, thou darling of my heart. I have prevailed upon one of my women, with
presents and promises, who I hope is honest to deliver this to thee. Our
private meetings, I fear will prove fatal to me; for I find our commerce, if I
survive, will make me a mother; but for fear it may touch me more in what thou
art to suffer, if known to be the father, death shall release thee from that
danger.


Upon reading of these two letters, different passions swelled in my soul. My
heart was torn with agonies for her I loved, and my breast was fired with
revenge against my unnatural brother: for as he had shook off all brotherly
love, I thought it was but justice I should do so too.

I sat a considerable time in the utmost agony, not for fear of death; for I
must confess I had not the least thought about it. The captain of the vessel
seeing me in that condition, spoke to me after this manner. Sir, though I am
well paid by your brother to end your life, yet I have so much compassion for
your sufferings (knowing your crime to be only love) as to mitigate your
sentence: I Will put you into a boat, with two men to conduct you, and every
thing that shall be necessary, upon this condition, that you will give me your
word and honor not to appear at Rome in forty days.

I thanked him for his kindness, gave him my word, and told him it was not in
fear of death, but only to disappoint my barbarous brother. Immediately a boat
was ordered out, and every thing that was needful for a month's voyage. My two
men were paid for the voyage beforehand, and we left the ship. I ordered them
to steer for Leghorn, because there I could be furnished with every thing that
I wanted, from my sister, who had resided there two years with her husband, a
nobleman of Florence. But the wind not proving favorable, we were drove out of
our intended course, and had it not been for a French vessel, bound for Malta,
who took us up, we had certainly perished. And happy for me, had it been my
fate to have had a wave for my winding sheet: for two days after, we were on
board a Corsair of Barbary, who met with us, and took us all prisoners.

I made no extraordinary appearance, seeing I was always disguised when I went
to the house where my mistress lay indisposed. Hamet (the name of our Irish
renegado) valued my ransom but at two hundred pounds. I wrote to both my
sisters several times, and laid before them my unhappy condition, but never
could hear from them. So that I either feared my letters had miscarried, or
they were willing to forget an unhappy wretch like myself. Though, to say the
truth, I never received any hard usage from Hamet; therefore, if the Divine
Being will favor us in our escape, I Will faithfully send him my ransom.

When he had ended his story, we condoled with one another, for our misfortunes
had a resemblance. By this time the day began to dawn, and Mustapha told us we
should reach Magazan before night. We were all mightily overjoyed; because we
expected to be a day longer in our voyage. I begged the favor of Miss Villars
to let me cleanse her face ^win the omb^e, which she consented to. I was filled
with contemplation of her beauty, but was roused from these pleasing thoughts,
by the appearance of several lowering clouds that seemed to threaten us with a
hurricane; frequent in those parts; and though they seldom last long, yet they
might prove dangerous to our small vessel.

Mustapha advised to make to shore, but I could by no persuasion agree to that,
but ordered him to hold on his course for Magazan. But the tempest rose so
suddenly, and so violent, that we were obliged to leave ourselves to the mercy
of the waves: and we did not know which way we drove, for the dark clouds had
almost formed another night.

Our boat was a new stout boat; and bore the weather very well, but it
frightened Miss Villars very much; and I had no other regard but for her. The
tempest continued for near half the day, and when it grew calm, and cleared up,
we were not in sight of land. By good fortune I had provided a compass; and I
ordered Mustapha to steer due south, the same course we kept before the storm
began, which was before the wind. But though we had sailed several hours south,
we could not discover any land. Mustapha advised us to put to windward back,
for he did not doubt but we had overshot Magazan in the storm.

We were preparing to tack about, when we discovered a sail whin half a league
of us; for it was hazy weather notwithstanding the storm was over, or we should
have perceived her time enough to have avoided her. We kept upon a wind, and it
freshening upon us our sail split, and we found it was impossible to avoid the
ship who gained upon us every moment. We thought it our wisest course to lay
by, and wait for her. Now, all the hope we had, was, that the vessel would
prove a ship of Europe. I desired Miss Villars to conceal her sex, and begged
the favor of the Italian and: Mustapha to keep the secret. The ship was near
us, and to our surprising joy, hoisted French colors. We immediately put on
board, because they lay by on purpose.

We were soon informed that Monsieur Pidau de St. Olon was on board, the
ambassador from the King of France to the Emperor of Morocco, to treat of peace
between the two crowns. I immediately begged to be brought to the ambassador's
presence, who received us very kindly. I told him all our stones, but conceded
that of Miss Villars, for fear of any accident. He used us very civilly, and
promised us protection. He said his affair would not detain him long, and be
would be sure to gain safe conduct for us into our own country.

I returned him thanks for his generous proffer, and begged he would command my
life, to see how readily I would obey him. He told me, since I was willing to
oblige him, he would soon put it in my power to serve him.

I have, said he, lost three of my retinue in the voyage, two by sicknes^, and
one drowned by accident. You Will just make up that number, and you need not take
any care for habits; I will provide for you. The fourth person in your company
I believe you will be satisfied should be taken care of on board our ship, for
his landing on the African coast may prove prejudicial to your affairs. I was
mightily pleased with his proposals, and communicated it to Miss Villars and
our Italian gentleman. Miss Villars told me she was entirely under my conduct,
and the Italian thought he should have a better opportunity of getting into his
own country from Mequine^ than France. I would not suffer Monsieur St. Olon to
cloth^ us as he proposed; for I had procured of the Jew four rich suits of
European cloth for a trifle, which I designed for Miss Villars and myself; for
we intended she should put off her Moorish dress the first opportunity.

The ambassador provided a cabin for Miss Villars and me; and he seemed
mightily taken with her youth and beauty (as a boy) and he would often say,
nature had mistaken her, designing her for the fairest of the softest sex.
These encomi^^^ made me very uneasy, fearing he should find out the ^^th. But,
I understood afterward, he had not the least mistrust.

He treated us very splendidly at supper, considering we were it sea. When the
ambassador went to rest, Miss Villars and I retired to the cabin allotted us.
What a sensible pleasure (...) I feel to have the happiness of her company
alone, without the fears and terrors of offending any one! She perceived a
satisfaction in my countenance, that spoke the joy of my heart; and by her
discourse that ensued, she was in some fear left a guilty thought* had worked
that change.

Mr. Boil, said she, I hope you know what regard to pay my sex, and do not
wrong the good opinion I have conceived of you. I owe the greatest obligation
so you, and I am not displeased I am in your power, while you use that power
with moderation. I had hardly the patience to hear her out. Madam, replied I,
be assured your own soul shall not be more pure than my thoughts. But yet I
will take the freedom to declare, no person in the world has that command over
me as you have. I must own you have it in your power to punish me by slighting
a heart full of the most tender regard for you; and all I ask is only leave to
hope; if I am denied that, the utmost of my resentments to you, shall only be
in hating life, which will be a burden not able for me long to bear. It would
be base for me, said Miss Villars, to give torments where I am obliged; I think
to disguise our thoughts is an art better lost than learnt: and to deal frankly
with you, I cannot find in my heart any aversion to you; which is a
declaration, if you know my temper, that ought to satisfy you. I said all the
tender things I was capable of, in return for this great blessing, and our
conversation lasted several hours. I told her at last, I was well assured she
wanted rest; and whatever pleasure I took in her company, I would deprive
myself of it, and leave her to repose.

She seemed very much concerned, that I was obliged to leave her alone: well
knowing I should not get the convenience of a place of rest to myself.

I told her there was not any fatigue I would not undergo for her with
pleasure. I left her, and night soon slipped away in pleasing imaginations. I was
surprised to see her who was ever in my thoughts, come out of the cabin
dressed. Madam, said I to her, I hope you have had nothing to disturb your
sleep. She obligingly answered me, nothing but the thoughts of your waking; and
therefore she desired I^ would go and repose myself in the cabin, and I think,
said she, it is my duty to watch now. I excused myself and told her it was but
for one night more, for in all probability we should land the next day, and
provide ourselves with be^^er accommodation.

We went into the cabin together, and our conversation chiefly entered on love.
She told me at last, she would leave her acknowledgments to me, till she was
more at liberty, and in their own country, for fear I should imagine the need
she had of my service, should make her declare herself in my favor. When I
found so fair a beginning, I was resolved to push my fortune, till with many
entreaties, vows, and oaths of my fidelity, she owned to me she had a tender
regard for me when she saw me first for she was convinced of my love at our
first conversation: not, continued she, that I had any understanding in the art
of love, but knew the hazard you bad put yourself in to serve me, could have no
other motive but that passion; and the more I thought of it, the more I (...)
my heart inclining to believe you.

Those persons that have felt the soft passion, may make a judgment of the
transports I was in at this declaration. I kissed her hand a thousand times,
and pressed it to my heart. She begged me to c^rb my transport, for fear of
being overheard or observed: for, continued she, you may remember, in my
relation of my misfortunes, how near we were suffering by such an oversight.
This kind caution bridled my tongue, but could not command my eyes; they spoke
the language of my soul.

Our silent conversation was disturbed by the joy of the sailors in discovering
land: and we thought it prudent to wait on the ambassador, and congratulate him
upon it. He received us very kindly, and told us he was pleased upon our
accounts, that we might recover on shore the fatigue of the sea and our
captivity. The captain told us we should come to an anchor before dinner in the
port of Mammora. I was mightily surprised to find that we were got south of
Sallee, and found that the tempest had drove us back beyond Sallee several
leagues. This we still esteem^^ a greater happiness, and if Mustapha had not
been guided by me, we had missed the good fortune of meeting with the French
vessel, and or course made the port of Sallee whether we would or no, Upon this
thought, I began to imagine that Mustapha, as understanding the mathematics,
knew where we were, and consequently had designed to betray us. I communicated
my thoughts to Monsieur St. Olon, and he came into my sentiments. He
immediately called the captain of the ship, and ordered Mustapha to be strictly
guarded in his absence, and if any Moors came on board, to prevent his seeing
of them; but desired that he might want nothing but his liberty. When we came
to an anchor, the captain was sent on shore to acquaint the Moors with the
arrival of an ambassador from France: and presently the f^rt saluted him with
^ne and twenty guns, which was returned from the ship gun for gun. The governor
of Mammora, in an hour's time, came on board attended, who saluted our
ambassador, and begged he would have patience to stay in the ship, till he had
acquainted the emperor, his master, with his arrival. The ambassador invited
him to an entertainment; and though I observed he refused wine, yet he and his
retinue swallowed the punch so fast, that their heads proved as light as their
heels. When they went on shore again, the cannon of the ship gave them a salvo,
which was returned by the fort, as soon as ever they were landed. The next day
an order came from the emperor that we should immediately repair to Mequinez,
the place where the emperor resided.

The next day the ambassador set forward with his whole retinue, among which
were Miss Villars, the Italian, and myself, dressed richly, after the European
fashion. We were provided with dromedaries to carry us, all but the ambassador,
who was presented with an Arabian courser. Within a mile or two of Mequinez, we
perceived the king at the head of his army, in a great plain. At first I
thought it a mark of respect to the ambassador of France; but found it was
purely accident, for our guide led us out of the way to avoid them.

When we arrrived at Mequinez, we were led to a house belonging to the French
consul, or rather a house he had hired for that occasion. Before we were well
entered the house, a guard of Moors was fixed upon us, and strict orders given
that not a soul should stir out, not even the ambassador or consul. I thought
this an odd proceeding, and sometimes imagined it was upon our account, as fear
is an expeditious painter, but my timidity vanished, when Monsieur St. Olon
informed me, it was the Moorish custom not to let a foreign ambassador give or
receive visits till after his first audience.

Miss Villars and I had an apartment allotted us, with but one bed in it, after
the Moorish manner. She told me, she could not bear the thoughts of my watching
every night, and begged I would go to rest with the Italian; but we found he
was provided with a companion, one of the retinue, and there was no help for
it. I always retired when my mistress undressed herself, and gave her time
going to bed: I then with a quilt laid myself down on the floor, but was far
from taking my repose. The thoughts of the woman I loved being so near me,
naked in bed, kindled such a desire in my breast; and the pain I took to
smother it, perfectly burnt me up. I would have my readers excuse me, if they
are disobliged at any part of my story, because I am only relating matters of
fact.

The next day, when I rose from my boarded bed, I retired to give the loadstone
of my desires time to dress herself: when I entered the room again, she
observed my countenance very attentively, and told me she was grieved to find
in my features, something that spoke a disordered body; which I am sure, said
she, is for want of rest, but, added she, I beg it as a favor you will
immediately undress yourself, and go into bed, and try to repose yourself, and
I Will make your excuse to the ambassador. I refused a great while, but in short,
she forced me to comply with her commands. I went to bed, but new thoughts
again attacked me, and drove sleep away. Miss Villars had retired, and staid
about an hour. When she came in again, she stole softly for fear of disturbing
me. My mind was so violently agitated, that I really began to be out of order,
and feverish, which she observed, and came to the bed side, and with a tender
inquietude, asked me how I did. I took hold of her hand, pressed it to my lips,
and thanked her for her kind care of me. Alas! she cried, you are very much
indisposed, and I am ^he cause of it. Upon this the tears ran down her cheeks
like morning dew on roses. Her tenderness gave me all the joy imaginable: and
as she leaned her h^ad over me, weeping, I pressed her soft lips close to mine,
which plunged my soul in exstasies of joy. She blushed at my freedom, yet still
begged I wauld try to sleep. I told her it was impossible, while she was there;
upon this she was going to retire in haste, but I caught her by the soft hand,
and told her if she went out, it would be a greater impossibility for me to
rest. She conjured me by that love I professed, (if it was not falsehood) to
declare to her ^he torments of my mind. She insisted so much upon it, that I
told her the secret of my heart. She fell upon her knees, and begged I would
not mention it any more; for she owned herself so much obliged to me, there was
not any thing in her power she could refuse me, but that. I begged her pardon,
and had resolved to suffer death sooner than to have disclosed my malady; but I
would be ever silent upon that theme, till she commanded me to speak. My dear
Boil, said she, (I am not ashamed to call you so) stay till we arrive in
England, and here I v^w to make you mine whenever you shall command me. Upon
saying this, she joined her lips to mine, not considering that endeavoring to
suppress my flame, she poured oil upon it, and made it burn ^he fiercer. I told
her true love was above nice formality, and that marriages were made in heaven.
Said she, I hope they are, but begged; by both our loves, to drop this theme; I
told her I would, though death would follow. I remained silent for some time,
while tears stopped her speech. We were interrupted, by a messenger from the
ambassador, who came to invite us to dinner, (for he always allowed us the
favor of dining at his table.) I begged to be e^^^sed, for I found myself a
little indisposed. The messenger had not been (...) a moment before the
ambassador came in to enquire after (...) health, and brought his physician
with him, who, feeling (...) pulse, told him I was in a fever, but bleeding he
did (...) doubt would give me ease. I told him, I should be better in the
morning, if not, I would take his advice. The ambassador would have Mr. Villars
(as we had named her) to dinner with him, who had endeavored to compose
herself while they had been in the room. As she was going from me, she squeezed
my hand, and said, Endeavor to compose yourself to rest, and you will soon be
better.

They retired and left me to my own thoughts, which were various and
disjointed. Miss Villars did not stay long: she came in softly as before,
expecting that I might have been asleep. When she found I was in the same
disorder, she burst into tears, and cried, Will nothing satisfy you but my
undoing? No, madam, said I, I will fight with my desires, and am resolved to
conquer or die. She staid with me till supper, and our whole discourse was upon
the passion of love. When she came back from supper, I had got up and had dressed
myself; but the combat in my mind had really disordered my body, which she soon
saw: she begged I would go to bed again, and she would watch me. I told her,
the world would not prevail upon me to break her rest, nor even she herself,
who was more to me th^^ the world. I had sat me down upon the bed, and Miss
Villars came and sat down by me. We remained silent a considerable time: at
last she took my hand in here is and pressed me by the fingers.

Mr. Boil, said she, I have overcome myself: I cannot see you in this torture
of ^^^^dy and mind and not contribute to your case. Here, solemnly swear to be
my husband, and do with me what you please. I hope you (...) a man of honor,
and that is what I rely upon. Nothing in this world could have transported me so
much as those few words did: I fell upon my knees, kissed her hands, and did I
know not what! Madam! said I, you have made me the happiest man the world
contains; and if I thought my heart and tongue did not agree in what I am going
to say, I would pull them both out this moment. When I had said this, I fell on
my knees, and made this short vo^^^^ "Thou God that know the heart of man, I
do beseech thee to punish me with eternity of torments, if ever I prove false
to this darling of my soul, whom before thee I take (as the greatest blessing)
to be my lawful wife." "And here, I swear (said she, kneeling) to take no other
to my bed and heart; and with this kiss, said she, I seal the sacred union." I
told her nothing could be more binding, and the priest could but confirm what
we had done already.

Now the tender moment was approaching to crown my joys with all I wished on
earth. Kings on their thrones to me seemed poor and base, and I Would not have
changed to be the monarch of the universe. I begged my dear bride I might be
her bride-maid as well as husband, and that she would give me leave to undress
her. Said she, My love, my life, my husband, I am to obey you in every thing
that is in my power, and when I fail in my obedience, may I be miserable in the
loss of you. I was too eager to say any thing in return, but I undressed her,
put her to bed, and you may be sure I did not stay long behind. The veil of
night was drawn round us, and I plunged into a sea of pleasures too delicate
for words to express.

The next day, the ambassador saw contentment in both our faces, and
congratulated me for the recovery of my health. Never was there so tender a
wife; and the longer I had the happiness of enjoyment, the more my love was
raised. The next day the ambassador was to have his first audience, and we were
all to be in readiness by seven in the morning. I got up early and dressed my
dear wife in a new suit of clothes, on purpose for this occasion. The governor
of Alcassar, Hamet addo Riffy, was to be our master of the ceremonies, who
attended us with several Moors of quali^^, and a troop of the king's blacks, as
guards. We set forward about eight o'clock, in this order. 1 st. Twelve of the
Moor guards. 2 d. Several of the nobility, two by two. 3 d. The ambassador,
with Hamet addo Riffy on his right hand, proceeded by two trumpets and
kettle-drums, (the post of honor is on the left among Moors, because you have
the command of their sword.) 4 th. Twenty-four gentlemen of the ambassador's
train, two by two. 5 th. Twelve French slaves that carried the presents. 6 th.
Twelve more of the guards; and the order was closed by a Moorish mob, that
abused us with their tongues all they could; nay, some of them attempted to
throw stones, but were bastinadoed by the guards. We were all on foot, though
the king's palace was a mile from the place where we sat out.

I was mightily concerned at the fatigue my dear wife underwent, for it was
violent hot; though we had the best on it for going next the ambassador (who
ordered we should do so) we had some shelter from the umbrella that was carried
over his head.

We entered the palace through the marble gate, (so called from two marble
pillars that adorn it) and from thence immured with white walls and black
guards on each side, we arrived at a stately pavilion; where a halt was
commanded till the king was acquainted with our arrival. We waited some time,
but at last saw him coming, mounted on a white horse, through one of the
avenues that led to the pavilion. His guards (who had lined that passage on
each side) bowed down to the ground as he passed along. He made but a very
indifferent appearance. As soon as he came to the po^tico, he gave a lance that
he bore to one of his guard, got off his horse, and squatted down upon the
floor, without anything under him. He had nothing in his dress to be
distinguished from the rest of his subjects, but was muffled up to the eyes
with a chocolate-coloured handkerchief, that did not seem over clean. His legs
and arms were bare: as to his age, he seemed to be about fifty; of a very tawny
complexion, and very lean: his hair black, inclining to gray; of a middle
stature, with hollowed cheeks, and eyes black, a small ho^^ed nose, and thick
lips. Some of his courtiers sat down on each side of him, bare-legged and
bare-headed; and behind him stood a black with a great fan in his hand, not
only to cool him, but to keep off the musketoes, a small fly, very troublesome
in most parts of Africa.

Mahomet ben addo Otar, his chief minister and favorite, was the only person
that stood.

As soon as the emperor had squatted down on the floor he repeated these words
in Arabic three time, "Tay boun," which is as much as to say, "You are
welcome;" a common expression when they are addressed by a foreigner. Then our
ambassador made a long speech in French, prepared for that purpose; which was
only a panegyric upon both kings, fulsome enough; but the French deal much in
wordy compliments. The interpreter when the ambassador had done, read the same
in Arabic to the emperor. The speech was very long in French and Arabic, but
the emperor heard it out patiently, which was reckoned a good omen; he also
excused himself that he did not admit him sooner to his audience, it being the
Ramadan or Easter. When the compliments were over, the ambassador presented all
his retinue to the emperor, but I observed he took a particular notice of my
wife, and eyed her several times, which gave me a great deal of uneasiness; for
it is as dangerous to be a handsome man as a handsome woman in Morocco, if the
brute of an emperor should have a fancy for them.

I longed to have an end of audience.

After we w^^^ presented, the ambassador ordered his presents to be opened and
spread before the emperor; which consisted of fine arms made at Paris, several
English watches, cloth, two Persian carpets, and two pieces of gold and silver
brocade. The emperor, in return, gave the ambassador four young slaves, three
of them French, (though he took them all for the same nation) but the other was
an Englishman, and (...) same person I mentioned in the beginning of this
relation, who went in the same boat on board the Success. I was very much
confounded at seeing him, ^ell knowing he was on board when I fell out of the
ship. I longed for an opportunity to confer with him, though I could not
perceive by his looks that he knew me; but that might be from my change of
habit, and the sun's tarnishing my complexion.

The emperor rose, (when he had given the slaves) mounted, and rode off; and we
went home in the same order as we came there; only the chief minister, Mahomet
ben addo Otar, accompanied the ambassador as far as the marble gate. I informed
my dear wife when we came to our lodging, the anxiety I was in when the emperor
eyed he: She told me she had made the same observation with much uneasiness:
for, said she, I had not the presence of mind, upon the instant, to imagine
myself a man* However, we both wished ourselves on board, and the embassy well
over, and then we might make ourselves merry with our fears.

The next day our fears were much increased; for hearing a noise in the street,
we went to look out to know the reason, and discovered Hamet our Irish
renegado, with several prisoners manacled. We soon retired again, but learnt by
other people that they were going to the emperor that he might make his choice.
The sight of him renewed our fears, as I said, and we resolved immediately to
get leave to go on board, for fear of some unlucky turn of fortune.

I, upon the instant, went to wait upon the ambassador, and declared to him
what I had seen, begging leave at the same (...) me we might be suffered to go
on board. He told me he would comply with my request for Miss Villars and the
Italian, but begged it as a favor that I would stay with him, for he should
have great need of my assistance; and if any thing should fall out, he would
engage for my liberty. Though the request out me to the heart, yet it was
neither prudence nor good manners to refuse him. I gave him my promise to obey
his commands, but begged he would not insist upon my going abroad but as seldom
as possible. I went to my wife, My readers, perhaps, may smile at my calling
her wife, but I will assure them, we thought ourselves as much married, as if
the parson had executed his holy function; nevertheless, we did not intend to
neglect that ceremony the very first opportunity.
and told her the ambassador's request and my promise. She agreed with me in
the reasonableness of it, but yet could not forbear shedding floods of tears at
our (we hoped) short separation. The next day was designed for the journey; but
the ensuing night was spent with sighs, tears, and lowness of spirit that
looked ominous. Yet we parted; and for several hours I could not bring my mind
to any peaceable form to wait on the ambassador: but he sent for me at last,
and told me the reason of his desiring me to continue with him was this --

The king, his master, had commanded him to make some observations of the
customs and manners of this part of Africa; and, added he, I have observed in
you a capacity fit to assist me in the design. I told him he might command me
in any thing that lay in my power, and that I took it for an honor ^e would
think me worthy of his employment.

We had notice the next day from the person that attended my wife with the
camels, that he saw them safe on board, which gave me some comfort. I begged
the ambassador to give me leave to speak a word or two with one of the slaves
that the emperor gave him. He ordered him to come before him, where I desired
he would tell me how he came into the hands of the Moors. He was prodigiously
surprised to see me there, and could hardly believe his eyes; for it was
thought by every body that I had either been killed or drowned; as indeed it
was very improbable to think otherwise. He informed me, that three days after
the Success parted with the Spanish man of war, another Algerine rover met with
them, and took them after an obstinate fight; the captain and several others
being slain in the battle: but it was his good fortune to be brought for the
emperor's use. I call it good fortune, said he, because I was presented to the
French ambassador, and I am now in hopes of my freedom.

I told the ambassador in French what he said; and he was pleased to say, that
to oblige me he would take him into his protection. I remembered Mahomet ben
addo Otar was ambassador in England; he came ^o visit the ambassador often, and
understanding English, I gathered several good hints for his design; for he was
courteous enough, though an enemy in his heart to the English.

I think it will not be much amiss here to give the reader a succinct account
of the customs and manners of the Moors of Fez and Morocco; and we will begin
from their last revolution.

Muiley Ismael, the present emperor of Morocco, pretends to derive his birth
from Mahomet himself. He was son to Muiley Xerif king of Taphilet, but was
succeeded by Muiley Archyd, who died with a debauch he made among his courtiers.

His unexpected death in 1672, gave room for many of his family to raise
rebellion in their several provinces: But Muiley Ismael being the greatest
favorite of the people, and of an enterprising temp^^, proclaimed himself king
of Taphilet, and seized his brother's measures, which are the sinews of war.
His nephew, Muiley Hamet gave him the most trouble; for he had gained a party,
and declared himself king of Sus and Morocco, had several battles, but at last
was overcome as well as the rest, and Ismael was settled the peaceful king of
Taphilet, Morocco, and Fez. I have given a description of his person already.
His empire spreads from north to south four hundred leagues, from east to west
upwards of a hundred and fifty.

There are three strong places possessed by the Europeans on the coast of
Africa, viz. Magazan on the ocean, by the Portuguese; and on the Mediterranean,
Melissa, and Centa, by the Spaniards. They had two more strong holds, Larache
and Mammora; but the present emperor drove them out shamefully. And Tangier
once belonged to the English, who abandoned it a few years ago, first
demolishing the fortifications.

The emperor has but nine seaports in his whole dominions, viz. Sancta Cruz,
Safy, Sallee, Mammora, Larache, Arzilla and Tangier, on the African ocean;
Zaffarina, and Tetuan, on the Mediterranean; though Tetuan is two leagues
within land. To begin in order as they are named; Sancta Cruz (or the holy
cross) is the first port to the southward. The town is about a mile in length,
and a quarter broad. The chief merchants are Jews, who trade with England and
Holland. Their vent is hides, dates, copper, and beeswax.

Safy, or Sophia, appears next, a town situate on a bill; but drives a larger
trade than Sancta Cruz.

Sallee, situated thirty-five leagues south-west of Cape Spartel. It is divided
into two towns, the old and the new; it is called by the natives, Arbat. There
is a very good harbor, and a strong castle well stored with guns, if the Moors
knew how to make use of them. The town is large and well inhabited, but the
walls are all demolished. I observed the ruins of a church, the steeple yet
standing, a noble fine Gothic building. The chief trade of this town consists
in the prizes that are brought in by their galleys.

About seven leagues more to the north stands Mammora, once possessed by the
Spaniards. It stands in a bottom, surrounded with mountains, which renders the
air very unwholesome, by reason of the excessive heat; but the bay is fine,
large, and secure from all winds. This town is generally the high road to
Mequinez, the present capital of Morocco.

The next port northward is Larache, a town of a pleasant situation, and
strongly fortified; but, to the eternal infamy of the Spaniards, delivered up
to Ismael, after a siege of five moons; two thousand soldiers and a hundred
officers being taken prisoners: a sufficient force to have defended it against
the whole powers of Muiley Ismael, for they neither wanted provisions nor
ammunition. But we shall leave them and their cowardice, and go on to

Arzillah, or Azillath, about twelve leagues more north. A place only famed for
tobacco, which they seldom trade abroad for, having sufficient: vent for it
among the natives of Morocco; and as we have but little business with it, we'll
come to

Tangier, (as fast as we can) a fine, large, well fortified city, when in the
hands of the English; but since they have left it, and razed the
fortifications, the Moors have thought fit to repair it.

The next, Zaffarina, is a place of very little note, and therefore we shall
make no observation concerning it.

The last is Tetuan, a town six miles within land, without any fortification.
The inhabitants came originally from the province of Andalusia in Spain, as
indeed did most of the Moors on the sea coast of Africa. They are white men,
pretty well civilized, very kind to strangers and Christians, and pay but
little regard to the emperor of Morocco.

As to the nature of the inhabitants, they are most of a tawny complexion, of a
lazy, idle disposition, and cursed with all the vices of mankind, mistrustful
to the last degree, false, jealous, and the very picture of ignorance. They
style themselves Mussulme^, or true believers, yet their word is not to be
relied on upon any occasion. The Moors are generally but indifferent soldiers,
and but seldom brave. They are often famed in the Spanish histories for men of
gallantry, but I could never find them inclined that way. They manage a horse,
it must be confessed, with a great deal of dexterity. They abominate the
Christians, (for the very word signifies in their language, dog) and are
continually seeking means to destroy them. Mahomet has taught them in his
Alcoran, that all of his faith who die fighting against the Christians,
immediately enter into Paradise in triumph: nay, even their horses, if they die
in battle, are immediately translated into heaven; for they hope to have the
pleasure of riding there as well as on earth.

Though polygamy is allowed, yet they must marry but four wives, and must
settle a dowry upon them; and if ever they put them away, they must return
their dowry along with them: But they may keep as many concubines as they think
fit; though they have this privilege, when they can please them no longer, they
sell them to the best bidd^^; so that the women of Morocco, in my opinion, have
but a sad time on it: Yet the husband is obliged to keep all their children.
They esteem idiots and naturals to be saints, if they are men; for they believe
the women have no fouls, and are only formed for propagation. They will not
allow them to enter their mosques, because they esteem them incapable of being
received into heaven; yet they say their prayers at home, and on Friday resort
to the places of burial, to weep over the graves of their deceased friends,
clothed in blue, which is their mourning. They hire professed mourners to
grieve and (...) at the graves of ^^l^tions, and howl over them, as I have seen
the Irish; asking them why they would die, when they were provided with every
thing that was necessary in this world. Their time is spent in eating,
drinking, sleeping, dallying with their women, horses, and prayers, (for they
never learn to read, and are forbid gaming:) and even their prayers are hurried
over as slothfully, as if they were asleep.

They have usually a string of beads in their hands, like the Roman Catholics;
and to every bead they have a short prayer, which, as they repeat, they drop
through their fingers. The prayer consists only in the different attributes of
God, as, "God is great, God is good, God is infinite, God is merciful." The
emperor of these wretches only differs from his subjects in a larger propensity
to their ill qualities, with the addition of (...) degree of cruelty and
avarice. I was told that during his twenty years reign, he had murdered with
his own hands twenty-three thousand men: Nay, I am apt to believe the truth of
it, for he put forty-seven to death in the one and twenty days we were at his
court.

Every nation is amazed to find his subjects so submissive and patient under so
excessive and cruel a tyranny: But they should understand, (bating their want
of power) that they are taught to believe, if they fill by the hand of a king,
who is Xerif, (which signifies Mahomet's successor) they immediately go up to
heaven; and if there is any that would not willingly be sent to heaven before
their time, they are sure to fly from him when he is clothed in yellow, which
is his color of murder; and he generally dies it of a blood-colour before he
goes to sleep.

As I was viewing some new buildings one day, near the king's palace, I
perceived him giving directions to some of the workmen. There were several
carts drove by his slaves with materials for his buildings, and as they passed
him, he bastinadoed some for going too fast, while others, thinking to mend
that fault, were drubbed by him for going too slow. One poor creature,
trembling for fear of what would follow, went bowing before his cart; but the
emperor wounding the horse in the flank he gave a spring, tumbled the wretch
down, and drove over him. Another following him, ran to assist his fellow, but
the emperor threw his dart, and struck him in the shoulder. The slave drew it
out, and upon his knees, presented it to him again, which the emperor (when the
man had got some distance from him) darted into his chine. The fool drew it out
once more, and covered with blood, gave it to him back again; but as he was
stooping, he fell down with loss of blood at the barbarian's feet, who did him
the favor to pin him to the earth through his back.

I was so shocked at the sight, that I could not recover myself for a good
while afterward. I thought the poor fellow was a fool; for if it had been my
own case, I would have returned it through his body the first time: for he was
sure of dying, and I think it would have been some satisfaction to have sent
the author of my death the same journey.

This king used to murder his slaves upon the least complaint from the Moons,
which they would make out of hatred to Christians. But the wretch ^^^ding his
slaves decrease too much, took another method; and when the next complaint was
mad^, he killed the slave the person complained against, b^t ordered the
complainant immediately to pay him double the price he cost him, or find him
two more slaves in his room that instant, which he was obliged to do; but this
proceeding stopped their mouths for the future.

They say he has a great deal of wit^ and courage, is very active, and expert
in riding, and hurling the dart. He drinks no wine, because his religion
forbids it: but when he takes opium, or drinks a certain mixture that he makes
himself, (compounded with brandy, cinnamon, cloves, a^^iseed and nutmegs,) woe
be to him that comes in his way! He Is much addicted to women, having no less
than four hundred concubines. He has one hundred and eighteen male children
alive, and about two hundred femal^s. One of the males whom he designs for his
successor, (and which he had by a black, who advises him in every thing, and is
reckoned a polite woman) he has named ^ailey Z^yden. His revenue consists in
presents from the governors of his provinces, and the Arabians who live in huts
about his dominions. When he has a mi^d to squeeze, he sends for a governor
from his provinc^^, who knows well enough what he is sent for, and therefore
provides accordingly: so that the emperor fleeces the governors, and they
fleece the people. So that there is no one r^^h but himself, and ^^t he does
not know what (...) to put his treasure to, but (...) it in secret places; and
the person that assi^ts him in the concealment is sure to lose his life for his
assistance.

Mequinez, (...) capit^^^ and the place of his residence, was formerly but a
small (...) b^t now it contains six hundred thousand (...) are so crowded,
there is hardly any passing along. It is but a mean city, very ill built; and if
there falls any rain, the dirtiest place I ever sat my foot in; for there is no
pavement in the streets: and when it is dry, the dust is ready to cho^k one.
The king's palace is indeed a very large place, almost four miles round,
including his gardens; but is very ill contrived. Here you shall see a fine
pillar added to support an old r^inated place, and yet he employs most of his
time in building. In short, it looks like gold-lace on a hop-sack.

His stables are the most regular buildings in all his palace. But that is no
wonder, for the Moors even reverence horses; and one that has been a pilgrimage
to Mecca, has as much veneration as the pilgrim himself. The king had one of
these horses, which I have seen always finely comparisoned, and a slave to
attend, who carried a pot and cloth to keep him clean. All the horses that are
thus sanctified are usually freed from all manner of service, and if the owner
cannot afford to keep it, which often happens, there is a pension settled upon
them by the Mufti.

The Jews drive a great trade here, but they pay sufficiently for that
privilege; for they are obliged to w^^r black caps, that they may be
distinguished; and notwithstanding their great trade, they are but s^u^vily
used; for if a child insults them, it is as much as their lives are worth to
resist.

The women of Morocco, I mean all that I had the fortune to see, were very
handsome* fine large full eyes, round faces, and every feature exact. They are
very amorous, and ^extrous in contriving methods to satisfy their desires.

A gentleman of our retinue told me, he had got an intrigue one of the Moorish
women, daughter to a governor of a province; and his manner of going to the
appointment was in a disguise. She sent him by a French slave of here is a
complete woman's dress* which are generally all alike; and their faces are all
muffled up to their eyes, so that they are often m^t by their own husbands in
the street, without being known; by this dress he got admittance as a lady
coming to pay a visit, and then they are very secure. For it is the custom,
whenever a man, even the husband, finds a pair of women's sandals, at the door
of his wife's chamber, he must retire; for it is the greatest affront they can
put on a woman, to enter her apartment when they have that warning to the
contrary. He told me she was a delicious creature, and mistress of the whole
art of love. It is no wonder if they give themselves up to love, when perhaps
there are twenty or more, (according to the capacity of the person that keeps
them) shares in one single man; and they must be contented to stay for due
benevolence, till their tyrant pleases to send for them.

The habit of the men is generally white, (which is a color they extremely
delight in) with a red cap on their heads; that is, the married men: for all
the youth, from the prince to the beggar, before wedlock, go uncovered. They
are close shaved under their caps, except one lock upon the crown of their
head, which they never cut off; being they are taught, by that lock, Mahomet is
to draw them up to their imaginary Paradise. They only shave under their chins,
but suffer their beards and mustachoes to grow, which they take a particular
pride in the length and largeness of; and he that is well bearded, must be a
wise man.

Their shirts are made like shifts, only the sleeves are so long that they hang
down over their hands. Under the shirt they wear linen drawers, that reach
down to their knees, for their legs are always bare; their shoes are made
without heels, like Irish brogues. Over the shirt is a vest without sleeves,
which they surround with a silk scarf, of what color they please (except
green, which is a color sacred to Mahomet, their emperor, and the clergy;) in
this they thrust short daggers, or knives. Over all is a garment, which they
call a Haick, about five ^lls long, and four broad, which they wrap round them
as we do our cloaks. Some of the meaner sort, especially in the country, wear
straw hats of their own make. Their dresses are all alike, only some add a gold
or silver fringe round the border.

As for religion, they rise early and late to prayers; but only (like children)
do it because they are ordered. Their Mufti, or head of their religion, is
reckoned the f^^st in the empire, and di^owns, the emperor's authority; but he
finds means to fleece him, as well as the rest of his subjects, who obey him
out of fear; for if there was one person found to love him, it would be as
strange a sight as one of their monsters.

I could not forbear smiling to see the providence of the Moors. Walking one
day about a mile from Mequinez, it began to rain prodigiously: I got under a
tree to shelter myself from the tempest. But I observed several of the natives
undress themselves with a great deal of precipitation, make up their clothes in
a bundle, and sit on them stark naked; and all their care was to keep them
surely from the wet, leaving their naked bodies exposed to the fury of the
storm. When it ceased, they walked a little way till their bodies were dry, and
then dressed themselves. If a man was to do so in England, he would be counted
a madman or a fool, yet I must own I thought them in the right; for, be the
storm ever so violent, yet when it is over, they pursue their journey with dry
clothes on their backs. But they have one convenience, they are dressed and
undrest in half a minute. Nay, I am informed those that travel on camels, or on
horseback, have a convenience covered with an oiled cloth, in which they thrust
their clothes on the like occasion, and ride naked. I fancy, to meet an army in
a storm would create a terrible fright, and do as much execution to an ignorant
body, as their offensive arms, and force them to seek for safety in their heels.

The emperor is able to raise an hundred thousand horse, and fifty thousand
foot. When they are to make war among themselves, they go very unwillingly into
the field; but when they oppose the Christians, they do it with a great deal of
cheerfulness; because they expect indulgences for the expiation of their sins.
When they are ready to give battle, they range their armies after this manner.
They divide their horse into two bodies, and place one at each wing; the foot
is in the middle, so that the whole forms a crescent or half moon. Before they
begin the battle, they give a great shout, then make a short prayer, and fall
on without much order very furiously; so that they soon overcome, or are as
soon put to ^^ight. Break but their foremost ranks, and you put their whole
body into confusion.

I have said before, that no person is rich but the emperor; neither do they
take the methods to be so; or if they are, their greatest wisdom will be to
conceal it; for if once known, they are sure to lose all their wealth.

No foreign coin is current in Morocco, except Spanish pieces of eight, which
are only received by weight. But the Jews will secretly take any coin, and I
suppose dispose of it again with the same circumspection they receive it. They
have but three sorts of coin current amongst them. First, a ducat of Barbary
gold. Second, a Blanquile of silver. And last, a Felowze of copper, The image
of the emperor is not allowed to be put on their money, being expressly forbid
by Mahomet in his Alcoran; but they stamp them with Arabian characters. Their
way of reckoning is by the ounce.

These are the heads of what I observed in my small stay among them. The
ambassador informed me, he was in some fear that his embassy would not succeed;
for he said, he found little else but delays, excuses, and nothing of sincerity
among them. We were informed, that the emperor designed to go speedily upon an
expedition against the Moors of the province of Oran, who had newly revolted,
and put to death their governor for his avarice, he having extorted from them
vast sums of money; and the inhabitants after his death, chose one out of their
own province to command them. This hastened our ambassador in his legation, to
get an answer one way or other. But we were informed the king designed to set
out the next day upon his expedition, and yet the ambassador had not his
audience of leave. This made him and us very uneasy; for we could not stir from
Mequinez, without the emperor's express leave. But about seven in the evening,
the ambassador had orders to come and take his last audience, which was the
ninth of June 1693. We went in the (...) manner as we did at first. But we were
informed by our interpreter, that the king was in a very ill humor, and that
he had but an hour before killed two of his chief blacks* by stabling them with
a dagger h^ continually wore at his girdle.

We entered the palace farther than at the first time, where we waited a full
half hour. At lad, the emperor approached richly dressed, and finely mounted on a
white Barbary; the saddle and other accoutrements wrought with gold and
precious stones in several places. He was this day in his vellow or fatal vast,
and sprinkled in many places with the blood or those h^ had stain; and I
thought his countenance had something more of horror in it than at our first
audience. He had a spear in his hand, set round with pearls on the top, and a
cap with ostriches' feathers waving in the wind. All his attendants had fled
his presence, at the notice of having on his yellow vest; and he had only a
dozen of h^ guards waiting upon him trembling, but the Alcaydes and other great
men crept about us during our audience.

The emperor began with his old compliment of, "You Are welcome," but his looks
and words I thought did but ill agree. The ambassador used many arguments with
him to bring h^ embassy to a happy issue, but to no purpose. -- The ambassador
told me, the king was a person that had not the leaf regard to his word, and
even disowned a letter he had written to his master the king of France.
Therefore, said he we will take our leave of this country of monsters in two
days: for the king had signed his departure, with all his retinue.

I was very well pleased with this resolution; for now I should once more see
that treasure of my soul, whose absence had robbed me of all joy. I even
thought these two days the longest of my life; but at last they were past and
we set out merrily; at least I did, and all the re^^ of the retinue. Though I
must own, I could not answer for the ambassador, for I believe the ^ll success
of his embassy had a little chagrined him. I did my utmost to endeavor to
divert his melancholy upon the road, which he took very kindly. We lay in tents
the first night, which the ambassador had taken care to provide us, and
provision likewise; for there is never an inn between Mequinez and Mammora.

We rose the next day very early, that we might avoid the heat of the sun. When
we came within a league of the town, we saw coming toward us our Italian, and
by the melancholy in his looks, I began to tremble with apprehension of some
accident. As soon as he approached u^, after paying his obeisance to the
ambassador, he addressed himself to me. Said he, (in French)*

I wish some one else would have taken my commission upon them, for what I have
to tell you will cut you to the heart. The various troubles in my breast locked
up my tongue, so that I had not power to ask him any questions. In short, said
he, your mistress is forced away from us, through the treachery of Mustapha. At
hearing this fatal news, I dropped senseless from my camel, nor came I to
myself till we arrived at Mammora. I was a thousand times going to destroy
myself, and I believe I had done it in the height of my despair, if I had not
been withheld, In short, the ambassador was no longer ignorant of my cruel
loss; for in my ravings, I had called her my dear wife. He seemed amazed at the
discovery, and reproached me in a handsome manner, for not trusting him with
the secret. I was not in a condition to beg his pardon, neither was there any
one could give me comfort. I was carried on board, where I enquired in what
manner she was taken away.

The captain informed us, that Mustapha had made his escape out of the
cabin-window, by swimming. I did not tell any one of it, said the captain,
because I thought it would be to no purpose; for I imagined there could be no
other ill consequence to attend his escape, but merely the loss of him. He had
been gone three days, when on the fourth, there came on board us the governor
of Mammora, the fugitive Mustapha, and one hundred soldiers, who immediately
seized on the young gentleman, who they said was a woman, and wife to a
renegado of Sallee. It was in vain to oppose him, especially when I found by
her breasts, that she was really a woman. They took her on shore,
notwithstanding her cries, shrieks, and lamentation, which pierced our very
hearts. They put her on board a Saick, and set sail immediately, steering
south, as we suppose, for the port of Sallee. This gentleman (meaning the
Italian) took it upon him to acquaint you with the unhappy accident; but, added
he, I believe it is not impossible to regain her. The ambassador was so good as
to offer his assistance in what lay in his power. I begged he would be pleased
to lend me a boat with some hands to work her. He very willingly granted my
request; and told me he would lend me the ship, but he feared it might occasion
a more public quarrel.

He lent me ten hands for pateraros, and sufficient small arms, with every
thing that was necessary. My kind Italian would accompany me, and the rest of
the company went voluntarily. We spent but little time in setting out, and the
wind proving favorable, we set sail, and made very good way. The Saick had not
pursued her voyage above five hours before us, so that we had hopes of getting
up with them. I encouraged my companions, who labored incessantly. We sailed
and rowed all night, and when the morning dawned, we gained sight of a vessel;
which we did not doubt was that we sought for. We labored hard to come up with
her, and gained upon her every moment. Before eight o'clock we came along side
of her, and I soon discovered Mustapha giving orders about the engagement. I
drew out a pair of pistols, and shot him dead. The rest fired upon us, but
notwithstanding all their opposition, I jumped into their vessel, followed by
the Italian and five more of the men; and though they were superior in number,
yet we soon made them ask for quarter. I upon the instant enquired for her that
was always in my thoughts; but to my great grief, was informed by an English
slave at the ^ar, that she was taken on board of a galley by Captain Hamet our
Irish renegado; and they assured me it was impossible for them to be overtaken
Unspeakable was the sorrow I felt at this relation; and all the satisfaction I
felt, was, that I had rewarded Mustapha for his treachery. We steered our
course back, but I was more dead than alive in the voyage.

When we came on board, the ambassador condoled with me for my misfortune, and
entreated me to take comfort. I told him death was now my only comfort, and I
hoped that it was not far off.

Our Italian had agreed for his passage on board a vessel in the bay bound for
Rome: He begged that I would accompany him into Italy: and when he had settled
his affairs, he would (if it lay in his power) come back to Sallee, and do his
endeavor to find what was become of Miss Villars. I thanked him for his offer,
and told him I would accept of it. I had effects enough, having all the money
and jewels we brought from Hamet's country house. We took leave of the
amba^^ador, and gave him abundance of thanks for his civilities, and went on
board the vessel that waited for us: we set sail immediately, and in two months
safely arrived at Rome; where our Italian did not care to go publicly on
shore, but stayed till the darkness of the night favored our landing.

We had all our goods disembarked, and took a private lodging in an obscure
part of the city, where we were sure of being concealed. We asked our landlord,
(who was a Frenchman) about the news of the place. He told us a great deal of
idle stuff, which signified nothing to us; at last, by the advice of the
Italian, I enquired of him, if Hernando Alvares was in town or not? He answered
me, that he had been dead above two months, and had left a noble estate behind
him. I asked him if he had not left a wife to possess it. No, said he.

About three years ago, (continued our landlord) he was to have been married to
a beautiful young lady, an heiress to a vast fortune; but his brother stepped in
between, and gained her affection. Some say they were married, and others not;
but she was delivered of a fine boy. Don Hernando took a barbarous revenge of
his brother, as it is reported: he bribed a captain of a vessel to put a weight
about his neck, and drown him in the sea. But to make amends for his inhuman
act, he has left his vast estate to the son his brother had by the lady, and
has chosen his holiness the Pope for his guardian. Pray, said I, what is become
of the young lady? He answered me, he could not tell; but it was supposed she
was gone into a nunnery.

The Italian, while our discourse lasted, turned his face to the window, that
we might not perceive the disorder of his countenance. As soon as our landlord
was gone, he turned to me, and embraced me; said he, My dear friend, let what
will happen to me, I shall have it in my power to serve you with my fortune;
and so much I think myself obliged to you, that if half will buy your
mistress's liberty, you shall command it. I returned him the acknowledgement
his kind proffer deserved, but told him, I could not expect to be so happy. He
bid me not despair. I begged he would not mention any thing of my affairs, till
his own came to a lucky issue.

The next day, we procured ourselves habits after the mode of Rome, and
resolved to go to Grimaldi's country-(...) hear, if it were possible, some
tidings of Isabella.

Antonio had dressed himself in a mean habit, and appeared as my servant. It
being but six pleasant miles, we had resolved to walk it. We entered a village
within half a mile of the place, and resolved to dine at a poor inn, there to
gain some intelligence. I went for a French merchant, and Don Antonio passed
(as I said) for my servant and interpreter, and informed me of the discourse
that passed between them. That gentleman (meaning me), says he to our host, has
some business to communicate to Don Antonio Grimaldi, (for we knew of his being
there.) Our innkeeper told us, it would be a difficult matter to talk to him
about business now, for he was that very evening going to set out with his
daughter, in order to put her* into a nunnery at Naples; for all his
persuasions, added he, cannot prevail upon her, but she is fixed unalterable in
her resolution. This news, you may be sure, hastened our departure; but we did
not well know how to disclose the secret we had to unfold.

Don Antonio, as not doubting Isabella's affection to him, was fearful lest an
abrupt discovery should have some strange effect upon her. We therefore
resolved, that I should first appear, and break the matter by degrees: for he
had informed me that she spoke French very well. When we approached the house,
Antonio stood at some distance, while I went up to the door alone. The porter
and I not ^^derstanding one another, I had like to have returned as wise as I
came. But at last a servant in the family* happening to understand French, came
and ended our sputtering at one another, I informed him I had a secret of the
greatest importance to declare to Donna Isabella. He told me he would acquaint
his lord with it. The servant went in, and immediately returned with a grave
old gentleman that seemed to have been weeping. He asked me in French, what I
had to say to his daughter, for she did not care to speak to any one. I begged
that I might be brought to her presence, and did not doubt but I had something
to say to her which would* not displease her. Don Antonio Grimaldi gravely
smiled and shook his head: No, no, Sir, said he, you have nothing to give
either her or me comfort, unless you could revive ^he dead. I answered him, he
did no know what I could do. But I told him the longer he delayed my seeing
her, the longer he deferred their own happiness. Well, said he, I have no
hopes; but you shall see my daughter, to convince you that nothing in this
world can make us happy.

He led (...) through several stately apartments, all hung with black. And
though it was high noon, yet the sun's light was excluded* and dim twinkling
lamps usurped his room. At last, we entered a chamber, where sat the fair
forlorn. I stopped a moment to behold her, and notwithstanding a fixed
melancholy on her countenance, beauty triumphed there. She was caressing an
infant she had in her arms. The father entered first, and told her in French,
that a gentleman of France had a secret to communicate to her, that would
banish her melancholy. The gentleman (replied the lady,) may promise
impossibilities, but rather than expose him, I would beg him not to open his
mouth upon that subject. Madam, said I, I own myself a physician, but I pretend
to cure the mind, as well as the body; and to acquaint you with what you know
already, you mourn the loss of a gentleman, that you imagine was drowned at
sea: But I can assure you he escaped that danger, and is now a captive in
Barbary, pining under the severest want; and all the hope he has of freedom, is
through your means.

The lady upon this, looked wistfully upon her father, and said, Dear father,
don't endeavor to (...) me any longer; you know I have your (...), and my ^^ne
is cap^red. My dear child* I am amazed as much as you can be, replied the (...)
for by all that is holy* I never saw this gentleman in (...) before, and am so
far from believing him, that ((...) his pardon) I fancy there must be some very
great (...). Upon this, I related to them all his story from the beginning to
our meeting in Barbary.

I found my relation had staggered her faith a little, for a pleasing (...) by
powerful fear, ^^se in (...) beautiful face; and (...) herself at my (...) all
my endeavors to the contrary. Dear Sir, (...) she* do not show (...) plunge me
into (...). Madam, (...) and heavenly powers, I have seen him within these two
months, and what I have related to you, his own mouth informed me; and having
gained my liberty, I made him a promise to see his friends in Italy, and inform
them of his condition. The transports and exstasies that took possession of
both their souls cannot be expressed by words. They embraced me, kissed me, and
called me their preserver. Unlooked-for happiness! said Isabella, Heaven, thou
have heard my prayers! and does my dear Antonio live! I Will immediately embark
for Barbary, and fetch him thence myself: Even all that I am worth, my precious
boy shall sell his fortune too, to redeem his father. O my young Antonio,
Heaven has restored thy father from the dead, said she to her child, and I hope
we shall see him again. The pretty innocent mingled his tears of joy with
theirs. After their first transports were over, they again embraced me, and
begged I would put them in a way to pay me the obligations they owed me. Then
they proceeded to enquire which way they must go about to accomplish his
liberty. I told them I had a servant waiting without, that I intended should
accompany the persons they would send to manage the affair. They seemed to
reproach me for letting him wait without, and were immediately sending for him
in. I begged they would give me leave to go for him myself, seeing he was a
foreigner, and they would find it a hard matter to make him understand them.
Upon this I ^an out, and called to Antonio, and told him in a few words how
things stood. He followed me close at the h^^ls: I went into the room first,
and as Antonio Grimaldi was giving him his hand to lead him in* he fell upon
his knees before him. Isabella casting (...) eyes upon him, gave a shrink, and
cried out, It Is he, his he himself, my dear Antonio! joy took away her speech*
and she fell down into a trance. He ran and caught her in his arms, kissed and
embraced her; and at last brought her to herself. Imagination must make up the
discourse between them. He told her at last, when words of sense took place,
that he was obliged to me for his liberty; for he had sent several letters to
his sisters, but* never could get any answer. They informed him that both his
sisters were gone to reside at Veni^e with their husbands* and that was the
reason their letters never came to their hands. Now, said Antonio, if my friend
(meaning me) was but happy, it would complete my joy. But to find a wife, a
son, and father kind, when I had many reasons to think the contrary, must have
some alloy, or it would not be possible for me to bear it.

Antonio upon this, related my unhappy story, and they all lamented my hard
fortune. He afterward enquired of his dear Isabella concerning her own
sufferings; which she readily began.

Said she, That day you left me, the troubles of my mind wrought so much upon
my body, that the physicians declared I was in a violent fever, and advised my
father to send me into the country, which he accordingly did the next day. The
thoughts of being so far from my dear Antonio increased my malady, and my
father had little hopes of my life. My fever, after having brought me to the
brink of the grave, left me: and my father imagining it was the approaching
marriage that had wrought this sudden illness, told me one day, that if it was
that which lay so heavy upon my spirits, he would remove it, by giving me power
of refusing to be the wife of Hernando Alvares. I thanked him, and told him he
had taken the only way to restore my health; and that if I was forced to wed
him, I should be for ever miserable. He was the tenderest of fathers, and
informed me he would never force my inclinations. The kindness my father showed
me, worked so much upon me, that I began to recover.

Your brother used often to visit me in my illness, which retarded my health.
My father seeing it would never be in my power to love him, very frankly told
him so, and begged that he would discontinue his visits; for he was resolved
his daughter should never give her hand, where it was not in her power to give
her heart. They parted with many words between them, but my father persisted in
his resolution.

I began to discover that I was with child, and a new sort of illness seized
me. I knew this was an accident that could not long be concealed, therefore I
resolved to let you know my condition; and I gained my woman, by several
promises of reward, to deliver a letter to you: But she betrayed me to your
brother, which I suspected from her not appearing. I therefore declared the
truth to my indulgent father. He was very much enraged at the discovery, but
paternal love prevailed over his passion; he forgave me, and promised to make
me happy with my dear Antonio. These promises made my sickness vanish, and I
had no other disease but what attends breeding women. My father went to Rome to
enquire after Don Antonio, but could not get the least information of him. This
gave me a new shock. But what bitter agonies did I feel, when I received a
letter from your brother, (with a copy of that I had written to you, enclosed*)
which was as follows:

UNGRATEFUL woman! Yet I will no more upbraid thee, but let thy crime be thy
punishment. He that betrayed me I will not call by the name of brother: He has
paid for his ingratitude with his life. I only give thee this notice, that thou
may feel some of those pangs that thou have thrust into the breast of

HERNANDO ALVARES.


The reading of this letter sunk me down, and I called for death, as my last
and only hope. I resolved to refuse all food, and had starved myself to death,
if a good priest had not convinced me by his arguments that my soul was in
danger; that I should be guilty of a double murder, myself and and an infant. I
lingered on in a restless state of unhappiness, till the time of my delivery
came, which I prayed to heaven to end with my life; but it pleased the Almighty
Power to spare me to be happy.

The sight of my precious infant called to mind the loss of his father; but I
resolved to banish all thoughts of death, that I might take care of his tender
years. But I begged my father to give me leave to go into a nunnery. With much
importunity he granted my request, on this condition, that if I continued in
that mind at the end of two years, I might do as I thought fit. Though I
thought the time an age, yet I unwillingly consented.

My father used means with the Pope, to have your brother called to an account
for your death, and it had gone hard with him, if we could have procured any
witnesses; but for want of them he was acquitted. In a little time, a heavy and
^eep melancholy seized him; and he professed so sincere a repentance, that even
I almost forgave him. He begged he might see the child; which my father made me
comply with. He shed such abundance of tears over it, that my father wept for
company: and he spoke so tenderly of the loss of his brother, that it wiped off
all suspicions of his repentance. Since thou have loft a father, said he,
through my barbarity, it is but just that I should prove a father to thee. He
frequently came to see him, though I could never be prevailed upon to accept of
a visit. At last his grief seized him so violently, that he was given over by
his physicians. When he was upon his deathbed, he made his will, and
bequeathed my little Antonio his whole estate, leaving the Pope his guardian.
He died full of repentance for his crime, and no doubt his soul took its flight
to heaven.

The generous Antonio could not refuse some tears to the memory of his
repentant brother; but joy succeeded sorrow. The Pope was acquainted with the
story, who sent to congratulate their happy meeting. Nothing but mirth and
pleasure ran through the villa, which increased my sorrow.

Don Antonio told me one day, that he did not think be had a right to rejoice
without me; and now, said he, I have nothing to afflict me but what you feel,
therefore I will bend my thoughts if it be possible, to relieve your grief. I
can procure a friar of my acquaintance to go to Sallee, one that knows the
nature of the business we shall send him about, seeing he has often gone to
redeem captives. We'll send for him, and you may give him what instructions you
think fit. I thanked him, and was very sorry for the trouble I should give him,
but was resolved to accompany him myself. He told me he would not have me go by
any means, for I could be of no manner of use in the affair, but rather a
hinderance; and if (...) should be once discovered, might fall into the same
state we both lately escaped from; and perhaps meet with much worse usage than
I had before. His advice was so reasonable* that I resolved to take it,
whatever violence I did myself. The friar was sent for, had his commission and
instructions given him; and withal to spare no cost, Antonio told him, whatever
he gave should not be thought unreasonable.

He was to have a thousand crowns for his expenses, and two thousand more if he
succeeded.

The friar undertook his voyage with a great deal of alacrity, and gave us
great hopes of his success by his willingness; and he embarked the next day for
Genoa, that port being the properest place to get a vessel for Barbary. We
wished him a good voyage, and recommended him to fortune.

Don Antonio did all he could to divert my melancholy: We often went a hunting,
shooting, fishing, and visiting the ladies. In short, he made me partake in all
the diversions Italy could afford. But though I seemed often to be diverted,
yet I had always my condition too much at heart to be merry. We viewed all the
rarities and antiquities of ancient and modern Rome. I must confess these
amusements lulled my sorrows often, but when I had time for reflecting, they
rushed upon me with the greater force.

I shall not trouble my reader in describing places treated on by pens far
above my weak capacity: but only give a short description of Naples, whither
Don Antonio would have me go. I was not much averse to the journey, though a
pretty long one; and we sat out with a very handsome equipage. Donna Isabella,
with her little son, accompanied us: but Don Antonio Grimaldi was obliged to
attend the Pope, to settle the affairs of his son-in-law's estate. I was
obliged to appear cheerful, if it was but in complaisance to Don Antonio.

We arrived at Naples in three days, without meeting any thing extraordinary
upon the road. Certainly, never any city in the world can boast a finer
situation: add to that, their ^addings are sumptuous, every private house seems
a palace, (...) every palace looks like the court of a king: the (...), and
(...) from tempest: strong both (...). In (...), if I was obliged to live out
(...) my native country, (...) every man is (...) of Na^^es should be the (...)
place. It has a wall kept in very (...) repair, with three (...) almost
impregnable. The (...) Mount (...) so called from a chapel (...) and (...). But
if it is (...), I cannot (...) the Roman Catholics came to have such a
particular regard for him, when it is very well known, he was (...) great
friend to them; at least, he was a scourge to their (...) in his writings.

This is not only a safeguard to the city and adjacent country, but might prove
its scourge. In 1587 it was blown up, by lightning penetrating to the
powder-room, which mightily damaged the whole city. The second is Castello
Neuvo, or the New Castle, built by Charles, king of Naples. This castle
commands the haven, and is generally the viceroy's dwelling. The third stands
on the south-east corner of the city, built upon a little rock joined to the
continent, by Lucullus the Roman, and is sometimes called by his name, but
oftener Castello del Ovo, or the Castle of the Egg, from its form. They have
also a fine arsenal for their galleys, very well kept, and furnished with great
store of ammunition. But I think the Mole the most extraordinary piece of work,
seeing it defends the haven from the stormy south: lined on each side, and
paved on the top with noble square stones, and in the middle a sine large
fountain of marble; the whole extent is five hundred paces, and ten in breadth.
The inhabitants often boast of the antiquity of their city, founded twenty
years after Troy's destruction, and called by the ancient poets Parthenope,
which Virgil does sufficiently testify in his Georgics: I^lo Virgilium me
tempore dul^is alebat
Parthenope, studiis stor^ntum ignobilis (...).


This city has suffered many revolutions, but none more extraordinary than that
in 1640, when a poor fisherman, without shoes to his feet, in five days time,
commanded the whole power of Naples; and might have lived in that grandeur, ^f
his mind had changed with his exalted state; but he was still a fisherman. His
short-lived fire blazed too fierce to last, and he fell a victim to the rage he
himself began.

Their churches are noble structures, and beautified with paintings by the best
hands. Their women are most of them beautiful, but my heart had no room to
think of them.

The city is governed by very wholesome laws. (...) one in particular adds much
to the quiet of it; none are suffered to wear swords but those of the
garrisons; so if there is any rencounter in the str^^ts, a boat at fifty cuffs
generally ends the dispute: Though bravoes are to be hired to do a murder here
as cheap as at Rome, and men of honor too; for we heard of a quarrel between
two Neapolitan gentlemen, where one, according to custom, hired a bravo to
murder the other, and gave him his reward beforehand. But it so fell out, that
some friends to both parties reconciled the two gentlemen. The person that had
bargained with the bravo for the job, sent to him, and told him of their
reconcilement, but that he might keep the money. The other told him that it was
not in his power to return it to him, but he was above receiving money without
doing his work, and therefore the gentleman must of necessity suffer death. He
entreated him, and used many arguments, but all to no purpose. When he found
nothing would prevail, he told him he would immediately acquaint the gentleman
with his design, which he did accordingly. Notwithstanding, the bravo the same
evening found his opportunity, and lest the other gentleman for dead upon the
Mole; though he recovered after a lingering illness. But the bravo had the
impudence to go to the other, (when he found the gentleman was in a fair way of
recovery) and told him he begged his pardon that he had not been as good as his
word, but he would take care and mend his hand very quickly. In short, he was
found so resolute in the matter, that the gentleman was obliged to hire another
of the same trade to give him a cast of his office, and dispatch the bravo
before he could execute what was designed; and the next day he was found dead
at the very door of the gentleman's house he had intended to assassinate,
waiting, as it was supposed for an opportunity to do his business.

After we had viewed every thing within the city, we went to see the much famed
Vesuvius, or the burning mountain, a league and a half east of the city. The
Neapolitans call it the bedchamber of the sun, because it appears to them
first from the top of that mountain. Round the bottom of it is the richest spot
of ground in the universe, I Will not except even the mines of Potosi; for the
yearly vintage produces twelve hundred thousand ducats. The middle of the hill
is very pleasantly shaded with chestnut, and several other fruit trees. The
mountain has a double top; that to the north terminates in a plain finely
cultivated. The other toward the south, which is the Volcano, rises much
higher.

When we had gained the summit, we descended gradually into its bowels, by
large steps cut out on purpose. It has, in times past, done much damage to the
country round it, by its sudden eruptions; but now it forebodes nothing but
rain, when the top is enveloped with clouds.

When we had sufficiently satisfied our curiosities at Naples, we took a tour
to Putzol or Posuolo, through a hollow rock, a mile in length, and no other
light but what came in at both ends, and one in the middle from the top of the
rock. This subterraneous passage is paved with stone all through, and the
narrowest part of it is ten yards over. About the middle is a small chapel
dedicated to the Virgin Mary. We visited all the rarities of the place,
particularly Virgil's tomb, which is almost covered with ivy. They told me of a
laurel-tree that sprouted naturally out of it, but (not to take from that
incomparable man, whose works are ever-living laurels) I could not see any such
thing. We also viewed the Lake Agnio, so called from the multitude of serpents
or snakes that fall into it from the pendent mountains. The water is of two
different qualities; that tasted from the surface is sweet or fresh, but that
taken deeper is of a brackish taste, supposed from some minerals that environ
it.

On the south side of the lake stands a natural stove, which is called St.
German's Stove: but we had not curiosity enough to enter it, nor faith enough
to believe a ridiculous fable that is told concerning it, (though it is
reported a saint declared it for a truth) which I shall put down here, and
leave my reader to judge of it himself. St. German was advised to repair to
this stove, to cure him of a dangerous malady. When he came there he found the
soul of a very pious man that he knew, tormented with the heat of the place.
St. German, (as understanding the language of souls) asked him, how so good a
man as he was in his lifetime, came to be condemned to such a severe
punishment. The soul very civilly answered him, that it was for siding with
^^aurentius, who opposed Symmachus in the popedom; but he was convinced that
his prayers would fetch him out of that hot house. St. German prayed heartily,
you may be sure, and got the soul of the man out from thence; but where it went
after, no one could tell. But the place was called ever after, St. German's
Stove.

To the east of the bordering mountain is a place they call the Cave of Death;
for whatever thing of life ventures into the farther end, they say immediately
drops down dead; though a person that lived in a neighboring village ventured
in often for a reward. When he came out again, he was all of a sweat, and
hardly able to stand for five or six minutes. When he had recovered himself, he
took a dog out of a bag he had brought with him, and by the means of a wooden
instrument made for that purpose, thrust him in to the very end, and drew him
out dead to all appearance. When he had remained some time for us to view him,
he took him up by the forelegs, and threw him into the Lake Agnio, where he
recovered immediately, swam out, and ran away from us. Don Antonio told me it
was a hard matter to get a dog there; for as soon as ever they saw a stranger,
they would run away into the woods, and sneak home again when they were gone;
which was the reason the person that went in, always secures one for that
occasion.

A mile farther, we went to the court of Vulcan; a place unpleasant enough,
continually smoking, and such hot vapors arise from the pores of the earth,
that it almost overcame me. In some places water bubbles out of the cavities;
and if we threw a stone into it, it rebounded back as if you had struck it
against a pavement. But the place is reckoned to cure a great many distempers;
especially to make women pregnant, and to cure diseases of the head and eyes.
Donna Isabella was carried over it in a sedan; but I believe she did not want
it upon the score of barrenness, as you may understand in her story.

We spent six weeks in this not unpleasing entertainment, and Don Antonio being
pretty well satiated as well as myself, we went back again to Rome.

And now my melancholy gained such ground upon me, that it was not in the power
of dissimulation to hide it. Don Antonio and all the family expressed a great
deal of trouble for my sorrow; and I am well assured there was not any thing in
their power they would have refused, to have given me quiet: but the mind's
disease baffles the physician's art. At last a letter arrived from the friar,
which gave us no other account, but that he was safe returned to Genoa, and
intended to embark for Rome in a few days. This lame account quite disheartened
me, for now we had not the least hope, seeing we all agreed if he had succeeded
he would have been forward enough to have acquainted us with it. The knowledge
of this cast me quite down, and my body was forced to submit to the troubles of
my mind. A strong fever seized me, and brought me to the brink of the grave:
and though I wished for death, yet, like common friends, he fled from me in my
necessity.

Don Antonio and his lady seldom went from my bedside, and had I been a
brother to them they could not have regarded me more. But nature, in spite of
my misfortunes, prevailed, and I gathered strength even against my will. They
had informed me in my illness (by my importunity) of the friar's arrival, and
that he had not succeeded in his negotiation: but yet they had not told me all
the particulars. I desired the friar might be sent for, and conceal nothing
from me of what had passed. Accordingly he came, and gave me the following
relation:

Sir, said he, (in French,) as soon as I arrived at Sallee, I met with Hamet
the Irish renegado. He received me at first after a brutish manner, but when I
declared I came to pay him his demand for one of his slaves who made his
escape, he began to be less sour in his treatment. He said a great many
handsome things concerning Don Antonio; but when I began to mention you, he
fell into a violent rage, and vented bitter reproaches against you; saying, you
were a vile impostor, had basely deceived and robbed him doubly, of his
mistress and his money. I told him I came to ransom the lady, and pay for
whatever damages you had done. As for the lady, said he, she is food for the
fishes long ago; for rather than she would submit to me, she threw herself
overboard, (before we had gained the port, when I had taken her out of a Saick,
which one of my slaves had brought her in from Mammora) and, in spite of our
endeavors to the contrary, sunk for ever to the bottom. [And is she gone? said
I: O proof of virtuous love! happy had I been to have embraced the same fate!

The relation of this killing disaster took away my senses for some time; but
when I had recovered, he went on.]

I had some hope at first this was only a fiction of his own; but I found in
the town, that it was no secret, and every body declared that it was truth. A
Jew confirmed me in it, whom you had bought several things of for your voyage.
He told me that Hamet arrived without any woman with him, for he saw him land
in a very ill humor, and had complained of him for assisting you, to his
superior at Mequinez, and he received a sufficient check from him. I was too
well convinced of the truth, and therefore hastened my departure, and I am very
sorry I could not succeed; but that it was in fate, and I hope you will calmly
submit to the will of Heaven, who sends these afflictions for trials.

The good friar gave me a great many wholesome admonitions; but I was not in a
state much to observe them. I now began to be careless of the world, because
there was nothing in it (since the death of my dear wife) worthy my notice. I
had no thoughts of returning to England, though I had opportunities enough; but
took a resolution of going to some remote part of the world; imagining, the
farther I was from my native country, I should be the farther removed from my
anxiety. But alas! sorrow is too constant a companion, and there is no parting
with it, but by death.

I begged Don Antonio, if he heard of any ship bound for a long voyage, he
would acquaint me with it, which he promised me to do, (after finding
persuasion had no effect on me.) Two months passed away, and no news of a ship;
when I began to be very uneasy, and told Antonio, I would even make a voyage to
Genoa, where I could not well fail of a vessel. When he found nothing could
stay me, he asked me to what part of the world I would choose to go? I told him
I did not much care where. Why then, said he, if you please, my father and I
will sit you out a ship of what burden you think fit, either for war or
traffic. I thanked him, and told him I would have it for both, if he pleased,
and I would be their supercargo, if they thought fit to give me so great a
trust. In short, a ship of two hundred and fifty tons was bought of an English
merchant at Naples: a new flout vessel that mounted six and twenty brass guns,
and we manned her with a hundred hands, most English; who, understanding I
intended for the South Sea, were glad of the opportunity. Don Antonio took care
to provide every thing necessary for traffic: and I was made captain, and
supercargo. I told him I hoped I should in a few years bring him a good account
of his lading. He obligingly answered me, that he hoped I would come home
reconciled to myself, and he should think himself very happy. The worst of it
was, we had no commission, neither would I suffer Antonio to procure me one;
for we resolved, like Englishmen, to fight only with the enemies of our country.

I christened my ship the Isabella, out of respect to Antonio's lady, and
hoisted English colors on board. When the day came I was to go on board, there
were tears shed on both sides. I could not, without some regret, part with so
good a friend as Antonio had proved to me; and I am very well convinced that
they were as sincere in their sorrow.

We sat sail from Ostia, (where our ship lay ever since she came from Naples)
the second of March 1693, with intention to steer our nearest course for
America. Our ship proved an excellent sailer; and we made the Straits' mouth in
twelve days from our first departure. When I beheld the coast of Africa, it
brought fresh to my memory past transactions; and I longed for an opportunity
to be revenged on the Moors. The next day our men discovered two sail bearing
down the wind upon us. We thought ourselves too well provided to run away,
though we kept on our course; and perceiving but one of them that followed us,
I asked my men if they were willing to speak with that vessel, and they cried
one and all, they would with all their hearts. We prepared for an engagement
with all the expedition imaginable, for fear she might prove of Barbary. We
hoisted our English colors, and they did the same. When we found that, we lay
by, that we might be informed of the news in England. But as soon as ever they
came along side of us, they plucked down their English colors and hoisted
those of Morocco in their room; calling to us to surrender that instant or it
should be worse for us. We were a little surprised at first in being
disappointed; but, notwithstanding this, my men desired I would begin the
fight. We had not opened our po^ts yet, and I ordered my men not to do it till
I gave them the word. I sent a man to busy himself about the halliards of our
ancient, that the rover might imagine we were going to strike. We were well
provided with small arms, and all manner of warlike stores. I ordered every man
to their posts, and not to appear till they heard a whistle; upon which they
should open their ports, and fire both great guns and small arms. The rover
thought us long in striking our colors; he therefore called out to us again,
and told us if we did not strike that instant, they would pour a broadside
into us. Just upon that, I blew my whistle; my men obeyed my orders punctually,
they burst open our ports, thrust out their guns, and gave them a broadside,
with a discharge of their small arms. This put them in much confusion, as not
expecting any opposition; and I am certain we killed a great many of their men;
for, imagining we should be their prize without fighting, they had crowded upon
deck all their hands.

I had tacked about and given her another salute before they returned us the
favor. But they were not long backward, but poured in upon us very fast. My
men did their business very well, and the fight continued half an hour with the
utmost fury. I began to fancy we should have but dry meat, (as the sailors say)
and looking upon their quarter deck, I soon espied the renegado Hamet giving
directions. At the sight of him I was both surprised and pleased; but my soul
was filled with an unusual fury. We were so near, that I could hear every word
he said, though I could not understand him, because he spoke in the Moorish
tongue. As we were tacking about and charging again, I showed myself to him: I
told him he was the only man in the world that I hated; and that very day he
should be in my power, or death should put an end to both our lives. He seemed
surprised, but gave me a great deal of abusive language. I encouraged my men,
and desired them to fight bravely, telling them if we fell into their hands, we
should have no mercy. I had fired my piece at random before, that is, at the
first person I saw; but now I levelled all at Hamet, and he the same at me. At
last I had the good fortune to fetch him down. At this sight I could not
forbear giving a shout for joy, which so affected those that were near me and
understood the business, that they fought like so many furies; and after an
obstinate fight of two hours, they struck to us. We gave God thanks for our
victory; and I immediately went on board them, where we had made a terrible
slaughter, they having lost, by their own account, ninety-seven men.

I asked some of them, what ship that was which stood aloof from the
engagement; and they informed me it was a prize they had taken a few days
before, laden with wine and other commodities. I then thought of a stratagem to
get her into my power. I ordered our ship to strike her colors, and then we
hoisted those of the Moors, and took our* ship in ^ow. When the prize saw us in
that posture, she imagined the Moors had conquered, and made all the sail she
could to come up with us; so that we soon came near enough to send a longboat
armed on board her.

There were but twelve Moors on board, besides prisoners that were put under
hatches. When our men had taken care of them, I went to them, and ordered the
prisoners to be released, desiring the person that was the master to come upon
deck. The Moors had not taken any of the lading out of her. She was a sh^p of
ninety tons, bound for Liverpool, laden, as I said before, with port wines, and
several jars of oil. I told the master he was at liberty to pursue his voyage
when he thought fit. The poor man was some time before he could believe what I
said to be real: But when he was convinced, he returned me the thanks suitable
to the present I had made him. Yet he would make me a present of a couple of
hogsheads of wine, two jars of oil, and two of raisins; beside six of each to
the ship's crew.

I had lost seventeen of my men in the engagement, and eleven wounded; which I
supplied, by taking as many of the slaves they had on board of Hamet's ship,
all by their own choice; and the rest that did not care for so long a voyage, I
recommended to the master of the prize, who promised me to ^and them all in
England.

We pillaged the corsair, and found very good booty. We had out of her to the
value of two thousand pounds in goods* which I entered in the ship's books for
the use of the company. We did not know well how to dispose of her crew; and
though they deserved death, yet in cold blood I thought it was inhuman; and I
considered they had never injured me. So I released them by the consent of the
whole company, with this agreement, that they should make a present from me to
Mirza the eunuch of fifty pounds in their Moorish money, which he that had
command over the rest, swore by Mahomet to perform. When we had taken every
thing that was needful for our voyage out of her, we let her go, and pursued
our course.

We touched at the Canaries (or fortunate islands) to take in fresh water, and
turned the lading we had taken out of the corsair into money: and I shared it
among the sailors, reserving a fourth part for myself and owners, as I called
them. I gave the men, by lots, leave to go ashore, where they soon disposed of
their money for things they wanted; but the chief of their commerce was for
wine and brandy, knowing we had a long voyage to make.

We were obliged to leave the town sooner than we designed, by reason our pilot
had unfortunately killed a Portuguese, and the governor threatened to have our
ship stopped, if we did not surrender him up. I understood that the deceased
had been in the wrong, and therefore rather than run the hazard of loosing him,
we sat sail from thence the tenth of April. The castle fired several guns with
shot to stay us, but we did not regard it, but kept on our voyage.

We met with nothing worth our notice, till we made the island of St. Vincent*
one of the Cape Ve^ds, and came to an anchor in ten fathom water, in a fine
gravelly bottom.

These islands are the Hesperides of the ancients. The natives are blacks, a
poor miserable people. They brought us a few tortoise, which we exchanged any
trash for, and they were contented. The rivulet of fresh water would hardly
supply us, it being almost dried up; but we had wood enough. The whole island
is not above two leagues and a half in length, and half a one in breadth; very
barren of fruit, grass or roots, and even animals. I saw only a few wild asses,
and some goats, which were too nimble for us, or so far off that they were not
worth our wasting powder and shot.

The island of St. Anthony, about two leagues to the north, is a well inhabited
island, belonging to the crown of Portugal. We resolved to go and anchor there;
but the wind proving fair, we pursued our voyage, passed by the island de Fogo
in the night, and we could perceive the Volcano, burning like the flame of a
glass-house. Twenty days afterward, we passed the Equinoctial Line, with the
usual ceremony of ducking all those persons that had never been there before:
But I bought off the best part of the delinquents for an anchor of brandy.

The next day, we buried two of our men, who died of the wounds they had
received in the fight; but all the rest happily recovered. We gave them three
guns, and committed them to the waves.

In the latitude of twenty-two, we saw a great number of fowls, and therefore
judged we could not be many leagues from land, which we discovered soon after
to be the island of Ascension, about two leagues to the north; but we passed by
it, and in two days more, anchored in six fathom water at the island of St.
Catherine's, about half a mile from the main land of Brazil.

This island lies in twenty-seven degrees thirty minutes of south latitude. It
is almost a continual grove of trees, and but thinly inhabited by Portuguese,
and a few blacks. They are in want almost of all the necessaries of life,
besides provision, which is plentiful enough, such as it is. The inhabitants
are courteous enough, and would not take money for any thing we had of them,
but linen and woolen. And after I had got every thing that was necessary for
the ship, I sold them goods to the value of four hundred pounds, which I
received in pure gold. They never have peace with the Indians of the continent;
and being so very near, they have often formerly made inroads, and carried off
the inhabitants. But they have prevented such attempts for the future, by
^^^ilding several redoubts, where they keep constant guard.

They pay no other taxes but the church tithes, which they will he sure not to
lose; and for religion they had but one friar when I was there, and all his
business was, as I was informed, only to receive his tenths.

A Frenchman told me a pleasant story of one of the inhabitants, an industrious
fellow that had ten children; but notwithstanding his industry, found it a hard
matter to bring both ends together at the year's end: though the worst of his
grievances was the priest's tithes, and his money. He often endeavored to
persuade the father to forget him a year or two, but all to no purpose.

One day the father paid him a visit, in order to receive his dues. The poor
man told him ingenuously he had it not in his power to give it to him. But
still he insisted. At last he told him he had but one way to procure it, and
that he feared the church would not allow of. The friar told him him he was the
best judge of that, if he would tell him what it was. Why, said the man, a
person that lives on the continent has several fat pigs, of a very fine breed.
Now, said he, I could bring one over with me unperceived of any one, as I come
from my daily labor; and such a one (naming a neighbor) will give me a good
price for it. The friar paused some time* but at last gave him this answer. It
is certainly a sin to steal, but yet it is a greater sin to rob the church of
its due, and therefore I will absolve you. But bring the pig to me, for if it
is worth so much to your neighbor, it is worth as much to me. The man told him
he would be sure to bring it to him that night; and the friar said, if he was
not at home, he would leave word with his servant to take care of it. Now the
friar had no constant dwelling here; for they are sent from Lagoa, a town upon
the continent, about ten leagues to S. S. W. and their tithes were usualy sent
there in a small bark kept for that purpose. The priest took care to be out of
the way (that he might swear he knew nothing of the matter, if it was found
out) at the time when the man was to come with his pig; but gave his servant a
strict order, that whatever was brought should be immediately carried on board,
and taken a great deal of care of*

When the time came, the man was as good as his word, and brought to the
priest's house his promise in a ha^d-^^sket. The servant obeyed his master's
orders, and (...) to carry it on board; but before be could get to the harbor,
what he had in his basket began to cry our. The poor fellow was very much
frightened to find he had got a (...) in the basket; but fearing, by the charge
his master (...) of it, he was deeply concerned in the affair, made all the
haste he could on board: and the vessel setting sail that night, ^e went with
his charge (...) Lagoa, where he very secretly delivered it to the brotherhood.

The priest at St. Catharine's thought his man had robbed him, and made his
escape, seeing he was missing so long; for he had carried a great many other
things on board before the child. The imagination of this made the father very
uneasy; and the wind continuing fair, he embarked on board a vessel, and
arrived at Lagoa the day after his man. But what was his surprise, when he
found he had got a sucking child, instead of a sucking pig! He told the rest of
his brethren the affront that had been put upon him; and they resolved to send
the bantling back again: but either for want of due care, or through the
fatigue of the sea, the child died. When the friar came back to St.
Catharine's, he ran open-mouthed to the poor man, and swore he should be
excommunicated for playing such tricks with the church. The man told him he was
forward enough to have his tithes; so having ten children, and finding nine too
many to keep, he was resolved he should have his due, and have the tenth. And
farther added, if he offered to make any more stir about it, he would acquaint
every body with his encouraging him to steal from his neighbors.

The father finding the man had too much understanding to be priest-ridden,
thought it his best way to hold his tongue. But the secret was disclosed, and
the poor priest led a sad fort of life: for whenever he came for his tithes,
many would merrily ask him if he would have his tithe pig. In short, the friar
was shamed out of the island, and the fraternity were obliged to send another
man in his room, who very often hears the story of the child, though much
against his will.

We anchored first within a bow shot of the island of Parrots, in seven fathom
water* but we were informed the best place to water our ship, was two leagues
beyond the island of St. Catharine's. We had our present wants supplied from
the continent, though no enough to water the ship; so we resolved to steer for
the watering place in the bay of Arazatiba.

We steered between the island and the continent, and all the way on each side
we discovered a beautiful prospect of houses* environed with natural woods and
groves, which gave the eye a vast delight. When we approached the bay of
Arazatiba, we perceived a ship, with English colors, with her anchor a peak,
in order to discover who we were. I immediately hoisted English colors, but
prepared for an engagement, as imagining her to be French, (or some English
pirate;) for there was war between the two nations; but I found it was a
privateer commanded by Captain Dampier, who made me a visit, after having
hailed us. When he was on board, he used many persuasions to engage me to
consort with him, and follow the business of privateering; but I told him I had
other affairs to manage. After I had treated him handsomely with what the ship
afforded, he took his leave, and invited me to dine on board his vessel the
next day. I gave him my promise to wait on him, and I accordingly went, where I
was very handsomely treated; and there we agreed two days after to make an
entertainment jointly for the officers of both ships on shore; and the day
after that for the rest of the crews.

In order to this, I commanded a large tent to be pitched, capable of holding
fifty persons; and we strove who should send the most materials on shore for
our feast. We had the music of both vessels; but mine proving to be the best;
as being Italian, gave the most delight: not but they joined in consort, and
agreed very well.

After dinner, Captain Dampier told me, though he could not oblige me with
Italian music, yet he had an English eunuch that sang admirably; he added, he
could not answer for his judgment, but he was very well convinced he never
heard a finer voice in his life. The person was brought in; but my readers may
guess at my surprise, when, in the person of the singer, I discovered my
mistress's lawyer, whom my master and his friend had equipt for a fine singer*
I knew him as soon as ever I saw him, but I perceived by his behavior he had
no knowledge of me; neither was it very possible be could have known me;
because he had never seen me but once, and then he had too much concern to make
any observations; but the occasion had imprinted in my mind a lively idea of
him.

He sung admirably well, and with good judgment. I asked the captain how he
came to be an eunuch; he told me he could not inform me, neither could the ever
prevail upon him to let him know it. We were very merry for several hours; and
I may safely declare, that during that time I had buried my inward malady.

I told the singer, I believed I could let Captain Dampier into the secret of
his castration, if he would not be offended at it. He seemed very much
concerned, and blushed; but imagining I kn^w nothing of the matter, he gave me
his consent to say what I thought fit; yet with the utmost chagrin in his face,
as believing he was only to be the jest of the company.

But when I began to name my master, and entered into some part of the story, I
found him in the utmost confusion, insomuch that I pitied him, and told him I
would not proceed any farther without his consent. He told me in bad French,
(for he had observed that the captain and I sometimes talked to one another in
that language) that I was very welcome to tell his unfortunate story, but not
to so many auditors; for, added he, I perceive you know it very well. I gave
him my word only to tell the captain, for which he thanked me; but I told him
in return, that he must let me into the rest of the story; which he promised to
do. The captain and I, with my quondam lawyer, took an opportunity of leaving
the company, and walking a little way up the river side, where I informed him
that I came to the knowledge of his story, by the porter that dogged him, (for
I did not think it convenient to let him know that I was a person concerned)
and that seeing him go into the coach in Lombard Street, I remembered his face
again. He gave us his story in the following manner:

I was bred up to the law by my father, an attorney of Lincoln's Inn* who,
dying, left me a small estate, which I soon spent in none of the best of
company. I had no thoughts of business, till drove to it through the utmost
necessity. But finding want approaching, I began to open my eyes, I took
chambers in Clifford's Inn, and resolved to stick to business. I soon found
clients enough through the credit of my father; and understanding the rough as
well as* the smooth part of the law, I got money enough to supply even any
extravagance. I had ever been a great admirer of the female sex, and had the
good fortune, or rather the ill, to succeed in most of my amors.

The first time I ever saw the fatal cause of my misfortune, was at St.
Dunstan's church; (which, to my shame I must own, I too often frequented
without devotion.) Our eyes often told us the language of the heart. I got the
opportunity of sitting in the next pew to her, but had never once disclosed my
passion.

One Sunday, as the clerk had set the Psalm, she begged I would lend her my
book; saying, she had left hers at home. When she had done, she returned it to
me, and thanked me. I had resolved with myself to have waited on her out of the
church, but was prevented by the person that was afterward her husband. When I
came home, I pulled my prayer book out of my pocket, but perceived it would not
shut as usual, which put me on examining it. I found a note pinned to the last
leaf, which I had not observed before; the contents were to invite me to an
assignation that evening at six.

I was very punctual, and found her there before me. I begged her pardon for
making her wait, which she easily granted with a gentle reproach; and we soon
came to a right understanding; for that very night, before we parted, I had
what I wished; the sweet which was followed by* the worst of bitters.

She told me she had long had a passion for me: which, though she resisted all
she could, got the better of her modesty, and forced her to declare it. She
informed me too, that she was speedily to be married to the man that led her
out of the church, though it was much against her inclination: but she was
obliged to comply with her mother's commands.

We had many meetings: sometimes at my chambers, till I was taken too much
notice of by some of my neighbors: and when she was married we often met at
different places, and she as often made me handsome presents. -- [He then
related now he was discovered at my master's house by one of the apprentices,
(meaning me; but as he concealed his face by turning it to the window, he could
not remember him.) He also related all that I have declared in the former
sheets; and added, that when the operation was over, his mistress (as knowing
him of no farther use to her) left him without speaking a word.]

When I had recovered strength, said he, to write, I sent for some of my
intimate friends, and among the rest a surgeon. I told him my misfortune, and
was examined by him; but I was obliged to stay at the inn several days. At last
(though almost a miracle) I was perfectly cured, and returned to my business;
but my story getting air, I was made the scoff of every body that saw me; till
in short my life became a burden to me, and I took a resolution to go to some
part of the world, where no one should know me; and getting acquainted with
Captain Dampier, he favored me so far as to enter me steward. I had learnt to
sing when I was young; and my voice growing clear by my loss, is much improved.
I had kept my misfortune a secret to all the crew, if I had not received a
wound in my thigh, by an Indian arrow on the coast of Florida, a year ago; for
the surgeon coming to dress me, when the extreme anguish had taken away my
senses, perceived my condition, and disclosed it to the company: but I have the
good fortune not to be flouted at.

When the story was finished, we joined our company again, and ended the day in
mirth and jollity. The next day my crew went on shore to regale themselves; for
Captain Dampier and I had altered our resolution of sending both companies
together, for fear of quarrels and disorder. And his crew went on shore the
following day.

About noon, as I was reading in my cabin, I heard the report of several
pieces; upon which I ran out, and went myself to the topmast head where I
perceived my men, who were filling our casks (...) river of Parrots, surrounded
by a multitude of Indian^ (...) upon the instant, let slip our cables, and
having a strong sea-breeze, steered full into the river's mouth at all hazards,
ordering every man to his arms, and to load all our great guns with
musket-ball. By good fortune, the tide was almost at the highest, so that we
came on broadside the rivulet where our men were defending themselves. They
had made a rampart with the empty casks, and had kept off the Indians with
their pieces; but just as we came, they had spent all their ammunition, and had
resolved to submit to the Indians. But as soon as they perceived us, they took
to their heels and ran toward our ship, and the Indians after them; but we
soon stopped their career, by firing our double and round, which killed them
fifty* men, and put the rest to flight. We took our men on board, and intended
to fall out of the river, but found the tide turned; and before we could get
out, our ship ran aground, so that we were obliged to wait till the next tide.
I was very uneasy at this accident, and ordered my lieutenant to take the boat,
and acquaint Captain Dampier with it.

In the mean time, not to be idle, I armed twenty men, and ordered them to
guard the rest while they filled our casks; which was accordingly done, and
with the longboat brought on board. I would not let them be hoisted into the
ship, for fear of hurting her now she lay aground; though it proved to be a
clayey bottom.

An hour before night we perceived an Indian running very swiftly to us, who
called to us in Portuguese to fetch him on board. As soon as he was in the
ship, he told a man that understood Portuguese, that the Indians, to the number
of a thousand, designed in the middle of the night to attack our ship, and that
they would come down in canoes; for they very well knew we could not get out
till tide of flood.

This man, whom we took for an Indian, was a Portuguese the Indians had taken
prisoner a year before, and understanding their language, learnt their
resolution; and while they were calling their number together, he took his
opportunity to make his escape. I ordered him to be told he should be rewarded
for his intelligence. I immediately called all the officers together to consult
about the danger, and we agreed to send to Captain Dampier for help, who came
with fifty men well armed: and, by his advice, as soon as it was dark, we
landed six of our cannon, and raised a small battery without any noise or
bustle; these were pointed up the river slanting. Two of our guns were loaded
with double and round, in the stern of our ship. The rest of our men were
ordered in close coverts, on each side of the river, with directions to let the
Indian canoes pass them, and not to fire till they were gone by.

Every thing was concerted and settled, and every man ordered to his post, to
expect the charge; and we had contrived it so well, that none of our fires
could hurt one another.

About one o'clock in the morning we could hear their paddles in the water, and
soon after perceive them silently falling down the river, to the number of two
hundred canoes. We let them come within fifty yards of our ship before we
fired; but, when we began, we made such a terrible slaughter among them, that I
pitied them. We took one canoe with twelve Indians, and their Chief among them.
When the morning dawned, we were amazed to see what havoc death had made; the
very shores were stained with blood, and we had not lost one man of either of
our crews.

The Portuguese, who gave us notice, I rewarded with a hundred pounds, and two
new suits of clothes, both of linen and woollen; and we made use of him for our
interpreter. He told us we had one of their Caciques, among the prisoners, and
a man of great power among the Indians. I ordered him to ask him the reason of
his enmity to us, since we had never offended them. He told him that he took us
for Spaniards or Portuguese, nations they hated from the barbarous usage they
had met with from them: but he was sorry he had molefied us, seeing he was
convinced we were Englishmen, and enemies to the Spaniards as well as
themselves: But however, he would pay sufficiently for his ransom, if we would
spare his life; and accordingly we agreed for an hundred weight of gold dust,
and twenty in ingots, and he ordered one of his retinue to fetch it. In the
mean time, we took the advantage of the tide, and fell down to our old station.

The next day at noon, two canoes arrived, one with the gold, and several
persons of quality, that came to wait on their king; and the other (...) with
fruits and provisions, which I equally parted between both ships companies. I
took the ingots for sharers, and the dust was divided among us, according to
our allowance. Captain Dampier and his crew were mightily pleased with their
dividend, and once more pressed me to accompany them: But I gave them a flat
denial for the present, with this hope, that when I had visited several places
in the South Sea, I would return to (...) Salvador, and wait two months for
them there.

We put the Indians on shore, and the next day weighed anchor again, saluting
Captain Dampier with eleven guns, who returned us the like number, and we
steered our course with a fresh gale, for the streights of Magellan. I intended
to pass through those streights into the South Sea; for I was of opinion it
would shorten that voyage; and then my curiosity strengthened that opinion; but
I was advised by my lieutenant to venture up to Buenos Airs, a town belonging
to the Spaniards, where he assured me we might drive a good trade underhand
with the merchants. I communicated the matter to the whole company, who
unanimously agreed it was the best course we could steer. So we kept in with
the shore, and steered for the Rio de la Plata, or the River of Plate, which we
reached in twenty days without any accident. As we had was with France and
Spain, I had hoisted French colors, that we might have the liberty to trade
with more safety.

Buenos Airs is situated about fifty leagues up the River of Plate, which
above the town receives the name of Paraguay; and takes its rise many leagues
up the country; which a possessed by a numerous nation of Indians, who
sometimes trade with the Spaniards, but oftener murder them when they can meet
them conveniently; for the spirit of revenge is sucked in with their milk, and
handed down from father to son; so that they imagine it be a very meritorious
died to dispatch one of them; and they are generally rewarded by their Cacique
for it.

The town of Buenos Airs takes its name from the excellent temperature of the
climate, and its pleasant situation. They have commerce with the ships of
Europe not above once a year, which bring them the necessaries they want, and
in return ease them of their gold; that being a metal less esteemed than iron,
which proves more useful to them. When we were within two leagues of the port,
we came to an anchor in a little creek in eight fathom water, and a sandy
bottom. We did not care to go nearer the town, for fear the governor should
have taken it in his head to have hindered our going out again.

Though we were not in sight of it, yet we had canoes on board of us in an hour
after our anchoring; and some of note came incognito, to be informed of what we
dealt in. One of them told me, he believed it would be no difficult thing to
dispose of my cargo, if I thought fit to make the governor a small present.
Accordingly I took his advice, and sent my steward in my name, with a piece of
holland, and half a dozen pieces of Italian silks; which he received as a very
valuable present, and sent me word he would not in the least molest me,
provided I did not deal too barefaced. I understood him, and therefore was very
cautious, selling but to one at a time, nor would I suffer another to enter my
ship till the former was dispatched.

In two days I got rid of all the cargo that I intended to part with, to a very
great advantage; and then I allowed my men liberty to do what they thought fit
with what they had, which gave them a general satisfaction.

The next day I invited the governor on board, with some of the principal
merchants, and entertained them in my cabin; and in return, I was to dine on
shore at the castle. But I left a strict order with my lieutenant how to behave
himself if I should be stopped; for I knew the Spaniards to be a very
unfaithful people.

When we landed, I observed the town made but a mean appearance, consisting
only of two streets, built in the form of a cross, and surrounded with a mud
wall. The castle itself made but an indifferent figure: but however, I was
elegantly entertained. The governor seemed to have less of the formality of the
Spaniard than ever I met with in any of them. When I took my leave of him, he
made me a present of two Indian slaves and a bar of gold that weighed three
pounds two ounces. When I came on board, I called a council, to know what
course we should steer next, for as to traffic, I had no pretense to go to the
South Sea, seeing all my cargo was already disposed of. We debated for some
time, and at last we all agreed to go to the South Sea, upon the score of
privateering. We communicated our intentions to the company, and they all
seemed very much rejoiced at the resolution I had taken.

Now I began to repent I had not joined with Captain Dampier, for I wanted men
for my notable exploit; but I did not despair of meeting with him in the South
Sea. We weighed anchor, and steered for the streights of Magellan, with a fair
wind. One morning my servant waked me, and told me that a sail bore down upon
us, and the lieutenant desired to know how to behave himself. I rose upon the
instant, and, by the help of my perspective, saw it was a vessel with English
colors; but I imagined they were put up only for a show. I caused French
colors to be hoisted. Which was soon answered by the same in the ship that
pursued us. I ordered every thing to be prepared for an engagement, without any
hurry, commanded my men not to appear upon deck, and kept on my course with
crowded sail, that our pursuers might imagine I was willing to get from them;
yet I ordered it so by false steering, that they gained upon us. About three in
the afternoon, they were within half a league of us, firing every quarter of an
hour a gun to leeward, to let us know we were to take them for friends.

I ordered our men to tack about, to hoist up English colors, and bear upon
them. We soon perceived we had much surprised them; but notwithstanding, they
kept up their French colors, and seemed to prepare for the engagement, though
they were much inferior to us. When we came along side, I hailed them, and
(after their owning they were French) commanded them to surrender; but was
answered with a broadside, which we returned so fast, that they soon struck,
and called for quarter. I ordered the captain to come on board, who informed me
that his vessel was called the Felicity, belonging to Monsieur de Gennes, and
had been separated from the fleet three days before. I used the captain very
handsomely, for the sake of Monsieur St. Olon, the French ambassador. I gave
him a latter and a small present for that gentleman, and dismissed him without
taking any thing from them. I found this action did not please some of my men;
and not caring to have them uneasy, I summoned them upon the deck, and told
them the obligations I had to the French ambassador; acquainting them, as it
was a ship of war, there was not much to be expected from them, therefore I
told them I would share five hundred pounds among them to make them amends for
their disappointment. But not one of them would accept a penny; and in return,
I told them I did not intend to make any more such compliments to the French,
if ever they came into my power again. They were very well pleased at my
declaration, and some of them praised my generosity; for though most sailors
are rough and blunt in speech, yet they can in their way admire a generous
action as well as other men.

Our officers were under some apprehensions of meeting with the squadron of
Monsieur de Gennes, which, being a fleet of five sail, would certainly be too
hard for us; and we were informed by the captain of the Felicity that they were
sailed for the streights of Magellan. I found their fears very reasonable, and
it would be a foolhardy action to encounter a force so much superior; for
though life was burdensome enough to me, yet humanity obliged me not to hazard
the lives of so many men that were not out of love with this world. So I
resolved to wave my curiosity, and make for Le Maire's streights; which in five
days time we discovered, known to sailors by three rocks, called the Three
Brothers, from their likeness to one another.

We found a strong current setting northward, and an unusual tossing of the
ship; but we got through the streights in two days with safety, and made for
the South Sea.

The next day, we discovered the Magellan clouds so well known to sailors,
which convinced us that we were over against those streights that run into the
South Sea. These clouds are always seen in the same degree, and the same
orbicular form. We kept our course, not intending to come within sight of the
continent for fear of a discovery; and the weather favored us, it continuing
very hazy.

About an hour within night we heard the sound of a trumpet, which we
conjectured must be on board of some vessel, because we were well assured we
were not near enough to the land; upon which I immediately gave orders to put
our all our lights, and steer our course that way we heard the sound; which,
founding often, gave us true notice of their course; and in half an hour,
though pretty dark, we gained sight of them: but their mirth was soon changed
when we got up with them, thrust out our guns and hailed them. We understood
they were Spanish, and I ordered them to be told, if they did not upon the
instant ly by, and send their commander on board, I would immediately fire upon
them. They very readily complied with my orders, hoisted out their boat, and
the captain came on board me, whose name was Don Juan Villegro, and his ship
the Wildfire: he was employed by the viceroy of Peru to carry condemned
persons to Baldivia, which is the residence of most of the rogues of America.
But we were also informed they had the Real Situado on board, which is a sum of
money so called, that is sent from the vicoroy of Peru to pay and clothe the
garrison, as well as to repair the fortifications of Baldivia. This sum usually
amounted to four hundred thousand crowns, but we could find no more than two
hundred and fifty thousand: but then, to make amends for the deficiency, we met
with a great many valuable East India goods, brought from thence by their
Manilla ship; for the merchants always put their supply to Baldivia in the ship
that carries the money to pay the garrison, that being the only time to dispose
of their goods.

This prize made my men mad with joy, and I feared it would make them think
they should have enough, and consequently desire to return home. But I soon
found it had the contrary effect, and they all expected, from this earnest of
good fortune, riches enough in the voyage we proposed, to make them for ever
happy.

I treated the prisoners handsomely, which were forty-six, including sixteen
felons, who were well pleased to have changed their masters; expecting better
usage from us than from the Spaniards of Baldivia, where they were designed.
There was one Roberts, an Englishman, among them, who, I have been informed,
has been executed since for piracy: I entered him, two Frenchmen, four
Spaniards, and the trumpeter, in my books to reinforce my crew; understanding
their crime was only suspicion of piracy, therefore I was convinced they were
good sailors. But I did not know how to dispose of the ship and the rest of the
crew. If I should give them their liberty, they would of course alarm the
country; and if I kept them with me, provisions would fall short; for they were
victualled but for a month's voyage.

The Spanish captain being informed of my fears, told me, by an interpreter,
that he had received such handsome usage from me, that he would upon his honor
steer to what port I thought fit, and report, if I pleased, that I was sailed
back again for the North Sea. I told him, though I could rely upon his honor,
he could not answer for all the rest. At last I thought of a stratagem to
deceive the Spanish captain, as well as the other prisoners, as follows: In the
first watch of the night (the prisoners being all under hatches,) I came to our
sailors upon deck, and told them the ill consequence of keeping or letting go
the prisoners; and therefore concerted with them that they should pretend a
mutiny the next day, and all declare for going back through the streights into
the North Sea. When the first watch was relieved, I acquainted the other moiety
of the company, and then retired to rest. But my slumbers were broken with
visions of my dear Miss Villars: I dreamt I saw her in the arms of the renegado
Hamet, struggling and calling out on me for help, but before I could come to
her assistance, death had freed her from the barbarous wretch. This dream had
brought to my mind all my afflictions, and I cannot tell how long I should have
continued feeding upon my sighs, if I had not been alarmed with shouts and
noises upon deck. I ran out to see what was the matter, and found my men, as
was designed, in their feigned mutiny. I had forgot at first, and was much
alarmed; but recollecting, I carried on the cheat. And grief had so seated
herself on my countenance, with the thoughts of my dream, that out of my
quarter masters told me afterward, my looks were enough to deceive all the
world.

The Spaniards had leave to be upon deck all the day, and care was taken to let
them into the secret. At dinner I told the Spanish captain (for he and the
merchants always eat with me) that I thought his speeches yesterday were
prophetic, for I was compelled to comply with my obstinate crew, and sail for
the North Sea again. He replied, he wished me happy wherever I went: and to
carry on the deceit, we steered our course back again.

In the afternoon Roberts came to me, and told me that one of the Spaniards,
who was willing to stay with us, would undertake to bring me ten thousand
pieces of eight in ten days, if I would let him have the prize. Upon what
Roberts said, I sent for the man, and had him examined by Roberts, who
understood Spanish very well; the Spaniard told me, he would not have me
enquire into the secret till it was done; and for the better security; I might
send who I thought fit with him, provided he had one of his companions that was
to help in the design. Accordingly, I ordered twenty hands, and to obey the
Spaniard in this expedition, as if he was their captain.

We agreed to wait for them the limited time, in the same degree we parted from
them. I informed the Spanish captain, by an interpreter, that his countryman
was gone upon some secret expedition, and as soon as he returned we would
pursue our course. He answered, whatever he had undertaken, he was of the
opinion he would succeed in it, for he had certainly as much cunning as any
person in the world; he had been condemned to Baldivia once before, and made
his escape from thence; and he did not doubt but he would get from them again,
if he had been carried there the second time; and farther gave me some (...)
that he might deceive me in this undertaking.

I began to be in some fear of having a knavish trick played me, and would have
recalled the vessel if it had not been too late; but hoping for the best, I
resolved to cruize till the time appointed was expired.

I had clothed my two Indians, that were presented me by the governor of
Buenos Airs, in European habits very handsome; and instructed them in the
English tongue: they very readily learnt; and I gave them all the tender usage
imaginable, which they were obligingly sensible of; and I believe they would
have sacrificed their lives to have served me. I found them very handy, and
docible, and very goodnatured; which convinces me if mild methods were used
with them, they might very easily be brought to be friends to the Europeans;
especially the English. And I think it is a great pity, such a vast body of
people should be ignorant of the Divine Being that formed the universe. Though
the Spaniards, it is true, send missionaries among them to inculcate
Christianity, yet they generally neglect their holy functions, and strive all
they can to enrich themselves, by laying exorbitant taxes upon the poor
Indians: and I have been informed, that in some parts of America, all the
wealth they get is delivered to the mission, reserving to themselves only what
is needful, and that but from day to day, I had my two Indians made Christians;
one by the name of Robert, and the other Joseph; being mine and my father's
names. And I hope, in the sight of God, lay-baptism will suffice; especially
when we had not the happiness of the other form. And it is not impossible, if
they lead good lives, they may find the road to heaven as well as if they had
been christened in a church by an orthodox clergyman.

Three days before the time I expected my Spaniard back, we discovered two sail
making up to us, which us prepare for an engagement; but we soon perceived it
was our prize with another vessel. The Spaniard came on board, and informed me
that he had been something better than his word, for he believed that in money
and in goods, he had brought to the value of 80,000 dollars. He gave us the
following account, by Roberts:

Last time I (...) prisoner in Baldivia, I was compelled to work for one Don
Sancho Ramirez, a sordid, covetous, jealous, malicious wretch, one that used to
deal in merchandise. It was his usual method to wait at a country house near
the sea, for the arrival of the Real Situado ship, (which was the same I had
taken) and then go privately on board to deal with the merchants. The knowledge
of this made me undertake this expedition, as well as to get money, as to be
revenged on the old villain, for the stripes he has often given me without any
provocation. When we arrived within half a league of the place, we perceived a
bark riding at anchor. I began to demur, as fearing we might be discovered; but
at last resolved to proceed, let what would happen. The bark weighed and made
toward us, which occasioned another surprise; but my fears were soon over,
when I perceived Don Sancho upon deck. He hailed us, and desired we would
slacken sail, that he might come on board. Accordingly we ran into a small
creek, and came to an anchor. I did not appear at first, but let the other
Spaniard that went with us personate the captain, and instructed him
accordingly. As soon as he came on board, he enquired for Don Juan Villegro,
(for that gentleman used to command the Real Situado) and was answered, that he
was very ill, and could not sail this voyage. Then he enquired for the
merchants, telling him, that the governor had discovered his usual practice of
dealing first with them; therefore he had contrived to meet us in one of his
own vessels, that was ready laden for Buenos Airs, and only staid for our
arrival to set sail. I was glad to hear of that, because I intended to make a
prize of it. The Spaniard invited him into the cabin, while I went on board his
bark with ten men armed, and secured it, there being but five men and a boy in
it. The rest of the crew were on shore.

I cut her cable, and our own, and made out to sea again. When we were under
sail, I came on board, and showed myself to the old Don, and in a few words
made him understand his condition. I thought at first we should have been
obliged to have buried him, for he looked a great while like one that was dead.
But I recovered him a little, by showing him the box that contained his heart
and soul, (I mean his money.) He did his endeavor to fly at me to be revenged
on me, but he was held; but to give him a little more comfort, I read over to
him his bill of lading, and told him plainly, I would not deal with him if his
goods did not answer his bill. When he found he could do no good by passion, he
told me he would give me half his money, if I would restore him ship and cargo.
I was very well as I was, I told him: and since I got it all in my possession,
I would have no more dealings with him, only the odd ten pieces of eight more
for his ransom. He was so thunderstruck at this, that he did not so much as
offer to open his mouth to speak; but kept so long silent, that I (fancying he
would never speak again) took him upon deck that he might behold the lovely
prospect of the water; for by this time we were out of sight of land. His heart
then began to melt, and he fell down upon his knees, and begged he might have
his liberty, notwithstanding we had robbed him. I was in a very great passion,
and ordered him to mollify the word, and call it overreaching; which with much
chastisements he did. But I told him he was obliged to make you honor one
visit, and accordingly I have brought him to wait on you.

I must confess, I could not help admiring the Spaniard's ingenuity, and yet I
did not greatly relish the action; for though it was a lawful prize to us, yet
I thought it was downright robbery in him. However, I gave him the thanks our
interest required; and farther told him, by Roberts our interpreter, that he
should be very well rewarded for his undertaking.

The old Spaniard was brought on board of us, more dead than alive; and
understanding we were English, he spoke to me in that language, and begged he
might be set at liberty. I told him he need not apprehend any thing, for he
should have his liberty and civil usage. He thanked me as well as his grief
would give him leave, and I invited him to dine with me, which he did
accordingly the same day.

I ordered the cargo out of the bark, which was very considerable, and most of
the provision, because I feared it would be what we should want. The other
vessel, as belonging to the king of Spain, and one who could pretty well bear
that loss, I intended to keep for ourselves. The bark I restored to Don
Ramirez, with several bales of goods that would prove of small use to us,
though of value to him; nay, I would very willingly have given him all his
goods and money too, if it had not been for wronging my crew, for, as I said, I
looked upon it as gained by fraud. However I ventured to give him back twenty
thousand ryals, which did not amount to mine and my owner's share. He returned
me his acknowledgments, by giving me a very handsome ring that they had taken
from him, and told me, he ever thought the English generous enemies.

I caused all the prisoners to be put on board the bark, and took my leave of
them. They returned me abundance of thanks for my kind usage: and vowed if ever
fortune should send any of our countrymen among them, they should fare the
better for my sake. I must own I was not displeased with their acknowledgments.
A man feels a secret pleasure within himself when he has done a humane action;
when on the contrary, if a person has been guilty of baseness, horror and
remorse gnaws his conscience.

The day after I had parted with the prisoners, I summoned all my men upon
deck, and told them what the Spaniard had done for them, and advised with them
what recompense I should make him. We soon agreed he should have five thousand
pieces of eight, his companion five hundred, and the rest of them entered to a
share of the booty we had before taken. Accordingly I sent for them, and told
them what I intended. The Spaniard returned me suitable thanks in French; for
he had been informed I understood that language. I found in his discourse, a
ready turn of wit and humor, and of a person that had read mankind. He did not
seem to be above thirty years of age, of a free and open nature, having nothing
of the stiff formality of the Spaniard, though born a Seville in Old Spain. I
told him I expected a short account of his life; he readily answered, he should
be proud to comply with my desires, but he begged I would defer it for some
time, till he might be a little more used to my conversation; for, said he,
smiling, mine has been a very merry and odd sort of a life, and therefore, till
I have more freedom, I shall desist, because I shall lose the spirit in telling
it.

We steered our course toward Panama, depending that our prisoners would
spread the report of our going back again for the North Sea. In thirty-six
degrees, and forty-five minutes, we discovered a vessel steering the same
course: I ordered the prize to chase her, and before night she took her. It was
a bark laden with tallow and hides, bound for La Conception. I repented the
taking of her, for we soon found she was but a heavy sailor, and therefore
could not keep company with us, and it was not proper for us to let them depart.

Don Pedro Aquillio, which was the name of our intelligent Spaniard, told me,
he would undertake to dispose of the cargo and bark to a good advantage, if I
could tell how to dispose of the men, which were but four, that is, three
Indians and a Spaniard. The Indians were very well pleased to be received as
servants on board; yet we allowed then half a share in our future purchases.
The Spaniard (...) intended to detain, on board till we had made our cruising,
voyage, and then release him. So depending on Don Pedro's ingenuity. I let him
go off with the bark, with three Spaniards to assist him, having his promise to
return the next day. We were then within five league of La Conception, and
therefore resolved to remain in that station till his arrival. keeping Mamelles
de Biobio, or the dugs of Biobio (two rocks so called) in view.

The next day we perceived him coming with a pirogue, (a small Spanish boat
with one sail). He brought me a handsome present of fruit; and enough besides
for the whole crew. Well, said he, I have made but an indifferent bargain; I
have brought you but twenty thousand pieces of eight; the old rogue of a
governor would not give any more. He told me that the governor of La Conception
engrossed all the tallow and hides, and forced the retailers to give him his
own price; so he went boldly to him, and sold him bark and cargo.

Don Pedro advised us to cruise for the Manilla ship, which was daily expected.
His advice was approved of on all hands: therefore, orders were given to wood
and water the ships for the voyage; and accordingly we made for Juan Fernando,
and arrived there the fifth of September 1695. It being a remarkable day with
me, it lives in my memory; for the loss of my journal by an odd accident,
hinders me keeping a regular account. We spent two days in wooding and
watering, and killing goats, which are there in great plenty.

There are three islands that bear the name of Juan Fernando, the first
discoverer, though there are no other inhabitants on them than goats. There Is a
noble bay on the north side of the island capable of containing five hundred
sail, where you anchor at sixteen fathom water, a sandy bottom. We left it with
a favorable wind for our design, and made farther up the coast, January the
first; and was feared we had missed our booty, for the Manilla ship generally
arrives at, Acapulco about Christmas; however, we resolved to coast about for
twenty days longer, and if we sailed of her, to return into the North Sea, with
a design to cruise down the coast.

We kept out of sight of land, for fear of being discovered.

On the sixth we perceived two sail, and accordingly gave them chance. Don
Pedro assured me it was the Manilla ship, and a guard ship along with her. We
called a council immediately; where it was resolved the bark should attack the
Manilla ship, while ours was to engage the man of war; and this was the reason
Don Pedro gave for it; that the Manilla ship was so very unwieldy, the bark
could play round her, and being so small, she was out of the reach of their
cannon, for they could make no use but of those upon their upper deck, The man
of war seeing we gave them chase, slackened her sail to stay for us, imagining
we should both attack him, but he found himself mistaken. Our pink passed him
without firing a gun; but as soon as ever we came along side, we gave him a
broadside, with a loud huzza. He soon returned it, but we plied him so close,
that he began to make off; but we followed him close at the heels, and coming
under his starboard quarter, gave him another broadside, which brought his
mainmast by the board; upon which he immediately struck.

The sea being very smooth, though a handsome breeze of wind, we manned our
longboat, and I went on board with forty hands, well armed. When I came upon
deck, I ordered the Spaniards to be taken on board, and secured under hatches;
but I was much surprised to find but sixteen men in the ship, besides eight
that were killed, and not one that appeared like an officer among them. But we
were soon informed that the captain had ordered one hundred and fifty of his
men on board the Manilla ship, as soon as they had discovered us in the
morning, because her crew were most of them sickly.

We imagined our small vessel must have warm work of it, being not above
thirty-five hands in all. So we resolved immediately to cut off the rudder of
the man of war, and leave her; for having lost her mainmast, she could not
follow us to do us any damage; and six of her men were taken on board us, who
finding we were English, seemed very willing to serve us; and I promised them
their share in the booty, if we succeeded. These six men were old Christians,
as they called themselves, and they value themselves very much upon it,
despising the Creolians.

We made all the sail we could after the Manilla ship, and soon overtook her;
for our small vessel had kept her very well in play, though she had warm work
of it, and her rigging was very much shattered, though they had not lost a
single man, but she was obliged to fall astern to mend her tackle. I ordered
them to send me twenty men on board, which I was obliged to lie by for. I had
brought all my guns to bear on one side, and did not fire one till I came under
her stern; and then I poured them into her, and tacked about to charge again. I
observed a boat busy about her stern, but could not imagine what they were
doing: However, I resolved they that were in it should find it a difficult
matter to go on board again; but I was much surprised to find it my own boat
with Don Pedro in it, who had taken the occasion in the smoke of our first
broadside to nail up the rudder, so that the ship could not tack about. He made
what haste be, could on board the bark, which had now mended all her ri^ging,
and got under the stern; and as fast as the Manil^a ship sent men to clear her
rudder, he prevented them with his small shot. In the mean time, we ventured to
come along side of her, notwithstanding her monstrous bulk, and gave her such
entertainment that she called out at last for quarter, and struck their
colors. I ordered all the officers to come on board, which they did. I
received them all very civilly, and immediately after went on board the prize.
I was amazed at her vast bulk. She had seven decks, and built so strong, that
not one of our shot had gone through; yet they had above sixty men killed,
through their ports, and other vacancies; and what was very surprising, we had
not one, and but two wounded.

They had above an hundred men sick on board them, so that the ship looked like
an hospital. It was very richly laden, and valued at 1,800,000 dollars, and
upwards. We ^ound but little money on board, besides the plate belonging to the
governor of Luconia, (one of the Philippine islands) who was coming home to his
own country, being a native of Mexico.

Though this was the richest prize that ever was taken, yet we did not know
well what to do with it. It would be an impossibility to work into the North
Sea, or back again to the East Indies, without farther help; for we had more
prisoners by two to one, than we had sailors on board, so we once more advised
with Don Pedro, who counseled us to send to Acapulco, and have the ship and
men ransomed. We all thought it would be both difficult and dangerous. Don
Pedro told us it should be neither, and he would undertake to do it. But
however, as it was a thing of very great consequence, we desired he would tell
us in what manner it should be done. Why as thus, said he, I Will take the bark,
with the captain of the Spanish man of war, the quondam governor, and one or
two more of the best quality, who shall make the case known to the city of
Acapulco, and no other way but by letter; for I will suffer but one of them to
go on shore, and I Will take care to order it well enough to give you notice, if
they should send any force against us, though there is no danger if they
should. For, added he, they have so man of war within two hundred leagues of
them, that which is taken being all they had to guard their coast. We were well
satisfied with his reasons, and gave him leave to proceed as he thought fit;
and accordingly the next day he ^at fail, with those persons mentioned along
with him; and, by the advice of all, we followed him, being very well con^^ced
by the Spaniards themselves, there was nothing of force to be apprehended. I
had fitted up the Spanish man of war again, and resolved to keep her, and
dispose of the bark. Therefore, as soon as we came within sight of land, I
ordered every thing to be taken out of her, and put on board the Spaniard,
which we sound was a very good sailor.

The day following, Don Pedro came on board, with several merchants and persons
of quality to treat about the ransom of the prize; and we agreed for 1,^00,000
dollars, after we had taken several bales of rich goods out of her. The money
was to be paid in six days, and we were to stay where we ^ode; for I did not
much care to trust them too far.

Is the mean time, we sent all their sick and wounded an (...). The bark was
disposed of for provision, and other necessities, and we took the opportunity
in waiting for the money, to water our ships. At the time appointed, the mon^^
came, and we surrendered the ship to the Spaniards.

Now we agreed, by joint consent, to go home, for we were all rich enough, and
every one of the crew thought so; yet we resolved to touch at St. Salvador on
the coast of Brazil, (and make our way through the Magellan straight) as well
to take in some refreshment, as to dispose of the rest of our goods, and careen
our vessels.

Accordingly we put our design in execution, and made the best of our way for
the streights of Magellan, and discovered those noted clouds, (which are a sure
guide to sailors) the third of May. We found the weather extremely cold, and
the mountains covered with snow; but we were well provided with good liquors,
and all convenient clothing. We anchored in Port Famine; formerly called
Knight's Bay, by the Dutch in a voyage 1568, with a fleet of five fail; where,
meeting with many troubles, and to eternize the memory of the voyage, (it being
the first the Dutch made to these streights)* the admiral knighted six of the
officers, by the (...) of Knights of the Furious Lion. The oaths they received
at the ceremony, were, Never to do, or consent to do anything against their
honors or to prejudice their present voyage; To expose their lives to the
service of the commonwealth; and, To do their utmost in driving the Spaniards
from their golden world. They were installed on shore, with a seagreen garter,
and a table built with their names engraved on it.

We saw several of the inhabitants, who were easily prevailed upon to come on
board us. But I could find no^^ing extraordinary in their height, as is
fabulously repo^^^. The tallest I could see among them did not exceed six feet.
They are certainly a poor miserable people, but very harmless; and I am apt to
believe all former stories of their monstrous height and cruelty, to be fables.

We got through the streights once more into the North Sea, and by degrees came
into a warmer climate. But a terrible storm overtook us, just as we were in
sight of Pepy's Island, much drove us within sight of Port Desire, upon the
continent* and therefore we thought it the safest way to (...) into the bay,
which accordingly we did, came to as anchor in seventeen fathom water.

At the south side of the port lies Penguin Island, so called from a
multiplicity of those birds resorting there. Our men went on shore, and in
three hours time brought on board five hundred of the fowls, and several
thousands of their eggs, which proved delicious food. They are called Penguin,
not from their fatness, as some others affirm, but from their whiteness mixed
with black. They are about the bigness of a goose, weighing from nine to
fourteen pounds: and though their chief diet is fish, yet they have no fishy
taste. Their skin is very thick, their bill is like that of a raven, though not
altogether so crooked; their neck is short and thick, and the rest of their
body resembles a goose, excepting the wings, which are only two stumps covered
with feathers, which they make use of in swimming. Their feet are black, like
those of a swan. They breed in holes of the rocks, which are so numerous, there
is no walking hardly for fear of falling into them. When they walk on shore
it is upright with their wings hanging, so that they appear in that posture like
small pigmies. We staid but two days here, and then steered our course for Rio
Janeiro, or the River of January, intending to touch at St. Sebastian's first,
and if we did not succeed there, to sail to St. Salvador. When we arrived
there, the Portuguese would not admit us to enter the bay, but fired several
guns from the forts laden with shot, to deter us from anchoring: we could not
imagine the meaning of it, but however we left them in that humor, and steered
for St. Salvador, and in one and twenty days we discovered Praya de Zumba, a
place very easily known from a number of white spots, which appear like linen
hung out to whiten or dry.

We passed Fort St. Anthony, and saluted it with eleven guns, which returned us
an equal number, without the charge of shot, and came to an anchor within half
a league of the city; which we also saluted with eleven guns, and received but
seven in return.

By advice of the officers, we shared among the sailors a thousand pieces of
eight a man, which pleased them exceedingly. The next day I went to wait on the
governor, who received me very civilly, and desired I would dine with him. We
were very magnificently served, and a band of Italian music played all the
while. After dinner I made my presents, which he accepted of very kindly, but
when I came to treat about our commerce, he flatly denied me, telling me it was
against the King of Portugal's express orders to suffer any trading with
foreigners. I begged his pardon if it was not to be complied with. He would
have returned my present, but I pressed him to accept it in so obliging a
manner that he did; and told me in French, that since he saw my generosity he
would comply with me. He immediately sent for several merchants, and took them
into his closet, where they stayed some time. When they came out again, the
governor told me those gentlemen would go on board, and view our commodities,
and if we could agree, he would be answerable for the money. One of the persons
seemed to be of a more free and open disposition than the Portuguese generally
are; (though most of the inhabitants of St. Salvador affect the manners of the
French.) We soon made an end of our bargain, and my merry merchant would oblige
me to go ashore and sup with him that night. He pressed me so heartily, that I
could not refuse him; and accordingly I went with only my two Indian servants,
who began to be understood in English.

When we arrived at the merchant's house, I was surprised to find it so
magnificent. He led us into a handsome summer house in the garden, where he
told me we were to sup; and, said he, to convince you that you are welcome,
I Will bring my wife and daughter to keep us company, which is reckoned as a
thing extraordinary among us. But, added he, I have been in England and France,
and I find the women are not the less honest, for having their liberty. I told
him I thought constraint did but when their inventions to gain their desires.
Said he, I am of your mind, therefore give them all the liberty they desire,
and I cannot find I have had any reason to repent it.

In a little time he ushered in the two ladies, his wife and daughter, both
very beautiful, and notwithstanding the heat of the climate, very fair. The
wife seemed about five and thirty, the daughter about sixteen, and they both
spoke very good French. Our conversation was kept up with all the spirit I was
capable of: I soon discovered a great deal of wit in them both, and made them
my compliment, in finding ladies so extraordinary in so remote a part of the
world.

When we had supped, the merchant (whose name was Don Jaques) told me it was
his custom to provide beds for his guests, as well as supper: and, after we had
walked a turn or two round the garden, we all retired to our several apartments.

The next morning we drank chocolate together, and I invited Don Jaques, with
his wife and daughter, to dine with me on board the next day, which he
consented to. I now begged leave to be gone; but it being very hot, he had
provided me with a silk Palanquin: which is a thing like a hammock, with a
canopy over it, carried by two blacks, with each a rest to hang it on while
they take breath. This is all the vehicle in use at St. Salvador, by reason of
the unevenness and steepness of the situation.

I prepared for them with all the magnificence I could the next day. And when
they saw the variety of dishes, dressed after the English manner, they were
mightily pleased; and to add to their satisfaction, the music I had on board
played several elegant pieces, accompanied with the trumpet I had got from on
board the Spanish prize, for notwithstanding his being trumpeter to the
garrison of Baldivia, yet he was better pleased to be where he was. We drank
the King of England's, and the King of Portugal's health several times, with
the discharge of our cannon: and when the time for their going on shore came, I
fastened a small present of several sorts of silk upon the wife and daughter.
Don Jaques perceived what I was about, and merrily said, That is not fair; we
did not pay you for your company yesterday, and yet I believe it was as
valuable as that you received today, at least in my opinion; I shall not answer
for the ladies, said he, they are both capable of speaking for themselves. I
received many compliments on all hands: but not dealing much in them, I am very
willing to forget them.

In a day or two after, Don Jaques came on board, and told me the money for the
goods was ready, but I should not have it, unless I came myself to receive it.
I accordingly went with him, and he made me continue there all night, where we
had the conversation of the ladies as before.

When I was going away the next day, he told me he should soon find if any
thing else but money had the power to bring me to see him. After dinner I
expressed a desire of seeing the most remarkable places in the city, which he
complied with, and ordered two Palanquins to carry us.

The city of St. Salvador, the capital of Brazil, is situated in the bay of All
Saints, in 12 degrees 45 minutes southern latitude. It is divided into two
towns, upper and lower. The streets are straight, and pretty broad, but most of
them very steep; and all the goods are hoisted in and out of the vessels by
machines for that purpose. It was formerly under the dominion of the Spaniards,
but taken from them by the Dutch in 1624, and pretty well fortified by them;
yet notwithstanding that, the Spaniards retook it the next year. I could not
learn how long the Portuguese have possessed it, but they all agreed upwards of
fifty years. They have made it a regular fortified place, and very strong,
having five forts besides the castle, and stored with cannon, and other
ammunition, and small arms for ten thousand men. This is the usual seat of the
viceroy of Brazil; but when I was there, it was without one, though he was
expected every day.

The cathedral is a magnificent pile of building, finely adorned, and painted
after the modern manner. The jesuits' church is a noble structure, all of
European marble, with a fine organ, the pipes gilt. There are many more fine
churches, twenty in all, besides several convents and monasteries.

This place is also the residence of a bishop, who has a handsome palace; and
for the reverend clergy, I never saw such a number for the bigness of the
place, any where, as, Benedictines, Franciscans, Carmelites, Augustines,
Capuchines, Dominicans, and Barefooted Friars; (though I think most of the
people I saw there wore no stockings.) There are three nunneries, well stored
with nuns, but not to be seen; nor hardly any women in the town, but common
whores or black slaves; for the Portuguese look up their wives and daughters as
carefully as they do their money, and would have none look upon them but
themselves: except my friend Don Jaques, which is something the more
extraordinary.

It is a place of great trade to Guinea, and other parts, and is accounted one
of the richest cities in the King of Portugal's dominions. By moderate account,
there may be about 20,000 whites, or I should say, Portuguese; (for they are
none of the whitest) and about treble that number of slaves.

Don Jaques would make me take up five days in viewing the several parts of the
city, and obliged me to be at his house without going on board during that
time. Some part of the day we played at ombre, a game mightily in vogue among
the Spaniards and Portuguese and a very entertaining game for three, invented
by the jealous Spaniards for that number, to prevent any clandestine doings
between two. But alas! I believe there are more opportunities gained than lost
by it.

We had provided every thing we wanted now, and began to prepare for our
departure.

Don Jaques was very sorry to lose me, he told me; and indeed it was with some
regret I left him; for his civility had drawn from me a friendship insensibly.
I went to take leave of the governor, who made me a present of American
sweetmeats, and begged I would dine with him, which I could not in good
manners deny. When dinner was over, Don Jaques was so obligingly pressing for
me to sup with him the last time, that I could not refuse; but I begged he
would excuse my staying all right, and he gave me his word he would not press
me. I sent one of my Indians to order the boat to fetch me as ten that evening.

When the time of my stay was expired, I took my leave of Don Jaques and the
family, after having forced him to accept of a gold watch, and the ladies a
present each of a diamond ring, that I received from the governor of Lu^onia,
for my civility in returning him his plate and jewels, when we took the
Acapulco ship in the South Sea.

Well, said Don Jaques, I see you will pay for vour boat! in spite of my teeth.
I had taken leave of the wife and daughter before, who had left us in tears. I
must own I thought myself very much obliged for their tenderness; and it drew
such a deep melancholy upon my face, with thoughts of my dear wife, that Don
Jaques imagined it was grief for parting with him and his family. I did not
take any pains to undeceive him. Well, said he, I see a friendship may be
contracted in a few days, as well as love, especially where there is a harmony
of souls.

We had agreed to correspond together, and I had undertaken to send him some
European goods, if it pleased God to guard me safe to Europe. I had continued
longer with Don Jaques than I had intended to do, therefore whatever violence I
did myself, I took my leave. Don Jaques tenderly embraced me, and was so much
overwhelmed with grief, that I could not forbear sympathizing with him; but I
ordered his servants (whom I had liberally rewarded for the trouble I gave) to
shut the door, to prevent their master's going any farther.

I walked toward the port very melancholy, though with some precipitation; but
was roused out of it by one of my Indians crying, Master take a care, take a
care! I turned about, and saw four Portuguese pursuing us. I made a stand, and
drew my sword, took my cloak from my Indian, and put it across my arm to defend
myself the better. They all four attacked me at once; but my Indians, whom I
had ordered to wear swords on shore, fell upon them furiously, and dispatched
two of them immediately; and I had made a shift to drop a third, though not
without receiving several wounds. The fourth ran for it; but my Indians being
as nimble-footed as does, soon overtook him, and dragged him down the hill by
the hair of his head; while he cried out all the while, Misericordia!
Misericordia! The noise we made had brought up my boat's crew, who were all
armed with pistols and cutlasses: and the guard coming in the mean time, and
seeing my Indians dragging the fugitive, fell upon us; but my crew and Indians
charged them so furiously, that they soon put them to slight, though treble our
number; though this availed us but little, for the whole garrison was coming
down upon us. I then ordered my crew to resist no more, but submit to them: for
as we were innocent, I did not much fear to come off clear.

The bustle had roused Don Jaques, and his servants, who were soon informed of
the condition I was in, and he came in good time to interpose his authority;
for the Portuguese began to be outrageous. But the governor had sent a
gentleman to bring us before him: and accordingly I went accompanied by Don
Jaques. But the wounds I received bled so much, that they were obliged to carry
me to Don Jaques's, and send for a surgeon. My hurts were not dangerous, but I
was very faint with loss of blood.

Don Jaques waited on the governor, and informed him of the condition I was in;
but the governor not understanding who was the aggressor, ordered a guard of
soldiers at the door of the house, where I was. My boat's crew soon got on
board, and alarmed both the ships, who immediately weighed and came close to
shore, where they had prepared to fire upon the town, if I was not released
instantly. I understanding the matter, sent one to inform them, that the guard
was set upon me to secure me from the insults of the Portuguese, till the truth
of the matter was discovered. This would not serve their turn, but a hundred of
them, with the officers of Don Pedro, landed all well armed and vowed to wait
the event on shore. The governor did me the honor of a visit, and enquired
into the cause, and I informed him, as well as my weakness would permit me.
When they had examined the dead Portuguese, they found one of them was nephew
to the deceased viceroy. Upon the discovery of which, the Portuguese began to
be very much exasperated, and were hardly restrained (...) rushing into the
house, and tearing me to pieces: for (...) they did not regard the nephew, yet
they had a gre^^^ ^^^ration for his deceased uncle, who behaved himself with
(...) great deal of candor in his post, and the inhabitants mightily regretted
his loss. The governor appeased their fury* by telling them I should have no
favor shown me if I was guilty, let the consequence be what it would. And
immediately a court was summoned to try me, though it was midnight, and I was
carried there in a Palanquin, weak as I was. But I was obliged to send for my
lieutenant, and tell him there was no danger; and also ordered him to send the
crew on board again. When we came to the place of justice, the governor ordered
me a seat; but the business was soon ended; for the Portuguese we had secured,
owned that his master had designed to murder me, because he was informed I was
his rival in the beautiful Donna Blanca, (which was the daughter of Don
Jaques.) I was very much surprised (as well as Don Jaques) at this report, and
we both declared it was only a jealous suggestion of the gentleman; which every
one came into; and the ground he had for it, was my often frequenting Don
Jaques's house, upon the score of friendship only, and lodging there.

The governor handsomely dismissed me, and told me he was very sorry I had been
detained from my affairs. I returned, that I was as sorry to be the cause of so
unhappy an accident, in a country where I had received so much civility.

Don Jaques begged I would go back to his house, and stay till my wounds were
well; but the governor took us aside, and said to us in French, I know, Don
Jaques, it is your friendship for the captain that makes you desire his company;
but if I might advise you, I would have him go on board upon the instant; for
though he is very innocent as to the matter, yet I doubt some of the deceased's
friends or relations, which are numerous, not having regard to justice, will
contrive some method to dispatch him out of the way; for most of the Portuguese
are jealous, malicious, and revengeful, and very seldom look into the merits of
a cause.

I thanked the governor for his kind caution; and Don Jaques, notwithstanding
his friendship, could not but come into what he said. I therefore ordered
myself to be carried on board that moment. It being broad day, the governor and
his guard would accompany me to the waterside, but Don Jaques would go on
board with me. In the boat he told me he had some thoughts of coming to reside
in England, for, said he, I have enough, and therefore I will, in two or three
years more, leave off traffic and live quiet in the world. But he begged I
would write to him as soon as I arrived in Europe, and let him know the place I
had chose to live in; for, added he, let it be where it will, if it is ever in
my fortune to arrive safe in Europe, I Will make another voyage only for the
hopes of seeing you. I returned him the acknowledgment due to so much
friendship, and we parted with tears on both sides.

As soon as I had got on hoard, the wind being fair, we weighed and stood out
of the bay. When we were out at sea, a letter was brought me written in French,
the translation of which is as follows:

SIR,
I was resolved to make trial of you before I suffered my heart to choose you
for a friend; and I am so well convinced of the sincerity of your soul, that I
will confide in you a secret dear to my repose. I had an amor with a beautiful
lady before I was married, that produced the bearer of this letter. I have kept
him concealed from my family hitherto but the person I trusted with his
education and this secret, being dead, I feared I should find some difficulty
to conceal him any longer here: therefore, depending upon your good nature and
friendship* I have ventured to send him to you, with sufficient to bear his
expenses in his education, which I would have suitable to the estate I have in
my power to give him. I shall ever earn this obligation, and always think it my
greatest happiness to subscribe myself

Your sincere friend and serv^^^ JAQUES DE RAMIREZ.


I must own I was very much surprised at this epistle, and could not imagine
his reasons for concealing it from me. I ordered the person that brought the
letter to be conducted in, and immediately entered my cabin one of the
beautifullest boys I had ever sat my eyes on. He seemed about fifteen, his hair
fair and long, curling down his shoulders; in short, every feature so exact and
uniform, and so innocent withal, that I was amazed. At last I took him by the
hand and embraced him, and told him for his father's sake, he should be as dear
to me as my own son. But finding he did not answer me, for I spoke to him in
English, I repeated the same in French: he returned me thanks, and said he did
not doubt but he should find it so.

After some time, he delivered me a casket, in which were jewels to the value
of five thousand pistoles, and a little box which contained a thousand
moidores. I told him I would take as much care of them as if they were my own.

These, Sir, said the youth, are designed to bear my charges. Then ordering
another box in, had it opened, and told me what it contained was a present from
his father to me. When I examined it, I found six silver dishes, and three
dozen of plates of the same metal; a dozen of knives, forks, and spoons in
gold, and half a dozen of gold sweet-meat plates. In a large box was a variety
of all manner of conserves, and cordials; and I was informed he had made small
presents to every officer in the ship, and to the common sailors a week's fresh
provision, with liquor in proportion. I was amazed at his bounty, for his
present to me was what a prince might have received. I thought it was my duty
to show all the kindness I was capable of to the son of so generous a father;
therefore I ordered him a field-bed in my cabin; and his behavior was so
engaging, that I felt as much tenderness for him as if he had been my own
child; and having skill in surgery, I trusted him with the management of my
wounds; though I had a very good ship-surgeon, who supplied him with what he
wanted. My hurts, which were not dangerous, soon healed, and I recovered my
strength again I could not prevail upon young Don Ferdinand (Don Jaque^'s son)
to go often upon deck. He said he would rather choose to stay in the cabin,
where he had French Books of his own, and some of mine to entertain him; for I
had taken an opportunity to procure several at St. Salvador, and among the
rest, a French and English Grammar and Dictionary, which mightily pleased Don
Ferdinand for he had a great desire to learn English: I gave him all the help I
could; and he, in return, instructed me in the Portuguese language: so that in
a short time we could discourse in either.

We had resolved to steer our course for the island of Tercera, the capital of
Azores; and after fifty days sail, we discovered the peak of one of the islands
of Azores, which is called Pico, from the mountain. It is in the resemblance of
a pyramid, and may be discovered as many leagues off as the peak of Teneriff;
for we were then by observations thirty leagues off from it, and yet could see
it distinctly.

In two days more we discovered the island of St. Michael. We were all pleased
that we had entered that part of the world we call Europe, the birth place of
most of us; and what pleased us more, was, that we had fortunes.

August the 19th, 1696, we anchored in the bay of Angra, the capital of the
Axores, in the island of Ter^era. I cannot give any great commendation of the
port, for I think it a very indifferent one. We did not design to stay long,
only to get some water, and some fresh provisions; for we were informed there
was no riding out a st^^^ there. We got in what we wanted with all the
expedition we could, while the weather was favorable.

The city is seated at the bottom of the bay, under the brow of a hill called
Monto de Brazil, or the Brazil mountain; but for what reason so called I could
not be informed. It is very well fortified, having two strong castles, and
eight batteries besides, with guns of thirty pounds shot: But it is very
indifferently garrisoned, having no more than two hundred men in pay, and most
wretchedly supplied, having no clothing for three years.

The town is very agreeable, having a stream of water running quite through it,
which drives several mills for the use of the public; and almost in every
quarter are public fountains of excellent tasted water. From this place are
brought the finest Canary birds; though less than those of the Canaries, yet
they exceed them far in the excellency of their pipes.

Money is very scarce here, and consequently every thing cheap. I bought two
months biscuit for the ships much cheaper than in any port of Europe. Corn is
their chief commodity, which they send to Portugal; but for any other trade, I
believe the King of Portugal gets but little advantage.

I was grown such a proficient in the Portuguese tongue, that I could make a
shift to be understood; and by understanding that language, soon sound a gate
to the Spanish tongue, by the help of Don Pedro, who had learned to speak
English very fluently. We got acquainted with one of the fathers of the
Cordeliers, who showed us the churches, and other things of note in the city.
The cathedral is a very handsome building, and well painted, which goes by the
name of St. Salvador; and there is no danger of missing that title, and St.
Anthony, every where among the Portuguese. There Is no less them twenty, besides
the cathedral; with four monasteries, and four convents, that have each their
chapel beautifully adorned.

When we had got what refreshments were wanting, we sat sail for the Streights,
intending to touch no where, before we were got into the Mediterranean; and
because we met with nothing extraordinary in our voyage to Gibraltar, I will,
to divert the reader, give him (instead of bearings of coasts changes of wind,
and unexpected storms) the life of my companion, Don Pedro Aquillio, which he
related to us during the voyage, in the following manner.

THE LIFE OF DON PEDRO AQUILLIO.
MY father residing at France, when the commotions were engendering between the
king and the parliament, was made fast to the interest of Cardinal de Retz, by
marrying one of his nieces, of a very great fortune: he had a hand in most of
the secret transactions of those times; and wading too deep in those seas of
trouble, was obliged to retire to his native country. He, foreseeing what would
happen, took care of his affairs accordingly, sold his estate in France, and
sent my mother to Seville, the place of his birth, whither he soon followed.
The King of Spain having a very great regard for him gave him several offices
of honor and profit; and when I was born, I was son to the first man in the
city. My father, by living so long in France, had contracted the manners of the
French; and the formality of the Spaniard's seemed as strange to him as if he
had been born in another climate. He had several children, though none survived
but myself. When I had years enough over my head to fear the prejudice of
education, he took a resolution of sending me to the college of the four
nations in Paris, to complete my studies. And the first thing I learnt, was to
shake off all the customs of Spain, which was soon done; for they had taken but
small impression in my mind, because I found my father was averse to them. I
contracted a friendship with several young French noblemen of my own age: for
parity of years is the first step to friendship.

When I had reached my fifteenth year, I began to think of a mistress to
complete my studies. And, as I found it was a method among my companions to
supplant each other in their females without any animosity, I set myself so
willingly about it, that out of a dozen Madonas, I made myself master of six of
them. This occasioned many plots and contrivances to regain the flying fair
ones: though I perceived most money laid out in presents had a prevailing force
with them. We had our allowance paid quarterly, and getting all my companions
into gaming, I had the good fortune to strip them all. They seemed to be a
little uneasy, in losing their mistresses and money too; and my telling them,
as I had got the females, I should have most occasion for money, signified
nothing, but they all begged it as a great favor, that I would lend them one
half what I had won, to be repaid the next quarter; which, to oblige them, I
complied with, and to play we fell again; but fortune changed her amiable looks
from me, and I soon lost all I had won, with my own share too. The fickle dame
favored one of the company who would not lend any of us a penny. This
chagrined the rest very much. But to prevent any more importunity, he went away
into his own chamber, leaving room in all our pockets for the devil to dance a
saraband, for we had not one cross to keep him out; and what was our greatest
mortification, the holidays were approaching, that used to give us the
opportunity of rambling into the country. The person that won our money
happened to be the last that was added to our society; and though he had not
been long among us, we began to be tired of him, as much from his odd humors,
as his effeminacy. I at last thought of a project to be revenged on him, and it
was very much approved by the rest of my companions. The holidays being come,
we designed for our country rendezvous; but he that bore the purse, would not
go with us, without we could produce every (...) so much money. This put us to
our shifts again: But my man, who was an arch wag, begged I would accept of
what he had; for I had been so lucky as to have paid him his wages before my
loss. I accepted of his offer, and took from him ten Louis d'Ors. We contrived
it so well that they were shown to old Sir Snip from every person of our
society. Well, said he, sixty Louis d'Ors will do our business; but who should
be the purse-hearer was what he cavilled at; and not caring to trust any of us,
(and we resolved not to trust him) he pitched upon my man to be cash-keeper for
us all. And accordingly he put down in his pocketbook, so much money in bank,
received of such and such persons, when in reality, he had but twenty Louis
d'Ors.

When we had contrived every thing, we took horse, and rode six leagues that
evening, to the place where we designed to put in execution our project. We had
agreed every right to pay the expenses of the day, and have it set down in my
man's book. But when he was called for, (as we had concerted) no man was to be
found. There was strange enquiry made to no purpose; and we all agreed he had
taken the opportunity to rob us, and run away with out money. All that we had
to do was to beg of Snip to discharge the house. But he declared he had not
half a pistole in his pocket, which we knew very well, for he had sewed all the
rest into his waistcoat. Since it falls out so unluckily, said I, don't let us
make known our wants to the house, but go to rest and consult tomorrow. I lay
with Snip, for fear he should take it in his head to sneak off. In the night,
when I found that he was fast asleep, I bundled up all his clothes, and threw
them out of the window to my man that waited for them.

When morning came, I desired him to rise, that we might get all together to
consult; but no clothes were to be found. He began to storm and swear, but all
to no purpose; for not one of his oaths would bring back a rag of his clothes.
He told us in his ravings, that he had lost so much money, sewed up in his
waistcoat. We upbraided him for his covetousness, in not letting us share with
him; but it did not signify any thing. He threatened to go to the provost, and
have the landlord secured; and would have done it, if he had not been naked.

After raving to no purpose, he was obliged to go to bed to avoid catching
cold. He asked us what he should do in his condition, but all the advice we
gave him brought him no consolation.

He was very tall, and large made, and we used to call him in ridicule the
infant. He proposed to sell his horse to clothe him, but being so much out of
size there was not any thing to be had ready made that would fit him: This was
still worse and worse; and though the horse was sold for fifty pistoles, we
contrived it so that my landlord seized the money for his reckoning. This put
him almost beside himself, and he was ready to expire with vexation.

I pretended to be much concerned at this usage, while the rest of the company
laughed at his misfortune. I seemed to be very angry with them; and told them I
would do my endeavor to remedy every thing. I made them acquainted, that I had
just called to mind a person, a friend of mine, that lived in the town, much of
the infant's size, and I would go to borrow a suit of clothes for him. He
seemed very much rejoiced at this; for he resolved, as soon as ever her was
dressed, to take up the landlord, and swear the robbery against him.

I went, as he supposed, about his clothes; and after staying some time below,
I went up with a bundle, and seemed very much concerned that I could not
succeed. I told the infant that the gentleman was gone to Lions about business
of concern, and had carried all his clothes with him. But I had brought him a
masquerade habit that he had left behind him.

He expressed some satisfaction at the sight of it, that he ^ould not be
confined to lie in bed. But, ^id he, if it were not only for the name of
clothes, a man might as well go naked, for there is no stirring abroad in this
dress.

It was the habit of a satyr, that we had made on purpose for the occasion
before we left Paris. When we had equipt him, it was as much as I could do to
keep my countenance at the figure he made; and he seemed very much dissatisfied
with it, but however, he wore it for the convenience of not lying in bed.

When we were at dinner, we had many contrivances to get away, but none
feasible.

I told them at last, I had thought of a design that would certainly do our
business, and make up our losses, if the infant would consent to it. He readily
replied, he would stick at nothing to do that. Why then, said I, if you will
suffer yourself to be shown in that habit, as a monster nearly arrived, I Will
answer for the success of it.

After much talk, he agreed to do it, on this proviso, that his face should be
disguised. I told him I would step to my friend's house, for the mask that was
made to the habit. I returned and gave it to him, and he was soon satisfied
with the project.

Notwithstanding the bustle we made, none of the house (but the landlord) knew
any thing of the matter, and the next day it was given out about the town, that
a monster was to be shown in the afternoon. We had procured a chain, and other
materials to carry on the joke; and when the time came to show away, we had
such a concourse of people to see our monster (it being in the holidays) that
our profit gave us much satisfaction. For when the time of showing was over,
our money amounted to three and twenty pistoles; and the monster behaved
himself so well with our instructions, that he gave a general content.

We had taken care he should appear so fierce, that none should approach near
enough to discover the deceit. We had a great deal of diversion at the ignorant
people's suggestions. One country fellow asked how old he was. I told him four
years, three months, and five days. Lord bless me, (he cried out) why, by that
time he comes to be twenty, no house will be able to hold him.

In fine, we showed him so long that our money amounted to upwards of one
hundred pounds, which pleased our infant so well, that he desired to continue a
monster all the time of the holidays. But we resolved to carry the joke no
farther, though we did not tell him so.

We left the infant chained to the post of the window as usual, went down to my
landlord, and gave him instructions how to behave himself. We took care to
satisfy him well for the trouble he had been at.

We all rid away to the next village, and putting up our horses, returned on
foot, one by one, back again to the inn; and stole up stairs unperceived by any
one but the landlord. The infant, finding we staid longer than ordinary, began
to make a great noise; which my landlord hearing, he sent up one of his
servants, that knew nothing of the secret: when the infant saw him come in, he
made several signs to him; but as the fellow knew nothing of the jest, he did
not much like the action of the infant, but ran down to his master, frighted
out of his wits.

We had made peep-holes in the next room, where we could perceive every action
of the infant's; but he was so very much enraged, that he sat down biting his
nails for vexation; for he began to perceive the trick we had put upon him.
After fitting melancholy some time, he rose up and endeavored to undo the
chains; but as they were tied close behind, and made fast to a staple in the
wall, all his efforts were vain. All our care was to contain from laughing,
which was a very hard task. When he found he could not free himself, rage
entirely possessed him; and the noise he made with stamping, and rattling his
chains, brought up several of the servants armed, who opened the door
cautiously; but notwithstanding their valor, ran away as soon as they
perceived his menacing action; and turnbling over one another, took the
shortest way down stairs.

When we thought he had mortification enough, we sent my landlord into him with
a good horse-whip, and a letter in his hand. As soon as he had got within the
door, he spoke after this manner, in a landlord like tone. I was pretty well
assured at the beginning, that thou were a rank cheat; but now I am convinced
of it, I will chastise thee first, and reason with thee afterward, like other
criminal judges, punish first, and enquire into the demerits of the cause
afterward, that justice may not wait for any body.

These words were followed with some smart strokes, and the dialogue soon began
to be in much confusion; for between the roaring of the infant, the bawling of
my landlord, and the smacking of the whip, it was a continual jargon of noise;
and we were obliged all of us to own, that our host executed his commission to
a hair.

When he had a little recovered himself, he began to reason with his patient,
who, that he might the better hear him, laid himself down on his pallet to
condole his afflicted body. But their questions being very long, and the
answers but short, consisting of two monosyllable, Ay, or No, I will not
trouble you with the relation.

After their dialogue was over, he gave him the letter, which discovered our
design upon him. He was thunderstruck at our combination; and uttered such
imprecation of revenge, that my landlord was obliged to answer him with his
whip, which soon reduced him to reason.

We began to be tired with our infant, and so put an end to our diversion, and
his torture, by sending him clothes; though some in our company, would have had
him gone to Paris in that trim.

In a few days after the frolic was over, he commenced a suit of law against
us all, for a robbery; but the judges finding it only a trick of mirth, fined
every one of the defendants six livres a piece, and every one to pay his own
costs. This enraged the infant the more, and he began to meditate a more
pemicious revenge; for now he appeared the ridicule of the whole city, and he
could never stir without a train of boys at his heels.

The first instance of it was as follows: My servant having some intrigue on
his hands, had made bold with my clothes to carry it on: and coming home pretty
late, was shot through the back with a pistol-ball, just as he was entering the
college gates. Though it was well meant, the poor fellow escaped with life, yet
he lay dangerously ill for several days. He could give no account of the affair
at all, not having seen the person that wounded him. But the accident made me
very uneasy, for I was convinced the favor was meant to me. This made me
cautious how I ventured out of the college; for it was easy to imagine it was a
proof of the infant's resentment, who had left the college upon the loss of his
trial.

I now began to repent our confederacy against him, and wrote him a note to
assure him of my contrition, with my share of the money we had taken from him.
He received the cash, and sent me word he heartily forgave me. Imagining him
sincere, I ventured into the city, and soon frequented my old rendezvous; but I
had so much regard to myself as to get to college betimes.

One night as I was going home, four men in vizar masks rushed out from behind
a wall of a house that was building; they all fired upon me, and ran away as
soon as they had discharged their pi^o^s. I must confess, at first, fear made
me imagine myself no man of this world, but by degrees getting over my
apprehension, I found I had not get any hurt. This accident to me seemed
prodigious; for they were all four so near me, that several grains of powder
struck in my face. But I was brought out of my labyrinth of thought, when I
received the following letter the next morning.

SIR
I MUST own myself one of those unfortunate men, that, for want of better
employment, receive money as the price of blood. Though this I can say with a
clear conscience, I never have yet put my trade in practice. Yesterday morning
I was sent for to the house of Monsieur Gomberville, commonly called the
infant, who employed me to take away your life; and that he would be sure of
the execution, made one of the four that fired upon you last night; but as I
had the ordering of our arms, I took care nothing should be put in them that
was huriful. The acquaintance I had with your noble father, mode me the more
cautious concerning his son. I beg, in justice to me, you would keep your
chamber, and cause it to be reported you are dangerously wounded. I need not
caution you to be careful of yourself, for the infant's malice seems to me
implacable. We never have any words made of these things, because we know how
to revenge ourselves; therefore let no one else know the contents of this, and
be thankful for your life from

JAQUES MARRIOT


When I had rend the letter, I ordered my servant to bring the bearer before
me; where I soon found, by his manner of talking, that a little money would be
very acceptable to the sender; and therefore I sent him ten pistoles, with my
humble service, giving him to know that I would exactly comply with the
contents.

I began now seriously to think on the danger I had inconsiderately drawn upon
myself, for an innocent frolic; and that it would be but ill trusting to the
infant's resentment. I gave out that I was dangerously wounded; and the better
to carry it on, I got a surgeon (a friend of mine) to visit me frequently.

When I had kept my chamber long enough for the time of my cure, I ventured
abroad, but never without four or five of my friends for a guard, and came home
in very good time.

During my confinement, I received letters of condolement from several of my
mistresses, and when they heard of my recovery, as many of reproach for not
coming to visit them as usual. One in particular, and my favorite fair, was
very pressing for a meeting; and her chief reason was to pay her with my
presence for the affronts she had sustained from the infant upon my account. I
sent her word I would not fail waiting on her the Sunday following after dusk.
Accordingly, when the time came, I stole out without any of the college marks
on, and arrived safe at my Madona's.

After supper, and two or three bottles of hermitage, we went to bed: and when
we had made ourselves as merry as we could in the dark, I addressed myself to
sleep. But notwithstanding my willingness to receive the gentle god, he still
flew from me, and several hours passed without closing my eyes.

About midnight I thought I heard whispers in the next room, which very much
alarmed me; but my fears were trebly increased, when, looking through a chink
of the door, I discovered the infant, and four other fellows with masks in
their hands spreading saw-dust on the floor, and on the table lay several sacks.

I soon imagined what their preparations meant, therefore consulted my safety,
as well as I could, in the confusion of my thoughts.

I went always well armed since the last rencounter, having two brace of
pistols in my pockets, a good cutting sword, and a stilletto. But I was
confounded when searching for my clothes where I had laid them, none could be
found. I now began to think of death seriously, and beg pardon sincerely of God
for all my sins; for I knew it would be madness to think of escaping naked as I
was, without any thing for my defense. In the chaos of my thoughts, I
remembered a closet which had a window that looked into the Seine; and though
it was three stories from the river, yet as I could swim, I thought it better
to trust to providence, by leaping into the water, than to those cutthroats. I
stole softly to the window, but to my great consternation, found it too fast
for me to open; and by good fortune, in groping about, I found my clothes. I
put them on with a great deal of precipitation, and having prepared my arms
resolved not to die alone.

I waited some time before the chamber door opened. When it was opened, I could
perceive them coming in with masks on, and the foremost with a dark lanthorn. I
did not think fit to wait till they should discover I was not in the bed, but
rushed on the first, and shot him dead on the spot; and in two seconds of a
minute, dispatched two more, one with my sword, and the other with one of my
pistols; and had made as quick work with the other two, but they fell upon
their knees, and begged for mercy, which I granted on condition that one should
tie the other, which was readily complied with; when that was done, I bound the
other myself, and coming to secure my false mistress, found her expiring in the
bed. She had breath enough left to tell me, she had been caught in her own
trap; for designing to poison me in the wine I drank, the servant had mistaken
the bottle, and given it to her.

I asked her the reason of her hatred to me, being, as I remembered, guilty of
no fault. She told me, the infant had informed her that I was false to her,
which converted her love to the most implacable hatred. I must own this woman
was mistress of my heart, and I had several proofs of her sincerity; but she
was of a temper composed of fire and fury. She further told me, that I had
raised her rage to that height, that she was resolved to put an end to my life
herself, not caring to trust her revenge to any hands but her own.

She begged I would forgive her, and immediately expired. I examined my two
intended murderers, and found they were servants to the infant, and compelled
to what they did; therefore I resolved to pardon them.

I thought once of going to the provost, and giving him a particular account of
the action; but one of the fellows informed me, he was a near relation of the
infant's and had a very great love for him, which made me apprehend his passion
would overcome his justice. Therefore I resolved the the next morning to set
out for Spain, which I put in practice before day, and gave my man orders to
follow me.

I left Paris with this reflection, that from the meanest trifling accident,
often dreadful effects followed; and a woman once provoked was the most
dangerous enemy a man could have.

I met with nothing extraordinary in my voyage to Calais; but when I arrived at
Seville, I was informed my father (who was governor of that city) was at his
country house about six leagues off.

Though I was very much fatigued with my journey, I resolved to wait on him
that night. I hired a mule (for I had my servant's clothes on) and sat out. But
my beast being none of the best, tired with me about a league before I came to
the villa where my father resided.

I left him in the adjacent village, and pursued my journey on foot. As I was
willing to get to my father's house, I made all the speed I could. And though
it was very dark, I knew the way perfectly.

I overtook two men in a narrow lane, that called to me, asking why I had
stayed so long, and where was Don Lewis.

I fancied there was something of villainy going forward by the name of Don
Lewis, seeing he was an inveterate enemy of my father's. I did not answer them
immediately, which brought them upon me: they soon found their mistake, and
(...) me where I was going at that time of night; I told them I was going to
Saragoza, to my friends, for I had served a gentleman in Cadiz, that discharged
me for getting his maid with child; and was obliged to walk all night, seeing I
had not any money to pay for a lodging. I answered a great many other
questions, with the same truth and simplicity. And after talking some time, two
more came up to us, and asked the others who they had got with them. They went
all together, and, after a little talk, one that seemed to be the superior,
came up to me, and told me if I would make one of their enterprise that night,
he would not only reward me well, but take me into his service; but if I
refused after he had disclosed it to me, they would murder me immediately.

I told them, I would stick at nothing to get bread. Why then, said Sir
Gravity, my name is Don Lewis: I have a mental hatred to Ferdinand Aquillio,
governor of Serville. I have waited many years for my revenge, but never could
get an opportunity to execute it till now. He has received one of my servants
into his house as a domestic, who this night will open the door to us, where I
shall quench my hatred of him with his blood; and further, to dispatch all fear
of resistance, I can assure you there are but two more servants in the house,
whom the fellow has made drunk, which shall be ordered so, as if they had
murdered their master.

It was well for me that darkness covered the hemisphere, or the old devil
could have discovered the confusion in my countenance. But, notwithstanding my
consternation, I told him I should be proud to serve him in this or in any
other adventure. Gramercy, said the old one, and here is something to encourage
thee, (clapping a handful of dollars into my hand.)

I Will leave you to guess the confusion of my thoughts at this declaration, and
I was casting about in my mind how I should prevent this intended villainy.

When we arrived at my father's, we found the treacherous villain waiting for
his master. As soon as ever he saw us, he cried softly to Don Lewis, I am glad
your honor is come; but Don Ferdinand is in his closet, and does not intend to
go to bed tonight, because he is to be at Seville early in the morning, and he
has shut his closetdoor. Why then, said Don Lewis, we'll break it open. But,
returned the servant, he has arms always ready in his closet, and I fear the
enterprise will be a little difficult, for he is a tough old blade.

Upon this account a small pause ensued, which gave me leisure to think, and to
the old one I uttered my thoughts.

Sir, said I, submit this business to me, and I Will inform you how I design to
execute it. Your servant shall accompany me to the door of his closet, and
knock, and as soon as ever he opens it, I Will (...) a good account of the old
gentleman.

Thou counsellest well, replied the old Don, and I Will reward thee accordingly,
when the work is done. And I shall deserve it, thought I to myself, if my
intention succeeds.

Upon this resolve we went into the house, and this fellow conducted me up
stairs very softly. The closet was at the end of a large room, the door of
which I bolted in the inside with my one hand, and plunged my poinard to the
heart of the fellow with the other, who dropped dead at my feet. At the noise
he made in falling, my father cried out, Who is there? and rushed out of his
closet, with a pistol in his hand. I replied, It Is I, your son.

You may imagine the surprise my father was in at this sudden appearance, and
to see one of his servants weltering in his blood, and dead before me. Sir,
said I, banish your surprise, and go with me into your closet, where I will
inform you of this sudden and unlooked-for appearance; and must farther add,
that the hand of Providence, by me, has saved you from death.

My father followed me into his study, without speaking; where I declared to
him in as few words as the time would permit, all that had befallen me that
night; and we soon came to a resolution what to do.

We took each of us a blunderbuss, with a brace of pistols, went down the back
stairs, and came in upon them, a way they little expected. I came first into
the hall, as we had concerted.

As soon as the old wretch saw me, he cried, Well, my lad, have thou dispatched
the villain? Yes, Sir, said I, and have dragged him down that you may behold
what I have done. When he heard that, he gave a leap for joy, and came running
forward to view the pleasing fight. But words cannot express his looks, when he
saw my father confronting him with a blunderbuss in his hand. He ^ood
motionless, as if he had been turned to stone.

The other three endeavored to make their escape, but I discharged my
blunderbuss, and stopped two of them with my hasty messengers. The report of my
piece made Don Lewis fall down, as imagining himself slain; the third person
finding it impossible to escape, became desperate, and, like a flag at bay,
defied us. He pulled out a stilletto, and ran upon me like an angry lion, and,
notwithstanding I shot him in the breast with a brace of balls, wounded me in
three several places; I grappling with him, we came down together upon the body
of Don Lewis, who with our weight, began to cry out; and that moment had been
the last of my life, if my father had not ran to my assistance, and with his
sword nailed my antagonist to the pavement.

The report of our firearms had wakened the two drunken servants of my
father's who came half frightened out of their senses. By this time Don Lewis
had recovered himself, and seeing death before him, fell down upon his knees,
and implored my father's mercy.

Thou base man! replied my father, how can thou expect to live after thy
barbarous attempt upon his life that never wronged thee? He told him he did not
expect to be forgiven, only to be allowed a priest, and confession, and be
would die with a hearty penitence for his sins.

Wretch! cried my father, thou may see how Heaven abhors thy fact, by
blasting your design. This man thou ^eest before thee, whom thou did employ
in thy black design, is my own son, whose coming hither was like an angel sent
from heaven to my assistance. I see, returned the Don, the seal of Providence
is upon you, and I heartily repent the crime I intended to commit; and if you
will forgive me, and forget what is past, I Will esteem you as the saver of my
life; and to unite our friendship, I Will match my daughter with a noble dowry to
this your son, and may they ever live happy.

My father was too much of a gentleman, to murder in cold blood, though he had
sufficient excuse on his side if he had done it. On the other hand, his
daughter was a very great fortune, even beyond his hopes.

After some small pause, he made him this reply, Sir, you know within yourself,
that you have forfeited your life by the law, in so basely attempting mine; but
as I can forgive any injury designed me; if you perform your first promise I am
resolved to forgive all that is past. Sir, replied the other, (transported with
joy) I am so much obliged to you for my life, that I will not stir out of your
house, till I have signed articles of agreement; and I must farther add, that
nothing sets my shame more before my eyes, than this your goodness.

My father begged he would take a particular care how he gave way to hatred;
which, by the way, not only commenced in my father's getting the better of him
in a law suit, and was heightened by the King's conferring on him the honor of
the government of Seville, which Don Lewis had some hopes of.

We took care the next day to let the country know that those fellows that were
killed, had attempted to rob our house, but we having timely notice had
prevented them by their deaths.

The old gentleman was as good as his word, for articles of agreement were
drawn up between them, and I had leave to visit the lady when I thought fit.
But I was obliged to go back to Seville, and put myself in an equipage suitable
to the occasion, and Don Lewis followed after with his daughter.

I must confess I was charmed with her person at the first interview; and the
day was fixed for the nuptials, which rejoiced the whole city of Seville, that
two of the noblest houses were going to put an end to their enmity.

I took the privilege of an intended husband in my visits to my designed bride,
and in her conversation found she had no aversion for me, (at least I thought
so,) and I promised myself the utmost felicity in her enjoyment.

One morning about a week before the intended wedding, I came early to wait on
her, but was informed she was not come out of her chamber: therefore I resolved
to take a walk in the great piazza of the city, to give her time to dress
herself; but as I was going out, I observed my mistress's maid conferring with
a country fellow: the sight of me, I observed, gave the woman some confusion.
My heart told me I was concerned in their interview, therefore I went to the
corner of the street, and waited till their dialogue was over; which did not
keep me long, for the fellow soon parted with the woman, and went out of the
gate that leads to Cordova.

I had my man with me, whom I acquainted with my fears, ordering him to dog the
fellow, and get out of him, by fair means or foul, his business at Don Lewis's
house, and I would follow him on horseback.

Away ran my man, and I soon got my horse, and overtook them about a league and
a half from Seville.

When my man got sight of me, I observed he took a little basket from the
countryman, and ran away over the fields with it. I fancied by that he had
succeeded in his commission, so turned my horse and followed him.

When I had overtaken him, we went behind a tuft of trees, a little out of the
road, where he told me he had made the fellow believe he was sent by Teresa
(the name of the maid he was conferring with) to give him notice that he would
be pursued by a cavalier, and forced to deliver what he had received from her,
and perhaps be in danger of losing his life; and that he had orders to consult
with him for his safety.

The countryman, being none of the wisest, soon discovered the whole affair to
my man, and at sight of me, delivered the basket to him* and ran to a public
house in the next village, to wait till he could get clear of me, where my man
was to bring him his basket again. In the basket were four melons, and in one
of them we found a letter very artificially put up, which I took out, and with
terror of mind read the contents, which were as follows:

LIFE of my life, and treasure of my soul! I received yours, which gave me all
the consolation my disconsolate heart was capable of receiving. But the fatal
moment is approaching, when I must give up this body to another person, but
without a heart, which always dwells with you; and be assured unless ill usage
force it thence, shall ever dwell in the mansion of your breast. But, my soul,
grieve not, for ma^gre my tyrant husband, I will find time to see the darling
of my eyes, and in the pleasure of those dear arms forget the dull embraces of
a husband. Let ten be the latest this evening, when you shall find at the usual
place with long expecting love, your

ISABELLA.


I was thunderstruck at the reading of this letter, yet blessed my providential
stars that guided me to this black secret, before the priest had joined our
hands. And though a Spaniard, my resentment did not rise to jealousy, but my
fancy ran upon the enjoyment of this false fair one, without the marriage
chain. And what prompted me the more to it, was a postscript to her letter,
wherein she bade him come in his usual disguise, and in the dark. In order to
the accomplishment of my design, I went into a neighboring house, and wrote
the following letter, which was put in the melon in the room of the other.

MY LOVE,
I HAVE not time to write myself, I am so guarded by my father, and my tyrant
husband that is to be so, that I am obliged to employ Teresa. Don't come to the
usual place till you hear from me, which shall certainly be tomorrow. Adi^^,
thou life and soul of

ISABELLA.


Now all the hopes I had were, that the fellow knew what disguise this amorous
spark wore, and where was the place of rendezvous.

I left it all to my servant, who had cunning enough to outwit twenty of the
countryman. After I had delivered him his commission, I went back to Seville,
full of hopes and fears; and in two hours my man arrived* he gave me a
description of his converse with the countryman, (which was diverting enough)
and how happy they were in escaping my hands.

He informed me, the amorous gallant came disguised so the habit of a peasant,
and was admitted through the back garden of Don Lewis's house by the maid, who
always attended the hour and conveyed him to her apartment in the dark; which
was according to my wish, and by description of the spark's person, we were not
unlike as to proportion or age, and darkness would conceal the rest.

I soon provided myself of the habit I was to wear, and impatiently expected
the coming hour, which came at last, though the intervening ones seemed the
longest of my life.

I did not wait long, before I was admitted by the too faithful confident. We
went over the garden to a small room at the entrance of the house, where I soon
discovered my false fair one, though in the dark. She was undressed and
disincumbered of every let to enjoyment. I found, by her eger kisses and
embraces, there was no parleying required; so I c'en fell to and fed very
heartily: my partner in pleasure seemed to like what was prepared for her; and
before we parted gave me to understand I had done wonders, and much beyond her
expectation.

When we had dallied away about four hours in our feasting, the maid came to
tell me it was time to part, which we did, after snatching another morsel.

I went immediately home, was soon in bed, and had (...) want of any
provocative to sleep.

When I rose in the morning, I began to weigh maturely the last night's
adventure; but could come to no resolution as to the forming my behavior to my
false mistress but I resolved to be determined by hers.

I went to visit her about noon, and found her more than ordinary civil to me.

In short, I was so charmed with the sight of her, that I resolved to give her
another visit in my disguise, the same* ^ght; and all I had to do was to be
first at the place.

When the time came, my conductress was ready, as beore; but, going softly in,
she clapped to the door a little too hastily, and fastened my coat in it: and, to
give me the more uneasiness, she the same moment dropped the key out of her hand;
and though I could see where it lay, yet I could not stoop for it, because my
coat was secured in the door*

After groping about some time, she took it up, and opened the door to release
her prisoner; but on the very instant my rival appeared, and, finding himself
there before he came, (...) in and fastened upon me.

The maid, at the sight of the two Sofias, clapped to the door in a fright, and
ran screaming away; so we had the happiness to be locked in the garden
together. But however, to make the best of a bad market, (as the saying is) I
got my rival down, and belabored him with my fists; for, as good fortune would
have it, we had neither of us any offensive weapons.

The noise of the maid, and our bustling, alarmed an English mastiff, that was
watchman to the house, who, without saying, By your leave, had the impudence to
fasten upon my rival by the arm, and worry him very handsomely. But,
notwithstanding my reason to the contrary, I took pity on him, and, by force of
arms, destroyed the dog; that is, I held him so fast about the throat with my
hands, that his last breath flew away in a huff.

My disguised spark seeing himself so unexpectedly relieved, gave me thanks for
his safety: and as soon as ever he spoke, (for we had been sullen before,
neither of us having opened our lips) I knew him by his tongue to be one of my
particular acquaintance.

Why, how now, Don Juan! said I, how came you thus disguised? Na^, replied the
Don, I ought to ask you the same thing. With several questions and answers, we
came to a right understanding. If I had known, said he, your pretensions here,
I should never have made any attempt to your prejudice. Come, come, said I,
it is very well as it is. So we turned that to mirth and ridicule, which perhaps
others of our nation would have turned to blood Our next thing was to make our
escape, for the whole house was alarmed, and coming upon us with their domestic
weapons, such as pokers, spits, fire-shovels, etc. My companion led me into a
place in the garden where the wall was something lower than any where else; and
just as we had gained the ascent, we perceived a man mounting from the other
side; but my friend did him the favor to tumble him down again; he quickly got
up, and ran upon him most furiously with his poinard, and gave him several
stabs; but my friend closed with him, wrested his weapon from him, and stabbed
him to the heart.

As soon as he was sped, we made off; but did not go far before my companion
dropped down dead of his wounds. I was very much grieved at this accident, but
made the best of my way home, for fear I should come into trouble about it, if
I was caught near the dead bodies.

I went to bed, but very much perplexed in mind, and had no rest all night. But
what was my grief in the morning, when my servant brought me word that my
father and Don Juan my friend were found murdered in the habits of peasants,
under Don Lewis's garden-wall. The relation deprived me of the use of speech
for some time, and my reason forsook me. I was more than once going to put an
end to my life, and had certainly done it, if I had no^ been prevented by my
faithful servant. But when my reason returned again, I began to think of the
adventure with some calmness; for though I had all the grief imaginable for the
loss of so good a father, yet I was of temper not to grieve long at any thing;
and then the fortune I thought myself master of, appeared so lovely to me, that
it soon dried up my tears.

The city imagined my father came by his death through Don Lewis's means, as
remembering the ancient enmity of the two houses: and being found so near his
house, strengthened the opinion of every body: and I was the only person
satisfied to the contrary.

The servants that brought in my father's body gave me several papers found in
his pockets; among which were two letters that partly let me into the truth of
this unhappy adventure. The first was to this purpose:

SIR,
YOUR generosity has prevailed, and I can no longer withstand your offers, (on
the condition, as you promise in your last, that you will break off the match
between your son and my lady.) You must provide yourself of a peasant's habit,
and tomorrow I will send you a note to instruct you farther.

Yours, etc. TERESA,


The second was as follows:

BE at the west end of the garden at one in the morning, and ascend a ladder of
rope you will find there, and bring it over with you: near the corner you will
perceive an arbor, go in there, and wait till I come to conduct you to your
wishes. I Will take care nothing shall be in your way to interrupt your privacy;
and be sure you be careful of your tongue, for if you speak, we shall be both
undone.

My thoughts were in the utmost confusion about the unravelling of this fatal
affair; and running over in my imagination my past conversations with my
father, I remembered in our last, he told me, he thought it a little of the
soonest for me to marry: and that it would be more for my interest to delay our
nuptials: and, perhaps, said he, I may give you sufficient reasons for the
contrary. Whatever his reasons were, I little thought of the true one.

I sent a letter to the maid of my false mis^r^ss, but she fearing she should
be found out (as she really was) absconded.

Don Lewis sent to condole with me in my great loss; but I could perceive it
gave him some satisfaction, that I was in actual possession of that estate,
which I had only hopes of in the life of my father. His visit was but short,
yet I thought it too long; for as I had no design of marrying the daughter, I
was very willing to drop my acquaintance with the father. Though I gave him
hopes, when decency would permit, I would not fail in my addresses to his
daughter.

After the interment of my father. I began to examine his affairs, and was not
very well pleased to find the best part of his estate mortgaged for twelve
years to several persons; and, instead of finding myself worth twenty thousand
crowns a year, soon found I was not worth the sixth part.

It was agreed, that my father was very profuse in his way of living, always
keeping open house; yet it was every body's opinion he did not expend half his
income.

I sometimes imagined there was some underhand dealing in the affair, but it
was past my finding out: I therefore took an odd resolution. I determined with
myself to undergo a voluntary banishment, till the term of years on the
mortgage was expired.

I made a visit to Don Lewis, and told him my resolves, and my reasons for it,
which he could not but applaud; for it was easy enough to perceive interest was
the jack he aimed at. He did not press me to see his daughter, nor I him; but
after assurance of remembrancing on both sides, we parted.

I must own, my soul longed for another taste of the delicious banquet; and I
hope you will excuse me when I own to you, my passion could not be called love;
but as I found it impracticable, I made myself as easy as I could.

In a few weeks I had finished my affairs, and waited for the sailing of the
West India fleet, resolving for the city of Mexico, where I had an uncle very
rich, who had often expressed in his letters to my father the great desire he
had to see me.

I had raised out of the ruins of my father's fortune six thousand crowns,
without so much as touching any of his plate, or furniture; the care of those
things with all my writings, I trusted with a near kinsman, superior of a
monastery in the city.

One day, going about two leagues out of the town, my horse's girth broke,
which obliged me so alight at a saddler's to have it made good. The man asked
me if I would not take a walk in the garden while he was doing his work, which
I accordingly did.

At the end of the walk was a pretty arbor, and in it sat a woman reading;
who, at first sight of me, gave a great shriek, and was running out; but I
stopped her, and begging pardon for disturbing her, told her I would retire and
leave her alone. But upon finding it was Teresa, maid to my quondam mistress, I
resolved to stay with her, that I might know something of my father's affair.

She appeared confounded at the sight of me, as imagining I had come on purpose
to apprehend her, but I soon undeceived her, and with a little soothing
language, and a couple of pistoles, she disposed herself to give me all the
information she could.

Sir, said she, I hope you will pardon me, for what I did was purely by
influence of gold.

Your father declared to me, that at first sight of my mistress, his heart and
reason forsook him; and often informed me that if he could not enjoy her, he
should be obliged to put an end to his misery by death. I often laid before him
the injury he would do to you his son, but he as often declared he would break
off the match between you; for he was well assured you had no very violent
inclination for her, and there were other women in Seville, of as great fortune
as my mistress, that would be proud of his alliance.

The many rich presents he made me, overcame my honesty; and that unfortunate
night that brought him his death, was to have completed his happiness. But,
said she, (after some pause) I am very much at a loss to find out one thing.
What Is that, madam? said I, Why Sir, returned Madona, since I know how matters
stand between you and my mistress, I shall give you to understand, that you are
not the favored lover; and that another gentleman revelled in those delights
which you, perhaps, ought to have the whole possession of; and that was the
reason I was so willing to comply with your father, for I had intended to
introduce him in the habit of the said gentleman, unknown to my mistress, and
had provided a story accordingly. For as soon as ever the gentleman was gone,
your father should have taken his place in the same disguise; and I intended to
impose on my mistress, that her lover was returned to take another farewell of
her. And this (...) was easy to be carried on, seeing they were obliged to
silence, old Don Lewis lodging in the next room. But what amazes me, (as I was
saying) opening the door to let my mistress lover in, another in the same
disguise rushed in upon me, which I am sure was not your father. I soon cleared
up this affair with her, and let her know how I had supplanted my rival.

She seemed vary much surprised at the unravelling of this secret, but was very
glad she had nothing to apprehend from my resentment, seeing that was the chief
cause of leaving her mistress, as imagining I should find the latter she had
sent him. And upon this she resolved to go to her mistress again, for she heard
every day from the family, and knew how matters stood; and that her mistress
wanted her, that they might condole together for the loss of Don Juan her old
spark. But she declared she was not very sorry for his loss, for money came
very hard from him; And you know, Sir, said she, it is our business to make hay
while the sun shines.

Madam, said I, since I know what you like best, if you will pursue my intrigue,
twenty pistoles are at your service. Indeed, Sir, returned madam, it must be
something very extraordinary that I shall refuse for such a sum. Why then I Will
let you into my plot, said I; you shall inform your mistress that Don Juan is
not dead, as was reported; but after a tedious and dangerous illness, was
recovered to a miracle, but concealed his revival, being under some
apprehension of answering for the life of my father.

Sir, said she, I like your plot so well that I Will answer for the success of
it, and I Will go about it instantly, for I long to be fingering the gold. Why
then, said I, you shall finger it beforehand, and when the business is done,
I Will double the sum. She was mightily pleased with the amendment to the
bargain; and the third night after was concluded on for the time, when I was to
attend as before.

I took leave of Teresa, and pursued my journey, made merry with my friends,
and returned.

At length the happy moment came that I so long expected. My mercenary
confident was ready; I entered, and once more took possession of all my
treasure; and as I thought it would be the last time, was profuse enough. My
lady seemed very well pleased with my night's work, and in plain terms told me
so.

I had prepared a letter, in which I had disclosed every thing. When our loving
affair was over, she asked me softly how I was engaged* in that adventure. I
told her as softly as I could, that I knew she would be inquisitive, and
talking being dangerous, I had brought the account in writing, which I put into
her hand, and with some regret took my leave; for the next day was designed for
our embarkation. As I walked over the garden, I asked Teresa how long the amor
had been between Don Juan and her lady; she told me about two years, and this
was the commencement.

Don Juan, said she, (whose country house lay about two leagues from my
master's) was set upon by thieves, and dangerously wounded; and there had lost
his life, if Don Lewis had not, very fortunately for him, come that way
attended, and drove off the thieves. Don Juan was so very much hurt, that it
was not thought safe to carry him home; therefore my master ordered him to his
house, where his wounds kept him a great while. When he had recovered strength
enough to walk, he usually employed his time in the garden, where my lady often
seeing him, fell desperately in love with him. She made me the confident of her
infant passion, and I being a very proper person to be trusted with such
secrets, advised her to let the Don see her, which we contrived thus:

She was to go into an arbor at the further end of the garden, (where I had
observed Don Juan sat every day) and pretend to be asleep. She took all the
care that was necessary in her dress, and did as I directed her. It succeeded
to her wish; for the Don at the sight of her, imagining her an earthly goddess,
kneeled and kissed her hand. She seemed to wake in a pretended fright, but it
was not long before they came to a right understanding.

That place was made the rendezvous of the lovers, when opportunity would
permit; but he recovering, (though he pretended a weakness for some time) was
obliged to take his leave of our house; though in the father's absence, they
found opportunity to satisfy their loves; and when they resided in town, he
continued his visits in the disguise of a countryman, which he used to send to
my lady with presents of fruit, and by that means they received letters from
each other.

When she had finished her short relation, I gave her the twenty pistoles I
promised her, and took my leave. She seemed to be in some confusion about
managing it with her mistress, for she would certainly find her out, she said,
when she would be confirmed of Don Juan's death; but she comforted herself with
telling me that her mistress durst not disclose it to any body, for fear of
betraying herself. But poor Teresa little thought her mistress would find it
out so soon as the next morning, when she had read my letter that I put into
her hand when with her.

The next day, I ordered my equipage on board our ship, which lay at Cadiz, and
followed myself; but the wind chopping about, hindered our setting sail. I then
repented the leaving my letter with my mistress, for by the help of my money
with Teresa, I might have made another meal with her.

I did not think it prudent to go on shore, fearing her resentment might form
some designs on my life, I therefore contented myself on board, till the wind
should prove fair for sailing. As I was reading in my cabin one day alone, my
servant brought me a letter; The content were these:

NOBLE SIR,
UNDERSTANDING you are bound for Mexico, the place of my birth, I shall think
it the greatest honor in the world, if you please to take me into your
protection. My father was a rich merchant of that city, who, going to another
world, has left me a considerable estate in this. Those persons who h^d the
care of my education here, seem to have designs against my fortune; therefore I
have made my escape from them, but must return to my betrayers, if you have not
the goodness to be my guardian to Mexico, where I shall return the obligation
you shall please to lay me under, in being my protector.


I asked my man, who brought the letter, and he told me a young negro. I bid
him bring him in. I asked him several questions, and found him ready with his
answers. He informed me, that his father, though a negro, was a man of
substance, and sent him in his infancy to be educated in Seville, and for the
rest the letter informed me.

I was mightily pleased with the person of the black gentleman, and treated him
civilly, with assurance of delivering him safe to his friends in Mexico.

When we were alone, he told me he had a farther secret to discover to me, if
he was sure of not being interrupted. Upon hearing this, I ordered my servant
on shore for some necessaries, and informed him we need not fear any
interruption for some hours.

After a long pause, and casting his eyes on the ground, he began thus:

This veil of night would not hide my blushes, if I were not convinced in your
knowledge of my frailty. But if you will consider my youth, climate, and
opportunity, you will allow few of my sex could withstand the temptation. Be not
surprised to find in this disguise the daughter of Don Lewis, who is so far
subject to the caprice of love, as to disclose to you the inmost secret of her
heart.

The letter you left with me, produced a contrary effect than I believe you
imagined; and, instead of rage and indignation taking possession of my breast,
a foster passion stole in, and I felt all the tenderness imaginable for Don
Pedro.

I expect nothing but ill ^^age from you for my past conduct; but if you can
believe there is any sincerity in woman, after what I have been guilty of. I am
assured you may depend on what I say, that no other object shall share my heart
with you. I do not mean the tie of wedlock, but if you will accept of me as I
am. I Will be as subservient to your commands as your meanest slave.

I was so confounded, between pleasure and amazement, that I imagined all I
heard and saw was a dream; but, being sweetly convinced of the reality. I said
all my passion could suggest in return, not giving myself time to consider of
the oddness of the accident: 'Twas sufficient I had in possession all that was
lovely in woman in my imagination; and I had no other thought, but how to keep
her from the knowledge of her father on shore, and the sailors on board, for we
did not know when we should set sail.

My mistress told me, if she had not succeeded with me, she resolved for a
nunnery, but since we were reconciled, she had laid by all thoughts of the
habit. She made her escape from her father's without the assistance or
knowledge of any but Teresa. But what favored her escape was the absence of
her father for ten days in the country; yet she s^ared, when he came home
again, he would fright Teresa into confession, or by promises get it out of
her; for that she was mercenary enough to sell any thing she had to the best
bidder. To prevent which, we agreed to dress in the habit of a man, and let her
wear her own complexion.

Accordingly we went both on shore at Cadiz, and soon equipt ourselves with
what we wanted, and on board I brought my spark as a relation of mine, that I
had a mind to run his fortune with me. The next day the wind proving very
favorable, we set sail and left our apprehensions behind us.

I was obliged to let my servant into the secret, that I might have it kept so;
well knowing if he had discovered it himself, it had not been a secret long,
though the fellow was very faithful to any secret that was trusted to him.

We touched at the Madeira islands, passed the Pike of Teneriff, got over the
line, ducked our men as usual, and met with no extraordinary accident; but in
fifty-three days arrived safe at the city of Sancta Domingo, (or St. Dom^^ni^)
the capital city of the island Hispaniola.

I was very well pleased to find so delightful a place as this was, after the
fatigue of our voyage. My mistress and I took us a lodging at a good-natured
Spaniard's, that treated us very well for our money.

Here my lady told me, she felt the effects of our familiarity. I endeavored
to persuade her I had no hand in it; but she insisted upon it that the deed was
done by me, and gave me some proofs to believe it.

I was very much concerned to find means to hide it ^^om the house; for she
began to have those qualms which attend that natural distemper; and by the
beauty of her face, I feared her sex might soon be distinguished.

I kept her from the sight of our ship's crew in the voyage, she always staying
in the cabin; and it was very dangerous to discover a fine woman in this part
of the world, because there are few that are handsome.

I was upon thorns till our departure from Mexico; but the fleet staying longer
than I expected, I took a ramble to the most noted places in the island: and
since I understand by you flory you never were there, I Will give you a short
description of it.

Hispaniola is seated from seventeen degrees to nineteen degrees latitude, in
length about one hundred and twenty leagues, and breadth (about the middle
part) fifty. The air much the fame for heat as at Seville in Spain; the fruits
delicious, and some peculiar to the place.

The capital city is St. Domingo, which gives a delightful prospect from the
fields about it, being mixed with pleasant gardens and rivers.

Here the governor of the island resides, and here are kept all their offices,
and courts of judicature, and it is likewise the storehouse to the whole
island.

There are two cities more, St. Jago and Neustra Sermon de alta Gracia; the
last of which is to the south, and is famous for the best chocolate in the
world.

The cathedral of St. Domingo is a handsome pile of buildings, and the other
churches are answerable to the grandeur of the inhabitants, whose very artisans
are wealthy.

The friars live as luxurious here as in any other part of the world, and
follow the steps of their brethren in chasing the noblest situations.

This island was discovered by Columbus in the year 1498, and kept in the hands
of the Spaniards ever since that time; while most of their other acquisitions
are fallen to the English, French, and Dutch.

Though the French have some plantations in the island at present, yet they
were of their own acquiring, and not taken from the Spaniards; and being
chiefly hunters, and not very rich, the Spaniards make no attempt upon them.

No island can boast of more convenient ports than this, and every port
disembogues fine rivers (stored with palatable fis^^) into the sea; but then to
qualify that blessing, they are very much infested with alligators and
crocodiles. I saw one lying on the shore side like a log of wood, and as a
buffalo came there to drink, he sprung upon him, dragged him to the bottom, and
there devoured him; though they are easily to be avoided, from the aromatic
smell that comes from their skin.

I was much surprised to find in most houses, serpents instead of cats, that
were greater enemies to rats and mice; but what was more pleasing, they were
not the least offensive, having no venom on them. But then they will often play
the fox with the poultry, and destroy many of them, unless narrowly watched.

The Scolopendria of the Greeks is found here, and very large scorpions; but by
Divine Providence, neither of them are hurtful.

I shall not trouble you with any farther account of this island, because there
is not any thing to be found there but what is upon the continent, unless some
particular herbs; and as I am no botanist, I shall not take any notice of them.

The time came at last for our embarking for Vera Cruz, in order to go to
Mexico, and I left St. Domingo with some regret; as imagining I should not meet
with any other place in America so pleasant.

During our voyage, my mistress was mightily disordered.

We embarked for Vera Cruz, where we arrived without any accident; and having
no business there, we sat out by land for Mexico, and got safe there. But
enquiring for my uncle, I was informed he was gone to reside at Lima, the
capital city of Peru. My concern was the more, in that I feared I should not
meet with proper accommodation at Mexico, for want of him, in the affair of my
mistress; for her condition would not bear the fatigue of another removal.

I was entertained in the house of a near friend of my uncle's and one who kept
a correspondence with him; he was very civil to me, and of a freer disposition
than generally the Spaniards are; but he had the same vanity as all the old
Christians have, who pride themselves very much upon it. I let him into the
secret of my lady, and her condition; and by the help of his wife, we made her
reassume her proper dress. But we kept her private.

The time of her delivery came, and the product proved a lusty boy, who staid
among us three weeks, and then left us. I had no scruples about being the
father, for it was plain enough to be seen, it being my picture in miniature.
My mistress continued very weak, longer than the usual time: and I being alone
with her one day, she told me she was under some apprehensions concerning our
landlord, Don Manuel, who had made her secretly many large offers, and the
nurse was his emmissary. I told her I had the same proposals from his wife; and
though the woman was not disagreeable, nay, she might pass for a beauty, where
women were so scarce, yet I could not find any tenderness for her in my heart.

After many arguments between us, a thought came into me head, which I hoped
would produce some mirth among (...): I desired my mistress to give Don Manuel
some small encouragement, and leave the rest to me.

My landlord soon found an opportunity, through my means, to see my mistress.
She followed my advice, and transported the Don out of his senses; his joy was
not to be contained, he forgot the gravity of a Spaniard, and capered about
like a French dancing master. When I had learnt all their discourse from my
mistress, I begged her to continue her good numour to him, and promise him
meeting that day se'ennight in the summer house of the garden. She did as I
directed.

In the mean time, I took my opportunity to confabulate with the wife, and gave
her directions, the night appointed to go to the same summer house, but to
avoid speech, seeing it was over the water, and men were continually passing to
and fro. The good woman was as much overjoyed as her husband; and the better to
carry on my design I gave it out that I was to go with some gentlemen a hunting
the buffalo for two or three days, I desired my landlord (a title I had given
him out of mirth) to take care of my wise in my absence. I told my good
landlady this was a contrivance of mine, that we might not be suspected.

My mistress had made just the same agreement with the Don. The time came, and
the good man and woman were left to worry one another with their extraordinary
passion.

The next day at dinner, (for we generally eat together) Don Manuel cast many a
sheep's eye at my wife, and his good lady at me.

The same day, as I was reading in the garden, Madona came to me, and in bitter
terms of reproach gave me much ill language; and told me I had betrayed her to
her husband basely, by giving him the ring she gave me la^^ night. I found that
she had made a present to her husband of a ring, taking him for me, and she had
observed it upon his finger. She made so many speeches about it, that at last I
was compelled to tell her the whole truth, to get rid of her tiresome passion*
but I soon repented of my declaration; for she flew upon me, and with her nails
played the ^at with my face; and I had much ado to disengage myself from her.
So furious does a disappointed passion make a woman.

Her confounded temper made me resolve to leave Mexico. The husband began to
suspect something of the affair; but his imagination, that he had the company
of my wife in the summer house, curbed his resentment.

The woman's rage was unsurmountable, and it was not in my power to bring her
to temper: therefore I chose to avoid her as much as possible. As I was at
supper with my mistress, some few days after the accident happened, she told
me, she had received a present of cordial-water from Don Manuel's wise. Now I
had not told her of Madona's resentment, because I imagined it might make her
uneasy: but as soon as I heard of the present, something struck my mind there
was something uncommon in it; I therefore desired my mistress not to drink any
of it. Lord, said she, my dear, I have already, and desire you would taste it
too, for it is the pleasantest liquor I ever drank in my life.

I was mightily disturbed at it, and in two hours discovered the fatal effects.

My mistress began to be very much out of order; and notwithstanding all the
aid of the physicians, she expired in my arms, and every body agreed she had
been poisoned. I had in my fury and ravings, declared to Don Manuel the author
of this black deed; and when he went to enquire after her, was informed she
went out before night, and was supposed to have gone to the town of St. Jago,
on the lake, to one of her relations. Don Manuel sent after her, but she was
not to be found. He grieved at the loss of my dear mistress as much as I did;
and I dare avow, if he had found his wife, he would have sacrificed her to the
manes of my dear mistress.

I was very much grieved for the loss of my mistress, for I had reason to be
convinced her passion for me was unfeigned. You may easily imagine, there was
no staying for me in the house where this dismal accident happened. But as I
was preparing to be gone, the Corrigidor sent for me to appear before him, to
give him the best account I could of this action. I related to him the whole
truth, as I have told it you; only I declared it was my wife I had lost. Don
Manuel was seized, and put him in prison, notwithstanding I insisted upon his
innocence; but he proceeded in that manner, seeing it was supposed he was
accessory to his wife's escape. But a few days after he was secured, news was
brought, that his wife was found murdered in the woods, it was supposed by some
Indians, as she was endeavoring to make her escape from the hands of justice.

Thus she met her reward for her barbarous murder of a woman that never wronged
her, though indeed the favor was designed for me.

A few days after this fatal accident, I heard of some merchants that designed
to cross the continent to the South Sea, with a good guard. I made acquaintance
with them, paid my quota to the charge, and set out along with them, leaving
behind me the hateful city of Mexico, where I had lost the only thing I
esteemed on earth. And I must own to you, notwithstanding my philosophy, I
never thought of her for some time without the utmost heartbreaking. I have
endeavored indeed, by forcing my temper to mirth, to bury her in remembrance;
and time, with good company, has brought me some assistance; yet nevertheless,
I do firmly believe, no woman's charms will ever for the future break my rest;
for I am satisfied my late mistress made a hole quite through my heart. -- But
to pursue my discourse.

We set out, with a guard of fifty Spanish soldiers, for fear of the Indians,
who had made it their daily practice to set upon every body that went through
the country, if not too strong for them. I need not tell you that Mexico is one
of the finest cities in the world, or that it lies upon a lake, and no other
passage to it but over three broad causeways from different cities on the land.
But what is something extraordinary, one part of the lake is brackish, and
noisome, with no living creature in it; and the other is fresh, wholesome, and
^ored with palatable fish. But as there are many exact accounts of the
continent of America, and its conquest by my noble countryman Hernando Cortes,
I shall say no more of it; but I will take the liberty to add, that Caesar and
Alexander were but pigmy conquerors to him; and every body will be of that
opinion, if they will give themselves the trouble of reading his history.

We met with no Indians to oppose our passage, and arrived at Segovia, an
inland town environed with rocks, and but meanly built. Some of our company
staid there, and I was willing to stay along with them to refresh myself; for
it is but indifferent traveling over rocky mountains, and crossing rivers upon
hurdles, that is, pieces of timber lashed together with ropes; and it is
sometimes dangerous, though we got over safe with (...) whole company.

I staid fifteen days at Segovia, with fifteen of my companions. I was very
much surprised at the relation of some of the inhabitants of that place, who
told me that about two hundred of your countrymen the year before, (free
boo^ers) in spite of all opposition, came from the South Sea, to the North,
with a very great booty, defeated the Spaniards when ten to one, and posted to
all the advantage in the world, several times. The people of Segovia talk of
them as so many devils; and that they were aided by the black gentleman, or it
had been an impossibility to have gone through what they did. But it must be
confessed, your countrymen despise hazards, and laugh at the greatest dangers.

After we had sufficiently refreshed ourselves, we took our leave of Segovia,
and pursued our journey to the South Sea, with a guard of Indians, subservient
to the Spaniards. And I must own to you, there is not a people in the world
more true to their trust, than those confederate Indians that own the dominion
of Spain.

Our journey to St. Fee, was pleasant enough, through a (...) level, pleasant
country, and we rode upon mules, a beast (...) sure foot; and our chief
diversion was shooting of mon^ies, that played us several comical tricks,
running up the trees, and frequently did us the favor to urine in our faces,
and sometimes something worse.

When we arrived at St. Fee, a small town and port in the South Sea, we had the
good fortune of meeting with a vessel ready to sail for Lima. We went
immediately on board, (...) got clear of the shore that evening.

We arrived at Lima after a voyage of twenty-five days (...) landed at Caalo,
the port that all the ships of Spain anchor (...) and one of the finest in the
South Sea.

The town is built upon a point of land that runs into (...) sea. It is very
strongly fortified, and well garrisoned, I (...) my servant to my uncle at
Lima, to acquaint him that I (...) coming to wait on him the next day; but my
servant re^^^ed in four hours, with my uncle's coach, who informed (...) that
he was impatient till he saw me. My uncle was (...) of the civil courts, and a
man in very great power. He (...) his Major Domo to wait on me, with this
excuse, that he had come himself, but that he was afflicted with the gout. I
only staid till I had put on other clothes, and immediately after, went in the
coach with Major Domo, and arrived at my uncle's just within night. He was very
well pleased to see me, and caressed me in an extraordinary manner. But I was
something surprised to find that he had resolved for Spain within a month,
there to end his days.

I told him the story of my father's unhappy fate, only concealing his love to
Donna Elvira. He was very much shocked at the news, owning to me his chief
reason of going to Spain, was to have the happiness of living together. I then
told him, I supposed as that could not be, that he would alter his resolution,
and think no more of his voyage: But he answered, most of his effects were gone
for Spain two months before, and that he must of necessity follow.

I gave him to understand, that it was not in my power to wait upon him. He
took a great deal of pains to persuade me to it, but when he found it was to no
purpose, he told me, since I was not to be prevailed upon, he would leave me
master of a small fortune at Lima.

During his stay, he introduced me to most of the best families in the city,
and the viceroy was pleased to show me good countenance, and promised my uncle
to provide for me.

When the time came of his embarking for Spain, I waited on him on board, where
we took leave, though not with dry eyes; and I have repented many times that I
did not accompany him. But we must submit to fate; and what is allotted us by
fortune will come.

He left me master of a well furnished house, and a plantation, whose income
would provide every thing necessity required in the middle station of life,
with a promise that at his death I should inherit the remainder of his estate;
for he was a single man, and had no nearer relation than myself.

I took all the pleasure the place would afford: and to say the truth, there
was no want of any thing as Lima, except the conversation of the female sex;
though I must freely confess, I did not always want that.

The viceroy proved very kind to me, but death taking him away suddenly, I
mightily grieved his loss, as indeed I had reason; for the person that
succeeded him, proved the reverse. He made a general remove of all the officers
the deceased had put in posts, and among the rest I was one of the sufferers;
and farther, upon all occasions he made it his business to slight me, and often
affronted me so grossly, that nothing but his dignity skreened him from my
resentment: and many other people in power, (as the injudicious generally copy
the frailties of their superiors, and neglect their virtues) treated me in the
same manner; but I was resolved not to bear it.

One day as I was coming from my planlation upon my mule, attended only with my
old servant, I met a nephew of the viceroy's in his chaise, in a narrow road,
and not being willing to give way to him, we were both at a stand; which so
enraged the choleric gentleman, that he flew out of his vehicle, and ran his
spado into the belly of my mule, which dropped down dead.

I did not want so much provocation to raise my choler, therefore I drew upon
him, and left him in the same condition with my beast, grovelling upon the
sand. He had several people that attended him, who rushed upon me and my man,
overpowered us, and dragged us immediately to the viceroy's palace; who, being
glad of any pretense to wreak his illnature upon me, condemned me to Baldivia
for life, in spite of the intercession of those few friends I had.

It was in vain to complain of this hard trick of fortune; and the more to
plague me, he left orders that I should be disposed of to Don Sancho Ramirez, a
relation of his; the wretch that I have sufficiently revenged myself of, and,
in part, of the inhumane viceroy; for they were partners in trade.

Ramirez used to put me upon the most slavish business, but as I had money I
usually bought it off; for I received ^early my (...) ^state from Lima. I mean
from my plantation, for the (...) had seized all the rest of my movables; and
would have done this, but that the honest Indian, who had the oc^^^^ of it
(...) my uncle's.

(...) old (...) had a beautiful daughter, that I found was in (...) the
^^^ison of Baldivia. The colonel, notwithstanding my condition, was not ashamed
of my acquaintance, and often told me the torments he endured for the young
lady.

I asked him if the lady knew of his passion, he informed me, that he flattered
himself with the return, though they had never spoke to each other, but he had
received obliging glances from her fair eyes from the gallery which overlooked
the court of guard.

I agreed that if he would write a letter, I Would pawn my life she should have it,
and an answer to the bargain, if she had any inclination to send one. He
embraced me, and thanked me for my kind proffer, and wrote a passionate letter
to the lady, which I accompanied with another, to let her know I was devoted to
her service upon the colonel's account.

In two days I had an answer conveyed into a hollow tree in the garden, as I
had concerted in my note to her, that waited on the colonel's.

These paper-messengers brought matters to bear, and the kind lady resolved to
venture herself with the colonel.

We contrived a ladder of ropes long enough to reach from her window to the
terras on the court of guard: and I conveyed a small bundle of pack-thread for
her to throw down, which we fastened to the ladder of ropes, and the lady, with
much difficulty, pulled it up, and fastened it to an iron chest which was in
the room: But as she came trembling for fear down the ladder, it drew the chest
along the floor above, which ^^^kened that old devil her father. He immediately
alarmed all the servants, as well as slaves, but the colonel had got safe off
with his mistress.

When old hunks had summoned us all together, he went into the room to see what
the matter was; but when he sound his money safe, his distraction began to
abate. I must own* I wished heartily we could have cleared his money too, as
well as his daughter. It was some time ere he missed her, as having no notion
of her elopement; but when he found she (...) gone, his passion was
insurmountable; for the good (...) made bold with writings of an estate, that
it seems were (...) her by an old aunt; and I was very well pleased (...) go
empty-handed to my colonel; for I take money to be the sinews of love as well
as of war.

The enraged Don ran up and down like a madman, with about a dozen of us at his
heels: and as we appro^^ned the ditch of the castle, which happened to be free
from water, (the tide being out) but pretty well provided with mud, some of the
servants imagined they saw something lie on the mud. The old Don being very
peery, was stooping down, and gazing to be satisfied; and the devil prompting
me just at the same time, I clapped my knee into his bum, and down fell the poor
old Don into the mud.

I was the first which cried out for help, yet I did not make extraordinary
haste to assist him; but at last ropes were brought, and after he had
floundered about a quarter of an hour, we lugged him up in a sweet pickle.

By good luck, he did not mistrust the favor was designed him, but purely
accidental. I had an opportunity the next day to find out the lady and the
happy colonel, who had brought a commission from the priest to go to bed
together. He was so well pleased with my service, that he promised to ransom me
from Don Sancho, and did not doubt but he should succeed, seeing the Do^ made
money his summum bonum. But we were surprised at the refusal, for he had such a
strict charge from the viceroy of Peru to hold me fast, that it was more his
interest to keep me than to part with me. Nay, this proposal opened the old
Don's eyes, for he saw plainly I was at the bottom of his daughter's affair.
This so enraged him that he ordered a great wooden clog to be locked fast to my
leg, which I as obliged to lug along with me.

This proceeding drove me almost to despair, and I lost all hopes of ever
procuring my liberty.

The colonel and his lady (who had recovered the fortune from Don Sancho) were
very much grieved at my ill usage, and tried all manner of means for my
liberty, but to no purpose. I passed three years in this uncomfortable life,
and had the pleasure to hear that my implacable enemy the viceroy of Peru was
summoned to Spain, upon the account of some mal-administration. At the hearing
of this news, my hope of freedom began to revive, but it was soon clouded
again; for the old devil Don Sancho, was resolved to keep me a martyr to his
own revenge; and I weathered out two years more in my wretched confinement:
though, thanks to heaven, nothing depressed my spirits quite.

The colonel got an opportunity to tell me that there was a vessel in the road
bound for Lima; and the captain being a very good friend of his, he had
prevailed with him to take me on board him, if it was possible for me to get
out of hunk's clutches.

I made all the efforts imaginable, but to no purpose; and I was once more in
my imagination given up to eternal slavery.

The same night, as I was endeavoring to compose my troubled thoughts, I heard
a great noise in the castle-yard, and was very much surprised a while after,
when I saw an officer and a file of soldiers come to seize me as a plotter
against the state, and carried me to the colonel's lodging. But my surprise was
turned into joy, when I found he had used the stratagem to gain me my freedom.
I told him he had trebly repaid the obligation he was pleased to say he lay
under to me, and I was resolved not to accept of my liberty till I found what
stir Don Sancho made about it: but the colonel resolved me that he had the
means in his own hands to pacify him.

I went on board, and set sail the same evening. We had but an indifferent
voyage, being involved in many storms; yet at last we arrived safe at Calao.

I shall, if you think fit, give you a short description of Baldivia, because
few foreigners are permitted to enter their port.

Baldivia, or Valdivia, takes its name from the first se^nder, a Spaniard. The
old town stood a little higher than the new one, till it was destroyed by the
Indians. For Peter Baldivia, and the rest of the Spaniards, were such tyrants
over the p^^r natives, that they took heart, laid an ambush for them, and
destroyed them every one. But in the new town they are sufficiently guarded
from their insults, or danger from a foreign enemy: which have often attempted
them to no purpose. This being reckoned the (...) country for gold (...) in all
America, nature has b^^^^ded them very much in the (...) of the place; for
there is so l^ge a sand-ban^ (...) of the bay, that vessels are obliged to come
within five hundred yards of the shore (which is guarded by a strong castle) to
avoid it. It is a difficult harbor to enter; but when you are once at anchor,
no wind on the whole compass can hurt you, though it blew a storm, it is so
well sheltered by the land on all sides of it.

The inhabitants are chiefly made up of banished persons, who generally work in
the mines for so many years: and the time expired, they have so much land of
their own to cultivate; and most of them find the means to be rich; but how
honestly, I Will give you leave to judge. The country about it is very fruitful,
and produces great numbers of apple trees, from which they make very good
cider. But the juice of the grape is very unpalatable there, and those that do
procure it, must pay extravagantly for it.

This city (for it is no less) is esteemed the key to the South Sea.

The governor and officers are generally sent from Lima, but the soldiers are
composed of those persons that are sent there for a punishment. And though few
persons choose to be sent there, yet as few desire to leave it, when once they
are settled.

Notwithstanding the people could make a shift to live without religion, yet
there are seven churches and three monasteries; but they seemed to be in a
ruinated condition: and I don't doubt but an age or two hence, those that pass
that way may find them totally ruined.

As I said, we arrived safe at the port of Calao, I was resolved to remain
incognito, till I had enquired into the affairs of the city.

I took an occasion to send to my Indian tenant, who came to me, and was very
well pleased to find me at liberty.

I sent him to several of my friends, to acquaint them with what circumstances
I lay under, who soon informed the viceroy of my misfortune, and he as readily
complied with my desire, allowing me the liberty I had enjoyed before I was
sent to Baldivia.

I once more made my appearance at Lima, renewed my acquaintance, and began to
divert myself as before. By degrees I crept into the good graces of the
viceroy, who gave me a post in the government, that brought me a considerable
income, and, with the esteem of most people, I passed on a whole year.

The viceroy, not liking his situation, found the means to be recalled to
Spain: yet, recommending me to his successor, I remained in the same station he
before had given me; though I cannot brag of any more favors bestowed on me by
my new superior; for he was a man of an uncertain temper, proud and revengeful.
He was newly married to a very rich widow at Lima, who had a very beautiful
daughter, by report; for she was not suffered to take the liberties of the
place.

I often had a great desire to see her face, for I had observed her veiled many
times at church, which was all the liberty she had. I was informed she was
designed a wife for the supreme judge, though much against her inclination,
seeing there was a disparity of years, which is certainly the greatest bitter
to the sweets of matrimony; but nothing is consulted now more than wealth.

I received a letter from my uncle at Seville, wherein he desired I would leave
Lima, and come to Spain: and to induce me to it, he gave me the promise to make
me his heir. I must own I began to be pretty well tired of this climate; and
the time drawing on for the expiration of my mortgage, I set myself to prepare
things accordingly.

I disposed of my plantation to my faithful Indian for an under price, seeing I
thought I was under many obligations to him. I resigned up my office in the
viceroy's palace, indeed, because I could not get leave to dispose of it.

I turned all my effects into gold dust, and sent it before me to my uncle; and
now I only waited for company to go over land to Vera Cruz, a port in the North
Sea, where I should have the convenience of embarking for Spain.

I began now to think of settling in the world, and indeed it was almost time,
for I had passed my twenty-eighth year, and at that age the heat of youth
should be pretty well over; for if a man cannot see his follies on this side
thirty, he is in danger of being incorrigible all the days of his life.
Besides, I had very good encouragement to stability, in my own fortune, and the
prospect of my uncle's; who, in all probability, had not many years to live,
being in his eighty-third year.

Well then, as my story is almost off the stage, I Will throw you into the
bargain a short account of one place more, for my catastrophe, and then to my
epilogue for detaining you so long, and that shall be the description of Lima,
as it is at present.

Lima, the capital city of Peru, is situated about two leagues from the
seaport of Calao, in 12 degrees 6 minutes of southern latitude, and 79 degrees
45 minutes of western longitude. It is built on a noble plain, with hills at a
distance.

Francis Pizarro was the founder, in the year 1535, though it has changed its
name, since his time, from La Cindad de los R^ges, or City of Kings, to Lima,
which is only a corruption of the Indian word Rimac, which was the name of an
Indian idol formerly worshipped in that place.

This is the finest city (next to Mexico) in all America. All the streets are
in a direct line exactly measured out, and much of the same length and breadth,
being fifty yards wide.

In the heart of the city is the noblest square my eyes ever beheld, and in the
midst a fountain of brass, adorned with eight lions, continually spouting
water, supplied by the river of Lima, that runs through the skirts of the town,
covered with a handsome stone bridge that leads to the suburbs. Within the
suburbs, is a fine public walk, beautified with orange trees, and in the
evening it is crowded with the best company of the city. Although this city is
so beautiful, it was mostly destroyed by an earthquake in the year 1682. There
are no less than fifty-seven churches and chapels (with those that are in the
monasteries) in this city, and twenty-four monasteries for men, and twelve for
women. The cathedral is very magnificent, as are most of the other churches,
though chiefly built with wood from the first story, by reason of the
earthquakes.

The viceroy of Peru has his residence here, and is so powerful that he hardly
owns the king his master to be his superior. Here are likewise kept all the
courts of justice, and from the high court there is no appeal. Among the rest,
they have settled an inquisition, which, on my conscience, is worse than (...)
of Spain. Heaven keep every body from it; for in this court the informant is a
witness, and the accuser is ever behind the curtain; and, to mend the matter,
the witnesses are never brought face to face.

To complete the grandeur of the place, there is an archbishopric, and an
university of three well filled colleges; though the students don't always
follow learning, for I have found some ignorant enough.

There are twelve hospitals, and one of them for Indians.

This city is garrisoned with two thousand horse, and six thousand foot; but
very indifferent troops for service against a foreign foe, being chiefly
composed of Creolians and Indians. These Creolians (who are so named from owing
their birth to America) are most of them proud, lazy and ignorant, and
generally tyrants whenever they have power, though sharp enough as to trade,
and will overreach you if they can.

They are all inclined to venery, and will sacrifice every thing to gratify
that vice. The women (who are really very handsome) generally sit at home all
day cross-legged, and as mute as fishes; but at night it is customary to haunt
the streets veiled, and will as hardly be refused a favor, as the men with us
on the like occasion.

As I was sitting one evening in my lodging, dispatching some letters for
Spain, I heard somebody knock softly at my door. My servant was gone abroad,
and therefore I rose and opened it myself; but was surprised to see a lady
veiled, who, without making any words, came in and sat down on a couch. After
she had reposed herself some time, she unveiled, and discovered to me one of
the sweetest faces I had ever seen. I was almost turned into stone at the sight
of so much beauty, and was ready to fall down and worship her as divine. Said
she, I came not here to be gazed at; I like you, and if you can do the same by
me, I believe you will not use me ill.

Madam, I replied, I know no other way to convince you that I like you, but
one. With that I took her into an alcove, where we soon came to a right
understanding. As soon as our small matter of business was over, she desired to
be dismissed, yet with a promise to give me another visit the next evening;
But, said she, if you should chance by any accident to see me in any other
place, take your eyes from the object for fear of danger; for those messengers
of the soul betray their trust. I promised to observe her directions, and left
her, but yet could not help my curiosity; for when she was got down stairs, I
put on my cloak, followed her, and observed she went into the viceroy's palace.
I was convinced by the dress she wore, that she was none of the common sort;
and much diverted I was at the accident.

The next day, she did me the favor of another visit, when we passed our time
as pleasantly as we could; and my Incognita seemed very much pleased with my
company.

After our toying was over, she told me she was afraid of losing me, for she
heard I designed for Spain. I informed her, nothing had power to stop me, but
the passion I had for her.

She at last discovered herself to me: she was daughter-in-law to the viceroy:
she told me that she had respected me a great while, and had many disputes with
her honor and love; but the former was forced to give way to the latter. She
likewise let me know of her approaching marriage, and added, that the knowledge
of my person would make her aversion to her husband much stronger. We had many
meetings to the content of us both; and she made me several presents of jewels,
which I intend to keep for her sake, having preserved them through all my
fortunes. Our meetings now began to be less frequent, seeing the weeding-day
was fixed, which gave me a great deal of uneasiness. To divert my melancholy, I
usually took a walk in the orange-grove, where, in my musing fits, I often
staid longer than usual.

As I was going home one evening, I heard the clashing of swords at a distance,
and immediately after, saw a person running toward me, who cried, For the
Virgin Mary's sake, if you are a gentleman, lend me your sword, to defend
myself against a villain who has offered me the vilest indignity. I made him no
answer, but gave him my sword, (for he looked like a man of quality) and
followed him.

Just as I turned the corner, I saw him engaged, and his antagonist dropped down
dead.

The gentleman seeing that, took to his heels.

The street being alarmed with the bustle, as I came near the body, I was
seized as the murderer. What strengthened their opinion, (and I must confess
had but an indifferent look) was my sword remaining in the body of the
deceased. All my asseverations of innocence ^ignified nothing: I was carried
before the Corrigidore; but having no witnesses of my assaulting him, and one
fellow by good fortune proving I was not the person that engaged him first, I
was only once more condemned to Baldivia. I cursed my hard stars a thousand
times, and the grief of parting from my mistress was like to rid me of my life;
but time began to wear it off.

I was secured in the castle of the city till the vessel was ready to sail.

While I was confined, in order to be transported to Baldivia, a gentleman came
into the prison, and begged half an hour's conversation with me. I had been so
liberal to the keeper with my money, and pretty jovial in my humor, that I
believe if I had asked him to let me go, he would not have denied me; so that I
begged the favor to admit the gentleman, and his absence during our
conversation. He obeyed me in both, and the gentleman entered my room: which,
though mean, was the best in the prison.

As soon as the gentleman had reposed himself upon a chair, (none of the best)
he asked me if I would please to refresh myself with any thing the place
afforded; but I answered in the negative; he made a half a dozen hums and haws,
and opened his mouth to utter sense.

Sir, said he, you see before you the unhappy person who is the occasion of
your confinement. I should not be thus free with you, if I were not assured of
your generous good nature. Once more I must tell you, you see before you the
unhappy man who is guilty of that fact you are to suffer for. I am a gentleman
by birth; and though I had not the good fortune to owe my first birth to Old
Spain, yet I have this for my consolation, that my parents were born at Cordova
there; but the frowns of fortune driving them to this part of the world, gr^w
ashamed of her ill looks, and greeted them with smiles of favor. In a few
years, Plutus the god of wealth made them a visit, and took his leave of them
with a promise of his frequent return; and he proved as good as his word, for
in a little time fortune became a neuter gender, that is believing they did not
want her assistance, they were no more her devotees.

Sir, said I, the sooner you will please to come to plain Spanish, the sooner I
shall be in the ready road to your business.

Why then, said he, not to keep you in suspense, I am the person that was
obliged to you for your sword on such a time, which proved the instrument of my
revenge on a base wretch, that deserved an eternity of torments after this
life, for wronging the best of women. And since I find you love the shortest
way, without the tedious outward flourishes of rhetoric, I will inform you of
my story, with as much brevity as I am capable of.

My mother died about seven years since, and I may very justly say, the rest of
my father's life was a delirium; but death taking pity of his griefs, came to
his aid, and about two years ago I was left master of a plentiful fortune.

As death is the end of all things, and age must pay its tribute to him, I
shook off my grief for my father's loss; and in six months after his decease,
fell in love with a young lady of incomparable beauty, at least in my eye. My
fortune gave me easy access to the father of my fair, and when I had the
happiness of conversing with the object of my wishes, she did not seem averse
to my passion. Every thing concurring to my desires, Hymen joined those hands
whose hearts were united before.

For several days we revelled in the sweets of love; and I may justly say,
possession had not the power to pall desire; each moment of enjoyment seemed
new, and my utmost wish was centered in her breast; but the dire fiend,
tormenting jealousy, at last crept in, and palled my appetite to ardent love,
the fatal bitter to our mutual sweets.

I had a person that I called my friend, who shared the affluence of fortune
with me; we had the same desire to love and hate: I therefore thought I was but
poorly blessed, till my friend saw the idol of my soul. But Oh! what p^ngs that
fatal moment cost me: his eyes received the bane to all his peace, and in one
moment ^^^dered up his heart. I gave him leave (for what could I refu^^ such a
friend?) to visit my wife, when business demanded my absence. He often declared
his passion to he^ by plaintive sighs and languishing looks. When my wife
perceived he importuned her too far with his love, she threatened to tell me of
it; but in the mean time, he had acquainted me with what had passed between him
and my wife. Said he, My friend, I imagined your wife was like other women,
prone to change; therefore, in your absence, I counterfeited a passion for her,
to see whether she had that regard she ought to have for you, and I am pleased
to find that you have made so worthy a choice.

I must own to you, I was mightily pleased with this trial of my friend, as
believing it sprang from his kindness to me; and I had much to do to reconcile
my wife to his visits. She would often say, I wish your friend would be sincere
in his professions to you; for my part, I greatly doubt it.

In a little time after this accident, I perceived my friend began to look very
melancholy; I endeavored to sift the secret from him, but to no manner of
purpose for some time.

One day as we were riding out to take the air together, he seemed more deeply
plunged in sorrow than usual. I told him I should not take him for my friend
any longer, if he did not let me into the cause of his disorder. At last, with
much reluctance, he told me that the good opinion he had before conceived of my
wife was false, for he was well assured she was not true to my bed.

You may imagine what a thunderclap this must be to me, from a friend who I
was assured in myself would not relate a falsehood. It was some moments before
I could open my mouth; and all the time of my silence* he seemed so much
grieved that he had declared the secret to me, that I had no doubt of the truth
of it.

When my grief had given me liberty of speech. I begged he would give me the
foundation of his suspicion; but he desired to be excused till he had a certain
proof of her infidelity, which he did not doubt but that he should soon have,
though it was what he wished to be deceived in; and farther added, ^e would not
have me take any notice of it, but carry it fair to her, as if nothing had
happened; For if you should, said he, you will never (...) to the truth of the
matter.

I promised to comply with him, and went home: but Heaven knows with what a
heart.

I followed my friend's advice punctually, but yet could not help showing the
discontent of my mind in my countenance. My wife was mightily concerned for my
melancholy, and was very pressing to know the cause; and in a very tender
manner seemed to be disquieted, which I took all for art, and the cunning of
her ^ex.

I must own to you, that sometimes I imagined my friend had deceived me; but
whenever we had an opportunity of conversing, he strengthened my jealousy to
such a degree, that I began to wish the cause of it no longer in this world.
And if it had not been for my revenging myself on the supposed partner* of her
guilt, I had certainly taken methods to dispatch her hence.

I had some affairs to transact at Segovia every year; and the time drawing on
for my journey, my friend told me, before my return I should have demonstration
of her infidelity; For, said he, your absence will give her the opportunity she
wants, and she will be sure to take hold of it.

It was a great while before I could be prevailed upon by my friend to
undertake really this journey, but only to feign as if I had, that I might be
convinced of her perfidy, and punish it myself; but my friend laid me down so
many reasons for it, that I at last very unwi^lingly agreed to go. But in the
mean time, said he, you must order that I may have admittance in your absence*
that I may take my opportunity to observe all passages. Why, said I, I never
knew you debarred the liberty of my house. But you know, said he, since my
false declaration of love to try your wife's virtue, she has looked upon m^
more like an enemy than a friend, as knowing I was not sincere in my passion;
for women* ^e they ever so vicious, yet they ab^or the man that doubts their
virtue. Well then, said I^ if you will. we'll sup together tonight; and then
I Will take an opportunity to leave directions with my faithless wife, to allow
you the some privileges in my absence as you now have. Why th^^, returned my
friend, don't you be surprised at what I (...) say to her.

We par^^d, a^^ I went to prepare every thing for my intended journey. When I
was at dinner with my wife, I gave her some hints concerning my friend, and
that I desired he should have admittance in my absence; I observed she changed
color at my discourse, and seemed to be in the utmost confusion, although I
did not seem to see it.

After some talk about indifferent matters, she told me, if I thought fit, she
intended to live private in my absence, and admit of no visitors. For Sir, said
she, the world will be censorious, and receiving visits from a man, when you
are from home, is not consistent with our Spanish cus^o^s. She found by my
discourse that I was determined it should be so, wherefore she left off arguing
upon that subject: but I could perceive all the time we were together, my
resolves sat very uneasy upon (...): and it was with much difficulty she
restrained her tears. Her sorrow struck me to the heart, and it was the
greatest struggle I ever went through, to keep my temper: for I imagined all
her grief was in having this spy upon her actions.

When night approached* my friend came according to appointment, and during our
supper, I told my wife, she was to look upon him as my only friend, and give
him the same admi^^^^e as if it was myself, in every thing he should desire*
well knowing (I told her) he would ask nothing contrary to our (...) amity.

Sir, said my friend, I am very sorry I cannot comply with your desires; for I
have received letters from a near relation at Panama, and I am obliged to
attend his nuptials, seeing he cannot make proper marriage settlements without I
am upon the spot, and I fear I shall hardly return this six weeks. I was at
first very much surprised at this his sudden resolution, and was going to say
something upon it, till I observed he winked at me. I th^n began to remember
what he said to me in the morning, that I should not take notice of what he
said: But I observed that the cloud upon my wife's face began to disappear by
degrees, which seemed to me the greatest proof of her infidelity. I was so
provoked with the imaginary wrong, that I could not help showing it in words
and actions: but yet I had so much reason in my madness (for passion is no
less) that I concealed the real cause.

My wife seemed confounded at my incoherent anger, having never seen my fury
before; and when my friend was gone, begged I would tell her the real cause of
my uneasiness, for she was well assured some secret cause had ruffled my
temper; but I persisted in the obstinacy of not discovering it to her, and the
next day pursued my journey, with a dismal idea of what was to come.

Thought had so much impaired my strength with its violent workings, that I
found it a difficult thing to sit on my horse; and when I came to my inn at
night, I was carried to bed in a violent fever, and all night was in a
delirium. My servants sent for a physician, who gave me something to resist my
malady; and while he was with me, I uttered some words in my ravines, that gave
him to understand my disease proceeded from the mind. When I came to myself, I
was something surprised to hear him speak to me after this manner:

Sir, I have so long dealt with diseases of most kinds, that I have knowledge
enough to perceive when they proceed from a ^ill habit of (...), or (...)
maladies of the mind that slight all physic; and be not amazed when I tell you,
I have often cured the latter by wholesome advice. You are a young man, and
perhaps you have taken a wrong conception of things; if you will be pleased to
tell me your case, I Will give my advice without a fee; and do not think me
impertinent to desire it. I have seen more years than you. You may conceal your
name in your relation, and if my advice does not please you, you are but just
where you were: I shall be as faithful in keeping your secret, as your
confessor.

You may be assured I was very much surprised at his proceeding, and I easily
perceived a sincerity in his discourse, that gained him my esteem; and I was
resolved to let him into my story; which I did, as much as I have to you.

After a pause, he said, I had just come up to his imagination of my case; and
now, Sir, said he, I will proceed to my advice. Consider well what you are
about; you have confessed your friend owned to you he made pretended love to
your wife, to try her virtue, and yet I do not find he advised with you about
it before he had put his device in practice. To give you my sentiments of this
matter, I believe your friend to be false to you, and that he really is in love
with your wife. The distress of your spouse proceeded from her indignation to
him, and love to you. His telling you, after his attempt upon her, was no more
than to be first in the declaration, as imagining she would of course inform
you with it: her keeping it a secret from you was, not to make you uneasy, and
his declaring his suspicion of her virtue afterward, was either to be revenged
on her for slighting his passion, or to give him an opportunity in your absence
to wrong your wife.

This, in short, I fancy will prove the whole truth. Neither is this judgment
hard to make, for I am apt to believe, any disinterested person would make the
same judgment. Your passion has blinded your reason, yet, nevertheless, if you
can give yourself time to think calmly, I do not in the least doubt but you will
be of my opinion. This I am assured of, jealousy is a certain sign of love; and
if you should, in the heat of passion, do a rash deed, every moment of your
life will prove a torment to you. Lover's eyes are often false, and too quick
in false constructions. Call reason to your assistance; that will prove your
best friend. Take some time to think of my advice and counsel: friends may as
soon prove false as wives, and you (...) better lose the former than the latter.

All the while he was speaking, m^thought I was listening to an oracle; and, at
the end of his discourse, I could not help blaming myself for my rash belief. I
called over in my memory every particular of my wife's behavior, and could not
find any one action start up, to give me that hard opinion I had (...) rashly
conceived against her.

I returned the physician of my mind, as well as body* many thanks for his
cordial advice; and would have paid him in another kind, but I could not
prevail upon him to take a single dollar. No, said he, in accepting of your
money* I shall make it appear, that, like (...) I pleaded for my (...). No Sir,
all the recompense I shall a^^ (...) you, is, only to let me know the truth of
every thing, when the catastrophe is over, which I hope will not (...) your
wife: and if I might throw in one word of advice more, if you find the friend
you have so much confided in to be false, show your resentment (...) slighting
(...), and leave revenge to Heaven. I promised to follow his judicious advice
in every thing, and so we parted with a very good (...) for each other.

I was resolved to proceed no farther or my journey, but make the best of my
way back again; and as l went along, consider of my behavior, and let time
alone for proof. The reason I gave my servants for returning, was, that I had
not strength enough to pursue my journey, which, in reality, was no falsehood,
for I was weak enough; and I am convinced that disorders of the mind weaken the
body more than habitual distempers. In part of my journey back, I could not
come to any resolution how to behave, and therefore resolved to lie one night
more upon the road, to see if my pillow would advise me. When I arrived at my
inn, one of my servants told me Don Roderigo was just alighted. Hearing him
named, my blood ran a wild course about my body, and immediately it struck to
my mind that something was not right.

I asked my servant if Don Roderigo had seen him; he told me no, and that he
seemed disguised, as if he did not desire to be known. This strengthened my
suspicion of some ill action intended, or done already, and that he was making
his escape. I ordered my servants not to appear: but when supper was ready, I
sent for my host to bear me company, when, after some trivial discourse, I
asked him what guests he had in the house. He made no scruple in telling me;
but when he came to Don Roderigo, he declared he did not much like him; for he
seemed very willing to be private with two of his servants; and he had observed
them often whispering. They design, said he, to be going very early in the
morning, but I don't know which road they travel. I concealed my disturbance of
mind from my host, but resolved to be gone as early as Don Roderigo: and to be
sure of being early enough, I determined not to go to bed, notwithstanding the
weakness of my body required repose.

In the middle of the night, I heard people whispering in the next room, and I
could easily distinguish Roderigo's voice: though I could gather but little of
their discourse, yet I could hear mine and my wife's name ^^^en mentioned.

At break of day, I found they were preparing to be gone: and though I was
pretty expeditious, yet they were got out of the inn before I could get on
horseback with my servants. I was much vexed at it, yet pursued my journey
homeward. But I was very much amazed, when, about two leagues from Lima, I met
my wife in a coach with her maid, and two Indian servants. The servants, as
soon as they saw me, were overjoyed, and my wife could not open her mouth for
some time. I then began to relapse into my former jealousy, and imagined she
was following Don Roderigo.

At last she opened her mouth with a great deal of joy, Lord, my dear, said
she, is it you in reality, or are my senses deceived? I asked her the reason of
her journey, and her mighty surprise. Sir, answered she, that question
confounds me; have I not a letter from you, to come with all speed imaginable?
Here it is, continued she. I took the letter from her, and read the contents,
which were as follows:

MY DEAR,
PURSUING my journey. I had the misfortune to fall from my horse, and break my
arm, which prevents my writing to you. The accident is attended with a violent
fever, which, I am told, is very dangerous. I have refrained writing to you
till now, as expecting some amendment; but finding myself worse, I beg you will
come to me with all the expedition imaginable, for fear you should never see me
more alive.

Your affectionate Husband.


There needed no sphynx to unriddle this enigma; and I observed, by my wife's
countenance, we both knew the author of the letter. While we were confused, the
coachman that drove the coach was stealing away; but my wife cried out to stop
him, for that was the messenger that brought the letter to her: and she farther
added, he told her that he was to conduct her to me, for the coachman we had
before, was drowned: She said that that circumstance deceived her more than any
thing else: The fellow also told her that I had prevailed with a gentleman in
the neighborhood, where I lay hurt, to send him to drive the co^^h. I rode
after the fellow, and brought him back, ordered him into the coach-box, and
forced him to drive out of the road, to a neighboring village, where lived a
gentleman of my acquaintance. He very unwillingly complied with my commands;
and we kept very close to him to prevent his making away. When we arrived at my
friend's house, we secured the fellow in a strong room, and I left two of my
Indian servants to guard him. I made my friend acquainted with the accident,
and that this visit was not intended, but by mere chance. He gave me to know I
was welcome, let what would bring me there.

When my wife, and I, with my friend were alone, I tenderly embraced her, and
begged her pardon for my unjust suspicions of her virtue, and related the whole
progress of my jealousy, without omitting the least circumstance. She gave
thanks to Heaven for the danger she was saved from, and related to me the
manner of her being deceived by the fellow that brought the letter, as follows:

The fifth day after you had left me, as I was musing in the garden, my maid
told me a person had a letter to deliver me from you. I began to tremble with
timorous apprehensions, and my whole frame felt violent disorders. I ordered
the bearer to be brought to me; and when I had read the letter, grief locked up
my tongue, and I had not power to speak for some time. When I had recovered
speech, I asked the fellow where you were. Madam, said he, he is at Don
Floria's country house, (naming a friend of mine, that my wife had heard me
often mention) and knowing you had never a coachman, my master sent me to
conduct you to your husband. I would not spend time in dressing myself, but
just as I was, with my maid and the two Indians, pursued our journey. I never
once dreamed of any treachery, though I always doubted your false friend; but
as he had never been to visit me in your absence, it wiped away all suspicions
of him. I observed that the coachman, by his looks, did not like the company of
my servants, but I was too much concerned for you think of it much.

We congratulated one another again at our happy deliverance, and admired the
workings of divine providence, and the second cause, my friendly physician.

My wife expressed a great desire to see him, to return him acknowledgments for
his inspired advice, and, in the morning I promised her to go to him, if we
could get any convenient carriage; for we were not very fond of making use of
the coachman that brought her out.

I deferred his examination ^ill the next day, being too much fatigued to do it
then, though I had ordered he should want nothing but his liberty; for I
considered him only as an (...) to work his (...). When I was up in the
morning, I ordered him to be brought before me; but, after some time, they
brought me word he had made his escape, by creeping through the cieling of the
room, and throwing down the shingles, for it was a single apartment near the
garden. I was a little uneasy at his getting away as well as my wife, for fear
his master should make some attempt upon us in the house where we were, it
being a quarter of a mile from the village, and the gentleman my friend had but
few servants; therefore, it was thought the safest course for us to go
immediately to Lima. And as soon as we could procure mules we set out, and
reached that city without any molestation.

I heard nothing of the faithless Roderigo for several days, neither did I
think it strange; for I imagined, if he had any shame left, he would not dare
to appear publicly at Lima; but if he did, I had resolved to take my friendly
physician's advice, (which proved so successful to me in my distress) to show
my resentment in slighting him.

One night, as soft repose had locked up our senses, we were alarmed from our
downy sleep, by a fearful cry of Fire! fire! I arose, and ran into my wife's
apartment, where she remained frighted almost to death: and as people
generally, on the alarm of fire, know not what they do, she ran to the chamber
where the maids lay, and dressed herself in her servant's clothes. The maid
being equally frighted, when she found she had no clothes to put on, clapped on
her mistress's which I had brought after her, and was running down stairs to
free herself from the danger. As she was going through the hall, I observed
four men in masks seized her, and carried her off. I followed her with my sword
in my hand, till one of the villainous company came behind me, and run me
through the back. My servants, who came after me, bore me in faint with loss of
blood, but by good fortune, the wound did not prove dangerous, though well
meant.

We could never come by the truth how the house was set on fire, though it was
soon extinguished: but we were assured it must be by some one of the domestics.
It was easy to judge Don Roderigo was the cause of it, by running away with the
maid, as mistaking her for my wife, because she had in the hurry put on her
mistress's clothes and veil.

I was advised by my best friend to summon him before the supreme judge, for it
was dangerous to let him go on with impunity. But he would not obey the
summons, therefore he was designed to be outlawed by due course of law. But as
that takes up several months, I was obliged to keep a guard in my house, for I
received several menacing letters frequently from him, either thrown over the
wall, or left so that we could never secure any person that brought them. While
our suit was going on, our new viceroy arrived, who proving a friend to Don
Roderigo, a Noli prosequi was issued out, and I was obliged to stand at the
whole charge of the lawsuit. This violent and unjust proceeding of the
viceroy's, raised my ga^l to that degree, that I sai^ many warm things against
his administration, which came to his knowledge; for there are generally poor
spirited wretches in all governments, that have no other merit than to improve
tales, and feed the ears of their superiors with nauseous flattery and lies.

I was sent for to the viceroy, and examined concerning these reports; and so
far incensed him with my replies to his questions, that if I had not met with
some friends that palliated the matter, I don't know how far his resentment
would have carried him. I was dismissed with my liberty, but with a multitude
of menaces, if, for the future, I should give my tongue another loose; and I
soon found the effects of his rese^tment, by losing a small place in the
government; but as providence had put me above wanting it, I was not much
grieved at the loss.

My wife begged me to remove from Lima, a place where I had received so many
insults; and it was not improbable but I might receive more, which proved but
too true.

In a few days after I had appeared before the viceroy, the maid that was
forced away (by being mistook for my wife) came home miserably ill used, and
brought me a letter from the ungrateful Don Roderigo, which you may read if you
please: [Upon that he took the letter out of his pocket, and I found it as
follows:]

I DECLARE myself your in^^terate enemy, though I have no just reason to be so:
you may be sure my enmity is rooted forever in my heart, and I shall have no
rest in this world ^ill thou art (...) of it. I should not perhaps be so free
in declaring my mind in writing, if I was not very well assured the publishing
it would do thee no good. I have so much honor in me still, as to assure thee,
I would venture my life to hazard thine; and if I have ever the opportunity I
shall put it to the hazard; therefore be well guarded whenever thou appearest
abroad. Minds like mine are never appeased. I always was a villain, but had so
much canning as to hide it from the world till now this affair has published
it. And be assured I shall study every way to accomplish my revenge, whilst I
am

RODERIGO.


The insolence of this letter was not to be borne, and I was as impatient to
meet him, as he could be to meet with me; and I must own to you, I thirsted for
his blood, for his usage was beyond the nature of man to bear. I examined the
poor girl of what she knew of the wretch, who informed me that they put her
into a coach, and carried her a league out of town; but when they found their
mistake, the usage she bore from them was insupportable, and the brute Roderigo
told his servants, if they were pleased to make use of her in the vilest
manner, they were welcome. The wretches that served such a villain, must have
very near the same sentiments of honor and honestly, or they would seek
another master; they were too forward to neglect such a cruelty, and four of
them by turns ravished her. Strangers to the nature of the wretches, who are
superiors in this part of the world, would imagine such deeds should find
punishment by law: But alas! justice has fled the place, and we may expect more
mercy from the worst of cannibals than is to be found here.

The poor creature in a little time felt the farther effects of their cruelty;
for they gave her a distemper that ended her life.

Before her death she gave me knowledge of the place where they led her; for
they had not any caution in their villainous proceeding, but as soon as they
had gratified their lust and cruelty, turned her out of doors.

I had no farther need of any thing to wh^t my revenge; but I must own the
death of this unfortunate poor creature added fuel to the fire. My wife was
almost distracted at the unhappy accident, and had no other consolation, but
that she had escaped their cruel hands.

I did not acquaint her with my intention of seeking this villain, but I made
it my only business; I went to the place the poor maid had directed me to,
where I had information that he had left the place, and now resided in Lima. I
was very sorry he had changed his habitation, because I should find it a more
difficult thing to execute my resentment with safety in Lima. But, however, I
sent him the following letter:

THY usage to me is not to be borne; therefore if thou have that spirit, (which
I much question, from thy villainy, for villains are always cowards) meet me in
St. Justin's field tomorrow at six in the morning; as I imagine there is no
second in thy villainy, I shall expect thee alone; and I hope thou will not fail
to meet the injured.

ALONZO DE CASTO.


I chose St. Justin's field, for the convenience of a small public house which
over-looked it, where I went before day, that I might discover if he came
alone; for I had but little reason to expect fair play from such a villain.
When the time came, I saw him go by the house alone* I let him pass by me, to
see if he was not followed by any of his cursed crew; but finding none, I
hasted after him, into the middle of the field, and called to him; he turned
about, and, with the image of ^ell in his face, cried, I thought your
resentment would have brought you first into the field; but as I am here before
you, it speaks me no coward, though your vile scrawl would intimate as much.
Come, said I, no words, thy breath is poison to me, it will infect the air;
Only this, Sir, said he, as you had not named any particular weapons, I have
made bold to bring a pair of pistols with me; and to let you see I have some
honor, you shall take your choice. I g^ve him no answer, but took one, and we
agreed to stand at su^^ a distance. As I was going to fire, he cried out, Hold!
I will tell you one secret more before we engage, and that is this, your pistol
is only charged with powder, but ^^ine with ball, which I put in since you made
the choice; and now prepare for death, be assured this is the last moment of
thy life. I did not give myself time to answer, but fired (...) pistol and then
hurled it at him* and had the good fortune to cut him in the face with it; and
in the confusion and surprise, his pistol went off without hurting me. Now,
said I, thou wretch! we are once more on equal terms, and Heaven, I hope, will
favor the justest cause. We drew, and in a few passes I laid him for dead on
the ground; though in the ^encounter I had received a dangerous wound in the
breast. I went home, notwithstanding my hurt, and sent secretly for a surgeon
of my acquaintance, who dressed me, and told me I was in no danger.

My wife was very much grieved at the accident, though she could not but be
pleased at Roderigo's death, yet her fears increased, as imagining I should
suffer for it by the violent temper of the viceroy: but her grief began to blow
over, when, in several days after, no enquiry was made, nor even any notice
taken of his death.

I was very much surprised at it, imagining I had really killed him.

As soon as my wound was well, I went to the little house to enquire if they
knew any thing of the body: (for the owner of the house was formerly my
servant, and a man of much probity, who knew all my story;) he informed me,
that a little while after I past by (...) house home again, five persons r^^
that way, and coming to the body, seemed to mourn over it, and went the road
that leads to St. Dominic; (a village about half a mile from the place where we
fought.)

I imagined they had buried him privately in that village, and went home to
acquaint my wife, who shared my contentment.

I now went abroad as I was wont, and all the discourse was of Don Roderigo's
sudden disappearing. Servants and all had left his house, but no one suspected
any thing of his death. Some of my acquaintance told me they imagined this to
be some trick of his, and that he only lay dormant to meditate some mischief to
me.

I seemed to come into their fears, but in my mind slighted their advice, as
imagining I had nothing to fear. I past on a whole month without any danger at
all; but as I was going one day across the bridge to a warehouse I had in the
suburbs, a fellow came up to me, and privately asked me if I would be a chapman
for some East India goods. He told me a long story, that he was obliged to make
up a cargo and leave this part of the world, for his credit began to fail, and
if he did not get away speedily, his creditors would lay him up. We went to a
neighboring tavern, where he read me his bill of parcels. He told me he had
been encouraged to offer his goods to me, from the fairness of my character;
and was coming to wait on me when he had the good fortune to meet me. The next
day was agreed on for me to go and view the goods, for I was not to pay for
them till they were brought to my warehouse. Accordingly, as appointed, I went
to the house of the person, in Benedictine-street. I was shown into a room till
the goods were brought; but as I was looking on some paintings, five men rushed
out of a closet in the room, and seized me. They disarmed me, and took out
every thing that was in my pockets, went out, and locked me in. You may imagine
the surprise I was in, which was very much increased when I saw my enemy Don
Roderigo enter the room. I in my confusion thought I had seen a ghost, for he
looked very pale; but he soon convinced me of the contrary. And have I got you
at last? said he, I will now revenge myself at leisure; but to complete my
revenge, I have sent a token for your wife, that I may ravish her before thy
face; and then I Will devise tortures to rack every joint about thee. He gave me
to know that he had sent my watch for a token, and that she would bring such a
sum of money to pay for the goods. The torment of my soul no tongue can
express; and I am assured, if they had not taken my sword from me, I had put an
end to my wretched life.

The inhuman villain insulted me so much, that I rushed upon him, unarmed as I
was, and had certainly choked him, if his wicked assistants had not dragged me
from him.

It is well, said he, I have no other passion but lust reigning in my breast at
this instant; but when I have satiated my desires on thy wife, I Will then add
another pang for this usage; but, in the mean time, I Will leave you to think of
this matter alone, for I fancy you don't much care for my company.

As soon as he had made an end of this speech, he and his gang went out, and
fastened the door, on the other side. I Will give you leave to imagine the
confusion of my thoughts. I remained some time without moving; but accidentally
casting my eyes on the door, I observed there was a bar to shut it on the
inside. I immediately barred it, and began to look about to see if I could find
any thing for my defense; but to my grief could perceive nothing. I entered the
closet, and searched there, but to no purpose. Looking upon the floor of the
closet, I perceived one of the boards seemed to be loose: I essayed to pull it
up, but wanted some engine to effect it. I at last thought of the bar of the
door, ran to it, and by main force wrenched it from the staple: for I thought
if it would not serve me to make my escape, it would serve me to defend myself:
but I easily forced up the board, and with my bar beat down the cieling under
me. I was resolved to explore the hidden place, what ever was the consequence;
for it could not be worse than to remain where I was. I therefore ventured
down, though something of a difficult descent; for the joists were so close
together, I had much ado to force my body through; but at last, with much
difficulty, I pressed through, and had a desperate fall to the ground.

I soon found I had got into a cooper's cellar, for there were several pipe
staves, and tools to work with. I seized upon some of them, and by force
wrenched open the cellar door, which led me once more into the street before
Don Roderigo's house. I did not give myself time to consider, but ran toward
the bridge to get to my own house; but just as I entered the Cordeliers street,
I met my wife with her maid, and the wretch that had decoyed me to the house. I
ran upon him, seized him by the throat, and flung him over the bridge, where he
met with the reward of his villainy. I had not power of speech to inform my wife
of the accident, but made signs for her to go home. By this time it was dark;
and the profligate villain Don Roderigo, fancying his cursed emissary staid too
long, came out of his door which faced the bridge. As soon as I discovered him,
I ran toward him, and seized him; Now villain, said I, I will not part with
thee till thou have rendered up thy soul to hell. We both struggled, and I kept
him down; but the rest of his company coming up to his assistance, I quitted
him; and running to see if I could meet with some one armed, I had the good
fortune to light on you. As soon as I received your sword, I ran back, and just
met the villain as he was entering his door. I ran the weapon into his very
heart; and I believe you was a better witness of his death than myself, seeing
you were found near the body.

As soon as I saw him fall, I made the be^^ of my way home, not imagining you
would meet with any farther damage than the loss of your sword.

The darkness of the night, I fancy, concealed me from the servants that came
to the assistance of their master, for I never once was suspected; or perhaps
if they did know me, fear kept them from discovering me.

When I heard of your trial* I came myself into court, and if you had been
condemned, resolved to have discovered the truth; but finding you were to be
banished to Baldivia, I concealed the fact, imagining I had it in my power to
gain your freedom, by paying your ransom; which was the reason I came now to
wait upon you, to offer you my service in that or any thing else that lies in
my power. I returned him thanks for his offer; and considering his story, I
told him I was glad I was in some sort an instrument of his revenge. He would
force upon me a ring, and two hundred pieces of gold, and begged he might be
ranked in the number of my friends. He made me many visits, and once brought
his wife with him. She was a very handsome woman, and seemed to have a great
deal of wit. She made me several very handsome compliments in behalf of her
husband, and begged I would accept of their pictures set round with fine
oriental pearls.

He accompanied me on board, when our vessel was to set sail, putting in the
captain's hands, fresh provision, and several ^orts of good liquor, to comfort
me in my voyage.

I had the happiness to have pirates for my fellow sufferers, and the viceroy
had given out, to take off all censure from him* that I encouraged them in
their piracy.

We took our leaves, with protestations of a lasting friendship; and I lived as
merrily as I could till the day we had the good fortune to meet with you, which
has not given me any reason to change my humor.

We were mightily diverted with the relation of Don Pedro, and I found I was
not deceived when I took him for a man that understood the world.

We had now gained the Streights of Gibraltar; and had entered the
Mediterranean Sea. But I must confess I could not see the African shore,
without numbers of sighs for misfortunes past; and I found my griefs renewed
with the remembrance; and all the mitigation I had was the affectionate concern
from Don Ferdinand, to whom I had told my whole story. We had not made a day's
sail in the Mediterranean, ere we perceived two sail making toward us. I must
own, I had no desire to engage, being so richly laden; and therefore, by the
advice of both ships' company, made all the sail I could to avoid them. But our
vessels being foul with so long a voyage, and never once cleaned during our
whole course, they gained upon us, do what we could. When we found there was no
getting from them without fighting, we were as much determined on the other
hand to sight our ships to the bottom of the sea rather than surrender. Having
fixed this resolution, we prepared for the engagement; and when we had got all
things in readiness, we lessened our sails that they might come up to us. I
ordered every sailor to load as many arms as they could, and not to fire a gun
till I gave them orders; but as soon as ever they had fired the great guns, to
discharge our small arms upon them. I could not prevail upon Don Ferdinand to
keep below, though I saw fear strongly painted in his face. When they came
within pistol-shot of our ship, they hailed us and commanded us to strike
immediately. We made no other answer than with our guns and small arms, which
surprised them, and did them a great deal of damage in their rigging; for
cutting the topsail halliards with our shot, the topsail fell down upon the
cap, and hindered their ship's way very much; and I believe we might have made
our escape. But I perceived the Villars was ^ard put to it, (our Spanish man of
war, whom I had named the Villars, in remembrance of that dear one.) By this
time we were prepared again, and I ordered every man, as soon as they had
discharged, to lie flat upon their bellies till we had received the fire of the
enemy; which accordingly we did. They fired in upon us, but killed us not one
man. Then our hands rose up together, and fired in our small shot.

We had so damaged their rigging with this broadside, that we fell a (...) till
we were ch^^ged again, and then I gave our men orders (...) fire into the (...)
the ship, and point their guns low on purpose; which we (...) found had the
desired effect; for they had several shots betw^^^ wind and water, so that they
were obliged to heel the ship on the starboard side, to prevent the water
running in on the larboard. Seeing-there was not much to be feared from her, I
bore down to assist the Villars, because she was over-matched. But when her
antagonist found my design, and understood the condition of the other ship, she
made all the sail she could, and fled for it. We did not think fit to follow
her, but sent a boat on board to enquire how it stood with them in the Villars.
They sent me word they had lost eight men, had three wounded, and were very
much mauled in their rigging, as well as their hull, and had received a shot
between wind and water, and the ship leaked very much. I bad them search for
the leak; but there was no coming at it: therefore I ordered them to get out as
many of the goods as they could, and bring them on board me; the weather
proving very favorable, they went to work as fast as they could.

Our men brought me word that the ship we had engaged was sinking. They fired
several guns for assistance, and their consort being almost out of sight, I
bore down to help them all I could; but before we could come to them she sunk
to the bottom. The men had put out their longboat and barge, and were got in
them, and made toward us. As soon as they came within hearing, they called out
for quarter, which I promised them they should have. There were 123 of them;
and as their number exceeded ours, we were obliged to confine them, for fear
they should take it in their heads to set upon us.

The captain was killed in the engagement, but the lieutenant informed me they
were two men of war, of forty guns each, set out from Barcelona to cruise upon
the coast; and manned each with two hundred men, but the rest of their crew
were either killed, or being wounded sunk with the ship. I did not think it
proper to carry them to Italy, for fear it should prove prejudicial to Don
Antonio: and understanding, that in removing the goods on board the Villars,
they found out the leak and stopped it: I intended to put them on board her,
and give them the ship with their liberty; but first I ordered out the guns and
ammunition, and her goods, leaving them nothing but provisions and water, which
they returned me many thanks for, and so we parted.

The next day there arose such a storm as we had never felt before, and
continued in the utmost violence for fourteen days, so that now we were in
danger of drowning, and I believe most would have parted with their wealth to
have been safe on shore. At last we discovered land, but were very much
surprised to find it Candia, for now we began to be in fear of the Turkish
pirates. So we resolved to steer for Zant as fast we could, and there make
dividend of our prize money and goods. And accordingly we arrived there safely
the third of September School.

The island of Zant belongs to the Venetians, therefore we were out of danger
from the Turks. The town, which bears the same name with the island, is above a
mile in length, seated upon a beach of the bay. It is built mostly of stone,
and has a noble look from the sea. To the west of the town stands the castle,
built on a high and very steep hill, where most of the merchants dwell, and is
very near as big as the city below. It is a bishop's ^ee, and the governor is
of the nobility of Venice. The chief commodities they deal in are wine, oil,
and currants, which are esteemed of the best growth. They grow on vines like
other grapes, and are gathered in July, and then packed in hogsheads, ready for
the merchants.

Our men being well pleased they were out of danger, and in a place where wine
was to be bought cheap, trafficed so much for that commodity, that most of them
fell into dangerous diseases; therefore I resolved to leave Zant, and make for
Sapienza, ^n island with a good harbor, not inhabited, where they would not be
under the like temptation, so we came to an anchor there September 8. I ordered
twelve guns on shore, and raised a platform capable of defending us from the
insults of an enemy. In a pleasant green we put up a large tent, and others
smaller by it, for the officers and sailors; but I having but one bed put up on
shore, Don Ferdinand was forced to lie with me, though, as I thought, very
unwillingly. Our sharing the ready money took us up four days; I reserved a
fourth part to my owners, which amounted to upwards of sixty thousand pounds;
and a twelfth part for myself, which, with what presents and other things that
I had, amounted to the value of 50,000 pounds. Every sailor from first to last
shared above twelve hundred pounds a piece; but when we came to divide the
goods, we knew not which way to go about it; so with one common consent of the
sailors, I was obliged to accept of them, without paying one penny for them.

We set sail for Ostia the next day, after we had finished our dividend, and
arrived there November 1, after a voyage of two years and seven months, and the
richest prize that ever came into any port of Italy. I sent a letter to Don
Antonio, to give him notice of my arrival, and advice to come and take care of
his cargo. In two days, he, Donna Isabella, and her little son, came on board
in a pleasure-boat. I found they were in mourning, and I told them I was afraid
to ask them who it was; for they informed me that Isabella's father had been
dead above two years, but they had resolved never to wear any other color till
they had seen me. Never was a more tender meeting between friends than between
us; and I must confess, for some time all my cares lay hushed.

When I came to inform Don Antonio of the wealth I had brought home, he stood
amazed: for besides the money which I told him of, the goods I had on board
exceeded in value the freight I went out with. I could hardly prevail upon him
to accept of such a sum of money, till I informed him it was but barely his
due, and that I had very near as much to my own share.

I presented Don Ferdinand to Antonio and his lady, who seemed very much
pleased with him; and Don Pedro, out of his free merry humor, told me, he
hoped I would not forget him, because he was older, for he thought he had more
right to my friendship than Don Ferdinand, seeing he was an older acquaintance.
I let them into his life and humor; they received him very friendly, and we
all went to Don Antonio's villa together.

After staying a week, I began to be tired with so much pleasure, and therefore
begged leave of Don Antonio to visit Rome, only to show Don Ferdinand that
celebrated place. Don Antonio sent before to his palace to prepare for our
reception, and the next-day we followed. We visited all the (...), ancient and
modern, where we might see the grandeur of the ancient Romans by those
stupendous ruins still left. As Rome was formerly a nursery of war and
greatness, it is now a nursery of arts, (...) chiefly painting, architecture,
and music. There have flourished in one century, La^fra^^o, Doa^ni^hino,
Pi^tro du Co^tona, the Possines, Camassei. Guercin du Cento. Chivoli. Andrea
Sac^hi, the immortal Raphael* Ha^^ibal Carache Guido (...), Mu^^ano, and many
more excellent in the art of painting. Then Palladio, Vitruvius, Scammozi,
Pozza, and many more famous for architecture. Then the divine Corelli for
music, whose sweet compositions will be always new; and we may say by him, as a
great English poet said of our countryman Shakespeare, that the former had
pulled up the roots of music, as the latter of poety, and transplanted them
into their own gardens, where all those that follow must borrow a branch from
them.

I shall not say any thing more of Rome, ^^or of Naples, where we went once
more upon Don Ferdinand's account. I would have persuaded him to have begun his
studies at Rome, (for I supposed him a Roman Catholic) but he would not hear of
it, and begged he might go with me into England, which I promised him he should.

Donna Isabella had an orphan cousin that lived with her, of a vast fortune,
beautiful to a miracle; who, having seen Don Ferdinand, fell desperately in
love with him, but he did not seem to have the least regard for her. Don
Antonio discovered to me the secret, and pitying by experience, his kinswoman,
desired I would forward the match. But when Don Ferdinand understood my
desires, he fell upon his knees and begged I would never mention it more; for
he had made a solemn resolution never to marry any woman breathing. I pressed
him all I could, and laid the folly of such a rash resolution before him; but
it was preaching to a tempest, and all my arguments had no power upon him. On
the other hand, the merry Don Pedro was as deep in love with Dom^^ Felicia,
which was the name of the orphan lady. But his manner of courtship was so odd,
and out of the way, that he caused more diversion than we could have imagined.
If she went to bed, he would lay himself down at her chamber door, and sing
songs all night; so that if she had any inclination to have rested, he was
resolved she should not; and he would often say, he intended to plague her into
a compliance. If she went into the ga^^en, he was sure to follow her close; or
even at church, he would often tell her, it was in vain to pray for a blessing
from heaven, when she was committing murder with every look. In short, he would
often force a smile from the afflicted lady herself.

I was still endeavoring with Don Ferdinand to forget his ras^vow: but he
desired me, in such moving terms, not to entreat him further, that I resolved
never to trouble him any more upon that theme. Notwithstanding which, I begged
of Donna Isabella to try what she could do with him, for I imagined
complaisance might work upon him more than friendship. She sent for him into
her closet, and they remained together several hours; and I was very much
pleased the next day to see him walking in the garden, with only Donna Felicia.
I did not think proper to interrupt them, but when I had an opportunity, I
declared my satisfaction. and told him I easily forgave his not complying with
me, and yielding to the persuasion of Donna Isabella. He seemed to be in some
confusion as what I said to him, which I attributed to his denying me, and his
condescension to Donna Isabella. But in a few days* after that, I was something
more surprised to see Don Pedro eagerly addressing Donna Felicia, and she
regarding him more favorably than usual. And my surprise was increased, when
Donna Isabella told me the nuptial day was fixed between Don Pedro and Donna
Felicia. I told her I was very well pleased the lady had so soon forgot h^^
violent passion: but I added, that the stronger the flame, the shorter the
duration. If so, returned Donna Isabella, we may hope your passion is buried
long since. I told her, I did not love like others, for I was resolved to carry
mine with me to the grave. By what I have formerly heard from you, returned
Donna Isabella, as well as my husband, you have not the least glimpse of hopes.
Madam, said I, that is the reason I must despair: for no other fire shall ever
warm my breast, but what was kindled there by my first flame. We had much
discourse upon the same subject, and Donna Isabella told me at last, I was a
pattern for all faithful lovers.

When we were at Naples, I had provided goods and convenience of sending to St.
Salvador, according to my promise given to Don Jaques: and the vessel being to
touch at Ostia, was to send to me for my letters to Don Jaques. I desired Don
Ferdinand to write to his father, but he begged to be excused, for fear it
should fall into the hands of his lady; and for the same reason he begged I
would be cautious how I mentioned him. I told him he should see what I had
wrote, before I sent it; which was as follows:

SIR,
I KNOW not how to make you acknowledgements sufficient for those favors so
generously conferred upon me; and the manner of doing it stamps a double value
on the obligation. If there is no way to repay the mighty debt, yet I shall
with the utmost gratitude remember Don Jaques, and his kind benefits. I have
done myself the honor to send you those things you were desirous of the last
(...) I had the happiness of conversing with you; which I beg you will accept,
only for this reason, that you may see you shall ever live in the remembrance
of one, who shall think it the best good fortune can befall him, to subscribe
himself

Your sincere friend and servant, ROBERT BOIL.
P. S. I also beg you to give my humble duty to your good lady and virtuous
daughter; and be assured whatever you have given me in charge, shall have the
same regard, as if an immortal spirit had des^^^^ed from above, and written
your commission in my heart. Whatever letters you are pleased to honor me
with, direct for me at the palace of Antonio de Alvares in Rome, who will take
care to send them to me wherever I am; for as yet, I am undetermined where to
settle myself, but I have England in view.




I wrote this letter in the Portuguese language, and showed it to Don
Ferdinand, who approved of what I had written.

I had disposed of the rest of my goods on board, and the money amounted to
upwards of fifteen thousand pounds; but I could not prevail upon Don Antonio to
accept of one penny.

No, my dear friend, said he, you have already brought me to the fortune of a
nobleman; though it is not worldly wealth I covet. I have all the earth
contains, in the possession of my adorable wife: and even that, my greatest
happiness, is owing to you; and all the allay of joy I have, is, that I cannot
see you as blessed as I am. But, continued he, time, that wears out all things,
will, I hope, cure this amorous sickness of your soul. I ^et him know my grief
was fixed as destiny, and I had nothing else to do but to wing to the place
where the joy of my life did once reside; with this only hope, that the lively
imagination of my loss would put an end to all my sorrows, by sinking me into
the arms of death.

He was so very much concerned for me, that he could not avoid shedding tears;
and used all the arguments he could to persuade me to reside in Italy. I told
him I had more reason to go for my native country than what I had given him,
and that was the education of young Don Ferdinand, who begged to cultivate his
studies in England.

I turned all my money into bills of exchange, well knowing the casualities
that attend travelers: and I intended to go by land to Flanders with Don
Ferdinand, my two faithful Indians, and one servant more.

All my Spanish sailors that I had picked up by the way, had, by my consent,
their discharge, and were gone to their several homes, in circumstances beyond
their expectations* though they all declared, if I intended another voyage,
they would never forsake me. Some of my English s^^lors had married Italian
women, and so designed to settle in Italy.

When I desired Don Antonio to take charge of the ship, he told me he had
nothing to do with it, declaring it was mine, and therefore desired I would
make no more words about it; for, said he, you don't know, but you may meet
with something more to change your mind, and we may have the satisfaction of
seeing you once more.

In a few days after this, the nuptials were celebrated between Don Pedro and
Donna Felicia, who designed for Spain, (as soon as I left Italy) where he
intended to take up the mortgage of his estate, the time being almost expired.
I must own, the uncertainty of womens' tempers gave me much reflection: and I
thought this marriage was a very odd thing.

I now began to think of my journey: but first I ordered a goldsmiths to make
me every way the same parcel of plate as I received as a present from Don
Jaques de Ramirez, which I presented to Donna Isabella, that she might remember
me. She gave me many thanks for it, but seemed very unwilling to accept of it a
great while. I told her, as merrily as I could, if she made any more words
about it, I would return the ship that ^ore her name, and would be no longer
under her command. Well, said she, I Will accept it; but as you allow me to be
your owner, I Will give you orders in writing, that you must not break it open
till you come in such a latitude, that is, a fortnight after you are settled in
England. I promised to obey he^ punctually. The next day she gave me a sealed
paper, which, she told me, were the orders she mentioned.

I had given my lieutenant charge of the ship, with directions to make for
Bristol, with all the expedition practicable.

The next day, being February 6, 1699, I took my leave of all my acquaintance;
and, notwithstanding I am not used to weep, could not forbear shedding some
tears at parting with such true friends as Don Antonio and his lady had proved.
I rode the first day overwhelmed with melancholy, and not one thought of being
possessed with such a fortune, from nothing in so short a time, ever entered my
breast. But seeing Don Ferdinand by his countenance, partake of my sorrow, I
was forced to appear much less melancholy, to oblige him to be so too.

I would have shown him the rarities of Italy in our travels, but he seemed
very little inclined to curiosity; and we arrived at Antwerp without any
adventure. We staid some time there to recover the fatigue of our journey, but
more upon Don Ferdinand's account, seeing he was something indisposed, having
never traveled on horseback so far before.

As we approached the town, he and my Indians were surprised to see the manner
of begging. The boys and girls would run before you, and of a sudden stop
short, stand upon their heads, and (...) their hands, saying their prayers all
the while.

The city of Antwerp is finely situated upon the River Scheld; it is very well
fortified, and upon the walls are planted trees that give an agreeable shade,
and make it pleasant walking. The castle, both strong and beautiful, was
founded by the Duke of Al^a. The city in bigness may compare with Bristol;
their streets spacious, and houses very magnificent. The church of Sancta
Maria, their cathedral, is superb building; and of that neatness, that the
emperor Charles the Vth of Germany, would often say, "It was only fit to be
kept in a case." The inside is as glorious and neat as the outside. The
paintings were performed by Sir Peter Paul Reubens, an inhabitant of Antwerp,
and are equal to any thing that ever he did. The Jesuits' church is also very
beautiful, adorned with abundance of curious marble pillars, and all the
pannels painted by the same hand as the other. There are several more beautiful
churches and chapels; but, as these mentioned are the chief, we shall take no
farther notice of them.

The third of April (having pretty well recovered our fatigue by a rest of ten
days) we set out for Calais, being the shortest cut for Dover, and arrived
there April the 6th, making short stages.

From this place we might behold the white cliffs of Dover. I must own I had
some secret satisfaction in viewing my native country; and the next day, early
in the morning we embarked, and reached the town by noon, having a very
favorable passage. Here landing, I had like to have lost one of my Indians.
Slinging his horses into the boat, he would get upon the back of one of them,
thinking he would go out quietly. But just upon the instant, a vessel riding by
the pier, fired a gun, and frighted the horse to such a degree, that he plunged
into the sea, and swam from the shore; and the Indian, being thrown off with
the start, had his foot so entangled in the stirrup, that (notwithstanding his
skill in swimming) he must have inevitably perished, if the other Indian seeing
the misfortune, had not plunged in, and with a knife cut the string. He then
took the horse by the bridle with one hand, and swimming with the other,
brought him safe to shore.

Don Ferdinand not being over pleased with riding on horseback, we took the
flying-coach the next day, and safely arrived at London. I ordered my English
servant, and the two Indians, with our baggage, to make two days of it; and
gave them directions to wait at the place where the coach inned, till I sent
for them.

When we arrived at London, I did not care to go to any of my acquaintance, but
rather chose to lie at a bagnio for a day or two; but I sent privately for my
uncle's clerk, that had endeavored to prevent my b^ing kidnapped, by putting a
letter in my pocket, mentioned in the beginning of this (...). He (...) to me
according to my desire, but was overjoyed and surprised to see me, though he
hardly knew me at first, for I had not sent him my name.

He informed me that my uncle had been dead above a year, and left his estate
to his eldest son, and his business to his youngest and him: but they would
often talk of me, not believing I was in the land of the living; yet they had
increased my small estate with their utmost care, intending, if ever I came
back again, to restore it to me. I let him into my whole history, and he was
very much pleased to hear that I had gained such a plentiful fortune. I got him
to provide us convenient lodgings and private, for I did not intend to go
abroad much; and also to go to the inn to fetch my servants.

My two Indians spoke English very well, and I had learnt them to write and
read; and being in modern habits, they were not much gazed at.

The time being expired that I was to look into my commission, (as Donna
Isabella called it) I resolved to break it open, having some curiosity. But it
was gone, and, notwithstanding all my search, I could not gain any tidings of
it. I could not imagine how I should lose that and nothing else. I must own I
was very uneasy, fearing it might be something of importance I was to do for
Donna Isabella; therefore I dispatched a letter to Italy to tell them of my
safe arrival, and my loss of the packet, and to send me a fresh one, with
directions where to write to me.

While I staid in town I purchased an estate of 2,000l. a year in
Somers^tshire, and yet had 25,000l. left, which I employed in the publik funds.
And now I had se^^led my estate, as well as the affairs of Don Ferdinand. I was
willing to forward him in his studies, and proposed to send him to Oxford with
a tutor. But he still begged to stay a little longer with me.

I therefore took a resolution of going to Bristol, only with Don Ferdinand and
one servant, with no other business than to see the place where my lost
treasu^^ once lived.

When we were arrived, I enquired which was the house that Mr. Villars, late
merchant, formerly dwelt in. We soon found it out, but were informed one
Captain Kendrick dwelt there. I was inquisitive to know if there was any
tidings of one Susan, who was formerly maid to Miss Villars, daughter to the
deceased merchant, and at last got information that she lived (...)
country house near the seaside.

I went immediately away for the place, though near thirty miles off, and late
in the evening. Before we had rode far the skies became gloomy, and a violent
storm threatened us, which soon overtook us with so much fury, that we were
forced to put into a little house out of the road for shelter. When we came
within, we could not see any body in it but a little child, playing with some
toys it had before it; and all we could get out of it was, that Mamma would
come by and by. It was as lovely a child as ever I saw, and we were still
admiring it when a man and woman came in. They were much amazed to find us
there; but I begged their pardon, and told them the storm drove us in to take
shelter.

The man told us we were very welcome to such as his house afforded, but he
feared we should find but poor accommodation. In short, the storm kept up i^,
its full force, and now it grew dark, and we were two miles from any inn; and
to add to our distress, we were strangers to the road. The man seeing us so put
to it, told us he had ^ut two beds, but we should be welcome to them such as
they were.

I told him I would gratify him for his trouble, and thereupon gave him a
guinea. He was very well pleased with my present, and began to show it in his
looks, as well as the woman. I gave him another, to provide us something to
eat, and to take care of our horses. He said he had but bad stable-room, but if
I pleased he would take my servant, and all the horses, with one of his own, to
bring him back again, and leave them at an inn in the neighboring village. I
agreed to it, and while he was gone, I asked the good woman many questions
about the child which we saw there, and soon found it was none of their own,
but a gentlewoman's a stranger to them, and one they had never seen but once.
Why, said I, how are you paid for the keeping of it? She seemed amazed at my
question, and was some time before she answered me; but at last she said she
was always very well paid.

I finding she did not much care for talking upon that subject, changed the
discourse. Soon after the man came in, we went to supper. I would have had Don
Ferdinand to have lain with me; but the man understanding we usually lay
asunder, would give us both beds, and they would ^it up. I asked them where the
child lay, and they told me in a cradle. I began to be concerned for the
infant, though without giving any reason. When we had supped, we went to bed,
and had but little rest; and when we rose in the morning. (it proving fair and
pleasant) we resolved to walk to the inn where our horses were, with our host
for our guide. When we arrived, I dismissed him with another guinea, and would
have got immediately on horseback, but Don Ferdinand was so very much
disordered that he was not able to mount. I was very much concerned for his
indisposition, and begged he would repose himself there, while I pursued my
journey, with a promise to return the next day, or send my servant for him. He
consented that it should be so, and I set forward.

Coming to a place where several roads met, I was confounded to know the right,
and therefore was some time at a stand, not knowing which to take: But hearing
several voices in an adjacent barn, I made up to it on foot, giving my horse to
my man. The nearer I approached, the more noise they made; but I could not
understand them. This awakened my curiosity, and I stole softly to the barn,
where I could observe, through a crevice, (unseen) upwards of twenty gypsies,
sitting in a huddle, with a child in the midst, stark naked, which they were
rubbing over with walnut shells; and every time it cried, they set up that
confused noise: But I was very much surprised to (...) in that child the
features of that I had seen the night before at my country landlord's. I
beckoned my servant to come near with my horses; being armed, I made to the
barn-door, and forced it open. I asked them in an imperious manner, what they
were doing with the child; and farther, affirming they had stole it from such a
place, giving them to understand I had people coming to apprehend them. Upon
hearing this, they all took to their heels; and some (I ^ound) that had come
there with crutches, ran very nimbly away without them; but the child was left
behind. I now began to consider with myself what I had done, and that I had
gotten a child, but did not know what to do with it. They had rubbed the poor
thing all over with the green walnut-shells, that made him look like one of
their fraternity. By good fortune they had left his clothes behind them, as
also some rags, which I suppose were to be put on instead of the others.

My man and I dressed it as well as we could, and aukwardly enough, but when we
had finished (notwithstanding my haste) I resolved to go back again, and
enquire into the affair. When we came to the inn, I gave the infant to the care
of the woman of the house till my return; and understanding Don Ferdinand was
gone to rest, I proceeded to my host's house without disturbing him. When we
arrived there, I met the woman at the door. Pray, said I to her, good woman,
where is the child that I saw here last night? Where is the child? the woman
replied sharply, why, the child's in his cradle asleep. Let me see it, said I.
No, said she, I will not disturb it for you nor no one else. I told her
peremptorily I would see it that instant, in spite of her, for I feared some
foul play. She finding me resolute, and alighting from my horse, said, Well,
Sir, since you are so desirous, I Will go and bring it to you. When she was gone,
I began to imagine myself mistaken, and that children might be very like,
without being the same; but I knew a guinea would reconcile her to my rudeness.
I staid waiting a considerable time, taken up with several thoughts, and not
observing how long I had waited, till my man told me the old woman was long a
coming. I began to call, and nobody answering, I ordered him to go in, and seek
for her. He came out again, and told me she was not in the house, nor any one
else; but that he believed she had slipped out of the back door, and got away
through the garden. I began to think there was something very extraordinary in
the adventure of the child, and resolved to be strict in the examination. I
entered the house myself, and searched, but to no purpose. I sent my man in the
mean time in pursuit of the woman, but he returned without her. There was never
a neighboring house to enquire nearer than the village where I left the child.
So I had just got on horseback, in order to go back, when I perceived the man
coming toward his own house. I spurred on to meet him, and he seemed much
concerned. I seized him by the collar, and told him I came to secure him for
the murder of the child I saw at his house last night. The man was in such a
terrible fright at what I said, that he was more dead than alive. Sure, Sir,
said he, it cannot be, it is not murdered. I ^id him produce it, or he should
be tried for it. In short, I frighted the poor fellow so much, that he told me,
if I would have a little patience, he would tell me all he knew concerning it
(still crying, I hope it is not murdered.) I told him the child was safe. We
went back to his house, where, after the fellow had a little composed himself,
he made the following relation:

About three years ago, a gentlewoman came to my wife, and made a bargain with
her to keep this infant, and by paying us handsomely, we imagined it belonged
to some person of distinction, for we received ten pounds every quarter, and
that before it was due. The lady would often take the child for a day or two,
and return it again. My wife being a worldly woman, laid several plots how to
know the child's extraction, but to no purpose; for, by all circumstances, we
believed the parents did not care for owning it. One day my wife told me she
had a design in her head, but she would not disclose it till she could be sure
of succeeding; and when the lady came the next time to take the child away for
a day as usual, my wife was in conference with her for some time. And when she
was gone, she told me that she had prevailed upon the lady to pay her one
hundred pounds beforehand, and that she brought her to it, by telling her we
would make a purchase of the house we live in. In short, my wife who wears the
breeches, made me consent to carry on the deceit: and the next day the lady
brought the child, and the hundred pound, and gave it my wife, without any
thing under my hand, and left us in a small time after. When she was gone, my
wife discoursed to me after this manner:

Husband, we have now one hundred and fifty pounds, (for we had been very
saving) besides our goods and cattle, which will fetch us one hundred more.
With this money we may go into my country, which was the Isle of Man, and live
contentedly all our lives, without any fear of bad crops and ill markets. Well,
said I, but what will become of the child? I quickly found by her expressions,
that she resolved to murder it. I was struck with horror at the proposition,
and notwithstanding her violent temper, opposed her in it; and told her upon no
conditions would I consent to do so barbarous a deed. I found her so sixth upon
the design of murder, that I was at last, as the lightest evil, obliged to
consent to her selling it to a company of gypsies, but with the greatest
reluctance in the world, which was executed this morning. But we had disposed
of every thing beforehand, with intention to have gone to Bristol two days
hence; for we were assured the lady would not come again for some time.

When he had done, I informed him how I came to meet with the child. I then
began to examine if he did not know where the lady lived; and at last he
confessed he dogged her to her house one day, set on by his wife, but would
never discover it to her, for fear of her playing some trick. I prevailed with
him to go with me, and show me the house, with the promise of a reward, and
letting him go afterward. We set out, after he had got a horse, and in two
hours arrived at a pleasant house, surrounded by a small river, and almost
covered with trees. I stopped some time to view it, and through a little avenue
saw two women gathering flowers; one had her face turned toward us, which the
man said was the woman that used to come to see the child, and that was the
place she carried it to. I ordered my man to take the horses to the next town,
about half a mile off, and come to me again. But I needed not have bid my host
to have gone about his business; for he, being fearful of the event, got away
without our perceiving it.

When my man was gone, I walked about to view the house, but I had lost sight
of the women, and it began to rain again. I stood up for shelter from the
weather under a large oak, and had but just got there, when a woman came out of
the gate with her mistress's service to invite me in. I was very well pleased
with the invitation, and went into the house, where I was met by the
gentlewoman, a very handsome lady. She told me, as I looked like a gentleman,
she desired I would take shelter there till the storm was over. I returned her
the thanks her civility deserved, and we sat down, but were immediately
interrupted with a ringing at the gate; and I perceived through a small window,
a gentleman in a scarlet cloak alight from his horse, and go in quite through
the house. The lady begged my pardon, and told me, she was obliged to keep
another lady company, while that person was there, but would wait on me as soon
as possible again. As my curiosity had brought me there, I had no thoughts of
going away till I had satisfied it in some measure. I could hear the man's
voice very plain, who seemed to threaten a lady with a great many hardships as
to her fortune, if she would not consent to his love. The lady answered in so
low a voice, that I could not hear what she said, but I found her answers did
but enrage him the more. They talked a great while, and at last they seemed to
be silent. I hearing the door open, stopped back into the room where the lady
had left me. She came to me again, and sat down. I hope, Sir, said she, you will
pardon my rudeness, but I could not wait on you before. Madam, I replied, I
ought to beg your pardon, for taking possession of your house here, who am an
utter stranger to you. We were interrupted in our compliments by the voice of a
person that screamed out Murder! murder! We both ran out, and coming to the
door where the noise was, we found it shut, and the voice still calling out for
help. I burst it open with my foot, and with my sword in my hand, ran into the
room, where I found the gentleman that came in the cloak endeavoring to force
a lady. I gave him a stroke on the head, and bid him turn about and defend
himself; which he did, with many bitter exclamations. But after several passes,
I had the good fortune to disarm him; and he having received several wounds,
dropped down with the loss of blood. The lady he had attempted was still in a
swoon; and the bustle had brought several women-servants into the room. I
retired into the chamber I came from, but desired the lady to take some care of
the wretch, who deserved death; but I wished he might survive, to prevent
further trouble. She took my advice, and sent to the next town for a surgeon,
who soon came, and my man along with him by accident. Perceiving his wounds
were not dangerous, (for I stood by while the surgeon dressed him) and finding
the house in too much confusion to be better informed concerning the child, I
was about to take my leave. But the lady I had so timely rescued, having
recovered her fright, desired she might thank me for so great a providence. I
was easily persuaded to stay, and immediately a lady came into the room. But,
good God! what transports did I feel, when in that lady I beheld every feature
of dear Miss Villars. Our eyes were fixed upon each other, and the sight of me
raised such a tumult of joy in her breast, that, combating with her unsettled
heart, she fell down in a swoon again. The other lady at first knew not the
meaning of our disorder; but when I called her my dear wife, and other
extravagant expressions of my love, she soon guessed the truth, and seemed as
much transported as we were. Words would but wrong the sentiments we felt for
each other. Thereforefore let the reader, if possible, guess the joy of two
lovers meeting after imagining each other no longer in this world. We thought
it was all a dream; but at last, being sweetly convinced of the reality, we
sent privately for the parson, and were tied by the outward ceremony of the
church, whose hearts had been divinely united long before; and that night, I
once more took possession of what I valued above all the world could give.

The next day, I sent for Don Ferdinand to partake in our joy, but was informed
his indisposition had increased upon him so much, that it was dangerous to
remove him. This was some allay to our joy, for I had a real friendship for
him. I told my dear wife the obligation I had to his father. I now desired to
know the particulars of her wonderful escape, which she related to me after the
following manner:

You know, said she, when we parted at Mequinez, our hearts foreboded something
would follow prejudicial to our loves. I was not acquainted with Mustapha's
escape; if I had, it is very probable, I might have avoided the misfortune that
befell me; but he got a vessel to carry him to Sall^e, (as he informed me when I
was their prisoner again) and by the way met with his master Hamet, who wrote a
letter to the governor of Mammora, and sent Mustapha with it, while he intended
to wait near the coast to guard us back. When they had seized me, they hurried
me away immediately on board a vessel, and sailed upon the instant; and before
night met with Hamet, where I was carried on board. He upbraided me in terms
that gave me to expect worse treatment from him; but I told him, rather than
submit to his nauseous love, I would starve myself to death, if I could find no
other means to rid me of my life. The next day, a storm arising of a sudden,
blew down one of their masts, and drove them back again; within sight of
Mammora; but to avoid it, they ran beyond it, and the storm continued. In the
evening it began to abate, and he steered his course back again; but before it
was dark, a ship appeared in view. And notwithstanding he had lost several men
in a former engagement, he resolved to set upon this vessel; and it growing
calm, he got up to her with rowing. The other vessel knowing what she was,
began with us first, and fired very briskly.

The fight continued about an hour, as near as I could guess; for all my
employment was to pray that some lucky shot would end my life, which was so
burdensome to me. When the noise of the ordnance ceased, I had not curiosity
enough to go to see how affairs stood. But judge my surprise and pleasure, when
I tell you the first man that entered the cabin, was the mate that I bad made
captain, as I mentioned to you in the relation of my first misfortune.

How, madam! cried he, is it you! thank Heaven my voyage is at an end. Come,
Madam, continued he, I Will carry you to one who thinks her life a burden till
you are safe, as your danger is owing to her. I had not power to return him an
answer, or ask him who it was he meant, I was so confounded with thought. He
carried me on board of his own ship, where he brought Miss Susan to me. My
heart was so full of joy, that for a moment you had slipped out of my memory.

The ship of Hamet's was just sinking, for they had shot her between wind and
water, and could not come to stop it. They had taken out as many of their goods
as the time would permit, and all the men that were wounded before she sunk. I
let them into your story, and the mutual affection we had; and in return the
captain gave me the following account of their getting away from Sallee.

You know, Madam, said he, the Moors were not very strict in searching us; and
I had at the first ^ight of them, (judging what they were) secured all the
merchants' money designed for trade as well as what I had of my own, about my
clothes, and in a great fur-cap, which I wore upon my head.

Hamer being satisfied with you, and what he found besides, would not fell us
for slaves, but gave us the liberty of walking about the town, with a small
allowance of provision, till we could send a person to England, for a thousand
pounds, which was the ransom of both ship and men. In a little time, I became
acquainted with one of the Jews of Sallee, whom I prevailed upon, by the force
of money, to buy the ship, and pay for our ransom, which he did, without any
one's concerning themselves about it. We did all we could to find you out, but
to no purpose: so we were obliged to set sail for England.

In car voyage home, Miss Susan informed me with your story, not concealing
even her own part in it; and I found her so sincere in her repentance, that I
could not help pitying her, which soon became a (...) passion, and when we
arrived in England, the ceremony of the church completed my happiness. We
acquainted Ms. Kendrick, your ladyship's guardian and steward, with your
misfortune; who, with the advice of us, fitted out the ship in your (...) with
a sufficient quantity of money for your ransom, if it were possible for us to
hear of you; and by meeting with you (...), we have comp^^led what we intended.
I returned them many thanks, (especially Miss Susan, who would accompany her
husband, in hopes to meet with me.) I desired captain Morris, (which was the
name of Miss Susan's husband) to steer toward Mammora, but he told me it was
no safe: for as there was a war proclaimed between France and England, the
ambassador could not answer for it if he did not make us a prize; and we were
further informed by one of the renegado prisoners, that he was very well
assured they were sailed for France.

Upon this notice we directed our course with this hope, that you would soon
arrive in England, and find me out; for I remembered, in the story of my
misfort^nes, I gave you marks enough to let you know where I was to be found.
Before we made the English coast, I found myself with child, and the very
imagination had like to have cost me my life, for fear the father of the unborn
infant would not come time enough to save my credit; for though I was well
assured of your honor, yet I knew the censuring world would be apt to blame my
conduct. I could hide nothing from the faithful Susan, who joined her fears
with mine.

When we came into Bristol channel, I consulted with Susan about my management,
and I at last resolved to live private, till I could hear some news of you. But
I was obliged to let Mr. Kendrick my steward into the knowledge of my arrival,
though he was a stranger to my condition.

I sent to London, in hopes of hearing some news of you; but you having kept
the name of your uncle secret in your relation our endeavors proved fruitless.

My melancholy increased with my condition; and for fea^ of a discovery, I went
into Wales, with a relation of Miss Susan's, and was delivered of a boy, that
proved the greatest comfort of my sinking heart; for in his face was every
feature of his dear father. I brought him back again here, and had put him to
nurse, as a child to a relation of Miss Susan's, and had resolved but this very
day to have sent for him home, that I might always have the satisfaction of
having him in my sight.

My steward finding I was under a necessity of living private, began to talk to
me of love; and often proceeded so far (after finding I disdained his passion)
to tell me, if I would not consent to make him my husband, he would take care
my estate should come into his hands. Though I could have soon broke his
designs as to my fortune, yet my solitary dwelling pleased me so well, that I
gave him good words, which did but more encourage his insolence, till it
arrived at that pitch you so happily delivered me from.

I soon found, by my wife's relation, that the infant I had so marvelously
saved was our own child. When I related the accident of meeting with the child,
my wife expressed so much fear, terror, tenderness, and joy, that I thought the
different passions would have taken away her understanding. By this we may
learn, there is a ruling providence that regulates every action of our lives,
when they tend to virtue.

Mr. Kendrick (the person that made the attempt upon my wife) was soon informed
of our happy meetings; and his wounds mending every day, he begged we would
favor him with a visit, which we complied with, when he asked pardon for all
past offenses in such a sincere manner, that we were easily prevailed upon to
forgive him.

He sent for all the books of accounts and writings that belonged to my wife's
estate, and delivered them up to us.

The same day, Captain Morris arrived from France; where he went by the desire
of my wife, as her last hope, to know if he could gain any intelligence of me.
He was so very diligent in his commission, that he got to the speech of
Monsieur de St. Olon, who informed him or my pursuing the vessel, and
returning, and of my voyage to Italy. I rewarded him by several handsome
presents for his trouble, and found in all his actions, a downright blunt
sincere honesty, which drew me into a friendship for him. I now began to think
of Don Ferdinand's illness, and resolved to go with my wife to make him a
visit; and my dear wife was so impatient to embrace the child, she would not
let me stay to finish my affairs with Mr. Kendrick.

As we were upon our journey, we were met by a relation of mine, son to that
barbarous uncle that had kidnapped me. He was in the country when I arrived at
London. Notwithstanding the injury I had suffered from his father, I could not
help receiving him with the utmost affection: for we were both of an age, and
very like as to our persons, being brought up together till the death of my
father, which created a friendship for each other.

He brought me a packet from Italy, and in it one enclosed from Don Jaques,
sent from St. Salvador. I broke open that first, which was as follows:

I HOPE the distance of climates has no force upon your friendship; mine here
has rather received an addition, though I am overwhelmed with a very great
misfortune. My daughter (in whom all my hopes centered) is, I fear, entirely
lost: for the very day you left us, was the last time my eyes beheld her. We
have some reason to fear the relations of the person who died by your sword,
have used some clandestine means, and perhaps have privately murdered her, to
be revenged on us for that accident, though of their own seeking. In short, I
am weary of this hateful place, and shall do my endeavor to seek repose in
some other part of the world; and relying upon your good-natured friendship, I
hope to have the honor very shortly after your receiving this, to embrace you
in England, for I am preparing to leave St. Salvador with the soonest. I
received your obliging letter and the bales of goods, all in good condition.
But there is something dark in it, or, at least my understanding cannot reach
this paragraph; And be assured whatever you gave me in charge, etc. I sent you
nothing but what I hope you will accept of as your own; and I took that manner
of leaving them with you, knowing your generous temper would not have been
easily persuaded to have accepted them from one that shall eve^ subscribe
himself

Your sincere friend and servant, JAQUES DE RAMIREZ.
P. S. My wife (who is inconsolable) throws in her love and service; and all
the hope she has left, is the expectation of ^^lling you face to face, the
grief she lies under at her fatal ^oss, and to bring as farther in your debt,
we beg you will leave us sufficient directions among our countrymen at your
Exchange where we may find you.




I was very (...) concerned at my friend's misfortune, especially in believing
I was in some sort the mistaken cause of it. I had informed my wife of the
adventure before, and she condoled with me; and the thoughts of being so near
the same distress in her own child, redoubled her grief. When we had given up
some time to those melancholy reflections, I broke open the following letter
from Don Antonio:

MY DEAR FRIEND,
WE received yours with the utmost transports; but as I am an Italian, I ought
to be jealous at the joy my wife expressed when she read it; and much more when
she declares that she will come to England, to reproach, you for the little
care you took of her commission. She will (farther to increase my jealousy)
write you her sentiments herself; but let her say what she will there, I am
resolved to esteem you as the only friend that is dear to

ANTONIO DE ALVARES.


The other letter (from Isabella) contained these words:

SIR,
I WILL suspend my reproaches till I see you, (which I hope will be soon.) I had
no commission to be executed in those papers you lost, but that of having
cleared the o^ person you cast on our sex of inconstancy, which you had some
grounds for, in the sudden marriage of Don Pedro and Donna Felicia, after her
violent passion for Don Ferdinand. When I found the cause of her distemper, I
(as having felt the keenest dart of love) pitied her pain, and therefore taxed
Don Ferdinand often with his wearing an obdurate heart in his (...). I pressed
him so often, that he desired to meet Donna Felicia and myself in my closet. We
came according to appointment, where he spoke to this effect: Madam, tax me no
more with hardness of heart, for if I had not a very tender one, I had never
arrived here; and to discover my frailty at once, know I am a woman: And upon
that uncovering her bosom, gave us evident (...). We were both so very much
surprised, that she went on with her discourse; I beg, ladies, you will never
open your mouth to my captain concerning th^s; for the moment I am sensible he
knows my weakness, shall be the last of my life. But, notwithstanding this
injunction, I cannot help informing you, in pity to her; and I am well assured,
(as your passion is hopeless) you have humanity enough not to destroy one who
dies for you; and nothing in this world can equal my joy, if I find when I
arrive, Don Ferdinand the wife to one who shall ever have the friendship of

ISABELLA DE ALVARES.


What words can express the amazement I felt at the reading this last letter!
My thoughts were confounded in reflection, and a chaos of ideas possessed my
brain. I was in so much confusion, that I thought of returning home again, to
consider of this strange turn. Recollected circumstances convinced me how blind
I was in not discovering it sooner. My soul was immediately filled with the
most tender pity; and I had not the use of words to declare my sentiments to my
wife and cousin. Sometimes I would imagine it was all a fictitious dream: yet
at last I was not displeased, that I had it in my power to restore to Don
Jaques his long lost daughter. My wife was as much concerned as I was, and my
cousin could hardly be^ieve it. I soon found that she had taken care the packet
should not fall in^^ my hands; and that convinced me she would not have her
disguise discovered. The next day we resolved to visit her, and form my
resolution from my observation.

When we arrived at the inn, we found her dressed at a table, with paper, pens,
and ink before her. She saluted them, and seemed mightily pleased with my good
fortune, and was very much concerned her indisposition would not admit of her
waiting on me, to partake in my contentment. Her weakness was so prevalent that
she could hardly utter her words. She knew nothing of my receiving the packet
from my cousin; but after we had sat some time. I (...) her the letter from her
father; which, as soon as she had read, she fell backward upon the bed in a
swoon.

The noise we made at this accident brought several people into the room; and
among the rest my landlady, who it seems, had fell desperately in love with
her, as imagining her to be a man. She made such outward complainings, that if
our minds had been at ease, she would have produced much mirth; but among her
actions, (...) buttoned her clothes, to give her breath, and soon discovered
her mistake in the object of her wishes. When she found by her breasts that
she* was a woman, she ran down the stairs with the utmost precipitation, and
left us alone to recover her. When we had brought her to her senses again, she
soon found that we had discovered her sex; and the grief and shame at the
accident had like to have thrown her again into her swooning. It was some time
before we could bring her to herself; but she found by my discourse, that I
understood the whole secret.

After a long pause, she said, I did not intend to let my frailty be known to
you till after my death; but since it is discovered, I beg you will have some
regard to my memory, and I shall die contented. I begged her not to talk of
death, but live to comfort her grieved parents. It is too late, said she, to
talk of any comfort, for I have called my greatest friend, Death, to my aid,
who is just now arrived. Upon uttering these words, a deadly paleness possessed
her face, and trembling seized her limbs; she had just strength enough to
declare to us that she had taken a dose of poison, provided for the occasion,
bought of an apothecary of the town; and that she was just going to write a
letter to me, but was prevented by our sudden appearance, whose contents were
only to see her secretly buried, and, if possible, to conceal her sex and story
from the world. She had hardly made an end, before her speech forsook her, and
life in all appearance fled the beauteous dwelling. My wife was not present at
this accident, her eager desire having carried her to her child; but she came
in before it was over. My cousin seemed more oppressed with grief than any of
us, for love had taken full possession of his heart.

While sorrow had locked up all our tongues, the apothecary came in, in a
strange confusion; for the report had soon dispersed ^^self all over that
little village. Sir, said he to me, don't be concerned at the condition you see
the gentleman in, for he is not dead, he has only took a sleeping po^^on. I
partly guessed his design, when he applied to me for poison; and the
extraordinary price he paid for it, convinced me it was for some sinister
design, and therefore I happily imposed upon him.

This news revived us all again, especially my cousin, who I thought would have
gone distracted for joy; and to see him impatient watching for her life's
return, (...) we may call i^ for ^^ly gave me further proof that one look,
(...) sufficient to (...) love forever in the soul. The apothecary, during this
interval of li^^ and death, (...) into her mouth, to help the (...) and at last
she opened her unwilling eyes, and gazed around her as if she had been in the
other world: but we soon convinced her of the apothecary's deceit, at which she
seemed in the utmost confusion, and gave us to understand that life was forced
upon her against her inclination, and she should shake it off.

We gave her all the comfort we were capable of, and my wife told her, if she
talked any longer of death, it was only that she could not bear to see us
happy. This as it were roused her from her lethargy. Well then, said she, I
will live, if it be only to convince you that I am pleased to see my captain
blessed; for she would always call me so. After we had a little composed her,
we left her with my cousin to look after my child, who was in the same place;
which had proved the secret instinct of nature; for at the first sight in the
house of his unnatural nurse, I could not help feeling a tender regard for him.
When we had satisfied our inn, we prevailed upon Donna Blanca (now no longer
Ferdinand) to come into the coach with us, and we arrived that evening at
Bristol; where we took possession of the house (which Captain Kendrick had
lived in) that belonged to my wife. We staid some time there to settle my
wife's affairs, and as much to recover Donna Blanca's indisposition.

My cousin by his assiduity, gained very much of her esteem, but she freely
declared, she had no room in her heart for love; but notwithstanding, with much
importunity, we prevailed upon her to accept him for a husband, and her esteem
soon came up to a more tender passion. As soon as the ceremony was over, we
took a journey to London to settle our affairs there, and provide for my
expected guests.

One morning, as we were pursuing our journey, coming near the skirts of a
wood, we heard several groans, which alarmed us; but as we had too many people
about us armed to fear any thing, we came out of the coach to know the reason*
where we found a woman weltering in blood, being stabbed in several places with
a sword. When I came to take a nearer view, I found it was the wife of my
former master, (the watch-maker.) I could not help having compassion for any
person, in that condition, therefore ordered her to be taken up and put in the
coach. Donna Blanca opened her breast, and stopped up her wounds as well as she
could, ^ll we could get a surgeon that I had ordered to be sent for. She soon
knew me, and cried out, Sure heaven has sent you, that know ^ay guilt, to be
witness of my repentance. The wrongs I have done my husband have pursued me to
my grave. When I had robbed him of all I could lay my hands on, I made my
escape to Ireland, changed my name, and set up for a greater fortune than I
really was. I had many suitors, but heaven, to punish me, made me place my
affections on a person that courted me for my money: and though I soon
understood he had but a very little estate, yet love prevailed with me to make
him my husband. He soon spent both his own and my fortune, and by contracting
many debts was forced to fly for England; and finding no relief, took to the
highway, where he has committed many robberies. He lodged me in a neighboring
village; but our place of meeting was generally in this wood, for fear of a
discovery. This morning he came, according to appointment, where he began his
discourse after this manner: I had no inclinations for you when I first married
you, but now I utterly abhor you, therefore I am resolved to part with you; but
I have another reason besides my hatred to you, which is this; I have it in my
power to marry an old woman very rich; and therefore it is necessary to send
you out of the world, for fear our marriage should come to her ears, and spoil
my fortune. He followed his discourse with these wounds which he gave me, and
rode into the wood; I not once offering to open my mouth; for astonishment had
tied up my tongue. I told her, I hoped heaven had given her all her punishment
in this world. That Is all the hope I have, said she, in my unfeigned
repentance; for I feel death approaching. We observed she was just expiring;
and before the surgeon came, she gave up her last breath, calling upon heaven
for mercy. I gave orders for her funeral, and sent after the murderer, but to
no purpose. But I heard he was taken on the highway, some time after, and
executed at Worcester, where he confessed the murder of his wife. Thus we see
the hand of heaven, though slow in punishment, yet always overtakes the guilty.
When I had given directions for her funeral, we pursued our journey, and
arrived safe at London.

Don Antonio and his lady arrived first in a private capacity; not caring to
make a show according to their birth, to be taken notice of. And in a few days
after came Don Jaques and his lady, in a ship of their own, in company with the
Isabella, which my lieutenant commanded, that had sprung a leak, which obliged
her to put into Lisbon to refit, where Don Jaques joyfully met with her.

I had desired Donna Blanca once more to put on her boy's clothes; for I
intended agreeably to surprise her parents.

I was obliged to take lodgings for Don Jaques's family, they intending to take
a convenient house in the city. As soon as mutual caresses were over, grief
again took possession of their souls for the loss of their child. After
condoling with them for some time, I begged them to hope for the best, and that
it was possible to hear of her again. They shook their heads, and told me, that
thought was long over, and they had no hope but in time to wear away their
unhappy loss.

I told them I had a kinsman (as much as I could remember the features of their
beautiful daughter) as like her as a man could be like a woman. They expressed
a great desire to see him. I told them I had invited him with another relation
to sup with us on purpose. We had taken care before, that Donna Blanca should
ombre her face, and speak nothing but English, on purpose to carry on the
deceit. Till the time of their coming, we spent it in relating our accidents in
the voyage. I told them how much I was surprised at the likeness of my cousin
to their daughter; for I had given them to understand it was a relation I had
never seen before I left England, which was truth.

When the time I had appointed came, Donna Blanca and my cousin entered. I
presented them to Don Jaques and his wife, as my relations, and they saluted
them as utter strangers. But when they saw and heard Donna Blanca, they burst
into tears at the great resemblance in both voice and features, as they said,
to their daughter. She carried it on as long as she could, speaking English all
the white; but at last her tears prevailed so much upon her tenderness, that
she begged leave to retire, but would return immediately. I made an apology for
my kinsman to Don Jaques and his wife, and told them he would return in a very
little time. The space of their absence was filled with sighs and tears: and as
I knew their grief would be soon over, never attempted to comfort them.

When they were ready they (...) a servant to tell me a gentleman wanted to
speak with me. I retired, came in again immediately, and told them our company
would be increased, for another relation and his (...) were just coming in to
sup with us; and upon that (...) leading by the (...) Donna Blanca. They (...)
Don Jaques and his wife. At the (...) of their (...), the (...) the their in a
(...); and Don Jaques was in such a (...), that he could not open his mouth,
but expressed his joy by tears, kisses, and embraces; and his lady coming to
herself, had like to have stifled her with her transports.

They did not ask any reasonable questions till the torrent of their joy was
poured out. After the first transports were over, Donna Blanca told her own
story. She said, the first time I dined at their house at St. Salvador, love
flew into her heart; and knowing the modesty due to her sex, she was resolved
never to discover it till she found the state of mine; yet finding her passion
daily increase, and understanding the day of my departure, she procured
secretly the habit of a man, with all other necessaries, and conveyed herself
on board the boat that carried the presents her father had sent me; and
counterfeited the letter she gave me as from her father. Every thing answered
my wish, said she, but I soon found my captain had no heart to bestow. It is
needless to tell how many bitter sighs and tears that knowledge cost me; but it
is now buried in oblivion. Then she proceeded to beg their pardon for her rash
folly, as she called it; and they were too much overjoyed not to forgive her
every thing; and they expressed a great deal of satisfaction in that they could
now call me a relation. We lived in all the contentment imaginable, returning
heaven our grateful thanks for its bounteous mercy. And now I am settled, I Will
take leave of my reader with this couplet of the poet: O never let a virtu^^s
mind d^spair,
For constant hearts are lo^e's peculiar care.


FINIS.
THE FOLLOWING BOOKS MAY BE HAD OF JOHN W. FOLSOM.
LIFE of General Putnam Pike's Arithmetic Morse's Geography, small Philadelphia
Latin Grammar Brown's Elements Cullen's Materia Medica Elliot's Medical
Pocketbook Edinburgh Dispensatory Buchan's Domestic Medicine Clark's Farrie^y
Young Clerk's Magazine Young's Night Thoughts Hervey's Meditations Rudiments of
Taste Chapone's Letters Devil on Two Sticks Milton's Works, 2 vol. Paradise
Lost Paradise Regained Lavate's Aphorisms New Robinson Crusoe Joseph Andrews
Fordyce's Addresses Doddridge's Rise and Progress of Religion Knox's Moral and
Religious Essays Enfield's Biographical Sermons Percival's Father's
Instructions Clark's Introduction Cat^chism of Nature Dodsley's Fables Latter
Writer Watts's Logic Paley's Moral and Political Philosophy Young Man's
Companion Thomson's Seasons History of America Life of Joseph, Son of Israel
Robertson's History of Ancient India, neatly bound Lessons to a Young Prince De
Lolme on the Constitution of England Dr. Moore's Travels, 2 vol. Man of Feeling
Vicar of Wakefield Dickinson's Familiar Letters on Religious Subjects The
Christian Remembrancer, or Short Reflections upon the Faith, Life, and Conduct
of a Real Christian Edwards on the Freedom of the Will Economy of Human Life
The Children's Friend, 4 vol. The Works of John Newton, of St. Mary's, London,
6 vol. O^^ian's Poems Evelina, 2 vol. Moor's Zeluco -- Monitor Smith's Letters
to Married Women Lowth's Grammar Croxal's AEsop Watt's Lyrick Poems Life of
Baron Trenck -- Gustavus Vassa -- Voltaire Humphrey's Poems -- Works.

