THE SIGNS OF THE TIMES: OR THE Overthrow of the PAPAL TYRANNY in France, THE
PRELUDE OF DESTRUCTION to POPERY and DESPOTISM; BUT OF PEACE TO MANKIND.

BY J. BICHENO.

BE YE READY; FOR IN SUCH AN HOUR AS YE THINK NOT THE SON OF MAN COMES.

MAT. XXIV. 44. LONDON, PRINTED: BALTIMORE: BE-PRINTED, BY JOHN HAYES, IN
SOUTH-STREET. 1794.

ADVERTISEMENT.
HISTORY no where informs us of any event so extraordinary as the late
revolution in France. -- If viewed on all sides, with its attending
circumstances, by an attentive and unprejudiced eye, it must surely excite the
greatest astonishment; and those who have been used to unite in their mind; the
providence of God with human occurrences, (whether they approve of this great
change of things or not) cannot help inquiring, Is this from men, or is it from
God? Is it one of those commotions produced by the conflicting passions of men,
that rise and sink, and are soon forgotten? or is it one of those events which
mark the great eras of time, and from which originate now orders of things? --
If the latter, it is undoubtedly the theme of prophecy.

Appearances indicate that this will be a fatal stroke to the papal
usurpations, and the reign of despotism. Those prophecies therefore which
direct our hopes to that interesting period, when all antichristian tyrannies
are to perish, deserve at this time, peculiar attention. But where shall we
find a clue to guide us in our inquiries? The author of the following thoughts
consulted commentators the most generally approved, on the prophecies of Daniel
and the Revelation of John. He sound much to edify and to excite curiosity, but
was still in the midst of a wilderness. At length he was determined to commit
himself to his own investigations, and explore these regions of wonders,
without placing implicit confidence in any guide. Circumstances led him to
conjecture, that the beast which John saw coming up out of the earth was Lewis
the Fourteenth, or the French tyranny, perfected by him; and that it was this
beast which slew the witnesses. This is the clue which he has followed, and he
thinks it is that by which the mazes of these wonderful visions, at least as
far as they have been accomplished, may be traced with precision, and some
things, which are yet to come, be conjectured with great advantage. But without
this to guide us, all is confusion.

A serious application to the study of the prophecies, and an attentive
observation of the signs of the times, have produced in my mind the strongest
persuasion that the utter downfall of the papacy, the final overthrow of
despotism, the resioration of the Jews and the renovation of all things, are
near at hand; and that every year will astonish us with new wonders. "As the
days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be. For as in the
days that were before the flood, they were eating and drinking, and marrying
and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and knew
not until the flood came, and took them all away, so shall also the coming of
the Son of Man be." Matt. xxiv. 37, 39.
From this persuasion arises the indispensible duty of calling the attention of
mankind, with peculiar earnestness to the things which belong to their peace.
"Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in my holy mountain: let all
the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the Lord comes, for it is
nigh at hand." Joel ii. 1.


I know what an author, who writes on subjects like these, has to expect. But
my heart tells me, that I publish these thoughts with the purest intentions,
and that my only aims are to serve the interests of Christianity, to promote
the welfare of my countrymen and the common cause of humanity, by inviting men
to consider the signs of the times; that, as individuals and as a nation, we
may examine our ways; repent and reform, and that thus the divine displeasure
may be averted, and that constitution, which has secured to this empire, so
many blessings, to which most other nations are strangers, may be purified and
strengthened, and by these means be continued to our posterity. I do therefore
most fervently pray that God may succeed this feeble attempt, and bless us, and
all men with peace.

Newbury, January 19, 1793.
PREVIOUS THOUGHTS.
THE kingdom which God was to set up under the Messiah, according to the
prophets, was to be a kingdom of righteousness, peace and joy. "Unto us a child
is born -- the government shall be upon his shoulder -- Of the increase of his
government and peace there shall be no end. -- The wolf and the lamb shall feed
together. He shall speak peace to the heathen," Isa. ix. 6 and 7.
who have long been the prey of destroyers, and of one another. If we
contemplate the principles of the kingdom of Jesus Christ, they promise fair to
produce the enjoyment of all that which the prophets predicted. But where is
the effect? The annals of the Christian world, as well as those of the pagan,
discover to us little more than the history of ambition, superstition, and
bloodshed. The career of this kingdom began in piety toward God, and in love
and peace to all mankind. But systems of error, superstition, and oppression,
soon interrupted its progress, and perverted its principles. Christianity has
been converted into a system of commerce, and those called the ministers of
Christ, have been a corporation of traders, in the souls and liberties of
mankind.

Were I to attempt to define the character of Antichrist, I should say, It is
all that which opposes itself to the kingdom of Christ, whether it flow from
the ecclesiastical or civil powers. The civil constitutions of nations, as well
as the ecclesiastical, so far as they accord with or have a tendency to promote
that pride and that ambition which lead to oppression, persecution, and war,
are antichristian. Whatever in religion is destructive of union among
Christians, which leads to domination over conscience, to hinder free enquiry
after truth, or any way oppresses and persecutes men for matters cognizable
only by God; is antichristian. Wherever there is intolerance, -- wherever we
find conditions of communion among Christians imposed, which Christ has not
clearly enjoined; wheresoever creeds and modes of worship are enforced by human
power; wherever men are made to forfeit any of their civil rights, or are
stigmatized, on account of their religious creeds; in what case soever one
Christian, or sect of Christians, assumes the seat of authority and judgment in
the church of Christ; whether they call for fire to destroy those who different
from them, or only exclude them from their communion and affection, there is a
portion of that spirit of Antichrist which has so long opposed itself to the
benign principles of the kingdom of the Prince of Peace. To this source it may
be easy to trace innumerable evils, nor can it be doubted but that this has
been the occasion of making the inconsiderate esteem the amiable religion of
Jesus, as a source of mischief instead of benevolence! Alas, how much of this
spirit remains amongst us all! How few have learned that 1 Cor. vii. 19.
in Jesus Christ circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but
the keeping of the commandments of God.

But we are assured from the scriptures, that all these usurpations and
antichristian principles shall have an end; and that the gospel shall produce
the various happy effects which are predicted. The religion of Christians shall
then no longer consist in Romans xiv. 17.
meat and drink, but in righteousness, peace and joy; the practice of justice;
the cultivation of harmony, and the diffusion of happiness.

The question is, When may we hope to see these predictions accomplished? Long
have a pious few had their eyes fixed on the promises of God, with ardent
expectation, and been crying, "How long, O Lord, ere thou will avenge the blood
of thy saints, and create J^rusalem a quiet dwelling place, and Zion the joy of
all the earth! Come Lord Jesus, come quickly! -- Behold I come at an hour when
ye think not! blessed is he that watches."

Some suppose, that in vain are our enquiries about the time of the
accomplishment of the predictions relative to the downfall of Antichrist, which
is to prepare the way for the peaceful kingdom of the Redeemer. If so,
wherefore is it said, "Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words
of this prophecy?" Rev. i. 3.
"Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding count the number of the
beast." xiii. 8.
Though the meaning of the prophecies is necessarily wrapped up in modes of
expression not easily to be understood, as they would otherwise operate against
their own accomplishment; yet they may not be absolutely inscrutable; and
especially when their accomplishment approaches nearer, and increasing light is
cast upon them by the arising of circumstances connected with them, which seems
in Dan. xii. and 9, to be predicted.

Much has my mind been of late affected with the appearances of things in the
Christian world, and with the occurrences which have, within these few years,
burst upon us. -- Occurrences which are unparalleled in the history of nations.

In America a revolution has taken place which is singular in its consequences,
and especially as they concern the state of religion. We have long been told
that if the Christian religion were left unprotected by establishments, and
unsupported by emoluments, it would soon be borne down, and all its solemnities
forsaken and despised. The experiment has now been made, and fact demonstrates
the fallacy of such conclusions. The people are eased of a heavy burden, and
pure and undefiled religion flourishes more than ever. Hirelings have
withdrawn, but piety and virtue, charity and union increase. But a few years
after this grand event, one of the first nations in Europe, long enslaved, and
blinded by superstition, at once broke its chains, and tore away the bandages
with which popish priests had bound the eyes of the multitude. Civil liberty
had long been forgotten, and for more than a hundred years, no liberty of
conscience was permitted to the insulted people. And as a nation, they had for
ages been made, by their tyrants, the scourge of all their neighbors. This
people have, to the astonishment of the whole civilized world, arose up as in
one day, and, in opposition to the combined power of their king, their priests,
and nobles, have dared to say, We will be free -- We will have just and equal
laws -- No man shall punish -- No man shall be punished but as the law commands
-- The poor no less than the rich, shall be protected -- Conscience is the
property of God, and every man shall worship his Maker as he pleases -- We will
never make war, but in self-defence, and will embrace all men as our brethren.
And this was not the resolution of a few, it was the solemn covenant of
twenty-six millions of people. What a phenomenon in the history of man! What
an epoch in the history of the church! But despots and their creatures, whose
existence depends on the ignorance and servility of mankind, fearing the
influence of such an example, have been exerting all their power to crush this
rising spirit of liberty, and to support the falling papacy. But by whose hand
was it, let me ask, that they and their remnant were driven back with loss and
shame? By His, who makes the wrath of man to praise him. -- Alas! the
calamities which opposition to the most benevolent sentiments has occasioned!
The passions of men have been enraged, and in the paroxism of resentment fear
and despair, the best of causes, the cause of liberty, has been stained by the
commission of crimes which afflict a great majority of their own nation, and
all the genuine friends of liberty and justice throughout the world. Who can
contemplate them but with the keenest anguish, those only excepted who are
watching for occasions to slander all who resist oppressors? The circumstances
of this wonderful revolution, mark it as an event of vast importance, and as
probably big with consequences beyond all conjecture.

The prophecies respecting the downfall of the Antichristian asurpations, must
have their accomplishment in some era, it may be the present. It is therefore
surely worth our while to enquire how far the predictions of God's word will
agree with the rise and progress of known events.

Thus it has appeared to me, and the more I have examined and thought upon the
subject, the more clearly do I seem to discern that the last days spoken of by
God's servants the prophets, are fast approaching; "when Babylon the great
shall come in remenbrance, and God will avenge the blood of his saints, and the
kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdoms of the Lord and of his
Christ;" by not only professing the religion of Jesus, but acting under its
influence and copying after his example who was meek and lowly in heart, and
who came "not to destroy men's lives but to save them." -- Not a kingdom of
anarchy, but a state of things, in which the governors and the governed, and
all the different ranks in society will unite to promote the general good. It
is not impossible that the present shaking of nations should bring about this
desirable event. Some however object that the progress of the French revolution
has been marked with too much outrage and blood; and that the persons engaged
in it are of a character too bad to admit it to be from God, -- a work which he
approves, and which he intends, as the introduction to those happy days of
which the prophets have spoken. But granting that the leaders in the French
revolution have been as atrociously wicked as represented, this does not in the
slightest degree, affect our hypothesis. What was Henry the Eighth, who began
our reformation? A monster! What were his motives? the gratifications of his
lusts. What were the means which he employed. -- How blind is man! We only know
that in God dwell the attributes of wisdom, justice and goodness, but we are
incapable of tracing the sphere of their operations. He saw fit to make use of
the Jewish ^ers, and to direct the worst of human passions, for the purpose of
effecting our redemption, by the death of Jesus Christ. Are established systems
of supersitition and tyranny to be overthrown by a few smooth words of
benevolence and wisdom? Happy if they could! Are the dragon and the beasts,
which have so depopulated the earth for ages, to perish without convulsion?
Read, -- Rev. xvi. 6.
"They have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou have given them
blood to drink for they are worthy." When this period shall arrive there will
be much work to do, for the execution of which the meek of the earth are by no
means qualified. To censure disorder, to shudder at bloodshed, and to practice
mercy, is our duty; for neither God's secret counsels, nor his providential
judgments, are to be the rule of our conduct. We know who has said, "Love your
enemies, and do good to them that hate you." This is our rule.

The French revolution then may be of God, and designed to issue in good,
although disgraced by outrages which nothing can justify.

FIRST INQUIRY.
IN endeavoring to make good this hypothesis, that the signs of the times
indicate the speedy downfall of all that spiritual and civil tyranny, which for
so many ages, has prevailed in opposition to the principles of the kingdom of
Christ, the Prince of Peace, there are three Inquiries which claim our
attention.

The first respects the dragon and the beasts, which John saw in his visions.
Rev. xi. 7. xii. and xiii.

The second respects the witnesses, Rev. xi. and the third Inquiry is, Whether
all the numbers of Daniel and John, which refer to the latter days, will agree
with the present times? Let us, with that reverence and devout candor which
become us when we apply to the word of God for instruction, attend to these
several Inquiries.

The grand scene of the prophetic vision of John opens in the fourth chapter of
the Revelations, and is continued to the end of the book. The whole may be
considered as a number of scenic pictures. Chapter the eleventh is a miniature
picture of the history of the church from the earliest times to the downfall of
all antichristian usurpations. The following visions are the same picture
variegated, for our instruction, on a larger scale.

Let us consider the visions in the twelfth and thirteenth chapters, and
especially the vision of the second beast, chap. xiii. and 11. for, if these be
understood, we shall have a key to unlock, not only the mysteries of the
eleventh chapter, but of many others which follow. Chapter xii. 3. "And there
appeared another wonder in heaven, and behold, a great red dragon, having seven
heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads. And his tail drew the
third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth," etc. Most
of the authors whom I have consulted, though they allow this chapter to contain
a representation of the persecutions of Pagan Rome, yet have strangely
spiritualized this dragon, so that whilst we are cautioned of our danger from
invisible spirits, the true object is forgotten, and we beat the air.

There can be no doubt, but the devil is a principal agent in all tyrannies,
ecclesiastical and civil; but what is here represented by the most terrify
imagery appears to be no other than that cruel civil tyranny of the Romans,
which cast down all the powers, and swept away all the remains of liberty in
Europe, the then supposed third part of the world; and which, while the
imperial head remained in full power, persecuted with unrelenting cruelty, the
church of Christ in its infancy; and under all the despotims which have arisen
from it, has more or less, continued to oppose the kingdom of Christ. This
dragon, therefore, represents the civil tyranny exercised by the Roman
Emperors, and by their successors in the several kingdoms which have arisen out
of the ruins of that empire; and specially by those who are now called the
Emperors of Germany, who profess, more immediately, to succeed the despots of
ancient Rome. While the first beast, in the next chapter, is the representation
of ecclesiastical or spiritual tyranny, this dragon represents civil tyranny.
They have the same origin, and their jurisdiction is alike extensive, and hence
they both appear with seven heads and ten horns. This dragon, we shall find,
gave to the beast his power and his seat, and great authority; but he still
continued, and although wounded, remains to this day, nor has he ever ceased to
practice destruction. All the world have worshipped him that gave power unto
the beast; yea, so base and servile have men been, that they have paid divine
homage and passive obedience to their destroyer, and have said, in the fullness
of their folly, not only of spiritual tyranny, Who is like unto the beast! but
of civil despotism, Who is like unto the dragon!

Chap. the thirteenth, verse the first. "I stood upon the sand of the sea, and
saw a beast rise up out of the s^a, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon
his horns ten crowns, and upon his head the name of blasphemy." All Protestants
are agreed, that by this beast, the papal power, as exercised by the Bishop of
Rome, supported by his clergy, and by those princes who have acknowledged his
jurisdiction, is intended. Ver. 11. "And I beheld another beast coming up out
of the earth, and he had two horns like a lamb, and he spoke as a dragon. And
he exercises all Rev. xiii. 12.
the power of the first beast before him, and causes the earth, and them which
dwell therein to worship the first beast," etc. Dr. Doddr^dge, in his notes on
this passage observe, As I look upon the former to be the papal power, I am
ready, with the best critics I know, to inte^^ret this of the religious orders
of the church of Rome. This beast is said to ascend from the earth, whereas the
other ascended from the sea, to make the distinction between them the more
remarkable: but what other mystery may be suggested, I cannot conjecture. Dr.
Goodwin understands by the first beast the temporal power which the Pope has
received from the kings of the ten antichristian kingdoms; and by the second
beast the spiritual power which the Pope and his clergy claim of binding and
loosing, of pardoning sin, and of cursing men to hell. Mr. Lowman supposes it
to represent the ecclesiastical princes of Germany, who have been such great
supporters of the power of the first beast. Most agree that although he is thus
represented as a distinct beast, yet he ri^es out of the empire of the first,
and is subordinate to him. It must, in all likelihood, signify some distinct
persecuting power, of a like nature and kind with the first, supporting and
advan^ing his ^utno^^ty. Lowman, p 136 Where may be ^een the various opinions
on this subject
But very inferior as I am to these learned men, I beg leave to propose a
conjecture which I think has more weight than at first view we may be willing
to admit.

May we not understand it of Lewis XIV. or at least of that tyranny which the
family of the Capets have exercised to the great opprestion of the Christian
church; and to the destruction of mankind? Why might not Lewis XIV. or the
Capets and their tyranny be the objects of John's vision, as well as Alexander
or Antiochus, or any other tyrant, that of Daniel's? Read their political
history and private memoirs. If pre-eminence in vice, oppression, and murder,
enitle to this distinction, who so abhorrent and vile? Who such enemies to the
truth of God, and the happiness of mankind? Their tyranny has been the scourge
of France, of Europe, and the world. No country ever had such a ra^e of tyrant,
as France, and ti^l within these few months there was not an Englishman who did
not with this tyranny to be extirpated from the earth. The rest ess and cru^^
ambition of the kings of France and their court within these few years, has
occasioned the slaughter of unnumbered thousands of our fr^ends and countrymen,
and oad^d u^ with a debt which makes a I the nation groun. Not the people or
France, let us remember, but their despots, against whose oppression, they have
lately ri^en up, have been the a^t^ons of all these evils. And as long as the
old system remained, there was no hope of remedy. How happy therefore would it
have been for the surrounding nations, if the people of France had been
permitted to ^ettle their new ^onstitution which promised peace and security to
all their neighbors as well as to themselves! But for the interferences of
foreign courts, all would now have been peace
What crue^ties did Lewis XIV. especially perpetrate toward his Protestant
subjects; and what devastation and woe did he spread over Europe in his c^uel
wars! Examine the description. -- "And I beheld another beast coming up out of
the earth, and he had two horns, like a lamb, and he spoke as a dragon." John
saw the other beast, the papal tyranny, (which is the usurpation of a
foreigner,) advance, plunging through the waves of that sea of civil
commotions, and religious contentions, which at the time of his rising agitated
the Roman empire, and what was called the Christian church but this comes up
out of the earth, Perhaps by the first beast's coming up out of the sea,
nothing more may be intended than that foreign juris^liction which the papacy
was to exercise; and by the second beast's coming up out of the earth, that his
tyranny was to ^e ^owestic, and exercised rather over his own country than
foreign nations. This agrees perfectly with the difference between the papal
usurpations and the tyranny of Lewis XIV.
it rises at home, and from circumstances somewhat more settled, and in times
not so agitated by commotions. If this be the beast in chapter xi. 7. which was
to overcome and slay the witnesses, (as I am thoroughly persuaded it is) there
we have a more descriptive account of his origin.

The second beast is said to come up out of the earth, but this from what our
translators render the bottomless pit; from the abyss, or pit, bog, or wirlpool
of infinite depth. And from what a bog of vice, treachery and cruelty on the
one hand, and of superstition, servility and baseness on the other, did the
French tyranny arise! Or if you please so to express it, from a wirlpool which
draws into its vortex, and swallows up every thing, the most precious to man.

Historians have represented Lewis XIV. as raising the French monarchy to the
pinnacle of its glory. And if pride and ambition, persecution and bloodshed
constitute supreme glory, it did so. But "the wisdom of the world is
foolishness with God." O the folly and cruelty of men! they create devourers,
as if for the pleasure of witnessing and celebrating their exploits of blood;
and even think it impiety to complain when their own rurn arrives to be
devoured!

How perfectly do these two descriptions of the second beast agree! The angel
describes him as ascending out of the abyss; John sees him arising out of the
earth. And what sort of a spot may we suppose the theater of his rising to be?
The choicest spot which nature can furnish? Rather, where Behemoth Job xl. 21.
makes his bed, in ^he coverts of the reeds and sens, from whence he drags his
muddy ^imbs to the mountains of slaughter, where all the beasts of the field
play.

"And he had two horns like a lamb." Here we may observe that (...) Bo^rbo^s,
formerly kings of Na^ar^e only; on the extinction of ^^e family of Valois in
1589, which reigned over France; were be^ome possessed of both kingdoms, and
Henry IV. grandfather of Lewis XIV. in whom the kingdoms were united, took the
titles of King of France and Nacarre. These were his two horns like a lamb.

"And he spoke as a dragon." His profession of that religion which ^eaches to
be meek and harmless, presents an appearance of innocence, but when he opens
his mouth, the accents are those of a dragon, which bespeak him formed for
mischief, and not for the benefit of mankind. All this agrees perfectly with
the French tyranny, and particularly with Lewis the XIV. who was at once a
superstitious devotee and a cruel despot; who though styled the Most Christian
King, practiced the enormities of the dragon, who made war with them, who kept
the commandments of God, and had the testimony of Jesus. Witness the
persecutions with which he harrassed the Protestants, and his attempts to
extirpate the reformed by the revocation of the Edict of Nants; a persecution
more cruel than any since the days of persecution commenced. See Claude's
Complaints of the Protestants. The Edict of Nants, issued in 1598, grant^^d to
the Protestants the free exercise of their religion; many ^^hurches in every
part of France, and judges of their own persua^ion; a free access to all places
of honor and dignity, an hundred ^laces as pledges of their future security,
and funds to maintain both Rev. xii. 17.
their ministers and garrisons. But no sooner was Lewis. XIV. arrived to the
years of manhood, than he formed the resolution of destroying the Protestants.
Did we not know him to have been a beast, we could hardly give credit to the
report of the motive which pushed this resolution into practice. "Soon after he
came to the crown," says Mr. Claude, page 43. there arose in the kingdom a
civil war, which proved so sharp and desperate, as brought the state within a
hair's breadth of utter ruin. Those of the reformed religion still kept their
loyalty so inviolable, and accompanied it with such a zeal, and with a fervor
s^ extraordinary, and so successful, that the king found himself obliged to
give public marks of it by a declaration made at St. Germains in the year 1652.
Then, as well at court as in the armies, each strove to proclaim loudest the
merits of the reformed. But, can you believe that there is so much depravity in
human nature? Their enemies said, If on this occasion this party could preserve
the state, this shows likewise that they could have overthrown it; this party
must therefore by all means, be crushed. Lewis and the abettors of his tyranny,
instantly set about it. A thousand dreadful blows," says Mr. Saurin, were
struck at our afflicted church es, before that which destoyed them: for our
enemies, if I m^^ use such an expression, not content with seeing our ruin,
ende^voured to taste it. As soon as the kingdom was settled in pea^^ they fell
upon them, and persecuted them in every imaginable way. They were excluded from
the king's household, -- from all employments of honor and profit, -- all the
courts of justice, erected by virtue of the Edict of Nants, were abolished, so
that in all trials their enemies only were their judges, and in all the courts
of justice the cry was, Claude's Comp. etc. p. 52.
I plead against a heretic; I have to do with a man of a religion odious to the
state; and which the king is resolved to extirpate. Orders were printed at
Paris, and sent from thence to all the cities and parishes of the kingdom,
which empowered the parochial priests, churchwardens, and others to make an
exact inquiry into whatever any of the reformed might have done or said for
twenty years past, as well on the subject of religion as otherwise; to make
information of this before the justices of the peace, and punish them to the
utmost extremity. Thus, the prisons and dungeons were every where filled with
these pretended criminals; orders were issued, which deprived them in general
of all sorts of offices and employments, from the greatest to the smallest, in
the farms, and revenues; they were declared incapable of exercising any employ
in the custom-houses, guards, treasury, or post office, or even to be
messengers, stage-coachmen, or waggoners. Now a college was suppressed, and
then a church shut up, and at length they were forbid to worship God in public
at all, by the revocation of the Edict of Nants in 1685. Now says Saurin, we
were banished, then we were forbidden to quit the kingdom. on pain of death.
Here we saw the glorious rewards of those who betrayed their religion; and
there we beheld those who had the courage to confess it haled to a dungeoon, a
scaffold, or a galley. H^^^, we saw our persecutors drawning on a sledge the
dead bodies of those who had expired on the rack, there we beheld a false friar
tormenting a dying man, who was terrified on the one hand with the fear of hell
if he apostatized; and on the other, with the fear of leaving his children
without bread, if he should continue in the faith. When the arguments of
priests, and every other mean failed, cruel soldiers were quartered in their
houses to exert their skill in torments, to compel them to become Catholics.
"They cast some," say Mr. Claude, into large fires, and took them out when they
were half roasted; they ranged others with ropes under their armpits, and
plunged them several times into wells, till they promised to renounce their
religion; they tied them like criminals on the rack, and poured wine with a
fannel into their mouths, till being intoxicated, they promised to turn
Catholics. Some they slashed and cut with pen-knives; some they took by the
nose, with red-hot tongs, and led them up and down the rooms till they promised
to turn Catholics. These cruel proceedings made eight hundred thousand persons
quit the kingdom. And let us remember this same system of despotism and
persecution remained till overthrown in 1789. None of these cruel laws against
the Protestants were repealed, nor a particle of arbitrary power surrendered.

In that country, from whence the light of reformation first issued, and where
there were more faithful witnesses against the papal apostasy than in any other
nation of the world; and from whose number and influence, and the laws in their
favor, the old persecuting power was greatly reduced; there, the uncontroled
reign of antichrist was restored.

"And he commanded that they should make an image to the beast, which had the
wound by a sword and did live," i. e. This tyrant caused a system of dominion
to be over conscience, a system of persecution to be established, which was the
image of the first papal beast; for although it was not so extensive a tyranny,
as that exercised by the Pope being confined to one kingdom; yet it was the
similitude of it. "And he had power in give life to the image of the beast,
that the image of the beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would
not worship the image of the beast should be killed." He gave new vigor to the
dying papacy in France, and power to the popish party to issue their mandates
and command apostasy, on pain of death. As to the juggling tricks, and impious
frauds mentioned in the thirteenth and fourteenth verses, they are as
applicable to the impostures of this tyranny as to those of any other.

Thus far, I think, the likeness is perfect; and allowing Lewis XIV. or the
French tyranny, brought to perfection by him, to be the object of the vision,
it appears easy to be understood; but on every other hypothesis, which I have
seen, it is encumbered with inexplicable difficulties. Dr. Doddridge says, What
the image of the beast is, distinct from the beast itself, I confess I know not.

This part of our Inquiry upon which matters of no small importance are
suspended, will I hope be attentively considered; as likewise whatsoever
concerns this second beast and the conformity of the tyrannic proceedings of
Lewis to the character and conduct here predicted. The fact here contended for
being proved, we have a master key to unlock the greater part of the prophecies
before us, particularly that in the eleventh chapter from ver. 7. And even such
lesser mysteries as those contained in chapter xvi. and 2. where the first vial
is poured out upon two descriptions of men; upon them who have the mark of the
beast, papisis; and upon those who only worship or serve his image, those
Protestants who yield assistance to the antichristian party in France.

" And he caused all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to
receive a mark in their right hand, or in their forehead, and that no man might
buy or sell save he that had the mark, It was customary to mark slaves and
soldiers with some impression on the hand or forehead, that it might be known
to what master or commander they belonged: and it was a practice also with
devout idolaters to mark themselves with the signature of the god they
worshipped. To these customs, it is not to be questioned, there is here an
allusion.
or the number of his name." There is, we deny not, a difficulty in so
understanding this part of the description, as to give a perspicuous
explanation. It is the pleasure of Heaven, that it should be enveloped in
considerable obscurity. I make no pretensions to critical acumen, but it
appears to me that here are two conditions represented of enjoying the lowest
rights of citizens, unlimited submission to the authority of the church, the
Pope and his clergy; and passive obedience to the despotism of this second
beast. Where these were refused no man might buy or sell. With this description
the Claude's Complaints of the Protestants. p. 55.
cruel laws of Lewis the fourteenth, respecting the freedom of companies and
handicraft trades, by which the Protestants were hindered from earning bread
for their families, perfectly agree.

To exclude mankind from any of their civil rights, for their adherence to
matters of conscience, and to gratify a party, that that party, in return, may
support the views of ambitious men, is of the dragon and the beast; but that to
please the priesthood, and strengthen despotism, a man for being a Protestant
should be excluded from acting as a custom-house officer, a stage-coachman, or
a waggoner, was a most wanton exercise of antichristian power indeed; and this
was the exact case in the matter under consideration, for not only Lewis, but
Mazarine, his minister, and the other petty despots about the throne, found
their account in these proceedings. In this manner did they get rid of a body
of men who were dangerous enemies to their schemes of ambition. The court
gratified the priests, and in return, the priests supported court measures, and
helped Lewis, not only to get rid of these friends to liberty and justice, but
also to crush the Parliaments, which till now possessed considerable power.

But how shall we count the number of the name of the beast? No man might buy
or sell save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of
his name. Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding count the number of
the beast, for it is the number of a man. Not to specify particularly what
others have said about this number, there are two ways of calculating it which
agree with Lewis the fourteenth, as the person in whom the French monarchy
became a perfect beast. And the text suggests that there should be two, the
number of the beast, and the number of his name. The numeral letters in the
name of Lewis, as written in Latin give 666. Thus, L 50 U 5 D 500 O 0 V 5 I 1 C
100 U 5 S 0 666

It was to be the number of the name of the beast, and the number of a man, or
of a man's name.

Although so much stress is not, perhaps, to be laid upon the following way of
calculating this number of the second beast, yet it is worth taking notice of;
and possibly the Holy Spirit might point out that, by a remarkable providence,
a twofold way of counting this number should be afforded, that thus the
identity of the person and tyranny, might be ascertained with the greater
evidence. Of this I shall say nothing, but leave every one to his own judgment.
The first way of calculating ascertains the name of the man who should bring
the tyranny to perfection, the following, the length of time it should be in
perfecting; since the ancestors of that man began it. And on examination we
find, that from the time when Hugh Capet seized the throne of France, to the
time, when the French, under Lewis XIV. began that career of blood, which, for
many years, proved so calamitous to Europe, and especially to the Protestants,
was exactly 666 years. Hugh Capet seized the throne in 987, Lewis XIV. came to
the throne, on the death of his father Lewis XIII. in 1643, came to his
majority in 1652, and in the following year war was made upon Spain. Here he
begins to rise above the surface of that bog in which his tyranny had been
gendering for 666 years.

Thus, if I am not deceived, there is every proof which can be expected, proof,
which amounts much nearer to a demonstration than is usual on such subjects,
that the French monarchy, was the second beast which came up out of the earth.
And though I would guard against rash confidence, I feel a persuasion which I
cannot overcome, that this is the truth. And if it be, the consequences which
are united with it are to the last degree interesting, both to the church and
to mankind at large.

SECOND INQUIRY.
HAVING endeavored to prove that Lewis the fourteenth, or the tyranny of the
Capets, as perfected by that unequalled despot, was represented to John in his
vision of the second beast; the second inquiry respects the two witnesses in
Rev. xi.

This inquiry involves in it four questions. 1. Who are the witnesses? 2. Who
is to slay them, and where are their dead bodies to lie unburied? 3. What
length of time is intended by the three days and a half, during which their
dead bodies are to lie in the street of the great city? 4. What will be the
consequences attending their resurrection?


1. Who are these two witnesses? Rev. xi. 3.
"I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand
two hundred and threescore days clothed in sackcloth." The most prevailing
opinion is, that the faithful ministers of the gospel, and all those who bear
testimony against the errors and usurpations of antichrist, are intended; and
that the number two is mentioned in allusion to the law of Moses which required
two witnesses, at least, to make a testimony valid. Bishop Lloyd supposes them
to be the Waldenses and Albigenses, the early witnesses in France and its
vicinity, against the corruptions of popery. Dr. More explains it of unpolluted
priests and faithful magistrates. But I have long thought that, by these
witnesses, the spirit of prophecy intended the witnesses for gospel truth
against the spiritual dominations and corrupt errors of the papal apostasy; and
all those who bear witness for civil liberty against the tyrannies and
oppressions of those princes and governors, whose passions have enslaved
mankind and desolated the earth. The number of these witnesses has in general
been but small, yet, though they have prophesied in sackcloth, God in his good
providence, has always preserved to mankind a succession of both descriptions.
Even wise and good men have not, perhaps, sufficiently considered the worth and
importance of the witnesses of the latter description, in fulfilling the great
designs of God's goodness toward men; and hence they have almost always
interpreted this prophecy as relating to the state of religion only; as if the
civil and political state of men, were held in little consideration by the Lord
of the whole earth.

If we heartily consider the matter, the f^urth verse seems to confirm the
foregoing ideas. And although what is said in the fifth and sixth verses is
more obscure, yet as far as I can understand them, they are not inapplicable to
either of these characters. "These are the two olive trees, and the two
candlesticks, standing before the God of the while earth." Rev. xi. 4.
We have ^^ng been used to affix to these two beautiful tropes, olive trees and
candlesticks, the idea of saints; but this is by no means essential, for they
necessarily imply no more than excellence in that character which is sustained,
whether religious or civil. Allusion is here made to the emblems under which
J^s^ua and Zerubbabel, were represented to the prophet Zechariah Zeih. iv. 11
and 14.
; one of whom was employed in re-establishing, (after the captivity, and in a
time of religious and civil persecution) the religious, and the other the civil
polity, of the Jews. And what have the champions, in all ages and in all
countries, who have combated tyrants in the cause of liberty and justice; as
well as the advocates for the uncorrupted truth of Jesus been, but golden
candlesticks whose lights have illuminated this dark world, and which have at
once made conspicuous, the rights of men and the enormities of oppressors --
the truth of Jesus and the impieties of antichrist! And but for the zeal of
both these, in their different characters, being kept burning, by that oil of
benevolence toward man, and love to the truth of God's word, which the olive
trees represent; the earth had been involved in universal darkness, and the
triumphs of oppression and error had been complete.

What follows is still more highly figurative. "And if any man will hurt them,
fi^e proceeds out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies. Rev. xi. 5.
And if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed. These have
power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy: and have
power over waters to turn them to blood, and to sin the earth with all
plagues as often as they will." Rev. xi. 6.
What is here affirmed, has never been literally fulfilled, nor is it likely
that it ever will. There is some similarity between these plagues and those to
be inflicted under the first four vials. "There." on the pouring out of the
first vi^l, " there s^ll a grievous s^re upon the men who had the mark of the
beast, and upon them who wo^shipped his image. Rev. xv^. 2.
here, the witnesses smite the earth with all plagues." -- There, on the
pouring out of the second and third vials, the sea and the rivers became blood;
here, the witnesses turn the waters into blood, and restrain the rain of
heaven. There, on pouring out the fourth vial upon the sun, men were scorched
with great heat; here, fire proceeds out of the mouths of the witnesses to
devour their enemies. -- May not this highly figurative description, be made
more intelligible thus? The witnesses for religious truth and civil liberty,
although they shall defend their cause under great oppressions; yet such, under
the providence of God, shall be the effect of their zeal, eloquence, and
exertions, in the cause of God and man, that they shall occasion great
vexations to their enemies, and kindle a fire, which in the end, shall consume
their oppressors, and their systems together. And such advantages shall they
have, from the spirit of their attacks, and the succeeding providence of God,
that, from the mode of war which will then prevail, sire will seem to issue
from their mouths, and destroy their opposers. In this vision which John had,
we must suppose, that the parties in their conflicts passed in review before
him. As firearms were then unknown, it was not possible for John, when he saw
a vision of one of our modern battles, to understand the principles of what he
saw, unless he was favored with particular instruction from the angel; and
which, as it was not necessary, is not probable. Suppose then, that on the
rising ground before him, he saw the armies of the witnesses and of their
opposers, drawn up in battle-array. The witnesses, of course, occupying the
highest ground in the scene, and possessing most of his attention. The conflict
commences. He sees the fire run from column to column along the ranks, and
hears the thunder. He beholds the enemy fall, and the witnesses triumphant. In
such a vision the fire would seem to come out of their mouths and devour their
enemies.
Such shall be the effects of their arguments and exertions on the minds of
men, that the political heavens shall refuse to yield that rain which used to
swell those rivers that fed the great sea of oppression. "And all the rivers
shall be dry." Such shall be the effects of their unexampled efforts in the
cause of truth and justice, -- in the cause of injured man; that in the end,
avenging justice shall turn upon their enemies, and render to them according to
their deeds. -- If something of this kind be not meant by these powers which
are given to the witnesses, I own, I am at an utter loss to conceive what the
Holy Spirit intended.

And "when they had finished their testimony," i. e. when the thousand two
hundred and threescore days are about to draw to a conclusion, "the beast that
ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them and kill
them." Here our second question presents itself. Who, or what is it, that is
set forth by this beast?

If the position respecting the second beast in the thirteenth chapter be made
good, I answer, the French tyranny under Lewis the fourteenth, who came up out
of the bottomless quagmire. For as the abyss does not necessarily mean what is
commonly understood by the bottomless pit, ^ell, (though in a sense from thence
he came,) there appears a peculiar propriety in thus explaining it: for taken
altogether, and considering that some particular part of the antichristian
city, is to be the scene of the sufferings, death and resurrection of the
witnesses, the beast described in this eleventh chapter, agrees better with the
second beast in the thirteenth chapter, than with the first. And let us
remember it must be one of them, or we create a third beast which was not shown
to John in any of the following explanatory visions; and it is not probable
that so interesting an object would be presented in this miniature picture,
which is not to be found in any of those which are on a larger scale. With
Lewis it perfectly agrees. There is no nation existing which, first and last,
has produced such a number of faithful witnesses against papal corruptions and
tyrannies, as France. No people have so long a list of martyrs and confessors
to show, as the Protestants of that country; and there is no royal family in
Europe which has shed, in the support of Popery, half the blood which the
Capets have shed. Who deluged the earth with the blood of the Waldenses and
Albigenses, that inhabited the southern pars of France, and bore testimony
against the corruptions and usurpations of Rome? -- The cruel kings of France,
slew above a million of them. -- Who set on foot, and headed the executioners
of the massacre of barthoromew, which lasted seven days, and in which near
fifty thousand Protestants were murdered in Paris, and twenty five thousand
more in the provinces? -- The royal monsters of France. A massacre this, in
which neither age nor sex, nor even women with child, were spared; for the but
her, had received orders to slaughter all, even babes at the breast, if they
belonged to Protestan^s. The king himself stood at the windows of his palace,
endeavoring to shoot those who fled, and crying to their pursuers, kill'em,
kill'em. For this massac^e public rejoicings were made at Rome, and in other
Catholic countries. -- Hundreds of thousands of Protestan^s were slain in the
civil wars of France, for their attachmant to their principles. But as if Lewis
XIV. had determined to (...) do all his predecessors in persecution, he
perpetrated, by the base instruments of his despotism, all the enormities
connected with the revocation of the edict of Nan^^. Those who wish to see a
full account of the cruclties of this horrid persecution, a persecution which
did not wholly cease till the Revolution in 1789, may consult Mr. Claude's
Complaints of the Protestants of France. After setting forth the unheard of
barbarities which were practiced previous to the revocation of this edict, and
enumerating the articles of the edict which crushed the cause of Protestantism
in that country; he says, (p. 114,) In the execution of this edict, in the very
same day that it was registered and published at Paris, they began to demolish
the church at Charenton. The oldest minister thereof (Mr. Claude) was commanded
to leave Paris within four and twenty hours, and forthwith to quit the kingdom.
His colleagues were little better treated, they gave them forty eight hours to
leave Paris. The rest of the ministers were allowed fifteen ^a^s. But it can
hardly be believed to what ve^ations and cruelies they were exposed, they
neither p^rmi^ted them to dispose of their estates, nor to ca^ry away with them
any of their movables. Besides, they would not give them leave to take along
with them, either father or mother, brother or sister, or any of their kindred,
though they were many of them infirm, decayed, and poor, who could not subsist
but by their means. They went so far as even to deny them their own children,
if they were bove seven years old; nay, some they took from them that were
under that age, and even such as yet ^anged on their mothers breasts; and
refused them nurses for their newborn infants, which them there is could not give
suck to. -- In some frontier places they stopped, under various pre^ences, the
banished ministers, and pu^ them in p^^son. Then after they had thus detained
them, they would tell them, that the fi^ten (...) of the edict were expired,
and they c^u^d ^ot now have liberty to retire, but must before to the g^dl^^^s.
As to the rest, whom the for^e of persecution and hard usage constrained to
leave their houses and estates, and fly the kingdom; it is not to be imagined
what d^^gers they exp^se^ themse^ves to. Never were orders more s^^ere, or more
strict than those that were given against them. They d^^b^ed ^he guards!
seaport c^^es, highways and fords; they covered the country with ^^^ers; they
armed even the peasants, either to st^por kill those that passed. By these
means they quickly filled all the prisons in the kingdom; for the dread of the
or goons, who were qua^tered upon them to oblige th^n to embrace pop^ry; the
horror of seeing their con^cie^ces forced and their children taken from them,
and of living for the future in a land, where there wa^ neither justice nor
huma^^ity for them; obliged every one to think of escape, and to abandon all to
save the^ persons. All the poor prisoners have been treated with unheard of
rigor, confined in dungeons, loaded with heavy chains, almost starved with
hunger, and deprived of all converse but with their persecutors. They put many
into monasteries where they have experienced the worst of cruelties. Some
indeed have been so happy as to di^, in the midst of their torments; but others
have at ength sunk under the weight of the temptation: and some agai^^ by the
extraordinary assistance of God's grace, do still sustain it with an her^ic
courage. This was the state of things [p. 122] in the latt^r end of the year
1685, and the full accomplishment of the threats the clergy had made us three
years before, toward the end of their pretended pastoral letter, in which they
say, Ye must expect miseries incomparably more drea^ful and intolerable, than
all th^s^ which hitherto your revolt and your schism have drawn upon you. And
truly they have not been worse than their word. Cruel clergy! are these the
ministers of the merciful Jesus? Fiends from hell! Cruel government! Are these
the powers which are ordained of God, and which men are bound to obey on pain
of the divine displeasure? To maintain such a position is a slander on the
justice and goodness of the Creator. When this bloody religion and such inhuman
tyrannies fa^l, and their base instruments perish, under the vengeance of the
oppressed, is it an^ wonder that the angels shout, "thou art righteous, O Lord,
they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou have given them blood
to drink, for they are worthy." Shall not God take vengeance? He surely will.
He has promised that he will. The false friends of Christianity, and all the
creatures of tyranny will howl and ery, Alas! alas! that great city! But God
will say, Rejoice over her thou heaven. Vengeance is mine, I will repay.


We have heard how he made war, both upon the witnesses for the pure religion
of Jesus Christ, and upon those for civil liberty too, and slew them. By his
continued and multiplied persecutions and usurpations, and particularly by the
revocation of the Edict of Nants, he slew the former especially, but with them
the greater part of those of the latter description; for the true friends of
religion and of religious liberty, if they know any thing of their principles,
are the firmest friends of civil liberty also; as that which is most intimately
connected with the designs of Christ, and the triumphs of that uncorrupted
truth wherewith Christ has made us free.

But does not this perfect his beastly character? He it was also, who gave the
death-wound to the civil liberties of France, by taking from the parliaments
all their remaining power, and from France every shadow of freedom. Their
ancient constitution had been long impairing. It was undermined by the crafty
Levis the XI. and had been nearly swept away by the daring and sanguinary
councils of Richelieu under Lewis the XIII. The assembly of the states had been
disused ever since the beginning of this monarch's reign. The last time of its
meeting was in the year 1614. But all civil liberty did not then expire. Its
complete extinction was left for this tyrant. "For heretofore" (says
Puffendorf, in the style of a court sycophant) the parliament of Paris used to
oppose the king's designs, under a pretense that they had such a right. That
the king could not do any thing of moment without its consent; but the king has
taught it only to intermeddle with judicial business, and some other concerns,
which the king now and then, is ple^sed to leave to its decision. Thus did this
tyrant establish a perfect despotism, and from his days to the time of the
revolution in 1789, the people were strangers to both civil and religious
liberty. It is true that persecution and violence have not continued ever since
to rage i^ the same degree. If they had, that kingdom must have been
depopul^ted, and n^^ an object left to be tyrannized over; and not only that
country laid waste, but all (...) accessible world. The same system of
oppression was pursued, though not ^lways; the same length; the same tyrannic
laws continued in force and were exercised, when ever the king or his courtiers
conceived it necessary for the prom^tion o^ their n^^ sures. The late
banishments and imprisonments of the members (...) the p^r^^m^^^ of Paris, for
refusing to register those loans [because they thought them oppressive^ the
people] which the court demanded, are in every ones memory. And th^^^ some, to
answer their own unworthy purposes, may endeavor to p^r^ua^e (...) to t^^
contrary, yet to the disinterested and dispassionate these tyrannic proceeding,
appea^ manifestly to have been the things which hastened the downsel of the
unhappy Lewis the sixteenth.


Thus perished liberty, thus perished the renowned resormers of France, whose
faithfulness will be had in everlasting remembrance, and whose sufferings will
be avenged in the downs^^ of that tyranny which inflicted them. For though
"their dead bodies shall ^e in the street of the great city, which spiritually
is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified;" and though the
"people and kindreds and tongues, and nations see their dead bodies, three days
and a half, and shall not suffer them to be put into graves," though few or
none of the nations will, comparatively This indifference is perfectly
consistent with the asylum which the hu^ted Protestants of France, who could
escape from their country, found in the neighbouting states and kingdoms; for
whe^ever sympathy individuals might se^^ and all true Christians certainly
felt; and though for the sake of their manufact ries, property, increase of
population, and in pity for their sufferings, they received and encouraged
them, yet what nation ever armed in their defense or even moved a finger,
comparatively, for the relief of all the millions, who were first unarmed, ^n^
then offered the mark of the beast, or banishment, the gall^es, the dan^e^n,
the ^a^k, and death? What Protestant nation did any thing worth c^^l^ng an
exerti^n in favor of all the thousands and hundreds of housands, which were
hu^^^^d, l^ke will beasts, by popish prie^ts and their bloodhounds; and drive^
from their country, or^^^dered, -- of all the thousands and ^ens of thousands
who for a good c^n^cience w^r^ torn from their families, immured in dungeon^,
condemned to the ^al^ie^, or d^l^^ere^ over to the insolence and cruelty of
dragoons? -- Not one! But the fall ^f that tyranny, which indicted these
enormities, produces a shock which is felt from one end (...) the earth to the
other. Whence is this?
have any pity on them, to yield them assistance, or do for them any office of
humanity, but may even rejoice over them (many of them at least) and make
merry, and send gifts one to another because these two proph^ts who tormented
them, are slain, though instead of assisting them, they may wish their
everlasting extinction, or exert themselves ever so much against them -- when
the days are fulfilled, they shall awake in their children and successors, and
shake and overturn from its de^pest foundations the tyranny which slew them.
"And after three days and a half, the spirit of life from God entered into
them."

Here the third question presents itself. What duration of time are we to
understand by these three days and a half?

Before I offer my interpretation of this number, there is one consideration
which claims a previous attention. On a careful examination, we shall find in
all the predictions of the prophets, that although they give us assurance of
the facts, yet the time of their accomplishment is left in a state of
uncertainty. And even where dates are fixed, as in the predictions respecting
the return of the Jews from Babylon, after 70 years captivity; and the
appearance of the Messiah after 70 weeks, or 490 years; yet the commencement of
these periods is involved in obscurity, till light is thrown upon them by the
event. It never was intended that men should know with certainty when any
future event is to take place, and this for an obvious reason. The prophecies,
we should remember, were designed not to gratify our curiosity, but so confirm
our faith in the truth of the divine word, by their accomplishment. And hence
the necessity that these three days and a half should have a different meaning
from the common prophetic days, that thus the time might not so easily be
ascertained till the accomplishment should lead me^ to their true intention.
Were the prophecies so clear that every one could precisely know the
circumstances and the time to which they refer, hindrances, if we may speak
thus, would be thrown in the way of God's designs, and, in many cases, a check
would be given to the necessary exertions and pursuits of men. All the latter
part of the last century, thinking people of all countries, were expecting the
accomplishment of the 1260 years, (the time of the beast's power.) On the
revocation of the Edict of Nants, the whole Protestant world, and especially
the poor One of them, Peter Jurieu, says, I know not from what time God shall
please to begin the recko^ing o^ the three years and a half. Not but that I
strongly hope, that God intends to begin it at the time of the revocation of
the edict of Nants, but this does not rise to a full assurance. No, it did not
comport with he designs of God that any man should certainly know before the
accomplishment.
afflicted French, were of opinion that the unequalled persecutions which were
then endured were the slaying of the witnesses, and they were on tiptoe,
looking for the end of the three days and a half. See Bishop Newton on the
Prophecies in locum.
What is here laid down, particularly, that the days here should have a
different meaning from those other days in this book, being granted; (as I
think it must) let us proceed to seek an answer to this very interesting
question. What length of time is intended by th^se three days and a half?

My answer is, that days in this 11th ver. are the same with months in the 2d.
ver. or if you please, lunar days, reckoning as the Jews did, thirty days to a
month, and as is the method in calculating the above forty-two months, to make
them agree with the 1260 days in ver. 3. Some have supposed that these thr^e
days and a half are to be reckoned as we reckon the time, and times, and half a
time. Chap. ^ii. 14. taking them for Jewish years, and then reckoning the days
for years, i. e. 1260 years. But this is subversive of all that is said from
the seventh verse and on; it makes the whole duration of their prophesying the
same with their finishing it. And on this ground, the idea of lunar days or
months, seems a vast deal more feasible. Originally, the Jews measured their
months by the sun, and then every month consisted of thirty days. But after
they came out of Egypt they measu^ed them by the course of the moon, and then
the first was of thirty days, the next of twenty-nine, and so a ternately; that
which had thirty days was called a complete month, and that which had but
twenty-nine an incomplete month. From change to change are 29 days 12 hours and
44 minutes. And it may not be amiss to recollect that one ^unar month is the
length of the moon's day, for she turns round her axis exactly in the time that
she goes round the earth.




Thirty multiplied by three, adding fifteen for the half day, makes 105. When
this way of reckoning first occurred to my mind, I had no idea of the events
which this number connected; for I did not recollect the year when the Edict of
Nants was revoked. But looking over Quick's Synodicon, I found it to be October
18th, 1685, to which if 105 be added, it brings us to 1790. Take off a few
months, (if that should be thought necessary,) for the event taking place
before the half day is quite expired, and it brings us to 1789, when the
witnesses were to be quickened. Whether this may strike others as it struck me,
when I first observed the coincidence, I cannot tell; but, from this agreement
of the number 105, with the time which elapsed between one of the greatest
persecutions that was ever experienced by Christians, and this wonderful
revolution which has taken place, a thousand ideas rushed upon my mind. Is it
probable, is it possible, that this can be the quickening of the witnesses?
What! the olive trees! the candlesticks! I have always supposed these to be
saints! There are doubtless many characters among the French reformers who
deserve not the honorable title of witnesses; but was there ever a cause,
however good, which agitated a nation, in which some bad characters did not
mingle with the excellent? A mixture of good and evil seems inseparable from
the present state of things.
And can that zeal which has fired Frenchmen, to combat for civil and
religious liberty, be the spirit of life from God! Is this resurrection, in the
vision, the rising to this civil and religious liberty previous to better days!
I will do all that I can to discover the truth.

We have long been praying, thy kingdom come, and is there any probability that
the preludes to it are arrived, the Every one that is acquainted with-prophetic
language knows, that these are figurative representations of commotions in
nations and of the fall of princes and great men.
earthquakes, which shake the kingdoms of the world, the signs in heaven ^^ove,
and on the earth beneath: the darkening of the sun and moon and the falling of
the stars from heaven? And shall we be unconcerned about the signs of the
times? It is deserving the most serious examination whether the revolution in
France, be the beginning of the fulfillment of this prophecy. I say beginning,
for according to the prophecies, if this be the event pointed out by the
resurrection of the witnesses, we have as yet seen but the dawn of what is to
come, nor shall we perhaps for some time. Black and conflicting clouds will
darken the hemisphere and obscure our prospect; but they will spend themselves
and vanish. But were we sure that this event is what we conjecture, yet no man
could say, how long it would be before the spirit of life from God would, in
that larger degree, which we look for, enter into the witnesses for gospel
truth; for they may be quickened with political life and yet remain some time
with a small share of spiritual life. But,

Here the fourth question, which this Inquiry about the witnesses suggests,
arises, What are to be the consequences of their resurrection? Although a
general idea may be formed of that which is to take place, yet it does not
appear possible to mark out with certainty, what relates to future events,
wrapped up in figures like those which follow in this book. But we may
conjecture; our part is to compare those events which have taken place with the
predictions, and judge how far the prophecies are fulfilled, and not pry into
futurity with an over-anxious curiosity. Verse 11. "And after three days and a
half the spirit of life from God entered into them." When their enemies thought
them perished for ever, then, as under an impulse from The expressions, The
spirit of life from God; and a great voice from heaven, are Jewish phrases; for
when that people would represent any thing as very great, or out of the common
way, they said it was from the Lord, and from heaven, as, an evil spirit from
the Lord trouble him, i. e. a very evil spirit. The trees of the Lord are full
of sap, i. e. the immensely large cedars of Lebanon. How art thou fallen from
heaven! i. e. from what a height of dignity and greatness!
God, an unexampled zeal, for liberty and Although the French people are
actuated by an astonishing zeal for civil and religious liberty, yet the^r
character seems very far from agreeing with what we expect from the witnesses
for gospel truth. In the things of religion they appear to be no farther
enlightened at present, than to see the rights of conscience and the
absurdities and cruel oppressions of the pap^l system. This is certainly an
important part of truth, and what promises to pave the way for the triumphs of
pure religion; and perhaps, considering the greatness of that darkness emerged
from, it may be as much as could rationally be expected at the beginning of
such a reformation. But of tr^e godliness there appears but little at present;
and it is to be feared that they, as well as most other nations, must endure
great sufferings, before we shall see that repentance, which must precede the
happy days promised in God's word.
truth, suddenly actuated them. "And they stood upon their feet, and gr^^^ fear
fell upon them that saw them. And they heard a great voice from heaven saying
unto them, come up hither." The supreme power, by abolishing the laws under
which they suffered political death, invited them to quit their state of
bondage, and assume equal liberty with their fellows -- "And they ascended up
to heaven." To a more dignified state -- "And their enemies beheld them." Their
old oppressors, and their abettors, contemplated the change which was taking
place, both with astonishment and malice -- "And the same hoar there was a
great earthquake, and a tenth part of the city fe^l." Instantly, on these
witnesses for civil and religious liberty, being stirred up, as by a
supernatural impulse on their minds, to claim and vindicate their
imprescriptible rights, this monarchy, which is one of the ten horns of the
papal beast, or one of the ten streets of the antichristian city, See Bp.
Newton. Dr. Goodwin, Mede, and Lowman on this passa^e.
was so agitated by the conflict between the witnesses for liberty, and the
supporters of despotism; that it fell, and its abominable oppressions issued in
its utter ruin; and that as in one hour. The progress of liberty, in the
destruction of established tyrannies, is generally slow; and that which was
ages in erecting, is ages also in pulling down; but, the change of things here,
is not according to the common course of events; the witnesses awake, the
conflict commences, and the tyranny falls, as in one hour.

"And in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand." Thus it is in our
translation; but in the original it is, "There were slain By seven thousand we
are not to supp^se, that exactly this number, to perish By a common figure of
speech, it is a certain number for an uncertain. Or, ac^ perfect number, it may
intend all, i. e. all the titles of men in that country.
seven thousand names of men." The violence of war used to be directed against
the p^^sons of men, but now against their names. -- Those titles and
privileges, under the shield or which, they have been wont to commit, with
impunity, so many cruel oppressions. -- "A^ the remnant (...) glory to the God
of heaven." After a violent conflic for some time, between the witnesses and
their opposers, the form or prevailed, and those who had been rather spectators
of the contest than actors in it, united themselves to their cause; and thus
though, at least, many of them, might not be actuated with these view, they
glorified God in promoting his grand and good designs in this change of things
which he was now effecting, in the overthrow of antichristian despotism and
persecution. -- "Ye can discorn the face of the sky, but can ye not discern the
signs of the times?" Math. xvi 3.
-- "Why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right?" Lake x^i (...)
-- Ah! the answer to this question is too obvious. -- The Lord forgive them,
who, to promote their own designs, have blinded your eyes and perverted your
judgment! -- In doing this they have -- But, "the Lord reigns, let the earth
rejoice" -- Clouds and darkness are round about him; but rightousness and
judgment are the habitation of his throne." Ps. v^vii 1.2.


"The second woe is past, and behold the third woe comes quickly." Rev. xi. 14.
-- The two former woes respecting the Saracens and Turks; which are
denominated woes, on account of the terrible calamities which they occasioned
to mankind; being now passed by, and this internal commotion, in the country
where the witnesses first begin to arise, pretty well settled; behold a state
of things follows, which introduces a scene replete with woe!

Ver. 15. "Behold the third woe comes quickly. And the seventh angel sounded,
and there were great voices in heaven, saying, the kingdoms of this world are
become the kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever
and ever." Rev. xi. 15.
We are not to understand by this, that, on the sounding of the seventh
trumpet, the kingdom of righteousness, peace and universal happiness is
instantly to commence; but that that great scene now opens, which is to prepare
the way for it. The eighteenth verse obliges us to interpret it thus: The
nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead that they
should be judged. The time when thou will avenge the blood which tyrants have
shed -- and destroy them which have destroyed the earth. The nations will be
enraged at this change of things, and unite to oppose it, and great woes are to
follow. Woes, which all descriptions of men, it is likely, will feel, that they
may be brought to repentance; but which will, in their issue, fall chiefly upon
the heads of antichristian oppressors, the upholders of the papacy. Now the
angels begin to pour out the vials of the wrath of God; for, as we have already
observed, this chapter contains a complicated vision of a ^ong course of
events, in miniature, which is afterward illustrated by several distinct
visions on a larger scale.

But before we enter upon the consideration of the vials, permit me to adduce
some authorities, which especially if we consider the time when they were
written, more than a hundred years ago, tend very much to strengthen the
argument in favor of my hypothesis, respecting the witnesses; their slaying
and resurrection. The first I shall mention is Peter Jurieu, a French
Protestant minister, whose works were published in English in 1687. He says,
"The tenth part of the city which here fell, will, at some future time, appear
to be the kingdom of France, where a revolution will take place about the year
1785, and a separation from the papacy follow, when the names of Monks and
Nuns, of Carmelites and Augustines, Dominicans, etc. shall perish for ever, and
all those vain titles and armorial bearings, which serve for ornament and
pride, shall vanish; and brotherly love make all men equal. Not that there
shall be no distinctions, for it is not a kingdom of anarchy; but government
shall then be without bride and insolence; without tyranny and violence, and
subjects shall obey their governors with an humble spirit." The time required,
according to this author, after the quickening of the witnesses, ( i. e. from
the time of the revolution) to destroy antichrist, will be twenty or
twenty-sive years; and that it will take about seventy years more for the
abolishing of sects and parties among Christians, and for the conversion of the
Jews and Heathens. "And all this," he says, "cannot be brought about without
confusion and tumult. The popish empire cannot fall, but it must cause blood
and a mighty noise." Thus far Jurieu.

Dr. Goodwin, who wrote a hundred and fifty years since, in his Exposition upon
the Revelations, Part I. Chap. 7. has a great deal which is as astonishing as
it is apposite to the present argument. He says, (sect. 6.) "The saints and
churches of France, God has made a wonder to me in all his proceedings toward
them, first and last; and there would seem some great and special honor
reserved for them, yet at the last; for it is certain, that the first light of
the gospel, by that first and second angels preaching in chapter the fourteenth
(which laid the foundation of antichrist's ruin) was out from among them, and
they bore and underwent the great heat of that morming of persecution, which
was as great, if not greater than any since. -- And so, as that kingdom had the
first great stroke, so now it should have the honor of having the last great
stroke in the ruin of Rome."

Sect. 5th, he says, on Rev. xi. "By the earthquake here is meant a great
concussion or shaking of states politics, or ecclesiastical. -- The effect of
this earthquake and fall of this tenth part of the city, is killing seven
thousand of the names of men. -- Now, by men of name, in scripture is meant men
of title, office and dignity. -- As in the case of Corah's conspiracy, so here
a civil punishment falls upon these. For having killed these witnesses,
themselves are to be killed (happily) by being berest of their names and titles,
which are to be rooted out for ever, and condemned to perpetual forgetfulness."

The singular agreement of present events with what these authors foretold,
from the prophecies, so many years ago, is a circumstance which merits the
serious attention of all wise and considerate men; for it certainly adds great
weight to the conjecture, that what has taken place in France, is the beginning
of the final downfall of the papal usurpations and tyrannies. And if it should
be so -- woe be to them, who attempt to uphold what God has willed to fall! In
the ordinary wars which nations have waged, they have, perhaps, lost one or two
hundred thousand lives, and slaughtered as many of their enemies; countries
have been laid waste, and taxes incurred to the oppression of the industrious;
but in other respects they may have sat down much as they were; but, if the
present contest be what there is reason to suspect it; not merely a war of man
against man; but of God against antickristian usurpations and oppressions, the
issue to those who oppose his designs, must be different. Though, as was the
case with the Assyrians and with Cyrus, Isa x. 5, 7.
the instruments which he uses, may not know him, nor mean to fulfill Isa xl^ 4.
his will, yet they may be the rod of his anger to accomplish his councils.

Let us now revert to the question, What are to be the consequences of the
resurrection of the witnesses? Soon after it, the seventh trumper is to sound,
which is the signal for the seven angels to pour out their vials of God's wrath
upon the antichristian kingdom. -- Has this seventh trumpet been blown? Is it
sounding? Or is it about to sound for the angels to prepare to ex^^^ate the
vengeance of God, on the mother of harlots and all abominations? My heart
trembles at the idea of those calamities which are to sweep the earth, and of
those convulsons which will shake kingdoms and nations! "Who would not fear
thee, O King of nations? for to thee does it appertain! Jer. x. 7, 10.
At thy wrath the earth shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to
abide thine indignation!"

As to the gathering of the vintage in the fourteenth chapter, it appears to
me, that it properly falls under one or more of the vials, and as Dr. Goodwin
has well explained it, seems to be a vision of the vengeance which is to be
executed upon the Protestant party; for the wine press is said be trodden
without the city, i. e. without the jurisdiction or reach of the city of Rome;
and is represented in a separate vision, on purpose to show that vengeance will
fall even upon such kingdoms and nations as had cast off the Pope's supremacy.
Dr. Gill and others have supposed, that the Protestant nations will again
return to Popery, and persecute with great violence. But Dr. Goodwin's idea is
more probable. He says, in his Exposition, Part II. Chap. I. "Whether the
wine press will be brought into this country, he only knows who is the Lord
both of the harvest and the vintage; only this may be more confidently
affirmed, that those carnal Protestants in England and other places, who like
the outward court have been joined to the people of God, shall yet before the
expiration of the beast's kingdom The number of the beast, as we have
endeavored to prove above, is the tyranny of the Lewises; and as to have the
mark of the beast is to pay homage to the first beast, the usurped power of the
Pope and his clergy; so to have this number is to be devoted to the support of
the tyranny or the second beast.
and number, be more or less given up to the Papists, and be made to vail to
them, if not all of them, by bloody wars, and conquests, yet by some base and
unworthy yielding to them, as a just punishment of their carnal profession of
the gospel." "And the wine press was trodden without the city, and the blood
came out of the wine press, even unto the horses bridles, by the space of a
thousand and six hundred furlongs." The Lord avert from this country such a
judgment!

How incompetent is man to judge of the ways of God! -- While the trumpet is
blowing, and the angels are preparing to pour the divine vengeance on the heads
of tyrants and their supporters, and to spread desolation and woe for the sins
of men; the great army of saints and martyrs in heaven sing, "Great and
mavelous are thy work, Lord God A^^^^hty; Rev. xv. 3.
just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints! -- All nations shall come and
worship before thee, for thy judgments are made m^^^^^i."

"And I heard a great voice out of the temple, Rev. xiv 1
saying to the seven angels, Go your ways and pour the vials of the wrath of
God upon the earth." -- It app^ars to me, that although we must suppose a
conformity to the order of the vision, in inflicting the plagues of these seven
vials, yet, perhaps, it will not be such a formal one, as to exclude all
mixture. It strikes me, that although the vial which is to be poured out upon
the earth, will commence first, and that on the s^a follow, yet their falling
streams will mingle; and although the full torrent of the latter vials may not
commence, yet some small portion of them may be dashed upon the rivers, the
sun, or the throne of the beast, while the first are pouring out; and although
the plagues of the latter vials will commence last, as in the vision, yet the
streams of the f^rmer may still be running. The angels saying of this woe, that
it comes quickly, and the circumstance of the seven angels with their vials
all appearing, and being sent out at the same time, supposes that they will all
be employed together, to execute their missions on the several objects of the
divine displeasure. And we may hope that these judgments will soon be over.

Were I to retail half the opinions of authors on the following objects of the
divine vengean^e, adding to them my own conjectures, this pamphlet would swell
into a folio; but as I apprehend that the events which are here represented
have not yet taken place, or at most, are but now commencing, my reflections
shall be short. "And the first went and po^red out his vial upon the earth, and
there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the
beast, and upon them which wo^^hipped his image." Rev. xiv. 3.
The pouring out of this vial upon the earth may possibly refer to some
particular country on the main, where the judgments of God are to commence; or
perhaps, we may be taught by this emblem, that the downfall of the antichristian
kingdom shall begin with terrible wars on land; in which God's wrath shall be
manifested against those armies of land forces which have for so many ages been
the basis of tyrannic power, and who, at the nod of despots have slaughtered
their fellow creatures without either thinking or caring about the justice or
injustice of the cause; who have been the base instruments, without a motive,
of desolating nations and of carrying unnumbered woes from one end of the earth
to the other. But the time of judging the cause of the dead is come, and both
they who have the mark of the beast, i. e. who are the subjects and slaves of
the papacy, and they who worship, or only serve and endeavor to support the
image of the beast, (which according to what appears from chapter XIII, is the
tyranny of the antichristian party in France, all such as serve this image of
the beast, though not papists and slaves to Rome) shall experience such
chastisements and disappointments in their attempts to support what God has
determined to overthrow, and such violent and successful attacks on their
power, that they shall be deeply wounded and greviously vexed; or, a noisome
disease shall get into their camp, and cover the earth with their dead; that
thus men may see the hand which smites them, and give glory to God. " Ma^^.
xvi. 3.
Ye can discorn the face of the shy, but can ye not discern the signs of the
t^^^s."

"And the second angel poured out his vial upon the sea, and it became as the
blood of a dead man, and every living soul died in the sea." As in Isa. lx. 5.
"the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee," means the "inhabitants
of islands," and as "woe to the inhabitants of the earth and of the sea," chap.
xii. 12. means woe to the inhabitants of continents and of islands, all
mankind, so the pouring out of this second vial on the sea may indicate those
calamities which God will bring upon his enemies, the supporters of papal
tyrannies, in such situations; or, if this be not the meaning of the pouring
out of this second vial of wrath, (but which I think is most likely) it may
probably refer to the destruction of naval armaments, whether in battle, or by
God's more immediate judgments. And so great will be the destruction that the
sea will not only be stained with blood, but become as the blood of a dead man.

"And the third angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and fountains of
water, and they became blood," etc. This may be a representation of those
judgments which are to sall on the inhabitants of inland countries and where
rivers abound and have their sources; or, as it has been generally explained,
of that just vengeance which is to be inflicted upon those orders of men, who
by the abuse of power, both civil and ecclesiastical, have been the chief
sources of human misery and the great feeders of the sea of oppression. The
calamities which are to attend this vial are to be peculiarly grievous. This
may be concluded from the following circumstance, I heard the angel of the
waters say, Thou a^^ righteous O Lord! -- thou ^ast given them blood to drink,
for they are worthy. The former judgments pass in silent solemnity, as though
the objects of them were less conspicuous in guilt, but no sooner is this vial
poured out than it excites acclamations of praise. If this refer to the inland
countries of Europe, more especially where the people are held in vassalage,
and where, both the priests and nobles, above most others, rule the people with
a rod of iron, there appears a peculiar fitness in these acclamations.

"And the fourth angel poured out his vial upon the sun" This appears to be
either a representation of God's awful vengeance in visiting the nations with a
drought or excessive wet, that thus they may at once be humbled under his
mighty hand, and be more disposed to forward his designs in the overthrow of
antichristian systems of error and oppression. Or is it a prediction of the
display of God's wrath against those systems of pride and despotism which by
their splendour have been dazzling and by their violence consuming mankind. Mr.
Mede supposes this sun to be some splendid potentate of Europe, as the emperor
or the king of Spain. But if it be not the emblem of drought or wet, I should
rather suppose it to represent the extinction of despotism in general, than of
an individual monarch or monarchy. A friend has favored me with an extract
from the works of Mr. R Fleming, who in a sermon, printed 1721, apples it to
the French n^^narchy, and says: "Whereas Levis XIV took the sun for his emblem,
and forths more, Not phiribus unpa^, he may at length, or rather his success
rand t^ nion^rchy t^^l. before the year 1794. ^e forced to ackno^ledge that in
respect to neighboring p^t^ntates, he is sing ^^^^nstar; but as to the
exp^ration of t^is vial. I ferrit will not be before the and of the year 1794"
What a singular agreement between present circumstance, and this good man,
calculations! If by this vial's being poured out on the sun we are to
understand a drought, then he refers to the sun, but if it be an emb^em of much
ra^n, or of the wrath which is to be poured out on despotism, then I think,
with Dr. Goodwin, that it ^^fers to the ange^, who, by the witnesses is to
affect tyrants and their supporters with s^orching calamities.




"And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast." Rev.
xvi. 10.
This must be considered, as referring to those calamities which God intends to
bring upon the Pope, and upon that city and country where the throne of the
beast stands. And we may expect soon to see heavy judgments fall upon the Roman
Pontificate; and that city to be sacked and burnt which has been the source of
so many corruptions, and which has tyrannized for so many ages, with spiritual
despotism over those kingdoms that have given their power to the beast.

"And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates Rev.
xvi. 12.
, and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings (...) the east
might be prepared." The Turkish empire also shall experence the wrath of God
for their abominable oppressions, and thu^ a way be prepared for the return of
the Jews to their own land previous to their conversion to Christianity. But
the beast does not yet expire. "And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come
o^^ of the mouth of the From comparing this p^^lage with chap. xii. I am
indiced to suppose that by the dragon the emperor of Germany, the more
immediate successor of the Roman emperors, is intended; by the beast the Pope
and his clergy, and by the false prophet, (as bishop Newton and Dr D^^dr^dge
understand it) the second beast in chap. xiii. 11. This w^^l evidently appear
to every impartial person, to be the second beast, if we compare this place
with chapters xiii. 13 and 14, and xix. and 20. He is thus called because like
the ^^^^e prophets of old he engages himself in supp^rt of tyranny and
idolatry. These tyranny powers are to exert themselves to engage all the kings
of the earth in support of the ^a^ling papacy and deel^ning despotism. It is
worthy of remark that these foul spirit are to go forth unto the kings of the
earth, and not to the people, which seems to ^ad^cate that it will be a war, in
which kings will be more interested than mankind at large -- They are the
spirits of devils working miracles. No one supposes these to be true miracles.
This figurative language is used to set forth the impostures, ^es and frauds
with which they are to deceive men, and draw them into their destr^ctive
measures.


dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and o^^ of the mouth of the false
prophet; for they are the spirits of devils working miracles, which go forth
unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the
battle of that great day of God Almighty."

Great efforts will be made to engage all the kings of the earth, and of the
whole world, in support of the old antichristian system, against every attempt
which will be made for its destruction. But all these efforts will be in vain
-- the wrath of man shall praise God. It is his battle, and he will overthrow
his enemies and the enemies of mankind, with all their hosts.

"Behold I come as a thief! Blessed is he that watches." Rev. xvi. 1^.
This will take place at a time when men in general will have no expectation of
it, but will say in their heart, 2. Pet iii. 4.
"Where is the promise of his coming? For since the fathers fell asleep all
things continue as they were from the beginning." They will calculate events on
common principles, and deceive themselves into ruin. Blested is he that
watches. "And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew
tongue Armageddon," Rev. xv 16.
or the mountain of Megiddo, thus called because it shall be a place more
remarkable for slaughter than Megiddo ever was. Judges v. 19.2. Kings ix. 27.
and Zech. xii. 11. May our country, in that day, whether it be near or afar
off, if not engaged on the side of the King of kings, be far from the mountain
of slaughter! In this country, above most others, the rights of conscience, and
the civil rights of mankind have been protected. Let us hope therefore, that
when the Judge of all the earth shall make inquisition for blood, that we shall
ind mercy; or, if with the rest of the nations, who are to be pu^ified by
affliction, we must share in the cup of trembling, here ^s ground for
confidence in prayer that mercy may be mixed with judgment. For the judgment of
God will be a judgment of proportion. Where there has been most oppression,
where sin has been most triumphant, and especially where there has been most
persecution of conscience, there will the heaviest woes fall. Let us therefore
repent and seek God; this is at all seasons necessary, but an additional motive
enforces it, when the signs of the times suggest some very signal crisis to be
at hand. For whether men will see it or not, all things do not continue as they
were from the beginning. Ps. xii. 5.
"For the oppression of the poor, for the siging of the needy, now will I arise
says the Lord."

"And the seventh Rev. xvi. 17.
angel poured his vial into the air, and there came a great voice out of the
temple of heaven from the throne, saying -- It is done -- And there were voices
and thunderings, and lightnings, Rev. xvi. 18.
and there was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the
earth, so mighty an earthquake and so great. And the great city was divided
into three parts, Rev. xvi. 19.
and the cities of the nations fell, and great Babylon came in remembrance
before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his
wrath, and every island fled away, and the mountains were not found," Rev. xvi.
20.
etc. Either God, in his providence, will cause the state of the air to be such
that nature shall be thrown into terrible commotions, plagues shall be
gendered, and famines occasioned, that thus blind and obdurate men, who would
not see his judgments in war, may behold his hand in those more conspicuous
tokens of his wrath which will affect the rich as well as the poor, and may be
brought to repentance; or it may mean that the kingdom of satan, who is called
the prince of the power of the air, shall now fall.

Babylon the great, the mother of harlots and abominations (...) the earth, the
source of oppressions and all tyrannies, falls; an not only the mother, but all
her children; all the cities of the nations; all the tyrannic polities which
have despised and oppress the servants of God, and all mankind; and no place
is found f^^ them. The beast and the false prophet are taken, Rev. xix. 20.
and cast it a lake of fire, and now But perhaps some inquisitive mind may say,
The beast of Rome, spirit^ tyranny, and the false prophet, his great supporter,
are taken and exemplary ju^tice is inflicted on them for their abominations,
but the dragon, civil tyranny, is no^ taken with them. Not he arose first and
will continue longest. But his career i^^ short. Chap xx. "And I saw an angel
come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit. And he laid hold
on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the devil and satan, and bound him a
thousand years. And east him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set
a seal upon him, that he should ^eceive the nations no more till the thousand
years should be fulfilled: and after that he must be loosed a little season."
Now commences the first resurrection as predicted by Ez. (x^^xvii.) Now the
Jews, and others ^^ith them, will said that mercy which will be as ^ife from the
dead, (Romans xi. 15.) And as El^as lived in John the Bapti^, so shall the former
contessors and martyrs live in the Christians of this generation. And they
shall sit upon thrones of judgment, and act so much under the influence of
gospel principles, and establish such systems of justi^e and righteou^ness,
that, tyranny, which has bound so many, shall itself be bound and be cast into
the bottomless pit. Now liberty and peace, righteousness and joy will reign
undisturbed, for, what is here termed a thousand years; after which the dragon
is to be loosed for a little season. The events here predicted are evidently
the same with those foretold in Ezekiel. xxxvii. xxxviii. and. xxxix. and in Zech
xiv. What length of time then are we to understand by this thousand years? I
suppose that all which is here said is figurative, and that the years are not
what we generally understand by this term. I am in^^an^d to judge thus for two
seasons. Not only from a comp^^^son of the different prephecies concerning the
return of the Jews, the after persecutions of Gog and Ma^og, etc. which do not
seem to allow of so long a term as a thousand years between the shutting up of
the ^ragon and his loosing; but ^l^o from the general prophetie use of such
terms. Pays, weeks, etc. in the prophecies are generally used in a my^^tal
sense, and for the obvious reason which has been mea^^^ed I suppose therefore
that by this thousand years, a thousand weeks or months are intended. Time only
can ascertain this; but I think that the other prophecies restrain this period
to a thousand weeks, or a l^ttle more than nineteen years The proper and usual
meaning of a year, in prophetie language, may perhaps, stand for any change or
revolution of ^ime. John was a Jew, let us therefore examine the Hebrew word
for a year, and ear what Buxtorf says, Annus, ab (...) edictus, (...) ad
punctum, unde ^igreat coeperat, redeunte, it ^^etur, (...) et redeat. sow
seeing that the word year in Hebrew means a repetition, cr^a^^ving round ed
returning by the same steps, this is as app^^atle to a week as a year. Thus it
appears probable from the prophecies, that after the blo^^dy dragon, civil
^^ranny, whose horrie character, no objects in visib^e nature are sufficiently
vile to present; after this crafty se port, which is the devil and s^tar, has
been confined ^^^r about nineteen years, he will again get out ^f his prison and
make a ^^^^pente ef^^^t against the kingdom of righteousness, place and ^^y;
but he who by his provienti^^ judgments, ^ast the beast and the false p^^phet
into the lake of fire, will manifest himself in st^^ more con^p^cuous
judgments, and cast this dragon into the a^^e ^lace of torment, and thus put an
ever as^ing and to a tyranny, (...) des^astical and ^vil -- Now a prop^^^
opens, which transports the heart, and figures are used proportioned to the
s^^^m^ty and f^lie^y of the seen, which follow. Let the wise and pious
anticipate by hope these happy days! We look for new heavens and a new earth,
wherein dwells righteousness!


that economy of righteousness and pea^^ which Jesus the Prince of peace has
in charge, from his Father, ^o bestow on men, shall be established on immovable
foundations, till the consummation of all things; for not only human tyrannies
shall perish, but the witnesses for the pure religion of Jesus, shall be so
increased and quickened by an energy from above, and such an influence from God
attend his gospel, while all nature shall conspire to prepare men for
repentance, that satan's empire shall be overturned; the earth be filled with
the knowledge or the Lord; and they shall learn war no more. EVEN SO, COME LORD
JESUS!

THIRD INQUIRY.
WE are now come to the third Inquiry, Will all the numbers of Daniel and John,
which refer to the state of things that we are looking for, agree with the
present times? Let us examine. In discussing the numbers of Daniel, I shall not
take up much time in examining questions and in endeavoring to solve
difficulties which might be started; nor in enquiring whether any of these
numbers terminated in Antiochus Epiphanes. I think, and I have very respectable
authorities on my side, that they refer to the overthrow of the papal apostasy;
and all those systems of tyranny which have been so much at enmity with the
kingdom of Christ; to the purification of the Gentile church, and to the
restoration and conversion of the Jews. To save time, and to spare the reader's
patience, I shall take some things for granted, which may be seen argued at
length, in more voluminous writings.

In the first place, let us consider Daniel's vision in chap. viii It opens
with the appearance of a ram, having two horns, pushing westward, and
northward, and southward. Dan. viii. 4.
This the ang^^ interprets to be the kings of Media and Persia. Dan. viii. 20.
The next object i^ the vision is an he-goat, Dan. viii. 5.
which came from the west, with a notab horn between his eyes. This the angel
says, Dan. viii. 21.
is the king Grecia, the Grecian empire; and the great horn, between h^^ eyes,
the first king, Alexander. This horn was broken, and after it came up four
others; the four empires Dan. viii. 5.
which sprung up o^^ of the conquests of Alexander. "And out of one of them
came little horn, Dan. viii. 9.
which waxed exceeding great, toward the south, Dan. viii. 10.
and to ward the cast, and toward the pleasant land, and by him the place of
the daily sacrifice was taken away, Dan. viii. 11.
and the place of his sanctuary was cast down, etc. Then I heard one saint
speaking, and another saint said unto that certain saint which spoke, Dan.
viii. 13.
How long shall be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice, and the
transgression of desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the host to be
trodden under scot? And he said unto me, Dan. viii. 14.
Unto two thousand and three hundred days, then shall the sanctuary be
cleansed."

It seems natural to reckon these 2300 Dr. Newton, Bishop of Bristol, concludes
from ver. 13, that these days are to be calculated from the beginning of the
vision. "As the question was asked," says he, "not how long the da^, sacrifice
shall be taken away, and the transgression of desolation continue, but also,
how long the vision shall last; so the answer is to be understood, and there
two thousand and three hundred days denote the whole time from the beginning of
the vision to the cleansing of the sanctuary." Dissert on the Proph. vol. 1. p.
331.
days (or years) either from the first part of the vision, the pushing of the
ram, or the latter (...), the violences of the little horn; or from the time
when Daniel ^^w the vision. If we calculate from the time when Daniel saw the
vision, the termination of the 2300 years is past 40 or 50 years: and the
sanctuary is not cleansed. If from the latter part of the vision (as understood
of Antiochus) it will carry us to about the year A. D. 2130, which appears too
far; for, supposing the 1260 years power of the beast, predicted in the
Apocalypse, were to be calculated from the time when the Pope became a temporal
prince from the exarchate of Ruvenna being given to him by Pepin A. D. 755,
(some thinking that he was not a perfect beast till then) this would fall short
of Daniel's number by more than a hundred years; but seeing that the power,
idolatry, corruptions and usurpations of the papacy were such, at least, in the
sixth century, as appear sufficient to denominate it a beast, and it is
certain, that he began to rise much earlier; the most probable time for the
fixing the commencement of Daniel's 2300 years, and that which will altogether
agree best with the other numbers of Daniel, and the predictions in the
Apocalypse, is the beginning of the vision, the pushing of the ram, by which is
intended some distinguished exertions of the Persian empire for conquests. And
to what period of that empire does this so well agree as to the times of
Xerxes, and that particular push which he made when he invaded Prideaux's Con.
Part I, Book 4 p. 233.
Greece with an army of 2,641,610 fighting men, ^eckoning 517,610 on board his
fleet, which consisted of 1,207 ^hips of the line of battle, 3,000 galleys,
transports, victuallers, etc. beside the 220 ships, which the nations on this
side the Hellespont added, on board of which were 24,000 men. Of his land
forces 80,000 were horse. And besides this multitude as many more are ^eckoned
to have followed the camp, servants and eunuchs, etc. So that the whole number
of people engaged in this expedition was, at least, 5,000,000. What a push was
this for conquest! And (though he had been pushing for three or four years
before, yet) nothing else forbidding it, what period could be more proper for
the angel to begin his reckoning from? He passed the Hellespont B. C. 480: four
years before this he pushed at Egypt and reduced it; the next year he prepared
for this invasion; the following he entered into a league with the
Carthaginians against the Greeks, and in the year 481 B. C. marches as far as
Sardis, on his way toward Greece, where he winters, and in the spring passes
the Hellespont.

Suppose we fix the year 481 B. C. for the commencement of Danie^s 8 2,300
years (allowing our chronology to be correct) this carries us to the year of
Christ 1819, when the sanctuary and host are no longer to be trodden under
foot, i. e. the land of Palestine is no longer to be in the possession of the
enemies of the Jews, but they are to be restored, and the church freed from
antichristian abominations.

In Dan. XII. we have three different numbers. (The first agrees with that in
chap. vii. 25.) Ver 7. "I heard the man clothed in linen, which was upon the
waters of the river, when he held up his right hand and his left hand unto
heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever, that it shall be for a time,
times, and an half time." Three years and a half, or forty two months of years,
viz. 1260, "and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the
holy people, all these things shall be finished." Again, Ver. 11. "And from the
time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that
makes desolate set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days."
Ver. 12. "Blessed is he that waits and comes to the thousand and three
hundred and five and thirty days." As the first number agrees with the
predictions, in the revelation of John, respecting the continuance of the power
of the antichristian beast: and as the numbers appear to contradict each other
if they are confined to the tyranny of Antiochus (though he might be pointed at
a the type of Antichrist) I consider them as harmonizing with the New Testament
predictions. According to Rev. xi. 2. the holy city is to be trodden under foot
of the Gentiles forty and two months; and in ver. 3. the two witnesses are to
prophecy twelve hundred and sixty days clothed in sackcloth. Chap. xii. and 7.
w^ have the same number, and in ver. 14. we learn that the woman was to be
nourished in the wilderness for a time and times and half a time, chap. xiii.
5. Power is given unto the beast (the first beast remember, not the second) to
continue forty and two months. The same time, 1260 years, is intended by all
these numbers.

But how can we reconcile those three different numbers of Daniel, with the
seven (two in Daniel and five in the Apocalypse) which agree?

In the first place let it be allowed that the predicted final overthrow of
Antichrist began with the revolution in France in 1789, and then reckon thus:

Daniel's time, times and half a time (1260 years) begin and end with the five
numbers in the Apocalypse, and as they are 1260 years and supposed to end at
the French revolution, they must begin A. D. 529, and end in 1789. Daniel's
2300 years begin 481 years before Christ, and end in 1819, when some other
great event, or events, will take place. The beast and the false prophet (Rev.
xix. 20.) i. e. the papacy and the French tyranny, having previously been
brought to an end, then, perhaps, the dragon, civil despotism, will be bound
(Rev. xx. 2.) and the Jews, the dry bones in the valley of vision, be raised to
political li^e, Ezekiel. xxxvii.
and restored to their own land. -- Dan^el's 1290 years begin with his time,
times and half a time and with the former five, numbers of John in the
Apocal^^se, i. e. at the commencement of the reign of the beast, A. D. 529, and
end with the former number, (2300) in 1819. His 1335 years (the end of which
according to him will eminently be a blessed time) begin in the same year of
Christ 529, and terminate in 1864. When perhaps the Jews are to be converted by
that remarkable appearance of the Lord in their favor, which is predicted in
Ezekiel. xxxviii. and xxxix. and in Zech. xii. and xiv. Thus the final attack on
the beast, commences in 1789. Thirty years are employed in the overthrow of the
papacy, the Turks and other tyrannies: a season, it is likely of great
calamities, but especially to the enemies of Christ's kingdom. The next
forty-five years, to 1864, to which time Daniel's 1335 years extend, may be
spent in gathering the Jews, (who according to Jer. xvi. 16. will be unwilling
to return to their own land) and in purify^ng them by those trials, which,
according to the Jer. xxx. 3 -- 8 11 -- 16. Ezekiel. xx. 32 -- 38. xxxv. 24, 25,
31, 33. Zeph. iii. 7, 14.
prophets, are ^o take place on their first return: as well as in purifying,
and in ^ringing to an end all the sects and parties of the Gentile Chris^^ans:
and which may be affected by that greater light which is to ^^ine upon the
Christian church in the latter days, previous to ^^at greater glory and
superior state of felicity which is to commence, perhaps (as we have
conjectured from Daniel's number ^f 1335) about the year 1864, on the
conversion of the Jews and ^f those heathen nations, not before gathered to
Christ.

But, perhaps, it may be asked, What arguments are there which favor the
conjecture of the 529th year of Christ being that from which the power of the
beast is to be dated? I own I have put this year down by accident, as the
measurement back from 1789. To demonstrate, that in this year, he came to such
a state of maturity (for he was in embryo in the apostles days, and continued
to grow for ages) as to constitute him a beast, is not essential to the making
good our hypothesis. But though no man, from the history of past times, can
determine the exact year from which God dates the kingdom of antichrist, yet
there are good reasons from which a probable conjecture may be formed that it
was as early as the sixth century. Some of our most able critics, as Bishop
Newton and Mr. Lowman, are of opinion, that by the wound which the first beast
received, chap. xiii. 3. we are to understand the blow which was given to the
majesty and power of Rome, by subjecting it to the exarchate of Revenna, and
that by its being healed, is intended, its restoration to its former dignity by
this exarchate being given to the Pope, by which he became a temporal prince.
Now, this wounding took place A. D. 568, and continued 206 years. If this be
well considered, it tends much to strengthen our argument. But farther to
confirm our hypothesis, consider the state of society, and particularly the
state of what was called the church, in this sixth century. Magistrates were
tyrants, and priests were wicked, superstitious and intolerant beyond any
former age. Now, numberless laws and regulations were obtruded upon the church
by human authority, which at once violated the authority of Christ, defaced
Christianity, and robbed Christians of their dearest liberties. And in this
very year 529, which we are looking for, the Justinian code was first
published, by which those powers, privileges and immunities were secured to the
clergy; that union perfected between things civil and ecclesiastical, and those
law, imposed on the church, which have proved so injurious to Christianity, and
so calamitous to mankind. And which code, through the zeal of the clergy, has
been received, more or less, as the foundation of the jurisprudence of almost
every state in Christendom; and that not only in things civil, but
ecclesiastical; and by this means, as some author has observed, the old fancy
of the Romans, about the eternity of their command, is thus far verified.

That this pamphlet, which is already larger than intended, man not be swelled
into a volume, permit me to refer to Mosh^im's Eccle. Hist. Cont. VI. and
especially Part II. chap. 2d, 3d, and 4th All sorts of absurdities were
imposed, the grossest ignorance an^ wickedness prevailed among the clergy; the
Bishop of Rom^ grasped at absolute authority over conscience, and unlimited
supremacy over the whole Christian church; and though he did no^ altogether
succeed in the east. in this western part of the worl^ (where the seen of
John's visions chiefly lay) his dominion wa^ acknowledged, and paras^^^^^al
panegyrists, among other blasphemous assertions maintained, that the Roman
pontiff was constituted Judge in the piece of God, which he filled as the
vicegeren^ of the Most High; so that now was fulfilled that prediction of the
Apostle. 2 Thessalonians. xi. 3, 4. "As God he sits in the temple of God, ^^^^^ing
himself that he is God." Now the wicked were taught that remission of sins was
to be purchased by their liberalities to the church and its ministers; now
those doctrines which taught men the worship of saints and images; the efficacy
of observing human rites and institutions toward the attainment of salvation;
the power of relics, and a thousand more errors and absurdities were brought to
perfection. Now did monkery overrun the world, and marriage was forbidden as
unworthy of those who aspired to the saints. -- And in this very year 529 also,
a new order of monks, which in a manner absorbed all the others established in
the west, was instituted by Benedict of Nursia. In process of time, this order
having acquired immense riches, they sunk into luxury, intemperance and sloth;
abandoned themselves to all sorts of vices; extended their zeal and attention
to worldly affairs; insinuated themselves into the cabinets of princes, took
part in political cabals and court factions, made a vast augmentation of
superstitious rites; and, among other meritorious enterprises, labored most
ardently to swell the arrogance by enlarging the power and authority of the
Roman pontiff. This and the other monastic orders, (sinks of ignorance,
indolence and vice!) were the fountains from whence issued all sorts of
abominations, and the rivers which married superstition, oppression, and
violence, to all parts of the earth. They taught princes to tyrannize, and the
people to cringe.

Was not the time of the publishing of the formentioned code of Justinian, and
of the rising of this order of monks, a period, in the history of the apostasy,
in which we may suppose the Almighty, with distinguished propriety, to begin to
reckon the 1260 ^ears of the beast's power, and the treading down of the holy
^ity? The conjecture is probable a prior^: but, if present events, and these
compared with other events, agree to recommend this ^ate (529), the probability
is much increased.

To say no more of this concurrence of several numbers, thus ^^uing from
different periods, and these the most interesting in the history of nations,
and of the Church, and yet harmonizing ^n their termination so conformable to
what the prophets seem to ^oint out, respecting the events of the last days,
gives great pro^ability to the hypothesis, that the time is arrived for the
downfall of the antichristian tyranny, when God will rebuke the nations, and
they shall learn war no more; Isa. ii. 4.
when he will consume the idolatrous and persecuting man of sin with the spirit
of his mouth, and utterly destroy him with the brightness of his coming. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 8.


A TABLE.
B. C. A. C. The 2300 years, Dan. viii. 14. begin 481 when Xerxes set out to
invade Greece, and end 1819 A. C. A. C. The 1260 years, Dan. vii. 25. xii. 7.
Rev. xi. 2 and 3. xii. 6 and 14. xiii. 5. begin 529 When the come of Justinian
(the strong-hold of clerical tyranny) was first published, and when the order
of Benedictine mon^^, the great support of the papacy, was ^ounded; and end
1789 The 1290 years, Dan. xii. 11. begin 529 and end 1819 The 1335 years, Dan.
xii. 12. begin 529 and end A. C. A. C. The Witn^sses, (Rev. xi. 7.) are slain
by Lewis XIV. 1685 And after being politically dead three lunar days and a
half, begin to revive 1789 Thus the final attack of the Witnesses, for civil
and religious liberty, upon the errors, usu^pations and tyranner of the pa^d
b^all, comm^^c^s in the year 1789 To destroy the papa^y and other antichristian
despotisms, at least, so f^^ as to make way for the restoration of the Jews,
and to prepare mankind for greater blessings than have ever yet been known upon
earth, will take thirty years, the period for the gathering the vintage and
po^^ing out of the vials, which are to be the means of cleansing the sanctuary,
30 To gather and try the Jews preparatory to their conversion, to destroy the
remains of tyranny, and to purify and enlarge the Gentile ch^^^h, will occupy
forty-five years more: at the end of which, it is likely, there will be that
glorious appearance of the Lord in favor of his servants, promised in Ezekiel
xxxviii. and xxxix. and Zech. xii. 8. -- 4. xiv. and (it is p^^^^ble) in Rev.
xx. 9. Now the Jewish nation is born at once, (Isal. lxvi. and 8.) and the
distant hea^hens are to be conv^rted to Christianity. (Isa. lii. 10.15. Jer.
xvi. 19. Ezekiel. xxxix. 21.) This is the time of which Daniel says, Blesse^ is he
that comes to it, and which is the year 45 1664

CONCLUSION.
WHAT remains, but that the reader, unbiassed by a party spirit, ^e^ously
revolve in his mind, the proofs which have been adduce^, of that tyranny which
has so long been exercised in France, to the grievous oppression of the people
of that country and to the great injury of surrounding nations, being that
beastly power which, according to God's word, was to slay the witnesses for
truth and liberty; and whether the tim^ for their rising from their civil and
political death be arrived? The consequences connected with the truth of this
fact are unspeakably interesting to every nation in Europe, and even to all the
world. -- Are the distressing calamities which we have heard of, chastising
judgments for sin? Their cry, to all surrounding nations, is, Amos iv. 12.
Prepare to meet your God. -- Let every man and every nation -- REPENT and
REFORM.

It is the duty of every member of the community to contribute, what in him
lies, to the peace and happiness of his country. Who ^re the best friends of
our king and constitution? and who perform ^^e best services to their
fellow-citizens? They who exert all their ower to perpetuate imperfections and
abuses, and who flatter ^^ere they ought to condemn; or those who plead for
timely re^^m, that we may ward off the evils inseparable from revolutions, ^^d
who lift up their voice against the crying crimes of the nation, ^at men may
repent, and thus the displeasure of God be averted ^^d his blessing continued
to future generations? Who promote most ^^e general int^^^st and happiness?
They who labor to blind man^^^nd and pervert their judgments; or those who
invite them to dis^^^dionate examination, that they may beware of precipitating
them^^^ves into destructive measures? they who either by riot and
in^^^nperance, or by misrepresentation and calumny inflame the pas^^^ns of men
that they may engage them to forward their own in^^^ested views; or those who
exhort them to serious thoughtfulness, ^^^d a peaceable pursuit of those things
which may prolong the qui^^^ and prosperity of our country? "A true witness
delivers ^o^th; (...) a deceitful witness speaks lies." Prove. xiv. 25.

I may have failed in the execution, but my aim has been to serve ^^y king and
country, and to promote our common happiness, by ^^vestigating a most
interesting subject. In doing it. I believe that (...) have performed, though a
small, yet an acceptable service to God -- May it be a useful one to my
countrymen! With a heart ^^^tated and overflowing with anxious concern, I pray
that the ^^ar which threatens us, may be averted; and that the angry cloud
which are gathering around may sweep by this long savoured country, and spend
their stores of vengeance, only on the he^ds of ^^veterate oppressors.


