The Means, Nature, Properties and Effects of true Faith considered. A
DISCOURSE Delivered in a PUBLIC ASSEMBLY OF THE PEOPLE CALLED QUAKERS.

BY THOMAS STORY.

PHILADELPHIA: -- REPRINTED AND SOLD BY WILLIAM GIBBONS. No. 144. NORTH THIRD
STREET. 1793.

SOME HEADS of the following DISCOURSE.
THE first Means of Faith toward God, is the Works of the visible Creation.

The second Means of Faith toward God, and Jesus Christ the Lord, are the
manifold Testimonies under the Law of Moses; the Prophecies of the Prophets in
diverse Ages of the World, many hundreds of Years before they came (...), and
the Scriptures of the New Testament, testifying that: (...) Predictions are
accomplished in Christ the Messah.

The third Means of Faith which God has given unto Mankind, is the preaching
of the Gospel by the Ministers of Christ, chosen, appointed, and qualified by
^^nself.

The fourth and most excellent Means of Faith in God the Father, and in Jesus
Christ the Son of God, is the Divine Light, the Spirit of Truth in the hearts
of all Mankind, in the Ages, Times, and Parts of the World, and his inward
Works in Man.

An Exhortation to forsake Sin and Self, being contrary to the Nature and
Attributes of God, and some Unbelievers crept in, etc.

The State of the Nation of Great Britain with respect to Religion, when
Friends were first raised and made manifest as a People, and what they were at
that Day; with an Exhortation to this Generation to embrace the same Truth, not
by Tradition only, but rather, and chiefly, by the holy Spirit, etc.

With diverse other Truths in the Whole, as well Practical as Speculative.

The Means, Nature, Properties and Effects of true Faith.
In a SERMON preached at Horslydown, the 24th day of December 1738, in a
meeting of the people called Quakers, by Mr. Thomas Story.
IT is written in the holy scripture. That "without faith it is impossible to
please God," which I think plainly implies, that by faith we may please him.
And if we should be so injurious to the divine attributes, and hurtful to
ourselves in our highest interests, as to think of the Almighty, that he is
such a Being as that we can never please him, or to conceive an indispensible
duty incumbent upon us to please him, and yet that to remain impossible for us,
would be the most melancholy Thought, and we should be the most miserable of
all creatures.

But seeing the Lord is to be pleased by faith, and not to be pleased without
it, we may hope and expect, considering the attributes of his infinite goodness
and mercy; that he has, or will afford the means of faith; and it is expressly
said, that faith is the gift of God.

As to the means of faith toward God, that he is, That is afforded to mankind
in general; though there is an order of persons among them of whom the Lord
does not require faith, that is of infants, because they are not capable of it
in this sense; these, through his goodness, he has taken into the arms of his
mercy, and his own protection, they are under his own care: But as to the rest
of mankind, who are arrived at a rational state, and capable of believing in
God, he justly expects that all such should believe in him.

As the Almighty has made us rational creatures, and bestowed upon us proper
senses, whereby we may behold and perceive the visible Creation of God, in that
beautiful manner and order in which it appears.

This is the first means of faith that God has afforded unto mankind, and it
is universal, and altogether sufficient for the ends proposed by it; for every
rational person, in every nation under Heaven, looking upon the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, himself, and the rest of the Creation of God around him, is compelled
even by his own understanding, under a due consideration of the great and wise
work of the Creation, to refer back from the creatures to the Creator, and
determine positively and absolutely that he is, and is eternal and infinite in
his Being, and that he has in himself, eternally and unalterably, all those
attributes commonly ascribed unto him; that he is almighty in power, and
all-wise; for nothing less than infinite almighty power and unlimited wisdom,
could produce the visible creation, and support it in that order in which we
see it. And the senses which God has given us are so well adapted to the
cognizance (...) their proper objects, that we are able thereby, (...) in their
native and proper rectitude, to (...) infallibly, and that those things are not
fictitious, and that there is no deception or delusion in them, but that (...)
and perceive them as they really are.

And to remain a little longer upon the same subject; the Apostle says, That
whosoever comes to God must arst believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder
of all those who diligently seek him; this is a very rational position; for he
who does not first sincerely believe the Being of God, will never seek to know
him, nor consider him as a rewarder of those who seek him.

He therefore who believes the Being of God must seek him, and that not coldly
and indifferently, but with a real concern, and engagement of mind, and true
desire to know him; for the knowledge of God is of the highest importance to
us. For if we were able to know our own bodies, and every particular particle
of them; and the cause and manner of the connection of them; and the manner of
the connection of our bodies and minds, which are of Natures very different one
from the other; or the gradations and medium in which they do meet; or the mode
of the existence of the mind, in a state of separation from the body; or if we
could know the whole creation of God, and every particular part of it; and yet
ignorant of the Lord himself, and deprived of the enjoyment of his divine
presence, that knowledge would not satisfy the soul; nothing can do that
rightly but the knowledge of the Lord himself, in a state of eternal life with
him, and in him.

We must also seek to know the Lord in his moral properties and character: By
his mercy, justice, righteousness, truth, goodness, patience, long-suffering,
and Holiness; in all which if we are duly exercised and observant, we shall
know the Lord God in his divine essence, as he is love. And that exercise is
known after this manner. As all have sinned and come short of the knowledge of
the glory of God some one way and some another, but all against the one true
and living God. And as we have sinned against him in various instances, doing
that which is not just before him, for which the spirit of Christ, who is his
witness and righteousness, has judged and condemned us in our own
understandings, whereby we know, in our own experience, the Lord is just and
righteous; likewise, in some instances in the course of life we have been
untrue, and partial in our own favor, and respecters of persons in unjust
savor of others; for which we have suffered condemnation, by the spirit of
truth in our own hearts, by which we know he is truth, since our untruth and
falsehood are reproved by him and judged. And so far as we have sinned in any
sort, we have defiled ourselves thereby in mind and body, and offended against
the holiness of God; and yet, through his infinite unspeakable love and
goodness he has had mercy upon us, and exercised patience and long-suffering
toward us, shown us our sins, by the light of his divine grace, and thereby
taught us repentance unfeigned, and pardoned all our sins, through Christ the
beloved, whereby we are assured for ever, that our God is infinitely perfect in
mercy, justice, truth, righteousness, goodness, long-suffering, and holiness;
to the endless and never ceasing praise of his eternal name: and that by the
holy influence and enjoyment of his divine love, she abroad in our hears by his
holy spirit, under proper qualifications wrought thereby in us, WE KNOW THAT
GOD IS LOVE.

Now, seeing it so plainly appears, by the works of the creation of God, to the
understanding of every rational being under Heaven, that God is, he is of
consequence the first object of faith unto all such, in all nations, and in all
ages of the world.

And as to that part of the world who profess the name of God and Jesus Christ
the Lord: As God the Father is the first object of faith, by the works of the
citation, to the mere national or rational man, ignorant of Christ, so Jesus
Christ the Son of God is the second object of says (together with the father,
as they are one) to all them that believe, according to that saying of Christ,
"Ye believe in God believe also in me," that is, in himself; which is the
second point presented in my mind, soon (...) I sat down in this meeting among
you, to wait up in God with you at this time.

And (...) further means which God has (...) of all parts of the world (...)
hereby we may and ought to believe in God and Christ the Lord) is the manifold
testimonies Moses, and the great and (...) God. (...) his people Israel, (...)
of God, as (...) in the (...), seriptures, which are reasonable and sufficient
credentials concerning the coming of Christ into the world, and the manner and
end of it: For whosoever will search the holy scriptures with diligence,
unprejudiced, and with desire to be rightly informed in that important point,
may find, that Christ is the Messiah, or sent of God unto mankind, for our
instruction, redemption, and salvation, being predicted and prophesied of in
various ages of the world, by different persons of great note and eminence,
among whom there could be no collusion, or any contrivance, or cause, or
interest to deceive: And several hundreds of years in point of time, distant
one from another, and all concurring in that one point; that there was such an
extraordinary person, so particularly to be circumstanced, to come into the
world, in the fullness of time. And some of them declared so plainly the manner
of his coming into this world, his concerns in it, and going out of it, as if
they had been eye and ear witnesses of them, and given Isa. 53. Psalm. 22. v.
16. Mat. 35.16. Mark 15.24. Luke 23.34. John 19.23, 24. Psalm. 34.20. Zach.
12.10.
historical accounts of matters of fact, and things past, rather than
prophecies of things then to come, which did not come to pass for many ages
after their departure out of the world, which clearly demonstrates they had the
mind of God therein, before whom all things past, present, and to come (as to
us) are in view at all times, and no time elapseth unto him.

And the scriptures of the new testament do likewise witness, that the very
same person, attended with all those various circumstances, did come into the
world, according to the very letter of those predictions, and did the things
predicted of him, in the sight of the people, of the Jews in that age, (to whom
he was sent) and made his departure out of the world according to those
prophecies. All which, being public and notorious in the world, and written in
the same generation, by competent witnesses, both to matters of fact and
doctrine, might easily have been detected at the same time of falsehood, if
they had not been true, seeing the Lord Christ and his followers were so much
hated, opposed, and envied, and especially by the great, powerful, wise, and
learned of the world, at that time.

What therefore can remain doubtful in any one born under the christian name,
in this part of the world, where we have the free use of the holy scriptures,
in our own language, whereby the outward coming of Christ is so plainly and
fully proved, and established as everlasting irrefragable truth, and believed
in a general way.

But if there be any objection in the minds of any concerning those truths,
which are so plainly and rationally proved; it can arise from nothing else, but
invincible, indocible ignorance, the blackness of darkness in irrational minds:
Or from some en^y through which the Lord was rejected in that day as an
impostor and deceiver, by those whose temporal considerations and in(...) moved
against Him, and those who believed in (...) received Him.

Or it must be some select, secret, beloved, innate lust, opposite to the
nature and attributes of God, and even to human nature in its proper rectitude,
possessing such souls, which p^apts them to deny, at this day, the outward
coming and miracles of Christ, and the great and necessary ends of it unto all
mankind. They will believe nothing as matters of fact, but what they themselves
see and are witne^^es of, or what suits with their weak understandings, or what
they call their reason, which they have not yet defined to the rest of mankind,
what they mean thereby.

Would such men be so served by the rest of mankind? Would they not be believed
when they relate matters of fact of which they are eye witnesses, or what they
have heard? Would any of them have another to say he is no witness of what he
says, but a forger of falsehood, a contriver of lies? I may reasonably
conclude they would not, even in minute things; if then they themselves expect
to be believed in what they say or witness, though in things of little
consequence, why should they pretend to suspect the veracity of others equally
creditable, and much more so than they? Surely the prophets of God, and
apostles of Christ, and their testimonies, with the concurrence of the best and
wisest of men through ages, in the affirmative, ought, in common reason, to be
preferred and take place, against all the negative disputations and wranglings
of a few bold and ignorant men, who neither know or believe any thing of the
most important truths of the gospel, or what themselves affirm or deny
concerning them: Would such think it reasonable, that a few men born blind,
should oppose the rest of mankind, and deny that any see because they
themselves are blind.

Common credit is to be given among mankind one to another, in things of the
highest as well as the lowest consequence; or else no innocent person could be
cleared from the falsehood and oppression of the blackest and most envious
calumny. No wronged person righted: No business of any moment carried on: No
criminal, how guilty soever of the greatest crimes laid to his charge, could be
convicted, and brought to condign punishment, unless credit can be given to
those who are eye and ear witnesses of matters of fact, which they have heard
or seen.

The judges among the Jews, according to their judicial law and national order,
could not judge of any crime, but by the testimony of two or three witnesses.
And according to the constitution of our own nation, no judge is witness of any
matter of fact, or offense, by words, objected against any criminal, or
offender; but must judge according to the report of a jury, before whom matters
and things have been proved, by witnesses furnished with proper credentials,
and duly qualified. And then the judge applies the law to the offender,
according to the nature of the offense, whether it be against common and civil
right, or is criminal.

Seeing then there is, and must be a general credit among mankind one of
another, with regard to the low affairs of this ^ite, much more is it
necessary, that due credit be given by the children of men with respect to
those great and important facts we read of in the scriptures of truth,
concerning the stupendous miracles wrought by Christ the Son of God, so openly
done in many instances, before so many people, and in diverse times and places,
and authenticly reported unto us by proper witnesses.

But to command all distempers to be gone: To multiply natural food to so great
a degree, and that in two great instances, before so great multitudes of
people, who themselves did partake thereof: to call the dead out of the grave,
and the like, in the sight of multitudes of people, things so far transcending
the understandings and knowledge of poor mortals, that they are apt to
conclude, there cannot be any such things; and being blinded by corrupt desires
and appetites, sensual lusts and liberties of diverse kinds, destructive of a
right understanding in the things of God, and ruinous to the soul, they reject
the truth.

This is the foundation of all infidelity, concerning these matters and things
recorded in the holy scriptures, touching Christ the Lord, and so reasonably
proved, according to that saying of Christ to the like sort in that day,
"Verily, verily, I say unto thee, we speak that we do know, and testify that we
have seen; and ye receive not our witness. If I have told you carthly things,
and ye believe not, how shall ye believe if I tell you of heavenly things? And
no man has ascended up to Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the
Son of man which is in Heaven. And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the
wilderness, even so must the Son of man be listed up: That whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have eternal life. For God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life, For God sent not his Son into the world to
condemn the world: but that the world through him might be saved. He that
believes on him is not condemned: But he that believes not, is condemned
already, because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of
God. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men
loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. For every one
that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, least his deeds
should be reproved. But he that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds
may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God." John 3.11 to 21.

Again, how can thou comprehend by thy reason, or all the faculties of thy
mind, that a pure, infinite, eternal Spirit as God is, free from all
corporiety, could produce such a mighty substance as the dead and solid earth,
so contrary in nature to a spiritual being. This may be above thy capacity to
conceive, and yet if thou do not believe it, thou art scarce a rational
creature, since (as such) thou art compelled to believe, that the earth did not
produce itself, but that its being is owing to another and more excellent cause.

And seeing these things are above the reach of thy understanding, how and
after what manner it could be so produced, yet, since thy senses declare and
acknowledge its real being, that it is what it appears to be, and thou must
believe thy senses, against all the perverse reasonings thou or others can
advance. Why then can thou not believe, that John 11. from 33 to 45.
Jesus Christ the Son of God commanded the dead out of the grave, and did all
those other wonders ascribed unto him (unless thou art prepossessed with
prejudices as were the Jews) seeing he is the same wisdom and power of God by
whom all things were made and do exist, who gave being and life to mankind, and
so well and reasonably attested.

Was it not the spirit and power of the Almighty Creator of all worlds that
dwelt in that holy person, who acted in him and by him? And what other wisdom
or power could do them? For he assumed not the glory either of those works or
his sayings to himself as a man; but he told the people plainly, and often,(and
it is written for our instruction Jen. 8.26, 28. 5. and 30. and 12, 29, 15.
) that he wrought not those works, nor uttered his sayings of himself, but
imputes all unto the Father, the Author of the universe, who sent him into this
world, to bear witness unto him and to his power, among a perverse and
degenerate people, who had lost the knowledge of the true God, though they
professed his name.

Thus God, in his great goodness and mercy, has afforded us the testimony of
the holy scriptures in our own language, as instrumental MEANS of faith in the
Son of God, and, by his good providence, given and continued them hitherto,
unto all Christendom, in their several tongues, for the same end (these only
excepted who have yielded themselves captives and slaves to an antichristian
power, by which they are deprived of them, and of the information to be had
therein, and of their senses and understandings in the things of God as
reasonable creatures.) Let us all therefore who profess the holy Christian
religion, and have this great advantage, make a right use of them, and duly
improve it.

The third MEANS. etc.
There is also another MEANS of FAITH which the Most High has graciously given
unto mankind, and that is the preaching, and constant proclaiming of himself
and Jesus Christ the Lord, by such persons as he himself has breathed upon, by
his holy Spirit, in their own hearts, and thereby raised them up, sanctified,
fitted and prepared them, as living and present witnesses of himself, his
wisdom, power, judgment, goodness, mercies, favors and love, whereby they can,
and do, upon a sure foundation of truth and experience, testify unto others,
what God the Lord has done, and is still continuing to do, in and for their
souls, and that the Lord and giver of life and immortality, has in himself all
those divine and moral attributes and characters ascribed unto him in the holy
scriptures, by his exercising all of them communicable, in some good degree, in
and upon themselves in their own hearts, whereby many others, who have formerly
been stupid, senseless and dead, as to any knowledge of God, or the things of
God, have been quickened, and raised into a sense of the presence, power and
goodness of God, and have believed therein as made manifest in them, to their
unspeakable joy and present salvation then begun. As thousands in this age, as
in times past, can and will own and testify, when thereunto called, to the
glory of God and of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and yet many others who
have heard, and often do hear, the everlasting gospel of God preached by his
ministers, in a good degree of the demonstration of his wisdom, spirit and
power, do not yet believe, but remain under condemnation, because they do not
believe in the name of the only begotten Son of God; preached by his ministers
(I say) in divine love ^lowing in their souls, without any other motive than
its own commanding power and influence, whereby they are preserved from all
low, mean inducements of self, and mercenary views, and interests of the world.

The fourth MEANS, etc.
And to proceed yet further with regard to what came upon my mind, of a nearer,
closer, and clearer MEANS of FAITH in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ the
word and Son of God, even than all those mentioned already, and whereby they
are all confirmed; for there have been objections, though seeble, moved for
want of the understanding or perversely concerning the creation of the world
and all things visible. There have been exceptions likewise taken against the
truth and sense of the holy scriptures, or most important parts of them, for
want of a due and candid consideration of them, or from envy, or dislike in
corrupt and unreasonable minds, to the divine and moral matters and things
specified in them, by whom they have been, and still are, perverted and
rejected, to the great hurt, if not total ruin of those who do it; yet,
notwithstanding these, or any other objections, how subtle soever, raised or
that can be raised (if they had any weight in the balance of a free, reasonable
and unprejudiced mind) we are, every soul of us left without excuse, as much,
or more, than were the Jews; for when miraculous matters of fact were so well
attested by so many thousands of proper witnesses, and so conspicuous that they
could not be denied; then the more wicked and envious among them endeavored to
persuade the rest of the unthinking multitude, that Christ did these stupendous
works by the power of the devil, which the Lord confuted by fair reasoning,
saying, Mat. 12.25.
Every kingdom divided against itself, is brought to desolation; and every city
or house, divided against itself, shall not stand. And if Satin cast out Satin,
he is divided against himself: How shall then his kingdom stand? And as they
still perversely persisted in unbelief, the Lord Jesus challenged them to issue
upon this criterion, saying, I told you and ye believed not; the works that I
do in my Father's name they bear witness of me, believe me for the very works
sake. John 10.25, 37, 38. Chap. 14.10, 11 and 15, 24.

Yet though these works did so evidently and undeniably prove that the Almighty
was in him, and wrought these things by him, they would not believe in him. If
then those works of Christ without them, were sufficient to oblige the Jews, as
rational creatures, to believe in him, and left them without excuse; let us
consider in our own hearts, that the inward manifestation of the spirit of
Christ, the divine essential light and truth, which cannot be perverted or
avoided, is near unto every one of us, and in us, and that this inward work in
our own hearts, minds and consciences, is the last, most sensible and cogent
MEANS of says, which the Almighty has afforded to every national being, as
sufficient to induce him to believe, and is the present and immediate object of
faith; according to these sayings of Christ concerning himself. John 14. v. 16,
17, 18, 20, 23, 26.
I am the way, the truth, and the life, no man comes unto the father but by
me. It is expedient for you that I go away [as to that dispensation in the
flesh] for if I go not away the comforter will not come, but if I depart I will
send him to you. I will pray the Father and he shall give you another comforter
[not another in essence, but the same in another administration and
dispensation, this in the flesh, and that in the spirit "that he may abide with
you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot receive, because
it sees him not, neither knows him, but ye know him, for he dwells with
you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you.
At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you.
But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost [this is still himself in spirit]
"whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring
all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said (...) you. Chap. 16. v.
7, v. 9.
He will reprove or convince the world of sin, that is mankind and of
righteousness, and of judgment, of sin, because they believe not in me, etc.
But when the comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even
the Spirit of Truth which proceeds from the Father. He shall testify of me.
John 15.26.

In every dispensation of God to mankind, they who have believed in him have
pleased him: Abraham believed God before the law (his works cooperating with
his says) and it was imputed unto him for righteousness. By says Abel, Enoch,
Noah, Sarah, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, David, Samuel, and all the prophets
of God pleased him. Heb. 11.

Seeing then, that the spirit of Christ, the eternal essential truth (veiled
with a human mind) is the last and self-evidencing dispensation of God to
mankind, let all believe in him, as the present object of the faith of all
nations, that thereby we may please God, fear and love him, work righteousness,
and for ever be accepted of him. And seeing 1 John, 5.10. that he that
believes has the witness in himself; let us all examine ourselves, and see
whether we are in the faith or no.

Now as it is written in the holy scriptures concerning the spirit of Christ,
that he shall reprove the world of sin, because they do not believe in him, and
he that believes not is condemned already, because he has not believed in the
only begotten Son of God: As long as we are under the reproofs of the Spirit we
do not firmly believe in him, nor please God: Therefore, let us every one
consider the convictions we have in our own hearts and minds, and what and who
it is that does reprove and convict us of all our sins, transgressions, and
sailings: And peradventure concerning some things in the course of this life,
which no mortal has been privy to, but God and thy own conference only: And
things which thou had forgot many years, are brought fresh into thy
remembrance, with conviction and condemnation, as remaining upon a sure record.

Then here is an invisible, intelligent being near thee, and in thee, which is
not of thee; an intelligencer and remembrancer, who knows thy heart and mind,
and whatsoever lodges and appears therein, and brings thy thoughts, words and
actions to thy remembrance and understanding, condemning or approving as thy
ways have been, and works in thee by convictions and reproof, and strives
with thee against thyself, and that which is evil in thee, in thought or
purpose, word or action; and that from time to time, day to day, from week to
week, month to month, and year to year, laying open to thee, in thee, all thy
faults and failings, and charging them home upon thee, till either thou return
unto him who thus smites thee, and believes in him, and obeys him; and then he
will pardon all thy sins, and cleanse thee from an unrighteousness and sin, and
all the stains and pollutions of it, or finally thou will reject and desspise
and his reproof and counsel, remain in unbelief and hardness of heart,
pollution and condemnation for ever.

The Son of God put the test of his mission to the Jews upon his works (as
before) here then is a more immediate evidence in thyself, in thy own knowledge
and understanding, which thou can not deny, than, or pervert, a work of which
thou thyself art witness.

This is a work of the Spirit of Truth according to his word, and not a work of
the evil one as (...) antichristian insi^els have falsely taugh^ for the prince
of the darkness of this world reproves not the works of darkness, Satan
reproves not his own work; for then his kingdom would fall, and be d^troyed by
himself: no, this is the work of God, by this inward work we believe in him
whom God has sent, not to the J^ws only in the flesh, but to the Gentiles
also, even in all nations under Heaven, as he is the true right which lighte^
every man that comes into the world. This is he who enlightens thy
understanding, be thou male or female, and brings things to thy remembrance,
and convinces thee of the evil of thy doings, in the secret of thine own heart,
even of thy most secret sins, which no creature can charge thee with, as
likewise of those evils and transgression in which thou have had accomplices
and companions.

Is not this a plain demonstration to thee as a rational creature, not only of
the being of God, that he is, but likewise that he has all those divine
attributes commonly ascribed unto him, and particularly as in this case, his
omniscience; for thus he knows the secrets of thy heart, being in thee, and
what are thy thoughts, and what thou have been doing. He who has told thee,
and recounted unto thee, and condemned in thee, all that ever thou have done
^miss, in the course of life, is not he the Christ, the eternal Truth, the word
of God, and Holy Ghost.

Those therefore who thus believe in the Father and the Son, through these
credentials, please God; first in believing in him, then in leaving of those
evils, greater or lesser, which the witness of God, in the mind or man, does
reprove him for, as inconsisstent with the goodness, or any other attribute of
God, moral or divine, and with thy own reason and understanding.

God is come near unto mankind, as a witness against our transgressions, and
likewise as the righteous judge and executor of justice upon him w^t^ does
evil: But if we leave off those things which God does convince us of in our
hearts, and we come to believe in him, not only because of the wonderf^^ works
of his creation, which we behold, or what we have heard of him by his
ministers, or read of (...) in the (...) scriptures, but above all by his
sensible and experimental work of regeneration, begun in us, and carrie^ (...)
divine light and word of his (...). By the powerful operation of his ^oly
spirit, (...) truth, moving and (...) in our hearts, we then please God, as we
thus believe, honor, love and obey him.

But then w^^n we rightly and fully believe in God, and in Christ the Lord, and
please him, and are saved by him, what does our faith, obedience and (...) and
unto him? (...) for he has in himself (...) ^^vine perfections, (...), from
ever^t^^^g believe he made the worlds, so that nothing can be added unto him,
or taken away; he is unchangable in all his attributes divine and moral, the
same yesterday, to day and for ever, throughout all ages, generations and
dispersations. The addition and advantage is to ourselves, that we may become
complete in him: The whole purpose and design of the Most High in (...)
visiting mankind, is for our own happiness, which plainly and fully evinceth
the infinite goodness of God, both in our creation, restoration and
establishment at last in a state of unspeakable bliss, from which we cannot
fall nor swerve. By which also his infinite power and wisdom is made manifest.

Oh! what manner of goodness is this? Who can declare it? Nothing surely but
itself; that we, poor mortals, should be so regarded and thus favored with
understanding, and knowledge of the true God; not only to believe in him, but
to know him, and be made capable of loving him, and living in him, and by him
for ever.

An Exhortation to forsake Sin and Self.
O then, as reasonable creatures, as our Creator has already made us, let us
all forsake the evil of our own ways, being contrary to the nature and
attributes of God, and to the word of his eternal commandment, that so our sins
may be pardoned, our transgressions blotted out, eraced, forgotten, and buried
in oblivion for ever.

For as we renounce and forsake our sins, ourselves also, and those thoughts,
(...), affections and desires which desire us, and render us in^on^^stent and
opposite (...) holiness of God, we shall then, and not till then, be (...) unto
God, through the one (...) or between God and man, and then because he lives
we shall live also, and when he (...) becomes our life shall appear, we also
shall appear with him (...) glory, and see him as he is. And I believe there
are (...) in this audience who know these things, having (...) this faith in
God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ, and have obeyed him, pleased him,
and have their highest pleasure and satisfaction in him, and are therefore
truly thankful unto him, as the greatest favor and blessing.

But to pursue these things so far as my understanding is opened at this time,
I further add, that there are some among ourselves at this day, come in but not
by the door, who do not believe, and therefore do not please God, but are led
astray from him, and from the true fellowship of the Sons of the day of God, by
their natural and animal appetites and desires, gratifying themselves, and
their carnal and corrupt inclinations and dispositions, to which they are so
attached and bent, that they had rather they had no future state, being
ignorant of the glories there, than be sequestered from the mean and sordid
views of sense; taking pains likewise to quench and render ineffectual in
others, those good impressions of holiness and virtue, which, by the grace and
goodness of God, have been begun in them; which is matter of sorrow, and
concern of soul, in those who love them for the Lord's sake and their own, and
in his love travel for their eternal welfare and salvation. And therefore we
speak the truth as we have it to declare, that as seed it may take effect
according to the ground into which it falls, and for that reason I would have
all to come to a due consideration of their ways, and be wise in time.

To the Youth of both Sexes.
Young men and women, I would address these things in a particular manner unto
you, in the love and grace of God, which, at this time, I feel in my heart
toward you, that you may use your understandings as humane kind, and not submit
to thoughts, words, or actions below you; many of you are furnished with good
understandings as men, let them not be misused, misapplyed, or perverted, by
servile lusts, of any kind, or made subservient unto them, in yourselves or
others, on any account; but remember the Lord in time, seek him whilst he may
be found, consider his holy workings in you, from one time to another, in
coolness and humility, until thereby you become acquainted with him; by the
revelation and manifestation of his power, whereby you will be settled and
established in the truth, so as that no subtility or transformation of the
enemy or adversary of souls can deceive you. And when you come to know the
truth as it is in Jesus, the divine, living, eternal Truth of God to be
acquainted with this in your own hearts, you shall not then be deceived by the
cunning craftiness of ungodly men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive the rest
of mankind, especially the ignorant and credulous, for their own covetous ends
and gain, and for the obtaining of the riches, honors and glories of the world,
who, whilst they pretend to direct others in the way of life, and to the glory
of God, do not know it nor seek it in themselves, nor seriously believe it, as
appears fully by their lust after those things which do not pertain to the
kingdom of God, but of this world only: But by their fruits ye shall know them.

They who walk and dwell in the divine light of the Son of God, cannot be
deceived concerning the things of God, but they who dwell in darkness, the
prince of the power of the darkness of this world can come upon them unaware,
and surprise them; even all those (as well as others) who profess to believe in
the light of the Son of God (and to be born of God) who is the brightness of
the eternal and never changing day, and yet walk in darkness and in its gloomy
shades and ways.

O! then, take the saving counsel of Christ the Son of God, which he gave of
old and still gives, Believe in the light. In God who is the light, and in
Jesus Christ who is the eternal emanation of the Father's glory, that so you
may become children of that light and holy day of God, which even now, in some
degree, shines in your hearts and minds, and gives you knowledge of the true
and living God, which you can never acquire by any other means, but by the
inshining of this divine light and grace of the Son of God, the merciful
Savior of human kind.

Believe therefore, I say, in that divine light which opposes darkness in you,
according to that saying, " 2 Corinthians. 4.6.
God who commands the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ. And walk not in darkness, nor in the way of it, least you stumble
and fall, and do not know at what, and everlasting darkness and the power
thereof surround you, and enclose you, so that you see the light no more for
ever, nor the glory of God, that therein remains for evermore.

The word of God who appeared of old in an holy human mind, clothed with human
flesh without us, appears now in the minds of mankind; (the divine nature being
clothed still, and that inseperably for ever, with the same human mind) not in
the same body of flesh, or with bodily parts, for that is the first vail, but
in the human mind, which is the second vail; the word of God, the wisdom and
power of God, therefore is clothed with a rational nature, which is as a veil
to the divine nature, and in that he appears in the minds of mankind, being in
the same nature wherein he is like unto us in all things, sin excepted.

The true God therefore is come near unto mankind, even in our own hearts and
in our own nature, that as the Son is made partaker of human nature by the will
of the Father, and therewith clothed, so we likewise by the same will, through
the glorious work of regeneration, might be clothed with the divine nature, in
our inner man, and made partakers thereof in him: That as we could not do the
will of God, nor please him as we ought, in our first and animal state and
nature, because of the weakness, ignorance, darkness and uncleanness of it, we
may now do his holy will through faith in his word, and virtue of the divine
nature in him, of which being born again after the inner-man, we become the
sons of God, and by which great and wonderful work, when finished, we are
established, as stars in the firmament of his eternal power for ever, and fall
no more, but everlastingly do the will of God, and please him.

But though this divine light, thus veiled, is glorious, so that we cannot
behold him with open face, so long as we are sinful and impure, and his
appearance, through our own darkness, seems then but small and glimmering,
hardly perceptible; yet if we sincerely believe in the least appearance thus of
the Son of God, and follow the views we have thereby, in abstaining from evil
things, and in saying, doing, or suffering, as he calls and leads, though
in small things, according to our strength, we shall then, still more and more,
proceed and increase in the knowledge of him, and the Father in and by him, to
our complete redemption and salvation in due time, to the glory of God and the
Lamb, and to our own eternal and unspeakable peace and joy.

And if we make right use of the understanding which God has thus given unto
us, unto his glory, he will increase it to our comfort, and give us more and
more the knowledge of himself, and of his ways. In his light we shall see more
light, as we increase in purity, as it is said by the Apostle, Jam. 1.5, 6.
If any one of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him: But let him ask in
faith, nothing wavering. And not hunt after the wisdom of this world in your
own wills and ways, or think to find God, the knowledge of God, or of the
things of God there, or thereby, 1 Corinthians. 3.19.
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. See 1 Corinthians. 1.19, 20,
21, to the end.

Jam. 3.15, 17.
There is a wisdom which descends not from Above, is earthly, sensual for
natural and devilish. But the wisdom which is from Above, is (...), then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
without partiality and without hypocrisy. Ungodly men are, by their own wisdom
wise to do evil, but how to do good they know not. Look therefore unto the
Spirit of Christ, the wisdom of God in your own hearts, mind his leadings and
dictates there, and he will teach you more in a little time, and give you a
better understanding in the things of God, and way of eternal life, and clearer
view of God, than by all your natural parts and faculties, and searches thereby
without, you are able to make, or even can be informed of, by any other way or
means.

The Son of God, in the days of his flesh, spoke as never man spoke, and he
speaks so still, his words are spirit and life still, and the more so in that
he is come nearer unto mankind, and we unto him: We who sometimes were afar
off, are now brought near by the life of Christ.

The Lord is become the teacher of his people himself, blessed be his Holy
Name, and there are many witnesses of it at this day, in many parts of the
world. I am not speaking as in the open air only, for there are many, and even
in this assembly, who do know these things by happy experience, being witnesses
of them in some good degree, and what the Lord has done, and is still doing in
them and for them, by his Holy Spirit in their hearts, and therefore they still
believe in him, and are confirmed therein, and that the Lord of Life and
Immortality will yet do more and more abundantly, and more excellently for his
faithful ones, than what he has already done.

And I entreat you, young people, of both sexes, that you do not sit down
contented, under an accidental form of Religion and worship, obtained by
tradition as the (...) parents, who obtained a living (...) God by the
operation of the Spirit of his Son; and by (...) him, and serving him
faithfully in their (...) him, and he was with them, and (...) freely in all
their worship and services, by the comfort of his holy and divine Presence: But
seek ye the the living God, for and in yourselves; for he says, "They that
seek me early only shall find me." This is encouragement indeed, to go upon
that most needful and glorious work.

And I can tell you, through the infinite mercy and goodness of God that there
are more excellent enjoyments in the sense of the presence of God, the Eternal
Fountain of all good, in a state of reconciliation with him, through Christ the
Lord, than there is or can be, in all the things and pleasures of this world,
that the heart of man can conceive, or desire, or wish for, if he might have
them all without rebuke, or any account to be given for the use or abuse of
them, in this world or that which is to come.

They are no way to be compared unto the Lord himself, who is ever living
divine and holy love, and an ocean of eternal, everlasting and undeclarable
pleasure. Many times, my friends, we sit in our meetings, though in silence,
under the canopy of Divine Love; there is our true and solid peace; this many
times, begets fresh desires, and a f^rther search and breathing of souls, after
the living God, and a f^rther enquiry after an increase of the peace and
comfortable enjoyments of his living and life-giving presence in our minds.

And you know, that many times, through the wonderful mercy and condescension
of the Most High, as we sit in our a^semb^i^s, under the canopy of his
goodness, his (...) making presence dissolves us into an efflux of tears, which
flow in love to God from the hearts and eyes of the people, and visited of the
Lord.

Many of us, in the times of our convincement of the truth of God, having a
glimpse of him who we had pierced by our transgressions, were sorrowful and
wept abundantly, because of our sins, and the offenses of mankind, against the
pure, holy, just and good God, our Creator; but then, superexalted glory be
given, as due to our God, all our sins being forgiven, through his mercy
declared by Christ the Lord, and the stains and pollutions of our
transgressions wiped away, by the soul-baptizing shames of Divine Love, the
tears of joy flowing from the eyes many times, in a solid sense of that love
moving in our hearts, far transcended the tears of sorrow. The ministration of
condemnation is glorious in its time, but the ministration of justification and
reconciliation unto our Creator, through divine and heart-melting love, is more
glorious, and in that holy love, and the life of it is God, who is love, most
acceptably adored.

The minds of mankind have departed from the true and living God, and gone a
whoring after other gods of their own ch^sing; they have been drawn out by
their senses, after the visible things of this world, the idle vanities and
foolish sinful pleasures of it, mere trifles, and being incessantly exercised
therein, and become habitual, they do not so much as consider the great work of
the creation of God, nor who made them, nor his great wisdom and power thereby,
but are constantly amused and carried away in their minds by worthless toys and
trifles, a shame to mankind; who should and might have more understanding,
prudence and wisdom.

Therefore, O ye young ones, and of all ranks and sexes here today, abstain
from all vain and hurtful things, and labor with holy and servent zeal, more
and more after the knowledge of God, and to please him by all the means which
he has afforded, that you may not be sound wanting: that there may not be such
a dreadful inscription found against any of you as against some of old, who
were sporting themselves in their excesses, and profaning the captive vessels
of the temple of God, in the time of their mirth and joviality, but were
quickly weighed in the balance of God, and found wanting, they were light as
the dust and chaff, not fit for his use, and the kingdom was suddenly rent from
them, and given to the servant of God, employed for their chastisement and
correction.

Yet there is a more excellent kingdom, even the kingdom of Heaven, offered
unto us: For in that day when the inhabitants of this land were greatly
departed from Charity, the bond of Christian peace, and gone into Enmity, sect
against sect, party against party, and one against another, contending unto a
sea of blood, for various opinions, about what they called Religion, these
works so contrary to the nature and end of the Christian ^aith and doctrine, at
the same time testifying against them, that they were not in the nature and
Spirit of Christ, nor of the religion of the Primitives; nor subjects o^
Christ, the Prince of Righteousness and Divine Peace, the King of Salem, nor of
his kingdom.

Then it was that the Almighty arose in the brightness of his divine light, and
therein manifested himself to a hidden People scattered among the multitudes in
the Nations who were sincerely seeking the Lord with all their souls, and unto
them it pleased him to reveal his kingdom, and by the cogent force of his
Divine Grace and Love, to draw them together into one mind the mind of Christ,
and to settle them therein, as one Body, a Holy Nation, a Royal Priesthood, and
Peculiar People unto himself, zealous of goods Works, in a state of innocence
and holiness of his own working in them; freed from the blind, furious and
destructive zeal of the frenzy multitude in that day, and by the example
doctrine and nature of the Prince of Peace, their divine Holy Head and
Lawgiver, renounced the destructive carnal weapons of war and blood^hed for
ever, and put on the whole Armor of Light, under the banner whereof they made
war, not upon the people of the land, their fellow subjects, nor upon the
lawful prince of the land, to whom they learned subjection in things below,
according to the ordinance of God on that behalf, and rules of the kingdom, for
the doing of justice and truth among the children of men; but, as of old, the
weapons of their warfare were directed and employed against spiritual
wickedness, though exalted in the highest places of the earth, and great was
the conflict in that day, when the Son of God erected his holy ensign and
standard of righteousness, light and truth, against the fallen and apostatized
Nations; for the camp of the Lord was surrounded on every side, and war
proclaimed and made against him and his faithful followers (though but a few)
by all sects, parties, and powers, of the earth, under every name but the name
of Jesus, which they despised in their ways, fought against by their works, and
opposed with all their might, but did not prevail; for his standard is sure,
and standing still, and shall never fall; for the Nations of this world shall
be subdued thereby in due time, and submit unto the great Captain of the armies
of God, the Lord Jehovah, in whom there is everlasting and all-sufficient
strength, now going forth upon his white horse, conquering and to co^quer, and
in that day who shall be able to stand or oppose him?

Is God therefore a respecter of persons, or Nations, or parties, that it
pleased him to make choice of that people, and passed by the main body of those
in the land, and many more worthy in the sight of men than they? No, that I do
not mean; but the Most High, in the council of his wisdom and goodness, and for
the manifestation and exaltation of his power, and purposes of his own glory,
and their salvation, called them by his grace to believe in his only begotten
Son, the Word of Life, as revealed in their hearts.

And according to the course of the good Providence of God, and his way of
working in the earth, now as of old, as says an apostle of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.26
to 31.
Ye see your calling brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble are called: But God has chosen the foolish things
of the world, to confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the
world, to confound the things that are mighty; and base things of the world,
and things which are despised, has God chosen, yea, and things which are not,
to bring to naught things that are; that no flesh should glory in his presence.
But as God is no respecter of persons, but mercifully inviteth all Nations unto
salvation, saying, (by his prophet of old) Come unto me all ye ends of the
Earth, and be ye saved. And again, Rev. 22.17.
The Spirit and Bride say come: and let him that hears say come: and let him
that is a-thirst come: and whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life
freely. So that all mankind are invited unto salvation upon one foundation and
motive; the love of God in Christ Jesus unto all Nations, and all may come that
will come, or even through other motives in themselves, may refuse, neglect,
despise, and fall short of so great riches and salvation.

And, notwithstanding the goodness of God to the last generation, who believed
in his eternal word, and pleased him, and the offers of salvation unto this
present age, the offspring of the last, and unto the people of this land in
general, as also unto other Nations; if we, or they who now profess the same
truth and Savior in words before men, and keep together in one body or bodies,
in any outward manner only, under any forms of worship, or rules of discipline
left by them, if we, or any among us, should apostatize from the grace, light
and Spirit of the Son of God, and proceed, or set up in our own strength, craft
and earthly wisdom, and become rich therein, in our own eyes: then the Lord
will leave us to our own blind conduct, as he has ever done all such, and ever
will throughout all generations, and then we shall justly fall, as they have
done, below the world, as the unsavory salt, and be trodden under the feet of
men.

But if you, who are of this present Generation, and profess the truth of God
by tradition only, and not by convincement by the Spirit of Christ in your own
hearts, will answer the invitation of God, who is striving with you,
immediately; and instrumentally by his ministers, who have no pay from you, nor
desire any of any kind, who seek not yours but you, and that not unto ourselves
but to the Lord, and embrace the eternal and present Truth freely, the Lord
will exalt all such above the world, and all the vain glories, and sinful
lusts, and pleasures therein.

But blessed be the Name of the Lord, he still continues us as a people to his
own glory; for as the offspring of the first generation under this dispensation
came up from their childhood in nature, embraced the traditions of their
fathers, before they know the truth, yet being in God's appointed time,
convinced in their own hearts, of the holy Spirit of Christ, of the truth and
of the dispensation of God unto his people at that time, it then became the
Religion of their judgment and experience, and not by tradition only.

And if we, in this present age, continue to be faithful unto God, and the
testimony of truth which came unto them and unto us, and grow up higher and
higher in virtue, and in the nature of Christ and his kingdom of peace and
love, the ages succeeding, embracing and remaining in the same faith, peace and
love, will still ascend higher and higher in the same, as one man, from stature
to stature, faith to faith, grace to grace, and glory to glory, until the whole
body, and all who shall be gathered thereunto, by the Spirit and Power of the
Lord, shall arrive, through the infinite power and wisdom of the Highest, unto
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, as the church, which is
his Body and Spouse, the fullness of him who fills all in all.

But once more I say, if we should be so unhappy as to apostatize from the life
of Christ in us, and sit down under an empty show and form of religion and
worship, without the thing itself, we shall fall short of the kingdom of God
(which God forbid) as many communities, who began well in their days, and ran
well for a season, though their successors have professed the same truths
according to the degrees of manifestation, have fallen short of the truth, and
utterly failed; from which the Lord himself, our only help, support and aid,
preserve us, and I hope he will, for his own name and glory, preserve us.

My friends, God Almighty is not to be stopped or hindered in his common course;
he will always have a people to believe in him, obey him, wait upon him and
worship him in the Spirit of his Son, Christ the Lord, the Eternal Truth; as a
holy elect seed, to love, fear and serve him.

O, says my soul, that we may so behave ourselves, as that we may ever be and
remain in the favor of God, and every name under the divine and peaceable
government of the holy Truth, in the whole course of their lives, in our morals
and every thing we do or say, then the Lord will cause his righteousness to go
before us, and his day more and more to arise upon us, even the Son of
Righteousness, with divine healing virtue as under his wings. The Lord heal all
our mala^ies, and the backslidings of the sick and weary among us, receive
those graciously who return unto him, and lead, instruct, and guide us all into
his everlasting kingdom of glory, to the honor and praise of his Eternal and
ever living Name.

Oh! that every soul here present were so alive and sensible as to feel the
love of God shed abroad in your hearts; your faith then, and your hope likewise
would be turned into experience, work by love, and be acceptable unto the
Almighty and please him; your adoration and (...) minds, and out of the view of
(...) love, is acceptable (...) the Lord.

No (...) unto his voice in you; and (...) abroad in your hearts, by his (...);
be true unto th^se (...) the Lord bring up (...) you in your own minds; for
they are done by (...) in love, through in the state some man yet be in, you do
(...) or believe it; forsake the evil of your ways so many as yet remain
therein and look to the power and virtue of the Truth, that you may be (...)
and saved thereby, and brought up, and (...) in the favor and image of God,
which is righteousness and true holiness; for God will have a people upon the
earth, as witnesses for him, against the wa^ and corruptions of the world,
until the Lord himself reign over all people and Nations under Heaven, which he
will do in his own time, as I am more an I more persuaded and assured;
notwithstanding the great (...) at present, and opposition of the children of
men through man, (...), and unlikeliness of it at this day, when so (...)
Reformation appears, after so many Nations of the world have professed the name
of the Our true and living God and Jesus Christ the Son of God, with so little
advance toward him in so many ages.

A general view of there things was (...) me soon after I sat down in this
(...) this afternoon, and (...) and ability (...) Gra^ of God: I shall now draw
to a (...) unto you young men and women, that you (...) your minds (...) and
your (...), after the (...) the world, for they are in the Broad Way, and lead
to destruction.

The Lord himself knows you, and loves you, and will not abridge you, in the
course of his Providence, of any thing that is good and sitting of which let
the Lord be judge, and not your own (...) and (...) and proper for you in your
several stations and services unto him, if you love, obey and follow him truly,
according to what you know, and please him, which is your reasonable duty, he
will preserve you from all evil, and give you at last to swim in the ocean of
his abounding and overflowing goodness to all eternity. And that it may be the
end and conclusion of all that are here, is the very desire of my soul for you
this evening.

FINIS.
The foregoing Sermon was taken in short hand, and transcribed at length, and
perused by the said Story, and published by his permission.

Lately Published and for Sale, [PRICE -- BOUND, 1 s6] DIVINE BREATHINS; OR, A
PIOUS SOUL THIRSTING AFTER CHRIST, etc.

BOOKS, BLANKS, CARDS, HAND-BILLS, etc.

Done with Neatness and Dispatch, by WILLIAM GIBBONS, No. 144, North Third
Street.


