THE SEARCH AFTER HAPPINESS:

A PASTORAL DRAMA;

FROM THE POETRY OF MISS MORE.

BY A LADY IN CONNECTICUT.

CATSKILL: PRINTED BY M. CROSWELL and Co.

M,DCC,XCIV.

CHARACTERS OF THE PASTORAL.
Six young Ladies of distinction, in the search after happiness.
CLEORA, PASTORELLA, EUPHELIA, LAURINDA, HONORIA, SOPHIA,
URANIA -- Ancient Shepherdess. Her Daughters.
SILVIA, ELIZA,
FLORELLA -- a young Shepherdess. JANE -- a poor old Shepherdess. EMMA -- her
Granddaughter. 1st. 2nd. 3rd. 4th. 5th. 6th. SHEPHERDESSES.
THE SEARCH AFTER HAPPINESS.
SCENE I. -- A GROVE.
CLEORA -- PASTORELLA. Cleora. WELCOME, ye humble vales! thrice welcome, ye
peaceful shades! -- here innocence finds a sweet retreat -- lone contemplation
here resides with happiness her guest. The reverend Hermit discovered true
wisdom in directing us to such a delightful retreat. Secluded from the world,
its folly, pomp and deceit; where daring guilt triumphs over unprotected
innocence: where suspicion poisons the cup of joy; and pleasure bears the sting
of remorse in her bosom, or langour, satiety and disgust succeed. -- You, my
cousin, have ever placed happiness in the rural shades: May I be taught by you,
whom I have too long despised, to woo her in these sacred haunts.


Pastorella. You need not now, my dear cousin, cease to despise the pursuits I
made in search of happiness. My delight was not the peaceful shades of
retirement, where no obtruding guest dare enter. The grove, the rill, had no
charms for me, if some sighing Damon did not there breathe forth the praises of
Pastorella. But these hallowed groves fill my soul with horror; and I look with
shame upon my past life. But who are these? They cannot be the gentle tenants
of the forest, for like us they seem the children of despair.


ENTER Euphelia, Laurinda, Honoria and Sophia. Hon. Ladies, may I ask if you
are of the family of Urania -- or, like us, wanderers in search of her dwelling?


Cle. We boast not the happiness of belonging to that respected name, but have
saught these shades to ask her friendship and advice.


Euph. How fortunate this meeting! our pursuits the same. We will seek her
dwelling together, and receive more pleasure and instruction by the variety of
precept, which the worthy Urania will bestow on each different character. And
by these branching oaks which seem coeval with time; by the landscape dressed
in every charm of nature, I think the spot not far distant that bounds our
wishes: -- And look! a lovely form approaches, whose innocence and cheerfulness
bespeak her an inhabitant of these delightful shades.


Lau. Perhaps it is Florella, whom Fame reports as the model of female
perfection.


ENTER Florella. Flor. Fair strangers, for such I am sure you are, these
uncultivated fields boast not the courtly manners you possess. May I, without
the imputation of impertinent curiosity, enquire from whence you came? If,
happily, some misfortune brought you to this place, I may afford some assistance;
or if your feet unwarily led you astray, I may direct you to regain your
weeping friends, who must fear to trace your steps in these unfrequented wilds.


Soph. Your kind enquiries, fair shepherdess, far from being impertinent,
bespeak the benevolent heart, which, undaunted, through these distant fields we
came to seek. Directed by an aged Hermit, famed for wisdom, we came in search
of happiness, who no longer blesses courts or cities with her smiles. He bade
us seek the lonely dwelling of Urania, where happiness found a loved retreat,
softening the pillow of straw, and strewing the thorny path of life with her
choicest flowers. The young, the amiable Florella, will give also, by her
example, a lively picture of the wise precepts of Urania. If you are, as my
heart suggests, if you are Florella -- Oh, deign to direct us in the paths to
happiness!


Flor. Ill would it suit my unexperienced age, to attempt to inform your steps
in the ways of truth, who have yet so much to learn. But would you ask the
council of the truly wise; I will with pleasure conduct you to the hospitable
cottage of Urania, which stands in yonder thicket of poplars. Yet, think not,
ladies, you will there find rural splendour; poverty has long been her guest;
cheerfulness and benevolence her attendants. For, though poor, she has much to
give; though doomed to earn her daily bread, the unfortunate never left her
cottage in sorrow. A soothing tear, a sigh with the distressed; instruction,
conveyed in the mildest terms, give releif to the broken, and comfort to the
wounded heart.


SCENE II. -- Urania's Cottage.
URANIA, SILVIA and ELIZA. Ura. Good morning my dear children.


Sil. and Eli. Good morning my dear mama.


Eli. We have been gathering this basket of fruit for you -- look, how fine it
is -- may I give all the little girls a peach mama?


Ura. Certainly, my dear. And do you now regret I did not allow you to strip
the flowers in spring, that you might give each little girl in the village a
garland for may day?


Eli. Oh, no mama, I shall never forget it, and will always in future obey you
without questioning the propriety of your commands.


Sil. Eliza, have you forgot the fine moral mama conveyed to us, concerning the
flowers we were so fond of.


Ura. What was it, my dear? I have forgot, and should like to have you remind
me of it.


Eli. Oh mama, it was as how the lilacs were like beauty without merit, which
lost its charms in the morning of spring; but if beauty was -- was -- what was
the word, Silvia?


Sil. If beauty was accompanied with merit, it would, like this fine fruit,
recall in autumn the charms of spring.


Eli. Indeed I did remember it mama, only I could not say it all, and have
never wished since to be as handsome as Harriot, who is so proud when people
look at her, and say -- how handsome she is!


Ura. You are both good girls to remember my instructions. I see you are dressed
in your holiday suits. Do you know why they dance in the village today?


Sil. Yes mama, it is because they are glad to have a fine harvest.


Ura. And do you think of no other rejoicing but the pipe and the dance: you
must also return thanks to the beneficent author of good, who causes the
changes of the seasons, and crowns (...) year with (...) now (...); who daily
(...), with what (...) the path marked out to us by our creator. It Is by his
goodness we exist in this delightful land; he clothes the spring with flowers,
the autumn with fruit: Then raise your hearts in praise to your all bounteous
protector; not only in your morning and evening adorations, but by preserving a
cheerful temper in all your concerns with the world, and with each other; and
by doing all the good you can to your fellow creatures. Your stores are not
large; but you can show the benevolence of your hearts, by being sweet
tempered, amiable and kind to your play-mates. -- Never wound the feelings of
any one. You, Silvia, laughed at Peggy the other day, because she did not dance
as well as her companions; yet Peggy is a good girl, and dancing is the only
thing she cannot perform with ease.


Sil. Indeed mama, I was very sorry the moment I had done laughing; and would
have asked her pardon; but I hoped she did not know I was laughing at her; and
I will never be guilty of so ill-natured a thing again -- you may depend upon
it, mama.


Eli. Oh, mama! there is Florella with some fine ladies, coming this way.


ENTER Florella, Cleora, Pastorella, Euphelia, Laurinda, Honoria and Sophia.
Flo. See how the good Urania employs her leisure hours, in training up those
sweet children; her precepts are all drawn from nature, and each flower she
makes a lesson to the heart. -- Mama, in my ramble to the village this morning,
I found these ladies, straying in search of your dwelling -- their business
they will best relate.


Cle. Worthy madam, we came hither, by the direction of a reverend hermit, to
ask your friendship and advice.


Ura. Fair ladies, whatever council or assistance is in my power to give, you
may freely command. Seat yourselves beneath these shades, and we will converse
with freedom.


Cle. Through life we have been seeking happiness; but she ever flies our
pursuit. Oh, madam! deign to direct our steps to find the spot that feels her
benignant smiles.


Ura. Say first, fair strangers, where ye have sought this lovely inmate of the
virtuous breast. Confined to no spot, she is found by all who seek her in the
way she would be won. And first, though hard the task, and harsh the request, you
must each disclose, without reserve, the ruling passion which has guided your
life, or I cannot direct you to find the fair fugitive you seek.


Euph. I was bred in the splendour of wealth: every fancy my wild imagination
formed, was instantly gratified by parents too fond of an only child, and an
heiress: Each day was filled with different follies, without reflection or
content: Each fashionable amusement crowded my time: My fortune and beauty
generally procured me admirers sufficient to please my vanity: I sang and
played well; dressed and danced to admiration -- my mind knew no higher
cultivation. Yet music lost its charms, if some sweeter (...) chanced to be
preferred. The ball-room, in which I found most delight, often clouded my face
with sorrow, if some more elegant dress or graceful dancer drew the eyes of the
multitude from me. I had been so long addressed with flattery, no other sounds
could soothe my ear. If any one gave me the most gentle admonition, they were
sure to meet my resentment. And while my rank, and the splendour of my
appearance at each public place, attracted the emulation and the envy of most
of my sex, my heart was the ^eat of discontent and wretchedness; till,
reflecting on my conduct, I sought the cell of the venerable Anselmo, who is
the father and friend of the human race, and with these ladies he directed me
to seek your retirement for advice.


Sil. Oh, mama! can you forgive us for wishing for wealth, if this is the lot
it brings.


Cle. I have pursued happiness in a different manner; but my hopes have proved
equally salacious. I scorned the gay circle of the beau-monde: The belles and
beux were equally my aversion: I wished to be known and admired by the remotest
ages. I sighed to possess the various talents which have given renown to the
most excellent authors. Poetry first caught my enraptured soul -- I aspired to
unite the sublimity of Milton; the satire of Swift; the graces of Pope; the
learning of Jonston; the pensive muse of Gray, and the pleasing softness of
Thomson; or the various talents of each, united in Shakespeare. History, Logic
and Astronomy, had each their turn to rule; Gibon, Robertson and Hume; Lock,
Newton and Halley, alternately, inspired my emulation. Thus, while I searched
each science, and acquired much fame in all; I found myself an object of dread
to one, and contempt to the other half of the world; till, convinced I have yet
something to learn before happiness will reside in this breast, I came here for
your kind instructions.


Past. To me, pomp and fame were equally indifferent: My naturally soft and
pensive heart, felt early the cruel shafts of misfortunes: -- No father's
prudent council pointed out the paths of truth, and taught me to shun the
dangerous rocks of delusion: No mother's bright example led my infant steps in
the road of virtue -- Death deprived me of their kindly aid in my earliest
years. Left to cultivate my mind as I pleased, I followed its romantic turn;
read nothing but novels, or the most tender poetry, and fancied these painted
life in its true colors; contemned the manners of the world, and flew to
silent groves and weeping rills. There I found adventures in each common
transaction; fancied each one who praised, esteemed; and who flattered, loved
me; and expected, ever long, the hero I sighed for, would answer the wishes of
Pastorella. But no such swain appeared; although, with all my follies, I had many
real and deserving lovers -- yet they did not possess the ideal virtues I
admired. My friendships were equally fallacious: Formed from accident, or
adventure, as my romantic heart dictated, they alternately deluded, betrayed
and left me, a prey to grief and disappointment: New profession caught my easy
belief -- and still I trusted, and was still deceived. Disappointed in all my
plans of happiness, I have come to seek her in your retirement.


Lau. Till now, I have passed heedlessly through life, without any principle for
my guide; careless of the morrow, but ever repining at the present hour. My
only misfortune has arisen from ignorance. I never wished to learn any thing
that would give me the least trouble to obtain. My aunt, who loved me as a
daughter, and undertook my education, was too indulgent to my weakness: I had
masters of every kind; who, while they were amply rewarded, did not hesitate to
indulge my inclinations, and represent my understanding and improvements to my
aunt, in the most flattering light. Thus, while my stature attained the size of
woman, my soul was but a child. My time passed away in slothful (...) busy
trifles: Too old to be amused with childish sports; too indolent to read, and
too ignorant to be agreeable in conversation, I found myself totally neglected.
Visits and public places, filled the drear vacuity of my mind; though these were
ever tasteless, by the small share I could take in the entertainment of the
company. Sick of fashion, which has hitherto swayed me, and tired of my own
follies, I have learnt enough to be displeased with myself, and submit my
future conduct entirely to your direction.


Hon. To you, madam, I am come, though with little hopes of a cure. Alas! my woes
are, I fear, past relief; yet to you, as to a tender parent, I dare open all my
heart. I gave my hand, or rather my father gave it for me, to a man, rich in
possessions, but poor in every quality of the soul that can render a woman
happy. As my understanding opened, I discovered the despicable character of the
man I was united to; possessing no love for me, nor the least deserving my
esteem; yet squandering my fortune and his own in foolish bargains and
expensive pleasures. Young, gay and thoughtless, I sought those amusements
abroad, which would alleviate the misery I felt at home; and, although I
conducted myself with prudence (as I thought) I found my character injured
among my friends, and destroyed with the rest of the world. I am not sensible
of any action that deserves severe censure: I mixed with the world; enjoyed its
bustle and admiration; and, though flattery soothed my ear, I am not conscious of
betraying the pleasure I felt, in one instance. But that will not restore my
good name; and till that is restored, happiness can only be found in solitudes
like this. Here, forgetful of the world, and by the world forgotten, I may
rest, till age has despoiled this form of the power to please; and then,
perhaps, I may be free from the pursuits of envy and detraction.


Soph. With Honoria, I complain of unhappiness in the married life; and with as
little hopes, sue for your soothing council. I was not obliged to marry a man I
could not love: Erastus preferred me to all my sex; I chose him from a thousand
lovers: Our union was considered as the certain path to happiness. But alas!
six months has not elapsed, ever Erastus ceased to pay me the least attention
of a lover. At first I wept: I though it my charms diminished, though my glass told
me they were not; and a crowd of admiring eyes, at each public place,
proclaimed it told me true, and my Erastus must be unfaithful. I in vain
upbraided him with perfidy. A cold look, that would once have driven him to
despair, and the most earnest entreaties of forgiveness, was now met with
indifference, and sometimes the word childish would escape his lips. At length
he returned my reproaches with bitterness -- we parted -- and I came hither to
hide my sorrows in your friendly retreat.


Ura. Your candor, dear ladies, deserves my warmest praise. I pity your
follies, and love your merits. How few, oh, sacred virtue, follow the paths thy
bright footsteps lead! But since you have sought my humble roof to learn her
abode, I will direct you with candor, as far as my imperfect mind will allow,
what my excellent mother first taught me, and a long series of years, fraught
with experience, has shown to be truth. Know then, that the first sources of
good or ill fortune, arise from education. Nature forms but few monsters, and
not many unhappy tempers: It Is the impression we receive in childhood, that
fixes the character: The mind, never at ease, if not implanted with good, will
produce evil; and first impressions are seldom effaced. Euphelia sighs for
splendour, dress and admiration, the sources of too many women's unhappiness.
Would you excel the whole sex in loveliness, bestow not all your attention
upon your outward charms. A beautiful woman without a mind, is seen with
pleasure at first, but like a novel, once read, is never looked at the second
time. Not that I despise the power of beauty; I would only render it more
lovely; it is the first recommendation; and if the heart and understanding
answer the first impression, they become irresistible. Beauty casts luster upon
virtue -- virtue adds sublimity to beauty. By adorning your mind, you will
conquer that impatience of seeing other women preferred before you; as you will
then see no woman is formed to conquer all hearts, though she may gain universal
admiration. It will also teach you to despise the flattery of fools, and wish
for the esteem of the good and great.


Euph. I acknowledge the justice of your reproofs, and will never again suffer
flattery or envy to wound my peace; but apply with ardour, to the improvement
of my understanding.


Ura. In fair Laurinda's uncultivated mind, we behold the diamond, unpolished,
in its native mine. Your understanding is naturally good; but the rust of
ignorance, has, through indolence, been suffered to obscure its luster. You are
yet young -- apply with diligence, and time will no longer hang heavy on your
hands. It Is not in the power of every one to be great; but we may all be good.
The knowledge of virtue and religion is open to every eye, and attainable by
every understanding. Set the standard of virtue high; never think you are
perfect; there is nothing precludes our improvement so much as thinking we are
already good. Never pass a moment unemployed. Remember time misspent, is the
greatest of crimes; as it is an act of ingratitude to Him, who will one day
require the use of it from our hands.


Lau. With heartfelt penitence, I mourn those misspent hours that can never be
restored; but will endeavor, by the future, to atone for the past.


Ura. I pity the misfortunes of Pastorella. A soul so tender; an imagination so
lively, would, with early culture, and maternal care, have proved a bright
ornament to the world. Poetry and novels should be read chiefly for amusement,
and not to form our opinions: Life, in those performances, is generally painted
in too high colors: By taking our ideas from them, we are apt to look upon the
ordinary transactions of life, as insipid -- its characters, vulgar. Could you
find a man, possessing all the accomplishments of your ideal hero, you could
not be happy without firmness of mind. Sensibility is so much the fashion, that
those who have it not, affect to possess it; and those who really possess it,
indulge their feelings to such excess, that, from a virtue, it becomes a
weakness. Fortitude takes nothing from female beauty, or delicacy, but adds
luster to sensibility. Look not on friendship as false, or love deceitful.
Never choose a friend from a ^^ight acquaintance, but study their worth, ever
you trust their fidelity: Nor believe a lover sincere, from his well-timed
compliments, and profuse flattery; who cannot see your foibles, and treats you
rather as an idol, than a friend: Such a lover flatters but to betray -- or
humbles himself to tyranize as a husband. Nothing here below is without alloy,
which plainly points to us not to place our whole happiness on this uncertain
world, where the fleeting shadows of bliss but hover for a moment in our view,
and wing their airy flight to regions beyond ^he skies; where our warmest
wishes will be ^atified, if they are not improper; and every (...) will be made
happy in the way they ^hoose.


Past. My thoughtless youth, by thee instructed, shall no longer be lost in the
paths ^f fiction; but with sorrow for my past fol^^es, I will endeavor in
future to distinguish between truth and error.


Ura. Learning, my dear Cleora, has been your only pursuit. The fair book of
knowledge is certainly unfolded, for our sex, equally with the other; yet
domestic virtues are more peculiarly our province. Could you arrive at
perfection in each science -- could you unite the talents of each favorite
author in your composition -- yet, if the milder graces of the mind --
goodnature, patience, humility, sweetness and sensibility, devoid of art -- if
these graces, peculiar to the female sex, embellish not the mind, you may be
admired, as dazzling; but never esteemed, as a fine woman; for we shine, only in
our proper sphere: Accomplishments were designed by heroes less to adorn, than
amend the mind. Make no pretense to wit -- it often wounds undesignedly; and is
not that applause contemptible, which is excited at the expense of a fellow
creature? As the muses have imparted to you a love of letters, I would not have
you neglect your talents: Cultivate them with care; but possess your knowledge
in silence and humility. Modesty takes nothing from genius; but adds a luster,
which envy must gaze at in silence: While the brightest talents often disgust,
when united to a too great consciousness of our own worth.


Cle. Confused and ashamed, I receive thy reproofs, with the fullest
conviction, thou best of friends, and will henceforth endeavor to be good,
rather than great.


Ura. Your situation, my dear Honoria, is truly unfortunate; yet it is not
hopeless. Have you children?


Hon. Yes, madam -- a son and daughter.


Ura. Then listen to my councils, and you may yet be happy. A young and
beautiful woman, who is not beloved, or who has an abandoned husband, should be
particularly watchful of her conduct. Every man looks upon such a woman with
pity, which inclines the heart to love. The world is censorious -- if you are
pleased with flattery, and permit (...) to be paid you, it is a tacit
acknowledgement of the pleasure it gives; and that acknowledgement lays you
open to censure. Would you be really admired, seek not for admiration; but,
following the duty of a mother, make your children your happiness; and can
there be a greater, than that of forming their young minds to every virtue? Can
you regret time spent in so useful and pleasing an employment? Without it, they
may fall into greater improprieties than their mother, and equal vices with
their father. By pursuing this line of conduct, far from receiving censure from
the world, you will be held forth, as a pattern of female excellence. A
situation like yours, is the only one where merit receives the fullest praise,
unmolested by the shafts of envy: And, perhaps, by this conduct you may reclaim
your husband; which, for your children's, if not for your own sake, you must
certainly wish.


Hon. How, my dear madam, shall I ever repay your kind reproofs? Yes, you have
indeed enlightened me -- I had forgotten I was a wife -- I had almost forgotten
I was a mother; and, while my sweet babes were looking to strangers, for a
mother's attention, I was, at best, but wasting my life in hearing insipid
encomiums on my beauty, and sharing tasteless amusements. But the world shall
no longer have cause to censure, or my children to complain: I renounce every
pleasure for their fake; and will forget every former misfortune, in improving
their young minds, and making them worthy of a better fate than mine.


Ura. Your misfortunes, beautiful Sophia, arose from receiving too much
adulation. A lady, possessing great personal charms, if she has not more than a
common share of prudence, and a good understanding, is always unhappy as a
wife. Accustomed, from infancy, to the delusive strains of flattery, she
expects adoration, instead of common sense. You reproached your husband with
inattention; and knew not, perhaps, or did not believe, that beauty ceases to
charm the husband. The reign is over, and sober reason takes her turn to rule.
If you wish to regain the love of Erastus, endeavor to obtain those charms
which will gain his esteem and friendship -- show that you can be sweet --
tempered and prudent, as a wife -- rational and agreeable, as a friend and
companion. Never expect, from your husband, the adulation of a lover -- it is
inconsistent with human nature. You will, by this conduct, if he has a good
heart and understanding, gain a more powerful ascendency over the heart of
Erastus, than he ever felt for you in the days of unrivalled beauty.


Soph. And must a woman stoop to solicit attention? Must I descend, in my turn,
to court?


Ura. Certainly. -- Do you consider yourself superior to your husband, that he
must ever bow to you? He wants a rational and good-natured companion -- while
you would have him adore you as a slave.


Soph. I believe I was wrong; and indeed, my consciousness of it, makes me
vexed that you should discover my errors: But I am determined to dismiss the
pride of beauty -- that pride, which has hitherto swayed all who approached me,
and in future only study to excel in humility and goodnature.


Ura. Continue in your good resolutions, dear ladies, and you will certainly be
as happy as this world will admit of. And would our whole sex pursue this
rational plan of happiness, it would reform the errors of man; merit, would
direct their choice -- reason, the bands of love -- and each dwelling rise a
temple to contentment; then man would no longer affect control, nor woman
sway. Beware of beginnings: Little differences embitter the married life; and
if once contention is allowed, adieu to love. [ENTER Eliza, who whispers to her
mama.] Will you retire to my cottage, and partake of a rural repast, which
Florella has prepared for us? And I will, in the mean time, recount many
instances of misfortune, similar to yours, which will enlighten and strengthen
your pursuit of virtue.


Hon. Madam, we attend you with pleasure.

[Exeunt.]
SCENE III. -- The grove before Urania's cottage.
ENTER a group of young Shepherdesses, with Silvia and Eliza. Sil. Welcome, my
sweet friends; why were you so long in coming? We have been looking for you
this hour.


1 st. Shep. We should have come much earlier, but we met a poor woman, loaded
with a bundle of sheaves which the reapers were so kind as to give her. She was
weak from age and the fatigue of carrying her bundle; so we each took a part,
and gathered some she had left, and went with her to the cottage. She requested
us to sing a song; and we danced before her door, while she wept at the
remembrance of days that were past.


Eli. Did you know who she was?


2 nd. Shep. Oh, it was Jane, the good old woman your mama is so fond of.


Eli. Mama says she was once very rich; her father had a very large farm, about
a league from our village; she was married to an honest man, who was killed
with my poor papa; and her brother was a bad man, and spent all his father's
estate.


Sil. Yes, poor woman, she used to delight to sing and dance on the green; and
the shepherds and shepherdesses were never so happy as when Miss Jenny led the
ball. But now she is supported by charity, without a friend in her distress to
help her: No wonder she wept at your kindness and gaiety.


3 rd. Shep. Poor woman, how I pity her! I will go every day and carry her wood
to make a fire; and help her get her food ready for the day.


4 th Shep. And I will carry her sheaves from our barn, that she may not be
obliged to glean any more.


5 th. Shep. And I will beg mama to let me knit her some stockings against
winter.


Sil. That will be charming. But as the music is not come, will you sit down
and we will sing a song to amuse us?


6 th Shep. With all our hearts. (They sit down.) Come Silvia, you must direct
our choice.


Sil. We will sing the sweet country life, if you please. (They sing.)


ENTER Florella with the ladies. Flor. Good morning my sweet little friends.
(They all rise and courtesy.) Silvia, will you wait on your young friends into
the cottage? Your mama wishes to see them before the sports of the day begin.


Cle. How happy are you, my beloved Florella, to hear daily the wise precepts
of the good Urania. Trained beneath her care, you must enjoy felicity unmixed
with remorse. But you will not envy us the pleasure of sharing it with you; for
here, retired from the delusive follies of the world, we will give up our
splendid titles, content to dwell with you and virtue in obscurity.


Flor. Do not deceive yourselves, dear ladies. Think not retirement the only
and certain road to happiness. It Is a plant too delicate to flourish in our
earthly soil. Though the face wears the smile of contentment, it may conceal a
sickning heart. Esteem none happy from appearance -- all have their portion of
misery. Uranai, my more than mother, though content and cheerful, has often drank
deep of the bitter cup of affliction. Born in affluence, and bred in splendour
-- united to the best of husbands, fortune seemed to smile upon their wishes.
War, cruel and unnatural war, deprived her of all these blessings. With a heart
torn with anguish for her slaughtered lord, doomed to wander destitute over
those fields, once her own -- in age obliged to earn bread for her helpless
babes -- Yet patient in distress, she looks forward with resignation and hope;
she knows the hand that wounds has power to heal.


Euph. Every thing I hear, every thing I see, enhances the high opinion I had
formed of the excellence of your worthy friend; for though with care she hides
her virtues from the world, worth like hers cannot remain unknown. Yet may I
ask one question -- Florella, why do you prefer retirement, if you do not find
it far happier than a public life?


Flor. To me the world is an empty void. My life, though short, has been a scene
of sorrow. I will briefly relate the painful tale. My father left an only
brother and myself heirs to a splendid estate. Florio had no prudence; by
different follies he became a beggar. My heart, at that time engaged to a
worthy youth, felt all his misfortunes as my own; for he wanted only prudence
to make him the best of brothers. Eugenius, my disinterested, my generous
lover, proposed renouncing my fortune in favor of my brother, who had learnt
prudence from adversity, and wanted only fortune to unite him with an amiable
and worthy lady, to whom he had been long ardently attached. I agreed to the
proposal with transport, and the next week was to have united us all in the
bands of Hymen; when the house where I lodged caught fire; my apartment was
high; the flames had already reached the staircase; but Eugenius, fearless of
danger, rushed through the flames, and carried me to a place of safety. But alas,
in preserving mine, he sacrificed his life. Never shall I forget the painful
hours he supported for my sake. When I had paid the last sad rites to his
memory, I saught the cottage of my dear Urania, who had bred me from infancy,
and with a small share of my fortune, to make her days less toilsome, I
renounced the world and left my brother the sole possession of the wealth I
could not enjoy. Eugenius also bequeathed me his large estate: But as he had
worthy and poor relations, I refused it, as to me it would have been merely a
loan from the needy; to them it was a source of happiness. My dear mama has
taught me patience, and, with her, I wait contentedly till the curtain of
eternity shall be drawn, and show me the justice of those misfortunes I have so
often repined at feeling. But you have no such melancholy cause to justify
renouncing society. You have friends to please, duties to perform, and fortunes
to spend in acts of beneficence.


Past. Methinks I could listen to your pleasing councils without a wish beyond
this lonely vale. But here are the sweet girls who were to sing for us.


ENTER Urania with the young shepherdesses. Ura. Ladies, I have bro't my little
companions, that you may partake of their innocent pastimes -- would you wish
to join in the festival today?


Lau. Nothing, madam, could give us more pleasure.


ENTER Jane, l^aning on two young girls. Ura. Oh, here are the young girls
returned with our good neighbor Jane. (Urania leads Jane to a seat.) How are
you today my good madam?


Jane. Thank you, neighbor, as well as three score years of trouble will allow
of. These sweet girls have made me weep for joy this day -- such was I once;
but no kind hand is left to bless my age. Excuse my sorrows, I meant not to
intrude upon your happiness. But this dear girl awakens all my woes -- so, just
so, my Loisa looked when the wave snatched her from my arms.


Emma. Think me your Loisa, and dry your tears.


1 st Shep. Did you, then, loose a daughter in the sea? I heard my papa say,
Emma's mama was taken from the waves by him, and bred up in his family as a
daughter. She married my uncle, and died when Emma was an infant. She was a
native of this country, and mama says Emma is her exact likeness.


Ura. Dear madam, be not alarmed. I bro't you here to enjoy an agreeable
surprise. This sweet girl is indeed your child; the only offspring of your
lamented Loisa.


Jane. (Taking Emma in her arms.) My God, I thank thee! that in the evening of
my days thou rep^yest me for sixty years of sorrow.


Emma. Ah, my dear, dear Grandmama! Now indeed, may I call you so. My heart
longed to tell you I was your child, when leaning on my arm, you told me your
history of sorrow; but I feared to alarm you too suddenly.


Jane. Oh, my joy is too, too great for utterance! But why, my dear child, why
were you so long hid from me?


1 st Shep. My papa and uncle though it you dead. They made many long and fruitless
searches for your retreat; till chance directed them to this village; where,
this morning, he learnt your abode.


Emma. No more shall you labor for your bread. My papa longs to see and embrace
you; and, in the dutiful affection of a son, evince the love he bore your Loisa.


Jane. That I should live to see this day -- that I should live to see the
child of my Loisa -- Oh, my God! Forgive -- forgive, thy ungrateful servant,
who has so often murmured at her cruel destiny. And oh! will thou forgive, if I
drop a tear once more to the memory of my child? Why was I not allowed to know
she lived -- why was I not permitted to enjoy her dear society?


Ura. My dear madam, restrain your feelings, or they will destroy your weak
frame. Repine not at the lot assigned by a being equally just and beneficent.
Strive to forget the past, in rejoicing at your present happiness. See here
your lovely child, sent as a ^^pport to your declining age; who will, with
unceasing care, guard the pillow of sickness, and convey your ashes to the tomb.


Jane. Indeed, indeed, madam, I am thankful; but I must still weep, this event
makes me quite a child.


Ura. Come, my girls, sing a song; perhaps it will alleviate the feelings of
Mrs. Jane; -- Will it not my good neighbor?


Jane. Oh, yes, madam, I should like to hear them. Will you sing the song you
sang this morning when first I beheld my child? Go Emma and join them.

(The girls sing -- Uronia then requests a song of the ladies -- who comply
with her request.)
ENTER a musician. Eli. Oh, mama, the music is come. May we dance?


Ura. Yes, my dears.

(The shepherdesses then dance a rural dance upon the green, and the curtain
drops.)
END OF THE PASTORAL.

