The Correspondence between CITIZEN GENET, Minister of the French Republic to
the United States of North America, and the Officers of the Federal Government.
To which are prefixed, the Instructions from the Constituted Authorities of
France to the said Minister. All from authentic Documents.
Philadelphia, 20th December, 1793, Second Year of the French Republic, One and
Indivisible.
CITIZEN GENET, Minister Plenipotentiary of the French Republic to the United
States, to Mr. Jefferson, Secretary of State.
SIR,
THE politics of regenerated France having candor, frankness, and publicity
for their only basis, the mysterious secrecy of courts being entirely rejected
from her councils, and the only art of her public agents being that of using
none, I have informed you, that I would publish my Correspondence with the
Federal Government, and likewise the instructions that have been given to me by
the Executive Council of the French Republic. The sheets which contain my
correspondence are not yet printed off, but those which contain the translation
of my instructions being finished, I hasten to enclose to you copies of them. I
beg that they may be distributed among the members of Congress, and that you
will request the President of the United States to lay them officia^ly before
the houses of that legislative body. This first part of the collection, which I
announce to you, and which I shall transmit to you in due succession, will
enable the representatives of the American people to determine, whether my
political conduct, since have resided in the United States, has been
conformable to the ^^^tions of the French people. This step is a duty which I
conceive I ow^ to my country, and thus leaving it to your sage Legislators to
take such measures respecting the points that are in negotiation between us, as
the interest of the United States shall appear to require, nothing will remain
for me to do, but to prosecute in your courts of judicature the authors and
abettors of the odious and vile machinations that have been plotted against me,
by means of a series of impostures which for a while have fascinated the minds
of the public, and ^^isled even your first magistrate, with a view to shake, at
least, if not to break off entirely, the alliance between two nations, which
every consideration calls upon to unite, and to rivet still faster the bonds
which tie them to each other, at a period when the most imminent danger equally
threatens them both.

Accept my respects, GENET.

Instructions to CITIZEN GENET, Minister Plenipotentiary from the French
Republic to the United States -- from the Executive Council and Minister of
Marine.
Memorial to serve as Instructions to CITIZEN GENET, Adjutant-general and
Colonel, going to America in quality of Minister Plenipotentiary of the French
Republic to the Congress of the United States.
THE patriotism which Citizen Genet has shown in the different employments
entrusted to him, and his known attachment for the cause of liberty and
equality, have determined the Executive Council to no^^inate him Minister
Plenipotentiary of the French Republic to the Congress of the United States of
America. This proof of confidence is the more flattering for Citizen Genet, as
the French nation set a high value upon the ties which unite them to the
American people, ties which the National Assembly has, on the ad June, 1791,
shown the desire to draw still closer; and the legislature has, moreover,
expressly ordered the Executive Power to negociate with the United States a new
treaty of commerce, which may increase, between the two nations, those
connections mutually advantageous both to the one and to the other of them.
Struck with the grandeur and importance of this negotiation, the Executive
Council prescribes to Citizen Genet to exert himself to strengthen the
Americans in the principles which led them to unite themselves to France; to
make them perceive, that they have no ally more natural or more disposed to
treat them as brethren; that these sentiments are engraven on the hearts of all
Frenchmen enlightened upon the true interests of their own country; and, if the
two nations have not yet reaped the advantage, it has been the fault of the
government we have just overthrown; it is through the reason of the cabinet of
Versailles. This truth is this day revealed. The Executive Council has called
for the instructions given to Citizen Genet's predecessors in America, and has
seen in them, with indignation, that at the very time the good people of
America expressed their gratitude to us in the most feeling manner, and gave us
every proof of their friendship, Vergeenns and Montmorin thought, that it was
right for France to hinder the United States from taking that political
stability of which they were capable, because they would soon acquire a
strength, which, it was probable, they would be eager to abuse. They, in
consequence, directed both the one and the other of these Ministers of Louis
XVI. to the Congress, to preserve the most passive conduct, and to speak only
of the Prince's personal wishes for the prosperity of the United States. The
same Machiavelian principle influenced the operations of the war for
independence; the same duplicity reigned over the negociations for peace. The
deputies from Congress expressed the desire, that the cabinet of Ver^ailles
would assist in the conquest of the two Floridas, of Canada, and of Nova
Scotia; but Louis and his ministers constantly refused, looking upon the
possession of these countries by Spain and England, as a useful principle of
uneasiness and vigilance for the Americans after the peace. This useless
jealousy turned into contempt; the people for whom they pretended to have taken
up arms, became an object of disdain; for the court neglected to correspond
with them, and by that criminal conduct they gave the power, whose influence in
America we ought to have extingnished, arms to combat and destroy our own.

It is thus the ministers, under the old system, blindly labored with all
their exertions to stifle liberty, after having been compelled by the general
voice of the nation to assist its birth in the new world; it is thus they cooled
the zeal; it is thus they loosened the bands of the two people; it is thus that
by their infamous policy they disgusted the Americans with the French alliance,
and strengthened, themselves, that of the English. The republicans who have
displaced these vile supporters of despotism, are eager to mark out for Citizen
Genet, a path diametrically opposite to the crooked windings by which his
predecessors were entangled. The Executive Council, faithful to its duties, and
obedient to the will of the French people, authorized Citizen Genet to declare
with freedom and sincerity, to the ministers of Congress, that those of the
French republic, throwing far from them every thing appertaining to the old
embassy, the revenue system, the cautious policy, and all those impediments to
the riches and prosperity of the nations, have highly approved the overtures
made to Citizen Ternant, as well by General Washington as by Mr. Jefferson,
upon the means of renewing and consolidating our commercial ties, in placing
them on the principles of truth itself; that the Executive Council are disposed
to set on foot a negotiation upon those foundations, and that they do not know
but that such a treaty admits a latitude still more extensive in becoming a
national agreement, in which two great people shall suspend their commercial
and political interests, and establish a mutual understanding, to befriend the
empire of liberty, wherever it can be embraced, to guarantee the sovereignty of
the people, and punish those powers who still keep up an exclusive colonial and
commercial system, by declaring that their vessels shall not be received in the
ports of the contracting parties. Such a pact which the people of France will
support with all the energy which distinguishes them, and of which they have
already given so many proofs, will quickly contribute to the general
emancipation of the new world. However vast this project may be, it will not be
difficult to execute, if the Americans determine on it, and it is to convince
them of its practicability that Citizen Genet must direct all his attention:
for, besides the advantages which humanity in general will draw from the
success of such a negotiation, we have at this moment a particular interest in
taking steps to act efficaciously against England and Spain, if, as every thing
announces, these powers attack us from hatred to our principles; if the English
ministers, instead of sharing in the glory of France, instead of considering
that our liberty, as well as that of those people whose chains we have broken,
for ever establishes that of their own country, suffer themselves to be
influenced by our enemies, and by those to the liberty of mankind, and embark
with every tyrant against that cause which we are defending. The military
preparations making in Great Britain become every day more and more serious,
and have an intimate connection with those of Spain. The friendship which
reigns between the ministers of the last power and those of St. James's proves
it; and in this situation of affairs we ought to excite, by all possible means,
the zeal of the Americans, who are as much interested as ourselves, in
discerning the destructive projects of George the Third, in which they are
probably an object. Their own safety f^ll depends on ours, and if we fail, they
will sooner or later fall under the iron rod of Great Britain. -- The executive
Council has room to believe that these reasons, in addition to the great
commercial advantages which we are disposed to concede to the United States,
will determine their government to adhere to all that Citizen Genet shall
propose to them on our part. And it is possible, however, that the false
representations which have been made to Congress, of the situation of our
internal affairs, of the state of our maritime force, of our finances, and
especially of the storms with which we are threatened, may make her ministers,
in the negociations which Citizen Genet is entrusted to open, adopt a timid and
wavering conduct, the Executive Council charges him, in expectation that the
American government will finally determine to make a common cause with us, to
take such steps as will appear to him exigencies may require, to serve the
cause of liberty and the freedom of the people. Citizen Genet will lend the
assistance of his good offices to all the French citizens who shall have
recourse to him, and whose conduct shall be unexceptionable. But the Executive
Council understands that this protection shall in no case contravene the laws
of the country, and shall not extend to people of doubtful character, banished
from their country, or to citizens whose conduct shall be reprehensible.
Citizen Genet will avoid as much as he can those ridiculous disputes about
etiquette, which so much occupied the old diplomacy. The representatives of
other powers are not, however, to be suffered to attempt to deprive France,
become free, of that precedence it enjoyed under its ancient forms. The
Executive Council informs Citizen Genet, for his regulation of the conduct
which they wish to be followed by the ministers of the French Republic, if
disputes should arise respecting the ceremony and the precedence between them
and the representatives of other powers.

The intention of the council is, that the ministers of the nation should
declare without reserve, that the French people see in all other people their
brethren and their equals, and that they desire to remove every idea of
superiority or precedence; but that if any state, mistaking the generosity of
these principles, pretends to any particular distinction, and endeavors to
obtain it by any steps direct or indirect, the ministers of the French people
shall then insist on all the prerogatives the French power has at any time
enjoyed; the nation determining that in that case its ministers should defend
those rights, being certain that the nation will make them respected.

As to the ceremonies of his first audience, the delivery of his credentials,
and his communications with the Federal government, Citizen Genet will conform
himself to those rules which the Congress shall have established for all the
diplomatic corpse in this respect; exceptions only offend; general rules wound
no one.

Such are the political objects trusted to the zeal of Citizen Genet; the
Executive Council will give him particular instructions upon the consular
affairs with which he will be charged, upon the negotiation relative to the
liquidation of the debt of the United States, upon the supplies for the
Colonies, upon those which the marine and war departments call for, and upon
the negociations which Citizen Ternant was charged to set on foot with the
United Sates to induce them to furnish corn, flour, and salt provisions on
account of their debt.

With the minister for foreign affairs Citizen Genet will correspond upon these
different objects, and it is from him that he will receive the nation's orders.
His communications with the other ministers will only extend to the details of
administration, relative to their respective departments, and he will be
careful to give distinct information to the minister for foreign affairs, to
the end that he may have always before his eyes the whole of the operations of
the French agents with foreign powers.

Read and agreed upon in Executive Council at Paris, January 14th, 1793, Second
year of the French Republic. (Signed)
MONGE, President, LE BRUN, Minister for Foreign Affairs.


Extract from a supplement to the instructions given to CITIZEN GENET, Minister
and Plenipotentiary of the French Republic to the United States of America.
THE Executive Council wish that a new treaty, founded upon a basis more
liberal and more fraternal than that of 1778, may be concluded as soon as
possible. As, however, they cannot conceal that in the actual state of Europe a
negotiation of this kind may be subject to many impediments, whether brought
about by secret maneuvers of the English minister and his partisans at
Philadelphia, by the timidity of certain members of the federal government,
who, notwithstanding their known patriotism, have always shown the strongest
aversion to every measure which might be unpleasant to England, they think it
right for the present, that Citizen Genet should draw every advantage which the
provisions of the subsisting treaty secure to the Republic, until a new compact
has more clearly and fully defined and enlarged them.

In this view, whichexisting circumstances render particularly important,
Citizen Genet is expressly enjoined to make himself thoroughly master of the
sense of the treaty of 1778, and to be watchful in the execution of the
articles which are favorable to the commerce and navigation of the French
Republic, and he will endeavor to satisfy the Americans, that the engagements
which may appear burdensome to them, are the just price of that Independence
which the French nation contributed to acquire for them.

In the probable case of a maritime war, Citizen Genet will employ all the
means in his power to procure a religious observance of the 17th, 21st, and 22d
articles of the treaty of commerce, by which the contracting parties engage
freely to admit the prizes made by either of the parties from his enemies, and
have renounced the right of permitting their citizens to serve under the flag
of a foreigner against the vessels of their respective (...), or even to admit
into their ports the prizes of for^^^^^rs, (...) the arming or supplying of
foreign privateers.

Th^^ (...) ^^^^re important in the now situation, as the great dis^^^^ (...)
^^^ateers from their ports, and the difficulty of supp^^^^ (...) ^^er their
cruizers the more expensive, and the return and (...) of their prizes more
precarious; while our vessels, av^^^^^ ^^emselves of their right, will have at
their disposal, all the (...) the United States and the provisions with which
they abound. It would be moreover to be feared that the fitting out in American
ports English armaments, or such as were pretended to be so, would induce a
number of individuals of the northern states, remarkable for their boldness and
activity, to accept of English commissions, and distress and injure our
commerce. Without doubt neither the Congress or the Executive power of the
United Sates would approve a conduct so little conformable to the ties of
friendship and good understanding which subsist between the two nations; but
the great extent of the English commerce in America now become free, the
prodigious number of its factors and of the emissaries of George the IIId. the
means of corruption, which their situation and their local acquaintance give
them, would render these expeditions the more frequent, as it would be so easy
to deceive the vigilance of government by concealed equipments. Citizen Genet
is therefore particularly enjoined to watch, by the consuls and commercial
agents, the conduct of the English in the different ports, to insist rigorously
upon the execution of the 17th, 21st, and 22d articles of the treaty of 1778,
and to prevent in the American ports all equipments, unless upon account of the
French nation, and the admission of any prize, except those which shall have
been made by the vessels of the republic. He will take care to explain himself
upon this object with the dignity and energy of the representative of a great
people, who, in faithfully fulfilling their engagements, know how to make their
right respected.

As soon as circumstances permit efficacious negociations concerning a new
treaty of commerce, Citizen Genet will not lose sight of stipulating positively
and without reserve for a reciprocal exemption from the duty on tonnage,
avoided under different pretenses, from many years past by the American
government, though expressly granted by the 5th article of the present treaty.

The mutual naturalization of French and American citizens, in commercial
respects, proposed by Mr. Jefferson and approved of by the Executive Council,
will render this exemption from the duty on tonnage less offensive for the
powers claiming a participation of the same favor by virtue of their treaties,
for the casus federis will be entirely changed with respect to them.

The reciprocal guarantee of the possessions of the two nations stipulated in
the 11th article of the treaty of 1778, can be established upon generous
principles, which have been already pointed out, and shall equally be an
essential clause in the new treaty which will be proposed. The Executive
Council in consequence recommend, especially to Citizen Genet, to sound early
the disposition of the American government, and to make it a condition sine qua
non, of their free commerce with the West Indies so essential to the United
States. It nearly concerns the peace and prosperity of the French nation, that
a people whose resources increase beyond all calculation, and whom nature has
placed so near our rich colonies, should become interested, by their own
engagements, in the preservation of these islands. Citizen Genet will find the
less difficulty in making this proposition relished in the United Sates, as the
great trade which will be the reward of it, will indemnify them ultimately for
the sacrifices which they may make at the outset; and the Americans cannot be
ignorant of the great disproportion between their resources and those of the
French Republic, and that for a very long period the guarantee asked of them
will be little else than nominal for them, while that on our part will be real,
and we shall immediately put ourselves in a state to fulfill it, in sending to
the American ports a sufficient force to put them beyond insult and to
facilitate their communication with the islands and with France. Fully to
insure the success of these negociations, and to render nugatory in the United
States those scandalous insinuations so clandestinely spread through Europe by
the enemies of the Republic, the Executive Council specially direct Citizen
Genet to adhere to the forms established for official communications with the
United States, between the government and foreign agents, and not to permit
himself to take any step, or make any overture, which can give umbrage to the
Americans in regard to the constitution which they have chosen, and which
^^tlers in many points from the principles established in France.

The emissaries and partisans of George III. the emigrants, and the Hispaniola
refugees, who are found in great numbers in the principal cities of the United
States, and who have already infected them with their falsehoods, will not fail
to watch the minister of the Republic, and to give all his measures the most
malicious construction. An open and patriotic conduct can alone put him beyond
the reach of calumny and misconstruction. The Executive Council relies, in this
respect, with an entire confidence upon the prudence and known moderation of
Citizen Genet.

In order that nothing may delay the conclusion of the negociations of Citizen
Genet with the Americans, and that he may have in his own power all the means
which can assist the pains he will take in the cause of liberty, the Executive
Council has given him the full powers annexed. The Minister of the Marine
Department will transmit to him a certain number of blank letters of marque,
which he will deliver to such French or American owners as shall apply for the
same.

The Minister at War shall likewise deliver to Citizen Genet, officer^^
commissions in blank for several grades in the army.

Done and agreed upon in Executive Council, the 17th day of January of the year
1793, and of the French Republic the second.

(Signed)
MONGE, President, LE BRUN, Minister for Foreign Affairs.


Copy of a letter from the Minister of the Marine to CITIZEN GENET, Minister of
the French Republic to the United States.
February 8th, 1793.
YOU will find enclosed, Citizen, 300 letters of marque, which you will
distribute to the Americans who may fit out and try their chance against the
English, Dutch, Russians, Prussians, and Austrians.

The means taken in France to register them in the Office of Classes, will be
supplied by that of registering them in the Chancery Office of the Consulates
of France, situate in the ports where the armed vessels may be fitted out, or
in the nearest ports to them. You will take care to number and sign these, to
keep an exact register, and to give me an account of the disposal of them by
every vessel bound from the ports of the United States to those of the Republic.

I add to this enclosure twenty copies of each of the laws of the 31st January
and 2d February last.

The laws relative to the encouragements granted to prizes and to their
distribution, will be soon passed for France. I shall transmit them to you as
soon as I receive them.

Foreign built vessels, the entry of which had been prohibited In 1791, may,
for the present, be armed in France, and partake of all the advantages granted
to those built in the docks of the Republic.

This regulation is of too much moment not to hasten you in communicating it to
all those who, knowing the law of 13th May, 1791, may think themselves deprived
of the power of introducing their vessels into France.

You will, doubtless, think it right to regulate your measures and your conduct
by the prudence and discretion which your character requires in the existing
circumstances, to contribute as much as in your power to the good of the
Republic, the success of its armaments, and the destruction of its enemies
commerce.

(Signed) MONGE.

Copy of a second Letter from the Minister of the Navy to CITIZEN GENET,
Ambassador of the French Republic to the United States of America.
Paris, May 28, 1793, second year of the Republic.
YOU will find hereunto annexed, Citizen, commissions for the conductors of
prizes, which you will continue to distribute to the captains, with the letters
of marque, according to the numbers of captures they shall think they may be
able to make at sea; you will inscribe them under the same number as the
letters of marque. The citizens forming the Provisional Executive Council of
the French Republic, mark the same number on each of the commissions delivered
to each captain. It has been thought necessary to adopt this uniform method in
all the maritime districts.

I give notice of it to the different organazeurs.

(Signed) DALBARADE.

Copy of the Credentials given to CITIZEN GENET.
In the name of the French Republic, by virtue of the law of the 19th August
last, which ^on^e^s on the Executive Council provisionally, all the functions
of the Executive power: and of the decree of the National C^^vent^^ of the 21st
September following, which cont^^^^ the (...) and o^^es a force at the last
period.

WE, the C^^^ens forming the Provisional Executive Council, to the Republic of
the United States of North America.

Very ^^ar, great Friends and Allies,

HAVING resolved to appoint a successor to Citizen Ter^^nt, ^^inster P^^^
potentiary of the ^ench Republic, tending with you, we have chosen Citizen
Genet, Adjutant-general and Colonel in the service of the Republic, to replace
him in the same character. The proofs of zeal and patriotism which he has
hitherto given, persuade us, that he will conduct himself in a manner to render
his person agreeable.

We pray you, very dear, great Friends and Allies, to give full credit to all
he shall be charged to say to you on the part of the Republic; especially when
he assures you of our disposition to promote the interests and prosperity of
the United States. We do not doubt he will give all his attention to convince
you of the desire of the French nation to bind more and more the ties of
friendship and fraternity which ought to unite two free people, formed mutually
to esteem each other, and to establish between them the most perfect harmony.

Written at Paris, the 30th December, 1792, the first of the Republic. LE BRUN
CLAVIERE, GARAT, ROLAND, PACHE, MONGE,
By the Provisional Executive Council. GROUVELLE, Secretary of the Council


