CONDEMNATION OF THE SLAVE TRADE; BEING AN INVESTIGATION OF THE ORIGIN AND
CONTINUATION OF THAT INHUMAN TRAFFIC:

HUMBLY INSCRIBED TO THE CITIZENS OF THE UNITED-STATES.

By A FRIEND TO HUMANITY.

NEW YORK: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, -- 1794 --

NOTE.
THE Author intends one-third of the profits arising from this pamphlet, as a
donation to the African Free School in this city.

INTRODUCTION.
TO THE CITIZENS OF THE UNITED STATES.
FELLOW CITIZENS,
I HAVE undertaken a piece of business of no small importance, that of
espousing the cause of a million and an half of human beings, now groaning
under the infernal yoke of slavery: and I have been induced to put this
publication under your protection, the rather, because I am convinced, that in
many instances, the principles therein contained have been adopted already. In
this work, I speak to men of a great variety of sentiments; but I shall class
them briefly under two heads; viz. those who believe in the scriptures and all
that is therein contained; and those who take reason for their guide: and with
respect to the former of these, I shall only remark, that they may find many
and strong proofs in the scriptures, of the truth of what I have advanced in
the course of this work -- With regard to the latter, reason will not admit,
that any man has a right to another man's money or other property; and
consequently that he has not a right to usurp that time which the Almighty has
given every man, to provide subsistence and comfort for himself and family; and
I am persuaded, that many of you, my fellow citizens, have long since
considered the slave trade as both iniquitous and unreasonable; and however a
man may say that a slave, who has been bought with his money, is his property;
yet that does not alter the fraud of the principle, any more than a man buying
stolen property of a thief, and paying his money for it, gives him a warrantee
title thereto; in the one case, the property has been clandestinely obtained;
in the other, the man's liberty has been withheld by force, and in defiance of
justice and humanity; however, some of my fellow-citizens, may not approve this
work, yet I hope they will read it with attention, and the time may come when
they may see the truth contained in it; namely, that justice and humanity are
the two greatest virtues that distinguish man from the brute creation; and I
have long admired the disinterested philanthropy of the Quakers with respect to
the Africans, which in my opinion is their brightest characteristic; and though
they seem to be thwarted in their benevolent intentions at present, yet I hope
to see the time, when their most sanguine expectations on that head will be
realized; and I shall only add, that if this work should be fortunate enough to
meet with approbation, and be the cause of bettering the condition of only one
human being, I shall be happy that I have undertaken it, hoping therefore for
your indulgence,

I subscribe myself Your Fellow-Citizen, A FRIEND TO HUMANITY.

THE SLAVE TRADE CONDEMNED.
CHAP. I.
I AM fully convinced, that such a publication as this will meet violent
opposition in the minds of many who are bound more by interest than justice or
humanity; and if a man betray no signs of flagrant injustice in his common
dealings among the red of mankind, with respect to pecuniary matters, be is
generally cried up for an honest man, a man of unspotted reputation etc. but we
are too apt to look over his conduct, as it relates to the poor ignorant
African, groaning under the yoke which he has laid upon him, and that any
particular description of mankind whether of one, or another stature or ^^^our,
were intended, by the great Creator of all, to be herd in a state of abject and
cringing dependence upon men of any description, is a doctrine, which I never
could see into, either from motives of religion, morality, reason or policy. By
the slave trade according to the construction generally put upon that word, is
meant that system which relates to the buying and selling the natives of
Africa. But although this be the general acceptance of the term slave trade yet
it cannot be denied that every system, whether political, religions or
domestic, that tends to setter the mind or body of man, and deprive him of the
utmost extent of his rights in a greater or less degree, a (...) of that system.
My intention is to lay national affairs entirely aside, and consider the two
extremes, of Despotism and Slavery, as they apply to individuals only.

In order to come at the truth of any matter, it is often improper to take it
up in that state, in which we find it, as coming through a number of hands; the
real state of the case may be obscured by falsehood and deceit, and it is
therefore necessary to investigate the subject to the very source, by which
means it is more than probable we may come at the true state of the case. That
it has been customary in all ages and countries, since the earth has been
tolerably inhabited, to keep slaves, is a truth, which, though it cannot be
denied, yet it ought to be lamented for the past and avoided for the future;
and in the first settlement of the world after the deluge, there being little
or no government among mankind, to restrain the strong and turbulant, and
protect the weak and more peaceable, it is no wonder if a few ruffians of one
neighborhood, depending more upon their own strength, than any regard to
justice, should go to another, pillage the place, and carry off not only the
spoils, but oftentimes the children of the helpless inhabitants; which
children, being kept continually as slaves, and brought up in that state,
having no idea of any other situation of life, became reconciled to it, and
appeared no way anxious about changing their station; but however reconciled a
man may be to a state of slavery, or however satisfied with his lot he may
appear in the eyes of the world to be, yet all this does not alter the fraud of
the principle on the part of the conqueror or master. It is in the above manner
that slavery has crept in upon mankind by degrees, and been handed down from
generation to generation, until it has arrived at the present period, in which
it is continued and supported in a more criminal extent than has ever before
been equalled in the annals of the world; and that it was customary in the
first age after the deluge, for the conquerors to make slaves or captives of
the conquered, can easily be proved to the satisfaction of any one who believes
in the old testament, in the case of the Sodomites being carried away captive,
by Chedalaomer, king of the Elamites or Persians, after he had defeated them;
and we also read, that Abraham hearing of this defeat of the Sodomites, and
that his nephew's lot was among the captives, armed his own servants to the
number of three hundred and eighteen, and pursuing the conquerors, overtook
them, attacked them and defeated them, recovering all the spoils which they had
taken, together with the men of Sodom. As we do not read that Abraham ever went
to war, either before or after this expedition, it is plain that he could not
have got these servants by conquest; and therefore must have got them by some
other means; and the most probable presumption is that he bought them from some
of the neighboring conquerors, who either having enough others, or thinking it
unsafe to keep too many among themselves, least they might attempt to regain
their liberty, or perhaps in order to enable them the better to carry on their
depredations, fell into the method of selling them to those who would give the
highest price for them. As to those who do not believe in the Scriptures, they
may find almost innumerable proofs in history of nations and individuals making
slaves of their conquered enemies, particularly the ancient Assyrians, and the
Romans. History abounds with relations of this nature, but it is needless at
present to say any thing further upon the subject.


As I have before stated, the avowed object of this publication, is to prove in
a satisfactory manner the fraud and unreasonableness of the present system of
slavery, as it applies to the unhappy Africans; not only as it relates to
bringing an additional number into the country, but also as it relates to those
already here; and it is contended by many of the advocates for this inhuman
traffic, that "the Africans are the seed of Cain, and that the mark which the
great Creator set upon their forefather, was to change his color from white to
black, and that this color was to follow his posterity as long as the world
stands, and that slavery was to be their unalterable lot, during that time." To
this I reply, that the mark set upon Cain, as far as I can discover from the
bible, was no other than a distinction of him from the rest of mankind, in
order that no one should lay violent hands upon him and slay him; for it
evidently appears to me that God intended to punish him while here upon earth
by those stings of conscience, which guilt, and the merited contempt of the
rest of mankind, never sail to bring upon the wretch who is so unfortunate as
to deserve them; neither can we form any probable opinion, whether the mark set
upon Cain, was any change in his color or not; it might have been a crop of
the ear, or a thousand other things, as well as a change of his color; but
admitting that his color was changed, it might as well have been purple,
green, yellow, etc. as black; and the black people might as well contend that
before that time, all men were black, and that Cain was made white; and still
have as good grounds to argue upon, as the advocates for slavery have, when
they say that Cain was made black; for I do not recollect any passage in the
bible that says what was Adam or Eve's color, and add to this, we cannot find
any passage to justify an opinion, that any of Cain's seed were in the ark; and
if there were, it must have come from the wives of some one or more of the
Patriarchs, or have been the wife of some one or other of Noah's sons. As the
Chronology in the male line is brought down from Adam, by which it plainly
appears that all the males who were in the ark, were descended from Seth, the
third son of Adam; and as we read, and have every reason to believe, that the
descendants of Seth held no intercourse with those of Cain, it amounts almost
to positive proof that Cain's posterity were all cut off by the deluge. As this
work may fall into the hands of many who do not believe that there ever was a
deluge which destroyed all mankind, except Noah and the other seven persons
mentioned in the account given of that event in the bible; I shall only deserve
that if they object to that belief they must also of necessity, object to the
belief of there ever having been such a man as Cain; both those accounts
resting upon the same foundation, viz. the credibility of the authors of the
bible, let them be who they may.
But admitting for argument sake, that the wives of Noah's sons, were entirly
of the blood of Cain, it would then follow, of course, that their posterity
(being of the seed of Cain on the one side, and that of Seth on the other) they
would be the equal descendants of both those ancestors; and therefore it would
be impossible to distinguish between them, which was to be considered as the
posterity of the one, and which the posterity of the other; and for instance,
suppose Cain's posterity (according to the arguments, or rather assertions, of
the advocates of slavery) to have been black, and the posterity of Seth to have
been white, by the intermarriage of Noah's sons with women descended from Cain,
and according to the course of nature, their children must have been between
black and white, or in other words, what we term mulattoes; and those children
having no other color to intermarry with, would never to the present
generation have varied their color (except according to the intense heat of
some, and cold of other climates) nor as I have just observed, would it be
possible for any one of them to convince the other, that he was the person
alluded to in God's setting a mark upon Cain, and must therefore be his
servant; as the other would have full as good a foundation to retort it upon
the first, and say that he was the seed of Cain, and thus would mankind be
eternally sheding the blood of man in vain, without a possibility of ever
arriving at the right of the story.

As for my own part I cannot conceive that the Creator ever intended to put
such a stumbling block in the way of mankind, much less how could we (at the
distance of upwards of four thousand years after the flood) pretend to say,
"this or that man is one of Cain's posterity; and I being one of the
descendants of Seth, am his right and lawful master." And again, admitting the
wife of one of Noah's sons only to have been a descendant of Cain, and that the
distinction could easily be made between the posterity of the one and the
posterity of the other two; it is holding up an idea the most derogatory to the
justice of the great Creator, to suppose he would be guilty (not only of
injustice but of double injustice) first, to inflict a heriditary punishment
upon one man and his posterity, whereby thousands, or perhaps millions of
innocent persons must suffer in an abject state of slavery, for the guilt of
one man who had sinned; and secondly, that his revenge not being satiated upon
the first, that he should blend the seed of the innocent with that of the
guilty, and deal out the bitter cup of slavery and disgrace to their posterity
to the end of time. And I believe the Almighty (to use the language of Mr.
Pain) to be too just to do any such a thing, and too Almighty to be driven to
the necessity of doing it. I never can be brought over to join a doctrine that
requires me to have so mean an opinion of my Creator, especially when it rests
on so slender a foundation.

By what I have said, I trust I shall remove the belief of the Africans now
among us, being the descendants of Cain, from the mind of every person who
shall see this work, unless he be a person who, lost to every sentiment of
humanity or benevolence, seeks only to hoard up riches at the expense of
injured humanity, and by stifling reason, morality, and every generous
sentiment of the human heart to carry his favorite design into execution.

CHAP. II.
HAVING in the foregoing chapter offered my reasons for supposing that the
present generation of Africans, are not the descendants of Cain; I propose in
the present one, to investigate this matter a little further; hoping that I
shall sufficiently prove at all events, that the slave trade is both
unreasonable and unjust. It is said, by another class of the advocates for the
slave trade, that "they are descended from Canaan, the son of Ham, and
grandson of Noah, and that they lay under this curse for the sin which
Canaan's father (Ham) committed by making sport of Noah when he was drunk in
his tent;" and that the Africans are descended from Ham, is exceedingly
probable, both from scripture, and history. Both of which agree that Ham was
the first settler of Egypt, from whence it is more than probable his
descendants penetrated into, and peopled the interior and more southern part of
(...).
But what can be the reason that the curse is only in part put in execution (in
that there are millions of Africans still at liberty, and consequently not
fulfilling the sentence passed upon them) I am totally at a loss to account
for. Besides, it appears from the bible, that Noah had been drunk but just
before he passed the sentence upon Canaan; and it does not appear to me, that a
man who had just been laying dormant the powers of reason, the greatest
blessing that God has given to man, was at that time a fit judge to pronounce
sentence upon a man who had offended him, and much less against the son who was
innocent of what the father had done.

But what does the sentence amount to? is it any temporary punishment which was
to be inflicted upon Canaan, for what his father had done? No -- it was to lay
his whole offspring under the curse of slavery, for a fault committed by his
father, of which he was innocent, and which (it is not probable) was a greater
fault than that committed by Noah himself, in getting drunk: in short, Noah
seems by the reading of the passage, to have been overruled by his passion, at
the time of his cursing his grandson; and whether or not this may be the case,
I cannot find from scripture or reason, whence he derived his authority to
curse him; or the power to give efficacy to his denunciations after they were
made. Neither does it appear to me, to correspond with divine or moral justice
or mercy, that the son should be made liable for the sins of the father; much
less, that his posterity for four thousand years, should continue slaves for
the expiation of his guilt; and add to all this, that one of the prophets has
said (and we are told that it is blasphemy to disbelieve them) no longer should
the proverb be used Ezekiel, 18, 2.
"that the fathers have eaten four grapes, and the children's teeth been set on
edge." From whence I infer that man is to be accountable for his own actions
only, and indeed the sequel of the chapter plainly demonstrates it to be so.

But supposing Noah to have been in a perfect and undisturbed state of mind at
the time of his cursing his grandson, I cannot see how that curse ought to
effect him or his posterity, and how many daily instances do we see of men
cursing their brothers, children, etc. and yet we do not see that those curses
have any effect whatsoever; except such as may be produced by the influence of
the curser among men, By allienating their affections from the cursed.
and I should rather take it for an example of the folly of such imprecations,
than any principle that ought to awe a child into an undue obedience of an
unjust and unreasonable command, of a sordid parent; and in a word, I dispute
the right of Noah or any other man that ever lived, to curse his offspring yet
unborn, thereby entailing slavery upon them. My father had no right to curse
me, and if he had done it, it would not have had any bad effect upon me: I have
no right to curse my offspring, neither had Noah, or any other man, a right
which was not also applicable to every other man.

To sum up the whole -- If Noah had a right to curse his grandson and his
posterity, it certainly admits, that every other man had a right to do the same
with respect to their grand-sons etc. and according to that doctrine, we should
soon have the whole human race cursed into slavery, for some real or supposed
misdemeanor, and none left for masters, to lord it over them. A thing, that is
inconsistent in itself, and morally impossible.

From these considerations, I am fully convinced, that the sentence passed upon
Canaan has nothing at all to do with the present state of slavery, into which
the unhappy Africans are plunged.

I shall therefore proceed to offer a few other remarks, in order to show, as
far as I am capable, the absurdity of this hateful traffic of human flesh and
blood.

CHAP III.
HAVING mentioned two principle points on which the advocates for the
slave trade place their dependence, and having offered my reasons for viewing
the subject in a different light, I shall next proceed to state a third
assertion of their's, and endeavor to confute it as well as I can both from
scripture and reason. They say that the color, hair, etc. of the Africans, is
different from that of a white man, and that these differences are sufficient
evidences that the Almighty intended them for slaves. What an absurd argument
is this! to say that he who knows no difference between man and man, should
have such a partiality for this, that, or the other color; or if he had, might
we not as reasonably expect him to be partial to the blacks as the whites; or
to the tawny colored Indian as either?

Reader, if you believe in the old or new testament, you may find many passages
in them which altogether condemn the practice of making slaves of our fellow
creatures; and that they are our fellow creatures cannot be denied; they have a
rational mind, if properly cultivated; many of them are persons of bright
talents, but for the most part, those talents are lost to mankind for want of
proper cultivation and encouragement.

Jesus Christ says, that the first, and great commandment is "thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy mind, with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength;" and that the second is like unto it, namely, "thou shall love thy
neighbor as thyself." In the first place then search the new testament, and
you will find it possitively proved, that every man breathing is our neighbor,
according to the doctrine of the aforementioned great philanthropist, who had
the most unbounded compassion for all men, and was a great lover of mercy. That
the Africans are men, I presume the most barefaced person in America, will not
pretend to deny; it therefore results, from these proofs, first, that the
Africans are men, and secondly, that all mankind are our neighbors; that the
keepers of slaves are guilty of a breach of the commandment that is the second
one in magnitude; and as long as that sin is left unrepented of, he can never
enter the kingdom of heaven (according to the Christian religion) and if it is
repented of, and the cause not removed, it is just leaving the same thing to be
repented of again at a future day. It is as if a thief having repented of his
former actions, continues the same course of life saying, that he could repent
of his future actions at a future time. This kind of conduct is holding up the
idea of keeping a running book account with the Almighty, sometimes charging,
and sometimes giving credit.
Again -- Jesus Christ says, do injustice to no man; how can a follower of his
reconcile these passages to his own conduct, in keeping his brother a slave? If
a man has wrought hard, and earned a sum of money, is it just that another
should come, and take it away from him? I presume that every man of reason will
say not; if this is not justice, neither is it just to withhold from him, that
time in which, by his industry he may acquire that money, whether it be more or
less.

Then if Jesus Christ has commanded his followers to do injustice to no man,
and on a careful examination, a man finds that he is oppressing his neighbor
(perhaps the widow, or the orphan) and consequently doing injustice to some
person, I say, how ill do that man's actions accord with the professions of his
lips, or with the amiable conduct of him whom they pretend to follow, who never
injured a man in his life, much less, enslaved him. It is further said, by the
same person (Jesus Christ) in comparing men to servants of a great man, who
went a long journey, that one of the servants got drunk and began to beat and
abuse the other servants in his lord's absence, and that he was punished
severely for it at his lord's return. From this I draw an inference, that the
Almighty is the Lord there spoken of, and that men are the servants; and that
they are to be called to account hereafter for their actions; if so, what must
be the situation of many who having enslaved their fellow servants, abuse them
without mercy? in short, their conduct is diametrically opposite to the mild
and philanthropic doctrine taught by Jesus Christ.

We come next to take a view of the manner of procuring slaves in Africa. This
is done in a variety of ways; first, two nations being at war with each other,
the poor wretches who are so unfortunate as to be taken prisoners, are sold by
the captain to the first good bidder. Secondly, I am told, that their princes
exercise a despotic sway over them, by which, they will sell hundreds annually
to all countries that want them. Thirdly, for any offense committed against
their laws, or rather barbarous and arbitrary customs, the king will sell them
which bears some affinity to the British government, sending their (pretended)
offenders to Botany-Bay; only with this difference, that the latter send them
for a certain term, whereas the former send them not only during life, but for
generations yet unborn. Fourthly, if any man owes a debt which he is unable to
pay, the creditor seizes upon the first of the debtor's family that falls in
his way; sells him, or her at the next seaport town, to the best bidder; and
thus entails slavery upon a man's posterity, on account of a trifling debt,
which perhaps a few days labor would discharge; and fifthly, the officers and
crews of ships, often kidknap the innocent creatures, particularly children, in
the woods and along the sea coast. There may be many other methods of obtaining
them, but these are the chief with which I am acquainted.

Let me ask any man of common sense or reason, if he can find the man innocent
who having been in the British or French service, and having taken a prisoner,
has sold him to an American; or would not the purchaser be equally guilty with
the seller? certainly he would, if he knew that the seller came dishonestly by
that property which he sold to him; and certainly no man can come so honestly
by another man, as to be authorized to make sale of him, as of a horse or a
cow. In the like manner let him take any of the other cases that I have
mentioned, and consider what ought to be done with the man who has been guilty
of one of these means of oppressing his neighbor. In a word, let any man of
reason or candor (I care not whether he is a religious man or not) take the
matter home to himself, and say how he would relish to have his wife and
children, or either of them, or perhaps, his brother or sister, torn away from
him and dragged to a foreign country, he knows not where, nor how to be used.
Let him contemplate the wife of his bosom, or a beloved sister, laboring in the
open field with little or no clothing to keep them decent, or guard them from
the inclemency of the weather; with an unmerciful wretch of a driver, who knows
no more of humanity than a tiger or a panther, to abuse them on every frivolous
occasion; and let him follow them from the field to the wretched hut, in which
they spend their melancholy nights; and view them with a scanty morsel of
miserable food, scarce sufficient to keep nature alive. Having brought his
imagination to this point, let him lay his hand upon his heart, and in the
presence of him who made man, say whether or not this is justice, mercy,
reason, or religion. If he cannot give it his approbation, when it applies to
himself or his connections* neither ought he when it applies to others, for
that would not be doing what he would wish to have done to himself. I am not,
as many may think I am, for setting the Africans free immediately, in that
state of ignorance and darkness in which they have been gropeing this long
time. But I shall, in the ensuing chapter, give some hints of a plan, which I
have engendered in my own mind, for setting them all free in time, and making
worthy citizens of them. Permit me reader, to ask you one question; suppose
yourself taken by any means whatever, and carried into a foreign country, and
there used as many of the Africans are here; would you hold any attempt too
hazardous to regain your liberty and return to your country and friends?
certainly not; why then condemn another man for that which in yourself you
would esteem the greatest virtue in your composition, the love of liberty? If
you do, you act contrary to that sublime and glorious principle, "do as you
would wish to be done by." A few words more, and I will close this chapter. At
the time when the American war commenced, it was declared that all men were
born, and of right ought to be free; and this principle was held up as the
creed of nine tenths of the people in America. Let him then, who fought for
liberty upon those principles, and he who has any thing to say in praise of the
glorious Fourth of July, 1776, remember that he is acting diametrically
opposite to those principles, provided he keeps either man, woman, or child in
slavery.

CHAP. IV.
IN the former part of this work, I have endeavored to convince all men of the
injustice and unreasonableness of keeping slaves. I come now to suggest a plan
for setting them free: with regard to this, people may differ greatly, it being
a matter of great magnitude; for my own part, I shall only attempt to drop a
few hints on the subject. To set all the slaves in America free at once, in
their present ignorant state of mind, would be fraught with great danger to the
community at large; and still more so to individuals. The plan therefore which
I would recommend is this; that every person having a slave, from ten years
old, and younger, or that may be born hereafter, be obliged to register the
name and also the time and place of birth of the said slave, in an office to be
kept in each district for that purpose. And let each such person be obliged
upon penalty of forfeiting the sum of -- to teach or cause to be taught, to the
said slave, the arts of reading and writing by the time he or she shall have
attained the age of fifteen years. By this means, they may be snatched from
ignorance and superstition, and the way fairly paved for making good citizens
of them when they come to be set free, which might be fixed at the age of one
or two and twenty; during which time, they ought not to be allowed to be taken
out of one state into another, least they should at last be cheated out of
their freedom. Perhaps some people may ridicule the idea of setting the
Africans free, because they are interested in keeping them slaves; but every
man who has the feeling of a man, must acknowledge, that though the keeping of
slaves has acquired the sanction of custom, yet it is unjust in the strictest
sense of the word. Hence I am inclined to hope that my proposition, after
receiving amendments, from abler pens, may meet the ideas of most people who
are generally agreed that it is not right to keep them, but disagree as to the
method of setting them at liberty. If I have offended any man, by the open
manner in which I have spoken of this infamous traffic, I would not have him
blame me for speaking my sentiments upon the subject; but rather blame himself
for his imprudence in leaving a door open to censure. Consider man (whoever
thou art, that enslavest thy fellow creature) that it would be far better for
thee to take proper measures in hand for setting him free at a convenient time,
than by tyrannizing over him all the days of his life; to make him thy enemy
and perhaps put thy life in danger from his thirst for revenge; and above all,
render thyself obnoxious to the great Creator, who is thy master. If the
Africans were free, the country would receive a great addition to its present
strength; because every one of this hardy race of people, who had by their
industry acquired a property, though ever so little, would no doubt stand in
defense of it; whereas, at present they have nothing for which it is worth
their while to venture their lives; for if a man is to be a slave all his life,
what matters it to him, whether his master is a Frenchman, an Englishman, or an
American?

Lastly; I am no Quaker, I am no Methodist (no offense I hope to any who are) I
am no discontented person, trying to disturb the public tranquillity; neither
am I a man who ever had, or who ever intends to have a slave. I am, on the
contrary, a man who would wish to maintain the Rights of Man, in the strictest
sense of the word; who would wish to preserve the public tranquillity, and
prevent it from being disturbed, while we may, least we should one day witness
such scenes as have recently been witnessed at St. Domingo, etc. I am a man who
as far as I can avoid, does nothing to any man which I would be unwilling that
man should do to me.

The late decree of the National Convention of France, freeing all their
negroes at once, is a great decree, and worthy the patriotic band who passed
it; but for want of a little education being bestowed upon them in time, I fear
they will be very disorderly during the present generation; as many people
pretend to say, that that decree was only passed upon political, and not upon
moral principles; I shall only say, that it is immeterial what was the motive,
so that it answers the grand object, that of restoring an injured people to
their long lost rights.

I shall now quit the subject altogether, well persuaded that (however it may,
or may not meet the approbation of my fellow-citizens) I have done my duty, and
hoping that this small specimen of my poor abilities may meet their serious
consideration.

A Friend to Humanity.

FINIS.

