A SERMON ON THE UNITY OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.

^. COR. 1.13. "IS CHRIST DIVIDED?"

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR WILLIAM GLENDINNING, PREACHER OF THE GOSPEL -- BY W.
W. WOODWARD, AT FRANKLIN'S HEAD, NO. 41, (...)-STREET. 1794.

A SERMON. On the Unity of the Christian Church.
1 COR. i. 13. Is Christ divided? --


PARTIES and divisions among the professors of Christianity have hurt and
wounded the cause of religion, more than ^ll the external attacks of deists and
insidels, heathens and devils. -- The Church of Christ, at this day, is
bleeding, even unto death, by the wounds she has received from this quarter.
And what renders the case of the poor afflicted Church more pitiable and
deplorable, is, that, while many are crying out against divisions and their sad
effects, few consider at whose door the divisions lie, or who the persons are,
that cause and foment them: And it often happens that the principal authors of
divisions are the loudest against them.

Bigots of all parties cry out against divisions; but their ideas are very
contracted; -- for they care not how much the body of Christ is rent, or
divided, if they can but keep one of his fingers, (...) I may be allowed the
expression, whole and entire to themselves. Thus while many lament the want of
unity, they mean unity in some favorite part only, and not in the whole. If
this part be in a thriving way, they have no concern for other parts, but
rather feel a secret satisfaction in hearing that they are crumbling to pieces,
-- and this often becomes a very agreeable topic of conversation. -- I wish
professors would impartially examine themselves, and see if they do not find
too much of this in their own breasts, notwithstanding all their pretended
desires of love and unity.

And should any man, being grieved at the distractions of Zion, and possessed
with a spirit of moderation and peace, come forward, and, with a lenient hand,
attempt to close the breaches, and heal the wounds of the bleeding Church, --
nothing can be more unpromising and unpopular. His proffered services are very
unacceptable, and he subjects himself to dreadful suspicious from every side:
-- Suspicious of his intention -- and of his leaning more to this part than to
that. Dreadful insinuations are thrown out, as if he was inimical to this part
or that, -- and grave cautions are given against paying any regard to what he
says, or even giving him a hearing: -- his doctrine is poisonous -- it savours
too much of Calvinisin, says one, -- and too much of Arminianisin, says
another: -- and, perhaps, the more effectually to counteract, and hinder the
salutary effects of the healing balm, his character is attacked, and the
soundness of his religion called greatly into question. -- And all this time
the same cry is kept up against divisions and their sad effects. -- Is not such
a conduct just as absurd, as if a man should set a house on fire, and furiously
rail against any one, that would attempt to quench it, and yet execrate, and
vehemently bawl out against all house-burners? But the truth is, that men of
this bigoted and contracted cast care not whose houses are burnt, so their own
eggs are roasted.

Contentions and divisions had grievously infested the Church at Corinth, and
St. Paul wrote this epistle to the Corinthians for the purpose of putting an
end to them. Therefore, after some introduction, he presses into the body of
his design, by addressing the Church in these pathetic words: -- How I beseech
you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the
same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment. He solemnly charges
them to cultivate a spirit of LOVE and UNITY in the Church, and to avoid all
party distinctions and party names, which are pregnant with mischief, --
naturally tending to contract the mind, stir up strife, and confine charity
within the narrow limits of a very small circle, and thus defeat and destroy
the very design of Christianity in the world. Such baleful consequences are
sure to take place, when one and auother are saying, I am of Paul, -- and I of
Apollos, -- and I of Cophas, or Peter, -- and I of Christ. -- Thus it was at
Corinth, and a partiality, in favor of this or that preacher, so much
prevailed, and gave rise to such warm contentions and bitterness, -- that, I
dare say, they might wish to have their separato assemblies, -- and that some
would not go to hear Paul, had he preached within 100 yards of their door. They
might not like his close, searching doctrine -- and to hear human nature so
degraded, and see it drawn in such black lines, as Paul was wont to do; -- nor
to ^ear so much about faith, and righteousness imputed -- and their own works
(...) from all share of merit in point of justification. These, you know, were
favorite topics with that great Apostle. -- Apelles was their man -- they
would go any distance to hear him. O, he was a sweet preacher -- his oratorial
powers were so charming, that he might be unto them as a very lovely song of
one that had a pleasant voice. -- Some would hear neither Paul or Apollos but
would turn out in all weathers, by night or by day -- be the season hot or
cold, wet or dry, to hear Peter -- they were pleased with his plain, blunt
manner of address -- and besides he seemed, at times, to countenance ceremonies
and the works of the law more than Paul did. -- Others again had no ear for any
but Paul -- for he had the character of a first-rate scholar, and a masterly
reasoner; -- they were for none of your fisherman -- they must have one brought
up at the seat of the Muses, or at the feet of some Gamaliel, or he would not
do for them. -- And there were others who were for no preacher at all, -- they
saw no necessity of going to hear any body -- they could stay at home, and say
their prayers, and do as well. I am of Christ, was their language.

Thus, or, perhaps, to the same purpose, they went on rapidly, to the great
disgrace of Christianity, the distraction of the Church, and the hurt of their
own souls. -- Against such proceedings the Apostle pungently remonstrates, as a
dangerous rook -- the bane of charity, and the ruin of the Christian Church. --
Is Christ divided? says he. This is his first argument to show the impropriety
and absurdity of church divisions. The argument stands thus -- Is Christ
divided? -- Every body will answer, no. Then the natural conclusion, from the
premises, is, Therefore, "his members should not be divided." -- Christ is the
head of the Church, and all his people are the members o^ that one head, -- the
constituent parts of Christ's body. And if there should be no schism in the
natural body -- no contention among its members, -- is it not equally unnatural
and pernicious, that there should be any schism, rent, or contention among the
members of that mystical body, the church, of which Christ is the universal
head? The Apostle makes use of the same reasoning, in the 12th chapter of this
epistle, when he reproves the Corinthiant for the divisions, which had arisen
among them, from the diversity of their spiritual gifts. "For as the body is
one," says he, "and has members; and all the members of that one body, being
many, are one body; so also is Christ."

In discoursing on the subject, I purpose,

I. To show who the members of Christ are, that constitate his body, the church.

II. Show that, in reality, there is but one church of C^^^d, in all the world,
which is commonly called the H^ly Cat^^^^^^ Church.

III. I shall apply the (...).

I. I am to show who the members of Christ are, which constitute his body, the
church. -- That all christians are members of the church of Christ, is, I
believe, a matter of no controversy at all. -- New men are called christians,
because they are the disciples of Christ, and, by a living faith, are united to
him, and have communion with him, both in his merit and spirit. This is the
case of all real christians, and in consequence of which, "they have put o^ the
old man, and are renewed in the spirit of their mind, and have (...) on the new
man, which after God is renewed in righteousness and true ho^^ne^^." -- On
else, men are called christians because they presess these things, and seen^,
by their lives, to be what they do profess, -- though they may be deslit^te of
an internal change and the vital (...) of (...) in their hearts. -- The (...)
are (...) are both just^^ied and sanctified; and these (...) the mythical body
of Christ, and are the (...), of his church, not only as visible, but (...) --
The latter, (...), and (...) must (...) of the church, as (...) by men, who
have neither authority, nor (...) to (...) the heart. -- (...) the (...)
judgment. In ju^ging of church members, the profession and life must both be
considered, because no man is to be esteemed a christian, who does not profess
all the essentials of christianity. Such as profess some parts of christianity,
and leave out, and deny other essential parts, are not, in fact professors of
Christianity, and consequently are not members of the church as visible.

But some might be willing to ask, what are the essentials of Christianity, --
and what is necessary for a man to profess, and be, in order to his being a
member of Christ's Church? -- This question may be answered in a few words. --
Every man, who so believes in God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, that his faith purifieth his heart, and works by obedient love, is a
true Christian, and consequently a member of the Church of Christ, as visible
and invisible. -- But to render this matter more plain, I shall express myself
a little more full on the essentials of Christianity and the characteristics of
church members. Every man, then, is a church member, who so believes in God, as
to take him for his Lord and God -- his Creator, Ruler and Governor, -- his
portion, his happiness and ultimate end: -- that so believes in Jesus Christ,
as to receive and rely on him, as his only Redeemer and God-man Mediator, who
has fulfilled all righteousness for us men, and for our salvation -- and was
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross -- suffering the just for the
unjust -- and made himself a sacrisice of atonement for the sins of men -- by
which obedience and suffering he has purchased pardon and grace, holiness and
heaven for poor, guilty and wretched sinners, who had incurred the displeasure
of God -- lost the divine image, and forfeited all right and title to life
eternal: -- that, having finished the work he came to do, he rose from the dead
-- ascended into heaven, where he reigns as Lord of the Church, and intercedes
with the Father in behalf of his people; -- and has given out laws, which we
must obey; -- and, at the last day, he will come again and raise the dead --
cite all mankind to the bar of his judgment seat, and will then judge the world
in righteousness, and pass sentence on Saints and sinners -- adjudging those to
everlasting life, and these to everlasting punishment. And moreover, that he
believes in, and takes the Holy Ghost for his sanctifier -- and to enlighten,
quicken and purify -- and, in a word, he believes that the Scriptures were
given by his holy inspiration -- sealed by his works and miracles -- and,
consequently, that they contain the true and faithful words of God."

What I have just now enumerated comprize the essentials of the Christian
religion, -- and whosoever professes these things, professes the essentials
of Christianity. And he that not only professes, but has also known the
transforming power of these truths his own heart, and his profession is
attended with seriousness and sobriety -- holiness of life and conversation --
a diligent use of all the means of grace, and the performance of all the known
duties of religion, -- piery toward God, and justice and mercy toward men --
and a desire to know more of God and his holy will, that his obedience may be
more perfect, and himself more dead to the world and sin -- more alive to God,
and more conformed to his holy image: -- if he lives a life of self-denial --
takes up the cross, and is daily endeavoring to crucify the flesh with its
affections and lusts: -- He, I say, that so believes, and walks, is a
Christian, both in faith and practice, -- is a living member of Christ's body
the Church, and in a state of salvation.

And he that professes all this, professes himself to be a Christian: And
though he may not have that living faith, which savingly unites him to Christ
-- purifies the heart, and constitutes an invisible member, -- yet, if his life
does not notoriousfly contradict and nullify his profession, he i^ a member of
the Church as visible, and must be received as such, by the pastors of the
Church, who are to judge only by the profession, life and conversation.

Particular modes and forms of religious worship, adopted by one or another,
enter not at all into the essentials of Christianity; nor ought these to be
made a bone of contention. If a man has faith in God, as reconciled to him
through Jesus Christ -- if he has repentance from dead works -- believes in the
Holy Ghost, and, by his sacred influence, is made a partaker of the divine
nature, and evidences the same, as expressed above, -- this man is
fundamentally right, and ought by no means to be excluded from our charity. --
In externals, let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind -- and make
prayer and supplication to God, in that way, which he finds most profitable to
himself. -- If men will not endeavor to cultivate love and unity with one
another, because one prays with a form, and another does not, -- I think there
is great reason to suppose, that their zeal savours more of the things of men,
than the things of God.

But among the members of the Catholic Church, there is a great variety, in
several respects. Some are babes, some are young men, and some are fathers.
Some are but lately converted -- others have borne the burden and heat of the
day. The former, being weak in grace and knowledge, must be fed with milk, and
taught and grounded in the first principles of the doctrines of Christ; -- the
latter, having their senses exercised by use, must be fed with stronger meat,
and carried on to maturity, or perfection. -- They differ much in their
complexion. Though all the members of the family resemble their heavenly Father
in holiness, yet, by their complexion, they may be distinguished one from
another. -- Some are meek, mild and timorous; -- others are more choleric and
sanguine. The former often complain of doubt, fear and difficulty; -- but the
latter are wont to speak in more positive strains, and appear more warm,
zealous and confident. -- They differ much as to spiritual health. Some are so
vigorous that they seem all alive in the duties of religion, and their relish
and appetite for their spiritual food, are so quick and sharp, that they go to
the several ordinances of religion and means of grace, with cheerfulness and
pleasure. Others have but weak stomachs, and are obliged to drag themselves on,
especially to secret duties, and to strive hard to get down the heavenly manna.
-- In a word, some live much in holy peace and joy, -- while others are under
frequent complaints of deadness, coldness and indisposition, though they are
truly tender and conscientious in all they do and say, and would not offend
God, on any consideration, -- while others, not a jot more conscientious, and
perhaps having a considerable share of misguided zeal, have few, or no
complaints at all.

The members also differ in this, that all are not equally useful, nor have
they all the same office. Some, like pillars in the house, are the supports of
the spiritual building, in the places where they live. Others can scarcely
stand on their own legs, or take one step further than they are supported and
guided by their brethren. Some lay out themselves in administering food and
physic, counsel and advice to the poor and weak members: while others have so
many maladies, that they trouble the family with their complaints and
grievances. -- Some are apt to teach, and are appointed pastors over the flock,
to go before them, tend them, and give their portion of food in due season --
rightly dividing the word, and sorting the provision according to the several
ages and circumstances of all under their care. Upon the whole, God has set
the members in the body, every one as it has pleased him, and in such order
and subserviency one to another, that the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have
no nood of thee, nor the head to the feet, I have no need of you. -- Having
shown who the members of Christ are, which constitute his body, the Church,
both (...) and in (...), I proceed

II. To show that the Church of Christ, in all the world, is but one, which is
commonly called the Holy Catholic Church.

This point may be proved in few words. It is strongly implied in the words of
the text, and is pretty clearly asserted in the words already quoted, from 1
Cor. xii. 12. For as the body is one and has many members, and all the members
of that one body, being many are one body; so also is Christ. -- If by the body
here is meant the Church, as it is universally understood, then it clearly
follows, that all christians, professing, believing and acting according to the
character drawn under the first head, being members of that one body, of which
Christ is the one undivided head, are all constituent parts of one and the same
church; and consequently, in the strictest sense of the word, there can be but
one church. Whether such christians live in Europe, Asia, Africa, or America,
they constitute one and the same body. They have all one God, the fountain of
their being and the source of their felicity -- one Father, who has reconciled
himself to them, by Jesus Christ, and them to him, by the renovation of their
nature, and shedding abroad his love in their heart, by the Holy Ghost. -- They
are all the children of God, by faith in Jesus Christ. They have all one
Redeemer, Savior and Mediator, who is the head sovereign and center of them
all; -- they are all built on one foundation, and Jesus Christ, the chief
conner stone, binds and connects all in one; and, by him, is the whole body
fitly joined together, and compacted. Jesus Christ is the chief corner stone
laid in Zion, on which all true believers are built up into one spiritual house
-- By his righteousness are they all freely justified -- by his obedience are
they all made righteous, and by his spirit are all governed and sanctified. --
They are actuated by the same divine Spirit, -- and by this one Spirit are all
baptized into one body, -- they all drink into one Spirit, and by that one
Spirit have all access to the Father, through Jesus Christ.

The church is one, as all the members have one and the same chief end, which
is, to glorify God and enjoy him for ever. -- They are one in affection and
desire. Sin is the object of their hatred -- the displeasure of God is the
object of their (...): while God and Christ, holiness and heaven, are the
objects of their love, hope and desire. Thus they unite, with one heart and
soul, in the same objects. -- They all li^e under the same divine government,
and are subject to the same (...) which is called the law of (...). -- the
(...) of fai^^ -- the law of Uberty -- and the law of Christ. -- They are all
in one and the same (...), are unanimous in renouncing the devil, the world and
the flesh -- in devoting themselves to God, as their Father -- to Jesus Christ,
as their Savior -- and to the Holy Ghost, as their sanctifier, -- and in
living in obedience to all the known and essential duties of the gospel. --
They love one another, and pray for the prosperity of the whole body. Their
conversation is in heaven, and the service of God is their employ. -- And, at
last, when they have finished their course, they shall obtain the same crown of
glory, join in the same general assembly and church of Christ in heaven, and
praise their common Lord and Savior, with one heart and soul and voice for
ever and ever.

Having dispatched the doctrine, I come,

III. To the

APPLICATION.
1. Under the first head, I showed what a man must profess, believe and be, in
order to constitute him a member of the christian church, as visible and
invisible. He, that denies the essentials of christianity, is not a member of
Christ's church at all. -- If he profess all the essentials of the christian
religion, and yet deny them in practice, by living in the commission of any sin
or sins forbidden thereby, -- or in the omission of any duty or duties, therein
commanded, and plainly enjoined, he can be no member of the Holy Catholic
church, because it is manifest that he is an unholy man. Such an one is not
even a visible member. And should a man profess to believe all the articles of
the christian faith, and habitually maintain an external conduct, in a good
measure conformable to his profession, though such an one must be accounted a
member of the Catholic Church as visible, yet he may be no member of the church
as real and invisible. A man may be blameless, as touching the righteousness of
the law, and externals of religion, and be no real christian, because we find
from scripture, that men may have a name, that they live, while they are dead,
and a form of godliness without the power thereof.

But such as profess and believe with that faith, which purifies the heart and
works by love, and unites to Christ mystically, and are thus made partakers of
his blood and righteousness, and the lifegiving and sanctifying virtues of the
Holy Ghost, derived from him, the head of vital influence, as the branches
derive sap from the vine; -- such are not only justified and pardoned, by faith
in the Redeemer, but are inwardly renewed in the spirit of their mind, -- are
holy in heart and life, and are therefore members of the church visible and
invisible, and in a seat of salvation.

If this state of the case be just, then, alas! how sew members, even visible,
has the church among us? -- How many profess no religion at all? And while the
generality profess to believe the essentials of christianity, at least do not
deny them, -- yet do they not live in swearing, lying, drunkenness,
uncleanness, and such like, -- or in the omission of the plain duties of
religion? -- And are there not many such among you? Let every one lay his han^l
on his breast, and say, Lord is it I? And what must be the consequence of such
a conduct? -- You profess a religion which daily and hourly condemns you; and
your profession of it will only aggravate your final condemnation at the bar of
God, and render your everlasting torment more intolerable -- a^less, according
to it, dictates, you, now, ^^pont and be converted that your sins may be
blotted out. -- O sinners, -- it will be more tolerable for Sodom than for you,
at that awful day.

But may a man not only profess, the essentials of the gospel, but sor^^ke all
known sin, and go in a round of all known duty, and yet be no more than a
visible member, and (...)? -- What then must you think of your case, O ye
profane neglecters of God, and the duties and ordinances of religion? Must not
hell and destruction be your portion, if you live and die in your present
state? -- And ought not this consideration to induce every one of us to look
inwardly to the foundation of our religion, and examine into the reality of it
and see whether it will stand the test. --

And, now, who among you are the living members of the Christian Church, and
who not? -- Push the question home, and bring the matter to some certain issue.
Be assured, this is a matter of no trifling importance.

2. I may be told, that you are members of the Old Episcopal Church, and that
you do not pretend to so much religion as other professions do. -- I tell you
there is but one Church, and the essentials of religion in doctrine and
holiness of heart and life are the same in all the members. This I have already
shown. Therefore, whatever you may say, or whatever custom may call you, while
you continue in the practice of sin, you are, in reality, no members of the
Christian Church. This Church, as you have heard, is that one body, of which
Christ is the head, and all the members thereof are holy. And though,
unfortunately, the professors of Christianity have been ranged under various
denominations, yet each of these will disown you, while you continue to act
inconsistent with the requisitions of the gospel.

Here I cannot but take notice of a very illf^^^ reduction, which is often cast
on the Old Church. To wit, That most of her members are drunkards or swearers,
^ars, gamesters, revellers, debauchees, and such like. -- Be not deceived my
friends, such are no members of any Christian Church. -- But you would say,
that you have known such admitted to the Lord's table in the old church. I
answer, that to admit such is exceeding wrong; but the Church is not the author
of the wrong. For where such are admitted, the fault lies, either with the sons
of Eli, or, which is most probable, with the very persons, who make the
objection. For had they, instead of making a schisin and salling off into a
divided party, done their duty, by admonishing the offender, and bringing
forward a proper information against corrupt members, that they might be cut
off, the ground of the objection would, probably, not have ex^^ted. (...) I
most heartily concur, with this difference only -- that, whereas he recommends
it to the Methodists in particular. I would, with equal warmth, recommend it to
(...) (...) Christians of every denomination And especially wou^d I (...) every
(...) to pay a parti^ula^ regard to what is contained in the fifth ^^rection,
which begins in page 90, and concludes in Page 1^6. Here he meet with the same
sentiment, I have just touched on, tr^ated more fully -- and wh^^h gave ^^^e to
this Note in the margin.
But you reply: -- They call themselves members of the Church. But this can no
more be helped, th^^ if they should call themselves Dukes or Lords, or any
other (...). True, in this country, the Church of England, as the Protestant
Episcopal Church was once called, was the established religion; and, perhaps,
ninety nine out of a hundred knew little of any other denomination, and in this
church their children were baptized, and, by custom, they were called
Churchmen. But the generality, when they grew up, joined themselves, in
reality, to no church at all; but followed, as they now do, the way of their
own hearts, and walked in the sight of their own eyes. And is this peculiar to
any particular denomination? Your own observation will inform you that it is
not. The truth of the case is this, that no man ever was, nor ever will be a
true member of Christ's church by natural generation; but he is made so by
spiritual regeneration, -- or being born of the Spirit of God.

3. Is it so that the church of Christ is one, and that all true Christians are
members of but one body, of which Christ is the head? What pity is it then,
that there should be so little love and forbearance among the professors of his
name, and so much animosity among his members? -- What signifies all
professions without love? -- Ah! this is right, says one, and sure I am, says
he, I love all the people of God. -- But who are they? Here is the point, O
says one, if ever I was among the people of God in my life, they are the
Baptists. And another, If ever I was among the people of God, they are the
Methodists; -- and so on. Now, if you can search to the bottom, you would find
the love of many great professors centring in this or that party, and confined
within the contracted circle of such as do as they do, say as they say, and
think as they think; and that in some particular matters very unessential, and
hardly countenanced by the word of God. Now, if you love them that love you,
what reward have you? Do not even the publicans the same? This is no proof at
all that you have any Christian love. Where there is a combination, or a
sameness in principles and practices, the worst of men, even horse-thieves, are
fond of one another. --

This is the truth says one, and I am sure, I love people of all professions,
who are Christians. -- But take care, -- don't you find it hard to think any
man a Christian, who is not of your party? -- Bigotry has a great tendency to
make men hard of belief, in this respect. And while those, possessed of it, are
blind to the failings of any of their own party, they have an eagle's eye to
discover the flaws of others, and a microscopic eye to magnify mole-hills into
mountains. -- Search and see how it stands with you, in this particular.

From bigotry and a party spirit it comes to pass, that we find some can give
no credit to the excellencies and good qualities of any, who belong not to
their own division, nor to the miscarriages of any who do. -- Tell them what a
laborious, pungent, animated, useful preacher such a man is, who belongs to a
different party; -- they don't seem to hear you, -- they receive the account
very coldly, -- and, perhaps, they will hum a tune, while you are talking, to
show they have no ear for that discourse. -- And after you have done, perhaps
the reply may be, -- But is he not a Calvinist? -- Or, "Is he not an Armenian?"
This is intended to obliterate, or, at least, to cast a cloud over all good
qualities whatever. -- And it is not unlikely, but they will hint, "That they
have heard a very different story -- and that one of their Brethren had
mentioned something -- but he did not like to say much. -- However they wish he
may be a good man -- though they fear he has got too much of the spirit of the
world." -- But if instead of good qualities, you mention some bad ones, or
relate some fault, you catch their attention at once, and are heard with a
smile of approbation. -- Pause, my brethren, and see how much of this belongs
to you. -- I sear some of you will find yourselves very far from the Catholic
love of that Christian, who, in reality, loves all the children or people of
God of every profession.

Christian love is universal. And we may pretend to Christianity as much as we
please, yet we do but deceive ourselves, if it does not open our hearts, in
love, to all professing christians as such, and all saints as saints, according
to their various degrees of amiableness. And that love and desire of unity,
which is not universal, has, in it, a strong tincture of wrath and schism. He,
that loves one party, and not the rest, falls vastly short of loving all
mankind; -- and he, that is united but to a part, must of consequence be
divided from the whole.

4. From what has been said, we may learn how much it is the duty of all
christians to promote unity among all professors in general, and in their own
neighbor hoods in particular; and to avoid all discord and divisions, and
whatever tends thereto. -- Unity, in the body of Christ, constitutes its
health, ease, quiet and prosperity. But smart, pain, inquietude and wounds, are
the native effects of impenitence; -- his bowels of compassion yearn over you:
-- he expostulates with you, and asks, why will ye die, O louse of Israel? --
He offers you pardon for all your sins, -- to help and guard you to eternal
glory; and to invest you with that inheritance, which was purchased with his
own precious blood. -- And, O will none of these things move you? -- Are you
determined like wicked Sodom, to hold on your course, and follow the way of
your own hearts? --

And is there no remedy? -- Is it in vain to speak to you -- Then let me turn
my voice to God. Lot found favor, and by his prayer saved one little city. And
who can tell, but the ears of the Lord may be open to my prayer, while I am
interceding for you. -- "And now, O thou fountain of mercy, have compassion on
this congregation, and their souls shall live. -- Open the ears and soften the
hearts of these poor obstinate sinners, with whom all our warnings and
entreaties have been in vain. -- O Lord Jesus, thou Savior of lost men, have
mercy on these souls, in the depth of their security, presumption and misery;
-- and may thy blood soften and melt their hearts. -- O thou Spirit of the
living God, apply the remedy to those, so dearly bought; bring them to a deep
sense of their danger -- seize their consciences, and with a holy

Perhaps, one will tell me, there is not a man upon earth more desirous of
peace and unity in the church, than he is. -- But upon what terms, pray? The
true answer might be, that all men should agree to his terms, and come over to
that party to which he is joined. -- Such pride and selfishness forbid all hope
of peace. The papists, no doubt, would have peace with protestants, on these
terms. Pride and selfishness are among the greatest enemies to the church's
peace. These the devil makes use of to break the unity of christians; and he
carefully watches all opportunities to throw in some bone of contention to
seatter and divide the members of Christ. He will make use of the opinions and
dispositions even of the godly to answer this diabolical purpose. Some of these
he will entangle in dangerous errors, and hereby he lays a train for blowing up
animosities and warm contentions in doctrinal points. Sometimes, by means of
rules for external government, he (...) occasion to excite passion and
prejudice, and the contention may become so sharp, that Paul and Barnabas are
separated.

But one main thing, why so many, at this day, have drank so deeply into a
divisive, party spirit, is, their being among, and so frequently conversing
with persons of a schismatic cast, who, both in private, and in public, are
still blowing the coa^^ of strife and contention. This is extremely dangerous,
especially to young persons, and such as are not well taught and grounded in
the nature and doctrines of the gospel. How many are now stiff bigots, and
furious for some divided party, in opposition to all others, who dreamed of no
such thing, when they first became intimate with their present associates. Had
they been told that such would be the effects, and that, in a little while,
they would be led to forsake, and oppose even their fathers in the gospel --
probably, they would have replied, with Hazael, Is thy servant a dog that he
should do this thing? But after hearing and seeing those men, whom they esteem
eminently pious, make it their religion and frequent practice to vilify and
traduce all others as enemies to Christ and the gospel -- and hearing their own
side extolled as mere angels, and all others represented as of suspicious
characters, or reproached and spoken against as blind, lifeless and formal --
enemies to the Church, or to them, as they generally call themselves the
church, by way of eminence and distinction; -- when they hear the principle of
one, or another loaded with hard (...) as if they were the offspring of the
devil, and such like: -- When this is the case, it is no wonder it should
^mprint a schismatical or party disposition on the minds of their hearers and
admirers. Conversing with such a party imbitters the mind, and naturally
creates uncharitableness toward all others; -- and their conscience becomes so
perverted and seared, that they can slander, revile, and throw out the most
opprobrious speeches against any that differ from them, without any sense of
guilt or shame, -- nay, they will call it faithfulness, and think they are bold
for God, while they are acting as contrary to the genius and design of the
gospel and the law of Christ, as light is to darkness. O that you, my dear
brethren, would bear with my plainness, and hear without prejudice -- for be
assured I have no end to serve, but the good of your souls, and the peace and
happiness of the Catholic church. -- Whenever you hear a man extolling his own
party -- and vilifying others, either in plain terms, or by hints and
insinuations -- mark that man, and beware -- take care how you catch that
spirit, -- for it is not the spirit of Christ, but the spirit of pride, bigotry
and selfishness -- yea, it is the spirit of him, who is the accuser of the
brethren, and the enemy of love and peace.

How much better would it be, and how much mere of the spirit of Christianity
would it manifest, if, instead of this, christians of every denomination would
be tender of the character of each other, and defend it, as long as it could be
done with honor -- and endeavor to cultivate a friendly correspondence with
each other; -- and if there is a diversity of sentiment, in some particular
articles, which are not essential, -- why should that which is not essential in
itself, be suffered to do such an essential injury, as that of tearing the body
of Christ to pieces, wounding the cause of religion -- and destroying the peace
and happiness of its professors. What if there be a diversity in some modes of
external worship, or rules of government; -- this is only the body and ought by
no means to hinder our unity and agreement in the soul of religion.

The essentials of religion, as briefly laid down under my first head, are
embraced, I believe by all persuasions -- and I should think, they constitute a
bottom broad enough, for all Christians to stand on together -- and afford a
sufficient basis, for catholic unity. -- Surely, those, who will not unite
here, must have some other ends to serve than the peace, harmony and welfare of
the Church, and the good of precious souls.

O could this blessed agreement, in the SOUL of religion once be permitted to
take place, and prevail, its happy consequences would soon be apparent.
Religion would gain credit and esteem in the earth, and force the world to say,
"See how these Christians love!" -- And it would not only gain credit, but
influence, when its genuine tendency should manifest itself, and prevail in
love and charity to all mankind. -- We should hear of no more jars and
contentions among its true professors, nor proscriptions of this or that
preacher, who has nothing worse to be laid to his charge, than that he does not
join sully to our particular party, and is not subject to our immediate
control. -- It would be sufficient for an union of hearts, if he fears God,
and orders his conversation agreeably to the rules of the gospel of God, though
he might not think proper to subject himself to every rule devised by man.

I have spoke the more freely on this subject, because it is well known, that
during the long course of my ministry, I have never sat up as a head, or
violent abettor of any party. And though I am a minister and a member of what
is called the Old Church, and such I expect to live and die, -- yet have I
strenuously endeavored to cultivate love, affection, harmony and friendship
with all -- I have vindicated the characters of all, which I believed to be
unjustly aspersed, -- and, as far as opportunity has served, I have heard all
-- preached to all, and gladly joined with all, in their places of worship, in
every ordinance of Christ. -- But I have seen so much mischief done by bigotry
and a party spirit, not only in that particular corner of the vineyard where I
have more statedly labored, but elsewhere, that I thought it incumbent on me
to show the impropriety of these things, and point out their baneful effects --
and to bear my testimony against them. And at the same time to lay down the
broad and solid basis of christian love and unity in the Soul -- the vitals and
essentials of religion, and to invite and exhort all to lay aside all their
jars, contentions, animosities and unchristian censures, and henceforth
endeavor to cultivate a friendly correspondence with all, -- and to imbibe a
spirit of love and charity -- as unbounded as the limits of the Holy Catholic
Church. That God of his infinite mercy may render what has been said effectual
to subserve the design and end intended, I beg for Christ's sake, Amen.


