A VERY SURPRISING NARRATIVE OF A YOUNG WOMAN, DISCOVERED IN A (...)-Cave;
AFTER HAVING BEEN TAKEN BY THE SAVAGE INDIANS of the Wilderness, in the Year
1777. And seeing no human being for the space of nine years.

In a Letter from a Gentleman to his Friend.

SECOND WINDSOR EDITION.

Printed by ALDEN SPOONER, at his Office, and sold Wholesale and Retail.
M.DCC.XCIV

A Surprising Narrative, etc.
SIR,
HAVING returned from the Westward -- I now sit down, agreeable to your
request, to give you an account of my journey --

TWO days after you left my house, Mr. Camber and myself, after providing
ourselves with provisions, began our journey, determining to penetrate the
Western Wilderness as far as prudence and safety would permit. We traveled for
thirteen days in a westerly direction, without meeting any thing uncommon or
worthy description, except a very great variety of birds and wild beasts, which
would frequently start before us -- and, as we had our muskets, contributed not
a little to our amusement and support. The land we found exceedingly rich and
fertile, every where well watered, and the variety of berries, nuts,
ground-nuts, etc. afforded a very comfortable living.

ON the 14th day of our travels, while we were observing a high hill, at the
foot of which, ran a beautiful stream, which passing into a small plain, after
a few windings, lost itself in a thicket -- and observing the agreeable
picturesque prospect, which presented itself on all sides, we were surprised at
the sound of a voice, which seemed at no great distance.

AT first we were uncertain whether the voice was an human one, or that of some
bird; as many extraordinary ones inhabited these wilds. After listening some
time, the voice ceased and we then determined to proceed up the hill, from
whence, we judged, the sound to come; that we might, if possible, discover what
voice it was that so much astonished us. Accordingly, crossing the brook, we
proceeded up the hill; and having arrived near the summit, we again distinctly
heard a voice singing in our own language, a mournful song. When the voice
ceased, we observed a small foot path, which we followed; and arriving at the
top of the hill, passing round a large rock, then through a thicket of bushes, at
the end of which, was a large opening: Upon our arrival here, to our
inexpressible amazement, we beheld a beautiful young Lady! sitting near the
mouth of a cave! -- She, not observing us, began again to sing. We now
attempted to approach her; when a dog, which we had not before observed, sprung
up and began to bark at us; at which she started up, and seeing us, gave a
scream and swooned away. We ran to her assistance, and having lifted her up,
she soon recovered; and looking wild at us, exclaim^^^ -- Heavens! Where am I?
-- And who, and ^^^m whence are you? -- We desired her to be under no
uneasiness -- told her we were travelers -- that we came only to view the
country; but that in all our travels, we had not met with any thing that had
surprised us so much, as her extraordinary appearance, in a place which we
imagined totally unfrequented.

AFTER a little conversation, having convinced her of our peaceable
dispositions, and that we intended her no injury, she invited us into the cave,
when she refreshed us with some ground-nuts, a kind of apples, some Indian
cake, and excellent water. -- We found her to be an agreeable, sensible Lady;
and after some conversation, we requested to know who she was, and how she came
to this place. She very readily complied with this request, and began her story
as follows: --

"STRANGERS, your appearance and conversation, entitle you to my confidence;
and, tho my story cannot be very interesting or entertaining -- yet it may
possibly excite your pity, while it gratifies your curiosity.

"I WAS born near Albany, in the year 1760* -- My father was a man of some
consequence, and of considerable estate in the place where he lived. -- I was
his only child, and had I continued with him, possibly, I might have been
happy. In the fifteenth year of my age, my father received into his family a
young Gentleman of education, as his clerk: This young man, by his easy
politeness -- his good sense, and agreeable manners, soon gained the esteem of
all the family. -- He had not been long with us, before he conceived an
unfortunate passion for me; and, as he had frequent: opportunities of
conversing with me -- his insinuating address, added to a sensible, engaging
conversation, soon found way to my heart: He quickly perceived that I was not
indifferent to him -- and took occasion to declare his passion; which he did
with so much ardour, and yet, with so much modesty, that I readily acknowledged
a mutual attachment.

AFTER this, we spent together many happy evenings, vowing mutual love, and
fondly anticipating future happiness. We were however obliged to conceal our
attachment from my father; who, as he was excessively eager in pursuit of
riches, we had no reason to suppose he would countenance our loves, or consent
to my marriage with a man destitute of fortune.

IT happened, one evening, as we were discoursing by ourselves in a little
garden, adjoining our house, that we were overheard by my father; who, either
suspected our attachment to each other, or from some other motives, had
purposely concealed himself in this place, where he knew we usually walked.
Next morning, my father, with an angry countenance, upbraided my lover with
treacherously engaging his daughter's affections -- and after calling him many
hard names, dismissed him, with peremptory order never again to enter his
house. It was in vain to remonstrate; he insisted on being obeyed -- and
ordered me to my chamber, where he confined me. My lover then wrote to my
father, stating to him our situation -- requested leave to address me, and
informed him of our mutual engagements, with the reason for not sooner
consulting him. To this, my father ordered the young Gentleman to trouble him
no further with his impertinence, nor ever to think of any further connection
with me. By means, however, of an old servant, long attached to my lover, we
found means to carry on a correspondence -- and, in about a month after, we
contrived matters, that I had an interview with my lover: I then agreed to quit
my father's house, and retire into the country, to see whether my absence would
not soften his heart -- and induce him to consent to my happiness. I therefore
packed up some clothes, and other things, and left my father's house in the
evening of the tenth of May, 1777, and retired several miles into the country,
to a little hut, where my lover left me, and went in disguise, to see what
effect my absence had upon my father. In five days he returned, and informed
me, that, my father, enraged at my elopement, had hired several men to search
the country, in pursuit of us; and that he threatened vengeance to us both --
and declared, that he would be the death of the man who carried off his
daughter. Thunderstruck at this account, I knew not what to do -- to attempt a
reconciliation with my father was vain -- or if possible to be effected, my
lover must be sacrificed to it, which would make me insupportably unhappy. In
order to elude the search of those who were in pursuit of us, we proposed to
move further into the country, and there to wait till time should calm my
father's rage, or effectually cool his resentment.

WE accordingly left the hut, and traveled at an easy rate, for four days,
determining to avoid being taken. -- But, O! how shall I relate the horrid
scene that followed? -- Toward the evening of the fourth day, we were
surrounded and made prisoners, by a party of Indians! -- who led us about two
miles, and then barbarously murdered my lover! cutting and mangling him in the
most inhuman manner! then, after tying him to a stake, they kindled a fire
round him! and, while he burnt, they ran round, singing and dancing! rejoicing
in their brutal cruelty!! I was at a few rods distance during this transaction!
and this scene had well nigh deprived me of life. I fainted away, and lay some
time motionless on the ground: -- When I recovered my senses* I perceived that
my guard had joined his companions, some of whom were seated round in rings,
and others continued singing and dancing. Seeing them all engaged, I withdrew
by degrees, into the bushes, and being out of sight, I got up and stood for
about an hour: -- I then sat down by the side of a tree, and being overcome by
fatigue, and the sight I had seen, I either fainted or fell asleep, and knew
nothing till the next morning, about seven o'clock. It Is impossible for me to
describe my feelings -- or for you to conceive a situation more wretched than
mine, at this time. -- Surrounded, as I supposed, on all sides with danger, I
knew not what to do, without a guide to direct, or friend to protect me. Often
I was upon the point of returning, and endeavoring to find, and deliver myself
a prisoner to those Indians, to whose cruelty I had so lately been a witness;
and, had I then seen them, I certainly should have delivered myself into there
power. At length I got up, and after walking some time, I resolved to seek some
place of shelter, where I might be secure from storms by day, and from beasts
by night; where I might dwell till a period should be put to my miserable
existence.

WITH this view, I wandered about for fourteen days, without knowing whither I
went. By day, the spontaneous produce of the earth supplied me with food -- by
night the ground was my couch, and the canopy of heaven my only covering. In
the afternoon of the fifteenth day I was surprised at seeing a man, of a
gigantic figure, walking toward me -- to run I knew would be vain, and no less
vain to attempt to hide. He soon came up with me, and accosted me in a language
I did not understand, and after surveying me for some time, he took me by the
hand, and led me to his cave; having entered, pointed to a stone seat on which
I sat down; he then gave me to eat some nuts and some Indian cake, after which,
he stretched himself out on a long stone, covered with skins, which he used as
a bed, and several times motioned to me to lay myself beside him. I declined
his offer, and at length he rose in a passion, and went into another apartment
of the cave, and brought forth a sword and hatchet. He then motioned to me,
that I must either accept of his bed, or expect death for my obstinacy. I still
declined his offer, and was resolved to die rather than comply with his desire.
He then brought a walnut bark, and having bound me, pointing toward the east,
intimating that he left me till morning, to consider his proposal; he then
returned to his bed, and, happily for me, he soon fell asleep. Having the
liberty of my teeth, I soon made out to bite the bark in two, with which he had
bound me, by which I found means to liberate myself while he continued
sleeping. As I considered this as the only opportunity I should have of freeing
my self from him -- as I expected that he would use violence when he waked, to
make me partake of his bed, and, as I knew I could not escape him by flight, I
did not long deliberate -- but took up the hatchet he had brought, and
summoning resolution, I, with three blows, effectually put an end to his
existence.

I THEN cut off his head, and next day, having cut him in quarters, drew him
out of the cave, about half a mile distance; when after covering him with
leaves and bushes, returned to this place. I now found myself alone, in the
possession of this cave, in which are several apartments. I here found a kind
of Indian corn, which I planted, and have yearly raised a small quantity. I
here contented myself as well as my wretched situation would permit -- here
have I existed for nine long years, in all which time this faithful Dog, which
I found in the cave, has been my only companion, and you are the only human
beings, who ever heard me tell my tale."

HERE she finished her narration, and, after shedding a plentiful shower of
tears, and a little conversation, she requested us to take rest, which request
we willingly complied with.

NEXT morning she conducted us through the cave, in which were four apartments,
one of which appeared pretty deep in the earth, in which was a spring of
excellent water -- in the other three were nothing very remarkable, except four
skulls, which we supposed were or persons murdered by the owner of the cave, or
of his former companions. We found also three hatchets, four bows, and several
arrows, one large tinder box, one sword, one old gun, and a number of skins of
dead beasts, and a few clothes. The bows, some arrows, the sword, and one
hatchet, we brought, away, which are now in my possession.

AFTER continuing in the cave five days, we proposed returning home, and
requested the Lady to accompany us. At first she refused to quit her cave; but
after some persuasion, she consented.

"GENTLEMEN, said she, I trust myself to your protection -- I have no reason to
question your good intentions, and willingly believe, from my small
acquaintance with you, that you will not seek to heap affliction upon a weak
woman, already borne down with misery and sorrow."

WE together left the cave, on the morning of the sixth day after our arrival
in it, and traveling the way we went, arrived at my house in seventeen days.
After resting about a week, we accompanied the Lady, agreeable to her desire,
to her father's house -- The old man did not at first recognize his daughter,
but being told who she was, he looked at her for some time, and them tenderly
embraced her, crying, " 0! my child, my long lost child! I do once more sold
thee in my arms!" He then fainted away. We with difficulty brought him to life;
but the scene had overcome him; he opened his eyes, and being a little
recovered, requested to know where she had lived so long, and what had happened
to her, since her leaving his house. We desired him to wait till he should be
better recovered, but he begged to be satisfied immediately, observing that he
had but a few moments to live. She then briefly related what had happened to
her, and the tragical death of her lover. -- He seemed much affected, and when
she had finished, he took her by the hand, and affectionately squeezed it,
acknowledging he had been unjustly cruel to her, and asked her forgiveness, and
attempted to say something more -- but immediately fainted; all our endeavors
to recover him were in vain, he lay about seven hours, and then expired.

HE left a handsome fortune to his daughter, who, notwithstanding his cruelty,
was deeply affected at his sudden and unexpected death. This adventure, the
most singular and extraordinary of my life, I have communicated, agreeable to
your desire, as it really happened, without addition or diminution; and am Sir,
yours, etc.

ABRAHAM PANTHER.

FINIS.

