THE Shepherd's Contemplation: OR, AN ESSAY ON WAYS AND MEANS TO PAY THE PUBLIC
DEBT, AND TO SEAT CONGRESS-MEN ON WOOL-PACKS. IN A LETTER TO GEORGE WASHINGTON,
President of the United States of North America, AND TO ALL THE OTHER GENUINE
AMERICAN PATRIOTS.

BY PASTOR AMERICANUS, A Patriot, and the Poor Man's Friend.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by W. W. WOODWARD, at Franklin's Head, No. 41,
Chesnut-street. 1794.

DEDICATION. To the MEMBERS of the PHILADELPHIA COUNTY SOCIETY for Promoting
AGRICULTURE and Domestic MANUFACTURES.
THE following Letter, drawn up with a view of making American Wool our staple
Commodity; and extend the Design of those concerned in the said Society, and in
our National Manufactory -- is earnestly Dedicated, by their sincere Friend,

Pastor Americanus.

PATRIOTS! By this short ensuing Scheme, you will perceive the subject of it,
viz. a Plan calculated to thrive, without the assistance of the peculator's
Bank, and the most effectual method of preserving the Commonalty or middling
sort of the People, and raising the Poor, which is congruous to the doctrine of
Equality.

To George Washington, AND TO ALL THE OTHER GENUINE AMERICAN PATRIOTS.
Philadelphia, March 17, 1794. GENTLEMEN,
THE reason of my presuming to address you on the subject of the culture of
Wool, is, because it is a matter on which the gradual abolition of our National
Debt depend, i. e. upon industry and population of America, as the same is held
forth in the following observations. That this is the real fact, I shall now
undertake to prove: so always, and provided, That you will patronize the
following scheme -- What say you, Gentlemen, to this matter? -- Now this great
principle of patriotism, I prove thus:

Permit me, gentlemen, in passing, just to observe, that here, and no where
else, lies all the life of our true policy -- To cloth and feed ourselves, and
our neighboring nations. I take this as a postulatum that will without
difficulty be granted.

Therefore,

Secondly, I shall, gentlemen, open myself fully on that important subject; not
for the sake of telling you a long story (which I know the genuine patriots,
are not particularly fond of) but for the sake of the weighty instruction that
I flatter myself, will necessarily result from our Shepherd's scheme. It shall
not be longer if I can help it, than so serious a matter requires. The American
Shepherd addresses us in this manner: He says, the reasons for my preferring
this Shepherd's scheme, are: First, It is because I want to see a plan for
improving the present condition of the poor white people. Next, It is because I
wish to be beneficial to my country. Thirdly, It is because I wish to throw my
mite into the best public treasury, and therein improve it.

Come -- help me raise the ever memorable Shepherd's Hall, and the profit
thereof will be commensurable to your public spirit: yes, and will be your
exceeding great reward. I labor not for myself only, but for all them that
patronize the said scheme.

He says, too, the position by me maintained is, that this scheme is more
excellent, than the Yankie's Tontine bank; which is as follows:

First, It is a scheme to increase the declining number of sheep in America,
and make wool our staple commodity.

Secondly, The short of the matter is this: Let it be supposed, that a number
of well disposed persons appropriate a small sum of money each to the culture
of wool.

Thirdly, Again, let it be supposed, that 6000 sheep may be pastured three
miles round the Shepherd's Hall. Now here arises a necessary query to those
well disposed persons, viz. What will three years produce of the said pasture
be?

That the culture of wool will produce an incredible treasury may be seen from
the English manufactures. This scheme properly executed will make the American
exports exceed her imports, which is the highest degree of our American
patriotism. Q. E. D.

Again, let it be supposed, that government will be propitious to the said
Shepherd's company, and give them a tract of land, etc. And that government
will lend them a sum of money at 4 per cent. The reason whereof is, because the
increase of the people will by industry reimburse the costs, and populate or
furnish a barren part of our land with the best sort of people. Three things
are here very remarkable: First, That the state will thereby obtain 4 per cent.
Secondly, That government will thereby obtain a number of useful people.
Thirdly, That government will thereby thus obtain the mechanic arts, and that
this plan properly executed will employ a number of emigrants, viz. Shepherds,
Ploughmen, and many other artificers, etc. in all an industrious and
independent city.

To conclude: The jealous Britons From the Maryland Journal.
NOTICE TO FARMERS. -- HARRY D. GOUGH, has a number of fine Ram Lambs, of his
broad-tailed Persian Breed. Those who wish to be supplied, must give
information, in writing, before the 20th of April next, appointing some person,
in Baltimore-Town, to recieve them, to whom they will be delivered about the
15th of September. The price, as heretofore, Twenty Dollars. Several gentlemen
were disappointed last year, by not applying in time; for, after the 20th of
April, no application can be attended to.

Perry-Hall, Feb. 26, 1793.


justly fearful lest they themselves should have lost their wool marts, made a
law, viz. -- That no English ram should be conveigled to North America; a plain
proof this, that we may make wool a staple commodity, and outvie England: just
in proportion to the differential quantity of the land in England, and the
quantity of land in the United States of America. All that I would be
understood to imply, is, that when the number of our sheep increase
proportionable to the number of our acres of land; then we shall actually and
de facto outvie England, and thereby make ourselves independent, or not depend
upon England, etc. or not depend upon manufactories. It is plain, therefore,
that our imports of woollen drapery will there by decrease, and our exportation
of woollen drapery will thereby increase.

What has been said, respective to the nature of the preceding scheme implies
its importance. But the way to facilitate it will more fully appear in
considering the formation of the articles of the company of the American
Shepherds.

N. B. Observe -- that the subscription money is not to be paid until the said
company shall be established with articles, and a power sufficient to take this
matter in hand. When once a company can be established, with a fund sufficient
to begin, there is no doubt but that it will have 6000 sheep in every county in
each state: yes, 6000 sheep in every American township.

To constitute the capital of the said company, subscriptions for shares
therein, at one Spanish dollar each, payable after the articles of the said
company are made, and when a sufficient number of persons have subscribed, they
will have the right to form the articles of the constitution of their company
of the American Shepherds.

Any person, partnership, society, church, or body politic, may subscribe for
as many shares as he, she, or they may think proper.

Books, for the purpose of subscribers entering their names, etc. will be
handed about by diverse well disposed persons.

I am, with fidelity and consideration, Gentlemen, your well disposed, and most
neglected servant, PASTOR AMERICANUS.

POSTSCRIPT;
BEING a short caution and warning to the careless inhabitants of the United
States of North America, and miscellaneous notes on the folly, shame, and
danger, of our being dependant on the British, and other foreign markets.

Note 1. Americans! This -- all this -- is pre-meditated against you, viz. War
and ruin, by the perfidious court of London. It is plain, therefore, that we
ought to prohibit her merchandise.

Note 2. Our present mercantile system is -- that we depend on the culture of
European wool; if so, then we are not yet independent! Is this common sense? Is
this a proof of our being independent? Is this the way to pay our National
debt? Is this a prudent scheme? Whoever thinks so, must be little acquainted
with independency, and domestic manufactures.

Let it be supposed, that the murrain among the European sheep, and the
pestilence, or an epidemical fever among the European people occasion the
culture and manufactures of European wool to fail; if so, then the indolent
Americans shall look to the culture of American wool, and see that they are all
naked, the rich and the poor, and are not ashamed. This being sub judice it is
only prophetic; and what is prophecy but a narrative preceding the fact.

Note 3. Being an extract of a letter from Calcutta, dated the 10th of November
1791. -- We should think that no cotton can be carried home from Bombay this
year, and even the year following. They have had about Surat and those places a
most dreadful famine, which occasioned an unheard of mortality among the
natives. When this calamity will end, is not known yet: and those of the
inhabitants who serve it, will first think of cultivating rice before they
meddle with cotton.

You cannot expect a single pound of cotton from this country; whatever
quantity we have here, will all go to China. See Claypoole's Daily Advertiser,
dated August 9, 1792.
-- I must add, that this extract is an apology for the preceding letter, and
for the miscellaneous notes added to it.

Note 4. Argument 1. It is argued, That if our American hat-makers buy
imported, foreign Wool, and that the directors of our National Manufactory give
a generous price for American Wool; then it is high time to make Wool our
staple commodity:

But the first is true; therefore also the last.

Note 5. Argument 2. If too great attention to commerce will soon introduce
idleness and luxury; and though it may enrich a few particular persons, it will
impoverish the country -- then our government will one day be a mere bankrupt.

But the first is true -- Ergo also the second will be true.

Note 6. Argument 3. By improving the productions of Nature, by manufactures,
the national riches are augmented, and it is by carrying these fruits of
industry to other nations, that a solid commerce is established in a great
empire. -- The American merchant will make his own reflections.

Note 7. This -- being the one only way to be independent of England, ought to
determine your doubts on this head. Let this then, my countrymen, call forth
your consideration. The subject is public good, and certainly merits, by its
importance, the attention of every person in woollen drapery.

Any person who may reject this scheme, is requested to produce a better. --
That I do in Truth -- what all pretend, and most men believe they do; I love my
country. -- This disposition has moved me to do, what every man ought to do, to
given attention to its interest, and to endeavor to promote its good.

P. A.


