THE JUVENILE MISCELLANY, IN PROSE and VERSE. SELECTED FROM THE WRITINGS OF
EMINENT AUTHORS.

"Delectando pariter atque docend^."

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE COMPILER, BY MORTECAI JONES, No. 3, MORAVIAN
ALLEY. M,DCC,XCV.

PREFACE.
TO inculcate the principles of virtue and morality, in the young and rising
generation, is, no doubt, an object of the greatest importance: and to effect
this purpose, is the chief inducement with the compiler of this small volume,
for intruding it on the public.

From the compilation of a youth, people arrived at maturity can expect ^^^tle
novelty or improvement; but as it ^^^obable that most of the readers, who shall
peruse this volume, will be little more advanced in life than himself, he hopes
it may contribute both to their entertainment and instruction.

Should this be the case a which from the opinion of several judicious friends,
to whom he has submitted the manuscript, it will, it may prove as an incitement
to his proceeding in some other undertaking, which, as he advances further in
life, he trusts, may prove more conducive to public utility: to promote which,
he knows to be the duty of every good citizen.

It would be ungrateful on the present occasion, to omit returning thanks, to
his many friends, who have patronized him with their subscriptions; and happy
shall he be, if upon perusal, it is found to answer their expectations.

THE JUVENILE MISCELLANY.
ON DEVOTION.
DEVOTION, considered simply in itself, is an intercourse betwixt God and us;
betwixt the Supreme, self-existent, inconceivable Spirit, which formed and
preserves the universe; and that particular spirit, with which, for awful
reasons, he has animated a portion of matter upon earth that we call man. It is
a silent act in which the soul divests itself of outward things, flies into
heaven, and pours forth all its wants, wishes, hopes, fears, guilt or
pleasures, into the bosom of an Almighty Friend. Though this devotion, in its
first stages, may be a wearisome and insipid exercise; yet this arises merely
from the depravity of nature and our passions. A little habit will overcome the
reluctance when you have fairly entered upon your journey; the ways of this
wisdom will be ways of pleasantness, and all its paths peace. True devotion,
doubtless requires a considerable degree of abstraction from the world: hence
modern christians treat it as a vision; hence many modern writers have little
of its unction; but it glows in the scriptures, it warms us in the fathers, it
burned in an Austin, and in many others of the persecuted martyrs who are now
with God. That we have little of it, is not wonderful; it makes no noise in the
circle of the learned, or of the elegant under a heap of worldly cares: we
smother the lovely infant and will not let it breathe.

Vanity, ambition, pleasure, avarice, quench the celestial fire: and these,
alas, are too much the gods of mortals ever since the world began! Writers have
been amusing us only with shadows of this piety, instead of giving us its soul
and substance. Superstition has placed it in opinion, ceremonies, austerities,
pilgrimages, persecutions, an august temple or splendid imagery, which has
little connection with sentiment or spirit. Enthusiasm has swelled with
unnatural conceptions, and obtruded a spurious offspring upon the world instead
of the engaging child of reason and truth; whilst the lukewarm and indifferent,
have rested in a few outward duties which have had no vigor: and as they spring
not from the heart, never entered the temple of the Most High.

Real piety is of a very different, and of a much more animated nature; it
looks up to God, sees, hears, and feels him in every event, in every
vicissitude, in all places, in all seasons and upon all occasions; it is theory
vivified by experience, it is faith substantiated by mental enjoyment; it is
heaven transplanted in the human bosom; it is the radiance of the Divinity,
warming and encircling man; it is a spiritual sense gratfiied by spiritual
sensations: without this, all ceremonies are inefficacious; books, prayers,
sacraments and meditations, are but a body without a soul, or a statue without
animation. That man is capable of having such an intercourse with his Maker,
there are many living witnesses to prove, without having recourse to the
visions of fanatics, or the dreams of enthusiasts. It may be proved to spring
from natural and philosophical causes; God is a spirit, so is the mind. Bodies
can have intercourse, so can souls: when minds are in an assimulating state of
purity, they are in union with their Maker. This was the bliss of Paradise; sin
interrupted, and holiness must restore it to a soul thus disposed. The Creator
communicates himself in a manner which is as insensible to the natural eye, as
the falling of the dews; but not less refreshing to its secret powers, than
that is to vegetation. The primitive saints are describing this when they speak
of their transports. David felt it when he longed for God. As the heart pants
after the waterbrooks. Paul, when he gloried in his tribulations, it was
embodied in him when he was carried up into the Third heaven and heard things
impossible to be uttered. Stephen was filled with it, when he saw the Heavens
opened, and prayed for his murderers. By it, martyrs were supported when they
were stoned and sawed asunder: and till we feel it in ourselves, we shall never
fully know how gracious the Lord is. If you can acquire this spiritual
abstraction, you will at once have made your fortune for eternity; it will be
of little moment what is your lot on earth, or what the distinguishing
vicissitudes of your life; prosperity or adversity, health or sickness, honor
or disgrace; a cottage or a crown will all be so many instruments of glory: the
whole creation will become a temple; every event and every object lead your
mind to God. And in his greatness and perfection you will insensibly lose the
littleness, the glare and tinsel of all human things. If I wish only to set off
your persons to the greatest advantage, I would recommend this true sublime
religion; it gives a pleasing serenity to the countenance, and a cheerfulness
to the spirits, beyond the reach of art or the power of affectation. It
communicates a real transport to the mind, which dissipation mimicks for a
moment, a sweetness to the disposition and luster to the manners, which all the
airs of modern politeness study but in vain.

THE CHINA-ASTER.
I PLANTED it with my own hand, said my little sister, holding up a withered
China-aster, plucked up by the roots. -- I covered it from the sun, I watered
it night and morning; and after all (wiping her eyes with the corner of her
frock) after all it is dead! -- " Alas! how many are the occurrences in life,
thought I, which resemble Mary's flower. -- Too easily believing what we wish,
we adopt some pretty trifle; and laying it as it were in our bosom, love it "as
a daughter." Fancy paints it in gay colors; increasing in beauty, we see its
little leaves expand, and trace its progress with anxious solicitude, from the
swelling bud to the full blown; and then when we fondly expect to enjoy it,
reality tells us after all it is dead! --

How often does an only son engross all the care of his parents, and wind
himself round every fiber of their hearts. To cherish the idol, is every wish
on the stretch, to indulge it are all the rarities of art and nature procured.
Sleepless nights and anxious days, are their lot: and lo! when they hope to see
the end of their labors, struck by the hand of disease, or debased by the
contaminating touch of vice, the agonizing parents find, after all, it is dead!
--

And how sanguine are the expectations of those relations and friends, who
possess a lovely girl, endowed with all the charms of beauty and goodness --
How do they exult in her very idea! -- she is the solace of their calamities,
and the staff of dependence for their declining years. -- Friendship rises in
her defense like a wall; and affection nourishes her like the mild dews of
spring -- Ah! to how little purpose! The canker-worm of love preys upon the
delicate root of this sweet sensitive, and the scorching winds of
disappointment drink up its moisture! -- It fades -- The hands of friendship
and affection are united to support it in vain: for The deep drawn often repeated
sigh
Has caused health's blushes to decay;
The tear that moist'ned beauty's eye,
Has worn its luster quite away.


It languishes and dies -- and regret bitterly weeping, raves round the lovely
fallen, and exclaims after all, it is dead! -- * * * etc.

ON THE RIGHT EMPLOYMENT OF TIME.
TIME is precious, but its value is unknown to us. We shall attain this
knowledge when we can no longer profit by it. Our friends ^^quire it of us, as
if it was nothing; and we give it to them in the same manner. It is often a
burth^ (...) us: we know not what to do with it, and are embarrassed about it.
The day will arrive, when a quarter of an hour will appear more desirable than
all the riches in the universe. God who is liberal and generous in all his
other gifts, teaches us by the wise economy of his providence, how circumspect
we ought to be in the right management of our time; for he never gives us two
moments together, he gives only the second as he takes away the first, and
keeps the third in his hands, leaving us in an absolute uncertainty whether it
shall ever be ours or not.

Time is given us that we may take care of eternity; and -- eternity will not
be too long to regret the loss of our time if we have misspent it.

ADDRESS TO YOUNG WOMEN
MY Daughter give me thy heart. Thy supreme affection none on earth can
deserve; human seize are all defective; human regards are often
insincere. Put not your trust in the son of man; he may deceive, or he may
change, or he may not be able to protect you: but of this kind you have nothing
to fear from your Creator.

Every thing in nature is subject to vicissitude; and -- nothing is more usual
than for men to adopt a different deportment, as their circumstances or
interests, their opinions or humors, vary. There is but one immutable friend
that sticks closer than a brother a lover or a parent. He is the same
yesterday, to day and forever. He will never leave you; he will never forsake
you; he has engaged himself by his promise; and he is not a man that he should
repent.

And now suppose that a woman possessed with a belief of the highest
excellence, is disappointed in her prospects of an agreeable union with one of
our sex: she turns her thoughts to heaven. She contemplates truth and
rectitude, wisdom and goodness, power, mercy and faithfulness in their source.
she considers them as all -- working together for her good; she sees them
shining through the cloud of disappointment; from this cloud she hears, as it
were, her Maker thus addressing her, " My daughter, give me thy heart; throw
thyself, my child, on my friendship. She is not disobedient to the heavenly
call. -- She prostrates herself in the presence of the Most High. To him she
devotes that heart which he formed; to him she pours it out with freedom.

ON RETIREMENT.
FEW will be found to display prudence or consistency of conduct, who do not
sometimes step asid^ from the tumult of the throng, to consider coolly their
circumstances and situations. Life cannot proceed fortuitously, without
incurring momentary danger. Plans of conduct must be formed, precautions taken,
errors retrieved, and probabilities of futurity considered: but all this
requires thought, and thought retirement.

It will conduce in a particular manner to the peace of all persons who
superintend large families, if they habituate themselves to disregard those
calumnies, which will certainly be poured upon them; though they should not
merit ill treatment. Their hearts, will indeed be often wrung with grief, if
they are sensible of every ill-natured whisper, which makes its way, like the
worm in the earth, and may at last, corrode the worthiest bosom, if the
breast plate of reason is not previously applied.

What have we to do, but to perform our duty, and leave the event to
Providence. Religion is the only safe refuge of a heart laboring under heavy
calamities. Religion makes the most truly serene and cheerful countenances.

THERE is no terrestrial good that can yield that substantial happiness which
is suited to the natures and desires of the human mind; and he who thinks to
find it in any thing beneath the sun, is surprising a phantom that will elude
his chase; and if it seem to loiter for his approach, it will only be to
convince him of his folly; to show him a mistake that he never saw, and of
which thousands never thought till their race terminated in that country, from
whence none ever returned to own their error, or confess their shame.

POOR JOSEPH.
A POOR half-witted man, named Joseph, whose employ was to go on errands, and
carry parcels, passing through London streets one day, heard psalm-singing in a
place of worship; he went into it, having a large parcel of yarn hanging over
his shoulders: it was Dr. Calamy's meeting house, St. Mary's, Aldermanbury. A
very well dressed audience surrounded the Doctor. He read the text in 1st Tim.
I. 15. "This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief." From this he
preached in the clearest and simplest manner, the ancient apostolic gospel, the
contents of this faithful saying, viz. that there is salvation for the vilest
sinners, solely through the worthiness of Jesus Christ, the God who made all
things. "Not many rich, not many noble, are called by this doctrine (says the
apostle) but God has chosen the weak things of this world to confound the
things that are mighty." While the elegant assembly listlessly heard this
doctrine, and if they were struck with any thing at all, it was only with some
brilliant expression or well turned period that dropped from the Doctor.
Joseph, in rags, gazing with astonishment, never took his eyes from the
preacher, but drank in with eagerness all he said: and trudging homeward, was
heard thus muttering to himself; "Jesus Christ, the God who made all things,
came into the world to save sinners, like Joseph; and this is true; and it is a
"faithful saying." Not long after this, Joseph was seized with a fever and was
dangerously ill. As he tossed upon his bed, his constant language was, "Joseph
is the chief of sinners; but Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners,
and Joseph loves him for this." His neighbors who came to see (...) wondered at
hearing him always dwelling on this. Some of the religious sort addressed him
in the following manner: -- But what say you of your own heart, Joseph? is
there no token for good about it? no saying change there? Have you closed with
Christ, by acting faith upon him? "Ah! no (says he) Joseph can act nothing;
Joseph has nothing to say for himself, but just that he is chief of sinners;
yet seeing it is a faithful saying, that Jesus, he who made all things, came
into the world to save sinners, why may not Joseph, after all, be saved?" One
man finding out where he heard this doctrine, on which he dwelt so uniformly,
and with such delight, went and asked Doctor Calamy to come and visit him. He
came; but Joseph was now very weak, and had not spoken for some time, and
though told of the Doctor's arrival, he took no notice of him; but when the
Doctor began to speak to to him, as soon as he heard the sound of his voice, he
instantly sprang up on his elbows, and seizing him by the hands, exclaimed as
loud as he could, with his now feeble and trembling voice, "O Sir, you are the
friend of the Lord Jesus, who I heard speak so well of him, and whom I love for
what you said of him. Joseph is the chief of sinners; but it is a faithful
saying, that Jesus Christ, the God who made all things, came into the world to
save sinners, and why not Joseph? O pray to that Jesus for me, pray that he may
save me: tell him that Joseph thinks he loves him, for coming into the world to
save such sinners as Joseph." The Doctor prayed. When he concluded, Joseph
thank him more kindly: he then put his hand under the pillow and took out an
old rag, in which were tied up five guineas; and putting it into the Doctor's
hand, (which he had kept all (...) time close in his) he thus addressed him,
"Jose^^ ^^n his folly, had laid up this to keep him in hi^^^d age: but Joseph
will never see old age; take it, and divide it amongst the poor friends of the
Lord Jesus, and tell them that Joseph gave it them for his sake who came into
the world to save sinners, "of whom he is chief." So saying, he reclined his
head. His exertions in talking, had been too much for him, so that he instantly
expired.

Doctor Calamy left this scene, but not without shedding tears over Joseph; and
used to tell this little story with much feeling; and as one of the most
affecting occurrences he ever met with.

ON THE RIGHT USE OF TIME.
LOOK on every day as a blank sheet of paper, put into your hands to be filled
up: remember the characters will remain to endless ages; and can never be
expunged; be careful, therefore, not to write any thing but what you may read
with pleasure a thousand years hence.

ON HAPPINESS.
TRUE happiness is of a retired nature, and an enemy to pomp and noise: it
arises in the first place from the enjoyment of ones self; and in the next from
the friendship and conversation of a sew select companions.

THE joys of dissipa^^^ (...) like gaudy colors, which for a moment attract the
sight, but soon fatigue and oppress it; while the satisfactions of home
resemble the green robe of nature, on which the eye loves to rest, and to which
it always returns with a sensation of delight.

PALEMON AND THIRSIS.
THE shades of the evening had begun to spread their dimming gloom over the
plains, when Palemon, who, with his son Thirsis, had just folded their flock,
slowly returning to their peaceful dwelling. Palemon had long been an
inhabitant of these uplands. His head was silvered over with age. Thirsis had
just reached that ascending period of life which verges on manhood. A lively
filial respect was implanted in his breast toward the venerable author of his
being. He looked up to him, not only for support, but for that advice, by which
he was to guide his steps through the thorny roads of life. Every admonition
that fell from his father's lips, he treasured up in his mind, and noted every
precept on the tablet of his heart.

Slowly returned they toward their home; for time had now abated the vigor of
the parent. "Behold, my son," cried the hoary-headed sage, as they moved on,
side by side, "Behold how every appearance marks the approach of winter! The
grove is no longer rendered vocal by the sweet choirsters that lately tuned,
among its branches, their sweetest lay. The scene around us yields not its
wonted pleasure. Its beauty fades apace. All nature seems to (...) as if
apprehensive of those dreary clouds wh^^ (...) will overcast you azure sky.

"How cheer^^^ (...) was that very scene, which is now enw^^^ (...) dejecting
gloom! Ripening crops of grain then waved to the gentle breeze; a breeze
fraught with refreshing fragrance from yonder balmy meads aside fruitful
plains, now, alas! stripped of their flowery vestment, and, with it, of their
enlivening odours.

"Then, as we early sought the fold, while yet Aurora lighted up the dawn, or
when, at our return, the evening resumed her gentle reign, soothed by the
nightingale's melodious notes, we tasted all the sweets by bounteous nature
spread. But now, which ever way we turn, the fading prospect sickens to our
view. The wood-land's variegated dies, drooping, proclaim in often repeated
sighs, the summer's last farewell. No more, ye fields, the flowrets deck your
glades; no more the trees their verdant foliage wave; no more the warblers
cheer the listening swain. Stern winter's chill approach has changed the scene.

"But why, my son, do we lament these transient pleasures flown? Spring shall
return and deck again the ravaged plain; and nature lose again her wintry form,
though not perhaps for me. -- My summer too is closed. But the bright cherub
Hope, presents a prospect far beyond the skies, where happier fields enjoy a
cloudless day, and groves immortal wear unfading bloom.

"Let, Thirsis, this clear ray of hope, beam ever in thy breast. Thou then wilt
not regret the fading beauties of the transient spring, nor heed the terrors of
the northern blast. A few revolving suns may bring the change w^^^ lands me on
that peaceful shore, where wi^^ (...) ^^ns shall never disturb the scene; but
w^^^ ^^^rlasting spring shall reign. This has (...) ^^^solation through life's
unvarying round (...) ^hirsis, be it thine."

Thus, as they walked, ^^^efluously flowed the admonitions of the hoary sage.
Nor were they lost, they were treasured up in the mind of Thirsis. -- When his
venerable parent slept underneath the grassy sod, he became as Palemon had
been, esteemed by all the country round, for the simplicity of his manners, and
the rectitude of his conduct.

SENSIBILITY.
AND is it true, then, that the cold and unfeeling are the happiest of mankind?
Are the finely feeeling soul -- the susceptible heart -- the qui^^ perception
of another's woes -- the sources of mi^^ry only? Are the noblest gifts of
Heaven, bestowon Heaven's creatures only for their torment?

Impious and ridiculous conclusion! Rather let afflicted sensibility believe,
that there are (at least hereafter) peculiar blessings reserved for those,

"Who feel for all the woes of all mankind;" and that the sigh, the tear, the
pang of sympathy, are treasured up in Heaven, as the price of joys ineffable,
of which, in the end, they shall not be disappointed.

Yes! these feelings shall be treasured up in Heaven; and on the day of final
reckoning, when mortal frailties shall meet the all-piercing eye of Judicial
Perfection, then, with cherubic tongues, they shall plead the cause of those,
whose bosoms, while on earth, they refined, elevated and rendered fit for the
transports of this happier region. There shall sympathy produce no sensations
but those of delight; and the degrees of happiness be determined by those of
sensibility.

Nay, even i^ (...) there are tender luxuries of soul, (...) with the pangs of
too susceptible virtue, (...) ^^se who have truly felt, would not exchange
(...) ^he insipid enjoyments of sordid indifference, (...) the frantic excesses
of the selfish voluptuary.

COMMON PURSUITS.
SO much have our common pursuits, which we plead as the means of supporting
life, diverted men from the true ends for which they were sent into the world,
that the judicious and pious, in all ages, since the time of Solomon, have
readily subscribed to his opinion, that all of them are indeed "vanity and
vexation of spirit." For we find that there are some who spend their whole time
in grammar and rhetoric, or in learning to speak well, without allowing
themselves any leisure to study the more important concerns of living well.

Others there are, who are so busy in finding out the riddles of a logical
sphinx, that they examine all the trifles and impertinencies of reason, to find
out what reason is, and in the search thereof, oftentimes lose themselves and
their reason too.

There are many, who, by arithmetic, learn to divide every thing into the most
minute fractions, and yet do not know how to divide a halfpenny with a poor
afflicted brother in the way of charity.

Many there are, who by the help of geometry, can set limits to grounds and
separate them from one another; can measure cities and countries, and yet
cannot attain to any rule whereby they are enabled to measure themselves.

The musician can bri^^ ^^^ferent voices and tones into one harmony, yet a^^^
while may have nothing that is harmonious in his own mind; nothing, which, by
reason of its perturbation, does not run counter to all musical measures.

The astronomer, whilst with fixed eyes he looks up to heaven, and attentively
views the motion of the stars, very frequently stumbles into the next ditch;
and while he is foretelling things to come, loses those that are present; for
though with fixed eyes he looks up to heaven, his mind is too much defiled with
the mire of this world, to think of a better.

The philosopher disputes gravely and accurately of the nature of things, and
yet, perhaps is no wiser than a real child, as to the nature of himself, and
the things of heaven.

The physician takes care of the health of others, but as to the knowledge of
the diseases of his own mind, may be as blind as a beetle; he diligently
watches the variations of his patient's pulse, but how to cure the evil
dispositions, and wrong tempers, in himself, he knows nor cares but little
about them.

The historian has the Theban and Trojan wars at his fingers ends, but is
almost wholly ignorant of a much higher concern, the proper knowledge of
himself.

The lawyer, though he has spent whole years in the construction and exposition
of human laws, for the government of others, is too often but little acquainted
with the divine law which te^^nes and enjoins a strict government over his own
actions.

The theologist earnestly contends for, and disputes about faith, but too
seldom thinks about charity; he speaks much of (...) but to help his neighbor
in time of need, h^^ too little concern.

The merchant is very solicitous of gain from every port to which he can extend
his trade, or in which he can obtain credit -- yet seldom troubles his head in
establishing a correspondence with that happy country, which offers the richest
merchandise -- that neither moth can corrupt, nor thieves have power to steal.

The farmer, though daily exercised with much toil and fatigue, in breaking up
and improving the most stubborn and rugged soils, with a view to a beneficial
crop, yet how does he neglect, year after year, to break up and improve the
barren soil of his own heart, which, without equal care and cultivation, will
never produce that crop of good works, which makes truly rich, and adds no
sorrow.

Arts and sciences do indeed weary the minds of men with continual labor, but
yield them no true felicity.

It is religion, only, can regulate the heart -- it causes it to melt in
sympathy with distress, or to glow with pleasure at the happiness of another --
it is that alone can harmonize the mind, "Attuning all its passions into peace."

The astronomer, if enlightened by it, must contemplate, with wonder and
admiration, those luminaries which his eye so often gazes on with pleasure. The
philosopher too, when the wonders of nature are opened to his view, with what
doration and gratitude must he look up to that great source from whence they
flow! And in all professions, how (...) ^^rfect is man! unless illumined by the
bright (...) of religion, which, like the glorious luminary, the sun, will
enlighten all our paths.

LET us study to join all the parts of virtue in proper union, to be constantly
and uniformly good, just, and upright, as well as pitiful and courteous; pious
as well at sympathising. Let us pray to him who made the heart, that he would
fill it with all proper dispositions; rectify all its errors; and render (...)
the happy abode of personal integrity and social tenderness, of purity,
benevolence, and devo^^^.

CANUTE.
THERE is a remarkable passage in the life of Canute, king of England,
containing instructions both to prince and people. His courtiers, (ever too
prone to magnify and flatter those whom they think to please by so doing) would
frequently extol his power and wealth, and pretend sometimes almost to adore
his person. Canute was a man of too good understanding not to see the folly of
such flattery, and of the persons from whom it came; but for their effectual
conviction, and to show the small power of kings, he caused his royal seat to
be placed on the seashore, while the tide was coming in; then, in the midst
of his flattering nobles and great lords, whom he caused to assemble together
for that purpose; arrayed in robes of gold with his crown on his head, and all
the state and royalty he could command, he thus addressed the sea. "Thou sea,
belongest to me, and the land whereon I sit is mine, nor has any one
unpunished resisted my commands; (...) ^arge thee, therefore, come no farther
upon th^^ and, neither presume to wet the feet of thy sovereign lord." But the
sea came rolling on, and, without reverence, wet and dashed the king. Then
rising from his seat, and looking round him, he desired all present to behold
the weakness of human power, and that none truly deserved the name of king, but
him whose eternal laws both heaven, earth and seas obey. From that time he
never wore a crown, esteeming earthly royalty nothing else than poor
contemptible vanity.

NOURISH in your bosoms humility and goodnature; these will teach you to make
the best of your lot, whatever it be, and give a relish to every enjoyment. All
is serene where they reside. Humility by arrogating nothing to herself, remains
unhurt at the supercilious scorn of ignorance or pride; and good nature, by
casting a veil over the foibles of others, presents to our view the best side
of this motley scene.

IF you have really made any advancement in mental improvement, it will
invigorate the powers of the soul, and inspire her with that magnanimity which
is certainly necessary to the happiness of a being, who is every moment exposed
to sorrow and disappointment. Value not yourselves on any refinements that are
short of this effect.

POLITENESS is that amiable disposition, which delight in the happiness of
others, consults their ease, prevents their wants, and yields them every
possible convenience. This is the source of those civilities and attentions,
which distinguish a well-bred person: without it etiquette dwindles into
unmeaning ceremony.

NOTHING so highly elevates and adorns the human character, as a steady
rational piety; nor is any thing capable of yielding so pure and exalted a
happiness to the soul, as a habit of devotion. No one who has experienced the
vicissitude of sublunary things, but must highly value the privilege of
possessing a friend, ever ready to hear the complaints of affliction, and the
power to relieve them.

THERE are pleasures to be met with in this journey of life; pure and sublime
ones too, if we look for them through the medium of unvitiated taste. -- Did
you ever discharge a social duty, but upon looking into the heart, you there
perceived a glow of satisfaction? -- But if you aim at more exalted, more
rapturous sensations, give full scope to the impulses of benevolence: try what
it is to heal the brokenhearted; diffuse joy through the mansions of sorrow,
and rescue merit from the pressure of indigence and misfortune. -- These
employments are capable of yielding pleasures suitable to the most exalted
capacities, boundless as the most sanguine imagination can paint them.

NOR is it from the relative duties alone we can derive happiness: the amusing,
interesting Book of Nature is open to all who can read it: here you meet with
eternal variety, order and beauty; a thousand charms await the mind which
possesses a taste for simple pleasures; to such the whole creation is a
boundless source of rational amusement. Happy, ineffably happy, they who can be
pleased with artless nature, and contemplate with delight, the noble imagery
with which she abounds.

THAT kindness which flows from the heart, is like a clear stream, that pours
its full and rapid current cheerfully along, for ever unobstructed in its
course; while those acts of benificence, which are performed with reluctance,
resemble shallow waters supplied by a muddy fountain, retarded in their noisy
progress by every pebble, dried by heat, and frozen by cold.

IN the country, the mind borrows virtue from the scene. When we tread the
lofty mountain, when the ample lake spreads its broad expanse of waters to our
view, when we listen to the fall of the torrent, the awed and astonished mind
is raised above the temptations of guilt; and when we wander amid the softer
scenes of Nature, the charms of the landscape, the song of the birds, the
mildness of the breeze, and the murmurs of the stream, soothe the passions into
peace, excite the most gentle emotions, and have power to cure all sadness but
despair! -- "Can man forbear to smile with Nature? Can the stormy passions in
his bosom roll, while every gale is peace, and every grove is melody?

THE occasional acts of benificence which proceed either from ostentation or
fear, resemble those scanty spots of verdure to which a sudden shower will
sometimes give birth in a flinty and sterile soil; while pure genuine
philantrophy flows like those unseen dews which are only marked in their benign
effects spreading new charms over creation.

FONDNESS for children, even in one not a parent, is an affection very natural
to a tender heart; for what is more interesting than the innocence, the
helplessness, the endearing simplicity of childhood?

IN the enjoyment of the beauties of Nature, the charms of friendship, and the
delightful intercourse of elegant and cultivated minds, the stream of time
flows not like the turbulent torrent which rushes in unequal cadence, as
impelled by the tempestuous winds, nor like the sluggish pool, whose waters
rest in dull stagnation: it glides cheerfully along, like the clear rivulet in
the valley, whose surface is unruffled by the blast of the mountains, and whose
basin reflects the verdant landscape through which it passes.

AVARICE is a passion as despicable as it is hateful. It chooses the most
insidious means for the attainment of its ends: it dares not pursue its objects
with the bold impetuosity of the soaring eagle, but skims the ground in narrow
circles like the swallow.

THE middle station of life appears to be that temperate region, in which the
mind, neither enervated by too full a ray of prosperity, nor chilled and
debased by the freezing blast of penury, is in the sitution most favorable for
every great and generous exertion.

In a mind where the principles of religion and integrity are firmly
established, sensibility is not merely the ally of weakness, or the slave of
guilt, but serves to give a stronger impulse to virtue.

VIRTUE is the only true support of pleasure; which when disjointed from it, is
like a plant when its fibers are cut, which may still look gay and lovely for a
while, but soon decays and perishes.

Live well, and then how soon soever thou die,

Thou art of age to claim eternity.

THE real motives which influence men of the world, can be as little kno^ from
their actions, as the original hue of some muddy substance, which, by chemical
operations has been made to assume a a tint of the parest colors.

THE human heart revolts against oppression, and is soothed by gentleness, as
the wave of the ocean rises in proportion to the violence of the winds, and
sinks with the breeze into mildness and serenity.

THE effusions of gaiety which are so exhilarating to a mind at ease, come to
an aching breast as a ray of the sun falls upon ice, too deep to be penetrated
by its influence.

Sensibility, when genuine and pure, has a strong connection with peity. --
That warmth of affection, and tenderness of heart which lead men to feel for
their brethren, and to enter into their joys and sorrows, should naturally
dispose them to melt at the remembrance of the divine goodness; to glow with
admiration at the divine Majesty; to send up the voice of praise and adoration
to that Supreme Being who makes his creatures happy. He who pretends to great
sensibility toward men, and yet has no feeling for the high objects of
religion, no heart to admire and adore the great father of the universe, has
reason to distrust the truth and delicacy of his Sensibility.

LET us study ^o join all the ^arts of virtue in proper union to be
consistantly and uniformly good; just and upright, as well as pitiful, and
courteous; pious as well as sympathising.

Let us pray to him who made the heart, that he would fill it with all proper
dispositions; rectify all its errors, and render it the happy abode of personal
integrity and social tenderness, of purity, benevolence and devotion.

TIME, when yet before us, seems to advance with slow and tardy steps, no
sooner is it past, than we discern its wings.

FORTITUDE without wisdom is rashness: Wisdom without justice is craft; and
justice without mercy is cruelty.

IT IS safer to fall a prey to ravens than railers; for ravens will eat none but
the dead; whereas these will devour a man while he is alive.

THE hour is hasting, in which, whatever praise or censure I have acquired will
be remembered with equal indifference. -- Time, who is impatient to date my
last paper, will shortly moulder the hand that is now writing, in the dust, and
still the breast that now throbs at the reflection; but let not this be read as
something that relates only to another; for a few years only can divide the eye
that is now reading from the hand that has written.

To know that there is nothing more deceitful than our own hearts, is an
important acquisition in the science of morality; to know, that the best heart
by its own delusions may be rendered the seat of misery; is the strongest
argument that can be adduced in favor of self-government; the encouragement of
mental rectitude and subjection of the passions.

THAT man is truly virtuous who is neither proud in good fortune, nor abject in
bad; who desires nothing but heaven, and fears nothing but the loss of it; who
is severe to himself, and easy to his neighbors; who speaks well of all but
himself, and never pardons his own defects, nor censures those of his brethren.
In a word, to do good, and fly from evil, is the sum of our duty -- this is
virtue in short hand; Perfection in Epitome; and Heaven in Reversion.

The following extraordinary affair happened at Lisbon.
A POOR widow came several times into the antichamber of the court, and though
frequently ordered to retire, constantly returned the next day, saying, she
must speak to the King. At length it happened, that seeing his majesty pass by,
she immediately advanced toward him, presented him with a casket, and spoke to
him as follows: "Sire, behold what I have discovered among the rubbish of some
of the buildings ruined by the great earthquake in 17 (...) am a poor widow,
and have six children. That casket would relieve me from my present distresses,
but I prefer my honor with a good conscience, to all the treasures in the
world. I deliver this to your majesty as the most proper person, to restore it
to its lawful possessor, and to reward me for the discovery." The king
immediately ordered the casket to be opened, and was struck with the beauty of
the jewels which it contained; after which speaking highly in praise of the
widow's honesty and disinterestedness, he assured her of his protection, and
immediately ordered he twenty thousand Paistres (3 s. 7 d. each.) His majesty
further ordered that proper enquiry should be made after the real proprietor;
and that if it should prove fruitless, the jewels should be sold, and the
produce appropriated to the use of the widow and her children.

AS the stone which rolls down the declivity acquires greater force and
velocity the nearer it approaches the vale, so the mind which once deviates
from the paths of rectitude, finks, by rapid degrees from dissipation to error,
from error to vice, and at length perpetrates, without remorse, crimes which it
once shuddered at the idea of.

VIRTUE MAN'S TRUEST INTEREST.
I FIND myself existing upon a little spot, surrounded every way by an immense
unknown expansion. -- Where am I? What sort of place do I inhabit? Is it
exactly accommodated in every instance to my ^^nvenience? Is there no excess of
cold, none of heat to offend me? Am I never annoyed by animals, either of my
own kind, or a different? Is every thing subservient to me, as though I had
ordered every thing myself? -- No -- nothing like it -- the farthest from it
possible. -- The world appears then, not originally made for the private
convenience of me alone? -- It does not. -- But is it not possible so to
accommodate it, by my own particular industry? If to accommodate man and beast,
heaven and earth, if this be beyond me, it is not possible. -- What consequence
then follows? or can there be any other than this -- If I seek an interest of
my own detatched from that of others, I seek an interest which is chimerical,
and can never have existence.

How then must I determine? have I no interest at all? -- If I have not, I am a
fool for staying here: it is a smoky house, and the sooner out of it the
better. -- But why no interest? Can I be contented with none but one separate
and detached! Is a social interest, joined with others, such an absurdity as
not to be admitted? -- The be, the bever, and the tribes of herding animals,
are enough to convince me that the thing is at least somewhere possible. How,
then, am I assured that it is not equally true of man? -- Admit it; and what
follows? If so, then honor and justice are my interest; then the whole train
of moral virtues are my interest; without some portion of which, not even
thieves can maintain society.

But, farther still -- I stop not here -- I pursue this social interest, as far
as I can trace my several relations. I pass from my own stock, my own
neighborhood, my own nation, to the whole race of mankind, as dispersed
throughout the earth. -- Am I not related to them all, by the mutual aids of
commerce, by the general intercourse of arts and letters, by that common,
nature of which we all participate?

Again -- I must have food and clothing. -- Without a proper genial warmth, I
instantly perish. -- Am I not related, in this view, to the very earth itself?
to the distant sun, from whose beams I derive vigor? to that stupendous course
and order of the infinite host of heaven, by which the times and seasons ever
uniformly pass on? Were this order once confounded, I could not probably
survive a moment; so absolutely do I depend on this common general welfare. --
What, then, have I to do, but to enlarge virtue into piety! Not only honor and
justice, and what I owe to man, is my interest; but gratitude also
acquiescence, resignation, adoration, and all I owe to this great polity, and
its greater Governor our common parent.

THE HERMIT: -- A FABLE.
A CERTAIN Hermit had scooped his cave near the summit of a lofty mountain,
from whence he had an opportunity of surveying a large extent both of sea and
land. He sat one evening contemplating with pleasure on the various objects
that lay diffused before him. The woods were dressed in the brightest verdure;
the thickets adorned with the gayest blossoms. The birds caroled beneath the
branches; the lambs frolicked around the meads; the peasant wistled beside his
team; and the ships driven by gentle gales, were returning safely into their
proper harbors. In short the arrival of spring had doubly enlivened the whole
scene before his eye; and every object yielded a display either of beauty or of
happiness.

On a sudden arose a violent storm. The winds mustered all their fury, and
whole forests of oak lay scattered on the ground. Darkness instantly succeeded;
hailstones and rain were poured forth in cataracts, and lightning and thunder
added horror to the gloom.

And now the sea, piled up in mountains, bore aloft the largest vessels, while
the horrid uproar of its waves drowned the shrieks of the wretched mariners.
When the whole tempest had exhausted its fury, it was instantly followed by the
shock of an earthquake.

The poor inhabitants of a neighboring village floked in crowds to our
Hermit's cave; religiously hoping, that his well-known sanctity would protect
them in their distress. They were however, not a little surprised at the
profound tranquillity that appeared in his countenance. "My friends," said he,
"be not dismayed. Terrible to me as well as to you, would have been the war of
elements we have just beheld; but that I have meditated with so much attention
on the various works of Providence, as to be persuaded that his goodness is
equal to his power.

MORAL.
The goodness of Providence apparent in his works, is a proper motive for our
tranquillity amidst every exertion of his power.

THE TWO SPRINGS: -- A FABLE.
TWO springs that issued from the same mountain, began their course together:
one of them took her way in a silent gentle stream, while the other rushed
along with a sounding and rapid current. Sister, said the latter, at the rate
you move, you will probably be dried up before you advance much further:
whereas, for myself, I will venture a wager, that within two or three hundred
furlongs I shall become navigable, and after distributing commerce and wealth
wherever I flow, I shall majestically proceed to pay my tribute to the ocean:
so farewell dear sister, and patiently submit to your fate. Her sister made no
reply; but calmly descended to the meadows below, increased her stream by
numberless little rills, which she collected in her progress, till at length
she was enabled to raise into a considerable river: whilst the proud stream
that had the vanity to depend solely upon her own sufficiency, continued a
shallow brook, and was glad at last to be helped forward, by throwing herself
into the arms of her despised sister.

MORAL.
There is more to be expected from sedate and silent than from noisy,
turbulent, and ostentatious beginnings.

GENIUS, VIRTUE, AND REPUTATION: -- A FABLE.
GENIUS, Virtue, and Reputation, three intimate friends, agreed to travel over
the island of Great Britain, to see whatever might be worthy of observation.
But as some misfortune, said they, may happen to separate us, let us consider
before we set out, by what means we may find each other again. Should it be my
ill fate, said Genius, to be severed from you, my associates, which heaven
forbid! you may find me kneeling in devotion before the tomb of Shakespeare; or
rapt in some grove where Milton talked with angels; or musing in grotto where
Pope caught inspiration. Virtue, with a sigh, acknowledged that her friends
were not very numerous: but were I to lose you, she cried, with whom I am at
present so happily united, I should choose to take sanctuary in the temples of
religion, in the palaces of royalty, or in the spacious domes of ministers of
state: but as it may be my ill fortune there to be denied admittance, enquire
for some cottage where contentment has a bower, and there you will certainly
find me. Ah! my dear companions, said Reputation very earnestly, you, I
perceive when missing, may possibly be recovered; but take care, I entreat you,
always to keep sight of me, for if I am once lost, I am never to be retrieved.

MORAL.
There are few things so irreparably lost as reputation.

AN ADDRESS TO THE DEITY.
Deus est quodeunque vides, quocunque moveris.

LUCAN.
GOD of my life! and author of my days!
Permit my feeble voice to lisp thy praife;
And trembling, take upon a mortal tongue
That hallowed name the hearts of seraph's sung.
Yet here the brightest seraphs could no more
Than hide their faces, tremble, and adore.
Worms, angels, men, in every different sphere
Are equal all, -- for all are nothing here.
All nature faints beneath the mighty name,
Which Nature's works through all her parts proclaim;
I feel that name my inmost thoughts control,
And breath an awful stillness through my soul;
As by a charm the waves of grief subside,
Impetuous passion stops her headlong tide:
At thy felt presence, all emotions cease,
And my hushed spirits find a sudden peace,
Till every wordly thought within me dies,
And earth's gay pageants vanish from my eyes;
Till all my sense is lost in infinite
And one vast object fills my aching sight.
But soon, alas! this holy calm is broke,
My soul submits to wear the wonted yoke;
With shackled pinions strives to soar in vain
And mingles with the dross of earth again.
But he, our gracious master, kind as just,
Knowing our frame, remembers, man is dust.
His spirit ever brooding over our mind,
Sees the first wish to better hopes inclined:
Marks the young dawn of every virtuous aim
And fans the smoking flax into a flame.
His ears are open to the softest cry,
His grace descends to meet the lifted eye:
He reads the language of a silent tear,
And sighs are incense from a heart sincere.
Such are the vows, the sacrifice I give,
Accept the vow, and bid the suppliant live;
From each terrestrial bondage set me free,
Still every wish that centers not in thee;
Bid my fond hopes, my vain disquiets cease,
And point my path to everlasting peace.
If the soft hand of winning pleasure leads
By living waters, and through flowery meads,
When all is smiling, tranquil, and serene,
And vernal beauty paints the flattering scene;
Oh! teach me to elude each latent snare,
And whisper to my sliding heart, -- beware!
With caution let me hear the Syren's voice,
And doubtful with a trembling heart, rejoice.
If friendless in a vale of tears I stray,
Where briars wound, and thorns perplex my way,
Still let my steady soul thy goodness see,
And with strong confidence lay hold on thee:
With equal eye my various lot recieve,
Refign'd to die, or resolute to live:
Prepared to kiss the scepter or the rod,
While God is seen in all, and all in God.
I read his awful name, emblazon'd high,
With golden letters on the illumined sky;
Nor less the mystic character I see,
Wrought in each flower, inscribed on every tree;
In every leaf that trembles through the breeze
I hear the voice of God among the trees;
With thee in shady solitudes I walk,
With thee in busy crowded cities talk:
In every creature own thy forming power,
In each event thy Providence adore.
Thy hopes shall animate my drooping soul,
Thy precepts guide me, and thy fear control.
Thus shall I rest unmoved by all alarms,
Secure within the temple of thine arms:
From anxious cares, from gloomy terrors free,
And feel myself omnipotent in thee.
Then when the last, the closing hour draws nigh,
And earth recedes before my swimming eye;
When trembling on the doubtful edge of fate,
I stand and stretch my view to either state;
Teach me to quit this transitory scene,
With decent triumph, and a look serene;
Teach me to fix my ardent hopes on high,
And having lived to thee, in thee to die.
THE HERMIT.
FAR in a wild, unknown to public view,
From youth to age, a reverend hermit grew;
The moss his bed, the cave his humble cell,
His food the fruits, his drink the crystal well;
Remote from man, with God he passed his days,
Prayer all his business, all his pleasure praise.
A life so sacred, such serene repose,
Seemed heaven itself, till one suggestion rose --
That vice should triumph, virtue vice obey;
This sprung some doubts of Providence's sway:
His hopes no more a certain prospect boast,
And all the tenor of his soul is lost.
So when a smooth expanse receives impressed
Calm nature's image on its watery breast,
Down bend the banks, the trees depending grow,
And skies beneath the answ'ring colors glow:
But if a stone the gentle sea divide,
Swift ruffling circles curl on every side,
And glimmering fragments of a broken sun;
Banks, trees, and skies in thick disorder run.
To clear this doubt, to know the world by sight,
To find if books or swains report it right,
(For yet by swains alone the world he knew,
Whose feet came wandering over the nightly dew)
We quits his cell; the pilgrim staff he bore,
And fixed the scallop in his hat before;
Then with the sun a rising journey went,
Sedate to think, and watching each event.
The morn was wasted in the pathless grass,
And long and lonesome was the wild to pass:
But when the southern sun had warmed the day,
A youth came posting over a crossing way;
His raiment decent, his complexion fair,
And soft, in graceful ringless, waved his hair:
Then near appreaching, "Father hail!" he cried;
And "hail my son!" the reverend sire replied:
Words followed words; from question answer flowed;
And talk of various kind deceived the road:
Till with each other pleased, and loath to part,
While in their age they differ, join in heart.
Thus stands an aged elm in ivy bound,
Thus youthful ivy claspe an elm around.
Now sunk the sun: the closing hour of day
Came onward, man^^d over with sober gray:
Nature in silence bid the world repose:
When near she road a stately palace rose.
There, by the moon, through ranks of trees they pass,
Whose verdure crowned their sloping sides of grass.
It chanced the noble master of the dome
Still made his house the wandering stranger's home:
Yet still the kindness, from a thirst of praise,
Proved the vain ^ourish of ^^ni^^^e ^^se.
The pair arrive the ^^v'ry'd se^^^ wait:
Their lord reciev^^ them at the pompous gate
The table grounds with costly pi^es of food.
And all is mo^ern ^^ o^pit^ol good.
Then led to r^^^, the day's long ^oil they d^o^
Deep sunk in sleep, and file and be^^s of d^wn.
At length it is (...) and at the dawn or day
Along the wide canals the zephyrs play;
Fresh over the gay parterres the breezes creep,
And shake the neighboring wood to banish sleep.
Up rise the guests, obedient to the call,
An early banquet decked the splendid hall:
Rich luscious wine a golden goblet graced,
Which the kind master forced the guests to taste.
Then, pleased and thankful, from the porch they go,
And, but the landlord, none had cause of woe:
His cup was vanished; for in secret guise
The younger guest purloin'd the glittering prize.
As one who spies a serpent in his way,
Glist'ning and basking in the summer ray,
Disordered stops, to shun the danger near,
Then walks with faintness on, and looks with fear;
So seemed the sire, when, far upon the road,
The shining spoil his wiley partner showed.
He stopped with silence, walked with trembling heart,
And much he wished, but durst not ask to part:
Murmuring he lifts his eyes, and thinks it hard,
That generous actions meet a base reward.
While thus they pass, the sun his glory shrouds;
The changing skies hang out their sable clouds;
A sound in air pre^ag'd approaching rain,
And beasts to covert scud across the plain.
Warned by the signs, the wandering pair retreat,
To seek for shelter at a neighboring feat:
'Twas built with turrets on a rising ground,
And strong, and large, and unimprov'd around;
Its owner's temper, timorous and severe,
Unkind and griping, caused a desert there.
As near the miser's heavy doors they drew,
Fierce rising gusts with sudden fury blew;
The nimble lightning, mixed with showers began,
And over their heads loud rolling thunders ran.
Here long they knock: but knock or call in vain,
Driven by the wind and battered by the rain.
At length some pity warmed the master's breast,
('It Was then his threshold first reciev'd a guest:)
Slow creeking, turns the door with jealous care,
And half he welcomes in the shivering pair.
One frugal faggot lights the naked walls,
And nature's fervor through their limbs recals:
Bread of the coarsest sort, with meagre wine,
(Each hardly granted) served them both to dine;
And when the tempest first appeared to cease,
A ready warning bid them part in peace.
With still remark the ponderous hermit viewed,
In one so rich, a life so poor and rude;
And why should such (within himself he cried)
Lock the lost wealth a thousand want beside?
But what new marks of wonder soon took place
In every settling feature of his face,
When from his vest the young companion bore
That cup the generous landlord owned before,
And paid profusely with the precious bowl
The stinted kindness of this churlish soul!
But now the clouds in airy tumult fly;
The sun, emerging, opes an azure sky:
A fresher green the smiling leaves display,
And glittering as they tremble, cheer the day:
The weather courts them from their poor retreat,
And the glad master bolts the wary gate.
While hence they walk, the pilgrim's bosom wrought
With all the travel of uncertain thought;
His partner's acts without their cause appear:
'Twas there a vice, and seemed a madness here:
Detesting that, and pitying this, he goes,
Lost and confounded with the various shows.
Now night's dim shades again involve the sky,
Again the wand'rers want a place to lie;
Again they search, and find a lodging nigh.
The soil improved around, the mansion neat,
And neither poorly low nor idly great;
It seemed to speak its master's turn of mind,
Content -- and not for praise, but virtue kind.
Hither the walkers turn with weary feet,
Then bless the mansion, and the master greet:
Their greeting fair, bestowed with modest guise,
The courteous master hears, and thus replies:
"Without a vain, without a grudging heart,
To him who gives us all, I yield a part;
From him you come; for him accept it here,
A frank and sober, more than costly cheer."
He spoke: and bid the welcome table spread;
Then talked of virtue till the time of bed;
When the grave household round his hall repair,
Warned by a bell, and closed the hours with prayer.
At length the world, renewed by calm repose,
Was strong for toil; the dappled morn arose:
Before the pilgrims part, the younger crept
Near the closed cradle, where an infant slept,
And writhed its neck: the landlord's little pride,
O strange return! grew black, and gasp'd and died.
Horror of horrors! what! his only son!
How looked our hermit when the fact was done?
Not hell, though hell's black jaws in sunder part,
And breathe blue fire could more assault his heart.
Confused, and struck with silence at the deed,
He flies, but trembling, fails to fly with speed.
His steps the youth pursues; the country lay
Perplexed with roads; a servant showed the way.
A river crossed the path; the passage over
Was nice to find; the servant trod before;
Long arms of oaks an open bridge supplied,
And deep the waves beneath the bending glide.
The youth, who seemed to watch a time to sin,
Approached the careless guide and thrust him in:
Plunging he falls, and rising lifts his head,
Then flashing turns, and sinks among the dead.
Wild sparkling rage inflames the father's eyes,
He bursts the bands of fear, and madly cries,
"Detested wretch!" -- But scarce his speech began,
When the strange partner seemed no longer man;
His youthful face grew more serenely sweet;
His robe turned white, and flowed upon his feet;
Fair rounds of radiant points invest his hair;
Celestial odours breathe through purpled air;
And wings, whose colors glittered on the day,
Wide at his back their gradual plumes display,
The form ethereal bursts upon his sight,
And moves in all the majesty of light.
Though loud at first the pilgrim's passion grew,
Sudden he gazed and wist not what to do;
Surprise in secret chains his words suspends,
And in a calm his settling temper ends.
But silence here the beauteous angel broke,
(The voice of music ravished as he spoke.)
"Thy prayer, thy praise, thy life to vice unknown,
In sweet memorial rise before the throne:
These charms success in our bright region find,
And force an angel down to calm thy mind:
For this commissioned, I forsook the sky;
Nay cease to kneel! thy fellow servants I.
"Then know the truth of government divine,
And let these scruples be no longer thine.
"The Maker justly claims the world he made,
In this the right of providence is laid;
Its sacred majesty through all depends
On using second means to work his ends;
It Is thus, withdrawn in state from human eye,
The power exerts his attributes on high,
Your actions uses, nor controuls your will,
And bids the doubting sons of men be still.
"What strange events can strike with more surprise,
Than those which lately struck thy wondering eyes.
Yet, taught by these, confess the Almighty just,
And where you cannot unriddle, learn to trust.
"The great, vain man, who fared on costly food,
Whose life was too luxurious to be good --
Who made his ivory stands with goblets shine,
And forced his guests to morning draughts of wine --
Has, with the cup, the graceless custom lost,
And still he welcomes but with less of cost.
"The mean suspicious wretch whose bolted door
Never moved in pity to the wandering poor,
With him I left the cup to teach his mind
That heaven can bless if mortals will be kind.
Conscious of wanting worth, he views the bowl,
And feels compassion touch his grateful soul.
Thus artists melt the sullen ore of lead,
With heaping coals of fire upon its head;
In the kind warmth the metal learns to glow,
And, loose from dross the silver runs below.
"Long had our pious friend in virtue trod,
But now the child half-wean'd his heart from God
(Child of his age) for him he lived in pain,
And measured back his steps to earth again.
To what excesses had his dotage run!
But God to save the father, took the son.
To all but thee in fits he seemed to go;
And 'twas my ministry to deal the blow.
The poor fond parent humbled in the dust,
Now owns in tears the punishment was just.
"But how had all his fortunes felt a wreck,
Had that false servant sped in safety back!
This night his treasured heaps he meant to steal;
And what a fund of charity would fail!
"Thus heaven instructs thy mind: this trial over,
Depart in peace, resign, and sin no more."
On sounding pinions here the youth withdrew;
The sage stood wondering as the seraph flew.
Thus looked Elisha when to mount on high,
His master took the chariot of the sky:
The fiery pomp ascending left the view,
The prophet gazed, and wished to follow too.
The bending hermit here a prayer begun:
Lord! as in heaven, on earth thy will be done:
Then gladly turning, sought his ancient place
And passed a life of piety and peace.
ON THE SHORTNESS OF HUMAN LIFE.
LIKE as as a damask rose you see,
Or like the blossom of the tree --
Or like the dainty flower in May,
Or like the morning to the day --
Or like the sun, or like the shade,
Or like the gourd which Jonas had;
Even such is man, whose thread is spun,
Drawn out, and cut, and so is done;
Withers the rose; the blossom blasts;
The flower fades; the morning hastes;
The sun does set; the shadows fly;
The gourd consumes; and mortals die.
Like to the grass that is newly sprung,
Or like a tale that is new begun;
Or like a bird that is here today,
Or like the pearled dew of May;
Or like an hour, or like a span,
Or like the singing of a swan.
Even such is man who lives by breath,
Is here, now there, in life and death.
The grass decays; the tale does end;
The bird is flown, the dews ascend;
The hour is short; the span not long;
The swan's near death; man's life is done.
Like to the bubble in the brook,
Or in a glass much like a look;
Or like the shuttle in the hand,
Or like the writing in the sand;
Or like a thought, or like a dream,
Or like the gliding of a stream.
Even such is man, who lives by breath,
Is here, now there, in life and death:
The bubbles burst; the look's forgot;
The shuttle's flung; the writing's blot;
The thought is past; the dream is gone;
The water glides; man's life is done.
A few more rolling years at most,
Will land me on fair Canaan's coast;
Where I shall sing my song of grace
And see my glorious hiding place.
Man was made to mourn.
WHEN chill November's surly blast,
Made fields and forests bare;
One evening as I wandered forth,
Along the banks of Air;
I spied a man whose aged step
Seemed weary worn with care,
His face was furrowed over with years,
And hoary was his hair.
Young stranger, whither wand'rest thou,
Began the reverend sage:
Does thirst of wealth thy step constrain,
Or youthful follies rage?
Or happily pressed with cares and woes,
Too soon thou have began,
To wander forth with me to mourn
The miseries of man.
The sun that over-hangs yon moors,
Out spreading far and wide;
Where hundreds labor to support
A haughty lordling's pride:
I Have seen yon weary winter sun
Twice forty times return,
And every time has added proof,
That man was made to mourn.
O man, while in thy early years,
How prodigal of time!
Mispending all thy precious hours,
Thy glorious youthful prime;
Alternate follies take the sway
Licentious follies burn,
Which tensold force gives Nature's law,
That man was made to mourn.
Look not alone on youthful prime,
Or manhood's active might,
Man then is useful to his kind,
Supported is his right:
But see him on the edge of life,
With cares and sorrows worn,
Then age and want, oh ill matched pair!
Show man was made to mourn.
A few seem favorites of fate,
In pleasures lap carest,
Yet think not all the rich and great,
Are likewise truly blessed:
But oh, what crowds in every land,
All wretched and forlorn,
Through weary life this lesson learn,
That man was made to mourn!
Many and sharp the numerous ills,
Inwoven with our frame,
More pointed still we make ourselves,
Regret, remorse and shame.
And man whose heaven erected face
The smiles of love adorn,
Man's inhumanity, man
Makes countless thousands mourn.
See yonder poor over labored Wight,
So abject, mean and vile,
Who begs a brother of the earth
To give him leave to toil.
And see his lordly fellow worm
The poor petition spurn,
Unmindful though a weeping wife
And helpless offspring mourn.
If I Am designed yon lordling's slave,
By nature's law designed;
Why was an independent wish
Ever planted in my mind?
If not, why am I subject to
His cruelty or scorn?
Or why has man the will and power
To make his fellow mourn.
Yet let not this, too much, my friend,
Disturb thy youthful breast,
This partial view of human kind
Is surely not the last.
The poor oppressed honest man,
Had never sure been born,
Had there not been some recompense
To comfort those that mourn.
O death, the poor man's dearest friend!
The kindest and the best,
Welcome the hour my aged limbs
Are laid with thee to rest:
The great, the wealthy fear thy blows
From pomp and pleasure torn;
But oh, a blessed relief to those
That weary laden mourn!
On Death.
WHEN men my sithe and dart supply
How great a king of fears am I!
They view me like the last of things,
They make and then they dread my stings
Fools if you less provo'^^ your fears,
No more my spectre form appears;
Death's but a path that must be trod,
If man would ever pass to God.
A port of calms, a state of ease,
From the rough rage of swelling seas;
And when their chains are thrown aside,
See the glad scene unfolding wide;
Clap the glad wings and tower away,
And mingle with the blaze of day.
Why then thy flowing sable stoles,
Deep pendent cypress mourning poles,
Loose scarfs to fall across thy weeds,
Long palls, drawn herses, covered steeds;
A plume of black, that as we tread,
Nod over the 'scutcheons of the dead.
When Fortune drops her gay parade,
When pleasute's transient rosed fade,
And wither in the tomb:
Unchanged is thy immortal prize,
Thy ever-verdant laurels rise
In undecaying bloom.
No more to fabled names confined,
To the supreme all perfect mind,
My thoughts direct their flight:
Wisdom's thy gift and all her force
From thee derived, eternal source
Of intellectual light.
O send her sure her steady ray,
To regulate my doubtful way,
Through life's perplexing road:
The mists of error to control,
And through its gloom direct my soul
To happiness and good.
Beneath her clear discerning eye
The visionary shadows fly
Of folly's painted show:
She sees through every fair disguise
That all but virtue's solid joys
Are vanity and woe.
A Hymn to Resignation.
OH! from that high and lofty sphere
Where throned in light you dwell;
Sweet maid in all thy charms descend
To gild my humble cell.
Thy presence heightens every bliss,
Draws out the sting of woe;
Allures to brighter worlds above,
And makes a heaven below.
The pilgrim roving all night long,
Through dreary tracts forlorn;
Often sighs oppressed and sighs again,
The wished return of morn.
As I in sorrow's gloomy night,
Condemned a while to stray;
Look up with ardent eye to heaven,
And ask the devious way.
O! screen me from surrounding ills,
Let dangers never annoy,
The arrow that in darkness flies
Commissioned to destroy.
Inconstant as the idle wind,
That sports with every flower;
When earthly friends by turns drop off,
Friends of our brighter hour.
Do thou blessed cherub fill my breast,
With all that is good and wise,
Snatch me from earth's tumultuous scenes,
And lead me to the skies.
There kindred spirits never deceive,
Soul mingles there with soul,
Sweet sympathy and truth are there,
And love cements the whole.
More welcome to this sorrowing heart,
Oh pensive queen thy strain,
Than all the joys mad riot gives,
To sooth the clamorous train.
You shade the poor man's evening walk.
With wreathes of endless green;
And when the lamp of life declines,
You tend the last dread scene.
Oh! then from heaven thy holy sphere,
Where throned in light you dwell:
Come Resignation, sainted maid,
And gild my humble cell.
Thoughts on the Sea shore.
IN every object here I see
Something, O Lord, that leads to thee.
Firm as the rocks the promise stands,
Thy mercies countless as the sands,
Thy love a sea immensely wide,
Thy grace an ever-flowing tide.
In every object here I see
Something, my heart, that points at thee.
Hard as the rocks that bound the strand,
Unfruitful as the barren sand,
Deep and deceitful as the ocean,
And like the tides in constant motion.
Compassion.
AH! little think the gay licentious proud,
Whom pleasure, power, and affluence surround;
They, who their thoughtless hours in giddy mirth,
And wanton, often cruel riot waste;
Ah! little think they, while they dance along,
How many feel this very moment, death
And all the sad variety of pain!
How many sunk in the devouring flood,
Or more devouring flame. How many bleed,
By shameful variance betwixt man and man;
How many pine in want, and dungeon glooms,
Shut up from common air, and common use
Of their own limbs. How many drink the cup
Of baleful grief, or eat the bitter bread
Of misery. Sore pierced by wintry winds,
How many shrink into the sordid hut
Of cheerless poverty. How many shake
With all the fiercer tortures of the mind,
Unbounded passion, madness, guilt, remorse;
Whence tumbled headlong from the height of life,
They furnish matter for the tragic muse.
Even in the vale where wisdom loves to dwell,
With friendship, peace, and contemplation joined,
How many, racked with honest passions, droop
In deep retired distress. How many stand
Around the deathbed of their dearest friends,
And point the parting anguish. Thought fond man,
Of these, and all the thousand nameless ills,
That one incessant struggle renders life
One scene of toil, of suffering and of fate,
Vice in its high career would stand appalled,
And heedless rambling impulse learn to think;
The conscious heart of charity would warm,
And her wide wish benevolence dilate;
The social tear would rise, the social sigh;
And into clear perfection, gradual bliss,
Refining still the social passions work.
THE HERMIT. Beattie.
AT the close of the day, when the hamlet is still,
And mortals the sweets of forgetfulness prove --
When naught but the torrent is heard on the hill.
And naught but the nightingale's song in the grove.
It Was then by the cave, of the moutain reclined,
A hermit his nightly complaint thus began:
Though mournful his numbers, his soul was resigned,
He thought as as a sage, though he felt as a man.
"Ah! why thus abandoned to darkness and woe,
Why thus lonely philomel flows thy sad strain?
For spring shall return and a lover bestow,
And thy bosom no trace of misfortune retain.
Yet if pity inspire thee, O cease not thy lay*
Mourn sweetest complainer, man calls thee to mourn,
O soothe him whose sorrows like thine pass away!
Full quickly they pass -- but they never return!
Now, gliding remote on the verge of the sky,
The moon, half extinct, a dim crescent displays;
But lately I marked, when majestic on high
She shone, and the planets were lost in her blaze.
Roll on then, fair orb, and with gladness pursue
The path that conducts thee to splendour again:
But man's faded glory no change shall renew;
Ah! fool to exult in a glory so vain!
It Is night, and the landscape is lovely no more,
I mourn, but ye wood-lands, I mourn not for you;
For morn is approaching, your charms to restore,
Perfumed with fresh fragrance, and glittering with dew.
Nor yet for the ravage of winter I mourn,
Kind Nature the embryo-blossom will save:
But when shall spring visit the mouldering urn!
O when shall it dawn on the night of the grave?"
"'It Was thus by the glare of false science betrayed,
That leads, to bewilder, and dazzles to blind:
My thoughts wont to roam from shade onward to shade,
Destruction before me, and sorrow behind.
O pity great Father of light, then I cried,
Thy creature, who fain would not wander from thee;
Lo, humbled in dust, I relinquish my pride:
From doubt and from darkness thou only can free.
And darkness and doubt are now flying away,
No longer I roam in conjecture forlorn,
So breaks on the traveller, faint and astray,
The bright and the balmy effulgence of morn.
See Truth, Love and Mercy, in triumph descending,
And nature all glowing in Eden's first bloom,
On the cold cheek of Death smiles and roses are blending,
And beauty immortal awakes from the tomb.
Reflections in Sickness.
TILL now, my soul, this earthly load
Was healthy, sound and strong;
My even spirits gently flowed,
Smooth rolled life's tide along.
My eyes with ardent brightness shone,
My cheeks gay roses graced,
My nerves retained their wonted tone,
With active vigor braced.
But now how changed my fabric reels,
Scarce equal to the weight;
My heart with rapid motion feels
Each pulse disordered beat.
Dim roll my eyes, my visage fades,
My hollow cheeks decay;
Each part the dire disease invades,
And nature pines away.
To day the gaudy flower we view,
In blooming beauty rise,
Tomorrow touched with baneful dew,
It languishes and dies.
Turn then my soul thy thoughts to God,
Who made this brittle frame;
For life depends upon his nod,
And health is in his name.
It Is he, he only can restrain
My blood's impetuous tide;
He who impelled the encroaching main,
And bade its rage subside.
He can resume whose will be done,
That breath his bounty gave;
Nor ask I if my sands are run,
One moment from the grave.
My sated taste dull pleasure palls,
And all my fancy cloys,
Why should I dread the voice that calls
To solid endless joys?
A HYMN.
GREAT Lord of all things! power divine,
Breathe on this erring heart of mine,
Thy grace serene and pure;
Defend my frail, my erring youth,
And teach me this important truth,
The humble are secure.
Teach me to bless my lowly lot,
Confined to this paternal cot,
Remote from regal state;
Content to court the cooling glade,
Inhale the breeze, enjoy the shade,
And love my humble fate.
No anxious vigils here I keep,
No dreams of gold distract my sleep
Nor lead my heart astray;
Nor blastings envy's tainted gale
Pollutes the pleasures of the vale,
To vex my harmless day.
Yon tower which rears its head so high,
And bids defiance to the sky,
Invites the hostile winds:
Yon branching oak extending wide,
Provokes destruction by its pride,
And courts the fall it finds.
Then let me shun the ambitious deed,
And all the dangerous paths that lead
To honors falsely won:
Lord! in thy sure protection blessed,
Submissive will I ever rest,
And may thy will be done!
An Extract from Thomson's Hymn.
-- I cannot go
Where Universal Love not smiles around,
Sustaining all yon orbs and all their sons,
From seeming evil still educing good,
And better thence again, and better still,
In infinite progression. But I lose
Myself in Him, in Light Ineffable:
Come then expressive Silence! muse his praise.
Description of Jehovah, from the xviiith psalm.
HE spoke: and lo! the heavens were bowed;
High on cherubic wings he rode,
Majestic to behold.
Profoundest night, the dark abyss,
And the thick gloom of all the skies,
Beneath his feet were rolled.
Tempestuous winds about him past,
Sublime upon each winged blast,
The great Jehovah came.
He flew abroad, all clothed in fire,
But bade thick clouds of smoke aspire,
To wrap the awful flame.
In folding skies his brightness veiled:
And, in the depth of night, concealed,
His dread pavillion stood.
The blackened clouds around him sweep,
And the dark waters of the deep
Enthrone their sovereign God.
Midst pealing thunders, fire, and smoke,
Jehovah awful silence broke,
And shook the powers beneath:
The rapid lightnings of the sky,
In awful dread of the MOST HIGH,
Were scattered by his breath.
CHARITY: AN ODE.
"ASCEND the bark, the sail expand;
"And fly the blood-polluted land!
"The tyrant's rage, and bigot's zeal
"Already whet the murdering steel,
"While virtue from the scene retires,
"And persecution lights her fires.
"Ascend the bark, expand the sail!
"Thy God shall grant the favoring gale;
"And awe-struck waves the ship respect,
"Which Piety and Faith direct:
"As from the land of rage and tears,
"The philosophic chief she bears.
"I see, I see the untaught band,
"Mildly they welcome thee to land;
"Thy brow no sullen fury wears;
"No dark resentment low'rs on theirs.
"Can Piety and Justice fail?
"Ascend the bark, expand the sail!
Thus Charity the chief addressed,
And warmed with sacred zeal, his his breast.
His ready feet the bark ascend;
His friends, a pious train attend.
Hope smiles, affection vainly pleads,
And Albion's guilty shore recedes.
Each wind in gentler breezes blows;
With gentler current ocean flows,
As if -- (what will not Virtue charm?) --
His pious vows their rage disarm;
And Delaware's capacious breast,
Exulting bears the welcome guest.
"Ye gazing tribes! your fears forego;
"No plund'rer I, or cruel foe.
"These hands, in war's dire trade unskilled,
"No spear protend, or falchion wield;
"Nor from my bark, with art accursed,
"Shall lightning fly, or thunder burst.
"Over wide extended lands you roam;
"We seek, alas! a peaceful home.
"These gifts your kindness shall repay;"
His friends the useful stores display.
Virtue the treaty ratified,
And Reason smiled with decent pride.
"Ye people hear! (again he spoke)
"Who groan beneath a double yoke,
"The voice of Charity revere;
"No holy tyrant threatens here;
"No despot rules with cruel sway;
"Securely toil, securely pray.
"Religion who shall dare restrain?
"New systems choose, or old retain.
"From temples, let your vows ascend;
"Or private in your closets bend.
"By priestly zeal or power unawed,
"Let all in freedom worship God."
The British ifles with rapture heard;
His voice the suffering German cheered.
In crowds they hasten to the shore,
And hear unmoved old Ocean roar.
Their shores they quit, and dangers slight;
Religion, Freedom, Peace invite.
Ye statesmen, whom weak minds revere!
Ye kings, who empire build on fear!
With candid minds, survey the plan,
And venerate the upright man,
Who, not to selfish views confined,
Studied the good of all mankind.
He spoke not to unwilling slaves;
The forest falls, the harvest waves;
The curve-disdaining street extends;
The dock resounds, the mast ascends.
Hope vigorous Labor sweetly cheers,
And Property the base endears.
To neighboring shores, and distant lands,
His worth a bright example stands.
A fertile region bears his name;
Philosophy exalts his fame;
The arts his matchless deeds record,
And heaven bestows the great reward.
Inscription for a bench beneath a favorite tree.
AVAUNT! ye noisy sons of wine,
Nor round your brows my roses twine:
'Twas not for you that Flora here
Bestowed those beauties of the year.
But ye who social converse love,
Or ye whom softer passions move,
Come pass with me the careless day,
Or in my groves in Freedom stray.
For you this verdant turf is spread,
For you this beech here rears its head,
For you has Flora scattered here
The varied beauties of the year.
Written for the Monument of a young Lady lately deceased in the 13th year of
her age.
THE vernal hope of lengthened life is cropped,
The opening blossom in the grave is dropped:
Yet weep not parents over this mouldering clay,
But rest your comfort on the judgment day;
For virgin innocence that knows no crime
Shall bloom eternal in a heavenly clime.
Epitaph on a young Lady.
TOO mild a soul for our rough clime,
Ascend thy native skies.
Flee from the woes of sinful time,
Thy virtue never dies.
But sweet Camelia, will thou fall,
And shall no sorrows flow,
We must resign when heaven does call,
But yet we feel the blow.
Thy precious dust in hope shall rest,
Of seeing fairer days,
Thy spirit triumph with the blessed,
In endless songs of praise.
Verses written by a Gentleman to his Wife on the tenth anniversary of their
marriage.
IT often has been agreed, you know,
There Is nothing new on earth below!
That sterling sense and beauty too,
Precisely as they charm in you,
Have charmed in multitudes before,
And will in many thousands more.
This doctrine suits me passing well;
And why, delights me much to tell.
It suits me well; because in you,
I want, I look for nothing new:
Ten years ago I praised your charms,
And wooed you to my faithful arms;
Ten years ago your truth I proved,
Ten years ago your virtues loved.
As time revolves in circling round,
In close and closer union bound,
You to my heart the same appear,
As good, as lovely, and as dear.
And, long on this returning day,
May thus my muse exulting say:
So may the fates be kind to me,
As I am kind and true to thee.
As I shall tenderly remove
Each trace of sorrows from my love.
So when together we descend,
The vale of life's remoter end,
The vain complaint that we grow old,
Shall be ^^^got as soon as told;
Memory shall speak of pleasures past,
With tender triumph to the last;
And hope renew a better scene,
Where death no more shall intervene.
TO CHEERFULNESS
JOY of the heart thou blissful guest,
And source of soft delight,
Thy charms by every heart confessed,
As fair as dawning light.
Devoid of thee when weight of care,
Our sinking minds oppress;
Thy presence can expel despair,
And mitigate distress.
Through thee we are led to give him praise,
From whom each blessing flows;
Thou crown'st the round of happy days,
That Providence bestows.
Verses written by a Gentleman on seeing his Child asleep in the cradle, just
before his going to prison.
SOFT babe! sweet image of a harmless mind!
How calm that sleep which innocenc^ enjoys!
The smiling cheek thou in thy slumber wear'st:
Is nature's language for a gentle heart;
It says, all is peace within. It is thy right;
It Is the blessed privilege of thy tender age
To wake, or sleep, in peace; to know no fears,
To dread no ill, to smile on friend or foe.
What moral lesson does thy slumber teach?
This preaching strikes, and mends a faulty heart.
Come here, ye guilty, for it speaks to you;
Tells what you lost, and what you will never regain:
Where dwells the power a wounded mind to heal?
Attend, ye misers, all pour wealth cannot lure
This slumber to your beds; unbrib'd it drops
The downy wing upon this infant brow.
Listen, ye heroes, kings, or higher names
(If such there be;) can minds, with coolest thought
To bloodshed trained, such peaceful moments taste?
Sleep like that babe, and I Will unsheath my sword:
Could gazing catch that flower of cordial peace,
My ardent eye I Would fix to pluck it thence,
And plant it in my breast. -- In vain that thought:
High heaven this bliss to sinful man denies;
It Is virtue's crown, and even an angels wealth.
Sleep on, mild infant sleep; and never know
What thy fond parent feels -- now feels for thee,
Though thou feels nothing. -- O would kind heaven grant
Thou never might wake again! how sweet to pass
From earth to heaven on such a gentle wing?
These looks world fix a smile on death's pale cheek!
I must away; relentless law compels:
I Will take thee too; thou in a cell can sleep,
And play within the horrors of a jail.
Thy father sleeps no more. -- What then? I Will watch
Thy sleeping hours; and when thou smil'st, I Will smile;
Smile even in misery; wipe my streaming eye,
Then smile again: will law forbid me this?
Thy mother in her peaceful tomb is laid;
Silent her griefs, which fretted life away.
At sight of thee her tender heart would bleed;
It bled for others, but for thee 'twould stream.
In happy time her soul to him is fled,
Whose blood for those that mercy love was spilt.
Thou know my God, by thy great pattern taught
I never turned my eye, nor shut my heart
From any wretch that walked this earth in pain.
When thy rich blessings on my head were poured,
Thou led'st my heart (for goodness come from thee)
To seek out misery in her bashful path,
And to my utmost every wound to heal.
My faith is firm; in this thy trying hand
My hope breathes fresh. Some virtuous minds thou wilt touch,
(Though few below thy glorious image wear,
To riot most, or vanity enslaved)
Then guide him to my cell; my chains he will break,
And light to me, and to this babe restore!
Through life be this resolve pursued,
Whatever your lot shall be,
To act with perfect rectitude,
And keep a conscience free.
Hope not your happiness to find,
Abroad, but homeward bend,
And always let your peace of mind,
Upon yourself depend.
If happiness be your pursuit,
Plant virtue, and content's the fruit.
Extract from or Elysian scene.
AT evening often while the setting sun
On the green summit of the eastern groves,
Poured full his yellow radiance; while the voice
Of Zephyr whispering 'midst the rustling leaves,
The sound of water murmuring through the sedge,
The turtle's plaintive call, and music soft
Of distants bells, whose ever-varying notes
In slow sad measure moved, combined to sooth
The soul to sweet solemnity of thought;
Beneath thy branchy bowers of thickest gloom,
Much on the imperfect state of man I have mused:
How pain over half his hours her iron reign
Ruthless extends; how pleasure from the path
Of innocence allures his steps; how hope
Fixes his eye on future joy, that flies
His fond pursuit; how fear his shuddering heart
Alarms with fancied ill; how doubt and care
Perplex his thought; how soon the tender rose
Of beauty fades; the sturdy oak of strength
Declines to earth, and over all our pride
Stern time triumphant stands: from general fate
To private woes then often has memory passed,
And mourned the loss of many a friend beloved.
Let not the current of your tears prevail,
But stem the torrent with religious sail.
The impetuous storms which inundate the plain
Soak through the ground, and reach the hidden grain;
Nourished and fed, the springing corn appears
And fresh successive showers fill the ears,
Ripened, we reap rich treasure from the field
Which without rain the earth would never yield.
It Is thus the seeds of grace sown in our hearts,
Are cherished by the blessings heaven imparts;
Blessings conveyed in sorrow's dark disguise,
Which yet the eye of faith can see and prize:
These cause the precious seed to take deep root,
Flourish and bear an hundred fold of fruit:
"The work which grace and wisdom undertake,
Eternal mercy never will forsake."
God will our hearts (where late the seed was sown)
With a full harvest of bright glory crown.
If ought on earth the immortal powers deride,
It Is surely this -- the littleness of pride.
-- I look on cheerfulness,
As on the health of virtue.
Grasp the whole world of reason, life and sense
In one close system of benevolence:
Happier, as kinder, in whatever degree,
An height of bliss is height of charity.
-- The wintry blasts of death
Kill not the beds of virtue: no they spread
Beneath the heavenly beam of brighter suns,
Through endless ages into brighter powers.
Fortune her gifts may variously dispose;
And these be happy called, unhappy those:
But heavens just balance equal will appear,
While those are placed in hope, and these in fear.
Who, for the poor renown of being smart,
Wow'd stick a dagger in his brother's heart?
-- Alas! where shall we find
Some spot to real happiness confined?
Friendship! mysterious cement of the soul!
Sweetner of life, and sweetner of society!
I owe thee much. --
It Is not for mortals always to be blessed:
But him the least the dull or painful hours
Of life oppress, whom sober sense conducts,
And virtue through the labyrinth we tread.
Virtue, the strength and beauty of the soul
Is the best gift of heaven: a happiness
That even above the smiles and frowns of fate
Exalts great nature's favorites.
Hymn to the Deity.
To thee, O God! whose glorious power
My every thought surveys,
Who view'st the work of every hour,
To thee I tune my lays.
O, let religion's holy flame,
My artless lines inspire,
And meek eyed piety proclaim
Her vot'ry's sacred fire.
Almighty Power! whose tender care
Did infancy protect,
Let riper years thy favor share,
And every step direct.
Teach me to shun the slippery way,
Where vice and folly reign,
Like clouds which darken nature's day,
And sadden all the plain.
O, guard me from temptation's power,
That subtle fiend of hell;
Never let his might my truth devour,
My innocence expel.
Teach me to know thy sacred will,
Thy holy laws obey,
Thy heavenly precepts to fulfill,
And keep religion's way.
Oh! to my soul do thou disclose
Where virtue's fountains run;
Pure as the radiant beam that flows
From yon meridian sun.
Instructed thus to praise thy name,
Let all my powers conspire;
My tongue with sacred joy proclaim
I^^ great Almighty Sire.
Accept, O God! my heartfelt praise
For all thy mercies past;
That care which watched my earliest days
Withhold not to the last.
That when the appointed hour of death
Revolving time shall bring;
Thy angels may receive my breath,
My Savior, God, and King.
Thrice happy they who on this mortal stage
Life's checkered road with well-tim'd caution tread;
Ever, from early youth to hoary age,
By virtue's precepts and by wisdom led:
For them no change of time can ever shake,
Nor death himself their peace or steady purpose break.
On Mr. Pope's (now Sir Wm. Tickle's) Garden, at Twickenham, written by a
native of America.
HAIL to the once beloved retreat
Of Pope's immortal muse!
In this unostentatious seat
Did all the graces choose,
With artless elegance to trace
The academic shade;
Where inspiration marked a place,
For contemplation made.
Here to the best of mothers, lo!
The best of sons displays,
An obelisk raised in his garden in memory of his mother.
A pattern of surviving woe,
And unaffected praise.
How often while fancy yet was young,
And hardly knew to roam,
On fluttering pinions have I sprung
Across the Atlantic foam.
In mental rapture to survey,
This soul enchanting spot,
This mingled scene of shade and day,
With yon muse-haunted grot.
Which still inspires the pensive mind,
Which awes the fancy still,
Though gushing now, no more we find,
The sweetly murmuring ^ill,
That echoed through the sounding cave,
Responsive to the strain,
Which here the tuneful Sisters gave,
Eternity to gain.
The genius of the grotto flown,
The sympathetic stream
Wept out its flood in plaintive moan,
And vanish as a dream.
With awful, yet serene delight,
This hallowed ground I tread,
Where wrapped imagination's flight,
Fondly recalls the dead.
And could he die, whose deathless song,
Resounding to the skies,
Still floats the silver Thames along,
Still bids our incense rise.
In flames of filial love supplied
Thither whence all began;
And shows divinely justified,
The ways of God and man.
The swain, who from thy sacred spring,
Fair Thames, could lull thy wave,
To hear Sicilian muses sing,
Can HE, within the grave?
That dreary prison, barred by fate,
Be now in silence bound;
And shall thy shores reberberate,
No more the sprightly sound?
Ye nymphs of Solyma, can he*
In death demand our tears?
Whose note still echo's heaven's decree,
"A GOD, a GOD appears?"
Ah, why, ye bards of Britain, say,
A radiant star so bright,
Just lent to cheer your darkling way,
And vanish from your sight?
To wake the soul, the genius raise,
And mend the heart, he came,
Immortal Life, his zeal repay^,
Their gift the skies reclaim.
By Lady M. W. M. in answer to a lady who advised retirement.
YOU little know the heart that you advise,
I view this various scene with equal eyes.
In crowded courts, I find myself alone,
And pay my worship to a nobler throne.
Long since the value of this world I know,
Pity the madness, and despise the show;
Well as I can, my tedious part I bear,
And wait for my dismission without fear:
Seldom I mark mankind's detested ways,
Not hearing censure, nor affecting praise.
And unconcerned my future state I trust,
To that SOLE BEING, merciful and just.
ON FRIENDSHIP.
"A generous (...) cold medium knows,
Burns with one flame, with one resentment glows."
HOW much to be prized and esteemed is a friend,
On whom we may always with safety depend!
Our joys when extended will always increase,
Our griefs when divided are hushed into peace.
When Fortune is smiling, what crowds will appear!
Their friendship to offer, and kindness sincere.
Yet change but the prospect, and point out distress,
No longer to court you they eagerly press.
To a child of five years old -- By Dr. Cotton.
FAIREST flower, all flowers excelling,
Which in Eden's garden grew;
Flowers of Eve's embower'd dwelling,
Are, my fair One -- types of you.
Mark, Maria, how ^he roses
Emulate thy damask cheek,
How the bud its sweets discloses,
Buds thy opening bloom bespeak.
Lillies are by plain direction,
Emblems of a double kind;
Emblems of thy fair complexion,
Emblems of thy fairer mind.
But, dear g^rl, both flowers and beauty,
Blossom, fade, and die away;
Then pursue good sense and duty,
Evergreens, that never decay.
The Hermit's Instruction to his Son.
BE thine those feelings of the mind,
That wake at honor's friendship's call;
Benevolence, that is unconfined,
Extends her liberal hand to all.
By sympathy's untutored ^^^e,
Be taught her social laws to keep;
Rejoice if human heart rejoice,
And weep if human eye shall weep.
The heart that bleeds for others woes,
Shall feel each selfish sorrow less;
His breast who happiness bestows,
Reflecting happiness shall bless.
Each ruder passion still withstood,
That breaks over virtue's sober line;
The tender, noble, and the good,
To cherish and indulge be thine.
On Writing.
Qest. TELL me what genius did the art invent,
The lively immage of a voice to paint,
Who first the secret how to color found,
And to give shape to reason wisely found?
With bodies how to clothe, ideas taught,
And how to draw the ple^^^ (...) a thought?
Who taught the hand to speak, the eye to hear,
A silent language roving far and near;
Whose softest notes oustrip loud thunder's sound,
And spread their accents through the world's vast round.
Yet with kind secrecy securely roll
Whispers of absent friends from Pole to Pole.
A speech heard by the deaf, spoke by the dumb,
Whose echo reaches, long long time to come;
Which dead men speak as well as those that live,
Tell me what genius did this Art contrive?
Ans. The wise Egyptians by the learned are thought
To be the first who use of writing taught:
In Hieroglyphics they expressed their sense,
With nicest skill and wondrous eloquence:
Letters unknown, they did this art invent,
To make thought lasting, reason permanent.
Till Isis of immortal fame arose,
And taught by letters how they might compose
A dress to show the image of the voice,
And make sound lasting, though deprived of noise.
On the death of a Child.
THE little bird at break of day,
That waked us with its song,
And fondly hoped from spray to spray,
The music to prolong.
Ere evening came, ill fated fell;
Struck by a hand unseen,
Resigned that breath which pleased sow ell,
And fluttered in the green.
The lambs that wont to bleet and play,
And sport in sunshine air,
That danced the fleeting hours away,
Nor knew nor want nor care.
As night her sable mantle spread,
Fell to the wolf a prey,
And here and there dispersed and dead,
The scattered fragments lay.
The bossoms which to vernal air
Their fragrant charms unfold,
And deck their spreading branches fair
In purple, white and gold;
Diffuse their sweets, and charm the eye
And promise future store;
Nipt by a frost, untimely die,
And shed perfumes no more.
'Twas thus the poppet ceased to breathe,
The small machine stood still!
The little lungs no longer heave,
Nor motion follows will.
No more that flattering voice we hear,
Soft as the linnet's song;
Each idle hour to soothe and cheer,
That slowly moves along.
Each sprightly action past and gone,
With all its tempting play;
Sprightly as lambs that tread the lawn
A^^ (...) a summer's day.
The dawn of reason we admired,
As opening blossoms fair,
Now to the silent grave retired,
Its organs moulder there.
Flowers on thy breast, and round thy head,
With thee their sweets resign,
Nipt from their tender stalks and dead,
Their fates resemble thine.
Just as their charms allure the eye,
And fragrant leaves unfold,
Closed in eternal night they lie,
To mix with common mould.
The spotless soul released from earth
A cherub sings above,
Immortal, by a second birth,
In thy Redeemer's love.
A FLAME arose in Pliny's curious mind,
To view the wonder, Mount Aetna, in too close a view of which Pliny lost his
life.
and the cause to find.
A sulfurous flame, or some invidious spark,
Robbed him of life, and Nature of her clerk.
Affected Sensibility.
A ROSE BUD overcharged with dew,
Its withering head reclined;
Near broken from its parent bough,
The sport of every wind.
Maria to the woodbine bower
With Emma chanc^d to walk,
Careful she raised the drooping flower
And tied its bending stalk.
Ah! live, she cried, my lovely rose,
And let thy charms expand;
Free to the gale thy scents expose,
Nor dread the spoiler's hand. --
As through the grove, at close of day,
Maria lonely strayed;
A wretched female crossed the way,
And thus implored her aid.
"In pity hear a daughter's prayer;
If you delay to save,
Alfred, my father, bowed with care,
Must sink into his grave!
Content within the little cot,
That decks yon humble vale,
The prayer that blessed our humble lot,
Was borne on every gale.
The lord of those domains, one day
Beheld this suckless face;
His bosom justice ceased to sway,
And passion held its place.
In vain to win me to his arms,
Each gaudy lure he tried;
To me his riches wanted charms,
Virtue was all my pride.
Heaven knows my pure unspotted fame,
Which more than gold I prize;
Nor will I earn the bread of shame,
No, though my parent dies!"
In vain the murmurs of distress,
Assailed Maria's ear;
What misery would fain express,
Maria would not hear!
A generous rustic crossed the space,
O'erheard the mournful tale;
Borne on the wings of eager haste,
He fleeted to the vale!
And, as the generous boon he gave,
Beneficently smiled;
Rejoiced, from lawless power, to save
The father and the child!
Shame on those hearts that never felt
A fellow-creature's woes;
Yet tenderly affect to melt
In pity for a rose!
OH! God, methinks it were a happy lot,
To be no better than a homely swain,
The peaceful tenant of a little cot,
The blithe companion of the vilage train!
Where cares, mistrust, and treason banish sleep,
See on his glittering couch the monarch laid;
While the poor swain, encircled by his sheep,
Securely slumbers in the haw thorn shade:
To tend his flock, was all his worldly care;
To rest and sport alternate hours were given,
Save when religion claims the pause of prayer,
And meditation waste the soul to heaven.
Unruffled flows the tenor of his day,
'Till time's white honors over his temple wave,
And Resignation smiling, midst decay,
Through Nature's path conduct him to the grave!
The Preacher.
REJOICE, O man, in youth's fresh prime,
While all around thee pleasures pour;
Beguile with mirth the fleeting time,
And fill with joy each varied hour:
Court willing beauty to thine arms,
Regale thy taste with rosy wine;
Let music open all her charms,
And soothe thy soul with airs divine:
Let fortune scatter riches round,
More than thy wishes could desire;
Thy plans with bright success be crowned,
While wondering crowds thy state admire:
Behold, with pride, thy lofty seat
O'erlook thy wide extended farms;
Thy fields with plenteous flocks replete,
Thy gardens bright in Flora's charms:
Yet cares will round thy dwelling wait,
Still multiplied by gloomy spleen;
Grief will invade thy rooms of state,
And sickness aim its dart unseen.
Then since nor wealth's nor pleasure's charm
Can soothe the soul with grief oppressed,
Nor stop stern death's uplifted arm.
When aimed to strike the sickly breast.
Let other thoughts thy mind employ,
Let true religion be thy guide;
Let virtuous acts be all thy joy,
And temperance at thy board preside.
Then shall thy life with pleasure flow:
And when the grave demands its prey;
Pleased shall thou leave a world of woe
For regions of eternal day.
MESSIAH, A Sacred Eclogue.
YE nymphs of Solyma! begin the song:
To heavenly themes sublimer strains belong.
The mossy fountains, and the sylvan shades,
The dreams of Pindus and the Aonian maids,
Delight no more -- O thou my voice inspire,
Who touched Isaiah's hallowed lips with fire!
Rapt into future times, the Bard begun:
A virgin shall conceive! a virgin bear a son.
From Jesse's root behold a branch arise,
Whose sacred flower with fragrance fills the skies:
The Ethereal spirit over its leaves shall move,
And on its top descends the mystic dove.
Ye heavens! from high the dewy nectar pour,
And in soft silence shed the kindly shower!
The sick and weak the healing plant shall aid,
From storms a shelter, and from heat a shade.
All crimes shall cease, and ancient fraud shall fail;
Returning justice lift aloft her scale:
Peace over the world her olive wand extend,
And white robbed innocence from heaven descend.
Swift fly the years, and rise the expected morn!
Oh spring to light, auspicious babe, be born!
See nature hastes her earliest wreaths to bring,
With all the incense of the breathing spring:
See lofty Lebanon his head advance,
See nodding forests on the mountains dance;
See spicy clouds from lowly Sharon rise,
And Carmel's flowery top perfume the skies!
Hark! a glad voice the lonely desert cheers;
Prepare the way, a God, a God appears!
A God! a God! the vocal hills reply,
The rocks proclaim the approaching Deity.
Lo! earth receives him from the bending skies;
Sink down ye mountains, and ye valleys, rise:
With heads declined, ye cedars, homage pay,
Be smooth, ye rocks, ye rapid floods give way;
The Savior comes, by ancient bards foretold;
Hear him ye deaf, and all ye blind behold!
He from thick films shall purge the visual ray,
And on the sightless eye balls pour the day:
It Is he the obstructed path of sound shall clear,
And bid new music charm the unfolding ear:
The dumb shall sing, the lame his crutch forego,
And leap exulting, like the bounding roe.
No sigh, no murmur, the wide world shall hear,
From every face he wipes off every tear.
In adamantine chains shall death be bound,
And hell's grim tyrant feel the eternal wound.
As the good shepherd tends his fleecy care,
Seeks freshest pasture, and the purest air,
Explores the lost, the wandering sheep directs,
By day o'ersees them, and by night protects,
The tender lambs he raises in his arms;
Feeds from his hand, and in his bosom warms;
Thus shall mankind his guardian care engage,
The promised Father of the future age.
No more shall nation against nation rise,
Nor ardent warriors meet with hateful eyes,
Nor fields with gleaming steel be covered over,
The brazen trumpets kindle rage no more:
But useless lances into scythes shall bend,
And the broad falchion in a ploughshare end;
Then palaces shall rise; the joyful Son
Shall finish what his short-lived Sire begun;
There vines a shadow to their race shall yield,
And the same hand that sowed, shall reap the field.
The swain in barren deserts, with surprise,
Sees lilies spring, and sudden verdure rise;
And starts, amidst the thirsty wilds, to hear
New falls of water murmuring in his ear.
On rifted rocks, the dragon's late abodes,
The green reed trembles, and the bulrush nods.
Waste sandy valleys, once perplexed with thorn,
The spiry fir and shapely box adorn;
To leafless shrubs the flow'ring palms succeed,
And odorous myrtle to the noisome weed.
The lambs with wolves shall graze the verdant mead
And boys in flowery bands the tiger lead:
The steer and lion at one crib shall meet,
And harmless serpents lick the pilgrim's feet.
The smiling infant in his hand shall take
The crested basilisk and speckled snake,
Pleased the green luster of the scales survey,
And with their forky tongues shall innocently play.
Rise, crowned with light, imperial Salem rise,
Exalt thy tow'ry head, and lift thy eyes:
See a long race thy spacious courts adorn;
See future sons and daughters yet unborn,
In crowding ranks on every side arise,
Demanding life, impatient for the skies.
See barbarous nations at thy gates attend,
Walk in thy light and in thy temple bend;
See thy bright altars thronged with prostrate kings,
And heaped with products of Sabaean springs.
For thee Idume's spicy forests blow,
And seeds of gold from Ophir's mountains glow.
See heaven its sparkling portals wide display,
And break upon thee in a flood of day.
No more the rising sun shall gild the morn,
Nor evening Cynthia fill her silver horn;
But lost, dissolved in thy superior rays,
One tide of glory, one unclouded blaze
Overflow thy courts: the Light himself shall shine
Revealed, and God's eternal day be thine.
The seas shall waste, the skies in smoke decay,
Rocks fall to dust, and mountains melt away;
But fixed his word, his saving power remains;
Thy realm forever lasts, thy own MESSIAH reigns.
Rural Happiness.
FAR from the town's tumultuous noise,
What pleasures grace the rural vale!
Hail, calm delights, unenvied joys!
Ye scenes of peace and virtue, hail!
How green the woods, how gay the bowers!
How every mead's profusely crowned
With springing herbs, and odorous flowers,
Ambrosial fragrance breathes around!
With concert full, on every spray,
The vocal tenants of the grove,
In many a wildly warbled lay,
Mellifluous tell their artless love.
Meandering rills, that pour along
Adown the green hill's tufted brow,
Quick bubbling join the general song,
And gladsome "warble as they flow."
How sweet amidst his circling flock,
The shepherd's tender flute complains!
While echo from the moss-clad rock,
Prolongs the gently dying strains.
Far from the town's perpetual noise,
What beauties grace the rural vale,
Hail calm delights, unenvied joys,
Ye scenes of peace and virtue, hail!
AN ELEGY written in a COUNTRY CHURCHYARD
THE curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The lowing herds wind slowly over the lea,
The ploughman homewards plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to wretchedness and me.
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds,
Save where the beetle wheels his drony flight,
And drowsy tinklings lull the distant folds;
Save that from yonder ivy mantled tower,
The moping owl does to the moon complain
Of such as wandering near her secret bower,
Molest her ancient solitary reign.
Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-tree's shade,
Where heaves the turf in many a mould ring heap
Each in his narrow cell forever laid,
The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
The bre^ry call of incense breathing morn,
The swallow, twitt^ring from the straw-built shed,
The cock's shr^ll clarion, or the echoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.
For them, no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
Or busy house-wife ply her evening care:
Nor children run to lisp their sire's return,
Or climb his knees, the envied kiss to share.
Often did the harvest to their sickle yield;
Their furrow often the stubborn glebe has broke;
How jocund did they drive their teams afield,
How bowed the woods beneath their sturdy stroke!
Let not ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys, and destiny obscure;
Nor granduer hear with a disdainful smile
The short and simple annals of the poor.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth ever gave,
Await alike the inovitable hour,
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
Nor you, ye proud impute to these the fault,
If memory over their tombs no trophies raise,
Where through the long-drawn isle and fretted vault,
The peeling anthem swells the note of praise.
Can storied urn, or animated o^st,
Back to its mansion call the fleeting bre^th?
Can honor's voice provoke the silent (...)
Or flattery souche the dull cold (...) of death?
Perhaps in this neglected spo^ is said,
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire*
Hands, that the rod of empire might have swayed
Or waked to extacy the living lyre.
But knowledge to their eyes, her ample page,
Rich with the spoils of time did never unroll;
Chill penury repressed their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Full many a gem, of purest ray serene,
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
Some village Hampden, that with dauntless breast,
The little tyrant of his fields withstood;
Some mute, inglorious Milton here may rest;
Some Cromwell, guiltless of his country's blood.
The applause of listening senates to command,
The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
To scatter plenty over a smiling land,
And read their history in a nation's eyes.
Their lot forbade: nor circumscribed alone
Their growing virtues, but their crimes confined,
Forbade to wade through slaughter to a throne,
And shut the gates of mercy on mankind;
The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide,
Do quench the blushes of ingenuous shame,
Or heap the shrine of luxury and pride
With incense kindled at the muse's flame.
Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife,
Their sober wishes never learned to stray;
Along the cool, sequestered vale of life,
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.
Yet, even these bones from insult to protect,
Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
With uncouth rhymes and shapeless sculpture decked,
Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.
Their name, their years, spelt by th'unletter'd muse,
The place of fame and elegy supply:
And many a holy text around she strews,
That teach the rustic moralist to die.
For who, to dumb forgetfulness a prey,
This pleasing, anxious being ever resigned,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one, longing, lingering look behind?
On some fond breast the parting soul relies;
Some pious drops the closing eye requires;
Even from the tomb the voice of nature cries,
Even in your ashes live their wonted fires.
For thee, who mindful of the unhonor'd dead,
Do in these lines their artless tale relate;
If chance by lonely contemplation led,
Some kindred spirit shall enquire thy fate;
Happily some hoary-headed swain may say,
"Often have we seen him at the peep of dawn,
Brushing, with hasty steps, the dews away,
To meet the sun upon the upland lawn.
There at the foot of yonder nodding beech,
That wreathes its old fantastic roots so high,
His listless length at noontide would he stretch,
And pore upon the brook that babbles by.
Hard by yon wood, now smiling as in scorn,
Mutt'ring his wayward fancies he would rove;
Now drooping, woeful wan^ like one forlorn,
Or crazed with care or crossed in hopeless love.
One morn I missed him on the accustomed hill,
Along the heath, and near his favorite tree;
Another came; nor yet beside the rill,
Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood was he.
The next, with dirges due, in sad array,
Slow through the church way path we saw him borne,
Approach and read (for thou can read) the lay,
Engraved on the stone beneath yon aged thorn."
THE EPITAPH.
Here rests his head upon the lap of earth,
A youth to fortune and to fame unknown:
Fair science frowned not on his humble birth;
And Melancholy marked him for her own.
Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere;
Heaven did a recompense as largely send:
He gave to miss'ry all he had, a tear;
He gained from heaven ('it was all he wished) a friend.
No farther seek his merits to disclose,
Or draw his frailties from their dread abode,
(There they alike in trembling hope repose)
The bosom of his Father and his God.
The Nunnery: in imitation of the former, by E. Jerningham.
RETIREMENT'S hour proclaims the tolling bell,
In due observance of its stern decree,
Each sacred virgin seeks her lonely cell,
And leaves the grate to solitude and me.
Now throws the western sun a fainter glare,
And silence soothes the vestal world to rest,
Save where some pale-ey'd novice wrapped in prayer,
Heaves a deep sigh and smites her guiltless breast.
Save that in artless, melancholy strains,
Some Eloisa whom soft passion moves;
Absorbed in sorrow, to the night complains,
Forever barred the Abbelard she loves.
Within these ancient walls, with moss overspread,
Where the relenting sinner learns to weep,
Each in her narrow cell forever laid,
The gentle daughters of devotion sleep.
Of wantonness, the pleasure-breathing lay
Or laughter beck'ning from her rosy seat,
Or vanity attired in colors gay,
Shall never allure them from their lonely state.
For them no more domestic joys return,
Nor tender father plies his wonted care;
The nuptual torch for them must never burn,
Nor prattling infants charm the lingering year.
Often do they weave the chaplets pictured gay,
To deck their altars and their shrines around:
How fervent do they chaunt the pious lay!
How through the lengthening isles the notes resound!
Let not the gay coquette, with jest profane,
Mock their veiled life, and destiny severe,
Nor worldly, beauty with a sneer, disdain
The humble duties of the cloistered fair.
The glist'ning eye, that half-seen breast of snow,
The coral lip, the bright vermillion bloom,
Await alike, the inexorable foe! --
The paths of pleasure lead but to the tomb.
Nor you, ye vain, impute to those the fault,
If flattery to their fame no trophies raise,
Where through the dome with grandeur's treasure fraught,
The numerous foplings lift the voice of praise
Can artful phrases or alluring words
Bid the pale cheek assume a second prime?
Can even Apollo's sweetly sounding chords
Arrest the speedy step of conquering time?
Perhaps in this drear mansion are confined
Some whose accomplished beauty could impart,
Each soft emotion to the sternest mind,
And wake to extacy the beating heart.
But pleasure flies them, a forbidden guest,
Decked with the flowers in youth's gay path that bloom,
The clay cold hand of penance chills their breath,
And over the rays of fancy throws a gloom.
Full many a riv'let wandering to the main,
Sequestered pours its solitary wave; --
Full many a flower is rooted from the plain,
To waste its sweetness on the desert grave.
Some veiled Eliza, like the clouded sun,
May here reside inglorious and unknown;
Some like Augusta, might have reared a son
To bless a nation and adorn a throne.
From flatt'ry's lip to drink the sweets of praise,
In rural charms with other belles to vie;
In circles to attend the partial gaze,
And view the beauty in the admirer's eye.
Their lot forbids, nor does alone remove
The thirst of praise, but even their crimes restrain;
Forbids through folly's labyrinth to rove,
And yield to vanity the slackened rein.
To raise 'mid Hymen's joys domestic strife,
Or seek the converse which they ought to shun
To loose the sacred ties of nuptual life,
And give to many, what they vowed to one.
Far from the circle of the splendid throng,
They tread obscurity's sequestered vale;
Their lonely hours unvaried creep along,
Unfann'd by pleasure's ever shifting gale.
What though they are sprinkled with aetherial dew,
With blooming wreathes by hands of seraphs crowned;
Though heaven's unfading splendors burst to view,
And harps celestial to their ears resound.
Still grateful memory paints the distant friend,
Not even the world to their remembrance dies;
Their midnight orisons to heaven ascend,
To stay the bolt descending from the skies.
For who entranced in visions from above
The thought of kindred razes from the mind;
Feels in the soul no warm returning love,
For some endeared companion left behind?
Their joy-encircled hearth as they forsook,
From some fond breast reluctant they withdrew,
As from the deck they sent a farewell look,
Fair Albion sunk forever to their view.
For thee, who mindful of the encloister'd train,
Do in these lines their mournful tale relate;
If by compassion guided to this fane,
Some kindred spirit shall enquire thy fate.
Happily some aged vestal may reply,
"Often have we seen him ere Aurora's ray,
Had painted bright the portals of the sky,
At yonder altar join the matin lay.
There at the foot of yonder nodding beech,
That wreathes its curling branches up so high;
His careless length at noontide would he stretch,
Or murmur with the brook that babbles by.
Where hapless Eloisa sought repose,
Often at yon grave would he her fate condole;
And in his breast as scenes of grief arose,
Sigh the kind requiem to her gentle soul.
One morn I missed him at the hour divine,
Along the isle, and in the sacrify
Another came -- nor yet beside the shrine,
Nor at the front, nor in the porch was he.
The next we heard the bell of death intone,
And in the fearful grave we saw him laid!
Approach and read on this sepulchral stone,
The lines engraved to soothe his hovering shade.'
THE EPITAPH.
By fate's stern hand untimely snatched away,
Does this deep vaulted cave a youth enfold;
He gave to solitude the studious day,
And pity formed his bosom of her mould.
With lyre devoted to compassion's ear,
Did he bewail the vestal's hapless doom!
Often has this marble caught his falling tear,
And for that generous tear he gained a tomb.
Pope's Epitaph on Gay.
OF manners gentle, of affection mild,
In wit a man, simplicity a child.
With (...) temp'ring virtuous rage,
(...) ^^^^ught, at once, and lash the age.
(...) ^emptation in a low estate,
(...) uncorrupted, even amongst the great.
A safe companion, and an easy friend,
Unblam'd through life, lamented in thy end.
These are thy honors, not that here thy bust
Is mixed with heroes, or with kings thy dust;
But that the virtuous and the good may say,
Striking their pensive bosoms, "Here lies GAY."
An Epitaph by G. Littleton Esquire on his Wife.
MADE to engage all hearts, and charm all eyes,
Though weak, magnanimous, though witty, wise:
Polite as all her life in courts had been,
Yet good as she the world had never seen.
The noble fire of an exalted mind,
With gentle female tenderness combined.
Her speech was the melodious voice of love,
Her song the warbling of the vernal grove.
Her eloquence was sweeter than her song,
Soft as her heart, and as her reason strong.
Her form each beauty of her mind expressed,
Her mind was virtue, by the Graces dressed.
An Epitaph on a poor, but honest Man.
STOP, reader, here, and deign a look
On one without a name,
Never entered in the ample book,
Of fortune, or of fame;
Studious of peace, he hated strife,
Meek virtues filled his breast,
His coat of arms, "a spotless life" --
"An honest heart," his crest.
Quartered therewith was innocence;
And thus his motto ran*
"A conscience void of all offense
"Before both God and man."
In the great day of wrath, though pride
Now scorns his pedigree;
Thousands shall wish they would been allied
To this great family.
Death's final conquest.
THE glories of our birth and state
Are shadows, not substantial things:
There is no armor against fate:
Death lays his icy hands on kings.
Scepter and crown
Must tumble down,
And in the dust be equal made
With the poor crooked sithe and spade.
Some men with swords may reap the field,
And plant fresh la^^^els where they kill:
But their strong ner^^es at last must yield,
They tame but one another still.
Early or late,
They stoop to sat,
And must give up their murmuring breath,
When they, pale captives, creep to death.
The garlands wither on your brow;
Then boast no more your mighty deeds:
Upon death's purple altar now
See where the victim victor bleeds:
All heads must come
To the cold tomb,
Only the actions of the just,
Smell sweet, and blossom in the dust.
On General Washingion.
GREAT without pomp, without ambition brave
Proud, not to conquer fellow-men, but save --
Friend to the weak, -- a foe to none but those,
Who planned their greatness on their brethren's woes --
Awed by no titles -- undefiled by lust --
Free without faction, obstinately just --
Too wise to learn from Machiavel's school,
That truth and perfidy by turns should rule --
Warmed by Religion's sacred, genuine ray,
Which points to future bliss the unerring way;
Yet never controlled by Superstition's laws,
The worst of tyrants in the noblest cause.
An Elegy, to the memory of John Foreman.
-- nec te tua plurima Pantheu
Lubentem pietas, nec Appolonis infula texit.
AENEID, lib. ii, v. 429.
THOUGH just and good, thou yield'st thy precious breath,
Nor can thy priesthood shield the stroke of death:
SHALL over the tyrant's dust the trophy blaze,
The sculptured urn the heroes ashes find;
And adulation pour her venal lays,
T'extol the pests, the butchers of mankind?
While sink the virtuous to some humble spot,
With scarce a sod to mark their hallowed clay,
Unknell'd, unwept, neglected and forgot,
To time, and base ingratitude a prey, --
Indignant reason spurns the black abuse,
(From Custom's shackels struggling to be free)
And bids an humble, though an honest muse,
Enraptured rise, and FOREMAN sing of thee.
Worth, honest worth, thy humble station graced;
While pure religion warmed thy ample mind;
Each child of want thy charity embraced;
Thy love was widen'd to all human kind.
Truth from thy lips her sacred lesson taught,
(With sophistry's perplexities unvext)
Pure flowed each word, the type of purer thought,
While thy life made a comment on thy text.
Who clad the naked, who the hungry fed?
Who gave a welcome to the vagrant poor?
Who ^^os'd the bondsman's chains when captive
Who drove temptation from the needy's door?
Who to the sons of anguish and despair,
In better worlds bade happier prospects rise?
From sorrow's cheek who wiped the trickling tear?
FOREMAN, each child of misery replies!
When over our land arrayed in terror's dark,
Stalked that ensanguin'd demon, grim-fac'd war,
While to each step Destruction set her mark,
And Carnage loaded her unhallowed car.
When father son, and brother, brother fought,
And discord raged with complicated woes;
Who then like thee, the christian lesson taught,
T'assist our friends, or to relieve our foes?
You Are gone, great sage, in better worlds to find
What virtue earns -- unmixed felicity;
And may thy spirit stimulate mankind
To think, to act, to live, to die like thee.
And if no tomb pride over thy dust shall rear,
Nor poet monumental stanzas plan,
On the green turf shall memory drop a tear,
And sighing say, Here lies the FRIEND of MAN.
Faith -- An Ode.
HIGH on a rock -- whose steadfast base
The rage of ocean braves;
Around whose summit, far from human ga^^,
The lightning innocently plays,
And the loud tempest idly raves --
Firm Faith behold! -- prepared for flight,
Toward heaven she boldly casts her daring eyes:
Enraptured views the flood of light,
Expands her rapid wings, and claims the promised skies.
In vain frail Vanity prepares,
With simulated smiles,
To lure her back. In vain she spreads her snares:
Faith hears her not, or faintly hears;
Superior to her artful wiles,
Her eyes the blissful realms explore;
Her ears anticipate each heavenly strain;
Avarice, unseen, displays his store;
Unheard, Ambition calls, and Beauty pleads in vain.
The Virtues at a distance stand,
Contemplating the scene.
No more authority exerts command;
Duty in vain, with accents bland
'Twixt her and heaven would intervene.
Affection modestly retires,
Nor arrogantly mourns her lost control;
Her boldness Fortitude admires;
Whilst with unslacken'd zeal, she seeks the glorious goal.
Her eyes the faithful chart survey,
By sacred Truth designed;
By this she regulates her daring way,
And gaining on the source of day,
To rapture yields her mind.
The angelic throng, for her, prepares
A glorious mansion in the blessed abode*
Where melting in seraphic airs,
She piously adores her Father and her God.
When all our weak resources fail,
When friends forsake, and foes assail,
Thy sure assistance let us share,
And chase the monster, fell Despair.
Soul-cheering Hope! the verse inspire,
As with bold hand I strike the lyre,
As, urged by thee, I wake the willing muse,
Who, warmed by patriot cares, extends her views.
Reason and truth the heartfelt wish allow.
Hail, self-dependent Industry!
A nation's bliss must spring from thee:
I form no visionary vow;
Since active Science guides the plough.
Hope -- An Ode.
HEARD ye that sigh? -- Soft as the gales,
Which gently stole through Eden's vales,
Ere man, as yet not desperate grown by vice,
Mourned his lost innocence and Paradise,
To heaven it rises -- Angels bear the sound,
Far, far above the starry frame!
From ^ope's aspiring breast it came;
And whilst glad myriads wait around,
With never-fading glory crowned,
Present it at the throne of grace,
An offering worthy of the place.
Heart-soothing Hope! thou friend of man!
With thee our earliest bliss began!
To thee, sweet comforter! our wishes tend;
Ah! deign thy humble vot'ries to befriend!
Guard us, bright seraph! from corroding care!
And Valor rivalling old Rome,
The shuttle throws or rears the dome.
Yet, yet, thou universal friend!
To all the race thy views extend;
And faintly sketch, sweet Hope, the happy plan,
Which may exalt the savage into man.
Base Avarice from the uncultur'd scene remove,
Who dare the garb of Justice wear!
To scenes of polished life repair;
Nor think, thy maxims can improve,
The untutored tenant of the grove.
Can Avarice religion preach?
Shall they who rob, pretend to teach?
Ye, whom superior talents bless,
Whom virtue leads to happiness!
By moral culture first prepare the soil;
Religion's fruit shall then reward your toil,
On earth the visionary ladder stood,
Which reached at length, the yielding skies;
And man, by slow degrees, must rise.
Uncheck'd by fear, unstained with blood,
Thus shall ye rear the public good
On justice, which shall time defy,
'Till Hope is swallowed up in Joy.
A Poem on our SAVIOR'S Nativity.
IN Bethlehem's fields those pastures large and fair,
As shepherds watched by night their fleecy care,
A dazzling light, without the sun returned,
And through the midnight's dusky horror burned.
Sonorous voices trembling from afar,
And softly warbled through the trembling air.
When soon, behold! the solemn silence broke,
And thus, in pleasing words the angels spoke:
"Immortal glory give to God on high,
Through all the lofty stations of the sky:
Let joy on earth, and endless peace ensue;
The great Messiah's born! thrice happy men! to you.
The great Messiah born! transporting sound!
To the wide world spread the blessed accents round,
What joy these long expected tidings bring!
To us is born a Savior and a King.
An infant in a virgin's arms he lies,
Who rides the winds, and thunders through the skies,
The God to whom the flaming seraph's bow,
Descends to lead the life of mortals now.
Come, we will lead you to the blessed abode,
Where in a manger lies the incarnate God;
Reduced to lodge among the sordid beasts,
Who all the spacious realms of light possessed;
And he, whose humble ministers we are,
Becomes a tender virgin's helpless care.
Through heaven but now the hasty tidings rung,
And anthems on the wondrous theme they sung.
Let air and heaven with joyful accents ring
In praises to the great Almighty King*
Let every mortal catch the happy sound,
And Peace and Happiness on earth abound.
A HYMN, Supposed to have been written by an English Officer.
HAIL Sovereign Lord, that first began
The scheme to rescue fallen man;
Hail matchless, free, eternal grace,
That gave my soul a hiding place!
Against the God that rules the sky,
I fought with hands uplifted high;
Despised the mercies of his grace,
Too grand to seek a hiding place.
Inwrap'd in thick Egyptian night,
And fond of darkness more than light.
Madly I run the sinful race,
Secure without a hiding place.
And thus eternal counsel ran,
"Almighty power arrest the man;"
I felt the arrows of distress,
And found I had no hiding place.
Indignant Justice stood in view,
To Sinai's fiery mount I flew;
But Justice cried with frowning face,
"This mountain is no hiding place."
At length a heavenly voice I heard,
And mercy for my soul appeared,
Which led me on with pleasing face,
To Jesus as my hiding place.
Should storms of sevenfold thunders roll,
And shake the globe from pole to pole;
No thunderbolts would daunt my face.
For Jesus is my hiding place.
FINIS.

