SHOCKING NARRATIVE OF THE MURDER OF Mr. Joseph Porter, BY CAPTAIN WILLIAM
CORRAN; On board of the Brig Falmouth, the 27th Day of May, 1794. Being on a
voyage from Port Royal, in Jamaica, to Belfast, in Ireland.

CONTAINING, An account of the conduct of the Captain, previous to the Murder;
also, the securing of him by the people afterward; who then put into a port
near Halifax, where the Captain wa^ sent, tried and sentenced to be hanged,
which sentence was put in execution on Monday, the 21st of July, 1794.

PRINTED AT WALPOLE. NEW HAMPSHIRE, BY ^. THOMAS AND D. CARLISLE, JUN.

M^^^^^^.

Shocking Narrative, etc.
ON (...) 24th day of March 1794, the brig Falmouth (...) from Port Royal,
Jamaica, bound to Belfast, in Ireland, to which place she belonged. At the time
she sailed, the following persons were on board:

William Corran, Master. Francis Turner, Mate. Henry Gilmore, John Douthard, --
Boyd, -- Carrol, Joseph York, (Mariners.) William Williams, a Cabin Boy. Joseph
Porter, a Passenger. And a Black Boy, Servent to Mr. Porter.

Nothing material happened on the voyage, until two of the hands, Boyd and
Carrol, were taken sick, and died apparently of violent fevers, the one
immediately after the other. -- During their illness, the Captain used to
inquire after their situation, and sent frequently from the cabin both Soup and
Coffee.

After the death of these men, which happened previous to the ^d of May, there
appeared an apparent difference in the conduct of the Captain, which showed
itself in particular instances of harsh treatment toward one another of the
Crew, whom he charged with an intention to poison him and run away with the
vessel.

Very soon after the death of the Men, they spoke an American Schooner, the
Master of which Captain Corran had before been acquainted with -- and who, on
hearing that he had lost two of his men, offered to supply him with two more.
Captain Corran thanked the American for his friendship, but told him he would
endeavor to do with the hands he had. This circumstance appeared strange to
the crew, as the loss of the men had rendered them but weak handed.

On the second of May, he took from the Mate a Quadrant, which he had given him
soon after their sailing; and likewise took from him his books of navigation;
taking into his own hands the entire navigatinn of the vessel.

Mr. Porter, the passenger, was in an extreme ill state of health, and was so
feeble as to be confined to his bed, which was in the star board stateroom. In
this situation he lay until the 24th of May, when the Mate being in the
larboard stateroom, and the Captain and Mr. Porter's servant in the cabin, the
Mate heard Captain Corran in warm language, abusing Mr. Porter, swearing that
he should not any longer stay in the stateroom, and ordering his black boy to
go immediately and bring his master into the cabin. This the boy attempted; but
finding himself unable to effect it; and Mr. Porter at the same time, begging
for God's sake that he might be suffered to lay where he was -- the Captain
entered the stateroom, and, with the assistance of the black boy, took Mr.
Porter by force, out of his bed, and supporting him himself under one arm, and
the black boy under the other, they brought him into the cabin, (he being
unable to walk himself) and sat him down in a chair. The Captain then ordered
the black boy to bring out his master's bed, and to make it up in the cabin,
upon two chests belonging to Mr. Porter. This being done, he compelled the
black boy to lay his master on the bed, and then sent for one of the top
gallant studding sails, which he made a sort of curtain to surround his bed.
After this transaction, he ordered the black boy out of the cabin, and, going
upon deck, gave a general order, that neither the black boy, nor any other
person should come into the cabin without his leave and that no person should
concern himself with Mr. Porter, as he would take care of him himself.

On the night of the 26th of May, about Midnight, the Captain sent for the
cabin boy; the boy came to him, and the Captain ordered him to fetch a candle;
after he had brought it, he damanded of the boy where he had been -- the boy
replied, it was his watch below: He then ordered him to strip off his jacket,
after which he bid him go to the locker and bring him the cat of nine tails.
The boy went to the locker, and told the Captain he could not find it: He
threatened to strike him with a cutlass, if he did not find it immediately, the
boy not being able to find it, he accordingly struck him with the flat of his
cutla^^ (...) which he took a pair of handcaffs out of the (...) the cabin, and
put them upon the boy's (...) then put a pistol to his breast and threat^^^^
(...) him. After some little time, the boy (...) opportunity to make his escape
out of the (...) as he ran across the deck he desired the (...) helm, if the
Captain inquired for him, to (...) he had jumped overboard. -- The boy ran
(...) into the hold, and hid himself for three days, (...) on some Indian corn
and sugar, which he foun^ (...) hold. Immediately after the boy left the cabin
(...) Captain fired his pistols through the cabin (...) and shattered them
considerably.

The 27th of May between the hours of 10 and (...) o'clock at night, the
Captain called Henry Gilmore (...) ordered him to bring a light. When Gilmore
can with the light, the Captain gave him a drink of grog and told him that he
hoped he would be in his favor, and that he was not afraid of the law. Gilmore
replied, that he did not wish to be against him or any other person. The
Captain soon after came upon deck, and desired that no person should be
permitted to come into the cabin, without orders from him, and that the watch
then on deck, should give the same charge to the watch which was to succeed
them. -- About a quarter past 12 o'clock the whole crew were alarmed by the
cries of Mr. Porter, exclaiming "MURDER! MURDER! etc." -- Through a hole in the
bulk head which parted the steerage from the cabin, and by looking down the
companion door, several of the crew saw Captain Corran striking at Mr. Porter
as he lay in his bed, with a cutlass. After striking him for some time, he
desisted for a short space, and coming up the companion ladder, began to abuse
Mr. Porter, damned him, and declaring that he was not worth five pounds in the
world. He than returned into the cabin again, and began to cut Mr. Porter as he
had done before, Mr. Porter again cried out and begged the Captain not to cut
him so, but to take a pistol and shoot him. He damned him, and said he would
not shoot him, but would cut him every half hour until day light. In a short
time, Mr. Porter begged him to desist, as he was (...) and it is supposed that
he died about this time, (...) were heard no more. Between one and (...), the
Captain came again on deck, with a (...) hand, and struck Mr. Porter's black
boy (...) ^^oulders, and bid him go down and dress (...) wounds. He also called
for a light and (...) with the boy into the cabin, and made (...) at Mr.
Porter's body with the cutlass, (...) What damn you, are you asleep?

(...) day light the Captain called John Douthard (...) cabin, who, on his
entering it found Mr. Por^^^ (...) his knees on the cabin floor, and his face
rest^^^ (...) ^n his bed, apparently lifeless. Captain Corran ^^^^red him to
take hold of Mr. Porter's legs, and (...) him on the bed. While Douthard was in
the act (...) ^oing this, he made several strokes at the body ov^^ his head,
which so intimidated Douthard, that he ^ropped the body and ran upon deck,
acquainting his companions that the Captain had murdered their passenger. At 4
o'clock the Captain came upon deck, and ordered Douthard to go down in the
cabin, and few Mr. Porter up in a blanket, and told him that Mr. Porter's
servant should assist him, Douthard refusing to, he seized him, and compelled
him by force to go into the cabin. By the Captain's order, with the assistance
of the black boy, he laid Mr. Porter's body on one of his own blankets, sewed
him up in it, and tied a white handkerchief round his head. The body was
mangled in a most shocking manner, there were large gashes about the hips,
above a foot long, he was also much cut about the arms: The sheet was very
bloody and much clotted blood was upon the floor, near the bed. After the body
was sewn up, Captain Corran ordered Douthard and the black boy to throw it out
of the cabin window. Douthard told him they were not able, and requested his
permission to call another person. He replied, that he would not let any other
person come into the cabin to help them. On finding, however, that they were
not able to effect the purpose themselves, he consented that Henry Gilmore
should be called. By the assistance of Gilmore the corpse was brought upon deck,
and laid upon a board in the gang way. From the companion door to the gang way,
there was a considerable quantity of blood which had run through the blanket as
they were carrying the body along. While the corpse was lying in the gang way,
the Captain came upon deck, leaned over the quarter rail, covered his eyes with
his hands, and appeared for some minutes much confused. He was roused from his
reverie by John Douthard, who asked him if they should heave the deceased
overboard. He seemed startled by the question, but bid them " away with him."
The body was accordingly committed to the sea. Immediately after this, he
ordered the vessel to be kept away N. W. and set the studding sails.

The Mate was obliged to keep out of the Captain's way, and was once forced to
go into the fore top -- and at other times to conceal himself in the hold, as
he had threatened to take away his life, and had pursued him apparently for
that purpose -- being whenever he came upon deck, constantly armed with a
cutlass and a pair of pistols.

On the 29th of May, the Captain sent several messages to the Mate, desiring
him to come upon deck, and declaring that he would not hurt him. The Mate
accordingly came up the fore scuttle, and being afraid to go aft, remained
behind the windlass: Captain Corran observing his shyness, and that his eye
appeared perpetually on him, told him he kept a damned, sharp look out: After
this he went down into the cabin, and kept for a considerable time, hammering
with a maul, whch led the crew to fear that he wanted to force out the lumber
port in order to founder the vessel. But it afterward appeared that he was
driving a great number of spikes into the after scuttle to fasten it down. --
About noon, Henry Gilmore who had been steering, was relieved from the helm,
and came forward where the Mate was, who inquired of him what course they were
steering. He informed him N. W. -- On which the Mate replied, that that course
would fetch no port in Europe, and that he was apprehensive that the Captain
had ill designs, both on them and the vessel. The Mate then consulted as many
of the crew as he conveniently could, who agreed to take the first opportunity
to secure the Captain. About an hour afterward the Captain came on deck, and
having walked to the tiller ropes, and turned round to proceed down the deck,
Joseph York, who was then at the helm, seized his arms behind, and struggling
with him, the rest of the crew came to his assistance, bound him, and brought
him into the cabin, where they secured his hands with a pair of hand cuffs
which they found in his chest.

Previous to his imprisonment, when he ordered the vessel, to be steered N. W.
he informed the crew that they were near the English Channel: But on the 30th
of May when the mate had got possession of his Quadrant, and was enabled to
take an observation, he found they were very near the latitude of Halifax, and
in about half an hour after they saw land; but a thick fog coming on, they were
not able to make a harbor until four days afterward, when they came to anchor
in Rose Bay between La Have and Lunenburgh, On searching for the books of
Navigation, after confining the Captain, they found that he had cut out of
every book the Table of the Sun's Declination. -- Immediately on their arrival
there the Mate went on shore, and made report to the magistrates of the
transaction o^ board the Brig Falmouth. -- The Captain was carried on shore,
and the Depositions of the people being taken, he was committed to prison, and
afterward brought to Halifax, where the Court of Admiralty was assembled on
Friday the 11th of July at the Court House, for the Trial of this unfortunate
Man, for the murder of Joseph Porter, a gentleman who took a passage on board
the Brig Falmouth, at Port Royal, Jamaica. -- The Court being opened with the
customary solemnities, the prisoner was arraigned, and pleaded not guilty, was
remanded for trial on Monday. On that day the trial commenced, and continued,
by adjourment, until Tuesday, when the examination on the part of the Crown
being ended -- the Prisoner was called upon by the Court to make his defense:
But declining to offer any thing in his defense -- he was again recommitted,
and the Court adjourned to nine o'clock on Tuesday. On Tuesday the Court again
assembled, and the Prisoner having nothing to say in his defense, the Court was
ordered to be cleared. After a short period the Court was again opened and the
Prisoner brought to the Bar, when his Excellency Governor Wentworth, the
President of the Court, addressed the prisoner; and declared, that the Court
have deliberately considered all the evidence which had been submitted to them,
were unanimously of opinion that he was guilty of the murder of JOSEPH PORTER.
His Excellency then demanded of the Prisoner if he had any thing to urge, why
sentence of Death should not be pronounced upon him. After hesitating a few
moments, the Prisoner began an imperfect narration of the proceedings on board
the Brig Falmouth, from her sailing from Jamaica, passing over the period when
the murder was committed, of which, however, he declared he was not guilty.
Having nothing further to offer, the President pronounced the awful Sentence of
Death upon him, and he was adjudged to be hanged on Monday the 21st of July,
between the hours of one and two o'clock at Point Pleasant, between the ebbing
and flowing of the tide.

On Monday the 21st of July this unhappy man, was carried from the Prison to
the Beach at Point Pleasant, where he satisfied, by the forfeiture of his life,
the injured Laws of the Country.

The foregoing Narrative contains every material fact related on the Trial of
William Corran; and perhaps there never was a Trial in which every witness
called, so perfectly corroborated the testimony of his fellow. -- But in the
midst of this coincidence of evidence, the mind is left at a loss for a clew,
by which to unrav^l the motive that could induce Captain Corran to commit a
Murder, attended by so many aggravated circumstances. -- The witnesses all
declared, they were unable to assign any reason -- that they knew of no quarrel
that subsisted between him and the deceased, previous to the 24th of May, when
he was ordered out of the state room; -- that previous to that period he had
treated Mr. Porter very kindly -- and that his uniform conduct, both in the
passage from Belfast to Jamaica and on the passage home, until the 2d of May,
had been such as to give no just cause of complaint to any of them.

Many have conjectured that a temporary insanity, at least must have been the
occasion of this horrid deed. To this conjecture every feeling mind must wish
to subscribe, especially when the testimony of respectable persons who have
known Captain Corran previous to this transaction, unite in describing him as a
man, distinguished by the general quietness and inoffensiveness of his manners.

Captain Corran was born in Ireland, in the town of Port a Far, in the County
of Down. He was a man of middle stature -- of a robust, athletick habit, and
possessing great bodily strength and activity. He was in the 32d year of his
age, and has left a father, two brothers and a sister, to lament his untimely
end.

He was in this place a few years ago, being then a foremast hand on board a
ship laden with Provisions from Ireland. His activity and behavior, were so
pleasing to the Captain, that before he left this port, he appointed him mate
of the ship.

What a contrast do the pleasing ideas that floated in his imagination at this
period of his first advancement in life form with the painful reflections that
must have crowded into his mind in his last painful visit to Halifax. He
feelingly noticed the contrast himself -- "Here" he exclaimed, "I was first
made mate of a vessel" -- and hesi^ating, he seemed by this manner as if he
would have added. "Here all my worldly prospects end -- here I must make my
exit."

At the mention of his father's name by a gentleman who attended him in his
last moments, he burst into a flood of tears, and appeared more affected by a
contemplation of the distress his death must occasion to his parent, than he
had ever shown on his own account.

FINIS.

