REMARKS ON THE BILL OF RIGHTS, CONSTITUTION AND SOME ACTS OF THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF VIRGINIA.

3d Art. of the Bill of Rights of Virginia -- "That Government is, or ought to
be, instituted for the common benefit, protection and security, of the People,
Nation, or Community; of all the various modes and forms of Government, that is
best, which is capable of producing the greatest degree of happiness and
safety, and is most effectually secured against the danger of
mal-administration; and that when any Government shall be found inadequate or
contrary to these purposes, a majority of the community has an indubitable,
unalienable, and indefeasible right, to reform, alter, or abolish it, in such
manner as shall be judged most conducive to the public weal.

1796.

CITIZENS OF VIRGINIA,
" THE Freedom of the Press is one of the great Bulwarks of Liberty, and can
never be restrained but by Despotic Government," -- Therefore every citizen has
the right of printing his thoughts of the Government and Laws under which he
lives. I conceived the Remarks contained in the following sheets, might be in
some measure beneficial to my Country, and have committed them to the Press. --
Perhaps some observations made may be somewhat incongruous to the popular
sentiment; however, I trust they will be found consistent with Truth and sound
Policy.

Those who write in favor of the reformation of a Government, generally
supposed to be established on the principles of Liberty, have many prejudices
to encounter. -- A jealousy which pervades all ranks of Citizens, and which is
the surest evidence of their attachment to the principles of Freedom, makes
them watch with vigilance the steps of a Reformer. And while this active spirit
is alive in my Countrymen, I have the consolation to hope that no Reformer,
howover he may cloak himself under the specious pretension to patriotic zeal,
will ever meet the approbation of Virginians unless supported by Truth.

REMARKS, etc.
CHAP. I. ARTICLE 1st of the BILL of RIGHTS.
"ALL men are by nature equally free and independent, and have certain inherent
rights of which when they enter into a state of society, they cannot by any
compact, deprive or divest their posterity; namely, the enjoyment of life and
liberty, with the means of acquiring and possessing property, and pursuing and
obtaining happiness and safety."

This, my countrymen, was the language of Virginia assembled in full and free
convention in 1776, -- when the recent experience of arbitrary power awakened
in every patriotic breast a determined opposition to Despotism, -- when
Americans had said they would be FREE. How forcible the expression -- how
pointed the sentiments this article contains! -- It will ever reflect honor
upon those worthy patriots who composed it, and upon the people whose exertions
in its support proved their attachment to its principles -- who under the
impressions of such principles fought and bled successfully.

Yes, "all men by nature are equally free and independent," and the history of
mankind evinces that all distinctions, titles and ensigns of royalty have
originated in the slavery of one party and despotism of another. While the
principles of liberty were well understood, mankind preserved their freedom and
independence. But when tyrants rose up and would enslave the world, they began
by taking advantage of the superstition of the crowd, by locking up the
fountains of wisdom and covering the human mind with a veil of ignorance. --
They knew the force of light and truth, and by degrees substituted in their
place ignorance and error. They persuaded to conquest and rapine, and
introduced the custom of rendering neighboring nations, tributary. Soon after
the custom or making slaves of the conquered obtained, and this was attended
with the most pernicious effects. Accustomed to behold others in a state of
vassalage, the genuine principles of liberty began to be corrupted. Mankind
soon doubted whether liberty was essential to happiness; and the poorer class
often sold themselves. By the habit of associating together, the servile spirit
increased. A few by degrees became possessed of greater power, which increased
as their wealth was augmented, till at length they ruled with despotic sway.
The multitude ignorant and inattentive glided imperceptibly to the lowest state
of vassalage, and not a trace of their former situation remained. Tyrants
imagining themselves secure, proceeded to more open and violent acts of
despotism. Sometimes indeed a poet would sing the lost liberty of his
countrymen, and in plaintive strains bemoan their unhappy situation; but he was
obliged to use figures and metaphors, and couch his meaning under such obscure
representations, as could be understood but by few, and were therefore totally
useless to the generality of mankind.

Here then we see the great importance of a general diffusion of knowledge, and
the great danger of tolerating slavery in any country.

Could any man have supposed the state which had adopted this as the first
article in her Bill of Rights, "all men are hy nature equally free and
independent," should not before this time have provided for the emancipation of
slaves? That the state which in the preamble to her constitution states as an
instance of royal misrule, "prompting our Negroes to rise up in arms against
us, those very Negroes whom by an inhuman use of his negative, he has refused
us permission to exclude by law," should have been nineteen years independent,
and yet passed no effectual act for the abolition of slavery? Is it material to
state in a bill of rights that all men by nature are equally free and
independent, and yet shall one half of the community be continued in slavery?
Have all men certain inherent rights, of which when they enter into a state of
society they cannot deprive or divest their posterity, and shall some be born
slaves? Have all men a right to the enjoyment of life and liberty, the means of
acquiring and possessing property, and shall some be neither free, acquire
property, nor possess it? Have all a right to be tried by an impartial jury of
twelve men of their vicinage, and shall four justices of the peace constitute a
court, to try and condemn one half of the community? -- And is not this the
situation of the slaves in Virginia? Her legislature suffers it to be so; yea
they refuse permission to bring in a bill for emancipation: My Countrymen, let
us not make a hypocritical declaration of a Bill of Rights.

The advantages resulting to Virginia from the emancipation of slaves may be
estimated by a comparison of her situation with that of the neighboring states
who have abolished slavery. -- I leave the reader to form his own conclusions
by making the comparison himself.

The disadvantages attendant on the toleration of slavery are numerous, obvious
to every observer, and in every man's mouth. It is injurious to every interest
civil and religious, pernicious to the morals of the people, promotive of
arrogance, indolence, impatience and extravagance, -- It impoverishes the
community, promotes distinctions odious and abominable, destroys the prime of
our soil, continues an expensive and injurious trade, prevents the
encouragement of manufactures, hinders our citizens from excelling in any of
the useful arts of life, gives our country a rude uncouth appearance, deprives
us of the advantage of faithful servants, whose interest would be a spur to
honesty and diligence, and upon the whole, is the ruin and disgrace of Virginia
and her neighboring Southern States.

I am aware that this is not a popular subject, but I am equally convinced that
if it is not soon the language of our legislature we may justly expect greater
calamities than we have yet experienced. -- How impolitic to have from their
very situation an enemy in the heart of our country! -- While they are slaves
their servile condition will render them disaffected to their rulers. Can the
slaves of a despot love? They may FEAR, but never can they LOVE.

CHAP. II. ART. 2d of the BILL of RIGHTS.
"THAT all power is vested in, and consequently derived from the people; that
magistrates, are their trustees and servants, and at all times amenable to
them."

Let us examine how far the Constitution corresponds with this article. -- The
15th article of the Constitution states and provides, That the Governor with
the advice of the Privy Council shall appoint justices of the peace for the
counties, and in case of vacancies or a necessity of increasing their number
hereafter, such appointments to be made on the recommendation of the county
courts -- The clerks shall be appointed by the respective county courts -- The
sheriffs and coroners shall be nominated by the respective county courts
approved by the governor, with the advice of the privy council, and
commissioned by the governor. The justices shall appoint constables, etc. etc.
-- Here then are justices appointed by a governor -- Does this correspond with
the 2d article of the bill of rights, which states that all power is vested in
and derived from the people? The governor creates justices, the justices
clerks, sheriffs, constables, and new justices -- Has this the appearance of
keeping the legislative, executive, and judiciary branches of government
separate and distinct, as the 3d article of the constitution provides? (except
that justices of the peace shall be eligible to either house of Assembly.)

Here is a power created by a governor afterward to create itself -- which,
may make laws, for it may constitute a majority of the legislature -- set upon
the bench to determine upon these laws, appoint its own clerk to record its
decisions, create its own sheriff to serve its executions, its coroners etc. --
Is not this blending the three powers which should be kept separate and
distinct?

Of what use to say all power is derived from the people? Let us see what
degree a magistrate on the County Court bench is removed from the people. 1.
The people elect the Assembly. 2. The Assembly the governor. 3. The governor
appoints the first set of magistrates. 4. The magistrate appoints his
successor, for recommendations are seldom refused -- Thus in the 4th degree
from the people we come to a justice of the peace -- two degrees farther off
than president of the United States -- now is this comportable with all power
being derived from the people? -- The very idea is ridiculous -- Cousins in the
fourth degree of consanguinity but seldom claim kin.

Enquire what is the effect of this strange medley? You will be told a parcel
of ignorant beings are placed on the bench who know little of law and it is to
be feared often too little of the purport of their title; you will be told of
lazy, ignorant drunken clerks, and bankrupt sheriffs, as the saying is, like
priest like people. You will be told of magistrates on the bench drunk,
deciding contrary to reason, law and every principle of equity -- Hence come
appeals after appeals, and more iniquity and litigation than I can enumerate.

But Says the Bill of Rights "magistrates are the trustees and servants of the
people, and at all times amenable to them."

How are you to impeach a magistrate of the County Court? by the General
Assembly; yes and of that branch of government they may constitute the
majority. How then is the matter likely to terminate? Boast then no longer of a
Bill of Rights.

CHAP. III. Article 3d of the Bill of Rights.
[Read at large in the title page]

This article is honorable to the convention who framed it and is the great
restorative of a defective constitution. It wisely provides for a reform in the
government when it shall be found inadequate to produce happiness and safety
and to prevent maladministration. Fear not then my countrymen the exercise of
your right, your indubitable, unalienable and indefeasible right, to call a
convention, to revise the constitution, to retrench, alter and amend its parts
as circumstances may require.

CHAP. IV. ART. 4.
That no man or set of men, are entitled to exclusive or separate emoluments,
or privileges from the community, but in consideration of public services;
which not being descendible, neither ought the offices of magistrate,
legislator, or judge to be hereditary. -- Then I humbly conceive magistrates
should not have the power of recommending others to that office. What is it
less than to give the father an opportunity of having his son appointed.

ART. 5th. That the excutive and legislative powers of the state should be kept
separate and distinct from the Judiciary, etc. This article is framed upon
republican principles and contains an examination of important rights. It
surpasses any encomium I can bestow; and requires only an attentive perusal to
command the approbation of every friend to democracy.

CHAH. V. ART. 5th of the CONSTITUTION,
Provides two representatives for each counts, etc.

It has long been matter of complaint that the state is unequally represented
in consequence of this article of the constitution. Some counties are more than
one-third larger than others, some have one-third sewer, who are entitled to
vote -- But a small county has the same number of representatives -- the
smallest with the largest in the state -- 100 freeholders send as many
delegates to the assembly as 500 -- and as the proportion of smaller counties
is something above that of the larger -- one-third only of the state may pass a
law, to which the remaining two-thirds may be opposed. So that a minority of
the people may rule.

This evil might be remedied, if the people would exercise their right to
revise the constitution. The state might be divided into districts, and each
district might send one or two representatives according to the number of
voters. Certainly an equal representation is matter of consequence and might
easily be procured. I submit the matter to my countrymen.

CHAP. VI.
Article the 11th of the constitution, provides for the election of a privy
council of state, and that they shall have a sum of money divided among them,
etc. This has long appeared to me a useless branch of our government, and might
I think be dispensed with and the expense saved. When the people are told that
it will save 6667 dollars, perhaps I shall meet with many of my opinion -- And
when they are further informed that a privy council is of no material
consequence to the state, perhaps some one may ask why they are not discarded?
Does it requite eight privy councillors and a governor, to prevent the
importation of the smallpox or yellow-fever? to issue a proclamation to make
vessels suspected perform quarantine forty days, to pardon now and then a
horse-thief, to commission a county surveyor, militia officer, etc?

ART. 12th. "The delegates for Virginia to the continental congress shall be
chosen annually, or superceded in the mean time by joint ballot of both houses
of the assembly."

This article has been some time dead, but seems to deserve a funeral
procession of a convention of the people at the burial.

CHAP. VII.
Article 14th of the Constitution provides for the appointment of the court of
Appeals.

Now of this court there are five judges, while the General court at present
consists of ten -- Suppose then, the present General court was made a court of
Appeals? Would there not be a better chance for wisdom among the ten? Perhaps
some one might object that the appeals are carried from the district Courts,
and this would be bringing the same cause before two at least of the same
judges -- just as if I were to appeal from Dick to Richard. -- This objection
is easily obviated -- Let the court of appeals require seven judges, then any
cause which might be brought in that court, from any particular district might
be tried by seven different judges -- because those who presided in that
district and tried the cause first, might retire if the whole ten judges were
present, and have an odd judge to keep them company.

But as some people are fond of putting difficulties in the way -- It might be
asked what would you do with cases referred by the district Judges to the
General court? The answer is equally obvious and reasonable. Let this be the
final determination of such cases. -- This would save a good deal of expense in
the appeal business, and I doubt not but that the decision would be as strictly
legal.

By discarding the present court of Appeals we should save 5000 dollars, which
if added to the 6667 before saved will amount to 11,687 dollars -- a pretty
round sum; a penny saved and wisdom gained is something worth while. The people
will think of the matter and form their opinions accordingly.

CHAP. VIII.
ARTICLE 16th of the BILL of RIGHTS,

Secures the free enjoyment of religious opinions. according to the dictates of
conscience, and the free exercise of christian duties; and declares it the duty
of all to practice, christian forbearance, love and charity toward one
another. Article 14th of the Constitution provides in the last clause, that all
ministers of the gospel of every denomination, shall be incapable of being
elected members of either house of Assembly, or Privy Council. Can any man
reconcile these two articles? Religion is left to every man's conscience and
can only be directed by reason and conviction, and yet if I embrace the
Christian system, and inculcate the gospel, as a preacher, I am rendered
incapable of serving my country in any office of State. It is the duty of all
to practice Christian charity except to a Christian Minister. Is not this to
admit all religions and stigmatize One? Why not prohibit a Deist? Is he more
worthy of confidence? -- But perhaps, his polite profanity and graceful
blasphemy is a recommendation -- (I do not here mean a Deist from principle and
conviction, for he must of consequence be a moral character or a great liar.) I
mean the pretended upstart, who imagining there is no small share of
discernment in discovering that the Bible is all a fable, deals out his
borrowed sarcasms, with pompous strut, and "damnable" impudence. But if
required to draw up his own creed, would either discover his abominable
ignorance, or cover it over with the affectation of sublime contempt for the
superstitious wretch who should presume to ask it. I know for my part no more
contemptible insignificant being, than one of your second hand Deists. But let
him be what he will he is fit by the provision of the Bill of Rights and
constitution to legislate for Virginia, if happily he be no preacher of the
Gosple.

Is it because of their lucrative office that they are prohibited? Alas the
Halcyon days of the drunken clergy are over! the sixteen thousand weight of
tobacco, has fled with the remains of priestcraft beyond the Atlantic, where it
was first provided. A man has nothing to recommend him now as a preacher but
rectitude of conduct. The time for making saints by the holy consecration of
his lordship the Bishop is over. We hear indeed of one Virginia Bishop, but his
scepter at present rules but a very confined circle, -- I am told however, he
is a mighty good moral man.

Were the framers of the constitution afraid of another establishment? I wonder
then that Deism, the refined religion of the most exalted improvement of
rationality, has never been proposed. We live it is said in the "Age of
Reason." What a pity that her vot aries do not take advantage of the zenith of
heglory! Perhaps her sun may go down in wrath upon an ungrateful people!

CHAP. IX.
AN act of Assembly (passed 17th of December 1792) makes it felony without
benefit of clergy to steal any mare, horse or gelding, foal or filley.

The great Montesquieu says Vol. 1. B. 13. Cha. 4th. P. 221 --

"Liberty is in its highest perfection, when criminal laws, derive each
punishment, from the criminal nature of the crime. There are then no arbitrary
decisions; the punishment does not flow from the capriciousness of the
legislator, but from the very nature of the thing; and man uses no violence to
man." Every one will easily perceive that the above cited act of Assembly does
not correspond with this principle of Montesquiu -- "That Liberty is favored by
the nature and proportion of punishments." For it makes the lower species of
crimes equal with the higher, and punishes without distinction the horse theif
and the murderer.

The same writer speaking of the power of punishment says, "Experience shows
that in countries remarkable for the lenity of penal laws, the spirit of the
inhabitants is as much affected by them, as in other countries by severer
punishments. The imagination grows accustomed to the one as well as the other."

Again when there is a breach of security with respect to property, there may
be some reasons for inflicting capital punishments. But it would perhaps be
much better and more natural, that crimes committed against the security of
property should be punished with the loss of property; and this ought to be the
case if men's fortunes were common or equal. But as those who have none, are
generally readiest to attack the property of others, it has been found
necessary instead of a pecuniary to substitute corporal punishments. I join him
in saying, that, what he has here advanced is extremely favorable to the
liberty of the citizen, and is founded in nature. Experience also proves that
corporal punishments of the lesser degree, have a stronger tendency to prevent
the commission of these crimes than those of a capital nature -- In many places
where the citizens of this common wealth have been infested with horse thieves,
though every exertion was made to bring them to justice, and some suffered
death, others continued these practices till the introduction of Lynch's law.
The free exercise of this, though inconsistent with the principles of liberty,
and often managed in too arbitrary a manner, has extirpated these pests from
neighbourhoods and rendered this property before uncertain, safe and secure. I
would by no means be understood to recommend this mode of proceedure, but
rather to insist upon a fair and legal trial by the twelve jurors, and after
full conviction of guilt, to use liberally the lash and same length of
confinement, or any punishment short of death which may be deemed sufficient.

What some advance, viz. that a man who would steal a horse can never
afterward make a good citizen, I am by no means willing to admit -- There has
been many a brave soldier whose back bore the lasting records of the Cat with
nine tails -- and there have been some instances of pardoned criminals becoming
useful citizens.

A man deserves death, who has attempted or perpetrated the crime of murder.
Life for life is consistent with reason. In this case the punishment of death
is the remedy as it were of a sick society. But surely, lesser crimes call for,
lesser punishments. The loss of a horse can ruin comparatively but few. But he
who is deprived of life or liberty has lost all that is dear and valuable.

CHAP. X.
An act passed the tenth of December, 1793, provides in the 22d clause -- Where
goods cannot be sold for three-fourths of their value, the debtor may give bond
and security for the payment of the debt in twelve months. An act highly useful
to the debtor, and often the best means of satisfying the creditor. But an act
passed during the last cession of the Assembly -- has provided for the
abolition of replevin after such a time.

I shall only observe here (with Montesquieu) great is the superiority which
one citizen has over another, by lending him money, which the latter borrows in
order to spend, and of course has no longer in possession. What must be the
consequence, if the laws of a republic, make a further addition to this
servitude and subjection, or in other language this imprisonment and sale of
property at three-fourths of its value? Can this act be intended to accommodate
our good friends the British merchants?

CHAP. XI.
IT may not be improper here to suggest that the Constitution should limit the
wages of the members of Assembly. To leave the matter to their determination is
perhaps throwing a temptation in their way. Indeed the last assembly agreed not
to be satisfied under twelve shillings per day; and some I am told thought
fifteen little enough. This may be, but suppose, they were to increase 2 s
every session, delegates would make fortunes at that rate.

I think their conduct in this particular merits the disapprobation of the
people, not so much on account of the largeness of the addition as the
precedent it established. Their usual wages had been ten shillings, there was
then an implied contract that they should serve the people at this price when
they were elected, and though it might have been proposed that the wages of the
Assembly should be raised from and after the expiration of that session, it was
highly improper that they should give themselves an additional sum.

CHAP. XII.
IN the first part of these remarks, I was necessarily led to show the
inconsistency of tollerating slavery, when the bill of rights had declared all
men by nature equally free and independent -- I shall here resume the subject
and endeavor to illustrate the evil more clearly and if possible recommend a
remedy.

Montesquieu, -- speaking of slavery says, "The state of slavery is bad. It is
neither useful to the master nor the slave; not to the slave, because he can do
nothing from a motive of virtue; not to the master because by having too great
an authority over his slaves, he insensibly accustoms himself to the want of
all moral virtues, and from hence grows fierce, hasty, severe, choleric,
voluptuous and cruel. In moderate (by which he means republican) states, it is
a point of the highest importance, that there should not be a great number of
slaves. The political Liberty of those states adds to the value of civil
Liberty and he who is deprived of the latter is also deprived of the former. He
sees the happiness of a society of which, he is not so much as a member; he
sees the security of others fenced by laws himself without any protection. He
sees that his master has a soul which can enlarge itself, while his own is
constrained to submit to continual depression. Nothing can more assimilate a
man to a beast, than living among freemen himself a slave. Such people as these
are the natural enemies of the society and their number must be dangerous." I
grant you this is a severe representation of the case; several acts have passed
tending to mitigate the state of slavery in Virginia. But still I must adopt
the language of Stern, -- But still slavery howso'eer disguised, thou art a
bitter draught.' I have quoted enough to demonstrate the evil -- Let us aim at
a remedy.

Paley in his Moral Philosophy has this remark -- "The great revolution which
has taken place in the Western World may possibly conduce (and who knows but
that it was designed?) to accelerate the fall of this abominable tyranny
(alluding to slavery;) and now that this contest and the passions which
attended it are no more, there may succeed perhaps a season for reflecting --
whether a legislature which had so long lent its assistance to the support of
an institution replete with human misery, was fit to be trusted with an empire,
the most extensive that ever obtained in any age, or quarter of the world."

He alludes here and with great justice, to the (...) legislature, the authors
of this evil; and well may we conclude from sad experience of the evil, that
they were not fit to be trusted. No doubt this excelent writer had a deep sense
of the evils introduced by slavery, and it was natural enough to suppose, that
a people who had bravely resisted British Tyranny and established their
Independence, would have abolished this institution. And I would now suppose
that it will yet be the case. -- Several efforts have been made and I doubt not
would have been attended with success, but for this great objection. The
discharging of slaves from all obligation to obey their masters, which would be
the consequence of a general emancipation, would have no better effect, than to
let loose one half of mankind upon the other. There is however one safe method
still remaining. I mean a gradual emancipation carried on by provisions of law
and under the protection of civil government. In this way the Greek and Roman
slavery was abolished -- by this method the Northern States have some of them
effected the desirable purpose -- and it is hoped by these means, this odious
institution will be banished from Virginia.

CHAP. XIII.
That the government should be revised is obvious to all who think of the
matter. That the people have a right to do so, the bill of rights has very
judiciously declared -- and that the exercise of this right cannot be attended
with any bad consquences, I think that love of Liberty which pervades the
breast of every real Virginian is sufficient security. To secure the happiness
of the people is the object which should ever be kept in view. But that in many
cases under the present constitution this is not sufficiently secured, many
have been a long time convinced. The administration of justice under the
present system of County courts is a proof of this. The evils resulting from
the local situation of the county court magistrates, are serious and alarming.
-- However upright they may be, yet the power of prejudice often may lead them
astray, for "humanum est errare." A particular acquaintance with the parties
litigant, a representation of the case by one concerned, the loadstone of
consanguinity, may incline the mind so far as to prevent an impartial decision.
Indeed a good man man feel himself embarrassed in a situation so very delicate.

The ignorance of the magistrates must prevent, them (...) from knowing what
judgment to give. And as they have no immediate reward for their trouble they
cannot be expected to bestow time in studying the laws of the land so as to be
qualified to give an opinion strictly legal.

Their being made eligible to either house of assembly and returning again to
their judicial capacity, and perhaps in mediately to exercise the office of
sheriff, is allowing them priveleges and exposing them to temptations, which
may be attended with dangerous consequences. It is certainly inconsistent with
every principle of democracy.

That they should nominate sheriffs and appoint clerks is by no means favorable
to the liberty and security of the people.

But as it is doing nothing to point out evils without aiming at a remedy, with
much diffidence I presume to offer one.

To remedy the want of knowledge at present too apparent, let a law be passed
or the constitution provide, that all judges of inferior courts should pass an
examination touching their legal knowledge before three judges of the superior
Courts, that they be appointed by the general Assembly upon their producing a
certificate of their examination stating that they were acquainted with the
laws of their country. That previous to their appointment they should be
recommended by a jury of their vicinage as persons of good moral character.

To remedy the evils resulting from their local situation, let the state be
divided into twelve districts or more if found necessary, and let them be
styled circuits. -- Let one judge appointed in the manner already proposed (or
any other mode better calculated to answer the purpose) preside in a district,
ride to the different Courthouses, sit so many days twice or thrice a year, and
be sent to a different circuit every succeeding court. Let these be styled
circuit Judges and have an adequate salary -- suppose one thousand Dollars
each. By an easy calculation this money may be raised without any additional
Tax.

By discarding the Privy Council, we gain Dollars. 6667 By making the General
Court a Court of Appeals and discarding the present judges of that court, we
save 5000 11,667. There are eighty seven counties in the state and the profits
arising from each clerkship may on an average be estimated at Eight hundred
Dollars; now was this office farmed out every year, men better qualified might
be procured for 600 dollars; many for that sum would study the business and the
chance of growing rich would no longer be confined to one man in a county. Now
by this management each county would gain 200 dollars and the agregate sum
would amount to 17,400 Add the sums above 11,667 Here we gain 29,067 Now twelve
circuit judges at 1000 dollars each, will be 12,000 17,067

Here then is adequate provision for salary and a considerable remainder to go
into the Treasury. Let it also be provided that no judge of the circuit court
shall be eligible to ither house of assembly.

Let the office ossheriff be elective; I doubt not but that the taxes would be
more cheerfully paid, and that sheriffs would be less subject to bankruptcy.

Is not a plan of this nature more consistent with that excellent principle of
keeping the different branches of government separate and distinct? Is it not
more likely to ensure the impartial administration of justice?

I am aware that if county courts are abolished, there will remain much local
business which should not occupy the time of the circuit courts, for this
purpose let magistrates be appointed or elected by the people to continue in
office four or five years, or those now in office be continued. This is a
sphere in which they are qualified to move, viz. repairing Courthouses,
Prisons, Highways, Bridges, trying warrants, etc.

Here they may move without endangering the community.

CHAP. XIV.
I HAVE attempted to make such remarks as have occurred to my mind, to point
out evils which appear to me to exist, and propose remedies which might tend to
prevent them. If they are founded in reason and consistent with civil and
political liberty, I trust they will meet the approbation of my fellow citizens.

I beg leave here to subjoin a few more remarks of a general nature. --

Political happiness must result from political freedom -- and every law which
tends to preserve the liberty and happiness of the people should be immediately
adopted and regularly executed.

It is remarked generally by strangers that the people in the Northern States,
are in a much better situation, than the Virginians and their Southern
neighbors. That they improve much more rapidly in the knowledge of every useful
art and invention, and by these means become more independent and respectable.
That there is surely a difference cannot be denied. Many causes conspire to
bring it about. Among these it may not be improper to mention, the defects too
apparent in our Constitution and Laws -- The toleration of slavery -- and the
extensive scale on which we continue the Tobacco trade. To prove this last
cause an evil, I solicit attention to the following particulars. --

It must be the prime of our soil which is allotted to the culture of this
plant. The consequence is that our lands are cut and cleared up wherever the
soil promises a flourishing crop. In good strong land the best timber is
generally found -- But this is sacrificed to the main object, and in profligate
abundance committed to the flames. Hence so much of our land is rendered in a
great measure useless. -- Hastily cut down -- injudiciously tended, in a few
years whole tracts (where the country is hilly) are swept into the valleys and
covered with immense bodies of sand, which it would require the work of ages to
remove. From the waste of timber comes the necessity of importing many articles
from foreign countries or neighboring states, which as the saying is, cost more
than they come to; a saying so much in vogue as to need no explication.

The time and trouble expended in the culture of Tobacco is another object
worthy notice. -- Spring, Summer, Fall and Winter, prove little enough for the
immense toil -- Hence often it happens, that too little provender is made for
the support of stock -- and it is no uncommon thing in traveling through
Virginia in the months of February and March, to have the tender feelings of
humanity tortured with the appearance of horses, hogs and cattle, hardly able
to creep upon the earth. --

Picture to your imagination a valuable horse, without flesh on his bones, or
skin on his back, after sweating in the plough a whole summer, -- no or without
strength to walk or skin to keep the yoke from his flesh -- But as the
appearance of misery even in the brute creation, is torturing to the generous
mind, so is the description, -- These are the fruits of Tobacco.

Attend also to the price it bears when carried to market, if happily it be not
refused. -- From twenty-four to thirty shillings an hundred weight is a liberal
calculation, and is this sufficient to recompense the direful drudgery? Let
every one be his own judge.

Will any man say, it becomes necessary, this alone will command cash -- and
enable to pay taxes, etc. -- This is false reasoning -- The culture of Wheat
would be far more profitable -- There is no danger as some suppose of
overstocking the market. Rather the more Wheat we make, the better price we
shall get. When other nations meet with a ready supply from the plenty in our
markets -- it will then be an object worth notice and our ports will be crowded
with ships to carry it away.

Another thing to be remarked, the extensive culture of Tobacco is a heavy tax
upon the people. It subjects them to the necessity of depending more upon
foreign markets than home manufactures. And in proportion as a country is
obliged to depend upon fereign instead of internal resources, are they poorer
and less independent.

Perhaps there is no country more blessed as to air, soil produce, etc. than
Virginia -- But by reason of impolitic management these blessings are but
little improved. A host of foreign merchants, take advantage of our imprudence,
pour in their toys and fripperies and reduce our short-sighted citizens to a
state of debt and embarrassment. My countrymen cannot forget the immense sums
due British merchants and if they reflect but a moment, they will lament with
me the slavery and difficulties under which many of our citizens, are at this
moment laboring. -- Picture to yourselves the hundreds, who must part with
house and home and every atom (...) property to satisfy greedy creditors. --
But all this has resulted from depending on the Tobacco trade. Let this
business be continued but a few years longer -- British merchants have nothing
more to do, but credit largely, by and by bring about a wardship themselves to
England and after Seven, Eight, or Ten years struggle make a peace, upon
condition, that all their debts shall be paid with interest -- After a few
years peace, they have only to propose a Treaty of Amity, etc. which American
Senators will be found to adopt in conjunction with some wise President, and
saddle the community with insolvencies. -- But I trust my countrymen will at
least grow wise by experience. Make only half the Tobacco -- try this a few
years -- I doubt not but the price will be double what it now is, and from the
extensive culture of wheat and a proper attention to manufactures our citizens
in a tenfold better situation.

CHAP. XV.
ANOTHER remark founded in truth, is that Education does not flourish with the
Virginians, in proportion to the advantages they enjoy. This is also owing in a
great measure to the early habits we form of expecting our support from
Africans. Necessity is the mother of invention and humility the road to
knowledge.

There is a wide field open here for the exertions of our legislature -- A much
more commendable employment, than imposing penalties on those assisting a poor
Negro, who supposing himself entitled to freedom appeals to courts of law and
is unfortunately cast. A few wholesome regulations would soon place education
upon a much more respectable footing.

The establishment of Colleges and Free-Schools in every district would tend to
a more general diffussion of knowledge, by rendering it more easy to obtain.
This in a short time would produce a visible effect upon the temper and morals
of the people. We should soon have our houses of Assembly, filled with men of
political descernment -- and be no longer reduced to the necessity of electing
many who are totally uninformed. -- Our courts of law would be supplied with
men of legal information and we should no longer complain of the ignorance of
county court magistrates. -- Our bar would be graced with men of profound
erudition in the science of law and jurisprudence, instead of being pestered
with tristing Quibblers. -- We should have Physicians skilled in the nature of
diseases, the construction of the human frame and the various medicines suited
to the situation of the sick in the room of pert Quacks, affecting a look of
sagacity to grace an enormous account. Our pulpits would be distinguished by
the abilities of divines skilled in the wisdom of revelation, and capable of
refuting the errors which abound -- instead of unmeaning declaimers beset with
narrow prejudice.

It is in a republican government (says Montesquieu) that the whole power of
education is required -- The laws of education in a republic should have virtue
as their object. This virtue may be defined the love of the laws and our
country. As this love requires a constant preference of public to private
interest, it is the source of all political virtues -- for they are nothing
more than this very preference itself. This love is particularly necessary in
Democracies. In these alone the government is intrested to private citizens.
Now government is like every thing else, to preserve it we must love it. Has it
ever been heard that Kings were not send of monarchy, or that despotic princes
hated arbitrary power?

Every thing therefore depends on establishing this love in a republic; and to
inspire it ought to be the principal business of Education.

Here then we may very justly infer the impolicy of importing teachers from
foreign countries, whose minds are already formed upon the principles of
Monarchy. But this has originated from the necessity of the case. Colleges and
free schools under the protection of the legislature, and the fostering care of
a sound democratic constitution would be the only effectual preservative
against the evil.

The want of a liberal and manly education will render us unable to perceive
the value of liberty. It will also prevent the acquisition of that dignity and
authority of mind, which alone can make a successful stand against the
encroachments of power. Ignorance is mean, and cannot offer these generous
sacrifices which our duty to our country demands, when its liberties are
endangered. A mind destitute of a proper education, will be easily deluded by
the sophistical arguments of those who, to serve selfish puposes, are ready to
explain away every dear-bought privilege, with a view to make converts to
doctrines detrimental to the rights of mankind. And with respect to those, who
are educated indeed, but educated in the manners and sentiments of monarchical
countries, their hearts are not American.

CHAP. XVI.
I SHALL now conclude the remarks, with observing, that the great fundamental
principles of political liberty and civil freedom are too little secured by our
present constitution and laws. And perhaps I am not far wrong when I assert,
that at least two thirds of those who think at all about matters of government
are of the same opinion. -- The generality of our honest industrious citizens,
seldom concern themselves about political affairs. Engaged in the commendable
employments of husbandry and agriculture, and persuaded they live in a land of
liberty, they feel contented. Peace and Harmony, Friendship and hospitality are
the natural consequences, and I boast in adding the distinguishing
characteristics of the citizens of Virginia. -- Every good man will rejoice
that this is the case and that the evils which may result from our present
system of government are not at this time sensibly experienced in a general
degree.

But all this is no argument against a revision of the government. For as in
the human body diseases lie sometimes a long while dormant, and the mortal
frame appear to enjoy health and vigor; yet at length they break out, and as
water confined in limits overleaps the bounds and hurry this earthly tabernacle
to the dust -- So it is with governments. -- Under the worst of constitutions
nations sometimes enjoy happiness, till the demon of arbitrary power ascending
the throne, plunge them into the depths of misery and slavery. Then my
countrymen, let us seize the occasion which a state of tranquillity affords --
delays are dangerous. And evils are always more easily cured, the earlier fit
exertions, and proper remedies are applied.

A Virginian Born and Bred.


