Traveling Millennarian TO THE PEOPLE OF AMERICA.

REV. i. 3. For th^^^ me is at hand -- Joseph's corn i^^^^pt -- (...) ^^^end of
(...) -- The Millennarian of Christ (...) on ^^^th for (...) thousand (...) --
Th^^^ (...) dead.

GENESIS xliii. 16^ And when Joseph saw that Benjamin w^^^ (...) them, he said to
the ru^^r of his house, '^^^ing th^se (...), for these m^^ shall (...) with me
at noon.'

REV. xxii. 10. He which testifies these things, says 'Surely I come
quietly.' Amen. Even so, come Lord Jesus.

PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, MOLLESTON CORREY, 1796.

TO THE READER.
IN 1783, at the Cross Roads, I made known the coming in of Christ's peaceable
kingdom -- a^ Dover also -- and next in Philadelphia, and in many places in
Pennsylvania and the Jerseys; and also wrote a Letter and delivered it to the
Congress in Princeton College. And in 1784, I sent Letters ^^^me Baptist
Associations; and traveled through New England, proclaiming the day of the
Lord near at hand: which I did also in Nova Scotia, and ever since, for twelve
years -- And now I have written upon the subject, to make it known more
extensive as the day approaches more near.

I am yours in Christ Jesus, MOLLESTON CORREY.

CONTENTS.
BY the typical representations, in the Old Testament teaching of Christ's
Spiritual kingdom.
1st. By a great plenty and a famine in Egypt Page 8 2d. By David's wars
against the Philistines. Page ib. 3d. Solomomon's kingdom and temple Page 9
4th. God created all things in six days Page 10 5th. By the priests sounding
the r^^'s borns round Jericho Page 11 6th. The prophet's cleansi^^ ^^he wa^ers
of Jericho ib. 7th. Jacob's se^^^^de for ^^achel Page 12 8th. The deliverance
of Mordecai and Esther obtained Page 13 9th. Elis^a's offering: and his
destroying the false prophets Page 16 The Promises quoted Page 17 CONCLUSION.
Verses on my past state of Life; and on the Antichrist of false worship.
BABYLON's DOWNFALL.
The Saints' Deliverance.
ARISE ye Saints, look up and view
The dawning of the Millennium day!
O come, your courage now renew,
And drive your rising fears away.
The whore forsaken, mourns her state,
And haughty Babylon downward bends,
While Jesus to avenge your blood,
In storms of flaming wrath desc^^^s:
And while he deals his fury round,
His haughty foes to consume,
He with his arm will guard your way,
And lead you to your heavenly home.
Then shall all the heathen lands resound
From shore to shore his fame --
And thou, America, in songs,
Redeeming love proclaim.
EXCELLENCY OF WISDOM.
ALL wisdom comes from the Lord, and is with him for ever. Who can number the
sands of the sea, or the drops of rain and the days of eternity? Who can find
out the height of heaven, and the breadth of the earth, and the deep? and
wisdom, wisdom has been before all things, and the understanding of prudence
from everlasting. The word of God most high is the fountain of wisdom. To whom
has the root of wisdom been made manifest, or who has known her wise
councils, or understood her great experience? There is one wise and greatly to
be feared; the Lord sits upon his throne, he created her, and saw her, and
poured her out upon all his works. She is with all flesh, according to his
gift; he has given her to them that love him and as God has promised, 'Seek
and ye shall find, ask and it shall be given unto you.' For secret things are
with him, and none can find out the Almighty to perfection; for there was no
man on earth or saint in heaven worthy to open the book or unloose the seals.
(Rv. v. 5.) Behold the lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David has
prevailed to open the book and unloose the seven feals thereof; which does open
unto his servants his mind, and will^^^ he makes them, his instruments for the
doing of his work, in building his spiritual temple of lively stones, fitted
and prepared by grace, and laid on the corner stone, a strong foundation, the
rock of eternal ages, Jesus Christ, the son of God, as Solomon's wisdom and
glory, and the magnificency of the house he built typified. (1 Kings ii. 45.)
And King Solomon shall be blessed, and the throne of David shall be established
before the Lord forever. And we see how wonderfully the Lord blessed him to
make him king instead of his father David, to reign in Israel, and to bring a
change of the times from wars and desolations, and to establish a peaceable
kingdom; and for this purpose the Lord appeared to him. (1 Kings iii. 5.) In
Gibeon the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream by night; and God said, 'Ask
what I shall give thee.' Upon this Solomon begins to express with all his heart
filled with thankfulness for the great mercies he had given his father, and
that he had given him a son to set on his throne, breaks forth into prayer and
praise, and acknowledges himself unable, being but a little child. I know not
how to go out or to come in. Thy people is a great people that cannot be
numbered for multitude; give, therefore, thy servant an understanding heart,
that I may judge thy people, and discern between good and bad. Here is example
for all, ^^lers both of church and state. O my dear people, y^^ whom God has
raised up to rule the states, give the people good laws, that you may enjoy a
blessing and not a curse; and that your speech may please the Lord as Solomon's
did: for he did not ask for long life, nor for riches, nor the life of his
enemies; but understanding to discern judgment, and the Lord granted his
request; and (1 Kings iii. 12.) so, I have given thee an understanding heart,
and there shall be none like unto thee all thy days.

So King Solomon was king over all Israel, and all the princes were under him,
and all the officers of his that ruled, every (...) according to his charge,
that they had over the work and the workmen which were employed in building the
temple of the Lord at Jerusalem; which typified, in a law dispensation, the
glories of the gospel in the conversion of sinners, 1st. By Christ's mission
declared by John the Baptist preaching in the wilderness, proclaiming liberty
to captives, and the opening of the prison doors to them that are bound: and of
the appearing of the promised Messiah that was foretold by all the prophets --
and proclaimed by the wise men from the east, directed by a star to Bethle^^^m,
where the young child was born and laid in a manger; which, in the fullness of
time, at thirty years of age, he began his public ministry in proclaiming the
truth of all the prophecies; and by his miracles, which he wrought before their
eyes, which plainly testified to a sinful world of sinners, that he was the
Christ that should come, and qualify and sit his workmen to build his temple:
1st. His apostles, which was sent through all the corners of the world, with
the glorious news of salvation for poor miserable sinners; and their message
was to them as Pharaoh said to the Egyptians, (Genesis xli. 55.) Go unto Joseph,
what he says, do.

And 2dly. By the preaching of his gospel, by his ministers that blow the
trumpet in Zion, making an alarm in God's holy mountain, in bringing many sons
to glory, by the captain of their salvation. And now, my brothers in
tribulation, while you are proclaiming the works of faith with earnest prayer
and praises, I Will employ my pen and write the glorious declarations of the
fullness of the promises for the l^^ter day, the glory of Jerusalem; while you,
infant babes of Christ, in humble homage, fall prostrate at his feet, with
cries that will pierce through the skies, and bring God's mercies down on a
wretched world of sinners.

1st Type -- Genesis xli. 53. 'And the seven years of plenty that was in the land
of Egypt ended, and the seven years of famine began to come, according as
Joseph had said, for the great dearth was in all lands, for the famine was over
all the fac^^ ^he earth. Then Joseph opened all-the storehouses, and sold unto
the Egyptians, and all countries came unto Joseph to buy corn.' And we have had
a glorious day of God's power spread abroad; so that the north has given up,
and the south has not kept back, in bringing sons from far, and daughters from
the uttermost part of the earth, as the queen of Sheba came to behold Solomon's
glory. But a famine has succeeded; the winter has come on the seed; there is
now but small gathering for the harvest men; the church seems to be on the
loosing hand; the world greatly engrosses her heart; the love of many are
waxing cold; she does not enjoy her first love; iniquity abounds, and
antichrist rising and falling away. As the Lord has said, shall I find faith
upon earth when I come? 'the man of sin being revealed, which Christ will
consume by the brightness of his coming.'

2d Type -- Sam. viii. 18. 'And ye shall cry out in that day, because of your
king, which ye have chosen, for the Lord will not hear you in that day.' For
Israel rejected the Lord, that he should not reign over them, and desired
Samuel to give them a king to fight their battles; and God gave them Saul in
his anger, because they would not obey the voice of Samuel. And the Lord
commanded Samuel to make known unto them the manner of the king that should
reign over them, because they rebelled in asking a king; and which should bring
them under tyranny to pay tribute, and made them servants and handmaidens; and
he took their fields and vine-yards, and olive-yards, and the tenth of their
seed, and the tenth of their sheep; and Saul warred against David, and envied
him in his heart, fearing that David would possess his kingdom, which came to
pass; for God raised up David to be king, to deliver his church, by destroying
the Philistines. And in the troublesome times of wars and blood, he made
preparation for the building of the temple, and brought in a peaceable kingdom
for his son Solomon.

And so God has ^iven unto the people of France, King Lewis the (...) ^^^enth,
and the kingdom of Popery which govern the ^bjects with laws pernicious both to
their souls and tyrannical in opposition to freedom, like Jeroboam's yoke,
chastises them with whips and scorpions. But God will be avenged on such a
wicked nation, to chastise the rebel kingdoms that give their strength to the
beast; which we see is fulfilling by his power spread into kingdoms, and is
magnifying himself against the god of armies, and does not honor the god of
forces; and when he shall go forth with all his force and craft, to make away
many in destroying hundreds of thousands in gaining the conquest over large
armies, and in pitching his tabernacle between the seas in the holy mountain,
that is England, he shall come to his end without hand: then Babylon shall
fall, which ruled over all nations; it will be the fall of the tenth part of
the city, and seven thousand men slain, which is France; and the ruling offices
of men will be no more. (Dan. vii. 27.) 'Then the kingdoms of this world shall
be the Lord's under the whole heaven, and all nations shall serve and obey him.'

3d Type -- Of Solomon's kingdom and Temple. -- There was Solomon's peaceable
kingdom, when all the wars ceased, a time made ready that the work of the Lord
was to be done in, building a temple, exceeding magnificial of fame and of
glory throughout all countries; and it was not to be done without king Hiram's
help; for he sent to Solomon ships loaded with gold and silver, and cunning
workmen for the engraving and running of golden vessels and skilful in all
manner of work; but king Solomon was the head, inspired by God according to the
pattern shown him, which represented the glory of the gentile church that God
would build up of spiritual stones, made ready from the rocks of sin, and
polished with Christ's blood to shine in brightness like the sun in the
firmament of heaven; and Hiram's kingdom represented the Jewish nation, which
the Lord will join into one people in righteousness, and a nation will be born
in a day. (Ezekiel. 34.) 'Fo^ as a shepherd seeks out his flock in the day, that
he (...) ^^ong them that are scattered abroad; so I will seek my sheep and
deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in the dark and
cloudy day.'

4th Type -- And as God created the world in six days, and rested the seventh
from all his labor, and commanded the seventh day to be a holy day to be
devoted to his service, a day of worship, and praise, and glory throughout all
generations, to glorify God for all his works done for the children of men: so
God will finish all the spiritual work of redemption in six thousand years, and
the seventh thousand will be a Sabbatical Rest for the new Jerusalem Saints
upon earth, that will receive life from the dead (Levit. xxv. 4.) 'The seventh
year shall be a Sabbath unto the land, a Sabbath for the Lord; (Number. viii. 1.)
and when thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light over against
the candlestick; (Number. xxviii. 25.) and on the seventh day ye shall have an
holy convocation, ye shall do no servile work; (Number. xxix. 1.) and the seventh
month, on the first day of the month, ye shall have a holy convocation, ye
shall do no servile work; it is a day for the blowing of the trumpets, and of
an offering; there were seven lambs of the first year without blemish, and an
offering on the 7th day of seven bullocks. (Dt. xv. 1.) And at the end of seven
years ye shall make a release, and there shall be no leavened bread seen with
thee in all thy coasts seven days. (Deuteronomy. xxxi.) They read the law to the
people every seven years; all which show unto us the seventh part of time will
be set apart for the glory of God.'

5th Type -- Joshua vi. 3, 4. 'And the Lord commanded Joshua, that he should
compass the city of Jericho with all his men of war, and go round about the
city once; thus shall ye do six days: and seven priests shall bear before the
ark seven trumpets of ram's horns; and the seventh day ye shall compass the
city seven times: and the priests shall blow with the trumpets; and it shall
come to pass that when they make a long blast with the ram's horns, and ye
shall hear the sound of the trumpet, all the people shall shout a great shout,
and the wall of the city shall fall down flat, and the people shall ascend up
before him.'

This plainly sets forth, that our spiritual Joshua has been sounding the
glories of his gospel by his prophets, apostles, and ministers, almost six
thousand years; and when the ministry shall cease, which will end at the full
period of six thousand years, this Jericho world shall be changed into a new
heaven and a new earth, when the pride of nations will be consumed by the fire
of grace, and the antichrist of superstition, idolatry, the Antinominian
security, Mohammedan and Pagan abomination that stands in the holy place that
makes desolate, will receive the sickel of God's judgment, which will gather
the clusters of the vine of the earth into the wine press of Almighty God.

6th Type -- 2 Kings ii. 19. 'The waters of Jericho healed, and the men of the
city said unto Elisha, Behold, I pray thee, the situation of the city is
pleasant, as my Lord sees; but the water is naught, and the ground barren: and
he said, Bring me a new cruise and put salt therein; and they brought it to
him, and he went forth to the spring of waters, and cast the salt in there, and
said, thus says the Lord, I have healed these waters: there shall not be from
thence any more death, or barren land.'

And so God will cleanse Jerusalem from her filthiness, when she shall say, I
am no more sick, and I am freed from death, for her inhabitants will no more
die, nor see corruption; the grave will no more cover her slain, nor death's
gorging mouth rage its prey; no more doctor's to separate flesh and blood
apart; no more hospitals of ulcered, noxious bodies of groaning pains; no more
lawyers pleading wrong causes, robbing the fatherless and widows; no more rich
worldlings with hearts set on gain; no more false teachers that preach for the
bag -- are like Judas, that fold Christ for thirty pieces of silver; no more to
trade with slaves and the souls of men. (Rev. xviii. 14.) 'And the fruits of
that thy soul lusted after, are departed from thee, and all things which were
dainty and goodly are departed from thee, and thou shall find them no more at
all.'

7th Type -- Jacob's serving for Rachel. (Genesis xxix. 15.) 'And Laban said unto
Jacob, Because thou art my brother, should thou serve me for naught? Tell me
what shall thy wages be? And Jacob loved Rachel, and said, I will serve thee
seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter. And when the time was expired,
Jacob expected to enjoy his bride. Laban deceived him, and gave him, and
brought in to Jacob his elder daughter Leah; and had to serve seven years more
before he got Rachel, which was a sorrowful time of trouble to him to be kept
from her whom he so much delighted in, with all his heart.' But it was so
determined by God, that Leah represented the Jewish nation, that the Lord had
first in the world, she being the elder: and Rachel typified the bringing in of
the Gentiles in a gospel dispensation, and that their spread should be as
extensive as the sun that runs its journeys round the world. And spiritual
Jacob, when married to Rachel, the Gentiles' fullness come in, which will build
Christ's Canticle Spouse, will make the Jews return -- As the Psalmist prayed,
O that the salvation of Israel was come out of Zion. When God will return to
deliver his people from captivity, Jacob will rejoice and Israel will be glad,
and Jacob's great trouble of labor fourteen years, set forth the great
troubles that the church should pass through while in this wilderness of sin
and corruption; and that time has almost run out since the dreadful time God
sent his rod on America, which since gave us a gospel day. And as soon as she
gained her freedom from England's tyranny, it also took wings and flew over the
Atlantic ocean to France, and cut off the King and Queen's heads -- a beginning
for everlasting fre^dom from the world, the flesh and the devil, the
destruction of the beast, and a glorious righteousness as the drops of the
morning dew upon the tender grass.

8th Type -- Est. chapter 1. 'Now it came to pass in the days (...) Ahasuerus,
which reigned from India unto Ethiopia, over an hundred and twenty-seven
provinces; and he sat on the throne of his kingdom, in a very glorious palace;
he made a feast unto all his nobles and princes, and servants, the power of
Media and Persia of the provinces before him; when he showed the riches of his
glorious kingdom, and the honor of his excellent majesty many days: and his
feast lasted seven days in the garden of the king's palace; and the Queen
Vashti made a feast seven days; but she rejected the king's commandment, and
was cast off, and was dispelled out of his kingdom, and he was wroth against
her; and Esther was brought in before the king, and she pleased him, and he
chose her instead of Queen Vashti; and the king made Esther his queen, and he
gave unto her the odours and ointments for purification, and seven maidens to
wait on her. Now in Shushan, the palace, there was a certain Jew, whose name
was Mordecai, and he brought up Esther as his own daughter; and also there was
man whose name was Haman, which the king had promoted; and all the servants
that were in the king's gate bowed and reverenced Haman. But Mordecai bowed
not, nor did him reverence; and they said, Why do you transgress the king's
commandments? and they told Haman, and he was full of wrath, and sought to
destroy all the Jews throughout the whole kingdom; and the plot was determined
for the Jews' destruction in all the provinces. And when Mordecai perceived all
that was done, he rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth with ashes, and went
out into the midst of the city, and cried with a loud and bitter cry, even
before the king's gate, and in every province where the king's letters came,
that declared their death, there was a great mourning, fasting, and weeping,
and wailing in sackcloth and ashes; and Mordecai showed it unto Esther, and
commanded that she should go in unto the king, and make supplication unto him,
and to make request for her people: and Esther returned an answer to Mordecai,
saying, Gather all the Jews, and fast for me; neither eat nor drink, three
days; and I will go in unto the king, which is not according to the law, and if
I perish I perish. And so the King and Haman came to banquet with Esther; and
when the book of records was read before the king, it was made known of a
secret of two chamberlains, who sought to take the king's life, which Mordecai
had made known, which gave him favor with the king; and also Haman's
wickedness was revealed by Esther to the king: and the king granted the queen's
petition for the deliverance of her people; and the adversary, wicked Haman,
was condemned and hanged on the gallows of fifty cubits high, that he had
erected for Mordecai: so the Jews received a great deliverance, and kept the
fourteenth day of the month Adar, a day of gladness and feasting and a good
day, and of sending of portions one to another.

So, the method I take to explain this passage -- 1st. As King Ahasuerus'
kingdom was so large and extensive, and his excellent majesty and riches which
he showed to all his nobles and princes; and he received their reverence by
bowing before the king; so God the Father, the Almighty King that rules over
all the kingdoms of this world, will make them bow at his footstool.

2d. Mordecai's great work for the deliverance of his people, shows us of Jesus
Christ's great and wonderful deliverance of his church; and as Mordecai was in
sackcloth in great distress for the Jews' calamity and destruction which was
determined by Haman; so Jesus Christ lay in the garden of Gethsemane in the
greatest extremity and pain, so as to sweat great drops of blood; which wrought
a glorious salvation for his people. And as disobedient Vashti rebelled against
the king's commandment, and would not obey his request, he rejected her, and
cast her off, which showed forth the rejection and casting off the Jews and the
rebel kingdoms of Satan's empire, the whore of Babylon, which sits a queen
riding on a scarlet beast, the abomination of the earth; and as Esther was
received instead of Vashti, for she pleased the king, and he loved her, and
granted her request, for a great mercy to the Jews: so God was to bring in the
gentiles of a gospel-day, which will make up their fullness; then the Jews will
return and inherit the promises. And as Haman was a wicked, haughty, proud man,
filled with envy, hatred, and malice against Mordecai and the Jews, which
accused him to the king for being disobedient to the king's commandment; Haman
sought to take his life, represented the devil's craft and subtlety to destroy
men's souls, and make them his servants at his will: and as Haman was hanged,
and his ten sons, so God will destroy the works of satan, and show mercy to the
ten kingdoms of the beast, and as two of the king's chamberlains, Bithan and
Teresh, of those that kept the door, were wroth, and sought to lay hold on the
king Ahasuerus; and the thing was known to Mordecai, who told it to Esther the
queen; and Esther certified it to the king in Mordecai's name; so Christ knows
all things; for secret things belong to the Lord, and he reveals his secrets
to his servants the prophets, and they pray to the king in Jesus' name to
destroy the wickedness of Pope Papal, and Mahomet, which is the two kingdoms
that is risen in wrath against the king of nations; which these two men's
rebellion showed forth. (1 Kings xviii.)

9th Type -- There was a Jezebel in the days Ahab, that ^^ew and put to death
the Lord's prophets, so that many hid themselves in coverts to save their
lives; and there was a prophet whose name was Elijah; and Ahab said unto him,
Art thou he that troubles Israel? and he answered and said, I have not
troubled Israel; but thou and thy father's house, in that ye have forsaken the
commandments of the Lord, and have followed Balaam. Now, therefore, send and
gather me all Israel unto Mount Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred
and fifty, and the prophets of the groves four hundred, that eat at Jezebel's
table; so Ahab gathered them all to Mount Carmel, and Elijah came unto all the
people and said, How long hal^ ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God,
follow him: but if Baal, then follow him. And the people answered him not a
word: then said Elijah, I even only remain the Lord's prophet; but the prophets
of Baal are four hundred and fifty men; give us two bullocks, and choose one for
yourselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and put no fire under,
and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on wood, and put no fire under
it, and call on your gods, and I will call on the name of the Lord, and the God
that answers by fire, let him be God; and they called till noon, saying, O
Baal, hear us; but there was no voice, nor any that answered; and they leaped
on the altar. And at noon Elijah mocked, and said, Cry aloud, for he is a God;
either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or on a journey, or peradventure he
sleeps, and must be awakened; and they cried aloud, and cut themselves after
their manner, with knives and lancets, until the time of the offering of the
evening sacrifice, and not any regarded. And Elijah said, Come near unto me;
and all the people came near, and he repaired the altar that was broken down;
and he took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of
Jacob, unto whom the word of the Lord came, saying, Israel shall be thy name;
and he made a trench about the altar that would contain two measures of seed:
and he put the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and filled barrels
of water that run round the altar; and it came to pass at the time of the
offering of the evening sacrifice, and the prophet said, Lord God of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, let it be known this day, that thou art God in Israel, and
that I am thy servant, and that I have done all these things at thy word. Hear
me, O Lord, hear me, that this people may know that thou art the Lord. Then the
fire of the Lord fell and consumed the burnt sacrifice, and the wood, and the
stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench; and when
all the people saw it, they fell on their faces, and they said, the Lord he is
God; the Lord he is the God. And Elijah said, Take the prophets of Baal and
slay them; let not one escape. So God will 'ere long destroy all false
prophecy; and as Elijah sent his servant to go up to the top of Carmel, and
looked toward the sea, and he saw nothing; and he sent him seven times; then
he saw a little cloud rising out of the sea like a man's hand: and the heaven
was black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. The little cloud is
the smallness of the church; the blackness, clouds, and wind, is the distress
of her labor and travail. But, when the seventh time will commence, it will
rain a great rain of righteousness through all the earth; the dry and the
thirsty pools will be filled.

Now I begin to explain the title of my book.

(Rev. i. 3.) For the time is at hand. There was a wonderful revelation made
unto John in the Isle of Patmos, of things that should shortly come to pass,
which he was commanded to write. 1st. The states of the seven churches of Asia,
both of such as were zealous for Christ's cause, and those that were but idol
^o shippers: and he sets forth the blessings of the Philadelphia church in a
gospel state, and what she should be in a new Jerusalem glory. (Rev. iii. 8.) I
know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can
shut it, for thou have a little strength, and have kept my word, and have not
denied my name. This is the state of the church that she is now in, Christ's
true Church of the Gentites; and by the blessings of the promises, fulfillment
in bringing in the latter day of glory, it will make up the fullness of the
Gentile's temple from all nations and kingdoms converted to the knowledge of
God, as the waters cover the great deep, which will bring in the false
Laodicean Church and the Jews -- (Rev. iii. 9.) Behold, I will make them of the
synagogue of Satan, to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I
have loved thee. The false church says I am rich, and have need of nothing; but
the word says thou art poor and wretched, blind and miserable. This is the
Antichrist that believe in their own righteousness, their own goodness, their
false worship, superstition and idolatry, worshipping idols and images, wood
and stone, untempered mortar, a daubing work that the fire has not refined; it
is dross and dung, the barren land not dug nor ploughed, nor sowed with the
seed of the woman, nor the serpent's head bruised; it is Priests' schemes of
men's own invention, Popish schemes of hellish arts, the simple does betray.
But the time is at hand that the Lord will send judgment to victory, and
deliver Zion universally, both Jews and Gentiles, and make them one nation and
kingdom in a heavenly state upon earth. Consider, O wicked sinners, that the
time, is at hand that you must die, and if unprepared, you will be damned. Also
the Day of Judgment is near at hand that Christ will judge you according to
your works, and receive a reward according to the deeds done in the body,
whether good or bad.

(Genesis xliii. 16.) And when Joseph saw that Benjamin was with them, Joseph
feeding his brethren, typified Jesus Christ feeding sinners with the bread of
his free grace in a gospel dispensation; and we see that Joseph did not dine
with them till Benjamin was with them, not till they were all together; for he
said to the ruler of his house, Bring these men home, for these men shall dine
with me at noon. So in the fullness of the Gentiles, which Benjamin the
youngest son showed forth: Then will be Jerusalem's feasting time, the feast of
tabernacles, the Jew's feast of the bread of life, and life from the dead; and
Joseph had a man that ruled his house, so Christ will have a glorified man of
his council that will be head and ruler in his spiritual kingdom: as God never
did any of his work of his temple without an instrument, so he will send his
messenger before him, that will be the refiner's fire, and the fuller's soap,
that will burn and purify, and melt hardened hearts, and make them hearts of
flesh, and will turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the
children to the fathers, and consume the earth from the curse.

(Rev. xxii. 20.) He which testifies these things, says, surely, I come
quickly. Amen. He which has spoken all the promises will fulfill them every jot
and tittle; for God alters not: and because God changes not, the seed of
Jacob is not consumed; he will come quickly, and cut his work short in
righteousness, because the Lord will make a short work upon earth: even so come
Lord Jesus: this is the churches prayer in her state of this wilderness,
travail and pain, as a woman with child, and is in pain to be delivered: and
the churches birth-pains are not at the greatest extremity; iti^s not midnight
yet, that she is slumbering and sleeping with the foolish virgins.

Ye virgin souls arise,
With all the dead awake
Unto salvation wise,
Oil in your vessels take.
Behold, your bridegroom will come and deliver you; he will ride on a swift
cloud, and come into Egypt, and destroy the idols, and make the hearts to melt
in the midst: but the Egyptian war must end first, and the cruel Lord and
fierce king and kingdom must be destroyed, and the kingdoms of this world must
be given, to the saints of the most high, to live with Christ by the glory of
his spirit one thousand years, to inherit all the glory of all the promises,
freed from the world, flesh, and the devil; for Satan will be bound that
thousand years, as you may read in the 20th of Rev. 1. And I saw an angel come
down from heaven, having they key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in
his hand; and he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the devil
and satan, and bound him a thousand years. Perhaps some would enquire when this
time will commence. I do not set forth the certain time; but show forth the
events that appear to my understanding to be the preparations that God is
making for his kingdom's glory. And these days are the churches imprisonment
and great distress. But so far I determine, that if the ten days of tribulation
and imprisonment is ten years, which is in Rev. ii. 10; then, from one thousand
seven hundred and ninety, when the wars begun in France for the destruction of
Popery and all the Antichristian powers: Then the fall of the Beast will be in
the year eighteen hundred of Satan's binding. Then Michael shall deliver Israel
from all their troubles. (Dan. xii. 1.) And at that time shall Michael stand
up, the great prince which stands for the children of thy people, and there
shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation; even to
that same time, and at that time thy people shall be delivered. And it will be
by wars and famine, and pestilence, which will be a great cutting off of
nations. (Zach. xiii. 8.) And it shall come to pass, that in all the land,
says the Lord, two parts therein shall be cut off and die; but the third shall
be left therein; and I will try them as gold is tried. They shall call on my
name, and I will hear them say, it is my people; and they shall say, the Lord
is my God. This work will be the first resurrection from the dead, as spoken by
the prophet. (Ezekiel. xxxvii. 1.) By the resurrection of dry bones. The dead hope
of Israel revived by the breath of the Lord. Thus says the Lord, Come from the
four winds, O breath, and breathe on these slain, that they may live. And
behold, I will take the children of Israel and bring them into their own land,
and will make them one nation upon the mountains of Israel, and one king shall
be king to them all; they shall no more be two nations, neither shall the be
two kingdoms any more, nor defile them with their idols, nor with their
transgressions; but I will save them, and will cleanse them, and they shall
have one shepherd typified by David; and I will make a covenant of peace with
them, and will set my sanctuary among them for evermore, and build them, and
make their land like unto the garden of Ede^. But, O ye mountains of Israel, ye
shall shoot forth your branches, and yield your fruit; for they are at hand to
come. And Christ's Millennium Saints will live and reign upon the earth one
thousand years in an immortal state of glory; and the dead saints that have
gone to heaven, and their dead bodies buried in the grave, shall so continue
till the thousand years are ended: then their souls will re^enter their bodies,
and experience greater joy of heavenly b^^s in Christ's holy kingdom of
everlasting happe^^ss, an endless eternity. Then they will ascend with their
glorious king to judgment, when the Millennium Church will be changed to a
greater glory to meet their Lord in the air at his second coming. (2 Pet. iii.
10.) But the day of the Lord comes as a thief in the night, in the which, the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with
fervent he^^; the earth also, and the works therein shall be burnt up. Then the
judgment will proceed that the wicked shall be judged in their bodies raised
from death and hell; the spiritual war will commence of Gog and Magog, deceived
a little season, a very short time, not a year nor a day, but an hour or less;
for there was silence in heaven half an hour; so as to expect that their
t^^^^ted souls, that have suffered the wrath of God, bei^^^ ^illed with wrath
and malice against God and his sai^^ in the same state as they died, will
expect to receive a deliverance, as some believe, in a hell redemption; but we
see what will be their dreadful sentence (Rev. xx. 9.) And fire came down from
God and devoured them, and the devil that deceived them, was cast into a lake
of fire and brimstone, where the Beast and the false prophet are, and shall be
tormented for ever and ever.

Now I return again to set forth the glories of the heavenly Jerusalem.

(Rev. xxi. 1.) I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and
first earth were passed away -- That is, the first state of the church will be
changed to a larger degree of glory, her former travail of trouble will be
ended, all things will be new to her; and poor sinners, which is earth,
earthly, and devlish and sensual will be changed, and made new and living
saints; the new Jerusalem will descend down out of heaven upon them. The
spirit, as the dove, was on Christ's head when he was baptized in Jordan. Also
the starry heavens will be a new heaven. No more thundering storms of thunder,
and black clouds and hurricane winds and dismal gusts to lay waste and break
the oaks of the wilderness; no more floods rushing down with rolling waves, nor
snows nor frosts to freeze the weary labourer or traveller; no more occasion
for the fleecy flocks to put the thick warm woollen clothing on our trembling
bodies. The earth will be a new earth of glory before it is destroyed, set
forth by the prophet, (Isa. xxxv. 1.) The wilderness and the solitary places
shall be glad for them, and the desert shall rejoice and blossom as a rose, it
shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing; the glory of
Lebanon shall be given unto it; the excellency of Carmel, and Sharon, they
shall see the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God. (Isa. lv. 12.)
For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace. The mountains and
the hills shall break forth into singing before you, and all the (...) ^f the
field shall clap their hands; instead of th^^^ (...), there shall come up the
fir tree; and instead of the ^^^er, shall come up the myrtle tree, and it shall
be to the Lord for a name, for an everlasting sign, that shall not be out off.
(Isa. lxv. 25.) The wolf and the lamb shall lie down together, and the lion
shall eat straw like the bullock, and dust shall be the serpent's meat; they
shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, says the Lord. (Isa. lxvi.
10.) Rejoice with Jerusalem and be glad all ye that love her; rejoice for joy
with her, for thus says the Lord; for behold, I will extend peace to her like
a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream: then shall ye
suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations, that ye may milk
out and be delighted with the abandance of her glory. So I will comfort you,
and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem; and when ye see this, your heart shall
rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb, and the hand of the Lord
shall be known toward his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies;
for, behold, the Lord will come with sire and his chariot like a whirlwind, to
render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of sire; for by sire and
by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh, and the slain of the Lord
shall be many; and it shall co^^^, pass that I will gather all nations and
tongues, and ^^^y shall come and see my glory; and this great ^o^k will be done
by the everlasting gospel preached by an angel in heaven. (Rev. xiv. 6.) And I
saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to
preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, kindred, and
tongue, and people; and we see the glorious work that was wrought in the
seventh verse, saying, with a loud voice, fear God and give glory to him, for
the hour of his judgment is come, and worship him that made heaven and earth,
and the sea, and the fountain of waters: this will make Babylon fall -- 8th
verse -- And another angel followed, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that
great city; because she made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication; then comes the woman out of the wilderness. (Isa. xii. 1.) And
there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the sun and the
moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars.

The Churches hard travail will be ended, and the man child caught up to God's
throne, which will be the rising of the two witnesses which has been slaying
three years and an half, which has been almost twelve hundred and sixty years
since the church sled into the wilderness from the face of the dragon that
poured out a flood of waters out of his mouth after the woman, that he might
cause her to be carried away of the flood. But when Michael shall destroy the
devil's war, which is come down upon the seat of the beast, as in Rev. xii. 12.
Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea, for the devil is come down
unto you, having great wrath, because he knows his time is but short: and
when the Dragon saw that he ^as cast unto the earth, he persecuted the woman
that brought forth the man child. What dreadful persecutions has she received
from the Popish nations, in killing thousands of Christ's servants, and has
executed wrath against the remnant of her seed, which ke^p the commandments of
God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. But soon we shall hear the Lord's
voice, saying in heaven, Now is come salvation and strength, and the kingdom of
our God, and the power of his Christ, for the accuser of our brethren is cast
down, which accused them before our God day and night; and they overcame him by
the blood of the lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not
their lives unto the death. Therefore, rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dwell in
them; then sin and sorrow shall cease. (Rev. xxii. 3.) And there shall be no
more curse; but the throne of God and the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants
shall serve him, not in a temple made with stones and wood, the work of men's
hands; but in the new Jerusalcm temple, which will be built up of Jew and
Gentile, stones of grace, which Solomon's house typified under the law
dispensation. This heavenly city is described in the 21st of Rev. descending
out of heaven, which will be on this ^arth as glorious stones most precious,
and as clear as crystal, the glory and beauty of every saint of that temple,
having twelve gates and twelve angels, which are the twelve tribes of Israel,
which will be brought into it from east, west, north, and south, as far as the
sun shines or men inhabit; for St. John saw no temple therein, for the Lord God
Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it, and the inhabitants is the bride,
the La^^^'s wife, in an everlasting marriage covenant, which will never be
separated, nor the union dissolved; but will endure for one thousand years on
earth, and then afterward in Christ's presence, face to face, an endless
eternity.

A Question asked, and Resolved.

In what way will the people live when changed into Millennium Saints -- will
they labor and till the ground, and eat temporal food -- and will they marry
and be given in marriage, and children born, and mothers suffer the pains of
labor, and some die in child birth, and infants be caught from womb and breast?

My opinion is, that when wars shall cease, the nations shall beat their swords
into plough-shares, not to till the ground as formerly; for there will be no
blackf^^^^hs blowing the bellows, nor beating on anvils; but shall receive the
plough-share of God's word into their stony hearts, which will plow up the
fallow ground from sin, and pruned from bearing thorns that pierced a
Redeemer's head. The earth shall have her Sabbath of rest, the seventh part of
time; and while the church eats temporal food, she will be under affliction of
pain and death; but when she will eat nothing but the manna of Christ's body,
she will enjoy perfect health, and they shall marry as they did in the days of
Norh, till the flood came and swept them all away. So they will while the flood
of Antichrist is sweeping away sinners into perdition, when his reign shall
end. They will no more dwell together man and wife, and will love all alike,
with all the heart, and the whole temple will be built. Therefore, there will
be no infants born after the top-stone is brought with shoutings, Grace, Grace.
(Isa. lxii. 5.) For as a young man marries a virgin, so shall thy sons marry
thee; and as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice
over thee; for the Lord has sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his
strength, surely no more will I give thy corn to be meat for thine enemies, and
the stranger shall not drink thy wine; sinners cannot be partakers of this
bread and wine, without they are Christ's people; but his saints eat it, and
they drink in the courts of holiness. (Isa. lxi. 11.) (...) as the earth
brings forth her bud, and as the garden causes the things that are sown in
it to spring forth, so the Lord God will cause righteousness and praise to
spring forth before all nations.

Now I shall show forth of the pouring out of fifth and sixth vials, and what
will be the dreadful, and happy, events that ill ensue. (Rev. xvi. 10.) And the
fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the Beast, and his kingdom was
full of darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain. There will be great
commotions of war in this time, and dismal calamities of death, when they will
blaspheme the God of heaven, because of their sores and pains, and repented not
of their deeds: but when the sixth angel poured out his vial on the river
Euphrates, and the water was dried up; that is, the flood of persecution is
brought to an end. Then the way of the kings of the East will be prepared; then
the glories of the gospel will take the wings of the morning, and fly unto the
uttermost parts of the earth. (Isa. lx. 10.) And the sons of strangers shall
build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee; and that men may
bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles; and that their kings may be
brought; and kings shall be nursing fathers, and queens nursing mothers, and
the church for the nation that will not serve thee, shall perish. Yea, those
nations shall be utterly wasted. (Isa. lix. 19.) So shall they fear the Lord
from the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun, when the enemy shall
come in like a flood, the spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against
him. (Song ii. 11, 12.) For so, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone;
the flowers appear on the earth; the time of the singing of birds is come, and
the voice of the turtle is heard in our land. The churches prayer, O that my
winter time-was ended; O that the reign of the Beast was over, that I might
experience the sweetness of the rose of Sharon in my soul. O what glory it will
be when wretched sinners will bloom the flowers of glory; no more to have
wrinkled faces, nor cold winter hearts. Then they will sing the song of Moses
and the Lamb. ((...) xi. 17.) Saying, we give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty,
which art, and wast, and art to come; because thou have taken to thee thy great
power, and have reigned: and when the second woe is past, and when, behold, the
third woe cemeth quickly; then the 7th angel sounded, and there were great
voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of
the Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. He which
testifies these things, says, Surely, I come quickly -- Amen. Even so, come
Lord Jesus.

M. CORREY.

ON MY PAST LIFE.
HOUSE and land was my paternal lot;
But sin and extravagance made me leave my cot.
When my fields grew in plenty of wheat and corn,
I like the lark hailed the sprightly morn.
My wife's sons and daughters, once the comfort of my age,
Has now left the world's wide busy stage;
And I twelve years have traveled from my native home,
And doomed in scanty poverty to roam:
And now I am miserably poor and old,
Keen winds I Have suffered, hunger, heat and cold,
And suff^^ great afflictions. I must not repine --
Be not seeure -- your lot may be like mine.
I am a man of sorrow, grief and misery:
We never were born here happiness for to see.
Was I to tell you the source of all my grief,
Sure you would pray for my relief.
Still as through life's meandering path I stray,
Lord be the sweet companion of my way,
And bring me safely to thy blessed abode,
Of light and life, and happiness in God.
Religion's sacred (...),
Unerring points the (...),
Where happiness for ever shines,
With unpolluted ray.
My fleecy flocks with wool kept me warm,
And clothed my body from the winter storm.
My cows bags full of milk brought to ^^^^door,
And every day in plenty gave me more.
Bacon and beef was my daily food;
The Lord that gave; the Lord is good.
My negroes toiled and made me bread,
The sinful crime I felt with awful dread;
I trampled on the mercies of my God,
And for my sins, smote me with his rod,
And made me my transgressions for to see,
And by his free grace and mercy set me free.
[Rom. vii. 9. -- For I was alive without the law once, but when the
commandment came, sin revived, and I died.]

I four years was condemned for my sin,
But I, like the dove, my Noah took me in.
Now I am in his ark from danger free,
Which will land me on eternity.
Six months I traveled in dark despair,
The dismal burden of temptation for to bear --
To hang myself -- to cut my children's throats --
To drown myself -- to fall out of boats --
To burn a wheat field -- to destroy man's bread --
Then be damned, with wilful curses on my head --
To open a mill-dam, and let the water go --
I might not drown myself in eternal woe.
I went to Philadelphia to be confined, that I might not kill my son;
I felt I ^as a wretched soul undone.
I feared on earth I should not long dwell,
But sink down into a dismal hell:
Tempted to fall headlong down into wells,
Terrified by the ringing of court bells.
I feared the prison and the court of men,
I should be condemned for murder and hanged; then
I ran through swamps, like a dog mad,
Driven with horror, my heart so bad.
Lying in the woods, satan by my side,
My heart full of cursed pride.
My wretched soul, how^guilty and forlorn,
Wishing I was never born,
To suffer such dreadful scenes of woe,
I did not know what to do or where to go.
The rainy storms and thunders in the skies,
The lightning I feared would burn out my eyes,
And send my soul into burning fire,
To be tormented, never to expire.
Now for a song of grateful praise,
With all his saints I Will join to raise.
Who plucked me from the jaws of hell?
My JESUS has done all things well.
[Prov. XXV. 14. -- Whosoever boasts himself of a false gift, is like wind and
clouds without rain.]

When infidelity abounds, I employ my pen,
To set forth the characters of deluded men.
The infidelian PAIN, the Deist man,
Who has written against the Gospel Plan;
The Arians and Socinians, that despise the Son of God,
Set at naught a Redeemer's blood;
Trusting on a righteousness of their own,
Rejecting the sacrifice who did atone.
[The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all nations that forget God. Ps.
xvi. 17.]

The Murrianites in no hell believe,
But all a full redemption shall receive.
WINCHESTER the Universalian has left the gospel way,
Preaching false to lead the blind astray.
WORTHLARIAN and COXTERIAN has left the Baptist class,
And gone the way of Balaam that smote his ass;
Believing all that sinned by Adam's fall,
Will be redeemed from hell's misery and thrall.
[Ezek. xiii. 14. -- O Israel! thy prophets are like foxes in the deserts --
xxxiv. 3 -- Woe be to the Shepherds that feed themselves -- Should not the
shepherds feed the flocks? Ye eat the fat, and ye cloathe you with the wool; ye
kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the flock. The diseased ye have not
strengthened, neither have ye healed that which is sick, neither have bound up
that which was broken, neither have you brought again that which was driven
away, neither have ye sought that which was lost, but with force and cruelty ye
have ruled them. -- Song of Solomon ii. 15. -- Take us the foxes, the little
foxes that spoil the vines, for our vines have tender grapes.]

You blind shepherds, that destroy men's souls,
Like tinkers of great noise to stop old holes.
Seek a pardon from the King Gibba's altar;
You have risen against his kingdom, must have a halter;
Like Haman plotted that the Jews might die,
Was hung on a gallows fifty cubits high.
Hiram ran vessels in the clayey ground,
Your metal is filthy dross, and not the gospel sound;
It will not fit the Scripture-would,
Nor join together, neither being hot nor cold.
Don't add nor diminish from the word of God.
Lest you feel his avenging rod.
You eat the fat, and don't feed the sheep,
You have no seed sown and cannot reap.
Unbutton, and open your sleeping eyes,
Lest you never see a God above the skies:
There is danger, warning take,
Escape eternal death, a burning lake.
I am in earnest -- be so too --
I am a Gentile -- you are like a hardened Jew --
You starve the flock, and love the flo^^^
Foxes that spoil the vines and kill the geese --
You rob hen-roosts, and kill the pigs,
The devil's tories, and not true whigs;
Serpents in a thorn hedge worse than briers,
The cruel Priests of Monks and Friars,
Having not a true gospel hope,
Get their commissions from the Pope;
By doing penance, believe their sins are forgiven,
And think they are going their way to heaven.
If they go down to hell in sin's dirt,
You cannot put on you there a hair shirt --
No pardon's dispensed to rebels there --
No, not for any that curse and swear;
No, not for thieves, no, not for liars;
No, not for Roman Priests, nor Friars:
But with the rebel crew and hellish band,
Before God, raised from death and hell, to stand,
With grim horrors falling on your guilty head,
Before his bar your final sentence dread,
Judged down to dwell in a burning lake,
Cursing your hellish chains, your dismal state.
False teachers encourage sin;
It is only free grace that takes finners in --
Into Noah's ark by hammer, blows and pin,
Built up by grace, new lives of faith begin:
But Antichrist brought on the flood --
The waters on earth fifteen cubits stood:
So now the flooth of Antichrist has covered the land,
I believe his end is near at hand.
There is a people called the Dancing Quakers,
They twist and turn cruel leg-shakers;
They strip off to shift and shirt when hot,
Black and nasty as a slut's pot;
They raise a whirling in their tails,
Worse than an old ship at sea without sails.
The Juzabel in a coffin put a live man,
A Captain smote it with his sword, out he ran;
Men and guns around he would not lie;
Received a fright, death seemed so nigh:
So cowards can's stand a gospel-fight,
Because of sin of nature's night.
Such deluders are like Tom Pain,
And will be till the Beast is slain.
O for a glorious Millennium Day,
To make such deceivers sing and pray.
I have painted the wickedness of dark nature,
Of proud and haughty hearts high in stature;
Like a church-^^ll, ball, and steeple,
Fine Priests in pulpit, in pews the people,
Only makes a poise, calls to the worship place,
With wicked hearts, of prim'd looks of (...),
At looking-glasses on Sunday morning trimming,
Nasty as snakes in mud-bog swimming.
Take warning! it is your wickedness I do relate,
Of the city of Philadelphia state.
Some years ago I remember well,
A judgment plague, a stink instead of sweet smell,
It stopped from playhouse, but again to it you went,
And regarded not the judgment God had sent;
A greater one may be hanging over head,
Of eternal death that will strike you dead.
Many families went out of town and left the place;
Because you had despised God's grace.
With powdered heads, a gaudy show,
With tinkling feet to church does go;
With jesting tales of gallant life,
Spending your days in wicked strife.
Thousands the Lord's sword has cut down,
In mouldering graves, no more in town.
Some sicken and die at dancing ball,
No more nimble footed at cloven-foot's hall?
Her vital tuning-strings are broke,
That twine the heart, receives a stroke,
And gone away on Apollion's hump'd back,
And left behind their merry fiddler Jack.
Ye Georgic merchants, your horrid negro trade,
You oppress the creatures God has made;
Like I shmaelites 20 silver pieces gave to increase their store,
Traitor Judas sold Christ for ten pieces more.
You lavish gold in bag and wrap it up,
Drunkards love their bottle, and drink a large sup.
You that have negroes, Wills, and Jacks,
Feed their bellies and cloth their backs;
Clothe their bodies from the winter storm,
They plough your ground and plant your corn.
[What God requires of thee, O man, is do justice, seek peace and love mercy,
to walk humbly with thy God.]

Young fondlings sleeping in Delilah's lap,
Is worse than wolves in a steel trap;
Like Sampson's wishes, the Philistines put out his eyes,
He that loves her charms for ever dies;
Her ways lead down to the gates of hell,
In the dark caverns forever dwell;
Her wicked heart as black as cripple mud,
And he is like a dull horse that has the stud,
That must have the spur and whi^^^
She giv^ (...), by (...) ^^^ip;
He falls on (...) is decked (...),
(...) her roling eyes combine;
(...) barn with threshing-^^ail,
(...) grimsess ribband trail.
Some for French cuts, of Turks pride, and plaited hair,
Away they go to galantine fair.
Some for horn-pipe, some for bag-pipe tone;
Some chufe pound cakes, and some Indian pone;
Some chufe white, some brown, some take black,
Some take any, so they get a pleasing snack;
Some at Blue-(...), their heads white with cockle,
Some drinking wine out of glasses and bottle;
Some cry, Landlord! what to pay? dollars ringing,
Some dr^nk f^st asleep, others singing;
Some cursing and some swearing,
Some fighting with bloody noses, hair tearing --
Away they get ho^^, and are raving mad,
Because they went there on pidda-pad.
Some follow the Pries^^, bell under tail ringing,
Between heaven and hell, of sins, care-rop^ swinging.
Hate your pride of Antichrist and folly,
Your enticing madam dames of beads, and Polly
Mind your laboring business with bended back,
Miss Flimsey is more weighty than a pedlar's pack;
Her deluding arts are sharper than pointed pins;
He that runs after her gets stinking sore shi^^,
And makes them^sick as a dog returned to his vomit;
Such worship idols, and believe in Mahomet.
Some hold in hand the snuff box at tea^^ble chats,
As blind and stupid as seven sleeping bats.
This is the wickedness of the ten Kings,
Mammon their god, earth's nothing things;
These please their lusts for a night's play,
Away they trudge home, c^^^^rdly see the way*
So Tom's light breeches and Miss's ruffled chintz trudge together,
But he must leave his light boots, and she her sine slippers of leath^^
And be dea^^ (...) both (...) and eyes
No more (...) e^^^^ah (...)
No more to (...) black (...)
He that eats of her dainties gets (...)
Therefore escape her rattling (...),
Or else you must eat in (...) he^ scorpion (...).
In every mountain and under green trees has pl^^d the harlot.
D^ck'd with (...), and clothed with scarlot.
Why tri^^^^^^ ^hy way to feel earth's love,
^eek only the Lord that (...) and reigns above.
Bound up right with w^sale (...) stays,
Has taught the wicked o^^s thy ways.
Why gaddest so much ab^^^ to charge thy way?
I^ will make you a^^^^^ed in a coming day.
My people has (...) me, and committed (...)
They despise God and worship devils.
Be astonished O heavens at this! --
O! sinners be horribly afraid of the serpent's kiss;
For though you wash with nitre and much soap.
You commit lewdness like Francis Pope;
And say I am ^ot polluted, nor go the way of Bala^m,
There Is too many such good people in the town of Salem
See thy way in chimp-foot valley, what have thou done?
Your days are near at end, your thread of life almostspun,
Your religion is nothing but founding brass,
Snuffing in the wind like a wild ass:
And as the thief is ashamed when he is found,
Taken away to prison, and within the iron grates is bound,
To meet the judge, a greater one than is at Dover town;
When the books will be opened and you judged ^^^n
Into r^lling waves, d^^per than Philadelphia ferry,
To traverse hell swifter than a dromedary
Crusts and carrion is the food of ravenous dogs*
Like bellow (...) full-frogs in spatter dock bogs.
But good fish are from ^he river (...) by seine,
So true Christians are drawn from hell and pain.
Pride rides in coaches, in grandeur, fame and noise
Of cracking whips, postilions, and waiting boys,
With window'd glass to keep them from the sun;
If the devil is your driver, you will be undone.
Away out of town to take the air and pleasure;
Perhaps poor creatures are without the richest treasure;
Without the King's chariot of love that is paved so fine,
They that ride in that, how beautiful they shine.
The sun shines in at the window glass,
The man's glory that rode in Jerusalem upon an ass. --
The huntsman in the morning blows his horn,
Away the thief runs from cribs of corn;
He cries hark, plunder, on the foxes drag.
The miser runs after gold to sill his bag.
Hark! a way in the cover plunder,
Hark! sinner, don't you hear law thunder.
Hark! Drag well, how the valleys ring,
Hear. sinner, the voice of Israel^s king.
Some hunters separate men and wives asunder,
O! what a dismal nights blunder! --
Some go a hunting, and some a gunning,
And leave their drollys in the (...) running.
Some don't kill meat, and will (...) pork,
There are some nice tasting folks in the town of York.
Some get bound to pillory to hear cow-skin whips,
Some wretched men curse and damn aboard of ships.
He that has a smoky house and a scolding wife,
Lives a very distressed life,
And must keep her with hats, fans, and turban shawls,
Still she is ill-natured, how loud she bawls.
With flounce, musts, camel's hair and Persian meeds,
Pick the sheets with their abominable deeds.
The poor Indian said, when the old man had ger'd his side,
How do you do brother? but the other skinn'd his hide.
So sinners that will not fear God, nor death dread,
Satan will make their wicked souls his drum head.
There are many false prophets in this latter day,
Teaching sinners down to hell the broad way:
Blind leading the blind, in this night as dark as pitch;
All such dehiders must fall into the ditch:
For they are as dry and hard as cow skin whips.
Apes and peaco^^s, with gold and silver in Hirare's ships,
False professors joined to churches, neither silver nor true gold,
Self-righteous pharisees, that are not of Christ's fold;
Such cry from morning to evening, O Baal! O Baal!
Such a god never filled the milk maid's ^^il.
They fail on the altar, and cut themselves with knives.
Many righteous men have Baalim wives,
That said to Job, why do thou retain thy integrity: curse God and die,
Many such are in hell, and must for ever lie.
IT is a great blessing to have a loving wife;
But some cross husbands lead them a wretched life,
Being as tough and crooked as any limb in woods,
Such have a nasty piece of household goods;
Being filled with wickedness, pride, and slander,
And beats her worse than wings of fighting s^opping gander.
I don't repreve you for living in houses of 2 or 3 story,
But because you d^^^ give God the glory.
(...) me ^a^mers man^^^ their ground,
And the wretched without the gospel sound.
Their beasts draw the burden, a heavy load,
(...) b^re his cross, and sinners despise his blood.
(...) you far^well, and end my verse and thyme,
(...) will employ my thoughts about millennium time.
(...) how friends and foes are dropping down dead be^^^^ you, and this you
have seen for a long time, to (...) w^rning to prepare for death. O let the
good^^^^^ (...) forbearance of God ^ead you to repentance, (...) ^^^^de you to
fly speedily to Christ for refuge and prote^^^ (...) wrath. Consider how
terrible death will be if it meets you in an unprepared state, in a Christless
condition. What a fearful change it will be to be taken ^^om earth to hell,
where the worm of a guilty conscience will never die, nor be at an end, nor the
fire of God's indignation never will be quenched; therefore, (...) God, and
give glory to his name, and live forever.

FINIS.

