A TREATISE CONCERNING THE PROPERTIES AND EFFECTS OF COFFEE.

FIRST AMERICAN EDITION.

BY BENJAMIN MOSELEY, M. D. Physician to His Royal Highness the Duke of York,
and his Household; to his royal highness the duke of Clarence, and his
Household; to His Majesty's Royal Military Hospital at Chelsea; Member of the
Royal College of Physicians of London, etc.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY SAMUEL H. SMITH. M, DCC, XCVI.

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
THE reception which the first Edition of this Treatise has met with, has made
it necessary to publish a second; which I now present to the Reader, with such
additions, as I hope will be acceptable and useful.

I have collected many authorities, to corroborate what I have advanced; that
as my opinions have prejudices to contend with, they may not, however, be
objectionable on the ground of singularity, and be considered as supported by
no other testimony than my own.

IN treating of the salutary advantages, which the Public will derive,
individually, from the general use of Coffee, it is impossible not to reflect
also, on the political benefits which will accrue to the Parent State, by
increasing its cultivation in her Colonies.

To the Colonists themselves the object is very extensive; and surely the
prosperity of so important a part of the Empire, as our West Indian Islands,
demands the most liberal attention on the part of this Kingdom.

FROM the produce of our plantations, that "magnificent property," as Mons.
NECKER terms the French Colonies, "which only the superficial and ignorant
affect to undervalue," this Country receives great additions to her Revenue,
and a total supply of one of the most useful articles (perhaps now a necessary)
of life. Yet, from the calamities lately inflicted on some of them by the hand
of Providence, and the accumulated burdens which the Public necessities have
laid on them all, many of the Planters are involved in ruin; and those who
escape, must owe their deliverance to the bravest struggles of industrious
virtue.

THE population of White Inhabitants which is the great security of the
Islands, consists chiefly of those who cultivate the inferior Staple
Commodities, among which, Coffee is now the principal; and this population has
always been proportionable to the increase or decrease of those Staples. Indigo
may be instanced as an example: When Indigo was encouraged in Jamaica, before
that impolitic duty was laid on it, which exterminated the cultivation of it in
our colonies, and gave it to the French, there were considerably more White
Inhabitants in that Island, than there are at present, though the Island now
produces five times the quantity of Sugar and Rum it did at that time.

THE cultivation of Coffee requiring but little capital, is an inducement for
people of small fortunes, to settle in the Islands. It is a creditable refuge
for the industrious man, who has been unfortunate in Trade, and to those whose
larger schemes in life have failed. -- It is an easy employment; the labor
light, and many parts of it performed by children. The situations and soil
where it is carried on, must be dry, and of course healthy, to be advantageous.
Coffee Plantations in particular, may be considered as a Nursery of useful
Inhabitants for the Colonies.

THE Soil best suited for coffee, is happily such as can be spared from every
other purpose. Large tracts of poor land, which would otherwise lie waste and
useless, may be rendered as profitable as the best, without the mortality and
casualties attendant on severe labor in hot climates.

THE numerous little families which live on Coffee Plantations, and are
dispersed in small settlements, in the interior parts of the Islands, occasion
the mountainous and woody lands to be cleared and opened; and to be intersected
with roads and easy communications.

THUS the residents live in safety, and all sorts of property acquire a
proportionate value and security. The retreats of fugitive Negroes are laid
open; plunder and depredation prevented, and conspiracies for rebellion are
deprived of their hiding-places. -- And thus the credit of the Planter, and
security of the Merchant, stand on a firm basis: Those commotions being
prevented, which have so often disturbed the tranquillity of the Islands, and
occasioned the ruin of many Individuals abroad and at home, to the great
defalcation of that immense Revenue, which these Islands pay to the
Mother Country The Duties and Excises, upon a Computation for the year 1781,
amount to about L1,346^12, sterling, annually, on the produce of Jamaica only.
.

THE truth is, that Sugar Plantations, though they are the great sources of
wealth to their proprietors, as well as to Government, do not employ a
sufficient number of White People for their internal security, against the
insurrections of the negroes. The manufacture is simple, and the labor wholly
carried on by Slaves; and though the Deficiency Law of Jamaica directs, that
one White Person shall be employed for every thirty Slaves, under a penalty of
thirty pounds per annum for every deficiency; yet, this Law is often defeated,
or the fine submitted to; as White Servants are expensive, and a less number
than that proportion, is sufficient for the purposes of making Sugar.

THE cultivation of inferior Staple Commodities, is therefore necessary to the
very existence of the Sugar Colonies; and I am persuaded, will prove to them
more beneficial in many respects, than at present is generally imagined. --
Here, then, is an open and grateful field for Colonial Patriotism; in which the
Amor Patriae will neither find opposition from envy, nor disappointment from
ingratitude. -- Here is the occasion to demonstrate the love of our Country,
and to perpetuate a benefit to mankind, which will never be forgotten: and
while a PEMRHYN, a LONG, and an EDWARDS, continue to point out to the Public,
with that ability by which they are as much distinguished as by their weight
and consequence, the true interest of the Sugar Colonies, and of this Country,
as connected with them, there will never be wanting some men, at least in the
Administration of this Kingdom, who will understand that a subject of the
realm, exerting his industry at four thousand miles distance, may be employed
as beneficially to the State, and is as much deserving the protection of it, as
the Country 'Squire, who leaves his fox-hounds, to give a silent vote or two
during the winter, and retires the remainder of the year to his Sabine Fields
in sloth and ignorance.

SIR NICHOLAS LAWS was the first person who planted Coffee in Jamaica; -- but
dying three years afterward, in 1731, he had not the happiness to see the
cultivation of it make any considerable progress.

IN 1732, several of the Planters and Merchants, belonging to the Island,
became patrons of the undertaking; and convinced, that under proper
encouragement it might be of importance to the Island, and that Coffee might
become a flourishing Staple Article of produce, they subscribed the sum of
220l. 10s. toward defraying the charges of soliciting an Act of Parliament for
lowering the Inland Duty, upon the importation of Coffee from Jamaica into
Great Britain; which at that time was 10l. sterling per Cwt. The circumstance
being but little known at present, and considering what obligation the Island
is under to their exertions, I am happy in having an opportunity of inserting
their names, as a proper tribute to the memory of those benefactors to the
Colony, and Friends to the Nation.

LONDON, Anno 1732.

A List of the persons who subscribed and paid into the hands of Mr. Roger
Drake and Co. the several sums undermentioned, toward defraying the Charges of
an application, for an Act of Parliament, to encourage the Planting of Coffee
in the Island of Jamaica.
L. s. John Ascough, Esquire 10 10 Thomas Per^ford, Esquire 10 10 James Dawkins, Esquire 10
10 Henry Dawkins, Esquire 10 10 Mess. Drake, Pennant, and Long, 21 0 Thomas Fish,
Esquire 10 10 Mr. James Fitter, 5 5 Cope Freeman, Esquire 10 10 John Gibbon, Esquire 10 10
Mr. John Gregory; 5 5 Capt. Joseph Hiscox; 10 10 Mr. Henry Lang and Co. 5 5
James Laws, Esquire. 10 10 John Lewis, Esquire 11 10 Mrs. Sala^^eh Low, 10 10 Samuel
Long, Esquire 10 10 Charles Long, Esquire 10 10 Mess. Macleigh and Gale, 10 10 Valent.
Mumbee, Esquire. 10 10 Pa^ele Peeke, Esquire 10 10 Capt. George Wane, 5 5 L220 10

In the same year, and in consequence of this solicitation, the Act 5 th Geo.
II. was passed, entitled, "An Act for encouraging the growth of Coffee in his
Majesty's Plantations in America." -- The preamble recites, that the soil and
climate of Jamaica, are particularly adapted for the growth of this Commodity;
and the act itself reduces the Inland Duty upon British Plantation Coffee
imported into Great Britain, from two shillings, to eighteen pence per pound:
-- And here it stood for many years, producing a Revenue to the Crown of about
10,000l. per anum. A few years ago, on the representation of the West India
Planters, Lord John Cavendish, the then Chancellor of the Exchequer, consented
to the very important re^^^ion of one shilling more; thereby furnishing a most
useful lesson to all future Financiers, -- the present Duty of sixpence per
pound actually producing nearly three times the sum that was received when the
Duty was eighteen pence: So true is the doctrine, that heavy taxation defeats
its own purpose.

IT has been computed, that one acre of land will contain 1100 Coffee plants,
which will produce berries in eighteen months from the sowing of the seed. The
trees will continue bearing for seven or eight years. -- Each tree, after the
first bearing, may produce, at a medium, one and an half or two pounds weight,
one with another; and six or eight servants can manage ten or twelve acres,
besides cultivating provisions for themselves. Upon this ground of calculation,
it is apparent, that one acre of land, supposing the weather not unfavourable,
may yield annually from 1700lb. to 2200lb. weight, which, when brought to
market, may sell for 9l. 15s. to 12l. 15s. sterling net. This, it is true, is
but a small profit; for it is little more than five farthings per pound,
whereas the Duty alone is sixpence per pound. If the Duty was equalized to that
upon Sugar, the medium profits per acre, would be about 40l. per annum. At
present, the net profits upon this Article, and upon Sugar in Jamaica, are
nearly equal per acre; -- that is, 10l. or 12l. sterling.

IN the year 1752, the export of Coffee from Jamaica, was rated at 60,000
pounds weight. In 1775, it was 440,000 pounds weight. -- Under the present Duty
of sixpence per pound, there is reason to expect, that the exports may rather
increase than diminish. But it is not likely to become a subject of very
extensive culture in our West Indian Islands, until even this Duty is lowered,
or at least while Foreign Coffee is permitted to enter into competition with it
at the British market. Though the Planters of Jamaica after a multitude of
experiments, and the most laudable exertions, have discovered the art of
cultivating, picking, and curing the berries, so as to make their Coffee equal
to the growth of Arabia. Some samples have been produced from that Island,
lately, which were pronounced by the London Dealers, even superior to the best
that has been brought from the East.

WHAT revolutions may change the nature of our commerce, were it possible to
foresee, it is not in my province to examine; but the Legislature of England,
as well as those of her Colonies, have a wise example before them, in the
conduct of France; by her promoting and protecting the growth of every thing,
that can supply the place of those articles which Europe purchaces in the East
Indies. Piementa (Myrtus Arborea Aromatica foliis laurinis), or All-spice, as
it is commonly called, from having a flavor, composed, as it were, of cloves,
cinnamon, juniper berries, nutmegs, and pepper, is the peculiar spice of
Jamaica From 12,000 to 15,000 bags of Piementa, have been annually imported
into England from Jamaica; Each bag contains about one hundred weight. It pays
a Duty of about twopence per pound.
: And it equals in virtues, and is more applicable to the general purposes of
life, and luxury too, than any spice that is brought from the East. The various
uses into which Piementa is converted in Europe, are but little known to those
who raise it. One secret, at least, I am able to divulge to them, which is,
that its essential oil, colored with Alkanet Root, to give it the appearance
of age, is sold all over Europe for the oil of cloves The principal and
prevailing flavor of Piementa, is like that of Cloves: Its oil exactly
resembles the oil of that spice, and sinks as that does in water. The oil
resides chiefly, like that of Cloves, in the shell, or cortical part.
.

SIR HANS SLOANE, in the Phil. Trans. Abr. vol. II. p. 667, says that "
Piementa may deservedly be counted the best and most temperate, mild, and
innocent of common spices; and fit to come into greater use, and gain more
ground, than it yet has, of the East India commodities of this kind; almost
all of which it far surpasses, by promoting the digestion of meat, attenuating
tough humors, moderately heating, strengthening the stomach, expelling wind,
and doing those friendly offices to the bowels, we generally expect from
spices." To this inferiority of the dear-bought and far-fetched spices of the
East, I can bear ample testimony; -- while the spice in question, being the
produce one of our own Colonies, and growing there in the greatest abundance,
can be afforded at a price, that the poor of Great Britain may have all the
comforts of its excellent properties; which I trust will be sufficiently made
known to them hereafter.

THE encouraging every article which increases the intercourse with our
Colonies, is increasing our Commerce. The payment for all the staples of the
West Indies, is made in our Manufactures; the sale of which must increase, in
proportion to the numbers that are employed in the cultivation of what is
bartered for them. Our West Indian Islands, without draining us of specie or
bullion, can supply us with many of those very articles for which we are
drained in other parts of the world The India Company pay for the Mocha Coffee,
in Specie. The original cost, is about 7l. sterling per Cwt.
. The quantity of shipping and seamen, necessarily employed in carrying
supplies thither, and transporting their commodities back to Europe, must be
very considerable. To these reflections it must also be added, that the
political disadvantage of not encouraging our own Colonies, is, that we must
encourage those of the French; which do, and will supply our markets, to the
detriment of our Revenue, and the impoverishing of our Colonies.

THUS France, with that transcendant wisdom which actuates her Government,
constantly keeping in view the grand political maxim of selling to all the
world, and "not buying from the stranger," adds to the native riches of her
great Country, all the Specie of Europe Mons. Necker says that there is now as
much Specie in France, as in all Europe ^^^des; Ten times as much as the Specie
and Bank-paper together in England; and that France has been acquiring for the
last fifteen years, the annual addition of 40,000,000^ Livers: 1,750,000l.
sterling: Equal to the increase of the coin of all the other European States
put together.
. How long our superiority in some branches of Manufacture, may stand in her
way, I cannot tell; but in imitating her example, "by improving the produce of
our own soil," and by encouraging the consumption at home of such Commodities,
as give employment to our own subjects abroad, England will do as France has
done -- enrich her Colonies, increase their attachment, and establish a
population there necessary for their preservation: -- augment her national
marine, strengthen her government, and aggrandise her empire.

Cecil Street, 15 th June, 1785.
A TREATISE etc.
IT is a generally received opinion, that the human frame is not less
influenced by diet than by climate; that its dispositions and characteristics
owe their originality as much to food, as those diseases evidently do, which
are the legitimate and indisputable issue of it.

IF the preceding position be just, there cannot surely be a subject more
interesting to man, than the pursuit of that knowledge which may instruct him
to avoid what is hurtful to health, to select for his use such things as tend
to raise the value of his condition, and to carry the enjoyments of life to
their utmost improvement.

WITH this idea, I venture to submit to the Public some observations which have
occurred to me, (...) and medicinal properties and effects (...)

IN England, the use of this berry hitherto has been principally confined to
the occasional luxury of individuals; as such, it is scarcely an object of
public concern; but Government wisely considering that this produce of our own
West India Islands is raised by our fellow subjects, and paid for in our
manufactures, has lately reduced the duty on the importation of Plantation
Coffee; which has brought it within the reach of almost every description of
people; and as it is not liable to any pernicious process in curing it, and is
incapable of adulteration, the use of it will probably become greatly extended;
-- as in other countries, it may diffuse itself among the mass of the people,
and make a considerable ingredient in their daily sustenance.

THE Plant, the Berries, and the Beverage, made from them, commonly pass under
the same name. The beverage, of which we speak in particular, is called by the
Egyptians Elkarie; by the Persians Cahwa; by the Arabians Cachua, and Coava; by
the Turks Cha^ve, and Cahue, from whence originate Caphe, Caffe, Coffi, Coffee,
and Coff^^, names by which it is universally known in Europe.

THE botanical description of the Coffee Plant has been already given by
several writers ^
; and as Sir Hans Sloane, in the Ph. Trans. No. 208, p. 63; Dr. Browne^ in his
Natural History of Jamaica, and Mr. Ellis, in 17774, have added to the number,
it is unnecessary here to say any thing on this subject, or to treat of its
Cultivation, but I though it might not to uninteresting in this Essay, to
include something of its (...), which will show it no less remarkable for the
universality with which it has been adopted by many regions of the East, than
for the permanently, after various persecutions, with which it has been
retained; notwithstanding the caprice of Taste, the violence of Laws, and the
austerity of Religion.

THE following account, from Arabian authority, is descriptive of the
commotions and prejudices, which Coffee formerly had to contend with and
conquer, among the Mahometans. Besides the similitude it bears to the ludicrous
notions, and contradictory opinions concerning Coffee in later times, it may
not be unentertaining to those who are accustomed to reflect, how great
communities are often violently agitated by trifles; and that kingdoms as well
as individuals, may be seriously ridiculous, and equally subject to transitory
delusion. It will appear also that Coffee, which after may struggles triumphed
^^^er the scrutiny of physicians, had nearely (...)der the influence of the
Alcoran; but (...) contest between the Alcoran and Coffee ended, as it were, in
a coalition.

"KHAIR BEG, Governor of Mecca by appointment of the Sultan of Egypt, was
unacquainted with Coffee, or of the manner of taking it. As he was going out of
the Mosque one day after evening prayer he observed in a corner of it a company
of people drinking Coffee, who were to spend the night there in prayer, and was
much offended at it. He thought at first they had been drinking wine; nor was
his surprise much diminished after they had explained to him the use and
virtues of this honor. On the contrary after they had informed him how much it
was in use in Mecca, and what merriment passed at the public places were it was
sold, he was of opinion that Coffee was intoxicating, at least that it conduced
to things forbidden by law.

"FOR this reason, after having ordered these people to go out of the Mosque,
with an injunction never to meet there for the future upon the like occasion,
he next day convened a great assembly Officers of Justice, and Doctors of Law,
together with Priests, and the most eminent men of Mecca to whom he
communicated what he had observed the night before in the Mosque and what he
was informed happened frequently in the public Coffee-houses; adding that he
was resolved to remedy this abuse, upon which he was desirous first to know
their opinions.

"THE Doctors agreed that the public Coffee-houses wanted regulation, as being
contrary to the law of pure Mahometanism: and declared that with respect to
Coffee, it was necessary to examine whether it was hurtful either to body or
mind; and concluded to take the advice of Physicians.

"THE Governor called (...) two Persons who were brothers, the most celebrated
physicians in M^^^^: one of them even wrote against the use of Coffee, jealous,
perhaps (says our Author), l^st the use of it should spoil their practice; so
they did, not fail to declare, that Coffee was cold and dry, and prejudicial to
health.

"A DOCTOR of the assembly replied, that BENGIAZLAH, an ancient Arabian
physician of great authority, had said that these berries were hot and dry and
consequently could not have the qualities just now ascribed to them.

"THE two Persian physicians replied, that BENGIAZLAH was a perfect stranger to
the berries in question; and declared, that if Coffee was reckoned among things
indifferent, and free for every body to make use of, yet it was apt to lead to
things not allowed of; and the safest way for true Mussulmen would be, to hold
it unlawful.

"THIS determination obtained all their suffrages; and several, either out of
prejudice, or false zeal, did not fail to affirm that Coffee had actually
disturbed their brains. One of the assistants maintained, that it intoxicated
like wine, which set all the assembly a laughing; because, in order to make a
judgment of it, it was necessary to have drank wine, which is forbidden by the
Mohammedan religion. He was asked whether he had ever drank any wine and he had
the imprudence to answer in the affirmative; which confession condemned him to
the bastinado, the punishment that is inflicted for this crime.

"COFFEE was however solemnly condemned at Mecca, as a thing forbidden by law,
notwithstanding the Mufti opposed the determination. But this rigor was not of
long duration; for the Sultan of Egypt, far from approving of the indiscreet
zeal of the Governor of Mecca, was surprised that he should dare to condemn a
thing so much in favor at Cairo, the capital of his dominions, where there
were Doctors of much greater authority than those of Mecca, and who had not
found any thing in the use of Coffee contrary to the law.

"THE Sultan ordered him therefore to revoke his prohibition, and to employ his
authority against the diorders only, if there were any, committed in the Coffee
houses; adding that because it was possible to abuse the very best things, even
the water of the fountain ZERVIZEM, in the Temple of MECCA, so much esteemed by
all Musselmen, it was not for that reason necessary absolutely to forbid them.

"THE two physicians who bore so great a part in the prohibition of Coffee,
came to an unfortunate end.

"AFTER the re-establishment of Coffee at Mecca, it was prohibited again, and
again reestablished.

"THE Sultan of Egypt consulted his Doctors of the Law upon this point; who
gave their opinions in writing, and proved by substantial reasons, the fallacy
of that condemnation, and the ignorance of those who passed it; which
established the use of Coffee at Cairo, upon a much stronger footing than ever.
But in the end, this great city also met with much trouble upon this subject.

"IN the year 1523 a scrupulous Doctor stated, that Coffee intoxicates the
head, and is prejudicial to health; and asked whether it was lawful or
unlawful? But none of his brethren were of his opinion, because it was obvious
that Coffee had not those bad qualities he ascribed to it; and therefore this
gave no shock at all to a custom so universally received.

"BUT about ten years after, a preacher held forth so vehemently against the
use of Coffee as a thing prohibited by law, that the mob fell upon the
Coffee-houses, broke the pots and dishes, and abused the company they found
there.

"UPON this there were two parties formed in the city; one of which maintained
that Coffee was prohibited by the law; the other, that it was not. But the
Judge in chief, having convened an assembly of all the Doctors, to have their
opinions, they all unanimously declared that the question had been already
determined by their predecessors, in favor of Coffee; that they were all of
the same sentiment; and that there was nothing further necessary than only to
restrain the extravagant heat of the zealots, and the indiscretion of ignorant
preachers. The Judge who presided was of the same opinion; and immediately
ordered all the assembly to be served with Coffee, and took some himself: an
example which presently composed all controversies, and made Coffee more
fashionable than before.

"AT the time when this custom was most prevalent in Constantinople, the Imans
and officers of the Mosques made a great clamor, that they were deserted,
whilst all the Coffee-houses were continually crowded. The Dervizes and priests
fell foul upon Coffee; not only affirming that it was unlawful, but that it was
a much greater sin to go to a Coffee-house than to a Tavern.

"AFTER a great deal of noise and declamation, all the Priests united to obtain
a solemn condemnation of this liquor; and maintained that Coffee roasted was a
sort of coal; and that every thing which had the least relation to a coal, was
forbidden by law. Upon this they drew up a question in form, and presented it
to the Mufti, with a request that he would determine it according to the duty
of his office. The Mufti, without giving himself the trouble of examining any
difficulties, gave a determination according to the mind of the Priests and
pronounced that Coffee was prohibited by the law of MAHOMET.

"ALL the Coffee-houses in Constantinople were immediately shut up, and the
officers of the police ordered to prevent the drinking of Coffee in what manner
soever.

"YET notwithstanding the rigor that was used in the execution of this order,
they could, never prevent the use of it in private. AMURATH III. in whose time
this prohibition had taken place, again indulged a liberty with regard to a
thing so agreeable, and which was believed otherwise not contrary to religion;
so that it was allowed to be drank in men's own houses, and grew more and more
into esteem. At last, the officers of the police, seeing there was no remedy,
were content for a certain sum, to permit it to be sold, provided it was not in
public; so that it was allowed to be drank in private houses, shutting up the
doors, or in the back shops.

"THERE wanted but little, to establish by degrees the public Coffee-houses. It
happened that a new Mufti, less scrupulous, or more wise than his predecessor,
declared solemnly that Coffee ought not to be looked upon as a coal; and that
the liquor made from it was not prohibited by the law. After this declaration,
the Zealots, Preachers, Doctors, Lawyers, and Mufti himself, far from
exclaiming against Coffee, took it themselves; and their example was
universally followed by the whole Court and City Voyage into Arabia Felix, p.
282, 296. Ed. Amst. 1716.
."

COFFEE, though a native of Arabia Felix, had been converted into use in Africa
and Persia, long before a beverage was made of it by the Arabians An Arabia
(...) of France's Liberty (...)
.

ABOUT the middle of the fifteenth century, the Mufti of Aden, a city in Arabia
Felix, traveling into Persia, learnt the use of it there, and on his return
introduced it to his countrymen.

IT is from this period, that any authentic account of the dietetic use of
Coffee is derived. Enthusiasm indeed his carried some admirers of this berry so
far into conjecture, as to trace its virtues back to the remotest ages: and to
suppose it the Nepenthe which HELEN received from an Egyptian Lady, and is
celebrated by HOMER as a soother of the mind, in the extremest state of anger,
grief, and misfortune.

FROM Aden it spread its influence through all Arabia, and other parts of the
Ottoman Empire, and arrived at Constantinople in the reign of Solomon the
Great, in the year 1554; and about a century afterward, it was adopted at
London and Paris.

THE virtues of this cheerful liquor, like moral virtues under despotism,
operated in Constantinople to its detriment: -- by dispelling the torpitude
brought on by their vicious excesses, and recruiting their spirits, sunk by the
depravity of their habits, it introduced a disposition to exercise the
understanding, -- a crime in every Government that tolerates nothing but silent
obedience.

RI(...) during the war in Candia, in the (...)HOMET the IVth, when the Turkish
affairs were (...) critical situation, "the V^^ir KUPRULI suppressed the
Coffee-houses, though he permitted the Taverns:" The former conducing to
intellectual recreation, and some speculations on the affairs of state, which
the Viser thought it was prudent to prevent. These were objections from which
the latter was free. This famous edict appears to have had no other relative
effect than to diminish the revenue; for Coffee throve under this political, as
well as it did under the former religious, persecution.

HOWEVER strange it may appear at this time, Coffee had similar difficulties to
encounter soon after its introduction into England; for it experienced the same
treatment under CHARLES the IId. that it met with in Turkey under an AMURATH
and a MAHOMET: it having been found an encourager of social meetings,
Coffee-houses were shut up by proclamation, as seminaries of sedition Anno 1675.
.

RAY observed, that the part of Arabia which produced Coffee in such abundance,
might truly be styled happy The Kingdom of Yemen.
; from whence many millions of bushels of this valuable treasure were then
annually exported to Turkey, Barbary, and Europe The Abbe Raynal says that
twelve millions five hundred and fifty thousand pounds weight of Coffee is now
annually expo^^ed from Arabia Felix; which at 14 ^^is per pound, brings (...)
that country (...) livers, (...) 8l. 15s. sterling The European Companies
purchase three millions five hundred thousand weight of this commodity.
. -- In Constantinople alone, the consumption is said to amount to more than
what is expended for wine in Paris.

IT was long after coffee had been an article of Commerce, that Europeans, were
able to obtain, or cultivate the plant, as the berry was exported dry, and
unfit for propagation.

IT has been said, that a Frenchman near Dijon in France, was the first person
who made the experiment with success, about the year 1670: the Trees raised
from the seeds he had sown produced berries, but they were tasteless and
insipid; and served for no other purpose, than for his amusement.

ACCORDING to BOERHAAVE's account, a Dutch Governor was the first person who
produced fresh berries from Mocha, and planted them in Batavia; and in the year
1690 sent a plant from thence to Amsterdam; which came to maturity, and
produced those berries, which have since furnished all that is now cultivated
in the West Indies.

IN 1714 a plant from the garden of Amsterdam was sent by the Magistrates, as a
present to LEWIS the XIVth, which was placed in the garden at Marli.

In 1718 the Dutch began to cultivate Coffee in Surinam; in 1727 the French
began to cultivate it in Martinico; and in 1728 the English began to cultivate
it in Jamaica.

THE first plant in Jamaica, was introduced by Sir NICHOLAS LAWS, and planted
at Townwell Estate, now called Temple Hall, belonging to Mr. LUTTRELL. -- How
its propagation has been extended since those periods, in the West Indies, is
^^o well known to require recital here.

SOME writers imagine that there are several sorts of Coffee G^^ff^y, etc.
; but the difference (...) only from the soil, cultivation, and curing, and not
from any difference in the species.

IF the Coffee in our West India Islands be planted in a dry soil, and in a
warm situation; if after the trees have acquired a certain age, the ripe
berries be collected with care and cleanliness, which will be small when dry,
like those which come from Arabia; and if they are kept a proper time before
they are used, this Coffee will have flavor and excellence equal to the best
that is imported from Mocha.

BUT the time and labor necessary to produce Coffee of the best quality have
discouraged our Planters from raising it at much expense; because, until
lately, it has been subject to a precarious, or losing market. Therefore
quantity, and large berries, the produce of young trees, lux^^i^nt soil, and
little attention, has turned to better account than quality.

AFTER Coffee has received all the excellence it can from the Planter, it is a
matter of great consequence, that proper care be taken in shipping it for
Europe: it should not be put into parts of the vessel where it may be injured
by dampness, or by the effluvia of other freight. Coffee berries are remarkably
disposed to imbibe exhalations from other bodies, and thereby acquire an
advantageous, and disagreeable flavor. Rum placed near to Coffee, will in a
short time so impregnate the berries as to injure their flavor. It is said,
that a few bags of pepper on board a ship from India, some years since spoiled
a whole cargo of Coffee Miller.
. The French are more attentive in this respect than the English; and indeed,
they omit nothing that can give their Coffee any advantage. But if their Coffee
be superior to ours, it is the effect of more encouragement. The industry and
genius of the French Coffee Planters, have been cherished; ours have been
restricted by a duty, which prevented the consumption of the article. Thus the
spirit of cultivation has been checked, improvement retarded, and consequently
the produce not brought to perfection.

THE chemical analysis of Coffee, evinces that it possesses a great portion of
mildly bitter, and lightly astringent gummous and resinous extract Newman
obtained eight ounces, from ^^teen ounces of roasted Coffee, b(...) and
spirituous menstruums.
; a considerable quantity of oil Bourdelin obtained six ounces six drams, from
two pounds and a half of r^a^^ed coffee^ and Hagb^^n, Phil. Trans. obtained two
ounces four drams two scruples, from one pound of unroasted Coffee.
; a fixed salt L^ F^^^re, Newman Lemery, Bourdelin, obtained nine drams and a
half, from two pounds and a half of roasted Coffee.
; and a volatile salt F^^^^^ B (...), obtained a volatile salt, that
efferveseed strongly with spirit of salt.
. -- These are its medicinal constituent principles.

THE intention of torrefaction, is not only to make it deliver those principles
and make them soluble in water, but to give it a property it does not possess
in the natural state of the berry.

BY the action of fire, its leguminous taste, and the aqueous part of its
mucilage are destroyed; its saline properties are created, and disengaged, and
its oil is rendered empyreumatic. -- From thence arises the pungent smell, and
exhilirating flavor, not found in its natural state.

ANIMAL oils are changed by fire in the same manner in broiled meats and
acquire that grateful odor, so exciting to weak appetites.

IMITATIONS of Coffee have been procured from roasted beans, peace, wheat, and
rye with almonds; but the delicacy of the oil in Coffee, which the fire, in
roasting, converts into its peculiar empyreuma, is not to be equalled.

THE roasting of the berry to a proper degree, requires great nicety: DU FOUR
remarks, that its virtue and agreeableness depend on it, and that both are
often injured in the ordinary method. BERNIER says, when he was at Cairo, where
it is so much drank, he was assured by the best judges, that there were only
two people in that great City, in the public way, who understood the preparing
it in perfection.

IF it is under-done, its virtues will not be imparted; and in use, it will
load and oppress the stomach: -- If it is over-done, it will yield a flat,
burnt, and bitter taste; its virtues will be destroyed; and in use it will heat
the body and act as an astringent " Cetera bonitas Caovae prac^ipue dependet a
cur^^sa and enquisita^t s^ione." RAY.
.

THE closer it is confined at the time of roasting and till used, the better
will its volatile pungency, flavor and virtues, be perserved.

FOURTEEN pounds weight of raw Coffee, is generally reduced at the public
roasting houses, to eleven pounds by the roasting; for which the Dealer pays
seven pence halfpenny; at the rate of five shillings for every hundred weight
In London.
. But the roasting ought to be regulated by the age, and quality of the Coffee,
and by nicer rules than the appearance of the fumes, and such as are usually
practiced; therefore the reduction must consequently vary, and no exact
standard can be ascertained. Besides, by mixing different sorts of Coffee
together, that require different degrees of heat and roasting, Coffee has
seldom all the advantages it is capable of receiving, to make it delicate,
grateful, and pleasant. This indeed can be effected no way so well, as by
people who have it roasted in their own houses, to their own taste, and fresh
as they want it for use.

THE extraordinary influence that Coffee, judiciously prepared, imparts to the
stomach, from its tonic and invigorating qualities, is strongly exemplified by
the immediate effect produced on taking it when the stomach is overloaded with
food, or nauseated with surfeit, or debilitated by intemperance.

To constitutionally weak stomachs, it affords a pleasing sensation; it
accelerates the process of digestion What the process of digestion in the body
is, we do not clearly understand; but we may co^^^le with S(...) that (...)
digestion, m^^ out of the body without the a^^istance of (...)id, can bear no
^^^^ty to it. -- Who would not inf(...) the disagreement of Coffee mixed with
wine in a glass, (...)eable effects would arise from mixing them in the
stomach^ Experience proves the co(...) and that (...)tomach i^ effected by a
(...) power, which (...).
, corrects crudities and removes cholic, and flatulencies.

BESIDES its effect in keeping up the harmony of the gastric powers, it
diffuses a genial warm^^, that cherishes the animal spirits, and takes away the
listlessness and languor (...)
, which so greatly embitter the hours of nervous people, after any deviation to
excess, fatigue, or irregularity.

THE foundation of all the mischiefs of intemperance is laid in the stomach;
when that is injured, instead of preparing the food, that the lacteals may
carry into the constitution, sweet and wholesome juices to the support of
health, it becomes the source of disease, and disperses through the whole frame
the cause of decay.

FROM the warmth and efficacy of Coffee in attenuating the viscid fluids, and
increasing the vigor of the circulation, it has been used with great success
in the fluor albus, in the dropsy, and in worm complaints; -- and in those
cama^ote, anasarcous, and such other diseases as arise from unwholesome food,
want of exercise, weak s^^^es, and obstructed perspiration.

IN vertigo, lethargy, catarrh and all disorders of the head, from construction
in the capillaries, long experience has proved it to be a powerful medicine ^
; and in certain cases of apoplexy, it has been found serviceable even when
given in glysters, where it has not been convenient to convey its effects by
the stomach. Mons. MALEBRANCHE restored a person from an apoplexy, by repeated
glysters of Coffee ^
.

THERE are but few people who are not informed of its utility for the headache;
the steam (...) times is very useful to mitigate pains of the head; -- in the
West Indies, where the violent species of headache, such as cephal^a,
hemicra^^a, and cla^^s, are more frequent, and more severe than in Europe.
Coffee is the only medicine that gives relief. Opiates are sometimes used, but
Coffee has an advantage that Opium does not possess; it may be taken to in all
conditions of the stomach; and at all times by women, who are most subject to
these complaints; as it dissipates those congestions and obstructions, that are
frequently the cause of the disease, and which Opium is known to increase, when
its temporary relief is past Egocum Lugduni Batavorum studiis operam datem, per
totum annum Cephalaea misere it butavi; and postquam potul copiose Tee, and
praecipue quidem Coffee quoti^ie sumendo a^^u^vi, semper immunis ap ea vixi,
non tantum sed ab omni allo incommodo, quamvis antea ^ta v^xerim, ut mort^s
haberet vices lenta quae trahebatur mihi vita gementi, qui per totum
quinquennium cum longa morborum serie acriter conflictavi. Ray.
.

FROM the stimulant and detergent properties of Coffee, it is used in all
obstructions of the visscera; it assists the secretions; powerfully promotes
the menses, and mitigates the pains attendant on the sparing discharge of that
evacuation. In the West Indies, the chlorosis and obstructed menses, are common
among laborious females, exposed to the effects of their own carelessness, and
the rigorous transitions of the climate; there strong Coffee drank warm in a
morning fasting, and good exercise after it, has been productive of innumerable
cures "Utuntur tamen ejus decocto ad robor^^dum ventriculum frigidiorem
adju^andamque concoctionem, et non minus ad auferendas a visceribus
obstructiones; in tumoribusque hepatis lienisque frigidis, and antiquis
obstructionibus, feliciori cum successu decoctum mu^tos d^es experiuntur. Quod
etiam uterum maximo respicere videtur, ipium enim excalfacit, obstructionesque
ab eo aufert, sic enim in fam^liari usu est apud omnes AEgyptias, Arabasque
mul^eres, ut semper, dum stuunt menses, ipsorum vacuationem, hujus decocti
serventis multum paulatim sorbillantes adjuvent. Ad promocendos etiam, in
quibus suppressi sunt, usus hujus decocti, purgato corpore multis diebus
utilissimus est." P-Alpin, lib. 10.
.

THE industrious Overseers of Plantations, and other Europeans employed in
cultivation in the West Indies, who are exposed to the morning and evening
dews, find great support from a cup of Coffee, before they go into the field:
it fortifies the stomach, and guards them against the diseases incident to
their way of life; especially in clearing of lands; or when their residence is
in humid situations, or in the vicinity of stagnant water. Those who are
imprudently addicted to intemperance, find Coffee a benign restorer, and bracer
of the stomach, for that nausea, weakness, and disorderly condition, which is
brought on by drinking bad fermented liquors, and new rum to excess.

IN continued and remitting fevers in hot climates, it frequently happens, at
the period when bark is indicated, that the stomach cannot retain it. -- This
is an embarrassment of great importance, in which the Practitioner has an
interval, only of a few hours, to decide on his patient's fate. -- Bark in
substance is required to answer the intention; and here, as well as in many
cases of intermittents, when every other mode of administering bark has proved
abortive, Coffee has been found an agreeable, and a successful vehicle.

COFFEE having the admirable property of promoting perspiration Leewenhoek,
Huxham.
, it allays thirst and checks preternatural heat.

THE great use of Coffee in France is supposed to have abated the prevalency of
the gravel: -- in the French Colonies, where Coffee is more used than with the
English, as well as in Turkey, where it is the principal beverage, not only the
gravel, but the gout, those tormentors of so many of the human race, are
scarcely known "On a reconnu par experience, que (la Boisson du Cafe) est d'un
grand secour a ceux qui sont incommodes par la repletion universelle du corpse,
par la grossuer particuliere du ventre, and par l'embarras qui se fait dans les
reins, and qui devient la cause generative des pierres, and par consequent des
coliques nephre, iques and des suppressions d'urine." Elle est salutaire aux
goutteux par l'experience particuliere de nos goutteux, qui s'y sont habitues:
^ar ils en tirent du moins ce benefice que leur acces sont moins frequent and
baucoup plus supportables."

De Blegny, p. 185 and 186.
.

IT has been found useful in quieting the tickling vexatious cough, that often
accompanies the small pox Huxham.
, and other eruptive fevers. -- A dish of strong Coffee without milk or sugar,
taken frequently in the paroxysm of an asthma, abates the fit; and I have often
known it to remove the fit entirely. Sir JOHN FLOYER, who had been afflicted
with the asthma from the seventeenth year of his age until he was upwards of
fourscore, found no remedy in all his elaborate researches, until the latter
part of his life, when he obtained it by Coffee.

PREPARED strong and clear, and diluted with a great portion of boiled milk, it
becomes a highly nutritious and balsamic diet; proper in hectic, pulmonic, and
all complaints, were a milk diet is useful "Elle est d'un effet merveillux pour
ceux qui ont la poitrine naturellement fo ble, ou accidentalement affoible par
le ^heume, par la toux inveteree, par une pulmonie naissante, and par ces
autres especes de fluxions qui rencent la voix rauque, and qui causent l'asthme
and la court haleine."

De Blegny, page 189.
; and is a great restorative to constitutions emaciated by the gout and other
chronic disorders.

LONG watching and intense study are wonderfully supported by it, and without
the ill consequences that succeed the suspension of rest and sleep, when the
nervous influence has nothing to sustain it.

WE are told that travelers in Eastern Countries, and Messengers who are sent
with dispatches, perform their tedious journeys by the alternate effects of
Opium and Coffee; -- and that the dervices and religious zealots, in their
abstemious devotions, support their vigils through their nocturnal ceremonies
by this exhilirating liquor.

MONS. BERNIER says, that the Turks, who frequently subsist a considerable time
upon Coffee only, look on it as an aliment that affords great nourishment to
the body: -- for which reason, during the rigid fast of the Ramadam, or Turkish
Lent, it is not only forbid, but any person is deemed to have violated the
injunctions of his Prophet, that has had even the smell of Coffee.

BACON says, Coffee "comforts the head and heart, and helps digestion Cent. 8,
Exp. 738. Bacon seems to have taken his idea of the Turkish Coffee-houses from
^^akluyt who cites Biddulph.
;" Dr. WILLIS says, "being daily drank, it wonderfully clears and enlightens
each part of the soul, and disperses all the clouds of every function
Pharmaceut. Rat. P. 1.
." The celebrated Doctor HARVEY used it often; VOLTAIRE lived almost on it; and
the learned and sedentary of every country have recourse to it, to refresh the
brain, oppressed by study and contemplation Elle fortify la memoire and le
judgment. Un aliment qui fortify puissamment toutes les actions naturelles. De
Blegny, page 181, 184.


.

AMONG the many valuable qualities of Coffee, that of its being an antidote to
the abuse of OPIUM, must not be considered as the least; for as mankind is not
content with the wonderful efficacy derived from the prudent use of opium, the
abuse of it is productive of many evils, that are only remediable by Coffee.

THE diseases generally brought on by a continued course of excessive doses of
Opium, are either loss of appetite, stupor, debility, loss of memory,
melancholy, palsy, or dropsy: -- and frequently the consequences of the
necessary and temporary use of common doses of laudanum, are nausea, languor,
giddiness of the head, cold sweats, headache, hysterics, and tremor.

VARIOUS have been the attempts of physicians and chemists to correct their
favorite Opium, and to improve and separate its useful from its hurtful
properties Paracelsus Helmont, Silvius etc. The use of Opium in the Lues
Venerea, is by no means a new discovery It has ha^^^s advocates and use like
Guaiacum, and other dia^poretics. Ferneli^s de Curatione Luis Ven -- Palma^ius
de Lue Ven. W^^ts Pharmaceut^ ^^. p 1. Paulli de paparere, etc.
; but their preparations have neither meliorated the simple juice of the
vegetable, as the great SYDENHAM asserts; nor have they taken away those
properties to which its prejudicial effects are attributed.

THERE never was, as far as we know, any preparation, or combination with
Opium, from the time of King MITHRIDATES down to the days of Doctor JONES, that
could be relied on to conteract the ill effects of its first operations, in
many constitutions; and that would prevent those disagreeable after operations
so much complained of in almost every subject and disease.

SUCH a preparation, would indeed be a large contribution to the Materia
Medica, and would make a considerable figure in the practice of physic. But
this may never be accomplished; it may not be in nature; -- the defect may be
the inherent imperfection of the vegetable, and inseparable from it; for as we
find in the moral world, the brightest virtues may be shaded with alloy; -- if
so, it will yet be some consolation, that we are able to remove those ills
which we cannot prevent.

EVERY Author who mentions Coffee, allows that it possesses singular power in
counteracting the hypnotic, or sleepy effects of Opium; this is the only virtue
assigned to it, in regard to Opium: as if the influence which Coffee exerts on
the system, to produce that effect, could be directed to no purpose, when these
contradictions were not employed in opposition, to rob each other of their
attributes.

CONFIRMED by many years observation, I believe that Coffee besides being the
best corrector of Opium, is the best medicine to remove those ills which it
produces, that has yet been discovered; and that the operations of common doses
of Opium, may be checked or extended, and may be graduated by it at pleasure.

THE heaviness, head ach, giddiness, sickness, and nervous affections, which
attack the patient in the morning who has taken an opiate at night, are
agreeably removed by a cup or two of strong Coffee.

In Military hospitals in hot climates, recourse is often had to large and
repeated doses of Opium; from which I have frequently observed, that the
retention of the stomach of the patient, has been greatly injured; the
secretion of urine impeded, or the bladder affected by a paralysis: -- even
these effects have been speedily removed, by a few cups of strong Coffee

THE general opinion is erroneous, though of long standing, that the Turks use
Coffee, exclusive of culinary purposes, only against the sleepy effects of
Opium. The Turks as well as the Persians and Indians, take Opium as a cordial
"P^aesan^l T^^^um it remedium car(...) dixerim quod in n^^^^ h^ctenu^ e^^
repert^^." Sy^^^^^.
, to invigorate them for the temporary enjoyment of amorous pleasures; and to
enable them to support fatigue, and to stimulate their nerves to the exertions
of courage and enterprise Ma^de^^ (...) Ve^a^e^ and Travels into (...) lib. ^.
p. 37^ 78, 84. B^^^^rius lib. 3. cap. 15 Erastus Disp. de Sa^^r. and de Narcot.
Georg. A^dreae Itiner. Ind. lib. 2. c. ^ J. J. Saar Itiner. Ind. p. 11.
Fog^^us^^ ^urcarum Nepenthe, etc.
. But when the desired effects of this cordial are over, languor, lassitude,
and dejection of spirits succeed. -- It is for these indispositions that Coffee
is so medicinally necessary to the Turks and they use it as their only remedy.

BUT while this unpleasing review of Opium is presented to our contemplation,
let us not forget the benefit which mankind derives from that inestimable
medicine.

IF the Silphium was held in veneration, stamped on coins, and hung up in
temples Plin. Hist. Not. lib. 10. c. 3. H^syeb^^s, Span^^im, de usu and Pres.
N^. ^s. Diste^^. 4.
; if the Mallow was dignified with the name of Sacred By Pythagoras.
; if a statue was erected to the Lettuce By Augustus, Sueton. Seve^^l of the
Valerian family ^^^obled their name with that of Lactu^^^^.
; -- what honors are not due to the POPPY, whose pure and unadulterated juice,
possesses power to relax the whole force of animal spasm; to arrest the
determination of the fluids and vital energy on particular parts, which often
tends to the sudden dissolution of the frame; to relieve corporal pain by
tranquillity and mental affliction by sleep "T^m homini quam morbo concillat."
Paracel.
; These are the unrivalled virtues of the POPPY, so highly distinguished by the
CREATOR, and whose excellence no human praise can reach.

IT is not to be expected that Coffee should escape objections, when the
virtues of Opium could not secure that from severe censure and condemnation.
Among the furious enemies of Opium was Professor STAHL, of Hall in Germany De
O(...).
; and among those of Coffee was SIMON PAULLI of Rostock, afterward physician
to the King of Denmark. As the former could see nothing but the mischiefs of
Opium, so the latter was blind to the virtues of Coffee. But PAULLI founded his
prejudice against Coffee, as he had his prejudices against Tea, Chocolate, and
Sugar -- not on experience, but on anecdotes, that had been picked up by hasty
travelers, which had no other foundation than absurd report, and conjecture
Olearius. Mart^rius. "Chinenses adeo exciccentur, al Herba Thee ut vix
expuant." De Ga^^rci^s. de ^^be Anglica^a.
. Unacquainted with the real properties of Coffee, his imagination supplied him
with fictitious ones; and classed with articles, with which it has no more
affinity, than they have analogy to each other "Insta^ Ru^^^. Agni Casii,
Campho^^e. Thee Coffee, Chocoladae, and similium omnis," etc.

S Paulli, Quadrip. Botan. p. 396.
, he assigned to it those qualities, which should affect the body by the
doctrine of GALEN "Corpus enim tale natura est, propte^^^ quod calidate,
frigidate, humi^li^^^e, necitate, sic commitium (...) carni esse (...). nervo
nervum, and aliorum (...) est quod est ob qualitatem qua^^or praedictarum,
etc." Calen.
, to correspond with the account he had read of its supposed effects, on Sultan
MAHOMET CASNIN, a King of Persia; who, it is said, from an excessive fondness
of Coffee, had sotted away the vigor of his constitution The Travels of the
Ambassadors from the Da^^ of Halstein into Muscovy and Persia, lib. 6.
. But chemistry and experience have brought the subject into light, and
PAULLI'S baseless fabric has vanished Vide page 26. "Il n'ya aucuus sels n'y
fixes ne essentials plus stomatique, pius temperens, and plus dissolvans, que
ceux qu'on sire du Caffe, etc." De Blegny.
.

I HAVE singled out SIMON PAULLI from among the adversaries of Coffee, for no
other motive, than to show from what tales so learned a man confesses he
supports a notion, that Coffee (like Tea to the Chinese) acted as a great drier
to the Persians, and abated aphrodisiacal warmth. This opinion has been since
received, and propagated from him, as he received and propagated it from its
fabulous origin. The facts have been refuted by DU FOUR, and many travelers.
-- Sir THOMAS HERBERT, who was several years in the East, tells us that the
Persians have a different opinion of Coffee: -- "They say that Coffee comforts
the brain, expels melancholy and sleep, purges choler, lightens the spirits,
and begets an excellent concoction, and by custom, becomes delicious. But all
these virtues do not conciliate their liking of it so (...), as the romantic
notion, that it was first invented and brewed by the Angel GABRIEL, to restore
MAHOMET'S decayed moisture, which it did effectuality Setting aside the
hyperbolical part of this Persian opinion, here is at least a tradition that
this not or was used in Arabia in the time of Mahomet, whose flight from Mecca
was in the year 622. This was eight centuries and a half antecedent to the
learned Egyptian Doctor's Treatise in defense of Coffee; which is said to have
been written in the year 1470; the copy of which, as has been mentioned, is in
the King of France's library. All the ancient nations who made much use of the
Legumina in their diet, prepared many of them by torefaction and it is most
probable that the Arabians were acquainted with the art of preparing a liquor,
from the parched or roasted berries of a tree that was indigenous among them,
prior to its use in Egypt and Persia, or in any of the neighboring Countries.
It is a question, though of more curiosity than importance, whether the drin^
might not have had its name from Cufa or Caffa, a city in Arabia Felix? The
Arabic Ban (the Coffee berry) corresponds with our Bean, and is probably its
etymon. Perhaps the Greek, BUNT, " Barley sleeped in water," Anglice, Malt, may
be traced from the Arabic Buna.
."

MANY have been the dogmas concerning Coffee: some Authors allege that it is
dry, and therefore good for the gross and phlegmatic, but hurtful to lean
people; some contend that it is cold, and therefore good for sanguine, bilious,
and hot constitutions; others that it is hot, and therefore bad for the
sanguine and bilious, but good for cold constitutions. Some assure us, that it
acts only as a sedative; others, that it acts only as a stimulant. With such
disputants there is no entering the lists: Medical science disclaims their
pretensions, as creations of the imagination; and transfers their contest for
decision, to a Synod of Turkish Priests.

I AM aware that there are others, who are decisively of opinion, that Coffee
is injurious "in thin habits and bilious temperaments; in melancholic and
hypochondriacal disorders, and to persons subject to haemorrhages." -- WILLIS
and CHEYNE, as well as LEWIS, were in some degree of this opinion.

In haemorrhages, particularly in those of the pulmonic and uterine kind, the
interdiction of Coffee is every where justly admitted Yet Dr. Percival says it
is "powerfully sedative." vol. I. p.
; but the other exceptions however they may have been taken up, and asserted in
England, where the confined use of Coffee has scarcely afforded a fair
opportunity to settle such a point, will be disputed in countries where it is
in general use. Let me add also that the result of my own observations in those
countries, is evidence against those exceptions; and it is confirmed by every
information I have obtained, from medical people resident in Constantinople,
and other parts of the Turkish Empire.

LET us examine this arbitary restriction to the use of Coffee, and see what
justice there is in the grounds on which it has been imposed, and what reason
there is in having submitted to it.

IN regard to "thin habits," where there is no disease, I can say but little;
being acquainted with no theory that militates against the prudent use of
Coffee in the alimentary way; nor why it should not be as harmless, to such
habits, as to those who are blessed with the greatest obesity and rotundity of
figure.

In "bilious temperaments," facts and experience must determine. Bilious
temperaments are surely no where so common as in hot climates; and in those
very countries, Coffee is certainly most used. There Coffee is found to temper
and soften the acrimony of the bile, and is remarkably serviceable in the
cholorea morbus. It is observed in bilious habits that the stomach receives
nothing more agreeably than Coffee; and that the nausea and inclination to
vomit, which often accompany bilious complaints, are taken away by Coffee. In
the jaundice, it is used with great success, and in obstructions of the liver.

To the opinion that Coffee is hurtful in "melancholic and hypochondriacal
disorders," a multitude of opinions may be opposed; and (...) well known power
in removing visceral obstru^^^^ns, and exhilirating the spirits; which
qualities have been attibuted to Coffee ever since the use of it was known Ill
remedy tres efficacement dans les deux sexes, a toutes les esprees d^
indispos^t^ons qu'on attribue aux vapeurs du foye, de la ^atte, and de la
matrice, and par consequent aux maladies hypocondriaques, and generalment a
^outes les passions hysteriques, etc.

De Blegny, p. 177.
.

IF it be demanded, what general description of people should abstain from the
use of Coffee? as it seems with some people to be necessary for the rightly
understanding of its virtues, to have something said against it, I must answer
that I know of none. Individuals possessing peculiar nervous sensibility, and
such as are subject to feverish irritability, should abstain from all
stimulating liquors; therefore, from Coffee. -- Those who from their own proper
experience, find it does not agree with them, can hardly stand in need of this
injunction "Je seay qu'il se ^rouve indifferemment enter les bilicux, les
sanguins, les pit^iteux, and les melancholiques, des persons a qui il fait du
been, and d'autres a qui il fait du mal; c'est pou^quo^ bi^^ qu'il soit vray
qu'il y aye peu d'alimens ny de medicamens ^e generalment (...) que le (...)."
De Blegny. p. 1^^.
.

IT is well known, that there are some habits which cannot endure any thing
that increases the sensibility of the nerves; and others that are affected by
particular stimulants. A cup of strong Coffee will cause some people to have a
tremor of the band: -- BOIL says, it acted as an emetic with one person;
others will be heated or be kept from sleeping by it. Tea, Champagne wine, and
many other things, will produce similar effects. It was on this account that
SLARE, and some others have confounded this excess of nervous sensibility, with
the palsy, which depends on a privation of sensibility; -- against which,
nothing appears to be more suitable than Coffee.

A SUBJECT like Coffee, possessed of active principles and evident operations,
must necessarily be capable of misapplication and abuse; and there must be
particular habits which these operations disturb -- SLARE says, he used it in
too great excess, and it affected his nerves Slare, having in^^^^^ed himself,
as one which whom Coffee did not agree, has mi^e^ many people; and as this
circumstance is sometimes qu^^ed to justify objectio(...) Coffee, I beg leave
to re^a^e his account of it in his own words: -- "Nor do I decry and condemn to
^ee th(...) it proved very prejudicial to my own health, and brought paralytic
affect^ons upon me. I confess, in my younger days I ignorantly used it in too
great^^^ss as many (...) do make use of th^s and other Indian dr^n^s; though I
have quite abandoned it for above thirty yea^s, and soon recovered the good
to^e of my nerves which continue steady to this day; yet I must (...) Coffee to
some people is of good use, when taken in (...) "It is true that they (Indian
drinks) do not agree with all (...) ^^ions; with some only one of these
entertaining liquids, as Green Tea; and with others, all of them (...)." -- I
(...) ^a^did ^e^at^on of Slare^s, requires no comment: but excess even of milk
given to children, whose natural food it is, produces the (...) an error often
committed by nurses, and is said by Hypocrates to have destroyed many children.
; but Dr. FOTHERGILL, who was a sensible man, and did not use it in great
excess, though he was of a very delicate habit and could not use Tea, drank
Coffee "almost constantly many years, without receiving any inconveniency from
it Fothergill^s Letter to Ellis.
."

But the history of particular cases, sometimes serves but to prove, that
mankind are not all organized alike; and that the sympathy of one, and the
antipathy of another, ought by no means to render useless, that infinite
variety which pervades all nature; and with which the earth is blessed in the
vegetable creation. -- Were it so, physic would acquire but little aid from the
toils of philosophy, when philosophy had no other incitement to labor, than
ba^^en speculation.

IT has long been a custom with many people among us, to add mustard to their
Coffee: mustard, or aromatics may with great propriety be added in flatulent,
lauguid, and scorbutic constitutions De Bleg^^, re^^mmends Coffee stron^ly in
the scurvy Du Four says the (...), are used (...).
; and particularly by invalids, and in such cases, where warmth or stimulus is
required.

THE Eastern nations add either cloves, cin^^^^on, cardam^ms, cummin^^ed, or
essence of ^mber, etc. but neither milk or sugar. Milk and sugar without the
aromatics, are generally used with it in Europe, America, and the West India
Islands, except when taken after dinner; then the method of the French is
commonly followed, and the milk is omitted.

A CUP or two thus taken after dinner without cream or milk, promotes
digestion, and has been found very serviceable to those who are habitually
costive. If a draught of water is taken before Coffee, according to the Eastern
custom, it gives it a tendency to act as an aperient.

THUS for the properties and medicinal effects of Coffee have been considered;
and as the beverage made from it, contains all the essential virtues of the
berry, which united, are most proper for dietetic purposes, I have not entered
into any discussion of its component parts separately, nor of the distilled
water, syrup, oil, and other simple preparations which have been made from the
berry; for I do not believe, that, those preparations possess any properties
deserving particular notice; but that we are indebted to the virtues we derive
from Coffee, to the total derangement of its natural state, by the process it
undergoes in roasting, from the fire.

THE mode of preparing this beverage for common use, differs in different
countries, principally as to the additions made to it. -- But though that is
generally understood, and that taste, constitution, the quality of the Coffee,
and the quantity intended to be drank, must be consulted, in regard to the
proportion of Coffee, to the water in making it -- yet there is one material
point, the importance of which is not so well understood, and which admits of
no deviation.

THE preservation of the virtues of the Coffee, as has been said, depends on
carefully confining it after it has been roasted; and not powdering it until
the time of using it; that the volatile and ethereal principles, generated by
the fire, may not escape. But all this will signify nothing, and the best
materials will be useless, unless this important admonition is strictly
attended to: that after the liquor is made, it should be bright and clear, and
entirely exempt from the least cloudiness or foul appearance, from a suspension
of any of the particles of the substance of the Coffee.

THERE is scarcely any vegetable infusion, or decoction, whose effects differ
from its gross origin, more than that of which we are speaking. Coffee taken in
substance, causes oppression at the stomach, heat, nausea, and indigestion:
consequently a continued use of a decoction of it, in which any quantity of its
substance is contained, besides being disgusting to the palate, must tend to
produce the same indispositions. The residuum of the roasted berry, after its
virtues are extracted from it, is little more than an earthly calx, and must
therefore be pernicious.

THE want of attention to this circumstance, I make no doubt, has been the
cause of many of the complaints against^ Coffee, and of the aversion which some
people have from it; and it is from this consideration that I have discontinued
to recommend the preparing of Coffee with milk instead of water, or of adding
the milk to it on the fire, as directed by Dr. FOTHERGILL; for the tenacity of
milk impedes that precipitation which is necessary for the purity of the
liquor, and should therefore not be added until after the clarification of it
is completed It is not to Coffee alone that this reflection is confined; every
article we use as a diluter, demands the same attention. Malt-liquors,
particularly small beer, which in this respect is much neglected, ought always
to be carefully fined. The f^eculent matter entangled by the muc^lage of the
malt, is hurtful to digestion, and detrimental to health.
.

THE Persians roast the membrane which envelopes the seed, and use it together
with the seed itself in their manner of preparing the infusion, and it is said
to be a considerable improvement Herman. Cynos. p. 324.
. The Turks made a delicate drink from the capsulas only, which is cooling and
refreshing, and is usued in summertime by people of fashion: this is called by
the French, Coffee a la Sultane.

THE Turks, Arabians, Persians, and Egyptians, drink Coffee all day long Quod
vini loco ^p^^po^ant: venditurque in publicis oenopolis, non secus quam apud
nos vinum.

Prosper Alpin. de Bon.
, in small cups, supping it up by little and little, as hot a^ they can bear it
Thevenot Herbert, William Keeling, who was employee in the service of the
East India Company in 1607, I believe is the first among our English
Navigators, who makes any mention of Coffee. He says, that the people in the
Island of Soctora, where he first met with it, have for entertainment a thing
called Coho, which is a back bitter drink they make from a berry brought from
Mecca; this they sup off very hot, and it is reckoned good for the head and
stomach.


; and what is prepared from three or four ounces among them, is considered as a
moderate quantity for one person in a day. In the Dutch, French, and English
Colonies, it is the daily breakfast, and evening repast.

IF a knowledge of the principles of Coffee, founded on examination and various
experiments, added to abservations made on the extensive and indiscriminate use
of it, cannot authorize us to attribute to it any particular circumstance
unfriendly to the human frame; -- if the unerring test of experience has
confirmed its utility, in many countries, not exclusively productive of those
inconveniences, habits, and diseases, for which its peculiar properties seem
most applicable; -- let those properties be duly considered; and let us reflect
on the state of our atmosphere; the food, and modes of life of the inhabitants,
so injurious to youth and beauty, filling the large towns and cities which
chronical infirmities; and I think it will be evident what advantages will
result from the general use of Coffee in England, as an article of diet, from
the comforts of which the poor are not excluded, and to what purposes it may
often be employed, as a safe and powerful medicine.

THE END.

