THE Trial, Condemnation and Horrid Execution OF David M'Lean, Formerly of
Pennsylvania, for High Treason, Against the British Government, at the city of
Quebec, on the 21st of July last*

Who was hanged, drawn, quartered and beheaded on the above day, with all the
attendant circumstances of cruelty and barbarity.

WINDHAM: Printed 1797.

Trial of David M'Lean, for High Treason.
QUEBEC, July 11.
ON Friday last came on before a special court of Oyer and Terminer, the trial
of David M'Lean for high treason; the indictment was opened by Mr. Ca^on, and
the case stated by the Attorney General. After the evidence for the crown was
closed, the prisoner desired to be heard in his own defense -- which was
granted. He began by thanking the court for the indulgence he had received, and
after a short address to the Jury on the subject of his innocence, he turned
round and began to harrangue the audience; hereupon he was interrupted by the
Chief Justice who informed him that a patient hearing should be given to
whatever he might have to urge, but that it should be addressed to the court or
jury, and (...) to the ^^sta^d^^s. The (...) apolog^z^d for his ignorance in
(...) of (...) proceeded in a ^^eech ^ear an ^our's length, to (...) account of
his life and connections (...) the course of which he (...) most of the
p^^^^^pal facts proved against him, particularly that of having a certificate
signed by A^^e^, the French (...), concealed in ^is (...), on all of which he
attempted to put an innocent construction, and concluded with a fervent prayer
to the Deity, that he would give the po^ers of utterance to his young counsel
who were to speak in his behalf. Mr. Pyke and Mr. Franklyn, who had been
assigned, were then heard for the prisoner; but they called for no witnesses.
The Attorney General made a very able reply, in which he commented on the
prisoner's indiscretion in attempting his own defense, and clearly refuted all
the pretexts he had set up, to the conviction of every body. The evidence was
then summed up by the Chief Justice, who observed, that most of the overt acts
charged, which were fourteen in number had been proved by three or four
witnesses; many of whom (which was rarely the case in prosecutions of this
sort) were not at all implicated in the crime.

The Jury, after being out about half an hour returned with the verdict of
GUILTY -- The prisoner upon being asked what he had to say, why judgment of
death should not be passed upon him, referred to his counsel, who moved two law
points in arrest of judgment, which were answered by the Attorney General, and
overruled by the court. The prisoner was again asked if he had any thing
further to say, and answering nothing, the Chief Justice proceeded to give
sentence, as nearly as we could collect it, to the following effect:

DAVID M'LEAN,
You have been indicted for the crime of High Treason, to which indictment you
plead "not Guilty," and for your trial put yourself on God and the country, by
which country you are found Guilt^. You have been tried by a respectable and
intelligent Jury, many of whom have heretofore served on the grand Inquest.

Your trial has been attended with such circumstances of fairness, openness and
lenity, as are not obtained in any country upon earth except where the laws of
England prevail. More than twenty days have elapsed since you were acquainted
with the particulars of the charge brought against you, and of the names of the
witnesses to prove it, that you might not be surprised by a sudden accusation,
and might have full time to prepare your defense. After the facts charged were
fully established by the verdict, your counsel have been heard on every
objection that could be brought to the regularity of the proceedings; had you
been accused of the like crime in that country, whose government you would wish
to impose on this province, instead of being allowed a period of 20 days, you
might have been charged, convicted and executed in less than so many minutes,
-- Reflect, therefore whether you have not been guilty of a mo^^ unjust attempt
against this government.

It appears in evidence that you are an al^en to the king's government;
notwithstanding which you have been treated with the same indulgence as tho you
had been a native subject. true it is, that a treaty of Amity subsists between
his majesty's subjects and the citizens of the United States, many of whom have
borne public testimony to the kindly offices received from the king's subjects
-- It is an intercourse we wish to cherish, as well with public bodies as with
individuals; and as it is not probable that you personally have received an
injury from this colony -- you have been guilty of an unprovoked attempt
against this government.

Having heard of some disturbances that were excited on account of the road
bill, you falsely concluded that his majesty's Canadian subjects were
disaffected to government and ready to join in a rebellion, which you were
willing to conduct. You might have known that it is easy to provoke murmers on
a like occasion, in the best regulated states. In England similar discontents
take place and subside as in this country -- for a short experience has
convinced the people that the measure was greatly for their benefit. Putting
conse^ence out of the question, as a prudent man, you had no ground to go upon.
No one therefore, but a rash and an unprincipled character would have engaged
in so desperate an enterprise, and no one but a cruel and inhuman character
would have projected such measures to carry it into execution. Consider, then*
whether you have not been guilty of a most atrocious and sanguinary attempt
against this government.

Perhaps you may think that these terms favor a spirit of reproach -- far from
it -- in your pitiable condition to betray such a temper were very unworthy.
No, they are utttered in the spirit of admonition, and that upon this
principle: You seem to possess a good understanding; I with therefore, to
fasten on your mind, the persuasion of this manifest truth, which nothing but
the most perverse obstinacy can resist, namely, that tho your designs were most
hostile against this government, yet you have experienced that fair trial you
would not have met with in any other government under heaven -- In hopes, that
when the mist of delusion shall have disappeared, the conviction of one truth,
may prepare your mind for the admission of others, and finally produce that
sense of contrition and remorse, which can alone expiate your dangerously
wicked crimes. Had your traiteros project been carried into execution, who is
there in this numerous audience that would not have felt the consequence among
his friends and relations, or in his own person? But as it has pleased
Providence to baffle your pernicious designs, I shall press the subject no
further.

This government, which you wish to overthrow, has like all others provided for
its security against those that wish to destroy it. In the scrutiny of offenses
it is more lenient than others, but it (...) equally severe in the punishm^^^
(...) that punishment you have justly incurred, and it would be highly
uncharitable to beguile you with the expectation that it will not be inflicted.
Let me therefore, most seriously exhort you to employ the short time you have
to live, in submitting yourself ^ith humiliation and repentance to the supreme
ruler of all things, whose goodness is equal to his power, and who, tho you
suffer here, may admit you to his everlasting mercy hereafter. That such may be
your portion is my most earnest prayer.

It remains that I should discharge the painful duty of pronouncing the
sentence of the law, which is: That you, David M'Lean, be taken to the place
from whence you came, and from thence to the place of execution, where you must
be hanged by the neck, but not till you are dead, for you must be cut down
alive, and your bowels be taken out and burnt before your face: then your head
must be severed from your body, which must be divided in four parts, and your
head and quarters be at the King's disposal; and the Lord have mercy on your
soul.

The trial lasted from 7 o'clock in the morning till nine in the evening.

After sentence was passed on him, he behaved as became his unhappy situation.
He confessed he was employed by Adet the late French minister at Philadelphia,
to carry letters to some disaffected gentlemen, to incite them to revolt
against the government of the province, with a promise of being assisted very
shortly with a naval force. He was charged also with commissions for those who
were to take the lead; several of whom are apprehended and now in confinement.
On the 21st of July he was brought from prison to the Grand Square, the whole
garrison were under arms -- two executioners attended, -- he declared that he
was innocent of any attempt to disturb the peace of the government, and did not
know that the letters he had been employed to carry for Adet were of that
tendency; he prayed about five minutes and then gave the signal that he was
ready. He was drawn up the gallows by a pulley, and let down again in a few
minutes, when the other executioner proceeded to quarter him, which began by
cutting a large incision in his left side and taking out his heart, which was
thrown into a fire kindled under the gallows for the purpose; he was then cut
into four quarters in a shocking and butchering manner; his head was severed
from his body and stuck on a pole, was fixed to the top of one of the Bastions
of St. Louis -- his quarters were permitted to be buried the next day. Thus
fell an unfortunate man, a dupe to French artifice. He was about 30 years of
age, a native of Airshire in Scotland.

FINIS.

