DETECTION OF A CONSPIRACY, FORMED BY THE UNITED IRISHMEN, WITH THE EVIDENT
INTENTION Of Aiding the Tyrants of France IN SUBVERTING THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

BY PETER PORCUPINE.

PHILADELPHIA: PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM COBBETT.

May 6, 1798.

DETECTION OF A CONSPIRACY, FORMED BY THE UNITED IRISHMEN.
I HAVE long thought, that the French have formed a regular plan for organizing
an active and effective force within these States; and I am persuaded, that
after what I am now going to lay before the public shall have been read with
attention, few people will be so blind as not to perceive, that my opinion was
well founded. The Parisian Propagande have, in every country that they wished
to ruin, found villains in abundance ready to engage in their service. The
ambitious they have allured by the prospect of power, and the needy by that of
pillage. In America there is less ambition and less poverty than in most other
countries, and therefore, though some traitors have been found amongst them,
the natives were not much to be relied on, in the prosecution of any design,
evidently hostile to the interests and honor of their country. They might be
deceived, they might be duped to lend their aid indirectly to some such design;
but no man, who is led on in the dark, can be safely confided in; because, at
the first dawn of light, it is a thousand to one but he makes his retreat.

The French seem to have been fully aware of this. Indeed, they learnt this
truth from the mortifying defection of the AMERICAN DEMOCRATIC SOCIETIES. There
were many well-meaning men, who became members of these seditious meetings from
ignorance, and who discovered no inconsiderable zeal in propagating their
principles; but, the bandage was torn from their eyes, and no sooner did they
perceive the real views of DALLAS and the other leaders, than they turned their
backs on them with detestation.

This lesson induced the French to exert their "diplomatic skill' in choosing
instruments more fit for their purpose. Ignorance when allied with honesty was
no tool for them to work with. Real, sincere, villainy, then without property,
without principles, without country and without character; dark and desperate,
unnatural and bloody-thirsty ruffins; these were what they wanted; and where
could they have sought them with such certainty of success, as amongst that
restless rebellious tribe, the emigrated UNITED IRISHMEN? The wretches known by
this name, had escaped from their country to avoid a punishment justly due to
their multitude of crimes. Here they expected to find an organized system of
perpetual anarchy: the needy anticipated a life of laziness and plunder, the
ambitious thought to grasp on power already molded to their hands; they all
counted upon a state of things, congenial to their own wicked dispositions.

Happily for us, they were deceived. They found a government, which, if too
weak (like their own) to punish conspirators according to their deserts, was
yet too sturdy to fall prostrate at their feet. They found property protected
from their fraternizing clutches; they saw their hopes of political consequence
vanish like a dream; and, instead of caresses, condolence and applause, from
the people, they meet with the same virtuous abhorrence that had followed them
from the shores of their native land.

Thus disappointed, thus mortified, thus humbled and disgraced, it was not to
be wondered at, that they conceived a hatred against America equal to that
which they entertained against their own country, and it is still less to be
wondered at, that they enrolled themselves in the treacherous service of France.

The first I heard of the existence of a Society of United Irishmen here, was
by a printed paper (a copy of which the reader will see by-and-bye dated the
18th December last, and signed Js. REYNOLDS. It was envelloped in a piece of
paper addressed to me, and was left by an unknown hand, at the house of a
person in Market-street. It was on the 16th of January that I received this
paper, and in about three weeks afterward, the plan of the conspiracy was
conveyed to me through the same channel.

This plan, which is called a constitution, is printed in a small octavo
pamphlet, bearing date the 8th of August last. The imprint imports, that it was
printed at Philadelphia, for the society; but the printer's name is very
cautiously omitted. The person who enclosed me the pamphlet, has, indeed,
written in the margin the name of a printer, who, from the villainous
publications which have come from his press, I make no doubt was really the
man; but this evidence is too weak for me to proceed upon in publishing his
name to the world, as guilty of an offense, which amount to treason against the
United States. -- Here follows the plan of the conspiracy.

DECLARATION and CONSTITUTION of the AMERICAN SOCIETY of UNITED IRISHMEN. --
Philadelphia; printed for the Society, August 8, 1797.
Declaration.
Six hundred years have past, since division and fraud reduced Ireland to
colonial subserviency; the division of her people have ever since subjected
them to the lash and to the good of a foreign tyranny; a tyranny more odious
than Asiatic despotism.

In our day and generation we have seen and we have felt; it is not necessary,
there is not now time cooly to count over the long black catalogue of her
baleful wrongs; there is not now time to argue and complain. THIS IS THE TIME
TO ACT; to act with energy we must act with union: Irishmen are united at home,
we will not be disunited abroad.

Our love for freedom has not been lessened by what we have experienced of its
effects, or for Ireland by our distance. Under the sacred influence of devotion
to the Union, EQUALITY AND LIBERTY of ALL men, we gladly embrace the solemn
ties by which we wish to be bound to one another, and hereby form ourselves
into an association,

UNDER THE NAME OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF UNITED IRISHMEN, ADOPTING THE
FOLLOWING CONSTITUTION.
[The declared intention of procuring equality and liberty to ALL men, is a
clear proof Ireland alone was not in their view. But, as we go on, we shall
perceive that neither that country nor its concerns are at all included in the
objects of these people. The words Ireland, Irishmen, etc. are mere substitutes
for other words, like the cant of the pick-pockets, according to which a hog
means a shilling, a pig means a sixpence, and so on. This will clearly appear
from the articles and TEST of the precious constitution.]

Section 1. That ALL SUCH PERSONS and such only, shall be eligible to this
Society of United Irishmen, as shall have suffered in the cause of freedom, or
who, by their zeal for THE RIGHTS OF MANKIND, shall have rendered themselves
distinguished and worthy of attachment and trust.

[Thus, you see, it is not IRISHMEN alone, who are eligible to this Society;
but ALL SUCH PERSONS as shall, according to their cant, have suffered in the
cause of freedom, or have shown their zeal for the rights of mankind!! In other
words, every scoundrel, of whatever nation, is eligible, provided he has been
manacled or transported, or has rendered himself worthy of the gibbet, for some
attempt at rebellion or some act of treason, no matter under what government or
on what occasion; or, provided his seditious principles are so well known and
established as to leave no room to doubt of his attachment to the cause.
Americans, then, and Britons, and Frenchmen, and men of every country being
eligible to the Society, can any one be silly enough to suppose, that the
conspiracy had Ireland in view? What had any of these people to do with
Ireland? But, on the absurdity of this we shall have time to remark by-and-by.
Indeed, the TEST itself gives the lie to this cant about Ireland. All that it
is necessary to remak on this section, is, that it provides for the admission
of every discontented, factious man in the United States: and that the latter
part of it is no more than a copy of the qualification clause of the Jacobin
Club at Paris, except that the latter required positive proof from every new
member of his having actually committed some crime deserving the halter, while
our liberal conspirators, thinking it unjust to exclude a villain merely
because he has failled of success, are willing, in some cases, to admit the
intention as equal in merit to the deed.]

Section 2. That no person shall be proposed for admittance but by a member in
his place.

Section 3. That no proposition for the admittance of a member shall be
received, unless it be seconded by another member present, and that it shall
likewise be necessary for the proposer and seconder, to vouch for the moral
character and CIVISM of the person proposed; in defect of which, no election
shall take place.

Section 4. Members shall have the privilege of proposing, or seconding the
proposal of candidates, in any Section, as well as that to which they belong.

Section 5. A candidate proposed agreeable to the 2d, 3d, and 4th sections,
shall not be ballotted for, until the next meeting after that in which he has
been proposed, unless known to two-thirds of the members present, (two black
beans to reject without a reason, and one with reasons), but, upon his
election, he shall be immediately admitted, under the following forms: --

Section 6. Before a person elected shall be considered a member, the President
shall put to him the following questions; an affirmative to the 1st, 5th and
6th, and a negative answer to the 2d, 3d, and 4th, shall be indispensable to
admission as such:

Section 7. I. Do you believe a free form of government, and uncontrouled
opinion on all subjects, to be the common rights of all the human species.

II. Do you think the people of Ireland are in possession of these rights.

III. Do you think the government of Great Britain ever was, or is now
disposed, to acknowledge, or assent, to the freedom of Ireland.

IV. Do you think Great Britain ought, of right, to govern Ireland.

V. Are you willing to do all that in you lies to promote the emancipation of
Ireland, and the establishment of a republican form of government there.

VI. Are you willing to bind yourself, by a solemn obligation, to the
principles you have acknowledged.

Section 8. That upon the candidate answering these questions, as required by
the sixth section, the following shall be administered as a test, all present
standing:

TEST.
I. A. B. in the presence of the SUPREME BEING do most solemnly swear, that I
will, to the utmost of my power, promote the emancipation of Ireland from the
tyranny of the British Government: -- That I will use the like endeavors for
increasing, and perpetuating, the warmest affection among all religious
denominations of men, and for the attainment of LIBERTY and EQUALITY, TO
MANKIND, IN WHATEVER NATION I MAY RESIDE. Moreover, I do swear, that I will, as
far as in me lies, promote the interest of this, and every other Society of
United Irishmen, and of each of its members -- and that I will never, from fear
of punishment, or hope of reward, divulge any of its SECRETS given to me as
such.

Section 8. That the TEST of this Society, the INTENTION of this INSTITUTION,
(in all other respects than as a social body, attached to freedom,) be
considered as SECRET AND INVIOLABLE in all cases, but between members, and in
the body of the Society.

Section 9. That nevertheless, a member of the Society shall not be considered
as divulging its secrets, who shall propound to persons disposed to become
members, the sense of the six propositions which precede the test.

[Here we see that Ireland is almost dropped out of sight. It is just mentioned
in order to introduce the British government; but the initiated is to swear,
that he will do the utmost of his power for the attainment of LIBERTY and
EQUALITY, to MANKIND; and, these efforts does he swear to make, IN WHATEVER
NATION HE MAY RESIDE! Ireland, therefore, if not totally dismissed by the TEST,
is no more contemplated by it than America is, taking the words in their
literal sense: and we shall see in the sequel, that this blessed liberty and
equality is intended for America alone.

The crimality of the purpose and end of the combination is most amply proved
by the section that immediately follows the TEST. -- The TEST of this society
and the INTENTION of the institution shall be kept SECRET and INVIOLABLE. --
The members may tell the world that it is a social body, attached to freedom;
that is, they may give out that its principles are friendly to general liberty;
they may represent it as one of those collections of individuals that men of
sense usually laugh at, but they must not say a word about the INTENTION of the
institution, nor must they discover the nature of the OATH.

Now, if nothing more were meant than an association against the government of
Great Britain, which they must well know would excite contempt and ridicule,
why all this secrecy? Why conceal the nature of the oath? and, particularly,
why conceal the intention of the institution?

By the 9th Section we see, that the discoveries, made even to those who offer
themselves as members, are to extend no further than "the sense of the six
propositions preceding the TEST." The Test itself they are to know nothing of,
'till they have gone too far to retreat, and then they are bound not to divulge
what they have learnt. First the initiated member swears, that he will never,
from fear of punishment, or hope of reward, divulge any of the secrets, given
to him as such? and then the INTENTION of the institution is immediately given
to him as one of those inviolable secrets! If there were nothing wicked,
nothing highly criminal, nothing dark and traitorous in this INTENTION, why is
the discovery of it thus guarded against? Men never "fear punishment" for
concealing what is not criminal. Indeed, this TEST stamps the character of the
combination: a Test of secrecy, as to the motives of the members, is essential
to a conspiracy; and it is that which distinguishes this society from "a social
body," which is the character they wish to appear under in the eyes of the
world.

Here again we perceive the plan to be little more than a copy of that of the
Jacobin club in France. The Christian Religion is discarded, and the initiated
wretch swears by the "SUPREME BEING." Next Liberty and Equality to mankind is
the object, in whatever country they may reside; the world are to be told, that
the society is merely a social body; but its real INTENTION is to be kept a
secret under the most solemn injunctions. Thus proceeded the Jacobins at Paris,
that social body who overturned the government of France. PLAYFAIR says, they
had two creeds, one to amuse the public, and another that, for long time, never
was known but to the members.

The oath of secrecy necessarily forbids a communication of one of the
pamphlets containing the TEST, etc. the person who made this communication to
me must, therefore, have broken his oath, or must have purloined the pamphlet.
I rather think the former; because had he not thus committed himself; were it
not that he was ashamed to own himself one of the conspirators, and at the same
time, incurred the odium of having betrayed his companions, it is pretty clear'
that possessing an inclination to make the discovery' he would long ago have
come forward as the instrument of an effectual prosecution. He tells me in a
note which covered one of the papers, that he has found a clue to all their
secrets, and, as I before observed* he writes down the name of the printer in
the margin. This latter circumstance was enough; for, if the printing could be
proved, or if it can be proved now, the printer at least, can be punished as a
conspirator, and this may lead to a discovery of his employers.

Having thus remarked on the design of the conspirators, I should now come to
the means provided for insuring its success, by which the reader will at least
see the extent of the plan, and will be fully convinced that its real object is
the destruction of the American Government.]

Section 10. The member thus initiated shall subscribe his name to the
constitution, and pay to the treasurer, half a dollar.

Section 11. The monthly subscription of each member shall be a quarter of a
dollar; payable on the first meeting in every month: if the member be elected
after the twentieth of any month, he shall pay no more than his fee of
initiation for that month.

Section 12. If any member neglect to pay the respective sums before mentioned,
for the space of three months, the secretary of his section shall then signify,
in writing to the member, the amount of the arrears, and demand payment, and
that in default thereof, his name and the sum due, shall be publicly read by
the treasurer of the section to which he may belong, on the three next
succeeding meetings thereof, and if his arrears be not paid on the third
reading, he shall be excluded the Society. But excluded members, upon paying
all arrears due, and the usual contributions that were payable during his
exclusion, may apply for admission, agreeable to the usual form, Provided,
nevertheless, that this rule shall not extend to such members as shall declare
their inability to pay, in reply to the secretary, in an authentic form, and
where local circumstances may render their attendance impossible, or highly
inconvenient.

Section 13. Any person elected by ballot, who shall not attend three
successive meetings after his election, shall forfeit it, unless due cause be
shown to the proper section for his absence.

Of the Officers of Sections.
Section 1. There shall be a president and secretary for each section elected,
by ballot, who shall continue in office six weeks -- they shall be re-eligible
after a period equal to that, during which they were in office.

Section 2. That a treasurer shall be appointed by ballot, who shall continue
in office for three months, and shall not be re-eligible until the expiration
of three months.

Section 3. The secretary shall have power, at the desire of the President, to
convoke extra meetings

Section 4. Each Section shall meet weekly or oftener in special cases.

Section 5. The hours of meeting shall be at seven o'clock from the 25th
September till 25th March, and at eight from the 25th of March till 25th
September.

Section 6. The chair shall be taken at the above hours precisely, if there
shall be ten members present.

Section 7. That in the absence of the President, or any other officer, the
Section shall call a member to the office, pro tem.

Section 8. That upon the President taking the chair, he shall direct the
secretary to read the minutes of the preceding meeting.

Section 9. The Roll shall be called previously to every adjournment.

Section 10. That balloting for, and the nomination, or initiation of
candidates, shall precede further business.

Section 11. That on open votes the President shall have a casting voice, and
when he speaks to a motion, he shall vacate the chair.

Section 12. That every motion shall be made standing, shall be delivered to
the President or Chairman in writing if required; must be seconded by another
member, also standing, before it shall be received by the President: any matter
of peculiar importance shall first be debated in a committee of the whole.

Section 13. The mover of a question shall have liberty to speak in reply; but
no other shall speak more than once, but in explanation on the same subject,
except in a committee of the whole.

Section 14. In matter of order, the President or Chairman shall decide finally.

Section 15. That in each section a committee shall be appointed to select
extracts from political works, to be read occasionally.

Section 16. That fines shall be levied for disorderly behavior, but not
exceeding fifty cents each, which fine shall be nominated by the President or
Chairman and in case of appeal, be decided by the majority of members present.

Section 17. No person shall interrupt the Chairman or any other member while
speaking, unless to the point of order; repetition of interruption, contrary to
this rule, to subject the disorderly member to such censure, besides a fine as
the society shall think fit. Extreme disorderly behavior shall subect the
offender to expulsion, at the will of three fourths of the members present.

Section 18. A member absenting himself from his section three nights
successively, (without acquainting it of the cause in writing, or by means of
another member, who shall declare upon his honor, that he is authorized by
such member, to make an apology for him, and offering some sufficient reason
for his absence) shall be liable to a fine of fifty cents, and on refusing to
pay such fine shall not be entitled to vote in his section, or transact any
other duty in the society until he shall have paid his fine.

Of Certificates.
Section 1. CERTIFICATES shall be provisionally granted to members of the
society removing from their vicinage, which shall be signed by the President
and Secretary of the section to which the members belong.

Section 2. A member going to a foreign country, or to a distant part of the
United States, shall give a week's notice of his intention, but in urgent
cases, the committee of secrecy, of his section, may grant such certificate.

Section 3. No member is entitled to a certificate, but in the foregoing cases.

Section 4. That members, on their return, must redeliver their certificates to
the President or Secretary, in the presence of the section to which they belong.

Of an Enlarged Organization.
Section 1. THAT when any section shall consist of eighty members in a city or
large town, it shall separate into two sections: country sections may separate
as their peculiar circumstances may tender expedient.

Section 2. That any section, state committee, or the general executive
committee, shall have the power of appointing an agent or agents, and
furnishing him or them with copies of the constitution, for the purpose of
forming new sections.

Section 3. Each section shall, quarterly, make an exact return of the numbers,
names, residences, and occupations of its members, to its proper state
committee, and the state committee shall make similar returns, at like periods,
to the general executive committee, who shall keep an exact register of the
names thus returned.

Section 4. As soon as there shall be two or more sections in any state of the
American Union, they shall be represented in a State Committee, in the
following manner, viz. when a section shall amount to eight members, they shall
send one Delegate to said committee: when to twenty-two, two Delegates; and
when to thirty-three, three Delegates, who shall not be re-eligible until they
have been out of office, for a time, equal to their term of service --
two-thirds of whom shall form a quorum. The State committee shall meet monthly,
or oftener, if necessary, and be partially renewed by a member from each
section every month.

Section 5. Distant Sections shall have the power of appointing persons to
represent them in their respective state committees, from among their brethren
whose local situation may render attendance more convenient.

Section 6. Each section shall appoint a committee of secrecy and
correspondence, to communicate with the state committee, which shall be
regulated in like manner. It shall also elect, every six weeks, a delegate, and
sub-delegate to attend the meetings of neighboring sections and report
proceedings.

Section 7. That the secretary of every section shall when a member takes his
seat, and subscribes the test, take down his place of residence, which he shall
carefully transmit to the committee of secrecy thereof, who shall divide the
sections into sub-sections of eight members who may live contiguous to one
another; that every eighth man shall have the charge of the other seven
members, to warn them in cases of urgency, or to extraordinary meetings of the
section: the secret committee or secretary of the section, shall by warning
those eighths, consider themselves as warning the whole section.

Section 8. When two or more state committees have been formed they shall elect
two of their members from each to a general executive committee, the first of
whom, from each state, shall go out of office by lot, and the rest in rotation,
and be replaced by a new member every three months, and not be re-eligible
until a period equal to their term of service. The general executive committee
is to possess the direction of the great interests of the whole society, and
keep up a constant communication with the committees of the different states.

Section. 9. The general executive committee shall, when their number exceeds
four, elect from among themselves, a committee of secrecy and correspondence,
consisting of three members, one of whom shall go out of office every three
months, and shall be re-eligible after a period equal to their time of service.

Section 10. The general executive committee shall assemble as often as the
interests of the institution demand, or when required so to do by the committee
of any state.

Section 11. There shall be a Treasurer for each state, to whom the Treasurers
of the Sections are to return quarterly payments and accounts. Each of the
State Treasurers are, at like periods, to make similar returns to the Treasurer
appointed by the General Executive Committee, who is to continue in office
three months, and to be accountable to their Committee of secrecy and
correspondence; he shall also, if required, exhibit his accounts to the secret
commit of any section. The State Treasurer shall be appointed by the State
Committee.

Section 12. Every officer, and every member of a committee, is responsible to
the body by whom he was elected, and liable to any punishment they may, on
account of delinquency, inflict.

Section 13. No person shall be eligible to hold two offices within his
respective section.

Section 14. That when the State Committees, or the General Executive
Committee, or a majority of the sections recommend a revision of the preceding
constitution, it shall take place.

[Now, leaving the mere formalities and other trifling things aside, let us
take this plan and look at it in its substance. It is very properly called an
"enlarged organization," for it embraces an extent no less than that of the
whole Union.

First, we see, that every restless wretch, of whatever nation, is admitted
into any section of the society, and has his name, place of residence, etc.
enrolled on its list; but, lest the assemblages should become unwieldly, or
alarming to the magistrates, these sections when they get to a certain
strength, separate, and the detached parts form new ones, just as bees swarm
when the hive is over-crowded -- The troops being thus enrolled in the
sections, the next thing is to render them manageable. Were the sections
subjected to no superior command; were they to remain scattered over the
country without any common head, they would be like so many independent
companies without a commander. But, these troops have not been raised to lie in
idleness, and, therefore, a mode of uniting their efforts is provided. The
sections in every state are to send delegates to form a State-Committee; and
these sixteen State-Committees are to send delegates to form a "General
EXECUTIVE Committee;" and this is the whole brought to one point.

So much for the organization. Now for the operative part of the plan.

"The General EXECUTIVE Committee" (which, I have not the least doubt, is now
sitting in Philadelphia) keeps up a constant communication with the
State-Committees, and from it, the whole Society, or rather army, receives
"directions" when and how to act. It has returns made to it of the numbers
enrolled in each State, of the names, residence, and occupation, of the persons
enrolled; by this mean it is at all times informed of its strength, and of
where that strength lies.

When it is necessary TO ACT, the General Executive Committee are to dispatch
their orders to the State Committees; these to their sections, and these again
(by their committee of secrecy) to their sub-sections. Here the orders reach
the active troops, and that there may be no confusion in their movements, these
sub-sections consist of only eight men each, all living near one another, and
one of these eight is a sort of non-commission officer, who (to use the very
words of the conspirators) is to "have the charge of the other seven, and is to
WARN them IN CASES OF URGENCY"!!!

Now, I appeal to any man of common sense, whether this infernal combination
can possibly have any other object in view than an insurrection against the
government of America. What "cases of urgency" can arise in this country, what
opportunity can offer itself here, for overturning the British Government in
Ireland? Were the villains, indeed furnished with wings; could they like other
birds of passage, assemble in a flock and take their flight to Ireland; then
the ostensible motive of the association would have something like plausibility
about it; but, as they are, this ostensible motive is a palpable absurdity, a
mere trick which has been invented in order to inveigh ignorant persons to take
the TEST, and, in case of detection, to avoid the punishment which the law
awards to traitors and spies; or at least, to leave room for doubt and
contention in the courts of justice; a bad chance being better than none, and
ten years imprisonment being better than death.

That this conspiracy is intended to aid the cause of France, it is hardly
necessary to insist on; every one must perceive it at the first glance. -- What
can these ragged russians expect to do alone? How can they alone support their
current expenses, exclusive of "cases of urgency," of arms, ammunition, etc.
etc. By an attention to the financical part of their plan, you will perceive,
that the money they collect from the members is barely sufficient to defray the
charges which must necessarily be incurred for rooms to meet in. Who is to pay
for printing their CONSTITUTIONS, their CERTIFICATES (which I hear is from an
engraved copper plate); who is to pay for the time and traveling expenses of
all their Delegates from the Sections to the State Committees, and from them to
the General Executive Committee at Philadelphia; who is to pay a sum amounting
to not less than forty thousand dollars annually? Who but those who boast of
their "Diplomatick Skill," and of their powerful faction in this country; those
who have long had in pay the leading patriots in Ireland, and who have
constantly supported a hireling press in each of the principal Cities of
America?

Next, observe that the closest intimacy exists between the sans-culotte
French, who are here, the most distinguished of the emigrated United Irishmen,
and a base American printer, notoriously in the service of France. Observe too,
that NAPPER TANDY went from New York to France, and that the conspiracy, as
appears by its date, was not formed, 'till after we heard of his arrival at
Paris.

The leaders in this conspiracy are the very same persons, who conducted that
in Ireland. When a section of their deluded partisans, in that country, were
taken unawares by the King's troops, no money but French was found upon them,
and this in a retired part of the kingdom, where it was impossible these
insatuated wretches could have come at it through any other channel than that
of the despots of Paris and their wicked agents. And, if a conspiracy could be
so effectually paid there, in a country at open war with France, with an alien
law, vigourously enforced, how easy must it be for them to maintain a hired and
regularly paid conspiracy here, when there is no check whatsoever to their
machinations!

This diabolical plan was formed on the 8th of August last, immediately before
the YELLOW FEVER commenced its ravages in this city; with this in his
recollection the reader will form his opinion respecting the following, which
is a copy of the printed paper, before mentioned.

American Society, OF UNITED IRISHMEN.
WHEN the Society of United Irishmen was formed here, men were found emulous of
crouding to the Irish Standard, for the aspect of Ireland then, afforded hope
that her wrongs would soon be redressed. -- That view so consoling to humanity,
has for a moment been obscured; but it is not honorable to desert a deserving
friend in distress, it is not honorable to abandon a meritorious cause, which,
when prosperous we have sworn to support.

The society is happy to find, that there is still reason to think, the fire
and the scourge, will not long be exercised over our brethren with impunity,
that the tyrannical imprisonments, the rapes, the arsons, the tortures, and the
military murders are about to be avenged, and, that a manly people, whom six
hundred years slavery could not debase, are about to be restored to their
rights.

We have cause to deplore the loss we have sustained by the disease which
lately suspended our meetings; and, we are unwilling to ascribe the present
neglect of attendance of some members, to unworthy motives -- but, it is deemed
a duty, to notify you, that those who in future absent themselves, cannot
conformably to the 18th Article of the Constitution, be regarded as belonging
to the association.

The next meeting will be held at 7 o'clock on the evening of the 21st instant,
in the African School-room, Willing's-alley, which lies between Third, Fourth,
Walnut, and Spruce-streets.

Signed by Order of the commitee, Js. REYNOLDS.
Philadelphia, December 18th, 1797.
This is the man, who began his canting letter, respecting his attack on Mr.
Pickering, with declaring that he was come here in search of "REPOSE"!! -- I
will just remark further on this notice, that I would lay my life it was
translated from the French. -- That view so consoling to humanity. -- This is
French in English words. -- a manly people whom six hundred years slavery could
not debase, are about to be restored to their right. -- A very awkward
translation of French cant.

This notice, I would have the reader believe, I have not published without
good proof of its being signed by REYNOLDS, the seeker of "REPOSE." His name is
written, and the hand writing has not only been carefully compared with the
signature to a letter of his, now in my possession; but has also been compared
and verified before one of the judges in this city. All that is now wanted is,
good proof of the person who printed, or who authorized printing, the plan of
the conspiracy, which is called the CONSTITUTION, and if any American, native
or adopted, is in possession of the means of producing such proof, and neglects
to produce it, he is to all intents and purposes a TRAITOR.

I shall, now, briefly state, what I have lately gathered respecting the
members of which the conspiracy now consists, and respecting the manner in
which they are to ACT, and on what occasions. In the mean time, I would have
THOSE, in whose power alone it is to counteract the baleful effects of this
hellish combination, to recollect, that any ALIEN LAW, which extends only to
ALIENS of a nation committing hostilities on the United States, will not reach
the members of this affiliation.

I am informed, by one of the persons who manage the affairs of the AFRICAN
SCHOOL, that the United Irishmen have not assembled there, for some time past,
and that the reason of this was, their number was become too great for so small
a room. I am also well informed, that two Englishmen have been admitted into
the Society (I dare say there are two hundred, and that they earnestly
solicited another Englishman to join it. Their strength, at this time, in this
city and twenty miles round, consists of above fifteen hundred; no contemptible
number, if we consider how short the space is, since they began to enlist. A
section has been formed at New York, another at Baltimore, and another is
either formed, or about to be formed, at Chambersburgh, in this state. Indeed,
there is very little doubt, but we shall very soon receive satisfactory
information of their being organized in every state, and in every principal
city and town in the Union.

With respect to their calling their troops into actual service, it is clear
that they would proceed in the same manner as the Jacobins in every other
country have done. Conspirators are always cowards: besides this, they know too
well their weakness to attempt an attack on the Government, unaided by any
other party, and unprotected by a foreign power. Their whole business
therefore, at present, is, to organize themselves; to enlist and number their
troops, and to lie in wait for what they very properly call, "cases of URGENCY."

If the "diplomatic skill" of France had been exercised with such complete
success as the tyrants of that wretched country supposed it was; if it had been
found, upon trial, that she possessed a very numerous and formidable faction
here entirely devoted to her orders, these "cases of URGENCY" might have arisen
from internal commotions. This source now seems to be dried up. The dispatches
from France have robbed the "Sister Republic" of all her adherents, except the
most abandoned and infamous miscreants amongst the Americans, her own
sans-culottes, and the half-gibbeted democrats from Great Britain and Ireland.
Nothing, then, can give rise to one of those cases of URGENCY short of an
invasion by France either from the Spanish territory, or from the sea; and, for
an event of this kind the conspirators are ooking for with hopes much more
sanguine than wandering seed of Abraham ever looked for the coming of the
Messiah.

An invasion on the coast is a thing naturally to be expected, unless an
alliance is formed with Great Britain: from Lousiana or the Floridas is to be
expected, whether such an alliance takes place or no. This, then, would be the
"case of URGENCY," and thus the conspirators would act. Before the panic would
be over, (for there are your panic people in all countries) the whole
affiliation would be in movement. They would thwart, threaten, or collect mobs;
openly oppose, or secretly betray, just as it suited their several situations.
They are not visible now, but then they would be seen and felt too. I make no
doubt but they have members, in some capacity or other, in every public
department. I should not wonder if they had at this time fifty in the different
branches of the Postoffice. Thus has it proved in every country, which the
infamous sans-culottes have invaded with success. In Holland, for instance, few
people feared the invaders. The barriers were well fortified, well garrisoned,
we supplied with ammunition and provisions, and the people appeared unanimous
in their hatred of the enemy. But the fortresses fell, nobody could tell how;
the French arrived as if it were by appointment, and many of those who had been
the loudest in their expressions against them, were the first that they took by
the hand. These villains had held a correspondence with them, and afterward
made a boast of their treason; the jacobin affiliation ran through all the
United Provinces; its members had crept into every department, civil and
military; the mine was completed, and, at the approach of the enemy it was
sprung. Just so was it in Italy, in Geneva, in Venice; so was it in
Switzerland; so will it be in Spain, and would it have been in Britain long
ago, had it not been for her insular situation and the watchfulness and vigor
of her government.

To the danger of such a conspiracy America is peculiarly exposed. Her distance
from France is often, and, I must add, very stupidly, held out as a guarantee
for her safety. I might insist that there is no barrier between her and the
Spanish territory, which nobody would deny; but, waving that, what, without the
interference of Great Britain, is there to prevent twenty thousand
sans-culottes from landing in this country? And, if they should do this, how
many circumstances has America against her which no state in Europe knew any
thing of!

From various causes these United States have become the resting place of
ninety nine hundredths of the factions villains, which Great Britain and
Ireland have vomitted from their shores. They are all schooled in sedition, are
adepts at their trade, and they most certainly bear as cordial a hatred to this
government as they did to their own. The French sans-culottes now here, capable
of bearing arms, amount to at least thirty thousand, all furious ruffians,
puffed up with vanity, starving with hunger, and sighing for conquest and
pillage.

Great numbers of these wretches, of all countries, are what are called
CITIZENS; so that no alien law will touch them. Several hundreds of French have
very lately been admitted to this destructive privilege and it is well known,
that REYNOLDS is not only a citizen, but the political father of other
citizens; for he has been suffered to vouch for their "good moral character and
their attachment to "Constitution," a necessary prelude to their admission. The
penal code has been softened down, till it has no terrors, except for the
honest man, who stands in need of protection. There are sixteen governments,
all in some measure independent of the general government, to whom the safety
of the nation is committed, and these sixteen are very far from being all in
the hands of such men as would lend their cordial support to that general
government. The villain, who would get his neck stretched in the Federal
courts, would very probably escape through other hands. In such a state of
things the civil magistrate must hold a blunted, if not a broken, sword; and as
to the military, though I would be willing to stake every thing on their
valor, yet valor alone without skilful commanders and soldier well
disciplined, is like a razor in the hands of a child.

But, what renders the situation of America more favorable to the views of
France than any other country, is, the negro slavery to the Southward. On this
it is that the villains ground their hope. It is said that some of the free
negroes have already been admitted into the conspiracy of the UNITED IRISHMEN,
and that some slave holders either in Carolina or Virginia have engaged, in "a
case of URGENCY," to set their negroes free, in order to excite discontents
amongst those of their neighbors, and thus involve the whole country in
rebellion and bloodshed. I do not take upon me to say that these preparatory
steps have been taken, but this I know, that nothing could be thought more
hellish or better calculated to insure success.

There are two sorts of people who will smile at all this, and will call it a
mere bug bear: these are, the muddy-headed men of indifference and the jacobins
themselves. But, I trust the real friends of government will see it in its true
light, and will not suffer themselves to be lulled asleep by the songs of
Doctor "REPOSE" and his adherents. All these people want for the present is, to
see the government quiet, dull, and unsuspecting. This is what they wished in
Britain and Ireland. Every precautionary measure of the legislature or the
executive; every inquiry, however legal, and however delicately conducted, they
brand with the name of "jealous tyranny;" and to every honest man, who has the
zeal to come forward in the discovery of their infernal plots, they give the
appellation of SPY. This has had much influence on weak minds. Your
good-natured peaceable man cannot bear the name of spy or informer; he would
sooner see his neighbors burnt in their beds, and his own wife and children
along them. I hope, however, that there is yet good sense and spirit enough
less amongst us to despise every thing these artful treacherous villains can
say, and to defeat every thing they shall attempt. The man, who shall bring the
leaders of this conspiracy to the halter, will deserve as well of his country
as those who shall shed their blood in its defense.


