Barlow's Letter. From the CONNECTICUT COURANT.
Messrs. HUDSON and GOODWIN,
THE enclosed pamphlet was printed at Matthew Ly^^'s p^^s in Fairhaven. He
entitles it "Copy of a Letter from an American Diplomatic Character in France
to a member of Congress in Philadelphia." Some of the most offensive parts of
this letter were recited in the indictment of Lion, the publishing of which (i.
e. the reading the whole letter to large collections of people in a great many
towers in his district, drawn together for the purpo^e) was the subject of the
second count, and the "printing" it of the third count in the indictment. --
[The subject of the first count was a letter from Lion to Mr. Spooner, the
printer of the Windsor paper.]

Lion told the court that the first knowledge he had of it was hearing general
Mason, a senator from Virginia, read it to a number of gentlemen in
Philadelphia last summer; that he applied to Mr. Baldwin, to whom it was
addressed, for liberty to take a copy it, to which ^e consented, upon condition
that Lion should show it to his friends in Vermont, particularly governor
Robinson and general Bradley, but not to suffer any copies of it to be taken,
nor to have it printed, to which Lion said he solemnly agreed. -- How he came
to print it in fact, however, in violation of his "solemn agreement," he did
not inform the court.

Several gentlemen who have seen it, and who are acquainted with Mr. Barlow,
have expressed their decided opinions that he never wrote it. The public may
rest assured, however, that the thing, infamous as it is, was really written by
Joel Barlow, and sent by the hand of a Mr. Lee to Abraham Baldwin. The most
indisputable testimony of the fact can be laid before the public if necessary.
-- Those who recollect what Mr. Barlow once was -- those who once respected and
loved him for his amiable dispositions, his talents, and his supposed pi^ty,
will exclaim "O! how fallen!" They will discover new evidence, if possible, of
the accursed demoralizing powers of that modern French philosophy which has
made of Europe a charnel house, and which Mr Barlow has been long known to have
embraced with enthusiastic ardor. But who could have expected from him such
displays of hatred to his native country! -- Who could expect that Joel Barlow
would have become the slanderer of WASHINGTON and ADAMS! The true lover of his
country will mourn that so many of her children a^^ become her most unnatural
foes, and aim with parricidal aim, the fatal dagger at her (...). I supply the
names, "Lee," "(...)," "(...)," on the authority of the gentleman who enables
me to assert the (...) of the letter -- they were left blanks in the pamphlet.

THE PAMPHLET. COPY of a LETTER from an AMERICAN DIPLOMATIC CHARACTER in France
to a MEMBER of CCONGRESS in Philadelphia.
(...) March, 1798. MY DEAR FRIEND,
(...) now a long time, even many years, since I have indulged myself in
communicating to you my political opinions, because I have generally thought it
useless, and at (...) dangerous to trust them to the ordinary (...) of
conveyance* but the opportunity of sending this letter into your ^wn hands, and
the very serious aspect our affairs have assumed in this country, induce (...)
to thr^^ (...) restraint, and to speak to you with so (...)* though f^r (...)
the hope that any (...) benefit will arise f^^m the communication.

The misunderstanding between the two Governments has become extremely alarming
-- Con^i^ence i^ completely destroyed. -- Mistrusts, Jealousy, and a
disposition to a wrong attribution of (...) are so apparent, as to require the
utmost caution in every word and action that are to come from your Executive: I
mean if your object is to avoid hostilities. Had this truth been understood
with you before the recall of Mun^^^, before the coming and second coming of
(...); had it guided the p^n that wrote the (...) speech of your President, and
stupid answer of your Senate, at the opening of Congress in November last, I
should probably have had no occasion to address you this letter.

To point out a remedy for the evil at it^ present ^^^ght, if indeed a remedy
can be found, it i^ necessary to call to mind the cause^ that have produced it;
for these causes are many; and some of the operative ones are generally
overlooked by the most attentive observer, on your side the water -- that act
of submission to the British government, commonly called Jay's treaty, is
usually considered both by its friends and enemies as the sol^ cause, or at
least the great cause of the present hostile disposition of the French (...)
toward the United States. This opinion i^ erroneous, other causes, and those
(...) public discussion, have had a much more decided effect. It is true that
considering the circumstances under which the treaty was made, when England was
flying, and the coalition ^rumbling before the armies of France, it served to
humble us in the eyes of all Europe. It is true that the manner in which it was
thrust down the throats of the people of America, by the man whose monstrous
influence formed an inexplicable contrast with the weakness of his political
talent, has effectually humbled u^ in ^ur own eyes, and has taught our citizens
to pride themselves in a ^enunciation of national dignity; it is likewise true,
that as the treaty affected France, it was a serious and undisguised attack
upon her interests; it was giving the lie to all our professions of friendship
and sympathy with her, in he^ distressed situation, it was ^^rrowing the
^reedom of commerce, multiplying the ar^^les of contraband, and throwing every
a^vantage of solving the frightful problem of ^^presentative democracy, (...)
that problem as already ^^lved by us; our energy was praised, our wisdom
ex^^gerated, our example quoted by them on all occasions. GEORGE WASHINGTON, a
name at that time dear to liberty, was placed at the head we could throw, into
the hand^ of her enemies; in all th^^^ and many other respects the treaty with
England has not yet been, nor never will be censured as much as it deserves; it
was a measure substantially hostile, and ostentatiously irritating to our best
friends. But it often happens, in public as well as in private affairs, that
the greatest injuries are forgiven or excused, while slighter ones, such as
border on contempt, excite the most ungovernable resentment, and lead to the
greatest acts of vengeance; a striking example of this has fallen under my
observation in the conduct of these two republics: at the moment when the old
government of France was shaken to its foundation, the new government of the
United States was consolidated and was beginning its operations under the most
favorable auspices. A great revolution in America had completed its work, it
convinced the world of the solidity of its principles, and held up to view an
unexampled prospect of public happiness. A much greater revolution in France
was opening its career. Its authors and conductors, though frightened at the
imm^nsity of the undertaking, from the task of our administration, and his
election was known to be unanimous; the French theerfore saw in WASHINGTON, the
people of the United States; they counted on his friendship, they drew
consolation from his supposed sympathy, while their principles were calumniated
and the nation threatened with war by all the cabinets of Europe. They grew
strong from a sense of danger, and they were proud of the reproaches of
princes, because they were confident of the approbation of the American people,
the elder sons of liberty.

It is difficult for you to conceive to what a degree their sensibility was
carried on this subject, at the beginning of the revolution; it was clear that
a sensibility of such force, must be the foundation of the most extravagant
affection; if properly nourished, it would have beg^t a con^idenc^ without
bounds; if (...), or ans^^^^d with indifference, it mus^ (...) jealousy, (...)
by the rule^ of justice, and blind to the light of truth. And w^^t was the
conduct of your President? (...) Jeff^rs^n (...) your Ambassador in France,
where (...) talents, and republican principles, had rendered him exceeding dear
to all (...) of liberty. It was well known here, that his int^nt^on was to
remain at this place during the revolution. They wished it exceedingly, because
both he and they were sensible that he would be able to ^^nder the most
essential services to both countries, by remaining in Pa^is during a (...) of
such momentous exp^^tations; no one will deny, that the occasion and the place,
called for the first diplomatic talents, and the purest republican virtue that
the United States could afford. Jefferson went from Paris on a short leave of
absence, with a fixed determination to return as soon as possible, but the
President ordered it otherwise, and the French believed it was from a
disapprobation of Jefferson's attachment to the cause of liberty in France.
This opinion may be hastily formed, but they were confirmed in it by the
President's naming to the same place, Govern^ur Morris, who for two winters
past, had filled Paris with invectives against every principle of liberty, who
was previously detested by all the leaders of the revolution; who was known to
be the broker, protector, and correspondent of the most obnoxious emigrants. It
is possible, that Washington, in suffering Jefferson to return, might have
acted from other motives than those of enmity to the French revolution, though
no other motives appear; but his naming Morris, was an insult that admits of no
palliative; it is in vain to say he was ignorant of the character that this man
bore in Paris: he was a wide-mouth bawle^, and had been for two years the
exaggerating echo of all the abuse in all Burke's pamphlets, and the worst
papers in London.

This seen was continued here, to the astonishment of all Europe for three
years, his business was to mislead the President, with respect to what was
going on in France, to insult the French nation and as far as possible to
betray them, for it was universally believed, and I have no doubt of the fact,
that after the English and Austrian ambassadors retired from Paris, Morris
acted as secret agent and spy for those two cabinets. A hasty word or action
co^ing from an ambassador, though malicious in itself, is not always
interpreted to be the language of the government that sent him; but a series of
ostentatious abuse continued for three years, becomes unequivocal. All Europe
leagued against liberty, considered America already in the coalition; and
France would at that time have grouped you among her enemies, had it not been
for several circumstance, wholly adventitious or foreign to the conduct of your
cabinet.

1. Some Americans in Paris, of character far more respectable than that of
Morris, endeavored, and with a momentary su^cess, to convince the leaders here,
that his conduct when known in America, must be disapproved.

2. France was in want of the trade and provisions of the United States, both
for her colonies and herself, it would therefore be inconvenient at that time
to have them for enemies.

3. The conduct of C. Genet, a subject of so much triumph to your cabinet and
that of St. James's, was one of the causes that saved you from a war at that
time. Genet had been sent by Brissot; Brissot was now fallen, it was for this
reason that the conduct of Genet was disapproved, and that of the American
government passed over in silence, though a silence marked with resentment and
contempt.

When after every remonstrance, and a formal demand from this government your
executive was pleased to remove Morris from his ostensible situation in Paris,
he emigrated, that is, he went and joined the emigrants in Germany, and has
been ever since among the enemies of France. But this is not all, a letter from
Washington to Morris, We have never before heard of any such letter, and
believe none such ever exi^ted; it is unquestionably one of the million of
jacobinic lies invented with design to make our beloved WASHINGTON odious to
his countrymen.
dated in the latter end of the year 1795, intercepted, and now in the hands of
the directory, gives him a commission as a secret agent to the cabinet of
London, to transact business so apparently hostile to the interest of France,
that I am assured this letter has sharpened the edge of resentment here, more
than the whole of Jay's treaty. This and other circumstances have given full
credit to the opinion here, that a journey which Morris took from London to
Berlin, in the year 1796, was a mission on the part of the British government
to engage the king of Prussia to rejoin the coalition against France. Another
fact, though of less consequence, could not escape the animadversion of the
French government. John Parish, American consul at Hamburg, was employed by the
English government as their agent for transmitting the subsidies and loans, to
the Emperor, and the King of Prussia, for the war against France; and to
freight and fit out vessels for the transporting troops to the West Indies. It
may be said that the American government were not answerable for a thing of
this sort, of which they could have no knowledge; but this has not prevented
the fact from being recognized among the proofs of an unfriendly disposition on
your side, and certainly great allowances ought to be made for the jealousy of
a nation g^^ded by all Europe, tormented by her own traitors, and standing
alone, in a cause in which ^he expected, at least a friendly countenance from
us, if not an active support. She looked upon the cause of liberty as our
cause; and though she did not require us to take arms, she considered herself
as fighting our battles in ^^r own.

Much has be^n said on the subject of national gratitude, and to ascertain how
much, or whether any was due from us to France, for the part she took in the
American war. I will not add to the observations that have been made on this
head, but it is clearly my opinion, that she has rendered us more solid service
by establishing the principle of representative government in Europe, than by
aiding us in America.

I shall say very little on the mission of Monroe, because I take it for
granted, from what I have heard, that he has already told his own story in
print. I will only say that in the midst of all difficulties created by the
madness of his predecessor, the continued folly of your Executive, the
unfortunate conclusion and ratification of the English treaty, he conducted
himself in such a manner as to form by his single character a counterpoise to
all the weight of resentment from this government; nobody doubts here, but that
he would have continued to do so to the end of the war, if your cabinet had let
him alone, and confined their blunders to their own continent, What must then
have been the astonishment of all our friends, and the ex^ltation of the court
of London, to see him recalled in the most abrupt and censorious manner.

For the personal qualities of Genesis Pinckney, because they had little or
nothing to do with his being refused here, as the successor of Monroe* I will
excuse him for writing weak and idle letters, but I will not excuse your
executive for printing them. We trust our Executive will try to get along
without the great Mr. Barlow's excuse.
Being rejected as ambassador, he went to spend the winter in Holland; and all
the world knows how many carriage wheels it cost him, to make these journies
through this frightful republican territory; Nothwithstanding all these evils,
both real and imaginary, there still remained one more -- to the patience of
his very impatient government, they knew that Washington was in the dotage of
his natural life, and near the close of his political career; they indulged the
hope that when he should be out of office, the American people would come to
their senses, or, at least, they saw that the character of the new President
would be a criterion by which the decided friendship or enmity of the United
States would be clearly seen. The candidates were Adams and Jefferson; the one
a reputed Royalist, and enemy to France; the other an eminent Republican, and a
friend to the cause of liberty in all countries. The sentiments of these two
men were not yet known here; those of the people were not yet known, because it
was supposed that the general idolatry for Washington had prevented them from
being freely uttered; these were the reasons why the Directory determined to
take no decided step in consequence of Monroe's recall, until the public voice
should decide between these two candidates. This accounts for the interest
which the French seemed to take in the event of that election. Their wishing
you to elect JEFFERSON, proves that they did not want to quarrel with you, and
that they still hoped that the people of America were friends to liberty. The
government have waited the event. This was an awful pause in the American
affairs in Europe; and it is astonishing to me how you could fail to view it in
that light in America, and to take the measure which the the most moderate
share of common sense, and the most palpable self interest, pointed out. We had
the unbroken (...) of Independent Americans, and dared to act in conformity to
it, the "diplomatic skill" of France notwithstanding.


When the election of Adams was announced here, it produced the order of the 2d
of March, which was meant to be little short of a declaration of war; but it
was so far short of it as to leave room on your side to come forward with an
additional project of negotiation, if you wished to avoid that calamity.

The enmity of the old President toward France, was now considered as
nationalized in America, and the government here was determined to fleece you
of your property, to a sufficient degree to bring you to your feeling in the
only nerve in which it was presumed your sensibility lay, which was your
pecuniary interest.

This uncomplying disposition of the Directory induced Mr. Adams to call an
extraordinary meeting of Congress, and consequently to make a speech.

To a man who had the least pretensions to prudence, there were but two courses
to be taken; one was to declare war if he wished to ruin his country; the other
was, if he wished to save it, to offer to negociate by sending some man or men
that he knew would be agreeable to France; or, at least, not to play the bully,
by forcing a man back, who had just been driven out of Paris. The true policy
would have been, to retrieve the mistake of Washington, by sending back Monroe.
You cannot imagine the effect produced here by the name only of a known friend
to liberty in America. A report prevailed here for a few days, that Madison was
named to this mission; -- it almost disarmed the government of all resentment.
Had the the news proved true, and Madison arrived, the business would have been
settled in 24 hours.

But Adams to attain his object, whatever it might be, found out a third
course, which discovers more invention than I supposed him to possess: he
formed a commission of three to make the people of the United States believe
that a negotiation was offered on their part, and then filled it up with names
from which there could not be the least expectation of success. The first was a
man who had just been refused, and could not be offered again without an
insult: sending him back, was undoubtedly intended as an insult, and it was so
received: the second was a man whose effigy had been burnt in Virginia, for his
violent defense of the British treaty -- at least it was so reported and
believed here: the third was a little make-weight man, appointed with the
intention that he should have no influence: -- and yet, to prove to you the
facility of this government, after all that had passed, I am able to assure
you, from the best authority, that if Gerry had been sent alone, and not
shackled with the other two, the directory would have negociated with him,
without any difficulty; at present, the three have been here five months,
without being received or rejected; and a new law is made, by which an
additional number of neutral vessels will fall into the hands of the French.

I shall hardly gain credit with you were I to state on how small a pivot the
fate of nations turns in Paris at this moment.

The speech of John Adams, at the opening of Congress in November, was waited
for here with as much expectation as if peace or war depended upon it. It was
hoped that after he had sent his commissioners, he would at least avoid the use
of insulting language against the nation with whom he was pretending to treat.
But when we found him borrowing the language of Edmund Burke, and telling the
world that, although he should succeed in treating with the French, there was
no dependence to be placed on any of their engagements; that their religion and
morality were at an end; that they had turned pirates and plunderers, and it
would be necessary to be perpetually armed against them, though you were at
peace -- we wondered that the answer of both houses had not been an order to
send him to a madhouse. Instead of this, the Senate have echoed the speech with
more serv^lity than ever George the third experienced from either house of
Parliament. Read over the paragraph that speaks of France; his bringing in of
the word Europe, under pretense of generalizing it, is so flimsy a cover for
his attack on thi^ nation, that it only adds to the abuse, by attempting to
impose on the understanding; he certainly could not mean the English, for he
brags in the next paragraph how well they keep their treaty. He could certainly
mean nobody but the French, for no other nation have overturned religion. Had
this speech borne a friendly aspect, or had the paragraph in question been
similar to the one inserted in the speech of governor M^fflin, on the same
subject, it would have facilitated the negotiation, and probably saved millions
to the United States.

In enumerating the causes which have brought the two republics to the brink of
war, several memorable speeches in your house of representatives, must not be
forgotten. One of your orators calls the French government a five headed
monster -- another says, Barras, when he pronounced his farewell speech to
Monroe, must have been drunk or mad. These gentlemen forget that Barras reads
their speeches; and that the five headed monster, when it shall have devoured
the fry of Europe, may possibly shark them in their turn.

Another subject of complaint, and that not the least, is the scurrility of
many of your newspapers, against the republic: among the most abusive i^ the
GAZETTE OF THE UNITED STATES, which is considered here as an official paper, or
printed under the eye and patronage of the government. The office of foreign
affairs receives these papers regularly; and you cannot suppose that any of
these insults pass unnoticed. It is remarked here, and with great truth, that
there is more dirty calumny against the French in American than in the London
papers.

But it is in vain to amuse ourselves in describing the nature of the disease,
unless there be a remedy within our reach. In my opinion there is one, but I
have scarcely any hope that you^ wise men will stumble upon it. Acknowledge
your error in sending Pinckney and Marshall to this country; -- recall them,
and perhaps Gerry with them -- name and send Madison or Monroe to take their
place, and let the President in his message to the Senate acknowledging the
nomination, utter sentiments full of friendship to the French nation,
government, and cause -- let him acknowledge that the principles of liberty are
equally dear to the two countries -- and deprecate the idea of gratifying the
tyrants of the world, by exhibiting the two great republics, whose existence
they strove in vain to prevent, now tearing out each others vitals.

I perceive that much stress is laid by your President, and your other leaders,
on the conduct of this Government, in refusing to receive your ambassador
Pinckney. I wish those gentlem^n could some how or other be made acquainted
with the following history. I hope you will not suppose, by inserting it here,
my intention is to justify the French government: No, my object will be truly
to serve my country, and to vindicate the hohonor of all the ardent spirits
among you, if they should neglect this opportunity of going to war for the
three broken wheels of Genesis Pinckney's carriage.

In the year 1796, the Swedish ambassador here, the Baron de Stahl, obtained
leave of absence, and presented his secretary as charge d'affaires, who had the
king's commission for that purpose. This man was refused, on which de Stahl
presented a note to the minister of foreign relations, desiring him to assign
the reasons, that the king might know in what he had offended the republic,
since he had been the first in Europe to acknowledge it, and the most ardent to
deserve its friendship. The answer to this note was, an order to the new charge
d'affaires to quit the republic, and a recall of the French ambassador from
Stockholm. As soon as couriers could pass to Sweden and back, the matter was
accommodated, by the King's renewing the Baron de Stahl, who was agreeable to
the French.

About the same time the Ambassador of Tuscany, while in peaceable exercise of
his functions, was ordered by the government to quit Paris in 24 hours, and the
republic in 8 days, without any reasons assigned. He obeyed, and the Grand Duke
very complaisantly sent another.

The ambassadors of Portugal and Rome, who were in full credence and activity a
few weeks ago, are now in prison in Paris. It is true that this was in
consequence of a rupture between this government and each of theirs. But the
fate of agents in such cases, used to be, to be sent away, and not to be
imprisoned.

The king of Spain lately sent a new ambassador here, in great pomp, who is
refused, and ordered to quit the country, without reasons publicly assigned.

You will remark, that in this light the Spanish and Swedish are cases in
point, for your Pinckney. But their poor Kings had not learned the etiquette of
John Adams, to name and send back the same man who had been refused. Kings, at
this day, have no notion of a rupture with France.

Another event has lately happened to the Baron de Stahl, which makes the
Swedish case, taken altogether, different from the American. (God grant that
the American may never come to it, as long as you have loving couples to send
on these missions.) The wife of Baron Stahl is just sent out of the republic on
a suspi^ion of conspiracy; while the husband occupies his post. What would the
Columbian blood ^ay to this? Let (...) hear none of your wicked bachelors
remark, that this order was solicited by the husband; no such reason is
assigned. Indeed, had the Baron obtained the order, he ought to have obtained
leave to clamor against it afterward; decency seemed to require it, and yet he
has not done it. Had it been an American ambassador, and had the American been
me, I should have tried hard to get my case inserted in a speech of John Adams,
or a letter of Timothy Pickering. I repeat to you, that I am not undertaking
the hopeless and useless task of vindicating all the measures that the violent
convulsions of the revolution have induced this people to adopt. But when Mr.
Adams shall hear of the sending away of his ambassador, I would advise him, and
all those who are concerned in his wounded honor, to club that commodity with
the kings, princes, and states above mentioned, and to try to bear their part
with a patience becoming a government that ha^ merited this sort of
chastisement more than all ^^eir fellow sufferers put together.

Your three commissioners will doubtless seize this occasion, by Mr. Lee, to
forward their dispatches. These will probably be of a nature to induce the
President to take some decisive step; and I am in trembling expectation of
seeing him give another desperate leap into the regions of madnes^. Without
knowing precisely the face that the commissioners will put to the business, I
will venture to affirm, that the answer propre will contribute more than its
due share to the coloring. A manly and independent style of writing appears not
to belong to their character.

Were I to write their letters to the executive, it should be in language like
this. -- "The French have many reasons for being offended with the American
government; these reasons are exaggerated by their jealousy, and other other
strong passions inseparable from the revolution. This is an unfavorable moment,
and we are improper persons, to attempt to explain away the imaginary wrongs on
which a great part of the^^ resentment is founded. We advise you to recall us
three, and at the same time to replace us with one or more persons whose
characters are well known and approved by ^he French; such as Madison or
Monroe. If you wish to terminate these disputes by negotiation, you must be
prepared for considerable sacrifice; such as a loan of money similar to what
this nation m^de to you last war; such as a modification of the British treaty,
or at least a new treaty with France, giving her more advantages than that
treaty gives to England. It is possible that on conditions of this kind, you
may obtain some indemnification for the spoilations on your commerce; somewhat
in the manner provided for with the English in Mr. Jay's treaty.

"It is scarcely necessary for us to observe that your commission, considering
the distance between the two countries, must no^ be straitened in its powers,
as in this affair so much depends on the manne^. The President will excuse us
if we insist on the necessity of using the utmost precaution in his public
speeches relative to this country and of the revolution, the magnanimity of the
nation, the sacrifices they have made in the general cause of liberty; the
French are extremely sensible on this subject." And if they had suffered you to
write in that style, or had written to themselves, they would have dec^^ved and
received the (...) of every (...) American.


I do not know that a letter of this kind would produce any effect with you;
but I beg you to remember the warning I now give you, that if your executive is
inaccessable to sentiments like these, you are very soon at war with the
conquerors of Europe.

So much depends on the measures to be taken in consequence of the dispatches
which I suppose will ^^company this letter, that I could not rest easy without
communicating my sentiments to some one who would be likely to make a good use
of them. I was going to address them to Jefferson, or to --, but I thought they
would be safest and best in the hands of my oldest and best friend.

You will naturally conclude, that some credit is due to my opinions, when you
reflect that they have been formed on a close observation of every stage of the
revolution, and an intimate relation with every set of leaders. The present
directory are but the successors and sub-successors of my fellow-laborers in
the days of my activity; for the political generations have passed away with
such rapidity, that in every thing, but wisdom, I am one of the worst or best
of the present race.

From the manner in which your present commission was composed, there is very
little doubt in my mind, and there certainly is none in the minds of the
Directory, that the emb^ssy was really intended for Lewis the XVIIIth. Your
Executive did not foresee the 18th Fructidor. When, in God's name are we to
expect any just ideas from America, relative to France? Look for a Republic in
England, but do not, I beseech you, look for a Monarchy in France!

12 March -- Since writing this letter, I reflect that you may be gone to
Georgia before it arrives; anxious of giving it a chance of doing some good, I
send a copy of the most substantial parts of it to --


