THE FORTUNATE DISCOVERY: OR, THE HISTORY OF HENRY VILLARS.

BY A LADY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK.

NEW YORK PRINTED

STOCKBRIDGE: REPRINTED BY ROSSETER and WILLARD 1798.

TO THE PUBLIC.
ENCOURAGED by the opinion of Friends, whose partiality for the Author has,
perhaps, misled their judgment, she humbly ventures to present the following
work to her fair Countrywomen. She trusts the heart of sensibility will not
find it destitute of merit. Imperfections it undoubtedly has -- for what human
performance is free of them? But, as it is her first public attempt, not
originally meant for the press, she hopes the eye of criticism will be turned
aside, and such allowances made, as candor may authorize, and liberality
suggest. Of one point she is conscious -- that a good intention has guided her
pen -- and as nothing will be found in it, militating against the most rigid
principles of virtue, she hopes for indulgence at least, if she is not honored
with approbation, or encouraged by applause.

State of New York, March, 1798.
THE FORTUNATE DISCOVERY: OR, THE HISTORY OF HENRY VILLARS.
IN a remote village in the northern parts of the State of New York, on the
side of a river beautifully shaded with ancient oaks, around whose branches the
bellvine and honey-suckle wantonly crept, stood a small house, or cottage,
environed with hawthorn: beneath whose foliage, the meandering ^^^ulet softly
stole: Nature had made (...) the deficiency of Art, to render this (...)
habitation truly delightful (...) At (...)mmencement of the contest with
(...)nd, Mr. Villars, with his amiable family, retired to this sequestered
spot, to shun the din of war; troubles in early life, had fixed a settled
melancholy in his disposition, that suited best with retirement, particularly
at this time, when the feeling heart must be ever affected with the distresses
of others. Mr. Villars was a Briton, but prepossessed in favor of America: and
though he wished to see her independent, he felt for his countrymen. Mrs.
Villars was an amiable woman, and still handsome; though trouble had greatly
impaired her charms: her now darling employment, was forming the young mind of
her daughter Louisa, whom she saw daily improving; she was now entering her
seventeenth year, and her beauty, though excelled by few, was her least
perfection. Mr. Villars equally employed his time with two fine boys, whose
good qualities promised amply to repay his care; in this manner they had passed
the three first years of the (...) and enjoyed a tranquillity, little kno^^ at
those times; when they were (...) on hearing the enemy fast appr^^^^ing, and
for many days, they (...) frequent skirmishes at a little distance. One evening
Louisa, accompanied by her younger brother Charles, was walking on the banks of
the river, the sun just sinking below the horizon, the chanting of the birds,
and the beauty of the evening, lulled her into a pleasing reverie, and she
wandered she knew not whither; nor did she think of the impropriety, till
reminded by her brother of the distance they were from home; at that instant a
beautiful little spaniel came up to them, and fawned on Louisa, then whining,
ran into an adjacent thicket; she immediately followed him, and perceiving a
young man on the ground, to all appearance dead; who by his dress appeared to
be a British officer. Louisa shrieked, and was running away, when the humane
little Charles said, "My dear sister, perhaps the gentleman is not dead, and we
may be of service to him."

LOUISA, ever alive to the call of humanity, summoned all her re^^^^^^^^
advanced to the young man and ^^^^ng salts to his nose she perceived (...)
breathe. At this instant an officer arrived with some water in his hat; seeing
Louisa (who was about to fly when she perceived him) he cried, "Ah, fair
stranger, art thou human, or an Angel, sent to relieve the distressed?" She
stopped, almost ready to faint with fright. Be not terrified, Madam, said he,
"but tell me where I may carry my dying friend." She desired he would stay with
him, while she ran for her father; she flew home with the utmost precipitation
and acquainted Mr. Villars, he was ever happy to be of service to his
fellow creatures, waited not a moment, but went with his servants, had the
gentleman brought home and put to bed; a surgeon was sent for, who pronounced
the wounds not mortal; but he had suffered so much from loss of blood, and want
of timely assistance, that the greatest care was necessary. -- After his wounds
had been dressed some time he opened his eyes, and (...) his friend by his bed
side, said, "(...) am I, my dear H^^^y?" "Under the (...) roof of hospitality,"
returned he. (...) pose yourself for the (...) you shall know (...) to whom
besides yourself am I obliged?" "Talk not to me of obligation" answered his
friend, "Heaven has sent an Angel in the form of a young lady, to our relief,
and her benevolent father has treated you as his child." During this
conversation, Mr. Villars, had retired to the other end of the room, perhaps he
had his emotion. -- He was extremely happy to have it in his power to be of
service to the wounded gentleman; but there was something in the voice and
manners of his friend, that struck him so forcibly, he could not account for
it; and his great resemblance to a person we shall hereafter mention, entirely
absorbed him in thought; when the young gentleman came to him, and begged he
would accept the thanks of his friend, who was now able to speak to him. Mr.
Villars approached the bed, and Captain Bellmore (for that was his name)
thanked him in the most (...) terms for his extreme kindness; (...) good man
told him, "to make himself as easy as his situation would permit, as his speedy
recovery depended greatly on his being quite tranquil. "Alas, sir" returned he,
"I am perfectly easy on my own account, but very unhappy on my friends. Mr.
Hargrave has left his camp in search of me; and I fear reports will be
circulated to the prejudice of his honor." Mr. Villars started at the thought,
and turning to Mr. Hargrave, (who sat in a deep reverie) said, "Can I, sir, be
of service to you?" this was pronounced with so much tenderness, that Mr.
Hargrave, before greatly prepossessed in his favor, now felt an emotion he
could not conquer; bowing very respectfully, he said, "his situation indeed
required a friend:" -- Mr. Villars told him it was late, and it was necessary
Captain Bellmore should rest, begged him to join his wife and daughter in this
little palour; promising Mr. Bellmore to do every thing in his power to serve
his friend, he wished him a good night. -- Mrs. Villars and Louisa rose to
receive Mr. Hargrave, and eagerly enquired after his friend. "He is much
better, Ladies," said he; and I hope, Madam (addressing himself to Louisa) will
in a short time be able to thank you as his guardian angel. Louisa blushed; and
only courtsied. Mr. Villars then begged Mr. Hargrave to inform them the manner
of his friend's being wounded, and hi^ leaving the camp. -- "He told them, the
day before they had had a smart skirmish -- that the party returned with an
account of Captain Bellmore's being missing. A deserter coming in soon after,
informed them he was lying on the field, he belived not quite dead. -- I
immediately applied for a flag to go in search of him; but the orders was to
march, and it could not be obtained. Our commanding officer was newly put in,
or this would not have been the case. -- Disgusted with the brutality of our
colonel, and a heart bleeding for my friend, I took the advantage of the night,
and left the camp in search of him -- it was near morning ere I found him.
Alas! how can I describe my feelings on seeing him in such a situation. I took
him in my arms to a river not far distant, washed the blood from his face, and
bound up his wounds with my handkerchief. After drinking a little water, he
seemed to recover: I saw a light at a distance, and endeavored to carry him to
it; but I was deceived -- it was only a vapor.

THE morn arrived, but with it no gleam of hope; I had wandered the whole day,
supporting my friend, I may say, carrying him; for he frequently fainted. I had
at length brought him to the bank of the river, where Miss Villars found him.
He had lost so much blood, and was so exhausted with endeavoring to travel,
that I thought he would have expired. He begged me to leave him, and take care
of myself. -- "My dear Harry," said he, "I feel I cannot live -- why will you
endanger yourself -- comfort my parents -- farewell my friend."

I HAD not time to tell him, I would never leave him, when he again fainted. I
ran for water to the river, when at my return, to my inexpressible joy, I
beheld Miss Villars. Heaven had heard my prayer, and sent relief when I had
despaired of finding it. -- Mr. Villars and the Ladies, highly recommended Mr.
Hargrave's humanity. The former said, "when things were properly represented,
his leaving the camp would be deemed meritorious. He thought it would be
dangerous to attempt returning. That as he was ever an enemy to dissimulation,
he would advise him to write to the general, and inform him of every
circumstance, and in the interim, to give himself up as a prisoner of war; he
made no doubt of his being very soon exchanged."

THE young gentleman very politely thanked him for his advice, and said he
would be entirely directed by him; then separated for the night, but not to
sleep. Mr. and Mrs. Villars, though they saw something in Mr. Hargrave that
interested them very much in his favor, they wished to be more particularly
acquainted with him. Miss Villars gentle heart was touched with compassion: the
scene she had been witness to, preyed so forcibly on her spirits, that she
could not sleep. At one moment, she fancied she saw Captain Bellmore on the
ground, just expiring: at (...) Hargrave dragged to prison as a (...) The next
morning the surgeon arrived, he said "Captain Bellmore was greatly recovered,
and he hoped in no danger;" which gave universal satisfaction to this
benevolent family. Mr. Hargrave was so rejoiced at his friend's recovery, that
he forgot his own situation, until reminded by Mr. Villars; who proposed going
with him to his commanding officer, whose quarters was not above twenty miles
distance. The business was soon settled; Mr. Villars procured for them leave of
absence, and they returned to the great satisfaction of Captain Bellmore, who
was much more anxious for his friend than himself. After a few days, he was
able to sit up; he begged Mr. Hargrave would entreat the Ladies permission for
him to thank them in person, for the favors he had received: he complied with
his request. Mrs. Villars told him, smiling, "she was happy his friend was well
enough to see company; that they would do themselves the pleasure of taking a
dish of tea with him that afternoon. -- Louisa appeared more lovely than usual;
her dress, which was simplicity itself, added to charms, already heightened by
the heartfelt satisfaction of having been serviceable to the distressed. --
Mr. Villars attended the Ladies to the room, where Mr. Hargrave waited to
receive them: he introduced Louisa to his friend, "as the person they were so
much indebted to." At that moment, the little spaniel jumped on her lap, and
licked her hands: Louisa caressed him, and mentioned his coming to her on the
bank of the river, and the extreme distress he seemed in. It is needless to
relate the many obliging things that was said: -- the afternoon passed away in
a most agreeable manner: they parted equally pleased with each other. Capt.
Bellmore told the Ladies, that it would greatly add to his recovery, if they
would favor him with their company often; which they promising to do, wished
him a good evening. -- "You are a happy fellow, Harry (said he, with a sigh,)
to wait on this divine girl in all her little excursions." -- He then launched
out so largely in Louisa's praise, that his friend rallied him; tell(...) "he
believed the last wound he (...)ceived, would be the most ob(...) cure:" --
Upon my word, Will," continued he, "I believe your case is desperate -- Miss
Villars improves so much on acquaintance, that I have little hopes of you. --
"And do you really believe I am in love with Miss Villars?" -- "Most sincerely
I do; for though I have had the pleasure of seeing her these six days past, and
been indulged with her agreeable conversation, I have not thought half the fine
things of her, that you have said within this quarter of an hour." -- "Can it
be possible Miss Villars has not charmed you? Is there any thing in her you can
disapprove?" Do not mistake me, my dear Will; she is a most deserving girl. I
have at this moment a sincere affection for her, and would risk my life to
serve her; but love is quite out of the question; so you see I shall be no
rival -- but upon my soul, you must not trifle with her." "Can you be serious
-- do you think, said Capt. Bellmore, "if it was, as you suppose, I could be
guilty of trifling with such a girl." "No, no, my friend," returned Hargrave,
"I know your goodness of heart better: but I (...) now bid you good night, and
join the agreeable group in the parlour, and strive to find out in the languid
blue eyes of the fair Louisa, what effect your black ones have had." Saying
this, he left him, and joined the family at supper. Mr. Villars proposed, since
company was so agreeable, to Captain Bellmore, Mrs. Villars would take her work
into his room the next day; and Louisa should read for his amusement. (Louisa
blushed, she knew not why, Mr. Hargrave politely thanked Mr. Villars for this
mark of attention; they soon after retired. Louisa, not much inclined to sleep,
sat down and wrote this following letter to Miss Summers:

To Miss ELIZA SUMMERS, NEW YORK.
"YOU have often, my dear Eliza, called me the recluse of the forest; and
rallied me upon having no adventures to write. I have now, my dear, one to
acquaint you with, which will exceed your most sanguine expectation. I was last
Wednesday evening, walking on the banks of the river, near our house; --
thinking of my Eliza, and the many happy days I have spent in her agreeable
company, when I was reminded of the distance we were from home, by my brother
Charles, who had accompanied me. I was about to return, when He (...) Miss
Villars informs her (...) with what the reader is already acquaint^^^


AS Captain Bellmore is now able to sit up, we this afternoon paid him a visit.
When I first saw him I was too much terrified to take particular notice of him;
I only observed, he was young and handsome; but to day I thought I never saw
any one so engaging. His person is symmetry itself; rather above the common
size; -- his hair is a bright che^^^t and he has the finest eyes and teeth I
ever saw. Mr. Hargrave, his friend, is a most agreeable man, and very handsome.
Papa seems m^^^ pleased with his countrymen, particularly with Mr. Hargrave --
and is more cheerful than usual.

AS the night is far advanced, I must conclude this long letter, with
requesting you to answer it as soon as possible; and subscribing myself your

sincerely affectionate, LOUISA VILLARS.


IN a short time Captain Bellmore was able to leave his room; he would often
lead to the Ladies while they were at work. Mr. Hargrave's conjectures were not
wrong; the young Captain's thoughts were continually fixed on the fair Louisa;
he was never happy but in her company -- when absent he was meditating whether
he ought, and how he should, discover his sentiments; he viewed the many bars
to his happiness -- his family was noble, and of unbounded ambition; there was
no pre(...) his father's consenting to his un(...) thought he saw something in
Mr. Villar's family, that pronounced them of a much higher rank than they at
present moved in; he wished to be acquainted with their connections, but had
not resolution to break the subject: whether they were, or were not, what they
appeared to be, he had never harbored a dishonorable thought. The anxiety of
his mind retarded his recovery; and his friends were sorry to find he did not
gain strength as fast as they first expected. "Advise me my Harry," said he to
his friend, "I love the divine Louisa, but would I not be a villain to endeavor
to gain her affections, when I am certain my father (on whom you know I am
entirely dependant,) will never consent to my marrying her." "You are not so
sure of that," returned his friend, "you can but ask it; should it be refused,
and you are happy enough to be agreeable to Miss Villars, you are both young
and can wait; you have great reason to expect promotion -- as your father's
interest (...) at any time procure you a (...) you may then please yourself."
M^^ Hargrave, though he spoke in this manner, had not the most distant idea of
Sir John Bellmore's consenting to his son's union, but he wished to encourage
his hopes, as he feared the consequence of his present uneasiness. One day,
after a conversation of this kind, Capt. Bellmore went to walk in a wood
adjoining the garden. Louisa was sitting in an arbor of jessamine, caressing
the favorite spaniel, when lifting up her eyes, she saw Capt. Bellmore
approaching. "Happy Juba!" said he -- at the same time, looking with uncommon
tenderness at Miss Villars, who had rose to retire as he entered the arbor;
begged her pardon, said he would be gone in a moment if she wished to be
alone." "No indeed, I do not," said she with an artless blush; at this he led
her back to the seat, and taking one of her hands which he pressed with ardour
to his breast, "will then my most adored Miss Villars permit me a few moments
conversation." Louisa had spoke before (...) thought, but it was now too late
to ^^^^ify her mistake, without (...) understand him; so carelessly (...), she
picked a sprig of jessamine, and asked him, "if he did not think it would make
a handsomer wreath than laurel?" He said he should not esteem either, unless he
could have the honor of laying them at her feet. -- Poor Louisa had
undesignedly led to the subject she most wished to avoid; not that it was
disagreeable to her; but her father had taught her to believe, that marriages
without the sanction of parents, would ever be unhappy; and from the sketches
she had heard from the gentlemen's conversation of Sir John Bellmore's family,
she had no hope of his consenting to his sons marrying without the lady was
possessed of a large fortune, she endeavored to again wave the subject; but the
opportunity was too favorable to his wishes to let it escape; he threw himself
at her feet, and opening his heart, told her, "it was not in the power of
riches, or preferment, to make him happy without her, that he had no great
reason to imagine his father would consent to his marriage, but he hoped as he
had pretty good interest in the army, to be soon independent." -- Louisa had
heard him patiently till now, said, "O, Sir, do not think you will ever be
independent of the duty you owe your parents;" I must not, I cannot hear you
any longer upon this subject." At these words she rose and was leaving the
arbor, but he prevented her; and entreated "she would not drive him to
despair, to tell him at least she did not hate him." -- "hate you, Captain
Bellmore. Oh, heaven! -- "If you do not hate me, my angel, said he, do not make
the life you saved miserable, by refusing me to hope for the only thing that
can make it desirable." Their stay had been longer in the arbor than either
imagined, and just as he had done speaking, they heard Mr. Villars and Mr.
Hargrave returning from hunting; Louisa then insisted upon going, "as her mamma
would wonder at her long stay." After making her promise to hear him on the
subject again, he permitted her to go, and took a walk to the woods, while
Louisa returned to the house. Unused ^^artifice, she could not easily get the
^^^ter of the confusion she was thrown (...) the above conversation; which was
not a little augmented by her mamma's asking her where she had been; she
however, answered pretty well, "in the jessamine bower, mamma, making this
wreath." Hargrave going up to her in a gay manner, asked, whose "happy brows
was to be crowned with that wreath:" but said he, smiling, "what is become of
the Captain, has he been making wreaths too?" "I -- I -- I don't know," said
Louisa, stammering; Hargrave thought by her confusion, all was out: giving her
a significant look (which Louisa perfectly understood,) "I will go look for
him," said he, "he is grown of late so fond of roseat bowers and purling
streams, that I am positively afraid he will turn poet." So saying he left her,
and went in search of the Captain, whom he found sitting on the bank of the
river, so lost in thought, that he approached nigh enough to slap him on the
shoulder before he perceived him: "Come," said he, "Mr. Villars is making a
bowl of current punch, (...) I suppose you have been sipping (...) nectar of
Miss Villars's conversation(...) the garden;" "why do you think have seen her
there?" returned the Captain; because the roses were heightened in her cheeks,
and the pretty confusion she was in when I asked her where you was, made me
imagine you had been assisting her to make that beautiful wreath of jessamine
she had in her hand." "You're a sad rattling fellow, Harry, but your heart is
at ease." "And so may yours be," answered Hargrave, "or I am much mistaken."
"I have seen Miss Villars," said the Captain, "and have told her all my doting
heart feels for her; she heard me, it is true -- but would not give me the
least hopes of ever being mine contrary to my parent's consent:" "Ha! ha! ha!
So you are quite in despair, because she did not immediately fly into your
arms. Come, come, Will, come in and drink a little of the old gentleman's
punch. I am sure you want it to cheer your spirits, for you have positively got
the hip:" So saying, he took him by the arm, and led him to the little parlour
where Mr. and Mrs. Villars were waiting with baskets of fruit and the current
punch for their return; over which simple repast we will leave them, and return
to Louisa, who had retired (soon after Mr. Hargrave went in search of his
friend,) to read a letter she had just received from Miss Summers. As the
reader will be better acquainted with this young Lady, it may not be deemed
unnecessary to inform them that she was the daughter of an eminent merchant in
the city of New York. She was very beautiful, and to a fund of good nature, was
added a great deal of vivacity. She was mistress of an excellent education,
which rendered her a desirable companion; early intimacy had endeared these
young Ladies to each other, and since Mr. Villars's retirement, they had
constantly corresponded: Louisa ever happy to hear from her friend, eagerly
broke the seal, and read as follows;

Miss SUMMERS to Miss VILLARS.
"IS it possible my belo(...) has at last met with an adventure! and so
desirable a one! -- To be the saving of such a pretty fellow. Upon my
conscience, I almost envy you, and really believe I could have consented to
have sighed amongst your shady bowers a month, to have been the heroine of such
a scene: but Louisa, have a care of that little heart of thine; methinks you
are very lavish in the praises of this young Briton; I have a great inclination
to see these beaux of yours. But my dear, do you know the news of your
adventure has reached the town already. I last night spent the evening at Mrs.
Mushroom's; Miss Vitrol, Miss Drip and Miss Maria Worthy, with many others, was
of the party; we were no sooner seated at the card-table, than Miss Vitrol
began, "bless me! Madam," said she, addressing herself to Mrs. Mushroom,) "have
you heard of the odd affair that has happened in Mr. Villars' family. "Oh dear!
aye" exclaimed Miss Drip, the oddest thing in nature." -- "Nothing has happened
to their disadvantage, I hope," said Mrs. Mushroom, "they are a family I have
the greatest regard for," "O -- no -- ^ said Miss Vitrol," they only say, two
British officers came nigh Mr. Villars': one of them pretended to be suddenly
taken ill, and (as they expected,) was carried into the house: and would you
believe Mem, it was only a contrivance to carry off Miss -- which they
positively did that night, (...) Mr. Villars was obliged to ride (...) most
morning, before he overto(...); "aye," added Miss Drip, "and they say Miss was
not so well pleased with being overtaken." -- I could scarcely contain myself,
when Colonel Rightly addressing himself to both Ladies, said, "I beg your
pardon, Ladies, but must take the liberty to tell you, you have been
misinformed: I have but a week ago received a letter from my friend Mr.
Villars, who mentioned an officer's being found dangerously wounded near his
house. The gallant manner his friend left the camp in search of him, and his
having obtained their leave of absence from the regiment, until Capt. Bellmore
recovered." -- I then joined Col. Rightly, and said, "I had a letter in my
pocket, in which Miss Villars had given me all the particulars of the affair
which had been so grossly misrepresented." -- "Indeed Miss Summers," said Miss
Drip (who is not so excellent at telling truth as her grandfather was at
dipping candles,) "I had this from a person, who had it from one of the people
that went in search of Miss Villars, it happened but four or five days ago:" --
"Pardon me, Miss," said the Col. "it is impossible to come from that place in
less than six days." This effectually silenced her, though she seemed much
nettled, her scandal did not take; Miss Vitrol begged I would favor the company
with a sight of Miss Villars's letter, "as it is very strange I should be so
misinformed." I said I should have no objection, if the discretion of Mr.
Villars's family needed any vouchers after what Colonel Rightly had said. The
two dispirited Ladies soon withdrew; and Maria Worthy (who had sat the whole
time biting her lips with vexation,) said "she really believed Miss Vitrol had
drained her father's vials for every bitter she could find, to compose so
malicious a draught: for the account she had heard, agreed exactly with what
Colonel Rightly had said." You may easily imagine, my dear Louisa, that I
enjoyed very little satisfaction that evening. I shall certainly take my Papa's
advice, and go no more to Mrs. Mushroom's, though she is a very good woman,
most of her acquaintance are the growth of a night, and I find no people so
fond of scandal as whom fortune alone has entitled to appear in genteel life.
-- I have been so much interested in your affairs, I had like to have forgotten
my own. Do you know I have made a new conquest -- and no less than the young,
the beautiful, the divine General Antique; he has visited at our house several
times, but I had not the least idea that his visits were to me: he pretends to
be very fond of music. I was one day playing on my piano forte; my sister
Caroline accompanied me with her voice, when he offered to join us with the
German flute. He played so shockingly, he put me out -- Caroline burst into a
fit of laughter, and our (...) was discord itself. -- Last Monday morning, the
old veteran was closeted with Papa above half an hour -- when we met at dinner,
I thought Papa looked as if he was very full of something: he laughed very
much, and told me, "he did not think I looked very well -- that it was a chance
if I had not visitors that afternoon -- he would advise me to smart up a
little, -- I did not take much notice of his gay manner, as he always had good
spirits. But when I went up to my room, Puff came running, "Miss -- Miss --
Miss Eliza, I have news for you -- would you believe it -- the old General has
been asking your Papa's permission to pay his addresses to you. -- This
morning, when he was in the compting-house with Mr. Summers, I went past the
door, and I heard him say, the divine Miss Summers. This, Mem, was enough, you
may be sure, for me to put my ear to the keyhole; and I am sorry to say, your
Papa gave his full consent. He said he had no objection, if he was agreeable to
you; and mentioned something about happiness and alliance; indeed Miss I was
quite frightened." -- I could not help laughing immoderately. "You need not be
frightened, Puff," said I -- my Papa might very well say, "if he was agreeable
to me, he had no objection." -- But, Miss, your Papa and Mamma were in their
own room soon after; and I heard them laughing, as if they were very much
pleased." -- I begged the good girl to be under no apprehension, for I was
determined to carry on the joke, and dress as smart as possible. At five a
carriage stopped at the door, and a thundering rap announced the approach of
this Adonis. -- He entered the room more alert than usual; for borne on the
wings of love, he had left at least forty years of his age behind. -- He was
dressed in a new suit of regimentals, cut so much in fashion, the tailor had
like to have forgot leaving any skirts at all; and Monsieur Empress had
exhausted his stock of perfumery, powder and pomatum; for never did I see the
ravages of time so completely covered: Mamma soon left (...) The old gentleman
began the attac^^ with, I -- I -- I -- have had the honor, Miss Summers, (here
an unlucky cough, which lasted some time, compelled him to begin again) "I have
the honor, divine Miss Summers, of your Papa's permission to throw myself at
your feet;" so saying, down he plumpt on one knee with so much force, I really
believe his rheumatic joints will feel it for a month. "O pray sir," said I,
"Rise, I cannot bear to see a gentleman of your years, in such a posture." This
struck him forcibly, and he continued sometime silent; fixing his little gray
eyes on me with, (I suppose he thought) a most languishing softness. "Angelic
creature," said he, "you must not regard the difference of a few years, in a
man who adores you, and can have no happiness unless he is permitted to hope:"
In short, my dear Louisa, he ran on in this strain for near an hour; I
coquested it so well, that he sometimes thought he was sure of me, and at
others (...)is hopes, with my great respect (...) age; after two hours killed
in this ^^^ner, we parted, I hope never to ^^et again; he promised himself
great pleasure in waiting upon me again -- but I shall take care never to be at
home. Papa wished me joy in the evening; he said, "he had made an excuse to go
out, as he had not command enough of his muscles, for such a rencounter." --
Mamma, who you know is much more serious, said, "it was very wrong to trifle
with the old gentleman, the preference he gave me, at least demanded a polite
refusal." But I do not consider how much of your time I am engaging with this
monstrous long letter, which may be at this time much better employed. Pray
write soon, but I charge you to be ingenuous; I expect to hear the handsome
captain is dying at your feet, but the heroic Hargrave, I intend having myself;
there is something so noble in his facing every danger in search of his friend,
he really must be a delightful fellow. I positively declare I will not write
another word more than,

that I am, my Louisa's most sincerely affectionate friend^ ELIZA SUMMERS


LOUISA, on first reading her friend's letter, was greatly nettled, at the
vulgar sarcasms of Miss Vitrol and Miss Drip; but on second consideration, she
looked on such scandal beneath her, and though it no more of it. The family were
now summoned to dinner, -- after the cloth was removed, Miss Villars said "she
had that morning received a letter from Miss Summers." At the mention of her
name, Captain Bellmore looked at his friend, and smiled. Mr. Villars asked what
news Eliza had wrote from town. As Louisa could not with propriety relate the
conversation at Mrs. Mushroom's; she said, "nothing extraordinary, except the
new conquest she has made of General Antique, who has with great formality,
asked her Papa's permission to pay his addresses to her." Mr. V. laughing,
turned to the gentlemen and said, "this young Lady is a beautiful girl of
eighteen, and General Antique, an old veteran of sixty at (...)." Mr. Hargrave
asked, Louisa, (...) Miss Summers of New York, was (...) they mentioned." She
an(...) she (...) and asked him if he was acquainted with her." Hargrave
looking a little confused, answered in the "negative; but that he had the
pleasure of seeing her once at the assembly. -- "While the British were in
possession of that place, Captain Bellmore, with two other officers and
himself, went in late, most of the Ladies were engaged," continued he. "And I
had despaired of finding a partner; when a gentleman introduced me to Miss
Summers, said, he had prevailed on her partner to excuse her for one dance."
"Did you never see her after," said Louisa. "Never," returned he, "I was
immediately sent on a distant expedition, and it has not been possibly in my
power to visit that city since. "You did not tell Miss Villars," said Captain
Bellmore, "what effect the bright eyes of her friend had on you. Indeed you
never saw a poor fellow more in love in your life." -- "Bellmore, you dream,"
answered Hargrave. -- "It is more than you did at that time," returned the
Captain, "I positively believe you did not sleep in a month." -- "Mr. Hargrave
was not very dangerously wounded, if he recovered in a month." said Louisa --
"No, no," continued Bellmore, "he did not in twelve: and positively I have
never heard him give another Lady as a toast since." -- "Miss Villars,"
answered Hargrave, "who has the pleasure of being acquainted with Miss Summers,
will, no doubt, acquit me, for thinking her a charming girl; and I will not
say, if I had had the happiness of seeing her often, I should have brought off
a whole heart." -- "I Am of opinion," returned Miss Villars, "you would have
lost it entirely; by what your friend says, it was pretty much shattered at
first sight; and I assure you, Miss Summers improves upon acquaintance. She is
a great fortune, and it would be no bad spec, Mr. Hargrave. -- "It is not for a
poor wandering fellow like me, to aspire to Miss Summers," answered Hargrave.
"You should not," said the Captain, "call yourself a poor fellow whilst the
acknowledged favorite of (...) --." Here a letter was bro't (...)in Bellmore,
which prevented his (...)ding. "He was desired as soon (...) was able to
travel, to come to town, and an exchange would be immediately procured." --
Captain Bellmore, though a good soldier, would have been content with remaining
longer in the country, to have enjoyed the society of his beloved Louisa; and
could not think of parting, until he had obtained her promise of being one day
his. -- Louisa's heart now revealed a secret; she though it she only esteemed him
as a friend; but when she heard he was soon to depart, she could scarcely hide
her emotion; and making an excuse to withdraw, retired to her own room, to
bewail the caprice of fortune. -- Mr. Villars said, "he hoped they did not
intend leaving them for some time; as Captain Bellmore's health was not
sufficiently reestablished for such a journey." After many obliging things said
on both sides, it was concluded, they should set out in a fortnight. -- Captain
Bellmore had no opportunity of speaking to Louisa for some days; -- when one
evening, the gentlemen requested her to walk -- with her Mamma's permission,
she consented. Charles and the young (...) were of the party. Enticed by the
beauty of the evening, they walked farther than they intended, when Charles
exclaimed, "bless me, sister, this is the very place where we found Captain
Bellmore." -- They all soon recollected the spot^ the blood forsook Louisa's
cheeks, and she was near sinking. On the edge of the thicket, stood a large
willow, at whose root nature (to invite the wearied traveller,) had placed a
beautiful bank covered with moss; to this seat they led her; she soon
recovered, and rose to return, but Hargrave, willing to oblige his friend,
said, "she had better rest a little, and he would go and gather some wild
flowers to add to her beauxpots; as he had seen some very handsome, near that
place." And continued he, "Charles and Edward will accompany me." -- So saying,
he took the boys by the hand, and was out of sight in an instant. -- The reader
may be assure(...) Captain did not lose the moments (...)tly wished for; but
plead his (...) so well, that had Louisa acted from the dictates of her heart,
he would have had no reason to complain. But she was sensible of the
impropriety of giving him hopes, when she saw no probability of their being
realised. He begged her to let him apply to her father; this she positively
refused -- and told him, she knew his opinion so well, it would be needless. --
She had not, however, disguise enough to hide entirely her approbation; and the
Captain had some consolation in thinking he was not altogether indifferent to
her. They had spent nearly an hour most agreeably; when Hargrave and the little
boys returned, with large bunches of flowers. After this, they had frequent
interviews. Hargrave undertook to plead his friend's cause; but there was no
occasion; he had an advocate in Louisa's breast, more powerful than any he
could offer. -- Captain Bellmore, at length, obtained the promise he wished.
The day before they were to depart, they walked to the favorite willow, where
they, in presence of Mr. Hargrave, vowed to (...) only for each other; and
wai(...) happy turn of fortune.

THE day arrived, when they were apart. As no one suspected an attachment
between the Captain and Louisa^ it was not difficult for them to steal a few
moments in private. They met in the jessamine bower; he pressed her to his
breast when he bid her adieu, -- poor Louisa could refrain her tears no longer;
but dissolved with the tenderness of the moment, hid them in his bosom.

THE scene was too affecting; they broke from each other. -- When the little
group assembled to breakfast, the concert was general; though the journey had
been twice retarded, it still arrived to soon, and they parted with mutual
regret. -- Mr. Villars accommodated them with horses to a town, about twenty
miles distant, from whence they were to take the packet. Louisa gave Mr.
Hargrave the following letter for Miss Summers:

Miss VILLARS to Miss SUMMERS.
AH! my dear Eliza, the (...) hour arrives. Many letters had passed between
Miss Villars and Miss Summers, which (...)
-- Captain Bellmore and Mr. Hargrave leave us to day; how is your poor
Louisa's heart torn between love and duty. An enemy to disguise, I look on
myself criminal, in placing my affections without the sanction of my parents.
But alas! it is now too late. -- I have not a heart to recall. Write to me, my
Eliza, and strive to reconcile me to myself. I have much to communicate, but my
spirits are too much hurried. I haste to take (perhaps) a last farewell. Oh!
Eliza -- if it should be so. -- I have promised Captain Bellmore to meet him a
few moments in the garden; and then must take leave with the rest of the
family. -- I dread the trial. -- Poor Hargrave too, seems at times thoughtful;
something I believe troubles him. He says I don't know how much I endanger him,
by making him bearer of this letter. Adieu, my dear Eliza.

May you ever be happier than your affectionate, LOUISA VILLARS.


NOTHING material happened on the road. The packet was ready to sail when they
arrived; they dismissed the servant with the horses, and a few lines to Mr.
Villars. The wind was fair, and in six days they arrived at New York. -- Mr.
Villars had recommended them to his friend Colonel Rightly. -- As soon as they
were dressed, they waited on him; he immediately provided them genteel
lodgings, and invited them to dine with him the next day. -- Captain Bellmore
begged, "he would recommend them to a merchant, as they had some bills they
wished to dispose of." -- Colonel Rightly told them "he made no doubt, but Mr.
Summers would purchase, to whatever amount they chose." -- And it was agreed,
they should wait on him the next day. -- Accordingly, Colonel Rightly called at
twelve, and attended them to Mr. Sommers's, who immediately purchased the
bills, (...) politely invited them up stairs; as (...) had mentioned having a
letter for (...) Summers. -- She was sitting with her Mamma and sister, when
they entered, Mr. Summers introduced them says (...) the same means. We will
now leave her, and return to town.

Mr. SUMMERS had one day invited Captain Bellmore and his friend to dine. Soon
after they came in, Mr. Hargrave told Mr. Summers, "he had letters from Lord
Beauclair, which mentioned this drafts being paid, and hoped he had the same
account." Mr. Summers said he had. -- At the name of Lord Beauclair, Eliza
started, and changed color: In the evening, she asked Mr. Hargrave if he was
any relation to him. "A very distant one," replied he, "but he has been a
father to me." "Pray," said Eliza, "is Lady Beauclair living." "She is,"
returned Hargrave, "but why, my dear Eliza, does the name of Lord Beauclair
seem to affect you;" (for during this discourse she has often changed color,)
"I have heard," answered Eliza, "he had a daughter he used very unkindly, and I
cannot hear his name without emotion: do they know she is still living." "They
do not," replied he. "I have heard the wen^ several years ago to the
East Indies with her family; I have often heard Lady Beauclair lament her, but
her name is never mentioned before my Lord." -- "Good God," said Eliza, "and
her only fault, was marrying a worthy man with a small fortune." -- "And is
that a small fault, my beloved Eliza," said he, clasping her in his arms. "Tell
me, I pray, if you know any thing of this Lady or her family; for be assured,
though I have been taught to look on myself as the heir of Lord Beauclair, if
ever I am so happy as to find Lady Maria, I shall willingly resign my
pretensions in her favor." "Your intention is truly meritorious," returned Miss
Summers. "You may perhaps find Lady Maria, or some of her family:" "Ah! Miss
Summers," said he, "riches or titles could only make me happy for being
acceptable to you; and I am confident, you would not prize such unjustly
retained." -- After a long and tender conversation, they parted equally pleased
with each other.

Miss SUMMERS was torn between love and friendship; she knew Lady Maria
Beverly; but was not at liberty to discover her; and if she did, she would
deprive the man she most regarded of immense riches; but friendship and justice
were predominant. She determined to write to her friend for permission to
discover her, which she immediately did. -- Mr. Hargrave related to Captain
Bellmore the above conversation -- they both concluded, Miss Summers must know
something of Lady Maria; but thought it best not to press her farther at
present, as she might not perhaps be at liberty to discover her. Not long after
this, Mr. Hargrave attended Miss Summers and her sister, to spend the evening
at Mrs. Hardy's. -- Doctor Squills by accident dropped in, he said he had just
come from the prison, and his feelings had not for a long time been so hurt. "A
very decent woman was brought there some days before," continued he. "She is
very ill, and I fear cannot live if she is not removed to a more comfortable
place:" -- "pray what is she charged with?" demanded Hargrave, "upon my word I
cannot tell" returned the Doctor, "(...) she was taken within our line, and
(...) not give a very good account of (...) She has traveled from the
Southward, in search of a young gentleman, she was nurse to, and whom she heard
was confined as a spy; I told her she might be perfectly easy on that account,
for no British officer was confined on such suspicion at present." Mr. Hargrave
asked him, "if he knew her name?" "I think it is Carely," answered the Doctor.
"Good God!" exclaimed he, "my old nurse." He begged the Ladies to excuse him,
and said, he would wait on Colonel Rightly, and prevail upon him to use his
interest, with regard to freeing Mrs. Carely." He was no sooner gone, than some
of the company expressed great surprise, at what they had heard. -- Captain
Bellmore who had dropped in accidentally, briefly related his being wounded,
and the disinterested behavior of Mr. Hargrave; which he supposed had given
rise to the report that frightened poor Mrs. Carely. The whole company joined
in his praise, and (...) had the inexpressible pleasure of (...)ng the chosen
of her heart extolled (...) highest degree.

Mr. HARGRAVE went immediately to Colonel Rightly, who promised to do every
thing in his power upon the occasion -- They went that night to the prison,
though it was late. Hargrave entered the room, followed by the Col. they
approached the bed -- she was sleeping. They had stood a few moments, when she
awoke, praying for blessings on her Harry. -- "Your Harry is with you." said
Hargrave, advancing. -- The poor woman was near fainting. -- "My son," returned
she, "I shall die easy, since I see you safe." -- "Compose yourself, good
mother, and tell me how you came here," replied Hargrave. -- "O! sir, I have
not strength; -- I heard somebody say, you would be taken as a spy; so came off
in the night, and wandered, I knew not where. I have been several months a
prisoner, but not confined so closely as at present."

Col. RIGHTLY told her, "to make herself easy -- that he would procure her
liberty, and take her to his own ho(...) -- The good woman thanked him wi^^ her
tears; her heart was too full for ^^terance. Next morning, Col. Rig^^^ applied
to the General, and had her brought home, where she very soon recovered; and
took the place of a housekeeper he had just discharged. -- About this time, a
peace was negociating; and hostilities ceased with Britain.

Mr. VILLARS, who had adjourned going to town (as he did not wish to leave his
family at such a time) now paid a visit to the metropolis. His first inquiries
were for Capt. Bellmore and Mr. Hargrave, who received him with the highest
satisfaction. They dined the next day at Mr. Sommers's with Colonel Rightly and
Major Beaucamp, who was also a British officer on leave of absence. The company
had assembled sometime before the Major came in. Mr. Summers introduced him. As
he approached Mr. Villars, he started and stopped. "Excuse me, sir -- your
likeness is so great to a friend of mine, that was I not almost certain of his
death, I should think I now saw him before me." -- "You are not mistaken, my
friend," (...) Mr. Villars, his eyes swiming in (...); "and can I be so happy,"
replied the Major pressing him to his breast, "again to meet my Beverly!" --
"You see indeed the man who once was Beverly," returned Mr. Villars; "but, ah!
the trials I have met since last we parted!" -- The reader may easily imagine
the astonishment of Mr. Hargrave and Captain Bellmore, at the above
conversation: -- the former would immediately have gone to Mr. Villars's, and
discovered his intentions in his favor; but Miss Summers detained him.
"Consider," said she, "you are dependent on Lord Beauclair; and should you
disoblige him, by interfering in this matter, you may be deprived of his favor,
and not have it in your power to serve them. You will, no doubt, hear Mr.
Villars's story; you may then mention your connections with Lord Beauclair, and
your intentions, should the estate come within your possession;" -- "you are
extremely right, my dear Eliza," answered he: "I can at present do nothing; but
I feel exceedingly interested in their behalf." In the mean time, Major
Beaucamp was asking M^^* Villars many questions, as he had (...) him since his
Marriage. Mr. Summers said, "He hoped the long friendship subsisting between
Mr. Villars and himself, would excuse his begging to hear his story, Miss
Summers was the only person (...), acquainted with Mr. Villars's (...) Louisa
had related to her in confidence.
which he thought would be very interesting." "My history is a melancholy one,"
returned he, "and I believe will afford little satisfaction; though
notwitstanding I Will endeavor to recollect facts, that will tear open wounds,
time can never heal." Accordingly, as soon as the cloth was removed, Mr.
Villars began as follows:

MY father was the youngest son of an ancient family in Cumberland, of the name
of Villars. My grandfather, at an advanced age, married a widow of small
fortune; she had one daughter, who was very beautiful; and her mother possessed
of a great deal of art, soon made a match between her and my father's elder
brother. She had great ascendancy over my grandfather, and found means to
withdraw his affection from his younger children. -- My father and a sister of
twelve years of age, (...) sent to a boarding-school, and never allowed to come
home. At my grandfather's death, they found themselves thrown on the world,
possessed of a very few hundreds. -- Miss Villars took her father's usage so
much to heart, that she died not long after. -- She was in her eighteenth year
when this melancholy event took place. My father who was of a lively turn,
submitted to the caprice of fortune, and strove to be content: he had studied
the law, but did not pay such strict attention to it as he ought. -- When he
had entered his two and twentieth year, a brother of my grandfather's mother
died, and left my father an estate near Bath, of six hundred pounds a year;
with which he was to take the name of Beverly. He soon after married Miss
Louisa Herbert, a very accomplished young Lady, with a fortune of ten thousand
pounds.

A YEAR after their marriage, I was born; and in two years more, they received
a second addition to their happiness, by the birth of a daughter. -- Nothing
material happened during our minority, until I attained my nineteenth year. My
father paid the greatest attention to our education, (^^t imprudently lived to
the extent of his income.) My mother often remonstrated to little purpose; he
was not of a disposition to brook restraint.

AT that age, I left the university; my father intended me for the army, but my
mother would never consent to it; and was with difficulty prevailed on, to
consent to my making the tour of France and Italy, the ensuing year; which I
did, accompanied by my friend Beaucamp, and his worthy father; who acted as
governor to us both. -- Whilst abroad, I became acquainted with Lord Sidly, son
to the Earl of Beauclair. He was pleased to profess the greatest friendship for
me; indeed it was amply returned; -- and I shall ever sincerely regret his loss.

Mr. VILLARS stopped and wiped his eyes. "We stayed," continued he, (...) two
years abroad, and returned to(...). -- My father was chosen as a (...)ber for a
neighboring borough, (...) the winter after I returned, I accompanied him to
town; my first enquiri^^ were for Lord Sidly. He received me with great
cordiality, and introduced me to Lady Beauclair, the Hon. Charles Sidly, and
Lady Maria, his sister. -- I was great part of my time with Lord Sidly; and had
frequent opportunities of seeing Lady Maria. -- I was admitted to all their
parties; -- the friendly and familiar footing I was on (...) the family, (for
even Lord Beauclair seemed particularly attentive to me) made me forget the
difference of rank; and my heart aspired to this lovely girl. -- I sometimes
fancied myself not indifferent to her; but I still endeavored to conceal my own
sentiments, in company with her brother.

I ONE night attended her to the play; there happened to be a riot -- Lady
Maria was extremely frightened; and we were making our way through the crowd,
with an intention to ge(...)ut, when a man rudely caught her arm. This way
Ma'am, said he. Throwing herself in my arms, "Oh! sa(...) Beverly," exclaimed
she. I (...), and bore her to the car(...) which I placed her almost fainting.
(...) seated myself by her and ordered (...) carriage to drive home. Lady Maria
asked for her brother; I told her "we had left him at the theater; but if she
wished, I would return and seek him." -- "O, no!" said she, "do not leave me."
-- I pressing her hand to my heart, told her, I would wish never to leave her;
-- her head was still reclined on my shoulder. -- At these words she sighed,
and starting, withdrew the hand I pressed, saying, "excuse me, Mr. Beverly, I
have been exceedingly frightened." The coach now stopped, and I attended her to
the parlour. Lady Beauclair asked, "why they came home so soon, and what had
become of Lord Sidly." I related what had happened. "I have caused a great deal
of trouble to Mr. Beverly," said Lady Maria; "he was so good as to carry me a
considerable distance in his arms." I could only answer her by a look, which I
thought she understood. The day following, the Hon. Charles Sidly set out on
his travels. His departure afforded mutual concern, as he was to take the (...)
of Europe; and he was not expected to return in some years.

SOON after this, I returned home, I corresponded with Lord Sidly, but dared
not mention my beloved Maria, agreeable to the dictates of my heart. When the
bathing season came on, he wrote me, that he should soon wait on Lady Maria to
Bath, as she was in ill health, and begged me to procure him lodgings; which I
immediately did, and waited with impatience for their arrival. It was not long
before I received a card with the welcome intelligence. I flew to their
lodgings, Lord Sidly met me on the stairs, and expressed the greatest happiness
at seeing me. Lady Maria arose as I entered; she looked very pale and languid:
I begged her to be seated, and told her, "I was grieved to owe the happiness of
seeing her, to ill health." Lord Sidly soon left the room; -- I was thrown from
my guard, and said something of a more tender nature, than I had ever dared
before: she seemed much affected, but I thought not displeased. -- In the
evening, I attended my sister Caroline to her lodgings. -- They were equally
pleased with each other; and the next day we went to the rooms. The Ladies
prefered walking home; as it was but a very short distance, Lord Sidly gave his
arm to Caroline, and I offered mine to Lady Maria. We had not proceeded far,
when she said, "you know not how unhappy I have been, Mr. Beverly, since you
left us." She then told me, "that her Papa had encouraged the addresses of Lord
Winter; whom I knew was very disagreeable to her: that he had given her
positive orders to prepare to marry him. -- And had it not been for the
intercession of her brother, who had prevailed on him to allow her a little
time, she should e're this have been dragged to the altar." She said, "she
would rather die, than marry that deserted Lord, which she supposed she should
be obliged to do when she returned." This was like fire to my brain; though I
had no right to hope. Yet to see her sacrificed to a superannuated wretch, who
had nothing to recommend him but imm(...) was more than I could bear (...)
pressing the hand I held to my boso^^ "my beloved Maria," cried I, "this
cannot, this must not be." -- She sighed, but made no reply. We had now reached
the house: Lord Sidly insisted upon our spending the day with them. -- My
father waited on him the next day, and invited them to dine; they accepted the
invitation. That and many more days we spent together. I was no longer master
of myself: I declared my sentiments without reserve, and pathetically lamented
my hard fortune; I had the pleasure to find she was not displeased: but would
say, "O! Beverly, I am sufficiently wretched, do not add to my distress, by
making me think I am the cause of unhappiness to you."

THUS we had spent six weeks, when one evening at an assembly, we were accosted
by Lord Winter: he told Lady Maria, "he had just arrived from town; and as he
did not know where she lodged, he expected to have the pleasure of meeting her
there: and very carelessly begged her to go down the next dance with him. She
answered, "she should dance but little, and was engaged;" "who is the happy
person that usurps (...) right," said he, indignantly. "Very well my Lady,
perhaps I may not be allowed to wait on you home neither?" -- "Very probable,
my Lord," replied she. At that moment, the dance was called -- as I advanced,
she arose and gave me her hand; she trembled so exceedingly, she could scarcely
move. When the dance was over, seeing her very much flurried, I led her to a
seat, and called her brother and Caroline to her. I told Lord Sidly, the sight
of Lord Winter had affected her so much, she was near fainting. -- "Lord Winter
here!" said he: "Damn him, he will be the death of the girl yet."

IN the course of the evening, Lord Winter had learnt, "I was the only one that
had attended Lady Maria since her arrival at Bath: that she spent the greatest
part of her time at our house; in short, it was supposed, I was her favored
admirer." He advanced, and addressing himself to her, asked "if he should order
his chariot." -- She thanked him; but said, "she should return with her
brother;" -- Lord Sidly gave him a card, and begged the favor of his company so
dine the next day: he returned a slight bow, and retired to a little distance,
where he could observe who went into the carriage. -- I led Lady Maria to the
door; when Lord Sidly said, "Beverly I must see you tomorrow morning." -- I
went accordingly, and learnt Lady Maria had been so ill all night, she was not
able to come down to breakfast. "I cannot conceive," said Lord Sidly, "why my
father insists on sacrificing the girl for riches." -- "Oh! my Lord," cried I,
"do you know no way to save her?" -- He saw my emotion, but taking no notice of
it, said, "what can I do for her? cannot you advise me?" -- "I could, but" --
"but what," said he smiling, "I suppose you would advise me to get some clever
fellow to take her out of his way." -- "My Lord," said I, starting, "be not
amazed, would not you like to assist me in preventing this match?" -- "I would
willingly lose my life, to contribute to her felicity." "But if I Am not
mistaken, you must preserve your life, to make her happy." "Henry," continued
he, "I will trifle no longer. I have long seen the affection between you and
Maria; and with my parent's consent, no man on earth I would as soon call
brother -- but as it is, I cannot bear to see her wretched. I am sensible the
blame will fall on me, but I am better able to bear it."

I know not what I said to him; my extacy may more easily be imagined than
defined. I would have fell at his feet, and embraced his knees; but preventing
me, he said "if I acted like such a crazy fellow, he would not trust his sister
with me." -- He then left me, to go to her, with whom he soon returned; and
leading her to the sofa, said, Beverly, Maria is quite chagrined at Lord
Winter's not calling on her this morning; and I have recommended an hour's
conversation with you, to recover her spirits. So saying, he smiled and left
us. "Brother!" exclaimed she, with surprise: I flew to her, and folding her in
my arms, told her what had passed between Lord Sidly and myself. We now gave a
loose to the most endearing sensations, and for a time forgot the many bars to
our union.

WE had been nearly two hours together, when Lord Sidly returned; he seemed
thoughtful, and walked the room sometime without speaking; then turning to us,
he said Lord Winter had left Bath; that he had made particular enquiries
concerning me, and was heard to say, "Lord Beauclair should be acquainted with
his children's behavior." "What is to be done, Beverly?" continued he. -- I
told him, "I thought no time was to be lost; and begged him to let us set out
immediately for Scotland."

IT was accordingly determined, we should be off at four that afternoon. To
prevent suspicion, we were to go the first stage in Lord Sidly's chariot; he
had sent a trusty servant on, to provide a post-chaise. Lord Sidly and my
sister were the only persons in the secret; I took all the money I had by me,
which amounted to two hundred guineas. -- I left a letter for my father, which
I told Caroline not to give him, until the next evening, as we should by that
time be out of reach.

LORD Sidly, at parting, put a banknote of fifteen hundred pounds in Maria's
hand; she was very much affected, and said, "O, my brother! what will you not
suffer on my account." "If you are happy, my dear girl, I shall be amply
repaid." About nine miles from Bath, we took a post-chaise, and Lord Sidly's
carriage returned: honest John had provided relays at every stage, so that we
were not obliged to wait a moment. We had traveled all night, but the next
day, poor Maria was so fatigued, we were obliged to rest some hours. We arrived
without any accident. Maria bore the journey much better than I had expected
she would. We were immediately married, and took lodgings, as I thought it best
not to return directly.

THE report of our being eloped, did not spread in Bath, until the afternoon
following our departure. -- My father was extremely enraged; his proud spirit
could not brook my being despised, as he was certain I should be by Lord
Beauclair's family; and he made no (...) but his lordship would use all his
^^^^est to effect his ruin, (which was indeed (...) case.)

LORD Winter had no sooner arrived in town, than he waited on Lord Beauclair,
and told him, it was currently reported, that Lady Maria received the addresses
of Mr. Beverly, and Lord Sidly encouraged it. It is impossible to express the
rage of his lordship, on this information: he dispatched a servant to his son
with orders to return immediately, without mentioning the cause -- before he
received the letter, the news of our elopement and marriage, had reached town;
-- Lord Beauclair's rage was now beyond all bounds; -- he wrote to my father in
the most approbious manner; and also to Lord Sidly, in which he forbid him ever
to appear in his presence; that he forever renounced Maria; and was determined
never to hear any interposition in favor of either of them.

LORD Sidly was extremely distressed on reading his father's letter; he did not
think he would have carried his resentment to such lengths. -- He immediately
set out for London. Upon his arrival, he went directly to his father's: when a
servant said, he had orders to tell him he had no home there. -- He took
lodgings near, and wrote to his mother in the most affecting manner. -- After
writing a third letter, he received an answer, by Susan Artless, Lady Maria's
maid. -- This was much colder than he expected from her. She informed him, Lord
Beauclair was determined not to see him: and begged he would never mention her
disobedient daughter to her; that Susan should be ordered to pack up her
clothes and jewels, which should be sent to her; and desired him to let her
know, it was all she had to expect. Poor Susan wept bitterly, and begged she
might go to her mistress, which she soon after did.

THOUGH Lord Sidly had only seven hundred pounds a year independent of his
father, he was determined never again to seek his favor; but immediately
purchased a majority in a marching regiment, destined for the East Indies --
from whence he never returned.

HERE Mr. Villars stopped, from an incapability of proceeding. -- He after some
time thus continued: "Some weeks after our marriage, Susan arrived with my
wife's trunks, and a letter from Lord Sidly; he mentioned his going to India,
but said he would pay us a visit before he sailed. -- Maria and I had both
wrote to Lord Beauclair; and our letters had been returned unopened; she could
bear with greater fortitude, their cruelty to herself, than to her brother; it
most sensibly affected us, that he should suffer so much for us; he spent a
fortnight with us before he sailed, and seemed perfectly cheerful. -- He told
my wife to be entirely easy, on his account, that leaving her happy, would be a
great means of making him so. Soon after he left us, we received a letter from
him, in which he empowered me to draw upon his banker for two hundred a year,
until his return.

MY wife disposed of her jewels; the sale of which amounted to fourteen hundred
pounds; this we added to the present Lord Sidly had so generously made his
sister, and purchased a small estate in my father's neighborhood. But, alas! a
cloud was now hanging over our heads, which burst with all its force.

MY father had been obliged to mortgage his estate for several hundreds. Lord
Beauclair bought the mortgage, and immediately closed it; this heightened my
father's resentment against me; he had never been perfectly reconciled; he
said, he was convinced I should be his ruin. -- My wife proposed mortgaging our
estate, to clear his, but he would not accept of it. His was accordingly sold
for much less than the value. -- My sister was just married to Colonel
Montgomery, and went with him to Scotland. Had my father been prudent, he still
had sufficient to live comfortably; but his spirit was too great to retrench.

AFTER his affairs were settled, there were seven thousand pounds remaining,
which he placed in the hands of an eminent broker: took a house in Bath; and
lived as usual. -- A year after our marriage, my Maria presented me with a son,
whom we named Henry, after Lord Sidly.

HERE Mr. Villars ceased -- the tears flowed so fast, he was obliged to leave
the room; in a short time he returned, and thus continued: "When my son was
about six months old; Lord and Lady Beauclair came to Bath. One day Lady
Beauclair saw the nurse and child walking before my father's door, (for though
very much incensed with me, she was fond of my child, and would often send for
him.) -- She stopped, and asked whose child it was: when she was told, she
started and walked on; then returning, told the nurse to step into a milliner's
shop with her; she caressed the infant. "It is a sweet boy," said she. She then
took a gold medal, and tied it by a ribbon round the child's neck: the nurse
asked if she should tell Mrs. Beverly to whom she was obliged. She answered,
"it was not material." -- When the nurse came home, she acquainted my wife with
the rencounter. -- My poor Maria was near fainting; she knew the medal, and
found her mother was still determined not to see her. -- She, however, resolved
again to write, but they left Bath the next day.

MY father's affairs now became desperate -- his creditors pressed upon him,
and we determined to mortgage our estate, and send him relief as from an
unknown hand. We raised eight hundred pounds, which we sent, enclosed in a
blank paper. But, alas! we were only involving ourselves, without doing him any
service. His debts were to a much greater amount than we were worth, and I saw
him dragged to the prison without the power to assist him.

I applied to several of his friends in town, but Lord Beauclair had prejudiced
them against him. He suffered but a few months -- he was seized with a fever
that carried him off within a few weeks.

HOW can I express my feelings? -- I looked upon myself as accessory to his
misfortune. The creditors took possession of every thing: my poor mother
suffered in silence, and never reproached me; she soon went to Scotland to my
sister, as Col. Montgomery had pressed her to spend the remainder of her days
with them. She was scarcely gone, when Mr. Granville, the gentleman from whom
we borrowed the money demanded immediate payment. Lord Beauclair would not
appear in this; but I have been since informed, he persuaded Mr. Granville to
act in the manner he did.

I WAS now obliged to apply to a broker, and to give an exhorbitant interest.
It is needless to mention the many misfortunes that attended me in the course
of two years; I was obliged to sell my estate. I had now one thousand pounds
left; with which I still continued in trade, with a merchant in Bristol. Our
whole stock was now embarked in one bottom, and the fate of that was uncertain;
troubles seemed to thicken upon us; anxiety for my family (for I had now two
children) entirely depressed my spirits: but fortune had still greater evils in
store; we had been but three years married, when we received accounts of Lord
Sidly's death: this stroke was almost too much for my poor Maria; but heaven
supported her through it. He had left a will with her, which we opened, and
found he had made her his heir: I commissioned a gentleman to wait on Lord
Beauclair with a copy of the will; his Lordship flew in a violent rage, said
that "Lord Henry had been very imprudent, to allow us any thing while he was
abroad; that the will was a vile forgery, and I should suffer for it." He was
indeed as good as his word; for three days after, I received his answer and was
arrested for forgery.

I WILL not pretend to figure my astonishment, or my dear Maria's distress; we
did not imagine, notwithstanding Lord Beauclair's threats, that he would have
gone to such lengths. The unfeeling bailiff pulled my wife, who was just
sinking into my arms, from me, and inhumanly dragged me away as Great God!
shall I ever forget this scene or the cries of my little Henry, who was not
three years old." Here Mr. Villars was obliged to stop for sometime, and then
went on as follows:

"I begged the bailiff to be patient; that I was certain I could obtain bail."
-- He said, "he had orders to admit of none." -- We then proceeded to a close
uncomfortable gaol, where I was informed I was to remain until I had my trial.
-- Mr. Traffic (the gentleman with whom I had commenced but (...)haved with the
greatest friend(...) undertook to have the will proved; (...) unfortunately for
us, Sir William Hardy, one of the witnesses, was in India; the other, a Mr.
Scrip, an attorney, immediately absconded; we made the strictest search for
him, but to no purpose; and it was supposed he was well paid for his absence.

MY wife wrote a most pathetic letter to her mother, and received for an
answer, "That it was entirely out of her power to do any thing for her, unless
she would consent to part from me; on those conditions she would be reinstated
in their favor; that she would take her son under their own particular care;
and I should be released, on promising to quit the country immediately, and
never return; and that I should have a month to consider of it^"

THIS was sent by a servant of Lord Beauclair's, who told Maria, he believed
his mistress was compelled to write as she did; for she wept very much when she
gave him the letter. Maria answered it immediately; she said it required no
time to consider; that though she was determined to live and die with me, and
trusted to a just God, who knew my innocence, to see me righted; -- to be
reconciled to her mother, was her most earnest wish; but was grieved, it could
not be accomplished but on terms she never would consent to.

I HAD remained six months in gaol, during which time, Mr Traffic had received
accounts of our vessel having made a losing voyage. My wife took a lodging
contiguous to the gaol, and discharged the few servants we kept, except my
son's nurse, whose husband and child were both dead; and her attachment to my
son was so great, she said she would never leave us.

MY wife had one day, brought the children to see me; I was caressing them
whilst she leaned over me, the tears flowing fast down her cheeks, when the
door opened, and the Hon. Charles Sidly, (now Lord Sidly, who we had not heard
was returned) entered. Though he had not so much tenderness in his disposition as
his brother, he could not behold this scene unaffected. He tenderly embraced
his sister, said (...) was grieved to see us thus; and (...)ly wished the
affair could be cle^^^^ up." He said that Lord Beauclair had been more
exasperated against us since Lord Sidly's death, knowing that his unkindness to
him, which drove him abroad, was entirely owing to us: He begged we would keep
up our spirits; he did not in the least doubt the authenticity of the will,
(which we had shown him) and hoped we might have it (...) our power to prove
it. -- He seemed much amazed, when we informed him of Mr. Scrip's sudden
disappearance. At parting, he put a note of five hundred pounds in Maria's
hand, and said he would see us again shortly.

I NOW set about settling my affairs, as I was resolved to leave England, as
soon as I could procure my liberty. -- At the end of three weeks, Lord Sidly
arrived, with an order for my enlargement. He said he was sorry to own, his
father seemed unreasonably incensed against us; and he would advise me to leave
England, at least for a time. That I might depend upon his interest, though he
did not dare openly to espouse my cause. -- I told him, it was our intention,
as I had no wish to stay i(...) place, in which I had experienced so many rubs
from fortune. -- He then gave me a note for L. 400, and told me I might every
year draw upon him for the like sum, through Mr. Traffic; and if ever the will
could be proved, he should with pleasure resign the estate his brother left us.

WE now prepared for our departure; we took our passage in a ship ready to sail
for India. Mr. Traffic gave me letters to his friends in Madeira, as the vessel
was to touch there. We were just ready to sail, when we were informed, that
Lord Sidly was dead, occasioned by a fall from his horse; and that in his last
moments, he had beseeched his parents to remember their unhappy daughter. We
were now again overwhelmed with grief and despair; this shock had so great an
effect on my poor Maria's health, that we were near losing our passage. She,
however, exerted the utmost of her strength, and we went on board.

I LEFT Lord Sidly's will with Mr. Traffic, and a power (if it could be
proved,) to sue (...) the estate. I made no doubt, but Lord Beauclair's hatred
would still follow me; so thought it expedient to change my name to Villars,
which indeed was my real one; but as I never had received any of the estate of
Beverly, I was not obliged to keep the name. Our whole fortune, after providing
for our sea stores, amounted to no more than twelve hundred pounds. We took no
servant with us, but Mrs. Worthy, the nurse, and a girl that attended Louisa,
who was eleven months old.

THE fourth of June, 1766, we sailed. The weather was exceeding fine, and
continued so, till the next afternoon, when a gust suddenly came up. The vessel
rolled excessively, and my wife and poor little Henry were very sick. Mrs.
Worthy took him for the benefit of the air, on deck, but unused to the motion
of a ship, her head turned; she reeled, and fell overboard -- and I never saw
them more." -- Here Mr. Villars was for some time incapable of proceeding. "It
is needless" continued he, after it had recovered himself, "to describe our
distress on this occasion: the vessel immediately brought too, but the (...)
ran so high, it was impossible to save them. We saw two fishing boats at a
distance, but there could be no possibility of their taking them up.

MY wife continued in fits for many hours; after they left her, she remained in
a violent fever, and in her delirium was continually calling for her child; and
it was many days ever she became more tranquil. -- I now saw it was the will of
the Almighty to chastise us, and prayed fervently for fortitude, to support the
trial I was in all probability to go through. Our attention was now roused by
the illness of our little Louisa; who had been obliged to be weaned, during her
mother's illness; she was for many days so bad, that we did not expect she
would have got to Madeira alive. After a short passage we reached that Island;
I had letters to many of the principal Merchants there, which not long after
our arrival I delivered; and received the greatest politeness from them.

MY wife and child's ill health, determined me to stay in Madeira* I wrote to
Mr. Traffic, and informed him of my loss, and my intention of remaining at the
island, which I desired him to keep secret, as well as my changing my name. I
also enclosed letters to my mother and sister, whom I had not heard from in
some time; I placed my small stock in a principal house, and was enabled to
live tolerably well.

NOTHING material happened, during our residence in Madeira; except my wife
presenting me with another son, whom we called Edward, after my father. -- The
climate not agreeing with either of us; we embarked for America. We were now
possessed of about two thousand pounds sterling. "To you sir," addressing
himself to Mr. Summers, "I was recommended, and have received the greatest
marks of friendship from many gentlemen in this town. -- I have lived several
years comfortably; and had it not been for the recollection of past
misfortunes, I might say happily. -- Here my youngest son was born, who after
the Hon. Charles Sidly, we named Charles. -- At the commencement of the war, we
retired to the Village, where we now live, and endeavor in peaceful retirement
to be grateful to God, who has supported us through so many trials, and has now
placed us in a situation to enjoy the necessaries, and many of the comforts of
life."

Mr. VILLARS here ended his story; and the company expressed the greatest
obligations to him for his condescension. Mr. Hargrave, who could contain
himself no longer, and who had discovered visible marks of uneasiness, now
approached Mr. Villars, and told him "he was extremely happy to find the
family, whom most on earth he wished to see; and should ever think the accident
that drew him to his house, the peculiar work of Providence."

Mr. VILLARS seemed surprised, and begged him to explain himself. "You see
before you, sir," continued Mr. Hargrave, "an orphan honored with the ^^vor of
Lord and (...) Beauclair. I have been brought (...)er their care^ (...) of her
(...) within a few years, I never heard the name of Lady Maria; and was much
surprised to find it was uncertain whether she was still living.

I EVER after this looked on myself as an usurper; and determined to make all
possible enquiries for the person who had a prior right to favors, I was daily
receiving; and in case I should be so fortunate as to find her, to use all my
interest toward reconciling her to her family. -- Heaven has in one respect,
heard my prayer, and I beg I may be allowed to go immediately to Lady
Beauclair." -- "By no means, my excellent young friend," replied Mr. Villars,
"I cannot express my obligations to you for your generosity; but Lord
Beauclair's hatred against me and mine, is so deeply rooted, that you would by
interceding for us, only deprive yourself of his favor, without rendering us
any essential service.

HARGRAVE ^^id, he would be ruled by him, for the present, but if ever (...)
Beauclair's ^^^^e came in his possession, he should (...) deter him from doing
ju^tice. M^^^ obliging things were said on both sides, but it growing late, the
party separated for the night, after Colonel Rightly had engaged them to dine
with him the next day. Miss Summers delighted with the generosity of her heroic
Harry (as she often called him) retired, but not to rest, the drowsy god was
banished from her eyes, by pleasing reflections; she rose, and determinied to
spend the remainder of the night in writing to her dear Louisa, to whom she
gave a full account of what had passed. "Be happy my dear Louisa," concluded
she, "you will have a fortune that sir William Bellmore can have no objections
to, whilst I glory in bestowing mine on the man who so nobly prefers generosity
to affluence." It was very late before Miss Summers finished her letter, which
she dispatched early next morning.

AT two o'clock, Captain Bellmore and Mr. Hargrave attended the Ladies to Col.
Rightly's, as Mr. Summers had business that would engage him till late. The old
gentleman received them with his usual politeness, and passed many encomiums on
the generous behavior of Hargrave, in which all the company joined him. Mr.
Villars and Mr. Summers soon joined them, and the day was spent with the utmost
cordiality. Soon after dinner Mr. Hargrave went out of the room, and stayed
some time. Mrs. Summers, addressing herself to Colonel Rightly, said, "I dare
say our young friend has gone to pay a visit to his old nurse:" "No doubt of it
madam," replied he. He then informed Mr. Villars of the many particulars
relating to Mrs. Carely; "come," continued he, "we will pass her room, as if by
chance, and you will be more than ever delighted with Hargrave. I think he
never appears in a more amiable light, than when he is saying obliging things
to this poor woman." Mr. Villars then followed him. The room door was open;
they entered. -- "Harry," said Colonel Rightly, "I am going to ask Mr.
Villars's opinion of some curiosities in my greenhouse; will you be of the
party?" Mrs. Carely rose as they entered, on seeing Mr. Villars, she started,
and seemed very much astonished; Mr. Villars (...) equally struck. What is the
matter (...) said Hargrave, "do you know this good woman? "Oh!" said he, she is
so like -- He had no time to say more, she flew to him, and grasping his knees,
exclaimed, it is he -- it is he himself, and fell senseless on the floor. Mr.
Hargrave ran for water, while Col. Rightly assisted, to lay her on the bed.
Villars walked the room, in great agitation; the Col. and Hargrave were equally
astonished; both wished but dared not ask an explanation. An account of Mrs.
Carley's situation reached the rest of the company, who all immediately went to
her room; she at length opened her eyes, but seemed insensible who were around
her. Mr. Villars still continued walking, sometimes stopping and looking at
Hargrave, then at Mrs. Carley. -- Hargrave at length broke silence. "Sir," said
he, "if you were to speak to her, it might perhaps bring her to her
recollection." Oh! returned he^ grasping his hand, could I be but certain^^ a
disappointment would be too -- too much -- here a friendly shower of tears come
to his relief; the sound of his (...) roused Mrs. Carley from her (...) --
Where (...) is (...) said she, rising; can I once more behold my beloved
Master. "My dear Mrs. Worthy," exclaimed he, "where is my" --. He could not
proceed.

"I KNOW what you would ask," replied she: "there," pointing to Hargrave,
"behold and bless your son. -- Here, gentle reader, we must draw a veil over
the ensuing scene, which words are too weak to paint. Let the affectionate
Father -- the dutiful Son -- the sincere Friend -- figure to themselves the
happiness of this joyful moment.

Mrs. CARLEY was now sufficiently recovered, to tell Mr. Villars they were
taken up by a fisherman; that after much trouble and difficulty, she had
conveyed the child to his Grand-Mama, where he was brought up in ignorance of
his birth. -- When her spirits were more composed, she said, she would give him
all the particulars.

"AH! my dear Harry!" said Mr. Villars, "I can now easily account for my
feelings, when I first saw you. I then thought it proceeded from your likeness
to Lord Sidly; but it was (...) that pointed out my son. How thankful ought I
to be to Divine Providence, who by an unforeseen accident, has bestowed the
greatest of blessings on me."

CAPT. Bellmore now approached; and taking a hand of each, said, "he should
ever think the event that had nearly put a period to his days, the happiest of
his life, since it had been productive of so pleasing a discovery." -- "How
much am I obliged to my dear William for his generous sentiments," returned
Hargrave, "Heaven, for wise purposes, often chastises, to give us the higher
relish for the blessings he intends us. The day you mention, was to me the most
distressing; and it has proved the most fortunate of my life."

COL. Rightly now informed the Ladies tea was waiting. They then bid Mrs.
Carely good night, and returned to the parlour. -- After tea, the company
returned to Mr. Sommers's, and the evening was spent with the greatest
satisfaction. -- Mr. Villars, long a stranger to happiness, now confessed, that
thus unexpectedly meeting with his son, and finding him so amiable, amply
compensated for all the troubles he had met with. Though still his joy was not
complete until his beloved Maria was acquainted with, and a partaker of his
felicity. -- He then proposed they should set out the next day for --. This
Col. Rightly and Mr. Summers objected to, saving, it would be wrong to surprise
Mrs. Villars; and advised him to write and prepare her for their coming.

Mr. VILLARS consented, (though with some reluctance) to be guided by them; but
said his spirits were so much ^^^rried, he could not write. The sprightly Eliza
(whose vivacity had been clouded at the thoughts of her Henry's leaving her)
said she would with pleasure undertake the task if Mr. Villars would permit
her. -- The eagerness with which she spoke, plainly discovered the sentiments
of her heart.

Mr. VILLARS, at that moment, recollected the conversation that had ^^^^ed at
his house, when first Miss Summers was mentioned. -- He took (...) hand, and
smiling, said, "go, my (...) Eliza, write your friends the (...) that awaits
them and give them your opinion of my Henry." -- A deeper (...) now overspread
her lovely face; and, happy at having an opportunity to retire, she curtsied
and withdrew. -- She met Hargrave He is still called Hargrave -- as it was
^^ought proper Lord Beauclair should be (...) with the discovery.
in the passage and told him, she was going to write to Louisa. He begged her
to let him add a postscript. "I must tell my sister," added he, "my felicity
will not be complete, until I have made her amiable friend her sister." -- "Ah!
said Eliza, smiling, can I aspire to the grandson of Lord Beauclair?" --
"Aspire! my dearest girl^^ virtues like thine, merit much more than I have, or
can have to bestow. If I was so happy as to gain a small place in your esteem,
when I could not tell you on whom you bestowed that favor, let now the brother
of your Louisa plead for a confirmation of that happiness, he only dared to
hope for."

"HARGRAVE," said she, (resuming her sprightly air) "you surely forget I have a
long letter to write, and do you think I can write any thing coherent, after
you have been talking to me in this manner. -- But go and comfort Capt.
Bellmore, for I see his face amazingly lengthened since your journey to -- has
been postponed for a few days." -- "I will obey you," replied he, "for believe
me, next to the happiness I hope for with my beloved Eliza, the first wish of
my heart, is to see him happy with Louisa. He then left her, and went in search
of his friend, who was waiting for him with Mr. Villars.

Mr. SUMMERS begged the company the next day to dine, and proposed that good
Mrs. Carely should be there; as he supposed she had many interesting things to
relate; this was concluded on, and they wished him a good night. -- Eliza spent
part of the night in writing to Louisa; but, as the reader is already
acquainted with the purport of the letter, we will omit it, and return to Mr.
Hargrave; who, after wishing his Father a good night, returned to his friend,
whose bosom was torn between (...) and fears. His Louisa's promi(...) knew was
^cred; but the unce(...) of Mr. Villars ^avoring his (...) him wretched; he was
walking the room in a pensive manner, when his friend entered. -- "What,
William," said he, "ever thoughtful -- come, be cheerful, and be a partaker of
the happiness I ^ow enjoy. Your Henry is not the nothing, he once thought
himself." -- "I do^ indeed most sincerely rejoice in this unexpected
discovery," returned the Captain, "you know my heart -- I need not tell my
friend, that whatever gives him pain or pleasure, has the same effect on me;
how great then must be my satisfaction, to find him a member of so worthy a
family."

"I NEVER." said Hargrave, "was happy in my situation, though I experienced the
greatest kindness from Lord and Lady Beauclair. I ever looked on myself as an
usurper; and the idea of Lady Maria's sufferings were always in my mind. I had
heard of many things that my father related, and it was my determination to
find her, if alive; (...) Oh! William, what must be my feelings, to find that
injured woman in my Mother. -- I wish much to hear Mrs. Carely's account, for I
am convinced Lord Beauclair is ignorant of my being his grandson."

"BUT, my dear friend," said the Capt. "you mention nothing of your lovely
sister; shall I be happy, or forever miserable?" -- "Can you doubt my wishes to
see you happy?" replied Hargrave; "be assured no interest of mine shall be
wanting to make you so; and indeed I see no great difficulty -- you are sure of
Louisa's affection, and ought to be satisfied for the present." And do you make
no allowance for the impatience of a lover?" said Bellmore. "Indeed I do,"
returned he, "for I have experienced a great deal of it myself."

MUCH more was said on the same subject, and Hargrave had nearly persuaded the
Capt. to hope, and be happy, when the clock, by one stroke, reminded them of
its being time to retire. The next day, the company all assembled at Mr.
Sommers's; as soon as the clot(...) removed, Mrs. Carely was called up; she was
no sooner seated, than Mr. Villars begged she would ^^vor them with an account
of what befell her, after his fall from the ship. "Ah! sir, we met with many
difficulties; but since I am so happy as to see my dear young master with you,
I shall die contented." She then began as follows:

"YOU no doubt sir, remember master Harry was very sick, and I carried him on
deck for the benefit of the air; it was careless in me to walk so near the side
of the vessel. I know not what it was, but something struck me, and I fell
overboard; I clasped the child in my arms, and I believe for some time I
floated on the water; the first I remember was finding myself in a dirty
fishing-boat, with two men; they carried us to a shore which was not far
distant, and which they told me was the coast of Ireland. I was too weak to
walk, and one of the men supported me, while the other carried the child; they
carried me to a neat little house near the banks of the river, and the women
supplied us with dry clothes; the dear child seemed almost insensible to every
thing till the next day, he then cried very much for his Mama. The good woman
allowed (...) to stay several days, and then advised me to apply for a service,
which I did; but I could learn very little with the child. I had three guineas,
which I endeavored to keep, to pay our passage to England.

I WORKED a year in Ireland, to get myself and the child a few clothes; but
this I could not have accomplished, had it not been for the humanity of the
lady with whom I lived. I told her and no one else, who we were; and she
advised me to write to Lord Beauclair. This I did not as I knew it would be in
vain: but I wished much to go to England, and she was so good as to furnish me
with necessaries for the passage.

THE poor dear child had forgot to call on his papa and mama; and I would not
remind him of them, as I thought it best in our present situation, (...) call
him my own. When we arrived in Portsmouth, I had but two guineas left; I
intended going to Bristol, to Mr. Traffic, from whom I was in hopes to hear of
you and my Lady. I set out in a wagon. I met on the road a fellow servant,
that had lived with us at Bath^ I asked him if Mr. Traffic still lived (...)
Bristol; he said he did, but that he had left town for the summer. I begged him
to tell me if there was any accounts from you; he said he had been informed,
you had sailed for India; that the ship was lost, and it was supposed, all had
perished.

OH! Sir, I now indeed thought my heart would have broke. -- This very night
our dear child fell sick, occasioned by fatigue; we stopped at a small
farmhouse, and were obliged to stay there several weeks; the child remained
long sick, and had he been well, I knew not where to go; I had but one brother,
(and he lived in Wales) and no other relations that had it in their power to
serve me. The sickly looks of my poor boy prevented any one's hiring me; I was
reduced to my last crown, when a though it struck me, that if Lady Beauclair saw
the child, she might perhaps have compassion on him, as his parents were dead,
their hatred might be at an end: I thought she would know him by the medal,
which you recollect, Sir, (...) about his neck at Bath, and (...) had worn ever
since.

I determined to go to London, if I begged my way. I set out the next day,
carrying the child on my back, sometimes he would walk a little way. I sold the
best gown I had, and was enabled to hire a lodging every night. We at length
arrived in London; and I waited on Lady Beauclair, at a time I knew his
Lordship was out. I got admittance, and related the whole story to her
Ladyship; she at first thought me an impostor; but when I showed her the medal,
she wept exceedingly; "poor boy!" said she, "it is hard he should suffer for
the faults of his parents. Here nurse, added she, is six guineas, take a small
lodging nigh, and let me see you again, as soon as you have an opportunity." I
had thanked her, and was taking my leave, when the child began to cry. -- "What
is the matter with him nurse," said her Ladyship, "nurse." cried the child, "I
used to call her nurse, and there was somebody I used to call Papa and Mama --
but they are all gone now," said he crying, "and I have no friend left but my
poor mother here: will not you, madam, be my friend?" Th(...) affected her
Ladyship, she could scarce speak: "yes, indeed, I will." answered she, "but I
cannot see you longer now. Go home, nurse, continued she "and be sure you let
no one know whose child he is." I soon after took my leave. I went again in a
few days; her Ladyship asked me very particularly, if I had obeyed her orders?
I told her I had; she then told me she would see me in a short time in company
with Lord Beauclair, and that I must not contradict any thing she said. I the
next day was sent for, I was shown into my Lady's dressing room. She told me,
she wished to have the child in the house; and had mentioned him, as a poor
child she had taken a fancy to, and that I must most solemnly promise, not to
mention to the child or any one else who he was; or make any enquiry about his
parents. Though my heart recoiled at this promise, I was compelled to make it.
-- She then ^^t me, and returned to the (...) I was soon ^^er sent for. -- My
(...) soon entered. "Here, my Lord," (...)e, (...) is the little boy I
mentioned to you." -- "He is a fine fellow," answered he: "and I dare say if
you wish to take the child, his parents will have no objection; as it will be
greatly to his advantage." -- "His parents are dead," replied her Ladyship,
"and he has no one to take care of him but this good woman. -- "Then you had
better take her in your service, as the child will want a nurse," returned his
Lordship. -- I was now ordered to give up my lodging, and return immediately.
-- Oh, Sir! I though it my heart would have burst, to see the dear child taken into
his Grandfather's house as an object of charity; I believe my Lady read my
thoughts; for as soon as we were alone, she said, "you no doubt, nurse, think
it strange, that I do not own my Grandson; believe me, I would willingly do it;
but if Lord Beauclair had the most distant idea of his being Beverly's son, he
would never be prevailed on to see him." -- She then told me to call him Henry
Hargrave.

I WAS shown to a very genteel apartment near her Ladyship's: in this room were
two beds, one for my sweet boy^ and the other for myself. -- There (...) one
closet filled with genteel clothing for him, and a great deal of very good for
myself. The other was filled with a number of curious toys. -- I shall never
forget the joy he expressed in the opening of these closets; I had got all his
things down, and he was sitting in the midst of them, when her Ladyship
entered; he was so deeply engaged, he did not perceive her; she held up her
finger in token of silence, and stood for some time silently admiring him; he
at last saw, and ran to her; he took her hand and kissed it.

"AH, madam!" said he, "have you put all these pretty things here for me?" "Yes
my dear," answered her Ladyship, "and you shall have a great many more, if you
are a good boy." -- "Indeed I will be very good^ and love you dearly, if you
will allow it," said he. -- This seemed to affect her very much: and indeed it
was a long time before she could see him, unmoved. -- Her affection for him
seemed daily to increase, and my Lord ^^w very fond of him. Masters of (...)
kind were got for him, and my whole employment was to wait on this dear child;
and had it not (...) for the recollection of yourself and my Lady, I should
have (...) perfectly happy.

I SAW with pleasure the improvement of my little master; nothing material
happened during several years. Master Harry grew fast, and had every advantage
a young man of fashion could have. -- He passed for a distant relation of her
Ladyship's, and was beloved by every body.

ABOUT four years ago, he heard Lord Beauclair had a daughter, whom he had
disinherited; and it was uncertain whether she was still living. He seemed more
thoughtful, and would sometimes ask me questions that wrong my very soul; and I
was often remoted to break my promise; but fearing it might be a disadvantage
to him, I remained silent.

SOMETIME after the war broke out in America, he expressed a d^^^re to go into
the army. My Lord a(...) very much averse to it; but (...) him so anxious,
(...) a lieutenancy. -- Duri(...) stay at lord Beauclair's, I married Edward
Carely, his Lordship's Butler. My Lady was so very uneasy at Mr. Hargrave's
going alone to America, that my Lord, to make her easy, gave Edward twenty
guineas to enlist, and then procured him a halbert, that we might come out with
Mr. Hargrave, which we did; and both of us endeavored to be as serviceable as
was in our power.

BUT, alas! my poor Edward was shot at the defeat of Cornwallis; -- since that
time, I have still continued with Mr. Hargrave. -- The regiment had orders to
march one morning by the dawn of day: I went, as usual, to know if my young
master had any commands for me; when, to my great surprise, I found his bed not
tumbled. He was gone -- and I know not where to look for him. I made every
enquiry for him, but to no pur^^^e. -- The fourth day, I heard two ^^^icers
talking about him: they said, that Captain Bellmore was (...); and if Mr.
Hargrave (...) search of him, he would have (...) back, had he not been taken.
They then said, it would, they were afraid, go hard with him, as he would
doubt^^^^ be taken for a spy.

THIS terrified me to such a degree, I scarcely know how I got to the tent. --
I immediately took the little money I had, and a change of clothes in a
handkerchief, and set out I knew not whither. -- I thought I heard the
gentlemen say, he would be brought to this place. -- I enquired my way: and had
not proceeded far, before I was taken up and searched. They said, I had been
employed by the enemy to carry letters to disaffected persons, and gain
intelligence: this I positively denied, I told them the reason of my leaving
the camp, but was not credited. -- I was immediately put under guard, and after
some months confinement, brought here, where I must have died, had n^^ your
dear son heard of me, and come to my relief."

HERE the good woman ceased, a^^ the company thanked her for the (...)
formation she had given them. (...) Villars said he should ever ^^gard (...)
for the care she had taken of his son; and the extreme tenderness she had shown
him; he then said, when Col. Rightly could provide a person to take her place,
she should go and spend the remainder of her days with them, to which she
eagerly consented.

It was no^ concluded they should set out in a few days. As nothing material
happened during these few days, we will leave the gentlemen, and return to the
little cottage of Mr. Villars, where the charming Louisa was sitting at work
with her mamma. -- Love until now, a stranger to her breast, had robbed her
cheeks of its wonted bloom, and left a languid paleness, that rather added to
her charms. Mrs. Villars saw, with pain, the change; and had for some time
sought an opportunity to speak to her.

POOR Louisa knew a Peace between England and America was negociating; and
consequently, the (...) would be recalled. Though (...) never consent to a
clandestine (...), still she could not suppo(...) never again beholding (...)
William. -- Forgetting me was not alone, she sighed deeply. Mrs. Villars now
spoke: "what is the matter Louisa?" said she, "you are not well, I fear. -- A
conscious blush overspread her cheek; I am very well, madam, why do you think
otherwise?" -- "No, my dear Louisa," replied Mrs. Villars, "your heart is not
at ease; be not surprised, when I tell you I have long known the cause of the
change, which I grieve to see in your health.

LOUISA, ever used to make her mamma her friend and confidant, now threw
herself into her arms, and confessed her love, her promise to Captain Bellmore,
and all her doubts and fears. -- Mrs. Villars embraced her tenderly, and said
many affectionate things; which though she did not attempt to cherish her
hopes, was still a (...) to her drooping spirits. ^


SOME hours past in this (...) when Louisa received a letter (...) which gave
them (...) Hargrave's gener(...) before he was discovered to be the son of Mr.
Villars.

THEY had scarcely time to extol his disinterestedness, when Edward entered
with another, which contained the welcome news of the discovery. The joy of
this worthy Family may be more easily imagined than described. To find in so
fin^ ^ youth, the son, she had so long lost, was too much for the depressed
spirits of Mrs. Villars; and Louisa and her little brothers could scarcely keep
her from fainting. She at (...) recovered sufficiently to thank the Supreme
Being, who for wise purposes, had robbed her of her Son, and now blessed her
declining years, by returning him so worthy.

THE boys expressed their satisfaction in the liveliest manner, Louisa for a
time forgot the sorrows of her heart; and the voice of joy and gladness
resounded in this peaceful habitation. They passed three days in the utmost
impatience; on the fourth, which was (...) were expected Louisa, at^e^^ed by
her two brother, and several of the genteel people of the village, ro^^ out to
meet them. At the end of four mile^, they perceived them advancing. At the
fight of Capt. Bellmore, (who Louisa had not been informed was coming with
them,) the bridle dropped from her hand, and she was near falling to the
ground. A Miss Herbert, and her brother, who were nigh, supported her, and she
soon recovered, sufficiently to go on.

Mr. VILLARS was extremely pleased with this mark of attention in his
neighbors; the amiable Henry immediately dismounted, and flew to (...) sister.
"Let me assist you to ^light, my dear Louisa," said he, "you look ill; shall I
call for any assista^^^" "No, my dear brother, my spirits are only a little
flurried at this unexpected happiness," returned she. The company now all
advanced: The complaisance which was due to the brother on this occasion, could
scarcely (...) the Capt. from flying to (...) before her brother, who, after
(...) to his breast, (...) his friend, and r^^^^ned to his brother, (...) bring
about a reconciliation; for since Lord Beauclair's health has been declining, I
have had great reason to think something hangs heavy at his heart. This once
accomplished, Sir John Bellmore's consent to your union is certain."

Mr dear Brother," said Louisa, "in striving to reconcile the families, you
will ruin your future prospects." -- "No no, my dear," returned he, "I shall go
cautiously to work for all (...) sakes; keep up your spirits, and hope the
best: but do not mention my intentions to any one."

CAPT. Bellmore now approached; -- Henry, making an excuse, left ther^;
"William," said he, turning to Louisa as he went out, "knows my intentions, you
need be under ^o restraint with (...)." -- What an excellent Brother have I,"
said Louisa. -- "You know (...)gh his worth^^ returned the Capt. (...) then
told him the conversation ^^^ch had just passed. -- "Oh! my dear Louisa," said
(...), "he has not let you into (...) his views, he (...) determined to make us
happy." -- "You (...) so(...)." interrupted (...), "perhaps (...) to return.
-- My dearest (...)he, pressing (...) to his (...) nothing but death shall keep
me from you. -- I am obliged to ^o with the regiment; but (...) soon return."

LOUISA (...) with difficult refrain from tear^, the thought of their going was
too much for her. -- A conversation ^he most tender, ensued; and nearly two
hours past imperceptibly.

THE generous Henry was not unemployed at this time; he took his parents aside,
and, finding they were acquainted with the attachment of his friend and sister,
endeavored to gain their ^^^^^nt to their union. -- Mr. Villars said he had
(...) objection, if Sir John Bellmore's c^^sent ^^^^d be obtained.

HENRY told him ingenuously, that there was no reason to expect that with
(...)rtune; but he should endeavor to obtain it and (...)is F^^^^r (...)
faile^, not to oppose a union, (...) which the happine^^ of two people m(...)
depended.

Mr. Villars was so (...)ding th(...) Son (...) for (...) at length said, he
would do nothing to o^^ose their happiness. This was ^o nig(...) the son would
press no farth^^ but acknowledged it a particular favor (...) himself.

HE then returned (...) the lovers, and (...) them, as he was tired of seeing
long faces* he had been making interest to get them in bondage, since he found
nothing short of everlasting chains would content them; they both (...), but
could not comprehend him: (...) words explained himself. The gloom was
immediately banished from their countenances, and there (...) heart at the
cottage.

SEVERAL weeks were spent in the greatest felicity; when Mr. Hargrave received
a letter from Mr. Summers, in which he requested him to come immediately to
town, as he had received dispatches from England for him. He (...) prepared for
his journey, (...) but the (...) day; leaving (...), who was (...) as (...) his
Eliza, obliterated almost every other idea, and he arrived in town much sooner
than could be expected. -- Mr. Summers was gone out of town, and not expected
in less than two days. Mrs. Summers received him with the greatest cordiality,
and begged he would make her house his home, whilst in town; to this he
willingly consented -- and his time was spent entirely with his beloved Eliza,
excepting a visit to Col. Rightly, and the good Nurse, Mrs. Carely.

MR. SUMMERS at length arrived; and on seeing Mr. Hargrave, who advanced to
meet him, he bowed respectfully; and taking a letter out of his pocket,
presented it to him. Mr. Hargrave had requested (...) to open all his letters.
-- My Lord." said he, I beg leave to wish your Lordship joy of a title and
fortune, of which few ^re ^as deserving." He ^^^rted, turned pale, and let the
letter drop from his hand: Mr. Summers took it up, and again presented it to
him. -- "Be not surprised, my Lord." said he, Lord Beauclair ^^^ed to a good
old age, and died sensible of his error. -- Ah! then let me see the letter,"
said he eagerly; and wiping away the tears which flowed very fast, he opened
it, and read as follows:

"MY LORD,
"I AM desired by my Lady, to inform your Lordship, of the death of Lord
Beauclair; a copy of his will is enclosed. As you will be surprised at some
things you will see in it, she desires me to inform you, that you are her
Grandson, and your real name is Beverly. That on account of my late Lord's
dislike to your Father, she was obliged to conceal your name, and connections
with them. That for some time after your departure, Lord Beauclair seemed
thoughtful; and would sometimes mention Lady Maria, which he had before forbid
any person to do in his presence. That after he fell sick, he would often wish
for your Lordship; and one day asked my Lady, if she did not think you
resembled his son Henry

My Lady thought this a favorable opportunity; and by degre^ discovered your
birth. It affected him very much; he said, it was a just punishment on him, for
the unkind usage he had given his Daughter. He had lost both his Sons, had
educated his Grandson, who would have been an honor to any man in England, as
an object of charity; and in his last days, was denied the satisfaction of
seeing him. He immediately ordered an Attorney, and made a new Will; in which
he has acknowledged your Lordship his lawful Heir; reserving a very
considerable sum, in case Lady Maria Beverly, or any of her Family, can be
found.

FOR particulars, my Lady refers your Lordship to Mrs. Carely; as soon as her
Ladyship is more composed, she will write ^^m, she begs you will get leave to
come home immediately.

I am, my Lord, your Lordship's most humble servant. ADAM TRUSTY.


"Oh!" cried he, his tears flowing afresh, "had I been with him in his last
days! -- Providence, for wise purposes, had ordered it otherwise," said Mr.
Summers; "had you not come to America, you would, in all probability, never
have discovered the worthiest of parents." "True," answered he, "I must not
repine. I loved Lord Beauclair as a parent, though I only thought him a
benefactor, and to have attended him in his illness and to have administered
consolation to his afflicted mind, would have been a great satisfaction to me;
but I thank the Almighty who, by the most mysterious means, has led me to my
parents, and enabled me to make them happy in their decline of life." "Those
sentiments," answered Mr. Summers, "are worthy of yourself."

MRS. Summers and her daughter now rose, to (...) the accustomary compliments
to (...) Lord; after her mother, Miss Summers attempted to ^^ea(...)eart was
too full for (...); she thought him entirely lost to her; the (...) died (...)
on (...), and she would have sunk on the sofa, had he not caught her in his
arms, and turning to Mr. Summers, "On you, Sir, depends my fate, I cannot be
happy without your charming daughter; I often attempted to speak to you on this
subject, but my dependent state kept me silent; the fortune that awaits me, I
shall only prize in sharing it with her." Mr. Summers had for some time seen an
attachment between his young friend and daughter, and would never have been
averse to the match; but now to hear him speak in this manner, was quite beyond
his most sanguine expectation. "My Lord," said he, "I hope Eliza is sensible of
the honor you do her, nothing can give me more pleasure than such a
connection; though your fortune is more than she has a right to expect; believe
me, I esteem your virtues much higher, and should have been happy, had you put
it in my power to have convinced you, that my consent would have as freely been
given to Mr. Hargrave as to Lord Beauclair." "Oh! Sir," returned his Lordship,
"you have long since convinced me of your friendship; you now make me the
happiest of man; I will endeavor to merit, as far as lies in m^ power, the
treasure you have bestowed on me; her happiness shall be my chief study."

DURING the above conversation, Miss Summers retired to the window, to avoid
confusion; he went to her, and pressing her to his bosom, said, "my dear Eliza,
you say nothing." "You cannot, my Lord," returned she, "think me insensible of
the honor your Lordship does me." "This still from you, my Eliza -- I am still
your Henry, speak to me as you used to do, and I am happy." "If any thing I can
say or do will make you happy, believe me, you will never be otherwise. "Come,
come, my dear," said Mr. Summers to his Lady, "I see these young people seem to
understand each other so well, I believe they will dispense with our company."
So saying, they left the room.

LORD Beauclair told her, there was an absolute necessity for his going
immediately to England: and earnestly begged to have the ceremony performed
before he went. -- The thought of parting, drew tears from Eliza. She
consented, to his wishes; and it was concluded, the marriage should take place
as soon as Mr. Villars's family could come to town.

IT was late when they parted; Lord Beauclair, retired to write to Lady
Beauclair, as an opportunity offered for England. He wrote to her in the most
affectionate manner, giving her a full account of his meeting with his parents,
his engagements with Miss Summers, and his intention of soon returning; he said
nothing of a design he had of persuading his father and his family to return
with him to England, lest he should fail. -- He spent the next day with his
Eliza, and the following set out for --, where he soon arrived.

MRS. Villars bore the death of her father, with greater resignation than her
son expected; his having mentioned her with kindness in his last moments.
seemed a great consolation. "He (...) forgiven me!" exclaimed she, clasping her
hands, "he no doubt, blessed me with his dying breath! and I am happy; my
mother too! could I once more throw myself at her feet."

"YOU shall, my dearest madam," answered Lord Beauclair; it is my earnest
desire that we will return to England." -- "What," said Mr. Villars, "go to a
place where I have never experienced any thing but trouble." -- "Every comfort
awaits you now, my dear Sir; -- If the fifteen thousand pounds my Grandfather
has left my Mother, is insufficient, as much of my fortune as you wish to make
use of, is entirely at your service."

AH! my Henry, such a Son as you are, can be refused nothing. Fifteen thousand
pounds is much more than we want for your Mother; and I will never alter our
manner of living. If we go with you to England, we must insist on living
retired." In this he was joined by Mrs. Villars.

THEIR amiable son took a hand of each. "You shall live as you please, (...)
dear Parents," said he, "only let me have the happiness of having you near me."
He then informed them of (...) to her chamber, to (...) They all advanced (...)
the young Lord. (...) down the cheek of the gentle Louisa, her ^^ther's good
fortune, was (...) by the death of her Grandfather; who, unkind as he had been,
she was always taught to rev^^e: "come my dear Louisa," cried her Brother, "be
cheerful; what do you say for a trip to England." "Ah!" said she, looking at
her Father. "True," said Mr. Villars, your brother has even persuaded me to go
(...) then turned her eyes on the Captain, who was in an extacy -- "my dear
Henry," said he to him in a low voice, "you are the (...)," Louisa and her
Brother (...) much satisfaction (...) going to (...).

(...) of the amiable Henry. The (...) of their qui^^^ng the place was soon
known; a (...) sincerely regretted. A gentleman whose lands joined Mr. Villars,
purchased the farm; and preparations were made for ^^^ir rem^^^^^; which was
accomplished in (...).

LORD Beauclair, (...) wrote to (...) Summers, to apprize her of their ^^^ning:
they had a short passage, (...)ed, amidst the congratulations (...) friends.
Mr. S(...) insisted on their make(...) house (...) home, during their stay
(...)wn. (...) Mrs. Carely, immediate(...) Mrs. Villars; she threw herself at
(...) feet, and bashed her hands with h(...). Mrs. Villars was very much
affected, she wished (...) ask her (...) purpose ret(...) to her chamber.

SOON after they arrived (...) made for the (...) of Lord Beauclair and Miss
Summers, which took place (...) The (...) and flounced with a silver net; (...)
with bunches of white roses. and lillies of (...); her fine dark hair,
undisguised by (...), hung in ringlets (...) her neck (...) her head, she wore
a sprig of lillies of the valley, and a white leather.

LORD Beauclair looked remarkably well; he was dressed entirely in his
regimentals, excepting a white satin ^est, trimmed with silver lace. Louisa
appeared (...) beautiful. Capt. Bellmore, who had recovered his spir(...) the
(...) hopes he now enj^^^d, was rema^^^^^^ cheerful, which made (...) appear
^^^ticularly to Louisa) m^^^ charming than ever (...) place, it was (...) for
them to obtain leave to return home

PREPARATIONS (...) made for the (...) a few weeks they were (...) for England.
-- (...) Beauclair felt (...) reluctance a(...) nothing but the extreme
affection she had for her Lord, could erase.

THE fleet being ready to fall, they embarked; -- Mrs. Carely again entered her
beloved Mistress's service -- Mr. Summers returned home with his family, and
though they parted with the^^ daughter with reluctance, they were happy to see
her so well situated. The passage was pleasant, they spent the time ^^^pily,
and arrived in perfect health, the first week in September.

WHEN they arrived in London, Lord Beauclair took lodgings not far from Lady
Beauclair, as he wished to prepare his Grandmother for the interview she so
little expected. Mrs. Villars would (...) have flown to her mother, but ^^e was
persuaded to re^^^^in her impatience for a short time. Lord Beauclair sent to
inform her of his arrival, and his intention of waiting on her immediatel^^ The
old Lady (...) him with emotion; "Oh! my (...) she, (...) more (...) to (...)
these a(...) -- (...), can you (...) me? ^an you (...) your (...) Grandfather,
for the ^^^kind usage your (...) has received, and our bringing you up in
ignorance of your birth? -- "Dear madam," said he, "I have nothing to forgive;
you have been a parent to me, all happens for the best; had I known my birth, I
might not have gone to America, and consequently have never found my Parents."
"Oh!" said she, "heaven directed you to them: my poor Maria! shall I ever
behold her again -- but she cannot wish to see me." "Your Ladyship is
mistaken," returned (...) wishes nothing so much as to throw herself at your
feet, and crave your blessing." Ah! how (...) would I gi(...) poor Beverly^ how
hardly he has been used too.

AFTER some time, Lord Beauclair told her of his marriage, and of his parents
having returned with him. She seemed in an extacy; she would (...) allow him to
(...) a moment, but insisted (...) bringing (...) all to her (...)
according(...) Lady's spirits had been so (...)equal: the task of meeting the^
all together, but desired to see her daughter alone; the meeting can be ^^^^er
imagined than described; they remained some time together, and then joined the
company: as Lady Beauclair entered, she ^^^rned to Mr. Villars; "Mr Beverly,"
said she, holding out her hand, "we have used you unkindly; can you forgive?"
-- "Madam," replied he; "the happiness I now enjoy, compensates for all past
troubles." "I would not blame our departed friend," said she, but believe me, I
always wished to be a friend to you, had it been in my (...)." Mr. Villars
^^^ged she would think of nothing that had pa(...) give him leave to introduce
his children to her; (...)ing, he took Lady Beauclair in one hand, and Louisa
in the other; and led them to her Ladyship, who received them in the most
affectionate manner^ Lord Beauclair presented his two brothers, and his friend.
After a considerable time, Lady Beauclair, addressing herself to Mr. Villars,
asked him why he had hanged his (...) and how he wi^^ed to (...) not my house,"
continued she, "large enough for us all? If not, Hampton-(...) (...) Ladyship's
Country (...).
is at your service."

HER first question he evaded; as (...) did not wish to revive disagreeable
circumstances but as little as possible. "With regard to my settling," said he,
troubles in early life -- She sighed; "excuse me, Madam -- troubles have
imbibed in us a love of retirement; and any other way of life, I feel, can
never make me happy." "You shall live as you ^^^^se," replied her Ladyship;
"but you would not wish to retire from your friends^" "By no means," answered
he, "I should prefer a snug place in the country, where I could always enjoy
myself and be happy with my friends."

THEY all approved his choice: and it was concluded, that they should (...)
with her Ladyship; and Lord (...) in a few days (...) his father in looking for
a place to (...) Capt. Bellmore would (...)turned to his lodgings, but the
(...)ly would not allow him.

THE next day, he set out for Portland Grove, his Father's country seat. He had
not an opportunity of speaking to Louisa in private, but at parting, put a
letter into her hand, filled with the most lasting professions of love, and a
promise to see her again in a short time. After taking a polite leave, he
mounted his horse, and rode off.

THE old Lady saw the trembling tear in the languid blue eye of Louisa, which
followed him until out of sight; and her pretense to quit the room, did not
pass unobserved.

"MY dear Eliza," said Lady Beauclair, "has not this handsome Captain made some
impression on the heart of your sister!" -- "Why does your ladyship think so?"
"I think I see it," said she; it is not from curiosity, but I have heard Sir
John Bellmore has made engagements for his Son, with Sir Danvers Lovemore, who
has an only Daughter, whose fortune will be forty thousand pounds.

"AH!" said Eliza, wh(...) heart caught the alarm for he^^^^e, and "my dear
madam, do not me(...) to Louisa -- it is then as I feared, cried the old Lady,
"if this is the case," answered Lady Beauclair, "they are the most unhappy
people on earth."

MRS. VILLARS and Louisa just entering, put a stop to the discourse. Louisa
perceived her friends countenance change, "What is the matter, my dear Eliza,"
said she, "are you not well?" "O yes," replied she, "only a little vaporish; I
will go and look for your Brother, and we will take a walk in the Park:" so
saying, she quitted the room. "Indeed madam, said Louisa," turning to her Mama,
"my sister is not well; I had better follow." "You are a good girl, Louisa,"
said her Grandmother, I believe your fears are without foundation." -- Louisa,
sat down; but seemed very uneasy.

LORD Beauclair soon came in leading his Lady, who had on her hat and gloves.
"Come Louisa," said he, Eliza wishes to walk in the Park this morning; get your
hat." She rose immediately, and accompanied (...)y had not walked far, before
(...) past two Ladies; one most superbly dressed, and very much affected,
hanging on the arm of the other; and talked so loud, that the conversation was
plainly heard by Lord Beauclair and the Ladies, "Lord, my dear," said the
affected Lady, "it is monstrous to walk (...) without a Beau; why does Sir
George leave us?" "He will return directly, said the other -- but is not your
intended returned from America?" "No, I believe not," replied she carelessly;
"I am very easy about it, I assure you." -- "Why," returned the other, "he is
very handsome, they tell me." -- "Aye, but he has no title; its a freak of
Papa's, because there is a good deal of money. But, upon my life, I had rather
have Lord Boquet, with his small fortune."

"But, my dear," said her friend, you are not acquainted with this handsome
young Captain. -- "True; but they say he is as grave as a Methodist Parson; a^^
would you believe it, he would as (...) as a card." At that moment, a gentleman
joined them, and they (...)another way.

"WHO can that affected creature be?" said Lady Beauclair. -- "A Miss
Lovemore," replied my Lord: A fantastical fool, with a great fortune; I suppose
some miserly fellow has been making a bargain with her father to increase his
son's riches, at the expense of his peace." "I am sure," said Louisa, "I should
sincerely pity the man that is sold for a fortune, to such a creature." -- "You
would indeed have thought so, Lady Beauclair, if you knew who it was."

SHE had told his Lordship, what (...) Grandmother had told her, (but did not
mention the name, as it had escaped her memory.) He would not credit it, but
laughed at it as an idle report. This conversation, however, convinced her of
its truth, and she was happy to find the Lady so indifferent. As soon as an
opportunity offered, she mentioned it to his Lordship, who now began to think
seriously of the matter, and to form schemes to serve his friend; where we will
leave him, and return to Captain Bellmore, who arrived at his father's gate
just as he was returning from riding.

"MY dear William," said he, "how glad I am to see you. I intended writing to
you by the next packet." -- "I am ^^^py, Sir," replied (...) "to have saved you
that troube. They now entered the house; his mother and sister received him
with the greatest joy. Sir John seemed in high spirits, and often ^in^ed having
something of consequence to impart to him.

THE next morning, Miss Bellmore ^^^^owed her brother into the garden. -- "I
come, my dear William, to prepare you for a disagreeable piece of intelligence,
which you will no doubt soon hear." -- She then briefly informed him of the
engagements his father had formed for him.

HE stood like one amazed: at length "my Augusta," said he, "whatever (...)
views my Father may have for me, I call my God to witness can ^^ver be
fulfilled." -- "Hush! William, you know my Father is arbitrary."

CAPT. Bellmore then informed his Sister of his attachment to Louisa; and his
positive determination to marry no one else. -- The gentle heart of Miss
Bellmore was pai^^^ from the first mention of this affair: how much m^^^ did
s(...) for him, when she found his aff(...) were engaged. She once had loved a
worthy object; and but for the unbounded avarice of Sir John ha(...)en happy.
Her tears flowed too (...), (...) brother's situation remin^^^ her of her own.
She wept for bo(...) and, waving her hand in silent ang^^^^, left him" and
Capt. Bellmore returned to the house with a heavy heart.

AT breakfast, Sir John told him, he had something of consequence to mention to
him: and desired him to follow him to his study; in a few words, Sir John
informed him of the engagements he had made, and desired he would immediately
fulfill them. -- His son, in vain, endeavored to ^emonstrate with him; he gave
him only two days to consider of his proposal; and if he would not consent to
marry Miss Lovemore, he should immediately sail for India, and there stay until
he found himself disposed to obey.

HIS son now told him, his affections were engaged to a Lady, whose connections
were far more noble than Miss Lovemore's, and whose fortune, though not so
large, was very handsome. His ^^^^er replied, "has he known it (...) might,
perhaps, have considered of (...); but his word was given to Sir Danvers; and
he (...) determined to be (...) pleasure; so saying(...)ut of the room.

CAPT. Bellmore threw himself on the sofa, and gave a loose to tears he could
not restrain. -- Lady Bellmore came to him, and taking his hand, said, "my dear
William! compose yourself." -- "Madam," cried he, sister, "my father has given
me two days to consider of his h^^ed propos^^^ -- there needs not (...) tell
him, I will leave the country if he insists upon it; for never, never will I
consent to this detested mar(...) so saying, he left the room, or(...); and,
after bidding his brother and sister (who entreated hi(...)) adieu, he (...)
out for London

SIR John (...) violent rag^, when he heard of his son's determination and
departure. -- Lady Bellmore went, and begged him to break with Sir Danvers, but
in vain.

WHEN Capt. Bellmore arrived in London, he waited only to dress, and flew
immediately to his Louisa. His pale and altered countenance, directly informed
her something had happened.

THERE was a great deal of company when he arrived; and he had not an
opportunity of speaking to Louisa, until the evening. "What is the matter?"
said she; "you are ill, or something has troubled (...)." -- "Oh, (...) my
beloved Louisa! we must part! I must leave you -- perhaps for ever."

SHE heard no more, but fell senseless in his arms; at that instant, Lord and
Lady Beauclair entered. -- O^ my fri^^d, said the unhappy William, "(...)uma^
(...) will be the (...) of us both." -- "I know how (...) replied his Lordship;
"I ^^^^^ed this (...), but endeavor to be (...) may (...) well."

CAPT. Bellmore heard him not; he clasped his lovely burden to his (...) Lady
Beauclair was endeavoring ^^^^^^ng her to ^^^e. Mrs. Villars and her mother now
entered; Bellmore seemed not to see them; but, ba^^ing the hands of his Louisa
with his tears, said, "would to heaven, my angel, thou had let me die in the
American forest; we then had both been happy.

LOUISA then looked (...) "Ah!" said she, wildly, "they have taken him away; he
is gone -- he is gone." -- "No, my life," cried he, "I am here; and if you can
take a beggar to thy arms, will never leave thee.

THE old Lady seemed very much affected. "These hearts," said she, (...) not be
parted. -- Mrs. Villars, (...) fright had tendered her in almost the same
situation with Louisa, now advanced toward her. "Louisa" said she, "you must
go and lay down; you will be better presently." -- She rose and followed her
Mama, giving (...) Bellmore, who stood motionles(...) took of infinite
distress. The Ladies all went with Louisa, for whom they we(...) apprehensive.

LORD Beauclair attempted to comfort his friend. "William" said (...), "you
have no resolution, why (...) (...) down; we have heard of you(...) design, and
have the pleasure to (...) you the Lady has not m^^^ inclination to fulfill the
engagement, than yourself. He then related the conversation they had heard in
the Park. This afforded some consolation to his depressed spirits; and he
consented that Lord Beauclair should endeavor to persuade Miss Lovemore to
refuse him.

ELIZA now entered in tear^; she said Louisa was very ill; that she made no
answer to any thing that was said to her; that Lady Beauclair and her Mama,
desired Capt. Bellmore would go to her, and appear to be quite composed; they
both followed her to Louisa's room: Lord Beauclair approached the bed, and
affecting a lively air; "what is the matter Louisa," said he? "Brother,"
answered she, wildly; William is gone -- he said he must leave me for ever;" --
"you mistake," replied the Captain -- "your William is here." He then
approached, and threw himself on his knees by her bedside; here I am, my love;
no force on earth shall hear me stop you^^ "Why did you say, we must part
then?" said she. A flood of tears now came to her relief, and she seemed
better. "Tell me, William," exclaimed she; "what has troubled you," -- "when
you are more composed, my life, answered he, "I am much better now," said she,
raising herself on the bed. "My dear sister," cried Lady Beauclair; "you must
ask no questions to night, it is late; tomorrow you shall be informed of what
you wish to know." Capt. Bellmore, after folding her in his arms; and swearing
no force on earth should constrain him to leave her, took his leave. Lord
Beauclair was obliged to do the same, as his Eliza would not be prevailed on to
leave her friend that night.

THE old Lady, and Mrs. Villars had left the room, when they found her reason
returning, lest their presence might be a restraint. As soon as the Captain
left the room, they returned, and finding her so much better, wished her a good
night, and left her with Lady Beauclair^

LOUISA rose with the sun, and stole from her sister, who had just fallen in a
deep sleep. She went to the saloon where, as she expected, she meet Capt.
Bellmore, who had no more inclination for sleep than herself. "My dear Louisa,"
said he; "why will you rise so early; you have no regard for your health." --
"O!" I am quite well; you must now tell me what has happened, I cannot bear
this suspense." He then led her to a settee, and briefly related what the
reader is already informed of. She heard him with a tolerable degree of
composure. "So," cried she, with a sigh; when he concluded, "you had determined
to obey him." -- "But partly my love; could I expect my Louisa would marry a
beggar! -- My determination was to go to India, and endeavor to acquire a
competence, which, if I succeeded in, to return to you -- if I failed -- to die
in a foreign country."

"COULD you consent to leave me?" said she, the tears starting from her eyes:
"Easily, my Louisa," tenderly pressing her to his bosom; "Heaven knows the
conflicts of my heart; your discerning eye perceived it. The tender manner in
which you asked the cause, threw me off my guard, and I absolutely uttered
words that so much affected you: But, Oh! my Louisa, to find myself so dear to
you, compensates for all I have met with."

JUST now Eliza entered, and rallied Louisa severely, for giving her the slip.
She imagined Capt. Bellmore had related his story to her, and was happy to see
her so composed. They were soon summoned to breakfast; Louisa seemed much
confused at meeting the rest of the Family; but her indisposition was slightly
touched on; and the conversation changed to a different subject.

LORD Beauclair thought no time like the present, and went as soon as dressed,
to wait on Miss Lovemore; he sent up his name; she had seen him, and had heard
of his new acquired title, and flattered herself, his Lordship would be added
to the train of her admirers, as she had not heard of his marriage; she (...)
him waiting sometime, in order to (...) new luster to her charms, by a
preposterous dress, rouge, etc. etc.

SHE at last came swimming into the room, with such an air, that his Lordship
could with difficulty, keep his (...) in order. After some conversation, too
trifling to relate, he mentioned Capt. Bellmore, and the connection which he
heard was to take place. "O Lord," I hate these made up matches; I am certain I
shall detest him, and my Father need not think I will ever consent to the
match."

LORD Beauclair said he was happy to see her so averse to it, "for," added he,
"the Captain, though he is a fine young man, is much too grave for you -- a
person of your life and spirits, would suit much better with a man of the Bon
Ton." "You do me honor, my Lord, I assure you I will never marry Capt.
Bellmore; I cannot abide the thought of a husband, whose grave looks would
always be giving one lessons of morality; they tell me, he does not touch
cards." O no, Madam; when he is from (...) regiment, he spends his time in
reading and writing lo^^ sonnets (...) the favorite of his heart, or perhaps
(...) a social hour where (...) perhaps never thought (...) heaven defend me
from such a (...) with an affected (...) shall give him a positive refusal, the
first time he comes." -- "Upon my word, Madam if that is your intention, I
think you had better put an end to this affair, by writing to him; and by so
doing, bring it to a more speedy conclusion; as the young man, after having the
pleasure of seeing you, and finding you so fascinating, may not so readily
resign you."

"OH! you have hit it," said she, "I will positively write to him. I told Papa
yesterday, I was determined not to marry him, unless he would purchase him a
title; but I knew the old gentleman was too fond of his money to do that. Will
you do me the honor, Madam, to be the bearer of the (...)

SHE consented, and flew to write; (...) soon returned, and presented a letter
to his Lordship, though he had said nothing to make her imagine him her love^^
She seemed much disappoin^^^, when he took leave; she, however, com(...), with
the thought of (...) (...) Bellmore, who read as follows:

"SIR,
"YOU have, no doubt, heard that our fathers have very wisely designed a match
between us; as I am entirely averse to it, I hope you will not give yourself
the trouble to wait on me; as my determination is ^^^ed, I beg you without urge
any thing to alter it: I never can, or will, be any thing mo^^ to you, than

SIR, Your humble servant, JULIA LOVEMORE.


THE Captain folded (...) deal of ^^^ersion: the next day Capt. Bellmore set
off (...)ther^^ When he (...), Sir John was out, his Mother and Sister flew to
welcome him; are you returned (...) happy, said they; "I hope so, Madam,"
returned he. He then showed his mother the letter; at that instant Sir John
entered; "well, William," said he, "are you returned to a sense of your duty."
He made no answer, but put the letter into his hand; he frowned: "damned
nonsense," cried he? "what are her whims, to Sir Danvers and my engagements?"
"what a life do you think Sir, two persons so averse to each other could lead;
besides, I have heard Sir Danvers will not thwart his daughter's inclinations."
Well, well, if Sir Danvers has a mind to let this foolish girl rule him, I am
willing to let it drop."

AUGUSTA had told lady Bellmore, of her brother's attachment to Miss Villars,
and th^^ it was more than probable she would have a genteel fortune, Lady
Bellmore had mentioned it to Sir John, which was the reason he (...) so easily
persuaded to relinquis(...).


