MEDICAL ADVICE; CHIEFLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION of SEAMEN: AND ADAPTED FOR THE
USE OF TRAVELERS, OR DOMESTIC LIFE.

CONTAINING PRACTICAL ESSAYS ON Diseases in General -- with plain and full
directions for their prevention and cure: Gunshot Wounds, Fractures,
Dislocations -- and on the Venereal Disease.

EXHIBITING A CONCISE VIEW OF THE MOST APPROVED PRACTICE IN MEDICINE.

BY William Burrell; Who prepares Medicine Chests, carefully suited to this
Pamphlet.

For want of timely care Millions have died of medicable wounds. Armstrong.
Dedicated to the Chamber of Commerce.

NEW YORK: PRINTED for the AUTHOR -- by R. WILSON. 1798.

TO THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE, OF T^^ CITY OF NEW YORK.
GENTLEMEN,
THE importance of the subject which I take the liberty to dedicate to you,
particularly that part relative to the treatment and prevention of Yellow
Fever, and other Diseases which have their origin, and are in general
denominated contagious, has engaged the attention of several learned and
ingenious men, who have attempted to devise means to remedy the evil, with a
penetration and zeal which must ever do them honor. It will not, I trust,
therefore be deemed presumptuous in me, to collect those important and valuable
discoveries together, so as to make them more universally known, and their
application more generally and extensively useful amongst that class of men,
who have not at all times an opportunity of calling in medical aid. In
confidence that the utility of the measure; its connection with the health and
comfort of those valuable citizens, who brave the danger of the seas, encounter
various hardships, and are exposed to the diseases of unhealthy climes, to
procure the conveniences and luxuries of the different parts of the globe, will
entitle me to your candid attention; and those readers who feel an interest in
whatever may contribute to the removal of misery.

THE following pages are particularly presented for your consideration, with a
view of supplying these defficiencies, which are too obvious in publications of
this nature.

I am, Gentlemen, with the utmost deference and respect, your humble Servant,
WILLIAM BURRELL.

PREFACE.
DAILY experience affords such numerous and melancholy instances of the fatal
effects of contagious diseases, and others more immediately within the power of
medicine to remove, as render every attempt to mitigate their violence
interesting to the Community at large, and the United States in particular. It
is scarce necessary to place before our Readers facts, in order to excite their
attention to the subject: Lately in this country, calamity itself has been the
constant complaint of every neighborhood; and almost every news-paper presents
us with an example of the direful consequences of infection. From this
malignant source it is, that the late awful and melancholy events in our cities
are principally to be attributed, and that our ships become scenes of
execution; -- the enterprising Mariner -- the hardy Soldier -- the industrious
Citizen (all entitled to the care and gratitude of a mercantile and rising
republic) are daily victims to the unsuspected influence of contagion.

IN contemplating the subject of noxious vapors, it struck me forcibly that
some service might be rendered to the public, and considerable improvements
made by turning my attention to the subject of medicine-chests for naval,
traveling, or domestic use, particularly the former, by pointing out the means
that are known by repeated experiments to possess the power of destroying
contagion, cleansing infected substances, and preventing the propagation of
diseases, which I have never seen sufficiently attended to in any book of
directions of this kind; besides the discovery of the means for that purpose,
which are communicated in the following sheets, are of a very recent date, and
not yet generally practiced.

WHAT avail the noblest remedies that nature and art have produced for the cure
of those dreadful maladies, without devising and applying means to destroy the
Fons et origo mali, (fountain and origin of evil,) and restore the purity of
the atmosphere in which the patient breathes, by removing the causes which
might subject him to a fatal relapse. -- Dr. Lind observes, "Wherever infection
lurks, and in whatever it is harbored, the admission of the purest air, or the
most perfect ventilation will often not avail either in removing or abating its
activity." It is to the persevering and unremitting attention to the best
interests of mankind, that we are indebted to the ingenious Drs. Carmichael
Smith, Priestly, Ingenhouz, Beddoes, Mitchill, and others of great eminence;
particularly the former gentleman for his important discovery, for arresting
and stopping the progress of contagious diseases, by a simple operation in
chemistry, which is in the power of every one to perform at a minutes notice.

As perfect ventilation and the free admission of pure air, is not always
practicable on board of ships, occasionally the use of steam will be
recommended, by which a large portion of water being converted into vapor,
which the air having a greater affinity to than for any foreign matter floating
in it; a complete exchange will take place, all the noxious particles will be
decomposed, the disagreeable stench or foetor arising from foul or diseased
bodies will be precipitated, and the atmosphere of the patient rendered pure.

A COMPLETE system of the practice of physic and surgery cannot be expected in
the compass of these directions; neither is it intended to preclude the
propriety of calling in proper medical aid, when it can be had.

As the medicine-chests will be equally portable, and not more expensive by the
additional means here recommended; they will of course, be rendered more
extensively useful. In short, if I should be fortunate enough in this instance
to contribute in the smallest degree to the health and comfort of Society, I
shall think myself amply rewarded.

MEDICAL ADVICE; Particularly to those who travel to the various regions of the
Globe.
IT is of the utmost importance for every individual, to well understand the
best methods of preserving health, and is the duty of every well-wisher to the
cause of humanity, to contribute his services; on this principle then the
following directions are written.

IN hot weather, after using any hard exercise, avoid drinking cold water, for
it has proved fatal: but as drink is absolutely necessary, the water should be
mixed with about one seventh or eight of good old spirits. To those who are
relaxed, nothing can be better than an addition to this drink of about twelve
drops of acid elixir of vitriol, three or four times a day, or a small quantity
of the juice of lemons or limes: but the most wholesome beverage for them who
enjoy a good state of health, is good sound porter or ale mixed with water.

EXCESSES of every kind should be avoided as much as possible, and drunkenness
in particular. No person should sleep at night in the open air, as it is
extremely hazardous, on account of the damps.

IT is strongly recommended to the commanders of ships trading to the different
parts of Africa, the East, and West Indies, not to permit any of their men to
remain on shore after sunset. -- But if from business, of any other unavoidable
circumstance, they should be sent in boats, up rivers, or on shore in the
neighborhood of marshy countries, a few large doses of bark in powder, given
in wine, may enable the constitution to resist the sedative power of the
chilling and noxious damps. -- Or a few doses of the ague pills, which are a
very powerful tonic, will answer still better in places, where from the rain
and fogs, the constitution may be said to be constantly in a vapor bath.

IN order to prevent injuries from the bite of musquetoes, horse-flies, and
other insects, as they sometimes produce inflammations and ulcers in the legs,
and even mortifications; wear long light linen trowsers. The best remedy for
the inflammation arising from these causes, is the juice of a lime, sharp
vinegar, Goulard's extract of lead and water, or spirit of hartshorn and water.

WHEN the water is bad or putrid, it may be sweetened in the following manner:
Expose it to the air as much as possible, by pumping it with a hand pump from
one vessel into another, mixing a little powdered charcoal or a small portion
of alum, which will throw down particles of dirt, clear the water, and its
wholesomeness will not be in the slightest degree impaired. Mr. OTSBRIDGE's
method of sweetening such water is the quickest, which is by passing it through
a series of vessels, placed under each other, having very small holes bored in
their bottoms, so that it may fall in small drops, like a gentle shower of
rain, through each of them into a receiver fixed below. The wind, or air,
having thus a free passage through the water, divided into small drops, w^^^
soon render it wholesome and sweet.


IN long voyages, beef, pork, etc. is frequently apt to become stale. -- "In
Mr. Gaine's almanac for 1797, there is a good Receipt, by which any meat, ever
so stinking, may be made as sweet and wholesome in a few minutes, as any meat
at all. The Receipt is as follows: Take some white ley, that is, boil some
clean ashes in water; let it stand till it settles; pour this off as clear as
rock water; boil your meat in this three or four minutes, or till it is sweet,
then wash it and dress it in any way, and no person could discover it had ever
been foetid or stinking. This will be found a useful communication to the navy,
where a solution of pot-ash may be used instead of the white ley."

"WE find that a few pails full of this ley or solution of pot-ash, will
restore to eatable condition, a barrel of stinking meat, which by the operation
of the pot-ash, is restored to a sound state." VIDE the case of the
Manufacturers of Soap and Candles.


FOR the most part small grog, that is, liquor united to a considerable
quantity of water, is the drink, and through necessity salt provisions are the
diet. Neither this diet, nor the liquor, produce diseases, unless the water
should be very putrid, which will sometimes, in hot climates, occasion fevers
of the malignant kind, and fluxes; and by the sea air, through the imprudence
of the men sleeping on the deck, are pleurisies, peripneumonies, and other
inflammatory diseases produced. -- The Guinea-worm, I believe is peculiar to
Africa, and a few parts of Asia. It has been supposed to proceed from a bad
quality in the water of the country; doubtless the waters of Senegal, Gambia,
Sierra Leon, Ganges, etc. are either unwholesome or muddy; supposing with Lind
and others, that the Guinea-worm is generated from animalcula, or their ova,
contained in the waters of the country; their production in the human body, may
probably be prevented, by drinking good water. -- "The Guinea-worm is a white,
round, slender worm, often some yards long, lodged in the interstices of the
muscles (or flesh), commonly in the legs, feet, or hands; when it attempts to
escape through the skin, it occasions a swelling, resembling a boil, attended
with great pain, until its black head appears in a small watery bladder on the
head of the bile. When this bladder breaks, the head of the worm is to be
secured, by tying it to a small roll of linen, spread with plaster; and part
of the worm is once or twice a day to be gently drawn forth, with care not to
break it, and wrapped round this roll, until it be brought away entire; then
the ulcer generally heals soon; but if part of the worm breaks off, the part
remaining in the flesh, can be ejected only by painful and tedious suppuration
in different places. Dr. Rouppe observes, that the Guineaworm is infectious. It
may at least be prudent, not to lie in the same apartment, and to avoid too
free a communication with such negroes as are afflicted with them."

BEFORE we proceed to give directions how to exhibit the medicines contained in
the medicine-chest, our attention shall be directed to the means pointed out by
Dr. Lind, for preventing a want of provisions at sea, and close our remarks
with some general observations respecting diet, more properly adapted to
domestic use.

"THE substances I have found most fit for the purpose are powder of salep and
portable soup, which convey the greatest quantity of vegetable and animal
nourishment under the smallest bulk. An ounce of powdered salep, and another of
portable soup, dissolved in two quarts of boiling water, become a rich thick
jelly, capable of receiving any flavor from the addition of spices. This is
sufficient for one man a day; two pounds of each would serve him a month: and
being a mixture of both animal and vegetable food, it is more wholesome than
either used alone. Hasselquist informs us, that a caravan from Ethiopia to
Egypt, having expended their provisions, lived for two months on gum arabic,
dissolved in water; this gum having luckily been a part of their merchandise.
The gum senega or arabic, serves as a sustenance for whole negro towns, during
a scarcity of other provisions, occasioned by a failure of their crops of
millet and rice.

SPICES render portable soup and salep, more grateful to the palate, and also
tend to improve their nutritive quality; as would appear from the following
incident of famine on board a ship at sea: A Malay ship arrived from Macassar,
at Manilla, which by the shifting of the monsoon, had been detained at sea much
longer than was expected, the men had been reduced to such extremities for want
of provisions, as to be obliged to subsist for two months, almost wholly upon
water and spices; the latter, viz. cinnamon, mace, and pepper, being the cargo
of the ship, notwithstanding which, upon their arrival at Manilla, they all,
the number of thirty, were in perfect health."

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS respecting DIET, more properly adapted to domestic use --
particularly in cases of indisposition or sickness.
PERSONS of imflammatory disposition, cannot use vegetables too plentifully.
Oat-meal is cooling, therefore made into gruel, affords a light and proper diet
for the sick, so are sago, simolina, and tapioca, used in general, in various
diseases, where such diet is necessary; and in all fevers, where animal food
should be generally avoided. From the finest wheat flour is made macaroni,
vermicelle, etc. as they are called in Italy, which may be boiled in water, and
affords excellent nourishment.

THOSE whose health is impaired, would do well to be cautious in the choice of
their food; veal, poultry, mutton well boiled, and fish are extremely
nutritive, oysters eaten from the shell are excellent.

MILK is friendly and nutritive, requiring little or no exertion, to prepare
for chyle, so are eggs, if care be taken they are not boiled hard; beef-tea is
good, and with prudence roast beef may be tried, and if it sits easy, may be
taken in change -- hard, salted, and dried meats must be avoided. Fungusses,
such as truffles, mushroons, morilles, champignons, etc. etc. are apt to tumify
the stomach, especially of the delicate in constitution, and debilitated; from
whence anxiety, heart-burn, cholics, hiccups. Sometimes they have been retained
three or four days undigested in the stomach, occasioning the most violent
pains and misery. Their juices are not liable to the same objections, should be
extracted, and their solid parts, which are as tough as leather, should be
thrown away. Esculent vegetables which are eaten raw, with vinegar, oil, and
salt, are called salads.

VIRTUES.
SALLADS are saponaceous, detergent, cooling, and antiseptic; opening and
diuretic, and, from the addition of vinegar, they become a grateful stimulant
for the stomach. -- From hence they excite appetite; correct an atrabilious
alcaline, putrid, scorbutic diathesis; they liberate the tongue, stomach,
intestines and kidneys from sordes; they cool the blood in summer, and resolve
obstructions of the liver, and other viscera. They agree with the sedentary,
scorbutic, and bilious, sanguineous; the heated, especially in hot climates or
in the summer heat; provided they do not disorder the stomach by their slow
digestion, or flatulency. They are improper and injurious to the cold,
debilitated, and nervous, and all those who have acidity in the stomach, or
inert bile.

THOSE who eat large quantities of cucumbers, are in general subject to fluxes,
and other stomach and intestinal disorders.

FRUITS.
THEY resist the putrid tendency of the humors and bile, by their abounding
with fixed air. By their acidulous taste they quench thirst, moderate heat, and
cool. They agree most with summer heat, and in hot climates they most abound.
-- Care should be taken not to eat them immoderately, as they will produce
disagreeable consequences, pretty generally known.

OF DRINKS.
PURE, good water, ought to be clear, without smell, taste or color; light,
cold, and contain a little fixed air; and, if examined by a chemical analysis,
exhibits no heterogenous principle; which is known, if by adding the acid of
sugar, by a fixed and a nitrous solution of silver. Little or no turbidness
appears; for water perfectly pure, is scarce found in any part of the world.
The best water is spring and mountainous, from rocks, the next is the river,
the worst is well, and all stagnant waters.

OF BEER, ALE, etc.
ALL new ales, and small beer, are flatulent and fattening. Ale, and porter,
are very good strengthening malt liquors, for those who use hard exercise.

THOSE who accustom themselves to drink malt-liquor in moderation, scarcely
ever have the gout; but its immoderate use produces corpulency, and sometimes
dropsy.

BEER if not very strong, is less heating than wine; it is a nourishing and
analeptic drink; hence proper for the feeble and emaciated, if they labor
under coughs or difficulty of breathing. In many where wine sours in the
stomach, beer or good ale will agree; if it be well hopped, it is said to
prevent the gravel, gout, or stone.

OF WINES.
A MODERATE use of wine strengthens the languid stomach, excites the appetite,
helps digestion, strengthens the nervous system, increases heat, resists
putridity, promotes perspiration, etc. A spare use of wine agrees with the
aged; in infancy it should be always prohibited (except it be ordered, and
taken as a medicine) for those who begin to drink wine after manhood, are much
more likely to escape gout, gravel, stone, and chronic diseases, and to be
healthful and long-lived, than those who in infancy or in youthful age, or,
whilst they be growing, are indulged with this liquor.

WINE is a preservative against putrid diseases. It exhilirates the mind, and
is the greatest friend to conviviality.

OF SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS.
As a medicine, in some cases, they are cordials and antiseptics: they agree
with the flatulent, hypocondriac, nervous and low spirited; but if continued
always, do mischief, destroying the tone of the stomach, viscera, etc.

WE are sorry to find the cities of America, imitate the great cities in
Europe, in the baneful practice of dram-drinking, so destructive to the health
and comfort of thousands. The ^^crease of brewing malt liquor, we trust will
afford more than a partial remedy to this wide-spreading evil, by giving the
people a more wholesome drink. However, we shall not quit our observations on
spirits, without warning seriously all its votaries, of their dreadful, slow,
poisonous qualities.

SWEET DRINKS,
ARE cider, cherry, elder-wine, etc. punch, lemonade, orangeade, orgeat,
cappilaire, etc.

THEY are cooling and pleasant; but some agree better with certain stomachs
than others, and when they disagree, they should not be repeated. As to cider,
it produces the rheumatism, gout, gravel and stone, therefore much less
salubrious than malt liquors.

WARM DRINKS.
TEA we believe is pretty generally used in most parts of America, and with
milk or cream, makes an excellent breakfast, if the quality be good, and it
agrees well with the stomach; it should never be drank without previously
eating bread and butter, rusks, biscuits, etc. The Chinese pronounce tea
noxious in inflammations of the eyes, in the cholic and palsy.

CHOCOLATE is nourishing, and proper for the debilitated hypochondriacs, and
those who labor under the piles, or costiveness.

COFFEE strengthens the stomach, promotes urine, and evacuates worms and wind
-- removes costiveness, elevates the sinking spirits. Without milk after
dinner, promotes digestion, retards putrefaction, and increases the vital
motions of the blood.

TREATMENT OF DISEASES.
BLEEDING.
IN the treatment of inflammatory distempers, great attention must be paid to
the season of the year and climate; for, in proportion as the country or season
is hot or cold, so must bleeding be regulated. In colder countries, large
bleedings are not only salutary, but absolutely necessary; in hot climates
bleeding must not be often repeated; it must be frequently omitted, as it
exhausts the strength of the patient. The inflammatory symptoms in most
diseases, by profuse bleeding, are immediately succeeded by a putrifactive
state of the juices, which will end in the death of the patient GENTLEMEN,
unacquainted with the operation of bleeding, will be instucted in a few minutes
how to perform it with perfect safety, by applying at my Dispensary in New York.
.

PLEURISY AND PERIPNEUMONY.
THE first is an acute pain in the side, with fever and difficulty of
breathing; the second violent difficulty of breathing and inflammatory fever.
Large and repeated bleedings are necessary. -- Internally, the following
medicines are proper to raise perspiration.

No. 3. Take of tartar emetic two grains, dissolve it in four table spoon fulls
of water, which is equal to two ounces in measure. Take three or four
tea-spoonfull every four or six hours.

No. 1. In order to open the bowels, take an ounce or more of glauber salts,
dissolve in half a pint of water, take a little every hour until it answers.
Common nitrous drink; -- dissolve two drachms of powdered salt nitre in a quart
of water; this may be sweetened with honey, molasses, or sugar, and drank
freely.

IF the difficulty of breathing or pain continues, bleeding must be repeated,
and a blister must be applied in the pleurisy, directly over the pain in the
side, but in the inflammation of the lungs to the pit of the stomach, which
must lay on sixteen or eighteen hours, and a discharge promoted by dressing it
with basilicon spread on a linen rag once or twice a day.

ACUTE, INFLAMMATORY FEVER
BEGINS with cold shiverings, succeeded by great heat, thirst, nausea, quick
full pulse, pain in the head, back, and loins, etc. It commonly arises from
sudden cold, the drinking cold liquors when overheated, or when in a state of
perspiration. It attacks the young, strong, and vigorous; very seldom the
debilitated. Repeated bleedings are necessary, if a nausea or vomiting should
be distressing. Dissolve three grains of No. 3, in four table spoonfulls of
water; after the bleeding, give a large spoonful every ten minutes or quarter
of an hour, which will discharge whatever is on the stomach, and perhaps
operate on the intestines; which if it should not, give the solution of No. 1,
or half a grain of tartar emetic, with a little magnesia, and about one scruple
of nitre, mixed in two ounces of common water, every hour till it operates.

FOR quenching the thirst, no drink will be equal to about a tea-cup full of
vinegar, lemon, or lime juice (strained from the pulp) mixed with a quart of
the common nitrous drink recommended under the pleurisy, etc.

IF the heat should be intense, it must be observed, that nitre is improper in
most cases in hot climates, but inflammatory disorders are not there so
frequent as in the colder countries.

IN all other respects the true inflammatory diseases may be treated exactly as
the pleurisy and peripneumony. If a delirium come on, blister the legs and
back. Internally give the nitrous drink, and eight or ten grains of No. 10,
every four or six hours.

IN the recovery of all inflammatory disorders, a gentle laxative will be
necessary -- as the solution of glauber salts, or twenty grains of julap, mixed
with about fifteen or twenty grains of nitre, or cream of tartar, and taken in
some water. When the patient begins to recover, twenty-five drops of No. 6, in
a cup of water, may be taken three or four times a day -- Diet in the
beginning, and during the augmentation of the fever, should be very low; after
its termination, a greater freedom is necessary.

RHEUMATISM
CONSISTS of wandering pains, affecting the larger joints, especially those of
the hip, knees, shoulders and elbows, shifting in the course of the muscles,
and much increased on motion. It is divided in two kinds, the acute and
chronic; and this division is necessary to be observed, on account of their
difference of treatment.

IT occurs most commonly of the acute kind, from the age of puberty to that of
thirty-five.

ITS causes are the sudden application of cold when heated, changes of weather,
and excesses inducing a plethoric state. When attended with fever, which in the
acute kind it generally is, its first symptoms begin with a considerable rigor,
in which the pulse is hard and full, and other febrile appearances attend. When
the fever departs, a degree of pain and stiffness is frequently felt in the
joints, which recurring on changes of weather, without fever, constitutes the
chronic kind.

IN the treatment of the first or acute kind, large and repeated bleedings are
necessary, as indicated by the strength of the pulse, especially on the first
days, and where there is much topical pain.

THE plentiful use of diluent liquids should be likewise enjoined, especially
thin gruel or barley water with nitre. -- Cooling purges are proper, but only
after the abatement of pain when motion is permitted. Blisters to the part,
when the pain is violent, are useful; after evacuation, sweating medicines, as
fifteen or twenty grains of Dover's powder every six hours may be used with
advantage.

IN the chronic kind, large evacuations are here to be avoided, and warm
applications of different kinds must be applied to the part, consisting of warm
oils, volatiles, turpentines, etc. The use of friction will likewise be of
service.

INFLAMMATION OF THE EYE.
THE cure consists in reducing the inflammatory disposition, by bleeding and
purging, and in diminishing the pain and irritability by local applications.
Blisters applied to the head or behind the ears often relieve. The following
application for inflamed eyes, is very proper: Take Goulard's extract of lead,
thirty drops, Brandy, sixty drops, Water, half a pint -- Bath the eyes
frequently.


INFLAMMATION of the Stomach, Intestines, Liver, and Kidney.
INFLAMMATION of the stomach, is known by an acute pain in the region of the
stomach, a sense of internal heat in the part, quick, hard contracted pulse,
great anxiety, watchfulness, violent vomiting, especially after taking any
thing into the stomach, much thirst, with great prostration of strength.

Inflammation of the Bowels or Intestines. -- There is a fixed pain in the
belly, attended with fever, costiveness, and vomiting; the pain is chiefly felt
in the region of the navel.

Inflammation of the Liver. -- A dull sense of pain and weight in the right
side below the false ribs, much heat and anxiety, the pulse at first slow,
afterward more quickened, a sense of fullness and tension in the region of the
liver, a loathing of food, sickness and vomiting, thirst, dry rough tongue,
becoming black, a pale sunk countenance, frequently of a yellow color,
troublesome hiccup. Sometimes the pain is more acute, attended with difficult
and painful respiration; the pain extends high in the cavity of the thorax or
breast, affecting the collar bone, and resembling pleurisy; there is generally
some degree of cough, and the patient cannot lie on the left side.

Inflammation of the Kidney. -- The symptoms are, a sense of heat, pain, and
somtiemes tumor and redness in the region of the kidney, a numbness of the leg
and thigh of the affected side, the urine high colored, and in small quantity,
accompanied with pain, difficulty in discharging it; the patient in general,
can lie more easily on the diseased than the opposite side. -- There is
generally nausea and vomiting, with much febrile heat and anxiety.

IN all the above disorders, bleed freely, and administer emolient opening
clysters, foment the parts affected -- and procure a liberal passage by the
bowels, as soon as the stomach will retain proper medicine. -- One ounce and
half of glauber salts, dissolved in twelve ounces of water, and by adding a few
drops of essence of mint, makes an agreeable opening mixture -- take four
spoonfulls every hour until the bowels are emptied freely. Warm bath should be
frequently employed in inflammation of the bowels.

THE application of blisters to the region of the part should not be neglected,
except in the inflammation of the kidney; for in that case they are not
admissible, barley water with a little gumarabic dissolved in it, may be drank
freely; castor-oil is an excellent aperient.

PILES.
THE piles consist of small tumors situated on the verge of the anus, or of a
varicose ring surrounding it. When a discharge from such tumors takes place,
they are termed bleeding: when there is no discharge, they are termed blind
piles.

COSTIVENESS is one of the most frequent causes of this disease, which is to be
obviated by means of different laxatives, suited to the particular
constitution; the best of which are cream of tartar, flour of sulphur, and
castor-oil. -- If there is much pain, apply fomentation and poultices; and the
parts during the continuance of the inflammation, should be carefully anointed
with soft pomatum or hog's lard before going to stool.

USE a spare diet, and guard against intemperance in drink, which is
particularly hurtful.

COUGHS.
Sometimes in changing from a warm climate to another, a violent cough is
occasioned, particularly to the coldest parts of N. America. Treating such a
complaint, bleeding is proper, and the cooling remedies above. If the
irritation and coughing is very violent, two tea-spoon fulls of No. 16, or
twenty-five or thirty drops of tincture of opium in a cup of the common nitrous
drink at bedtime. In all inflammatory cases keep the bowels laxative with
gentle purges of salts, or clysters, made of a spoonful of common salt and
coarse sugar dissolved in half a pint of warm water, with the addition of two,
three, or four table spoon fulls of castor-oil, or any other sweet oil; in
order to promote expectoration and prevent consumption, asthma, etc. give a
table spoonful of No. 18, as directed, night and morning.

DIARRHOEA AND DYSENTERY.
THE diarrhoea is a violent and continued purging, with gripings, etc. the
dysentery is a violent purging, in which the blood and mucus are voided with
griping pains, and an inclination to go to stool without evacuation, except of
a little blood and mucus.

GIVE a vomiting or nauseating dose of No. 18, in the morning fasting, so as to
evacuate bilious crudities, and repeat it in small doses afterward, two or
three times a day; it will require a table spoon full, or in some cases rather
more to vomit, and from three tea spoonfulls to better than half of a large
spoonful to produce a slight nausea, without vomiting, which is the alterative
and tonic dose.

IF dysentery is of long standing, the cure must be performed by giving a dose
night and morning. -- If the pain and griping is very troublesome, twenty-five
or thirty drops of tincture of opium, may be very conveniently given
occasionally, or every night at bedtime. -- Costiveness is sometimes the
consequence of its continued use; when this happens, omit it until a dose of
the anti-bilious pills, castor-oil, or rhubarb is taken.

IN the early stage of this disease, care must be taken to empty the intestines
of the putrid, acrid, matter contained in them. "The vegetable alkali or
carbonate of pot-ash, CALLED (salt of wormwood), acetite of pot-ash
(regenerated tartar), sulphite of pot-ash (vitriolated tartar), tartrite of
pot-ash (soluble tartar;) tartrite of soda (rochelle salt). Any of which may be
given. -- Castor-oil is a useful purgative.
will be found a very efficatious remedy. The dose which may be given with
safety is four grains of No. 20, dissolved in half an ounce of water, and
repeated every two or three hours, until natural stools are evacuated. -- If a
little of No. 11, jalap, or No. 19, rhubarb, be combined, its operation will be
greatly assisted.

WE are informed that marine salt (common salt) dissolved in any of the
vegetable acids, operated as a charm in dysenteries, in the Island of Jamaica,
when all other remedies which have been celebrated in curing this disease, had
failed.

IF violent pain, inflammation, etc. render bleeding necessary, it may be
performed once or twice according to existing circumstances.

ATTENTION must be paid to using the means recommended for purifying the air
and destroying pestilential stimulus.

SCURVY.
IT is chiefly owing to salt provisions. -- Vegetables and a fresh diet are the
most effectual remedies.

WHEN on shipboard, give fifteen or twenty grains of No. 12, cremor tartar,
and the same quantity of No. 21, flowers of sulphur, night and morning; avoid
as much as possible all salt meats, live principally on pease, burgoo, rice,
spruce beer prepared from the essence of spruce, etc. Infusion of malt is an
excellent preservative against putrid diseases in hot countries, and likewise
the scurvy. -- The limbs may be rubbed night and morning with vinegar. If a
wine glass of the juice of oranges or lemons (or for want of both of them
vinegar) with two ounces of brown sugar, were daily allowed to each man to mix
with his allowance of grog, it would be extremely serviceable.

INTERMITTING FEVER AND AGUE.
THE patient is first seized with a cold shivering, this is succeeded by heat,
an uneasiness, languor of the whole body, and great thirst; sometimes it is
attended with a violent headache, at others not. -- In the beginning of the
disorder, it will be best to give a vomiting dose of No. 18, afterward a
gentle laxative dose of No. 22.

No. 23. Ague and Fever Pills, which effect a cure in the most obstinate cases
doses. From 3 years old to 12, one pill every day at six o'clock in the
morning, at two in the afternoon; and at ten at night; from 12 years old and
upwards, two pills at the same hours.

THEIR use requires no restraint of diet, nor any particular regimen, only to
abstain from fish, milk, salt provisions, and fermented liquor, and keep dry
and warm. When a dose of the anti-bilious pills are taken, this medicine must
be omitted for that day. -- When the fever is off, the cure and return of
strength may be greatly promoted by taking the following

BARK MIXTURE.
TAKE of powdered bark, one ounce, put it into a quart bottle, add to it two
ounces of any spirit, and fill the bottle nearly with water; then put to this
two or three drachms of No. 6. Three or four table spoonfuls should be taken
three or four times a day when the fever is off.

DURING the fever, and hot sit, the diluted warm vinegar drink is to be
administered.

IF the viscera is obstructed, it must be removed by a dose of No. 22, once or
twice a week, and No. 24, (alterative pills,) taken on the intermediate days,
according to the direction.

PUTRID TENDING BILLIOUS, OR YELLOW FEVER. UNDER this head we class the nervous
fever, the ship-fever, the hospital-fever, the gaol-fever, the
pestilential-fever, etc. All of these are different names for the same disease,
and differ only from each other in malignity or violence, from local
circumstances, the state of the atmosphere, or season of the year.

Begins with languor, debility, headache, affection of the stomach peculiarly
disagreeable, vomiting of bile, and sometimes a diarrhoea, great thirst, heat,
and uneasiness of the whole body, and the spirits are exceedingly depressed;
sometimes the anxious symptoms of vomiting are such, that no remedy whatever
will allay; the eyes appear sad and watery, or in some degree inflamed, having
much that appearance, which is the consequence of exposure to the smoke of
green wood. The face often flushed, the tongue in the latter stage is of a
color nearly approaching to black, sometimes moist, but generally foul.

WE shall here particularly insist upon early attention to the first symptoms
of indisposition, which are a suppression of the excretion, or perspiration of
the skin and disorder in the functions of the stomach. Application of warm
water to the feet, THE eminent Dr. Clark's method of treating this fever, as it
appeared in Dominica in the year 1793, -- 1796, as communicated in the annals
of medicine, 1797, is so perfectly rational and successful, we shall here give
a few extracts.

DR. C. observes, that in general, few recovered who had a cold fit at the
beginning of the fever. If the yellowness appeared in twenty four hours, or if
the patients had been bled, they never recovered, unless by the aid of powerful
remedies acting in an evident and decisive manner. Dr. C's method of cure, is
to subdue the febrile stage, by the most speedy means, and prevent the
putrescent state; -- he observes, that although there were some appearances
which might seem to indicate blood-letting, yet it had very generally
pernicious effects. The French practitioners, with whom blood-letting is a
remedy in all diseases, erred much in this particular; and assure us, that
there was not a single instance of an emigrant recovering who had been bled in
this disease. He allows that in young athletic people, seized with this fever
soon after their arrival in the West Indies, bleeding may to a certain degree,
be of use, if performed during the first twenty-four hours from the attack, but
if used after that period, or at most after thirty-six hours, it will always be
found prejudicial, if not fatal. -- In the treatment Dr. C. in general, first
ordered pediluvium, or bathing the feet in warm water, and a purging clyster,
to moderate the determination to the head. After this, purging was the chief
means employed to moderate the fever. But he found it very difficult to procure
this evacuation by common purgatives. He recommends the following form, as the
most efficacious.

Take of powder of jalap, two scruples,

Calomel, one scruple,

Oil of mint, four drops,

Water sufficient to make them into sixteen pills, of these pills, six or eight
were given as speedily as possible, with a cupful of cold mint or cinnamon tea,
and two or three more repeated every hour, till they operated. If these were
rejected by vomiting, ten grains of calomel formed into two pills, were
administered immediately, and repeated in four hours, if they had not operated
plentifully before that time.

AFTER the purgatives had operated sufficiently, if the head ache was not
relieved, a blister was applied to the neck; perspiration was encouraged, by
giving warm drinks; and three or four grains of calomel was given in a pill,
every four or six hours. To this opium was sometimes added, (twenty or thirty
drops of the tincture) when the purging had a tendency to run to excess.

A BLISTER applied over the stomach, generally checked the vomiting, when
employed early in the disease. When there was little or no inclination to
vomit, Dr. C. added a proportion, viz. from half a grain to one or two grains
of the antimonial powder (No. 27) to the calomel; and pills with this
combination were given every second or third hour, till they had some effect. A
grain or two of opium, or twenty five to thirty five drops of the tincture was
afterward given, to settle the stomach and procure sleep. If the medicine
operated plentifully by stool before the opium was administered, and a profuse
perspiration followed, the fever was carried off in twenty four hours, and the
patient recovered. The antimonial when conjoined with calomel, rarely
occasioned vomiting, their effects were commonly to procure a few stools, and
to excite perspiration. And although vomiting in this fever is very much to be
dreaded, yet in all cases considered as desperate, this combination ought to be
tried.

AFTER the febrile stage, three or four grains of calomel were given every four
hours to an adult, and a glass of strong decoction of bark, was ordered every
hour in the intervals, with as much nourishment and wine as the stomach could
bear, given in small quantities frequently repeated. This plan was continued
for thirty-six or forty-eight hours after the febrile state was over a slight
salivation or spitting rarely took place; but the gums we are told, were
sometimes a little aff^^cted about the third day. When that happened, both
mercury and every other remedy was suspended, and nourishment and wine only
given.

Dr. C's method of prevention is on arrival a few calomel purges, in the course
of the first ten days, with a vegetable diet, and the moderate use of wine,
together with peruvian bark for several days after, and the renewal of the
calomel purges and bark from time to time, during the first two or three months
residence, was the most common method employed to prevent an attack, and it was
generally successful.


Opening the bowels by repeated clysters, give a decoction of tamarinds, or an
ounce and half of No. 1, dissolved in half a pint or better of tamarind water,
give a spoonful every hour, till it operates, a dose or two of the anti-bilious
pills will answer, to evacuate the intestines, where any objection arises to
the taste of liquid purges. -- If vomiting is not troublesome, give the acid
vitriolic drink, which is made by adding twenty drops of the concentrated acid
of vitriol, or two tea spoonfuls of the diluted acid of vitriol to a quart of
water, which is an excellent remedy, as it cools, allays the thirst; acts as an
antiputrescent, and comes in immediate contact with the seat of the disease.
The bark mixture may be given with advantage as prescribed under the ague and
fever, when the fever is reduced, and the patient begins to recover IN the
decline of this fever, affections of the liver and other viscera are not
unfrequently the consequence, a salivation has proved successful in the
East Indies; and it is equally advantageous in all warm climates; but we are
certain the scirrhous liver is safely cured by the alterative pills, No. 24,
without salivation.
.

MEANS OF PREVENTION.
WE intend in this terrible and most consuming disease, to be very minute and
particular in our observations on the means of prevention.

WHEN you arrive in hot climates, as the coast of Africa, East and West Indies,
etc. if full of blood, IT is of the utmost importance not to reduce the system
by bleeding or any other evacuation whatever, below the ordinary healthy
standard, as a firm constitution and a cheerful and fearless mind, most
powerfully resist the sedative action of pestilential contagion. What has
conducted the benevolent Howard through those dismal scenes, where disease sat
brooding, but that conciousness of duty which rendered him intrepid? His escape
from so many fiery trials, may convince others, by attention in similar
situations, how much it is in their power to avoid infection.
and of a plethoric habit, lose about a pint, and keep the bowels open with the
anti-bilious pills, which are excellent once or twice a week. If disposed to
perspire freely, omit bleeding. Take care to avoid the rains and subtle night
dews, which no ordinary clothing is proof against: drink a little small punch,
or wine warm every day, before the sea-breeze sets in. Ordinary drink may be
imperial water, which is made thus: Boil a large table spoonful of cream of
tartar, in five pints of water for ten minutes, put the peel of the lemon into
it, and two ounces of sugar. This is the best drink, and if the patient is weak
and relaxed, mix a small quantity of wine.

WHEN small punch is preferred to this liquor, always strain your lime or lemon
juice, clear from the pulp, to prevent the dry gripes; use exercise every
morning and evening, but not early or late; cold bathing with proper
precaution, is a powerful tonic or strengthener. In very hot close and moist
weather, it is a very general complaint, that in the morning a sense of
lassitude, aching and weariness is felt, with bitter taste in the mouth, acid
or bitter eructations, sickness, sense of weight at the stomach, rising of
phlegm, appetite impaired, flatulence in the stomach and bowels, vertigo or
giddiness in the head, lowness of spirits, etc. Some one or more of these
symptoms are usually felt, especially if foul air arising from swamps, ponds,
marshes, etc. has affected the lungs and stomach. -- Immediately take a dose of
No. 18, to evacuate bilious crudities, unload the stomach, and cleanse the
bronchial glands; repeat it if occasion serves. Afterward small doses, two or
three times a day, as a tonic and alterative to brace the relaxed solids,
strengthen the stomach, and give firmness and energy to the nervous system.

"SHIPS being amongst the chief agents in producing foul or pestilential air,
which from its heaviness has always a tendency to the lower parts, through
whose sides it cannot leak out by reason of their tightness; and therefore are
very often the seats of its most destructive ravages." In all countries
epidemic diseases, extraordinarily mortal, are frequently bred in ships, gaols,
camps, etc. and are incidental to every place ill aired and kept dirty; that
is, filled with animal steams from foul or diseased bodies.

THE application of nitrous vapor to the destruction of typhus contagion, is
of great importance, and will probably put a stop to the spread of contagious
diseases of any kind. I AM happy to add a note which further corroborates the
importanace and utility of the nitrous vapor taken from Mr. J. M. Gregor's
account of putrid contagious fever which appeared amongst the soldiers in the
island of Jersey, in July, August, Sept. and Octr. 1797.

"ALARMED at the fatal issue of the first case, be with two assistants
ca^^fully fumigated the hospital, the clothes, the bedding of the sick, and the
different barrack-rooms; which stopped its ravages completely; for out of
^^^^^y-six cases that occurred, the first case was the only one that proved
fatal. (...) this fever again appeared, with its original symptoms amongst some
convalescents. (...) by putting in practice the nitrous fumigation, and
thinning the wards of the hospital, the fever was again very soon got under."




SMALL portions of No. 13, concentrated acid of vitriol put into a china saucer
on hot sand, or over a lamp, and No. 2, purified nitre gradually sprinkled in,
and the vapor diffused about the bed, and through the cabin, half deck or
room; the windows and doors being closed, the bedsteads are directed to be
washed with diluted marine acid, No. 14, (viz. mix a little of it with each
pail of water), and the clothes, etc. to be immersed in the same as soon as
taken from the sick. By these means the spread of contagion in a most crowded
hospital ship, where it was making terrible havoc, was entirely stopped.
Private practice confirms these assertions, the spread of scarlatina has been
thus checked: and two parcels of the smallpox matter being taken, and the one
exposed to the nitrous vapor, lost its power of communicating the smallpox,
while the other imparted the infection to persons inoculated with it. The
nitrous vapor is not at all injurious, provided care be taken not to change it
into nitrous air, by the use of any metallic substance in stirring the mixture.

ALSO a quantity of water may occasionally be placed in the middle of the
cabin or room: the vapor of the water being more strongly attracted by the
air than the effluvium is; the latter will be precipitated, and will fall into
the water.

BUT, as spontaneous evaporation is very slow, the quantity of moisture is not
sufficient in all cases to supply as much fluid as will precipitate the whole
of the effluvium [as in cases of putrid fever, large ulcers or wounds,
mortifying limb, etc.] the use of steam is recommended, by which a large
portion of water being converted into vapor, a more complete exchange will
take place, and all the noxious parties be decomposed.

A QUANTITY of boiling water must be poured from one vessel to another, with a
view to supply the air more readily with a proper quantity of moisture, which
will precipitate the noxious effluvium and depurate the air; so ready is the
atmosphere to part with the mephitic matter it contains. WE consider as highly
reprehensible, any attempt to purify the air by combustible materials, such as
burning tar, sulphur, rozin, tobacco, etc. etc. It destroys or absorbs vital
air, at least so much diminishes it as to endanger life.
Use the above means in every case where the air of the room or cabin is
surcharged with human effluvia.

To prevent an accumulation of foetor, the usual method of airing the
bed-clothes, etc. upon deck in warm climates, should by no means be neglected.
The cabin, half deck, and bed-places, should be washed clean often with
alkaline ley, or pot-ash, mixed with water, and fumigated with the steam of
vinegar, taking care to sprinkle frequently, the floor of the cabin and half
deck with vinegar or lime juice, strained and freed from the pulp.

WITH regard to personal preservatives for those who are subject to danger, in
addition to the medicines and other means recommended above, the four-thieves
vinegar has been found a very useful preventative; cotton made into small
dossils, and dipped in it, may be put up the nostrils; or a vial containing
this vinegar, may be carried open before the mouth or under the nose. The
following is the method of preparing it:

TAKE of lavender flowers, rosemary, wormwood, sage and mint, of each a
handful; of white wine vinegar a gallon; let them stand in a sand bath, or warm
place for eight days to deject; when wanted, add three drachms of camphor to
each pint.

IF he is a man who enjoys health, and drinks a certain quantity of wine every
day, let him not venture without it; but let him abstain from more than is
necessary for this purpose; or should his habit be debilitated, a dose of bark,
or a glass of Huxham's tincture of bark, may be useful, observing often to
carefully wash his hands, face and mouth, making free and liberal use of water.

PUTRID SORE THROAT.
GIVE the acid drink, and bark mixture, be particularly careful to keep the
mouth, tongue, and fauces clean; especially before any thing is swallowed, by a
decoction of bark, made rather acid with a few drops of acid of vitriol; with
which gargle the throat and mouth frequently -- give a little castor oil or
some other very gentle laxative, to open the bowels -- observe similar
directions as given in other putrid diseases.

LOCKED JAW, AND OTHER SPASMODIC DISEASES.
THE locked jaw is not uncommon in hot countries, and is the companion of
gunshot wounds, ulcers and amputations; or it may arise from accidents or
splinters, puncturing the tendinous or nervous parts; wounds of the joints, and
lying in the open air at nights in the damp foggy seasons.

IN attempting the cure of those alarming affections, we must not wholly depend
on large doses of opium, musk, and warm bathing. I have seen all those methods
tried, but very rarely with success -- the symptoms of all spasmodic complaints
are in general so clearly marked that we need not here enumerate them. The
medicines, we shall place our chief dependence for success in the cure is No.
30, and a strong solution of No. 10, one pill, must if possible, be taken three
or four times a day, drinking a cup-full of strong solution of camphor pretty
often, use warm water baths with a small portion of No. 14, in it -- large
blisters may be applied to the most rigid parts.

DROPSY.
SMART doses of No. 11, thirty or forty grains, with five or six grains of No.
31, and two or three drachms of No. 12, every third day in honey or molasses or
dissolved in half a pint of boiling water, increasing the dose if necessary, so
as to operate freely, if no difficulty in breathing exists, give on the
intermediate days, bitters, etc. to strengthen the habit.

JAUNDICE.
TINGES the skin with a yellow or black color, and is cured by calomel in
small doses, with one or two of the anti-bilious pills every night; a vomit in
the first instance is proper. Give two or three grains of No. 3, and eight or
ten of No. 47, drinking freely of warm water, or a spoon-full of No. 18, which
in general empties the stomach very well; if occasion requires, repeat the
emetic in a day or two.

ASTHMA,
CONSISTS in an impeded and laborious respiration, threatening suffocation.

A VOMITING dose of No. 18, will with ease, facilitate the discharge of tough,
viscid, phlegm, and repeated in doses so regulated, as it may gently vomit
every morning, and nauseate two or three times a day. If the asthma is of long
standing, and the constitution phlegmatic, a vomiting dose may be taken two or
three times a week, according to the urgency of the symptoms, taking care to
keep the bowels laxative with No. 22.

SURGERY.
BRUISES and SPRAINS.
FOR external use, when the skin is not much destroyed, a mixture of sharp
vinegar, with twice its quantity of water, may be applied frequently by (...)
of linen cloths wrung out of it; and as often as they dry, moisten them again;
or lime water, with a portion of spirit, may be used with advantage. Spiritous
applications should not be used, except where the sole intention is to
strengthen the injured fibers; in slighter cases, a small quantity of spirit
may be mixed with vinegar, and used on the first reception of the bruise.

IF on account of a tumor or wound, a poultice is applied, the common bread
poultice is the best. If the bruise is considerable, and particularly, if any
internal part is affected, bleed as freely as the constitution will admit;
direct a cooling liquid diet, let glisters be repeatedly injected, if the lower
belly be the seat of complaint; and in all cases, repeated gentle purging is of
the greatest advantage. -- Violent pain may be allayed by taking a dose of
tincture of opium, or Dover's powder. The anodyne antimonial drops, No. 33,
give ten or fifteen drops every four or six hours; in bruises of the head, this
latter medicine may be depended upon.

BURNS AND SCALDS.
APPLY immediately a quantity of raw potatoes, pounded to a proper degree of
fineness; this, though a vulgar remedy, is nevertheless a very useful
application to parts that have been scalded or burnt; but chiefly in the former
case, they are to be applied cold, or bathe the parts very often with the
saturnine solution made by mixing three drachms of extract of lead, No. 5, in a
quart of water, to which is to be added a table spoonful of any spirits, and
keep a rag constantly wet with it on the part; when that is done, apply cerate,
spread upon a rag once a day. If inflammation is considerable, give a dose of
salts, and lose blood.

ITCH, and Herpetic Eruptions.
ITCH is a curtaneous eruption, of particular pustules in several parts of the
body, particularly in the joints, and between the fingers, on the arms, hands
and thighs; the eruption causes a violent itching, and sometimes are small, and
contain a fluid, and in some cases they are large and deep, and contain a white
matter, other times they are covered with crust or scabs; the heat always
increases with the itching. Bleed on the first appearance, and use the herpetic
linament No. 36, to the parts affected every night and morning. A few doses of
gentle physic will be useful; flowers of sulphur mixed with oil or hog's lard,
is a proper application.

GUNSHOT WOUNDS, etc.
THERE are different species of wounds 1. simple cuts or incised wounds. 2.
Punctured wounds. 3. Lacerated or contused wounds. 4. Gunshot wounds, and 5,
Poisoned wounds. In order to the cure of a simple incised wound, remove the
effused blood with a sponge, pressed out of moderately warm water. If a
considerable arterial haemorrhage, secure the vessel by ligature; i. e. pass a
thread of strong silk by a needle round the blood vessel, and secure by a knot.
Remove every extraneous body; if it can be done with prudence, extract it with
your fingers, if possible; when a lead ball is the substance lodged, if it
cannot be easily removed it may be left; but a splinter of wood, glass, iron,
or cloth, should be removed as soon as possible after the injury is inflicted.
This done, the lips of the wounds must be brought together as nearly as
possible, and so retained by adhesive plasters, if the wound is not deep, the
dressings may be pledgits of soft lint, covered with one of tow, spread with
some digestive ointment, as basilicon No. 35, and large enough to cover the
whole. These may be secured by such bandages as the situation of the wound will
admit. The first dressing usually remains two or three days, or until the
discharge of matter renders the separation of them easy. The dressing may be
repeated every 12 or 24 hours; when the wound is filled up with flesh, dress
with the cerate No. 34, to complete the cure IN gunshot wounds, which are deep
seated, inflamed, or the lips look black or gangrenous, lay the wounded limb in
large poultices easy and soft, which will at once encourage a kindly
suppuration and assuage the pain, a large soft warm, and comfortable, oily
poultice, is literally a bath for the limb, and will do great service to the
patient.

IT frequently happens when the patient i^ first wounded by bayo^et, sabre,
etc. etc. he is in great confusion, there is a tremor, (...) or almost a
convulsion of the whole frame. There is a coldness, fainting, and nervous
affection; but it is merely a nervous affection, and you should treat it as
such. You may expect it to subside in time, and therefore should give some warm
cordial and a large dose of tincture of opium (30 or 40 drops) to quiet the
commotion. This is no time for bleeding, whatever the nature of the wound may
be. If the stupor continues, you should give cordial draughts and wine.

IF a sharp fever should come on, still ^o not bleed, but rather be upon the
reserve, for, perhaps this, which at first seems to be a pure inflammatory
fever, may turn out to be a fit of an ague, it may be a low and malignant
fever. -- Reserve your bleeding for those more dangerous cases, where high
inflammation is so often fatal, and do not bleed in wounds of the hips,
shoulders or limbs, reserve bleeding for wounds of the breast or belly, or
great joints, for in all wounds of cavities, inflammation which can hardly be
escaped, is the great danger.

IF a man be wounded after a full meal, there can be no doubt of the propriety
of a gentle vomit, a table spoonful or two of mixture No. 18, will evacuate the
contents of the stomach very quickly, when it is allowed by the circumstances
of the wound. The bowels may be opened by a cooling saline laxative.

THE fever which attends are ill-conditioned wound is attended with great heat,
thirst, a foul tongue, a low, quick, unequal pulse, and there is a low
muttering delirium, or as Ranby express it, the head not quite clear, and bark
wine and elixer of vitriol are to be used.


.

FRACTURED LIMBS.
FRACTURES are of various kinds, viz. Transverse, oblique, and longitudinal.
When a bone is split into small pieces, it is said to be splintered, they are
also distinguished by different names; thus, when the soft parts remain sound,
the fracture is denominated simple; when attended with a wound, communicating
with the fracture, it is termed compound. Fractures are discovered by the eye,
the ear, and the touch. The symptoms are pain, swelling, and tension in the
contiguous parts; a more or less crooked and distorted state of the limb, a
crackling or grating noise on the parts being handled, and loss of power to a
certain extent in the injured limb.

THE indications of cure, are to replace the parts of the bone that have been
removed from their natural situation, to retain them in this situation as long
as may be necessary. In order to replace the parts of the bones, a slight
degree of extension may be employed by the upper part of the limb, being kept
firm by an assistant with his hands placed between the fracture and the
contiguous joint, while the under part of it is gently extended by another,
observing to keep the muscles as much relaxed as possible. If there is very
great tension and inflammation, they must be removed before the replacing of
the bone is attempted, by the means recommended in bruises, sprains, etc.

TO retain the bones when replaced, compresses, bandages, and a relaxed state
of the limb till the cure is completed, are necessary. The bandage must not be
applied with more tightness than is necessary to retain the bones in their
situation, a linen or flannel roller is the best for this purpose. In a healthy
middle aged person, a simple fracture of the thigh, or bones of the leg, will
require about two months for the cure. The humerus and bones of the forearm
about six weeks; the collar bone, ribs, and bones of the fingers and toes,
hands and feet, about three weeks. In infancy, the cure is effected in less
time, but in old age the process is more slow; to reduce the fracture of the
collar bone, it is only necessary to raise the arm, and support it at a proper
height; which is done by a sling round the neck, adapted to the length of the
arm, and applied equally to every part of it -- the bones are generally united
in a fortnight; but the corresponding arm should not be used until the end of
the third or fourth week.

FRACTURES of the ribs, are discovered by the seat of the pain, and by pressure
of the fingers. In general the symptoms are moderate, but in some instances the
pain is severe from the first, the breathing is difficult, attended with cough
and sometimes spitting of blood; the pulse is quick, full, and sometimes
oppressed. In every case of fractured ribs, bleed proportionably to the
strength of the patient. If any inequality is discovered, let the patient make
a deep inspiration, and by equal and moderate pressure, endeavor to replace
it; and to prevent its rising, apply a broad roller, or a leather belt quilted
inside, with cotton or flannel, moderately tight, and let it be worn for
several weeks -- the diet must be low.

DISLOCATIONS.
THE principal indications of cure, are to restore the luxated part; and
secondly, to retain it in its proper situation. But if inflammation, or tumor,
are considerable, they should be removed by bleeding, and application of
Goulard's extract of lead and water.

IN reducing luxations, the muscles should be put into a state of the greatest
relaxation by bending the limb. The extension should be gradual and continued,
until the dislo-cated bone is on a level with the cavity, or socket from whence
it receded; at which time, if the head does not return of itself, it must be
assisted by pressing upon it, and making a lever of the dislocated bone.

Recovery of Suspended Respiration, or Persons Apparently Dead by Drowning, etc.
FIRST, in removing the body, great care should be taken that it be not
bruised, shaken violently, roughly handled, nor carried over any one's
shoulders with the head hanging downwards, nor rolled upon the deck, or over a
barrel, nor lifted up by the heels: for experience proves that all these
methods are injurious, and often destroy the small remains of life. The body
should be cautiously carried in the arms of two or more persons with the head a
little raised and kept in as easy a position as possible. 1. WHEN the body is
taken out of the water, strip and wrap it closely in a coat, blanket, or other
warm covering; and convey it to the nearest commodious house, -- keeping the
face upwards and the head and shoulders a little raised.

2. LAY it on a bed, or mattrass, that is well heated by a warming pan, in a
chamber containing a fire; -- or, during very hot weather, place it in the
sunshine. Dry the body completely with warm cloths, and afterward rub it
diligently, but gently, with hot flannels, all over, and especially about the
heart. -- Apply to the hands, feet, and under the arm pits, cloths heated by a
warming pan, bags of hot grains or sand, heated bricks or bottles filled, or
bladders half filled, with warm water, -- the bricks or bottles being covered
with flannel. -- As soon as a quantity of hot water can be got ready, let
blankets or flannels strongly wrung out of it, be wrapped round the body, and
renewed as they grow cool.

N. B. THE heat of these applications should not be greater than can be
comfortably borne by the assistants.

3. DURING the foregoing operations, put the pipe of a pair of bellows into one
of the nostrils (the other nostril and mouth being closed by an assistant,) and
blow gently till the breast be a little raised: let the mouth then be le^^
free, and an easy pressure made on the breast. -- Repeat this imitation of
natural breathing, until signs of life appear, and then gradually discontinue
it. -- To prevent air getting into the stomach, let an assistant keep pressing
the upper part of the windpipe gently backwards.

N. B. IF the pipe of the bellows will not enter the nostril, a piece of stiff
paper, or leather, may be rolled up in the shape of a funnel, and the smaller
end put into the nostril, while the other receives the pipe of the bellows. --
Or if bellows are not at hand, blow into the lungs through such a tube, or
through a quill, reed, or other small pipe, with your breath.

4. WHEN breathing begins, touch the inside of the nostrils, with a feather
dipped in spirir of hartshorn or sharp mustard; or blow some pepper into them. A
glyster should now be given without delay, composed of a pint of warm water
mixed with a sixth part of rum, brandy, or gin, or with a large table spoonful
of spirit of hartshorn, or essence of peppermint, or a heaped teaspoo^ful of
flour of mustard.

5. As soon as the patient can swallow, give him by spoonfuls, a little warm
wine, or spirits mixed with water.

6. WHEN life is completely restored, the sufferer should remain at rest in a
warm bed; be supplied with warm wine whey, ale, posset, or other nourishing
drinks; and gentle sweating should be encouraged.

N. B. These attentions should be continued until the patient is out of all
danger, several persons having been lost from being quitted too soon.

No more than six persons to be admitted into the room; a greater number
serving only to spoil the air and to create confusion and mistakes.

Hanging. -- 1. If a medical person be present, let him take a few ounces of
blood from the jugular veins, or apply cupping-glasses to the neck.

The other means to be the same as recommened for drowned persons.

Suffocation by Noxious Vapors. -- 2. If the body be hot, strip and lay it in
the open air, with the head and shoulders raised. Then dash cold water upon it,
until signs of life appear; taking care that none get into the mouth or
nostrils. At the same time blow into the lungs as ordered in drowned persons.
-- If the body has grown cold, then warmth must be applied.

Frost-bitten, or Frozen. -- At first rub the parts affected, or the whole body
with snow; or wash them with cold water; -- but not near a fire, or in a warm
place; it being of great consequence that the heat be communicated very
gradually. -- If the breathing has stopped, blow into the lungs as already
described: and when recovery takes place, be cautious of giving spiritous
liquors, except in very small quantities, and well lowered with water.

Still-born, or Smothered under Bed-clothes. -- 1. In cases of still-birth,
fill the lungs with air, by blowing into the nostril or mouth through a quill,
then gently press the chest with the hand; and repeat this till natural
breathing begins. -- Also rub the body gently with the warm hand, before a
fire; put it into the warm bath; or wrap it in flannels well wrung out of water
moderately warmed;and stimulate the nostrils with spirit of hartshorn or
mustard.

2. When a child has been smothered in bed by overlaying, etc. if (as is
generally the case) the body be too hot, expose it immediately to a ^^rrent of
air for a short time; also blow into the lungs, and use gentle frictions.

No other means than those here recommended, are ever to be used, except under
the immediate direction of a medical gentleman; but the above means are to be
continued six hours, if needful.

Poison. -- Until medical assistance can be procured, endeavor to produce
vomiting, by giving large draughts of warm milk or water, mixed with oil,
melted butter or lard.

An IMPORTANT, PUBLIC, and HUMANE CAUTION. -- In great sinking of the strength,
especially in the end of fevers and other acute diseases, patients frequently
lie in a state resembling death. If the bed clothes be removed, the heat of the
body will be immediately dissipated, and every spark of life destroyed. By not
attending to this important circumstance, it is feared the lives of thousands
of our fellow creatures have been sacrificed, and their bodies committed to the
grave; -- who, by a more humane conduct, would have been restored to life.

Death may usurp on Nature many hours,
And yet the fire of Life kindle again
The o'er-prest spirits.
Shakespeare.


SECONDLY, the body is to be placed on a bed or mattrass, with the head a
little elevated; if wet should be gently dried with cloths, but in such a
cautious manner, as to prevent the mechanical effect of friction, from
propelling the blood toward the heart. Five or six ounces of brandy, spirits,
or some other warm aromatic, should be thrown into the stomach. If the patient
seems plethoric, and more particularly if the disease has been occasioned by
hanging, bleeding should be employed, and that as one of the first remedies;
nor should the application of a proper degree of warmth be neglected. Bottles
with hot water, or bricks heated, wrapped in a blanket, should be laid to the
bottom of the feet; the joints of the knees, and under the armpits. Fresh air
should be carefully admitted into the place where he lays. If an electrical
machine, is at hand, gentle shocks may be directed through the fourth or fifth
rib of the left side. Inflate the lungs by blowing air into them by a curved
pipe if one can be had, otherwise by a person blowing air into the lungs, and
pressing it out again, so as to imitate natural respiration. Electricity should
never be employed on any account, without a concomitant expansion of the lungs.
Tobacco, in any form is highly pernicious, and ought not therefore to be
applied on any account.

INFLATING the lungs, electrifying the heart, collapsing the lungs, and the
application of frictions, are to be continued four hours, if our endeavors be
not previously crowned with success. Frictions should never be employed before
the lungs have been several times expanded and collapsed. A little common oil
or lard as a medium for the friction, is preferable to either salt or spirits,
or any other stimulating substance. The above methods of restoring life are
applicable to various other causes of apparent death, whether from fits,
suffocation by damps, or noxious vapors, from the confined air of wells, etc.

P. S. FOR making the common bread poultice, water is decidedly preferable to
milk.

A TABLE OF WEIGHTS, etc.
Half a scruple, contains 10 grains. One scruple, 20 do. Half a dram, 30 do.
Two scruples, 40 do. One dram, 60 do. Two drachms, 120 do.


There is also a pewter measure, the large end of which contains one ounce, the
small end half an ounce.

INDEX OF DOSES OF MEDICINES.
No. Doses. ACID of vitriol diluted, or elixir of vitriol, (16) drops, 15 to 40
Antimonial powder, (27) grains, 2 to 6 Alum, (7) grains, 10 to 30 Bark,
Peruvian, (28) grains, 10 to 60 Camphor, (10) grains, 3 to 20 Castor Oil, (17)
half an ounce to 1 oz. Calomel, (25) grains, 5 to 15 Cremor Tartar, (12) half a
dr. to half an oz. Drops, Antimonial Anodine, (33) drops, 15 to 25 Elixir,
Paregoric, (16) drops, 10 to 60 Ginger, Powder, (31) grains, 5 to 20 Jalap,
Powder, (11) grains, 10 to 40 Ipecacuanh, Powder, (47) grains, 10 to 30
Magnesia, (19) half a dram to 2 Mint, essence of, (26) drops, 5 to 8 Pills,
Ague and Fever, (23) 3 times a day, 1 to 2 -- Anti-Bilious, (22) Night and
morn. 2 to 3 -- Alterative, (24) Night and morn. to 1 -- Mineral, (30) L. jaw,
1, 3 or 4 t. a d. Rhubarb, Powder, (19) grains, 10 to 40 Salt, Glauber, (1)
half an oz. to 1 -- Nitre, (2) grains, 10 to 30 -- Wormwood, (20) grains, 10 to
30 Spirit of hartshorn, (4) drops, 10 to 30 -- Sweet Nitre, (48) drops, 10 to
30 Specific, Pectoral, (18) teaspoonful to ^ sp. half Sulphur, flowers of, (21)
grains, 10 to 60 Tartar emetic, or tartarized antimony (3) grains, to 3
Tincture of opium, (15) drops, 10 to 40 -- Peruvian bark, Huxham's, (29) table
sp. full to w. g. ful^ Turlington's Balsam, (46) drops 30 to 60

CONTENTS.
ASTHMA, Page 43 Bruises and Sprains, Page 44 Beef, Pork, etc. when stale, how
to make wholesome, Page 11 Bear, Ale, etc. Page 18 Bleeding, Page 21 Coughs,
Page 29 Clyster, Page ib. Dedication, Page 2 Diet. observations on, Page 15
Diarrhoea and Dysentery, Page 30 Drinks, observation on, Page 17 -- Sweet
(Cider, Cherry, Elder-wine, Punch, Lemonade, etc.) Page 20 -- Warm (Tea, Coffee
and Chocolate,) Page 21 -- Acid Vitriolic, Page 36 -- Nitrous, common, Page 22
Dislocations, Page 49 Dropsy, Page 42 Drowning, recovery of, Page 50 Extract of
Lead, Solution of, Page 45 Eye, inflammation of, Page 26 Eye-water, Page ib.
Fever, acute inflammatory, Page 23 -- Intermitting, and ague, Page 32 --
Pleurisy and peripneumony, Page 22 -- Putrid tending, bilious or yellow, Page
33 Fractures in general, Page 47 -- Ribs, Page 49 Fruits, Page 17 Guinea-worm,
Page 12 -- Jaundice, Page 43 Itch, and herpetic eruptions, Page 45 Intestines,
inflammation of Page 27 Jaw, locked, Page 42 Kidney, inflammation of, Page 27
Liver inflammation of, Page ib. Liquors, Spiritous, Page 19 Medical advice,
Page 9 Mixture opening, Page 22 -- With essence of Mint, Page 28 -- Of tarter
emetic, Page 22 -- Of Peruvian bark, etc. Page 33 Musquetoes, horse-flies, etc.
bite of, Page 10 Preface, Page 5 Provisions, want of how to prevent, Page 14
Piles, Page 28 Pills, opening, Page 34 Powders, febrifuse and opening, Page 24
-- Antiscorbutic, Page 31 -- Cathartic (for the dropsy,) Page 42 Rheumatism,
Page 25 Sallads, their virtues, Page 16 Spices, their nutritive quality, Page
14 Scurvy, Page 31 Stomach, inflammation of, Page 26 Vapor, nitrous for the
destruction of contagion, Page 39 Vinegar, four thieves, Page 49 Water, bad or
putrid, how to sweeten, Page 11 -- Imperial, Page 37 Wounds, gunshot, Page 45
-- Bayonet, Sabre, etc. Page 46 Wines. Page 19


APPENDIX, On the Prevention and Cure of the VENEREAL DISEASE, Is published
separate.


