REFLECTIONS ON WAR. IN ANSWER TO REFLECTIONS ON PEACE.

BY F. D'IVERNOIS, ESQUIRE. WITH NOTES, QUOTATIONS, etc. FROM JOHN ADAMS, PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES.

At first, the arms of France were too much despised; now they are too much
dreaded.

Reflections on Peace, p. 8. PHILADELPHIA: PUBLISHED BY FRANCIS C. KING, No.
42, MARKET-STREET. 1798. Price 50 Cents.

TO THE AUTHOR OF REFLECTIONS ON PEACE.
M.....
A PAMPHLET has just been reprinted here, which every person of taste
attributes to you, and which no one can read without respecting its author.
Your wishes are for peace, and you would persuade the allied Powers not to
scruple purchasing it by very important concessions. In your wishes all Europe
will unite; but many, I believe, will think, with me, that the means which you
propose for accomplishing them would be productive of the most dangerous
consequences. It is consoling to see the milder affections still cherished in
the bosom of one of the sexes, while every thought of the other seems bent on
destruction; but yet, a great deal too much is at stake to allow its being
sacrificed to the impatience of an excessive sensibility, whose triumph could
only be preparatory to the bitterest regret.

I am too confident, perhaps, in entering the lists against one who unites the
seduction of sentiment peculiar to her own sex, with a courage in her political
remarks which might rather be expected in the other, and embellishes both with
hereditary eloquence. But truth and facts are the best support of an argument,
and will make up for any other disparity between the disputants.

My purpose I hope will not be mistaken. Indeed it will soon appear that we
really have both the same object; for who is there so unfeeling as not
anxiously to wish for peace? not indeed a suspicious and temporary suspension
of war, disguised under that name; but a peace equitable and durable, more so
than can possibly be obtained by any concessions on the part of the Allies.

Meaning to confine my observations to the actual situation, and the prospects
of the contending Powers, I shall say nothing of the picture which you have
sketched with so much spirit of the errors of the Coalition against France; but
merely observe, that the view you exhibit of the errors committed by the
combined Powers, will rather induce them to avoid such conduct in future, than
tempt them to repeat it.

I could wish to think so (you may say); but, admitting that past errors do not
necessarily lead to new disgrace, if you would interest us in the success of
the Allies, we must first know exactly what use they will make of it. Will they
again think of dismembering France, of compelling an unconditional submission
to the ancient system, and chastising those who destroyed it? Will they again
propose to bring back the emigrants in triumph to Paris, with their terrible
train of vengeance, exclusive privileges, feudal rights, and partial taxation?

All such ideas the events of the war have long since shown to be visionary.
For a long time the object has been to save Germany from being dismembered; and
to prevent the aggrandisement, instead of attempting the partition, of France.
The object has been to compel it to give back its conquests, and to keep so
destructive a torrent within its proper limits: and, as probably the happiness
and peace of a century to come will principally depend on the equitable
termination of the present contest, if the French cannot be conquered in the
field, yet still the war should be continued till absolute want compels them to
retire within their ancient boundaries.

You appear to believe that a formal acknowledgement of their Republic would
remove all difficulties, dissipate their fears, and lead to a general
restitution; and you think that the British Cabinet persists in wasting the
blood and treasure of the nation, merely to save the Kings of Europe from the
humiliation of such a declaration. Perhaps you have not heard that three months
ago January 26, 1795.
Mr. Pit himself moved and carried the following resolution in the House of
Commons: That, under the present circumstances, the House of Commons feels
itself called upon to declare its determination firmly and steadily to support
his Majesty in the vigorous prosecution of the present just and necessary war,
as affording, at this time, the only reasonable expectation of permanent
security and peace to this country: and that, for the attainment of these
objects, this House relies with equal confidence on his Majesty's intention to
employ vigorously the force and resources of the country, in support of its
essential interests; and on the desire uniformly manifested by his Majesty, to
effect a pacification on just and honorable grounds, with any Government in
France, under whatever form, which shall appear capable of maintaining the
accustomed relations of peace and amity with other countries.

Such has been, and such still is, the language of Mr. Pit. But though you
have said a great deal of that Minister in your work, I shall say very little
of him in mine. No one has less occasion for an officious defender than he; and
I do not see the use of confining so general a question, and, when all other
passions are so dangerously agitated, increasing the mischief by any personal
reflections.

CHAPTER I.
Whether the War has really been more disastrous to the confederated Powers,
than Neutrality would have been? Whether they ought to accede to any sort of
Treaty, which would leave the French in possession of the smallest part of
their Conquests? and whether the Chances of obtaining Restitution, and of
ultimate Success in the present Contest, are not in favor of that Party which
has the most permanent Resources?

BEFORE any discussion of the principal point in dispute, it will be convenient
to disentangle it from some questions which have a tendency to perplex it.

I do not mean (any more than M --) to go back to the origin of the war, or to
investigate its justice on the part of the two Princes who first united in
support of monarchy in France: I am afraid there is but too much reason to
believe that it has contributed to lead to the scaffold the King, whom they
wished to confirm on his throne, and to make those very principles triumphant,
which they intended to exterminate.

But, whatever may be thought of preceding circumstances, it cannot be denied
that Great Britain did not join the confederacy, until the principles of
Anarchy were triumphant in France; until that nation had avowed its project of
disseminating them universally, and until it had actually commenced hostilities
against States with which Great Britain had defensive alliances. In justice to
the British Government, this circumstance ought not to be overlooked; nor
should we judge of the policy of its conduct, by the bad success which has
hitherto attended it; but by the actual situation of Europe, at the time when
this country acceded to the confederacy; when the people were generally taught
to look upon the French Revolution as realising every airy vision of political
happiness; while in truth it menaced mankind with a far more dreadful scourge
than that under which we now suffer. We should revert to the time when, in very
many countries, the people seemed advancing, from admiration of the French
theories, to an impatience for putting them in practice. If, at so dangerous a
moment, there were Statesmen cool enough to resist the general enthusiasm, who
foresaw the inevitable consequence of those theories, and, in order to prevent
it, adopted the bold measure of drawing on their country toward an evil,
distressing no doubt, but neither unusual, nor without remedy, with a view to
save it from the irreparable mischief of revolutionary anarchy -- Statesmen
wise enough to rouse that popular zeal in defense of social order, which else
might have been seduced to subvert it; perhaps the gratitude of future ages
will be in proportion to the courage with which they have dared to oppose the
clamours of the day.

The Author of the Reflections on Peace, however, bitterly reproaches them for
not knowing how to avoid the scourge of revolutionary principles, but by the
scourge of war, instead of lowering all their sails during the storm. But
before we decide whether it was best boldly to bear up against it, or to let
the vessel drive before it, at the mercy of the waves, the bursting out of the
storm should be considered. This same writer calls it a new era. It was indeed
a time, when an unheard of and most dangerous doctrine was zealously propagated
with a sort of philosophic parade, which fascinated many even of the thinking
part of the world; and when consequently it became the duty of those who
foresaw the mischief, to give a contrary direction to popular enthusiasm. If
this so-much-blamed war, for which the French gave such justifying provocation,
or, if you insist upon it, so specious a pretense, has kept their neighbors
under the restraint of law, prevented turbulence by giving employment, and
strengthened the existing governments, by uniting in their defense those active
spirits, which else might have been united for their destruction: -- if, which
is indisputable, this political pestilence has already cost France ten times
more lives than all the nations of Europe together have lost, in defending
themselves from it by war: -- but beyond all other considerations, if the
British Constitution has triumphed, and will descend unchanged to posterity; --
I am convinced that future ages will look on the sacrifices of the present day,
as signal benefits. -- Bloody they are, no doubt, and calamitous; but
infinitely less so than the poisoned present of the revolutionary system which
the French have offered to the world.

If it is said that the nations which have not made such bloody sacrifices to
internal tranquillity, have neither felt the mischiefs of war, nor been
infected with this revolutionary contagion; I would ask what advantages those
nations which are within the grasp of France have found, from a disposition to
neutrality? Was it any security to Savoy, Holland, or the Palatinate? But
waving what might be said respecting them, I wish to consider what has really
been the situation of those other neutral States (so exclusively fortunate) to
which the war has not reached, whose wisdom and happiness is so greatly
extolled; and which are set up as patterns of the only line of conduct which
the belligent Powers should have adopted, and as instances of the profound
security which would have been the consequence.

Next to Denmark, the Author of the Reflections on Peace mentions Sweden,
which, we are told, owes its tranquillity to the system of neutrality adopted
by the prudence of the Regent. And yet, in the midst of this tranquil
Neutrality, this very Regent has detected a Conspiracy, which he represents as
atrocious, and as having put the independence and the quiet of Sweden in
imminent danger. Is it forgotten that, in claiming from the Court of Naples,
the person accused of contriving this conspiracy, the Regent of Sweden, in
December 1793, represented that, in this disastrous epoch, when Europe is
agitated from one end to the other, the Courts of it ought to guard their
common interests more vigilantly than ever? It is whimsical enough that the
Regent of Sweden, so much praised for not having joined with the rest of
Europe, to guard vigilantly those common interests, should actually have
addressed this language to Naples, a Court which has made very considerable
exertions in the common cause. It is still more so, that a Prince who can plead
it as an undeniable truth, that whoever protects traitors, exposes himself to
become the victim of their attempts, should be at the head of affairs in a
country, which, if it has not actually given military assistance to the French
Regicides, has at least, in very many other respects, contributed largely to
their resources. But what is more strange than all is, that the kingdom, whose
tranquil neutrality M -- extolls so much, is the only one which, during its
Neutrality, has seen one of its Kings assassinated, and an atrocious conspiracy
contrived against his successor. I know that the whole of this conspiracy is
not yet discovered, or at least has not been laid before the public:
consequently it is impossible to say, how much of it is imputable to French
principles; but who is bold enough to affirm that it would have taken place,
even though the Regent had put the nation into a state of defense? or to
congratulate her on the tranquillity of her neutrality?


But at least, says M --, we must acknowledge that the Americans are enriching
themselves by their neutrality. I admit it, and I am very far from blaming
them; but if they profit by the losses of the Old World, what a risk have they
not run of being torn in pieces by its Anarchy! Among them too the Convention
has sent emissaries commissioned to drive, if possible, the Patriarch of the
New World from his senatorial chair. They failed, indeed, in completing their
infernal work; but they succeeded too well in kindling a civil war, and
obliging parents to arm against their children; while, at most, the belligerent
Powers of the Old World have only been obliged to arm against a foreign enemy.
Who can conjecture what might have been the consequences of this civil war, if
Washington had not been alive, to give energy to law, to unite and arm the body
of American Proprietors, who, under his direction, readily submitted to the
painful duty of a fatiguing march against their misguided countrymen? In
America they found the necessity of pulling up by the roots these trees of
pretended Liberty which French Anarchy was beginning to plant in its remotest
forests. And yet we are coolly told that the neutral States have been very far
from imitating the example of the French! and we are to infer, that a people
separated from them by the Straits of Dover has been to blame for providing
effectually against a contagion malignant enough to reach beyond the Atlantic!
But when we see that France has repaid the sincere unarmed neutrality of the
New World by instigating its inhabitants to political suicide, we may judge
what would have been the fate of the governments in her vicinity, if they had
remained unarmed and unprepared for resistance. Yet, by a strange injustice,
though in England every seditious movement has been easily suppressed by a
slight exertion of civil authority; and in America, neutral from interest and
upon principle, the Government has been forced to raise on a sudden no less
than 16000 men, to suppress an insurrection entirely owing to doctrines of
anarchy disseminated by French emissaries; yet the British Cabinet, in the
person of Mr. Pit, is reproached with having persuaded the people of property
in England, that nothing but war could protect the Nation from the contagion of
French politics.

But (continues the author, page 8) has not Swisserland, at the very doors of
the French Revolution, avoided its introduction, and escaped the horrors of
war, by a prudent neutrality? No; it is certain that their disposition to
maintain peace would not have saved them, but for the concurrence of some other
very particular circumstances. A war was actually undertaken against them,
notwithstanding their avowed neutrality, and they were at one time in the most
imminent danger. The French Republic had sent positive orders to their General,
Montesquiou, to invade Swisserland; but this was prevented, in the first
instance, by the little State of Geneva, which adopted measures of resistance,
and became a barrier between the army of the Alps and the Pays de Vaud, till
the Helvetic Body had time to arm itself. The French General, too, had virtue
enough to protract the execution of his orders, and succeeded in procuring them
to be revoked; but not without determining to ruin himself rather than decline
representing to his employers the great injustice and the danger of the war
which they were kindling. Let not France be dishonored by an execrable abuse
of power. Will you suffer the infancy of a Republic on which the eyes of the
universe are fixed, to be polluted by the foul perfidy of Courts? Will you
disgrace your darling country, by the scandalous repetition of the fable of the
wolf and the lamb? Will it add to our honor, or to our power, to crush the
feeblest of our neighbors, to violate the sacred rules of universal justice,
and to plunge ourselves into an additional war? See A short Account of the late
Revolution in Geneva, printed for Elmsley, Strand, 1795.
And the revolution to which Geneva voluntarily submitted soon after, took away
their pretense for invading Swisserland. The deplorable fate of that
interesting city is but too generally known, as well as the iniquitous
declaration in the Convention, which said, There must be a Revolution in
Geneva, or our own must fail. We know that Swisserland, though by this time
prepared for resistance, had no way of avoiding a war but by withdrawing its
troops from the neighborhood of Geneva, and leaving it to its fate; and we
know, too, that the pretended crime of that city was having procured itself to
be included in the Helvetic Neutrality, which, said Brissot, is nothing but an
ill-disguised accession to the Coalition of Princes. Report to the Convention
in the name of the Diplomatic Committee, the 21st of December 1792, by Brissot.


Yet in sight of this unfortunate city, which the French have polluted, by
every atrocity of their own Revolution -- close to the gates of a city whose
Neutrality was its crime, a philosophic writer reproaches other nations for not
having trusted to a similar Neutrality!

I am, however, convinced, that nothing but the existing calamities of the war,
could have led M -- to lose sight of the far more terrible calamities from
which, in all probability, Europe has been preserved by it. Quite overjoyed to
see the French Revolution all at once take so moderate a turn, M -- does not
observe that it is the war, which, by exhausting that nation, has brought it so
soon to an epoch when the principles which led to it have lost their
attraction, even with the French themselves; and when they are as candid in
avowing the disastrous consequences of those principles, as formerly they were
zealous in trying to persuade other nations, that the adoption of them would
renovate the world, and restore the golden age.

Indeed there is now no longer any danger that other nations will be tempted to
drink this political poison, from which France at present feels such fatal
effects. They need no other warning against it than the following frightful,
but the salutary declaration of the very persons who, a few years since, were
so anxious in recommending it.

France, says Isnard, has been drenched with blood, and inundated with tears.
The sovereignty of the Nation has been wronged; we have seen whole troops of
victims dragged to the scaffold. Wretches! (addressing himself to a part of his
colleagues) look at your clothes! they are still spotted with blood. Be
grateful for the generosity which restrains me from displaying the immensity of
your crimes. This member of the Convention has published a pamphlet, which
(though meant to excite the public indignation against the faction of which he
has been the victim) is really a most eloquent accusation of the Revolution
itself, to which he so much contributed. Let other nations judge of that
Revolution by the following picture drawn by a man who has been one of its
authors, of its victims, and an eyewitness of what he describes.

"A civil war excited; Robespierre elevated to a dictatorial throne; the
Convention mutilated, debilitated, subjugated; the reign of terror established;
the proconsulate introduced; every natural feeling stifled; freedom of action,
of speech, and of the press, in chains; probity, virtue, and philosophy,
proscribed; commerce, sciences, and arts, annihilated; Vandalism and robbery
honored; calumny and information rewarded; Maratism deified; the wealth of the
public dilapidated; an agrarian system avowed; moral principle corrupted; the
national faith violated; property invaded; numerous tribunals of blood
instituted; the power of life and death delegated to the most ferocious of men;
thousands of scaffolds erected; 50,000 Bastilles crammed with pretended
state-prisoners; pestilence ravaging the prisons of the West; La Vendee
encouraged; 100,000 victims beheaded, blown to pieces, or drowned; 300,000
defenders of the unity of the Convention outlawed with a stroke of the pen;
600,000 true republicans compelled to emigrate; millions of families, of
widows, and of orphans, drowned in tears; whole departments put to the sword,
and consumed by the flames; vast countries producing no other harvest but bones
and briars; age massacred and burnt on its bed of pain; infancy murdered in the
mother's womb; chastity violated in the moment of death; the monsters of the
ocean fatted with human flesh; the Loire encumbered with carcases; the Rhone
and the Soane changed into rivers of blood; V^ncluse, to a fountain of tears;
Nantes, to a sepulcher; Paris, Arras, Bordeaux, Strasbourg, to
slaughter-houses; Lions in ruins; the South a desert; and France one vast
theater of horror, pillage, and murder."

Certainly it required the hand of a master to give so finished a sketch, in a
few lines; and certainly no writer but a Frenchman would have omitted to add to
this description, an account of the cause of so many horrors. The reader who
wishes to know them may find them detailed in the third book of Thucydides*
from which the above description is little else than an extract. He will
observe that Thucydides, in giving a frightful picture of the evils which
Greece suffered from an unlimited Democracy, positively declares that the same
evils will constantly recur whenever an attempt is made to introduce a pure
Democracy among a numerous people; wherever (to use the words of Freron)
orators appear to recommend the magnificent enterprise of forming a Democracy
of 25 millions of men.




France! (exclaimed Le Gendre, on the 24th of March) France is in ruins.
Whichever way I look, what do I behold, but desolation and death! In the south
I see the Rhone rolling its bloody waters to the Mediterranean! The public
places in Paris have been covered with the dead! The cities of the south have
been in flames! The north has been devastated and decimated by a ferocious
savage! The Republic has been one vast Bastille, and tyranny has presided
within these walls.

Terror (says Bailleul) subdued every soul, compressed the emotions of every
heart. Terror was the strength of the Government; of such a government, that
the numerous inhabitants of a vast territory seemed to have lost those
qualities which distinguish men from brutes. They seemed to have no life but
what their despots designed to allow them. Every man lost the consciousness of
his own existence, and was a mere machine, coming, going, thinking, or not
thinking, as he was impelled or animated by tyranny.

France (says Rovere) during the despotism of kings, was inhabited by courtiers
and slaves: under the tyranny of Robespierre it contained only executioners and
victims.

The history of the present Convention (says the Abbe Sieyes) may be divided
into two epochs: during the first it was constantly enslaved by the people;
during the second it was enslaved by Robespierre, by his accomplices, and by
the different factions which have succeeded them.

It is a vain attempt (said Collot d'Herbois, on the 24th of March) to blot out
your part from the History of the Revolution. The people seconded us all.

Tyranny has been exercised upon the people (says Saladin); terror has been the
soul of the government. Prisons and scaffolds have covered the soil of France;
and innocent blood has flowed in every part of it.

But listen to Barrere! -- What has commanded these terrible measures? THE
REVOLUTION. Through what medium? Through persons deputed by the people. Who
executed those measures? The Revolutionary Committees. Who approved them? The
Convention. Who superintended them? The Committee of General Safety. LIBERTY,
like Victory, weeps over the evils she is compelled to be the cause of.

These dreadful confessions are extracted from the debates of the Convention
itself. We observe, that the very men who make them, and who so heartily avow
them, are unanimous in declaring that France is become a Hell. They only differ
in the name of the Demon who has made it so. Rovere calls him Terror; Le Gendre
calls him Robespierre; Collot d'Herbois, and Abbe Sieyes, name the Convention
and the People; Barrere closes the list with openly accusing Liberty and the
Revolution.

Undoubtedly these are reasons why an imitation of the French Revolution need
no longer be dreaded: but if from these declarations, which so strongly
indicate that France is verging toward a regular government, we are to
conclude, that because the original object of the war is nearly attained, we
should therefore immediately propose a peace, in order that the new leaders of
the French may be in a situation to effect the reforms which are necessary; and
that Europe may enjoy the quiet for which she has been fighting, and which she
so anxiously desires; -- To those who argue in this way I answer, that, in the
first place, we ought to ascertain whether the new French leaders do sincerely
wish for a general peace, and whether in fact they are not internally convinced
that it will destroy their authority. But, besides that they have never yet
expressed such a wish, even if they had expressed it, the only pledge we can
have of the sincerity of such professions, will be an offer to make a complete
restitution of their conquests.

This consideration leads to another not less important -- Whether, even in
that case, any engagements made by the Girondist party, who once more take the
lead, can be depended on? The author of this pamphlet was one of those who
negociated and signed, on the part of Geneva, the first treaty made by the
French Republic; and can give evidence from his own experience, how little the
good faith of that Republic, or any engagement entered into by its Girondist
leaders, can be trusted. This very Faction, after giving its Minister full
powers to negociate a treaty with the Genevese, waited till the latter had
executed it on their part, and then coolly told them, they ought to have been
aware that the only admissible treaty was a communication of principles. It
remains to be considered (said Brissot in his report on this subject) whether a
free people can or ought to bind itself by treaties; whether they are not
useless between Republics which ought to be guided by a community of
principles; and indecent with every other form of Government which does not
derive its authority immediately from the People. On those questions depend the
SECRET of your own Revolution, and of those which are PREPARING. The practices
of the French Republic to prepare a Revolution at Geneva are now no longer a
secret; and before we accede to the opinion that she may safely be treated
with, the following series of facts which they offer should be considered.

1st, The present Convention refused to ratify a treaty with Geneva, made and
signed in her name by a General invested with full powers for that purpose, and
approved by the Ministers.

2dly, She pretended to give a color for this abuse of power by decreeing the
arrest of her Plenipotentiary, Montesquiou, though the Ministers declared that
he had only acted according to their orders.

3dly, To give additional effect to this unexampled abuse of power, the
Convention took care to wait till the treaty was not only ratified, but almost
completely executed, on the part of Geneva; and till the retreat of the Swiss
troops which had advanced to their assistance left them destitute of defense.

4thly, The French Republic had no other object, in substituting negotiation
for force, but to deceive and disarm the allies of Geneva; and to put it out of
their power to prevent that derangement of the social order established there,
which she was determined to effect at any risk.

5thly, Her measures were disguised by solemn treaties, which there is proof
she intended to violate, at the very moment she contracted them; and which were
violated only to bring about a Revolution i^ Geneva, more mischievous in its
consequences than any that could have followed from war.

6thly, If for so inconsiderable an object as that of subverting the limited
Democracy of Geneva, the Republic of France, while yet in her infancy, and
previous to her victories, did not scruple to disgrace herself by an open
violation of her first treaty, made with the weakest of her neighbors: then
let that State which of all her neighbors is the most formidable to her, and
whose constitution she has avowed it is essential to her interests to destroy;
and which nevertheless is persuaded to disarm itself, and to rely on the faith
of treaties -- let that State first have some security, that the French
Republic, under the government of the same party, though not with the same
chiefs, will treat with more honor, and execute its treaties with more
fidelity.

I repeat it, there is but one security which can be given for this, or which
ought to be accepted; I mean, the immediate restitution of all her conquests.




Since we know that such principles as these induced the Girondist party, which
at that time was all-powerful in France, to violate and annul the first treaty
signed by the French Republic, it remains perhaps to be considered whether it
would be wise to place implicit confidence in any new treaties which that party
may now be disposed to enter into, with any Government which does not (in their
opinion) derive its authority immediately from the people. Considering however
that circumstances are now very much changed; and aware too that their conduct
may differ according to the magnitude of the object; I will admit that in the
present state of things we may confide in the sincerity of the French Republic;
but I still deny that we can rely on the solidity of any peace, unless she will
guarantee it by a restitution of all her conquests; and I must add, that
nothing less than such a restitution will restore the balance of power in
Europe.

Whatever our new Preceptors may pretend, this balance of power is the
salvation of Europe: it preserves its tranquillity, precisely in the same way
that the balances of the British Constitution preserve the liberties of the
people: it protects weak nations from the usurpations of powerful ones, and
provides a general security against the abuse of strength in a general
coalition to repress it. This admirable equipoise of the forces of Europe has
now been for two centuries the palladium of her civilization. Formed by it into
one extensive and wealthy confederation, she has been saved from the
devastations of savage invaders. -- It is only since the adoption of this
system (accompanied and assisted by the Reformation) that barbarism has
vanished from Europe. Like Greece during a similar equipoise among her
Republics, she has since that period enjoyed in an eminent degree the blessings
of social order, and protection from oppression; and has cultivated with
unexampled success, the arts of which peace is the parent, and the sciences of
which she is the nurse. Favored by this system, the nations of Europe were
hourly acquiring knowledge, freedom, and happiness, when this new philosophy
appeared, to tell them that they were ignorant and superstitious slaves. It is
nevertheless this equipoise of force that has given Europe such a decided
superiority over the other two great divisions of the ancient world, which
though in many respects more favored by nature, yet will never emerge from
their present abject condition, until some divisions of power are established
among them; some federal system, adapted to their circumstances, which can
secure them from conquest, and protect the independence of the weak from the
violence of the strong.

Let us calculate, if possible, all the advantages which Europe has derived
from this system since the treaty of Westphalia, and then estimate the miseries
which she brought upon herself by neglecting it when Louis XIV. first began his
enterprises. Can any one who considers the subject, believe that the war which
ravaged almost all Europe about a century ago, would ever have taken place, if
in 1667 (the period of the first attack by Louis XVI.) the parties to the
treaty of Westphalia had understood their true interests well enough to see,
that then was the moment to unite against the ambition of France? The exertions
which might have effectually stopped Louis in the beginning of his career, and
compelled him to retreat within his own territories, would have been nothing in
comparison of the sacrifices which they were aftervards obliged to make, merely
to prevent him from passing the new boundary to which his first enterprise
enabled him to extend his dominions.

Who will deny that the French Republic is now what Louis XVI. was in 1667,
with the same over-bearing temper, the same thirst of dominion, the same
passion for aggrandisement? Who does not shudder at the prospect of the
torrents of blood which must slow for an age to come, if, by ceding to this
military Republic any portion of its immense conquests, we intoxicate it with
the ambitious desire of increasing them hereafter; or if we adopt the immoral
policy of yielding at present, with the secret intention of renewing the
contest at a more favorable opportunity?

The restitution of her conquests -- of all of them without exception, must be
the only basis of a solid peace; and now that the fury of the revolutionary
storm is so much abated, the ultimate object of the war, an object which Europe
and Great Britain should never lose sight of, is to preserve in full force the
confederation of Westphalia. I do not hesitate to say that if the greater part
of the allied Powers should be pusillanimous enough to wish to purchase leave
to retain what they have remaining, by finally abandoning what they have lost;
still the solemn engagements of Great Britain, her dignity, and her interest,
require of her to exert all the authority which she derives from her
preponderance in the alliance, in prevailing on them not to betray their own
cause; and, under any circumstances, to employ her whole force in defending it.

But possibly her Allies, fatigued with the contest, may say, "If the French
Republic persist in refusing to restore her conquests, must we have no
alternative; but be obliged to allow her an opportunity of adding to them, by
prolonging a war which has already given her so many provinces, and added so
much to her resources for pursuing it with increasing success?"

As to her resources, they no longer exist, or, at any rate, must very soon be
totally exhausted. It is upon this circumstance that Europe should fix its
attention; for it inevitably leads to a complete restitution of the provinces
which have been lost. At present the enthusiasm of her enemies is abated, and
the war differs from former wars in these respects only: 1st, That the German
States complain of being exhausted before they have suffered a third part of
what the seven-years war cost them; 2dly, That the French, by bringing into
action the whole of their resources at once, and pushing on with their national
impetuosity, have hitherto been irresistible; and 3dly, That as to the relative
situation of the conquerors and the conquered, the former are infinitely more
exhausted than the latter.

If there be a political truth, which the history of modern Europe puts out of
all controversy, it is this: that every war is now more or less a war of
finance, invariably terminating to the disadvantage of that Power whose
pecuniary resources are soonest exhausted. The great Frederic learned this
axiom from his father, never lost sight of it, and owed to it all his success.
If we read his works, we shall find, that it was only by an admirable
management of his revenues, and by his care to have always new resources in
reserve, that he was able to support, for seven successive years, and at last
to terminate with glory, a contest full of disasters, and during which his
enemies overran the whole of his dominions. When at last he obliged them to
retreat, and to restore all that they had taken from him, it was because they
felt an inability to persist in the war, the necessary consequence of exhausted
resources; while, with a foresight which secured success, the great abilities
of Frederic had been directed as much to recruit his treasures as his armies.

It is true, that when the means of war altogether depended on the accumulation
of treasure, its duration might be more easily be calculated beforehand than
now, that nations have discovered the dangerous secret of charging its expenses
on unborn generations, by additional debts. But still, if, in comparing the
strength of contending Powers, we add to their existing resources, those which
are derived from credit, we may foretell with sufficient certainty which of
them will ultimately be the most powerful, and consequently which has the best
reason to expect success from perseverance. In the present war, therefore,
before a thought is admitted on the part of the Allies of buying a peace by
sacrifices, which must necessarily render it insecure; before we give way to
despondency, we should examine whether our antagonist is not much nearer the
end of his treasures and his credit than we are; whether the distress resulting
from this circumstance does not more than counterbalance any victory in the
field; and whether, in spite of his wide-extended acquisitions, he is not on
the point of being in a situation to say with Pyrrhus, One victory more, and I
am undone.

An object then at present of the greatest importance, is to compare the
military resources, or, which in truth is the same thing, the finances and the
credit of France with those of Great Britain; for it is from such a comparison
only that we can decide whether the latter ought to make any concession for the
sake of peace.

CHAPTER II.
That at present the only Resource of France is her Assignats, on which even
her future military exertions must exclusively depend; which are depreciating
with a continually accelerating progression, and in a short time must
inevitably be of no value whatever.

THE Author of the Reflections on Peace begins with the following bold
assertion: The whole power of the French Revolution consists in the art of
exciting popular enthusiasm, and directing it to political purposes. Page 1,
line 1.

This (though assumed, and afterward relied on as a fundamental proposition) I
must deny without any hesitation. In the commencement of the Revolution it
might be true, but has long since ceased to be so: for, admitting that popular
enthusiasm, with liberty for its object, was the instrument employed to
overturn the French Monarchy, and to repel the attempts of the Combined Powers
to restore it; yet the republican system which succeeded it, could neither have
been founded nor supported so long, but by a cause more simple, more durable,
and more unremittingly active: -- I mean self-interest, which has been
stimulated by the invention of assignats. In them, and in them only, consists
at present all the power of the French Revolution. It is by them that it has
succeeded in bribing every personal consideration. By stipends to civil
officers, who are every one preachers of the new-fashioned doctrines, it has
succeeded in spreading them to every corner of France. Even its foreign
conquests are merely to be attributed to the assignats, which have hitherto
provided for 1,200,000 soldiers; and no doubt so extraordinary a number must
necessarily have produced extraordinary effects. If the conquests of the French
Republic have been three times as extensive as those of Louis XIV. it is
because the assignats have enabled it to maintain armies three times as
numerous. Of the truth of this we have the following confirmations in the
Convention, by Cambon, Feb. 8, 1795.

The nation is under great obligations to the Constituent Assembly for the
creation of assignats. This territorial money has very much assisted the
Revolution, by bringing into circulation the value of the national domains, by
enabling us to provision, equip, and maintain armies to the amount of 1200,000
men, to create fleets, to cultivate the lands for saltpetre! to manufacture
arms, etc. etc.

This same Cambon, who remarked that a fifth part of the effective population
of France had been engaged in the common defense, exclaimed on the 23d of
November last, in this same Convention. Some of my colleagues have said, that
the economical system of Louis XIV. should be adopted; who, when he had to
contend against a coalition of Powers, spent no more than 219 millions ( 9
millions sterling.) a year, while the expenses of the present war are almost ten
times as great; meaning to insinuate that the Convention squanders the wealth
of the nation.


What we have to consider is, whether the resources of France have not been
wasted with infinitely greater profusion; and whether she is not, in this
respect, on the eve of a catastrophe, proportionably more violent than that
which she experienced in the beginning of this century; and whether she will be
able much longer to delay this catastrophe, by delaying the total depreciation
of her paper money.

So long as the assignats were issued in any sort of proportion to the
confiscations which were pledged for them, they had a real value, and the
project was greatly successful. But from the time that the Convention,
intoxicated by a discovery so unexpected, and by means so immense, began to
employ itself in contriving pretenses for new wars, in order to bring them into
action; when it began to work this rich mine, as if absolutely inexhaustible;
every intelligent observer foresaw the rapid and complete depreciation of its
produce. The calculation that nothing could prolong the existence of assignats
beyond two or three years, has indeed proved erroneous; but it has proved so,
merely because it was impossible to conjecture that such extraordinary means
would be adopted for supporting them; and that Robespierre would come forward
to prop them up, when tottering, by his two additional projects of spoliation
and terror.

His process is well known. He began by a decree, which seized all the specie
that could be found, of every sort, and paid for it with assignats. He then
imposed the Law of the Maximum, and that of Requisitions; measures which, so
long as they could be borne, gave this new money a forced circulation, and a
pretended value. But as decrees so oppressive could not be enforced without
having innumerable officers and informers, The following extract from a speech
of Cambon's, on the 4th of November, will give some idea of the expense
incurred by Robespierre's system of terror.

A Government was formed which cost 591 millions (almost 25 millions sterling)
annually, merely in inspection. Immediately the husbandmen and manufacturers
left their usual occupations, which made them useful citizens, to become
members of Revolutionary Committees, where they had nothing to do, and by which
they enjoyed a sort of authority, and received five livres a day.


to compel the people to submit to them, he met the difficulties resulting from
this multiplication of expense, by contriving a new security for new emissions
of assignats.

For this purpose the system of terror was adopted in its fullest extent,
merely as a measure of finance, in which view Robespierre undoubtedly
considered it; and such was the success of his horrible proscriptions, that in
some instances the very same estates have actually been three times confiscated
and sold again. The assignats issued were but a sort of bills of exchange,
drawn on the Revolutionary Tribunal, and paid by the Guillotine, which
Robespierre is said to have called an engine for coining money.

In this way, as soon as the inferior and subaltern robbers of their country
were grown rich enough to be worth plundering, the Guillotine transferred their
wealth to the State, and furnished the security wanted for new emissions of
assignats: this sanguinary contrivance had the desired effect on the infatuated
multitude, who imagined that their value would not alter, at least in the
interior of the Republic, as long as they could find any demagogues to load
with riches one day, and to plunder on the next. It was by this terrible round
of confiscations, dilapidations of public wealth, executions, and emissions of
new paper, that the credit of the assignats was supported for more than a year,
and the Republic was actually enabled to provision her fourteen armies at a
cheaper rate, though with paper money, than the Allies could their forces with
specie. To produce this political miracle, cost Robespierre nothing more than a
declaration that half the property of France was to change its owners by
violent means.

However, those who were thus enriched, not finding themselves at all more
secure than those who were suffered to retain their property, began of course
to unite with them for the destruction of a tyrant equally dangerous to both:
almost a year elapsed before the object could be gained; but at last he, in his
turn, was dragged to execution; and by his death began a new epoch in the
history of assignats.

Every preceding faction, however atrocious its measures, had been regularly
supplanted by another proposing measures still more atrocious; but as it was
impossible to go beyond Robespierre in cruelty, those who supplanted him had no
way to secure themselves, but by promising to be more moderate; and
particularly they found themselves obliged to begin with abolishing the law of
the Maximum, and leaving the Guillotine which had supported it, without
employment.

But though they could not but know that the suppression of the maximum must be
fatal to the assignats, yet they never once dreamt of proposing a general
peace; though it was the only measure which was likely to prevent further
depreciation, by making further emissions unnecessary. They obstinately
persisted in carrying on the war, though they were no longer able to fix the
currency, or to keep up the value of the assignats, which they were obliged to
issue for its expense.

From that time their relative value has fallen, and must continue to fall in
the compound ratio of the depreciation of the existing mass (already much
greater than can be brought into circulation), and of its continual
augmentation. Nor is this all -- for their depreciation is advancing with a
rapidity continually and inevitably accelerated by this very simple
circumstance, that the lower those which have been already issued fall in one
month, to the greater nominal amount must new ones be issued in the next, in
order to defray equal expenses; and the Convention can only bear up against the
effect of their present progressive diminution of value, by means which hasten
their ruin. By increasing the quantity which they issue in one month, they
condemn themselves to issue a still greater quantity in the next. I appeal, for
the truth of this, to the last monthly report of their expenditure which we are
acquainted with, that of Nivose, which, though by no means a time of general
military operations, cost near eighteeen millions of pounds sterling, almost
twice as much as the month preceding. I learn by the English newspapers, that
the next month cost a third more than this of Nivose.
I appeal too to the care which the M^^^^^ers of the Convention have taken to
double their own salaries, which was done the 13th of last January. The
principle on which they did it is just; and indeed, as Cambon observed at the
time, the same principle might have allowed them to increase the sum almost
fourfold; because, even then, the assignats were at a discount of no less than
73 per cent. No wonder then that, ten days after, the Convention found itself
obliged to decree the same augmentation of pay to those in all other civil
employments; it is rather surprising, that it has hitherto refrained from
doubling in the same way the pay of its fourteen armies; and it would be still
more surprising, if it could avoid a progressive increase of all the salaries,
according to the progressive depreciation of its paper money.

The law of the maximum, and its train of terrors, gave an artificial credit to
the assignats; and of consequence, when the Convention was reduced to the
necessity of taking away this only support of them, their fall was
proportionably rapid. The people no sooner began to perceive this, than an
unbounded spirit of jobbing showed itself with respect to every sort of
commodity, to every thing which could possibly be exchanged for paper; and this
spirit has extended to every part of France, and to the lowest classes of
society. Boissy d'Anglas represents this very forcibly to the Convention, in a
speech of the 3d of March. At a time when objects of commerce fail, and when
requisitions, pre-emptions, arbitrary regulations of prices, and the absurd law
of the maximum, have discouraged cultivation, the citizens are irresistibly led
to speculations which occasion an unbounded desire of gain, and instead of
commerce are mere gaming.
Goods of all sorts changing their owners almost every day and every hour, are
each time sold for more and more assignats. Avarice cannot resist the
temptation of selling, for perhaps 150 livres, what a few days before cost but
100; and yet these 150 livres are hardly in the pocket, before their value is
so much fallen, as to make it an object to part with them again as soon as
possible for something else, whose value will rise in proportion to their
depreciation.

It is true, that in the neutral towns, and on the frontiers of France, the
discredit of the assignats has by no means been so rapid as in the interior;
but the reason is obvious. In those places they had before a regular exchange
for specie, the course of which depended upon commercial opinion, uncontrouled
by the maximum, or the guillotine; and instead of a forced value, they were
previously subject to a discount which varied according to circumstances. But
as the exchange of assignats on the frontiers is the only rule to estimate
their former value, or to guess at their future discredit, it is enough to
observe, that between the 24th of January, and the 24th of March, 1795, they
fell one half in Swisserland; having been at a discount, which, during that
period, progressively increased from 80 to 90 per cent.; so that, in the short
space of two months, they fell from a fifth to a tenth only of their original
value.

The consequence of this rapidly progressive depreciation must be obvious to
every one; since there cannot be a doubt but, if they continue to fall at the
rate of 50 per cent. every two months, in a very short time the assignats now
in circulation will not be worth the trouble and expense of issuing them. But
suppose this event can be delayed to the end of the present year, or even
beyond it, in the present state of things it must inevitably h^^^en; and when
it does happen, I ask what possible resource the Republic will have for the
preservation of its conquests, and the provision necessary for the numerous
armies which maintain those conquests; and which no longer consist of
volunteers and enthusiasts, but of forced levies, and mere disciplined
mercenaries. Its only step must be to disband its armies before they mutiny for
want of pay, to restore its conquests before the troops desert them, and offer
a peace before they are compelled to sue for it from absolute necessity: so
that a restitution of all the conquests made by the Republic, and a solid and
lasting peace, must speedily be the consequence of the rapid and inevitable
fall of the assignats, if the Allies will but have patience and steadiness
enough to wait the event without relaxing their military exertions.

I say, if the Allies have but steadiness enough to wait the event without
relaxing their military exertions; because it is evident that the progressive
fall of the assignats arises principally from the necessity of issuing new
ones. But since this necessity must continue as long as the war lasts, and must
be urgent in proportion to the exertions which the French are obliged to
counteract, it seems evident, that the annihilation of this, their only
remaining resource for carrying on the war, or preserving their conquests, will
be the sooner effected, in proportion as the cooperation of the Allied Powers
is more active and persevering; and that every one of those Powers which
withdraws itself from the confederation, postpones this total bankruptcy, in
proportion as the Republic, by being able to lessen its expenses, is in a
lesser degree obliged to accelerate its own ruin by issuing new assignats. The
defection, however, of some of the Allies can do no more than postpone this
event, which it is impossible to avoid, but by a general peace, the only
measure which can put an end to the necessity of new emissions; and till that
necessity is at an end, no attempt to support the credit of the existing
assignats can answer any purpose.

I know that, in reply to this reasoning, it will be said, that however
seemingly well founded it may be, yet unhappily experience has constantly
proved its fallaciousness; since France, far from being obliged to relax her
efforts, has hitherto from time to time found means to double them; and has
also doubled her triumphs, in consequence of this increasing exertion. But let
us not lose sight of the circumstance that it is precisely this reduplication
of her efforts which accelerates their termination. If those who considered
this subject four years ago were mistaken in anticipating this event, it was
because they could not possibly take into the calculation the desperate
measures adopted by Robespierre; measures, not at all tending to prevent it;
but only to make it ultimately more dreadful, in consequence of a temporary
suspension. How could they have conjectured that the Convention would have had
recourse to the law of the Maximum, which, as they own themselves, has
destroyed commerce, and annihilated agriculture? Breard, December 23, 1794.
A measure, which has ruined industry, cheated the probity which was faithful
to the laws, and enriched the criminal avidity which set them at defiance!
Echasseriaux, December 20, 1794.
That they would have adopted so senseless a system of legislature which made
terror the order of the day, and encouraged stock-jobbing -- a legislation,
says Boissy d'Anglas, January 8, 1795.
which enabled the Government to become the only merchant, farmer, and
manufacturer, in the Republic; which enabled it to exercise a tyranny
absolutely unknown upon the earth; and tending to universal annihilation of
property, by the assassination of every man who possessed any.

Who could have thought that the Guillotine would be able to introduce this
violent law, which supported the assignats; and to maintain it, by destroying
indiscriminately the new possessors of property and the old? or have
anticipated the dying words of Danton, that, to prolong a little its frightful
existence, this revolutionary monster would at last devour its own offspring?
Who could have thought that an unheardof circle of spoliations, kept in
constant motion by the dreadful agency of terror, would be able so suddenly and
so completely to enslave a warlike nation which allowed itself to be menaced
with the scaffold, Reflections sur la Paix, p. 40.
at the very moment when it was boasting of having broken its fetters?

I may be told that the calamities of war may possibly revive the system of
terror; but this I positively deny. This infernal prodigy in the French
Revolution never can be repeated; even the Nero of France, with his legion of
executioners, did not make it last longer than fourteen months; and I am not
afraid to assert that it would have been a thousand times more easy for him to
have prolonged its existence another year, than for his successors, who owed
their elevation to the abolition of it, to revive it for a single day.

I may also be told that Robespierre has left them an immense fund in the
estates which, though already confiscated, have not hitherto been sold, and
which are a sufficient security for new emissions of assignats. I know that
such has been their boast, and that in the beginning of this year they had the
assurance to assert that there remained security enough for 6 or 8 milliards
(250 to 330 millions sterling) of new paper-money.

But we want no better proof of the falsehood of such an assertion than this,
that, precisely at the time when it was made, the assignats began to fall more
rapidly than ever. And besides, this immense security, even if it existed,
could not cover such expenses as those of the last two months, for more than a
single year.

Having traced the history of assignats through the three first parts of it --
1st, Their credit derived from public confidence -- 2dly, Their reign by the
influence of the maximum and of terror -- and 3dly, Their discredit after the
repeal of the maximum -- it is now time to advert to the fourth Act of this
Drama, beyond a doubt the most important, because it leads us to the
catastrophe.

I have already said that Robespierre not having been able to support himself
but by the utmost excesses of the most flagrant injustice, his successors had
in fact no way of securing themselves but by absolutely opposite measures: of
any such measures the safest for them was an union with the Federalists, whose
faction, though it had been crushed and dispersed by Robespierre, was still
both numerous and powerful. As a measure of party, nothing could be more
prudent than this union; but it must be allowed too that nothing could be more
destructive to the assignats: for it was clearly impossible for the then
prevailing members of the Convention to procure the support of the Federalists,
without restoring the vast possessions they had been deprived of.

The decree for this restitution did not pass without violent debates for
several days. Duhem exclaimed, that this first restitution would assassinate
the country, and be a decree of counter-revolution; March 20, 1795.
others announced that, in consequence of it, the assignats would lose the
little value they still retained; and that to restore the whole of their
property to the families which had been plundered, would be to reduce the
public wealth to nothing. Public wealth, replied Boissy d'Anglas, built on
private poverty, is a barbarous sophism, invented in the ferocious den of the
Jacobins, who have offered to your creditors as a security, estates which they
well knew they had no right to mortgage. At last, when one of the Deputies,
alarmed at the measure, asked how they should pay the expenses of the war. We
are not at present, exclaimed Charrier, to enquire how the expense of the war
shall be paid, but to do justice. We are to prove to the people of other
States, that the Convention does not massacre her victims for the sake of their
wealth, as the governments The next note will show that Boissy d'Anglas went
further, and had candor enough to vindicate the Governments in question from
this accusation of Charrier's.
of those States wish them to believe.

Induced by this eloquence, and by some respect for those principles of equity
which it had so long trampled upon, at last, on the 20th of March, the
Convention decreed a suspension of sale* as a preliminary step to a restitution
of the property of all persons condemned by the revolutionary tribunals of
Robespierre.

It was not however so much a returning sense of justice which occasioned this
decree, as necessity, resulting from a multitude of irresistible causes, which
continue to operate, and will, sooner or later, bring on the restitution of the
property of at least one description of emigrants. If the crowd of unfortunate
women, innocent victims of the French Revolution, who now drag on a miserable
existence in foreign countries, and whose situation is one of the greatest
scandals to the Convention, could present themselves, as the Federalists have
done, at the bar of that Assembly, and say that the natural timidity of their
sex made them instinctively foresee the atrocities of the Jacobins; that an
Assembly which glories in having punished those atrocities, ought no longer to
impute it to defenseless females as a crime, that they foresaw them sooner, and
escaped from them by flight; that it ought not to retain their fortunes which
have been confiscated, and from which the deputies receive a part of their
salaries: -- if compassion can influence that Assembly as party-prudence has
done, I think so distressing a scene must move it to reply with one voice, in
the animated language of Boissy d'Anglas, on the 20th of March:

We all know that the confiscations founded on the monstrous sentences passed
by our late tyrants, are ROBBERIES; and that those ROBBERIES have plunged a
hundred thousand innocent families in misery. The ghosts of the murdered hover
about this hall; they call o^ you to restore to their widows, their brothers,
and their children, the property which they once possessed. Some have the
assurance to say that this property is necessary for the people! People of
France! rouse at once with indignation; reject with horror these bloody spoils;
reject this shameful tribute: it is unworthy of you; it should make you
shudder; it will make you accomplices of the monsters you are pursuing, of the
robbers you have condemned! Let me ask, is not this just as much as to say to
the people of France, Reject with horror the assignats? In fact, they should
long since have been held in horror. It is not, however, sentiment, but
self-interest, which will cause their rejection. The assignats have given birth
to the war, and the war will be their destruction.


In fact, though this decree has not been made more than six weeks, Besides
these restitutions, the Convention has already (on the 9th of November) passed
a decree for taking off the sequestration from the property belonging to
subjects of the Powers at war with France, and which has been valued at 25
millions of livres in specie. There were many persons who considered this
property (...) as pledged for the (...)
we know already that it has been extended (and particularly at Lions) to a
number of families who were by no means of the Federalist party. How indeed can
it be posssible to revive the commerce of France, without recalling the
merchants? And to what purpose will the merchants and manufacturers be
recalled, without restoring to them the means of carrying on their employment?

Let it not be imagined that the Convention was taken by surprise, when they
passed this important decree, and that, upon finding the total depreciation of
the assignats attributed to it, that Assembly will be tempted to revoke it.
They were perfectly well apprised beforehand of this, which had been predicted
with much force, by Le Cointre, so long ago as the 10th of last December. I now
ask you, (said he to his colleagues) what will become of public credit, if you
take but one step backward respecting property judicially confiscated, and
applied to the use of the Republic? -- What will become of the Finances? -- In
what a situation will you find yourselves? -- Confidence will be at an end; and
where in that case will you find purchasers? -- If, with respect to the
property in your hands, you but once look back wards! -- but I check myself --
I leave you to your reflections.

Surely the time when they were looking forward to these confiscations, was the
time when Le Cointre should have awakened the reflections of his colleague
Robespierre. It is not the decree of the 20th of March which has destroyed the
assignats, by restoring possessions that the State had no right to mortgage,
and which it could not possibly retain any longer: but it was Robespierre, who,
acquiring those possessions by robbery, in order to have security for new
assignats, and then wasting these new assignats to extend the conquests of the
Republic -- it was Robespierre that decreed a Counter-revolution, and
assassinated the Republic: for at present I do not scruple to assert that it
will perish, as the Monarchy perished, BY THE RUIN OF HER FINANCES.

It is to no purpose that the greater part of those who have succeeded
Robespierre, persist in attempting to deceive their countrymen, and Europe; --
to no purpose that they still talk of ten or twelve milliards (4 or 500
millions sterling) which they pretend the property of the emigrants will
produce, and which, they would persuade the world, is a security enough to
redeem all the assignats in existence, and all that they may have occasion to
issue. They themselves well know that nothing can be more untrue; for by their
own calculations it may be proved, that all the confiscations which remain
unsold are really not worth a fourth part of such a sum. Johannot, who seems to
have more integrity than any other person who has had the management of the
Revolutionary finances, in his report on that subject, of the 22d of December,
says, Whatever their amount may be, yet the security for them is much greater.
Accurate calculations prove that this security is more than 15 milliards (i. e.
more than 625000,000 sterling). The yearly income of the national property
which remains unsold, is about 300,000,000 (12,500,000 sterling), which,
estimated at forty years purchase, the current price of that property, gives a
real value of 12 milliards (500,000,000); which, with the estates not let, and
the unproductive property, (both together at least worth two milliards) and one
milliard which will revert to the nation by estates that would have descended
to emigrants, form an actual value of 15 milliards (625,000,000). Never had any
paper-money so solid a base!

When I undertake to measure this base, I presume I shall be allowed to lay out
of the account the two milliards at which estates not let, and unproductive
property, are valued; and to reason merely upon Johannot's assertion, that last
December the amount of the annual income of the confiscated estates which were
not sold, was about 300,000,000 (12,500,000). Now admitting this estimate as
true, we have a tolerably accurate rule to value the capital of those
300,000,000 of income by, not in assignats, which soon will have no existence,
but in specie.

Every one knows that formerly, in France, landed property sold from about 28
to 30 years purchase; and it will not be disputed, but that while so great a
mass of it is in the market, it must be difficult to find buyers who will go
beyond 25 years purchase in specie. But in fact, it will be impossible to find
them at that price: 1st, because the rent itself is estimated by assignats;
2dly, because a great part of this property is in houses, which are every day
falling to decay; 3dly, because we know, from the ingenuous confession of
Cambon, on the 28th of February, that estates are ruined if they remain in the
hands of the Republic; and if sold, intriguers take care to be the best
bidders, and, as soon as they get possession, sell the timber, strip the
estate, and when the second payment should be made, the Nation is obliged to
sell them again at the exorbitant loss occasioned by these dilapidations.

We see then by these recent acknowledgements, that it is these intriguing
purchasers which have enabled the Convention to boast of the enormous prices
given for national property; and of which circumstance it has from time to time
made such a parade; taking care however not to mention their being left on
hand, and resold at an exorbitant loss.

I believe, when these circumstances are considered, no one will dispute with
me, but that, if even the Republic should be settled, and all the confiscated
estates should remain at her disposal, it will hardly be able to get more for
them than even twenty years purchase in specie, if calculated upon the rent
paid in assignats; a price which, in specie, it is now very improbable they can
ever bring. But supposing it should be able to sell them at this price, the
whole of them would not fetch more than 6 milliards (250 millions sterling).
Now, from these 6 milliards in specie, for which at present we hypothetically
admit that the estates let for 300,000,000 currency may be sold, we must in the
first place deduct the immense restitutions made to the Federalists and others,
conformably to the decree passed on the 20th of last March: and though, to
lessen the opposition to this decree, those who proposed it, affected to assert
that these restitutions would not amount to more than one milliard
(41,666,666), I apprehend that the confiscations during the tyranny of
Robespiere, may, without the least exaggeration, be computed at a third of the
property which last December remained unsold; particularly when we are informed
by the latest newspapers from Paris, that, in the month of April, the Commit
of Finance proposed an absolute restitution of the property of all but the
Emigrants; so that, after this deduction, only two-thirds of the whole sum, or
4 milliards, remain.

Out of these 4 milliards, must be paid the immense debts of the Emigrants,
debts which the State is charged with, by a decree of the Convention, made
January 1, 1795. And as Cambon declared at that time, that the Emigrants had
not fewer than about a million of creditors; and as the Committee of Finances
has since estimated those debts at 1 milliard 800,000,000 of livres; this will
reduce what remains to the State to something more than two milliards.

With these two milliards, it has to pay all the assignats now in circulation;
and which, if Cambon may be believed, amounted to 6 milliards 400 millions, so
long ago as the 4th of last November; and which, notwithstanding some of them
have since been taken out of circulation, yet, by the additions that have since
been made, cannot now amount to less than 8 or 9 milliards. It has also to pay
all the new assignats which must be issued as long as the war lasts: and who
can calculate the amount to which, in consequence of depreciation, they must be
issued by next December, (...) the French should delay the restitution of their
conquests till that ^^me?

Besides all this, before the mass of assignats can be redeemed, provision
ought to be made for the annuities purchased during the monarchy, which amount
to about 100,000,000 a year (more than ^ millions sterling). Supposing this
debt to be paid with a dash of the pen, yet it will not be quite so easy to
strike out the great promises which have been made to a million of soldiers,
for whom the Committee of Finance proposes to reserve a milliard, as the reward
of their services. Nor is this all; for a consideration more pressing than any
even of these is, to repair what Echasseriaux ^^lls the ruins of agriculture,
and which will require immense and immediate advances.

Add to all this the necessary expenses to carry on the government, even if the
war were over, till the revenue can again be made productive, which at present,
reduced as it is in nominal amount, is still more reduced by being paid in
depreciated assignats, and I am confident is not equal to L.700,000 sterling in
specie: and which, in the impoverished and depopulated state of France, cannot
be brought near to the necessary expenses, however economically it may be
managed, without being infinitely more burdensome than four times that sum
would have been before the Revolution.

Let the reader seriously consider the above statement, and I believe he will
hardly subscribe to Johannot's assertion -- "Never had paper money so solid a
basis."




Accordingly Le Sage, Boissy d'Anglas, Cambaceres, La Reveilliere, and
Thibault, begin to remove the veil which has hitherto been used to hide the
dreadful state of the French Finances. -- As to the security of your assignats,
says Le Sage, it is French integrity and the probity of the nation. -- Boissy
d'Anglas, who six weeks before had affirmed that the assignats were undoubtedly
a property of incontestable solidity, a debt of the Nation secured on the
firmest basis, suddenly changed his language in the Convention: -- Your
assignats, said he on the 20th of March, are bills guaranteed by your
integrity, resting much more on the credit which we have a right to, than on
any other basis. Ten days after this, Cambaceres tells the Convention, that, if
it should dissolve itself, it would leave the Finances exhausted. March 6.
We must instantly, exclaims La Reveilliere, remedy the disorder of the
finances, by means simple, equitable, and of immediate efficacy -- If they
perish, we must perish with them, and the State with us. -- And lastly, to
crown all these alarming confessions, Thibault tells the Convention, on the 1st
of April, that there were three subjects which should never be publicly
mentioned; they are, says he, the State of Provisions, Religion, and the
Finances.

Let their transient Republic continue then, if it will, to inscribe on its new
assignats the pompous phrase of NATIONAL DOMAINS: no intelligent person can
help substituting instead of it this alarming acknowledgement: -- Exhausted
Finances! -- Security overloaded! -- Restitution begun! -- New emissions of
Paper! -- and continued Depreciation!

I presume a further explanation would be unnecessary, to show the way in which
each effect of this continued depreciation of assignats, becomes, in its turn,
a cause accelerating their ruin, which must approach with increasing rapidity,
that nothing can check but a general peace. I would willingly believe that the
present leaders of the Revolution have more integrity than their predecessors;
but, as I cannot believe that they have greater ability, I am convinced they
cannot discover any other way of carrying on the war than by new emissions of
depreciated assignats. I defy them to give any sort of permanent value to that
immense mass which has been issued, but by a general peace; or to put off much
longer the day when their people, wearied with misery, will compel them to
abandon all projects of aggrandisement, and to sacrifice all their conquests,
for so necessary an object; especially if Great Britain will but honorably
persist in rejecting any overture which does not propose a complete restitution
of all the French conquests, as a preliminary article.

Some persons however, either interested in misrepresenting the question, or
possibly deceived by the quackery of the French Committee of Finance, seem to
imagine that some or other of the visionary schemes which that Committee either
entertains, or wishes its constituents to entertain, may be practicable --
schemes which are to bring back the assignats into the public treasury by means
purely voluntary.

First then, as to the idea of Johannot, in a report of the 12th of last
December, that the value of the mortgaged property increases in exact
proportion to the multiplication of assignats, and that it is to this constant
inverted ratio between the value of the republican money, and that of the
national property, that the French are indebted for those inexhaustible
resources, which have astonished Europe, and have prepared the means of triumph
for fourteen armies. But I must deny that there has been such a constant
inverted ratio between the fall of the assignats, and the rise in the price of
national property. If this progression had existed at the time when Johannot
made this report, assignats being then at a discount of about 75 per cent. or
only a fourth of their first value, estates paid for in assignats would
consequently have sold at four times the usual price: one, for instance, which
at thirty years purchase, (the usual value before the war) would have sold for
1500 l. in specie, would last December have sold for 6000 l. in assignats. But
in the same speech, he says, that the national domains sell at only forty years
purchase; so that, by his own acknowledgement, the value of estates had only
risen a fourth, while that of assignats had fallen three fourths.

Possibly some persons may attribute this astonishing fall of the assignats,
not to their want of a real value, but solely to the quantity of this
representative of wealth, multiplied in such a degree, as to destroy all
proportion between it and the objects which it represents; Speech of
Echasseriaux, December 20.
so that, by diminishing their mass, and relieving the circulation from half of
the existing assignats, the remaining half would recover their original value.

It is now five months since this object engaged the attention of the Committee
of Finance, and that they declared such a diminution indispensable: but after
having presented report upon report, and project upon project, all that they
have really done, has been to increase the enormous mass of assignats, by
forcing almost as many new ones into circulation as they purposed to withdraw
from it. They have however suggested the following plans for their diminution,
which possibly will not be thought quite so easy in practice as in speculation.

The first was, of either an extraordinary loan, or revolutionary tax: As to
the civic and voluntary donations, Cambon does not estimate the total amount at
more than 20 millions (about 830,000 l. sterling). Every one knows (said he,
the 24th of November) how what were called voluntary donations have in general
been obtained. We cannot dissemble that the greater part of these pretended
free gifts were the product of terror and constraint.
but as to the first of these measures. Cambon observed, that the losses by the
law of the maximum had been too great to allow of entertaining such a project;
and as to revolutionary taxes, he avowed ingenuously on the 3d of February,
that the forced loan of about a milliard (about 41 millions sterling) had only
produced between 180 and 200 millions (about 8 millions sterling). A strange
defalcation, especially when we recollect that it was while the system of
terror was in its full force!

A second project was a lottery of four milliards (about 165 millions
sterling), which was to induce the holders of assignats to bring them into the
public treasury, on receiving instead of them, in the shape of prizes, effects
which the Republic found itself unable to sell in any other way. But then, said
Cambon, we must offer some premium -- and he calculated that by allowing 10 per
cent. it would cost the nation 390 millions, and an annual interest of 131
millions. -- A curious way of relieving the finances! Besides, whether as a
lottery or as a tontine, the project is impossible; for either the purchase of
tickets must be voluntary, in which case a security would be expected for their
value, that does not exist; or else this resumption of assignats must be
effected by force, and, far from improving the credit of any new emissions,
would only be evidence of their fate.

The third of Cambon's projects was a forced reduction of the nominal value of
assignats -- But, said he, very heartily, if we arbitrarily reduce the value of
those already in existence, what credit will the new emissions have? We should
find it absolutely impossible to carry on the war.

Force, however, is by no means necessary to bring about this reduction of
value. The bankruptcy is begun, and wants no decree to complete it: the only
difference is, that it will not be openly confessed, until the Convention
finds, as it soon must find, its new assignats so entirely without value, that
nobody will take them.

But as to Cambon's observation, that in this case the Republic will find it
impossible to carry on the war -- some persons imagine perhaps, that as the
Convention must long since have foreseen the total depreciation of its
paper-money, it must of course have made a provision for that event, out of the
immense quantity of of treasure which it procured by the pillage of the
churches. With respect to this treasure, the Convention itself admits that it
has been squandered with the same thoughtless profusion, as the paper-money;
and Cambon declared on the 2d of November, that the whole of the plate taken
from the churches, and of which Europe had heard such exaggerated accounts, did
not produce more than between 25 and 30 millions The shrine of St. Genevieve,
added he, the wealth of which was estimated so high, produced only 21,000
livres, (not quite L.900 sterling).
(about 11 or 1200,000 l. sterling).

Let us allow that this produce of sacrilege still remains hoarded up, yet it
is not equivalent to the nominal expense of two days of the last month: but,
since it is in specie, let us suppose it applied in discharging expenses
equivalent to those of Great Britain: it may then last about fifteen days; and
when that time is past, I ask once more -- To what will the French Republic
have recourse, in order to protract the war, and to defend its conquests? To
its ancient abundant resources? Let us consider the state to which the
Convention has reduced them. -- What were those resources? Its COMMERCE? -- It
has receved a deadly blow, says Boissy d'Anglas. The shrine of St. Genevieve,
added he, the wealth of which was estimated so high, produced only 21,000
livres, (not quite L.900 sterling).
-- Yes, adds Columbel, we all agree that every thing has been done Nivose.
to destroy commerce, and but too successfully. 29 December.
-- Its MANUFACTURES? -- They are annihilated; the workshops are deserted, and
the workmen are driven from the country, says Echasseriaux. 20 December.
-- Its AGRICULTURE? -- Listen to Pellet -- The tree of reproduction is cut off
at the roots. -- Its CREDIT? -- That credit to which, says Boissy d'Anglas,
they have a right. Where are the revenues on which it can now attempt to
borrow? Considering the sort of half-confession of Cambon, I very much doubt
whether the present receipts amount to more than 150 millions (6,250,000 l.
sterling); and in assignats, not very likely, I should suppose, to promise any
great surplus to borrow upon. Besides, where will they find dupes to lend them,
or indeed any monied men, connected with France, who have any thing left to
lend, but assignats.

But to anticipate at once any speculations on the means which the French may
be supposed to adopt for protracting the war -- let us imagine, that by a
stretch of authority the Convention actually reduces the nominal value of the
assignats, or that the people, by general consent, agree to give up half or
three-fourths of those in their hands, to retrieve the value of the remainder.
Whatever resource might be found in such measures, after a general peace; yet,
while the war continues, they would be useless: for nothing but a general peace
can take away the necessity of new emissions: and besides, to propose such a
measure to the French, in order to continue the war, would be modestly asking
them to burn half their fortunes, only to give the Convention an opportunity of
annihilating the remainder -- exhausting the little life that is left, in
grasping for a few months more Savoy and Belgium, and putting off for a short
time longer the return of the Stadtholder.

I think I have said enough to prove that it is not possible for France to
carry on a war of which aggrandisement is the only object, while the assignats,
her means of carrying it on, are in such a state of depreciation; and equally
impossible to prevent that depreciation, now that a system of moderation,
adopted from absolute necessity, prevents plunder and confiscation adequate to
the waste. With the an^^hilation of all their remaining value, which soon must
happen, will vanish every remaining charm of the Revolution; and a political
convulsion must follow, productive of consequences which at present can hardly
be conjectured. Such a bankruptcy of the State will most sensibly affect all
the poorer classes, and particularly the soldiers, whose absence has deprived
them of the opportunity of employing their paper in purchasing lands at a low
rate, and who, when they return, will find no public property remaining to
divide among them, as they were promised. If their indignation at finding their
paper fortunes of no sort of value, should induce them to require the annulling
all the sales of estates which have been made by the Convention, and which the
Jacobins at home have purchased for almost nothing, while they have been
bleeding on the frontiers; -- such a measure would be strictly equitable, and
would give the means of allowing some indemnification, both to them, and to the
former proprietors. But, as it would produce nothing toward carrying on a war;
then, and possibly not till then, the illusion on that subject will cease. Her
Revolution will then leave France nothing to contemplate, but the misery of her
people, the ruins which cover her, and the madness with which her demagogues
have wasted a resource, which, if prudently managed, would have effected and
secured the duration of all the improvements in her government which she
wanted. She will see their criminal absurdity, in having sacrificed such an
immense resource to the phantoms of military glory, and territorial
aggrandisement. But what is past cannot now be remedied; and of her present
misery the only cure is Peace, and her only future hope Economy. These words
every Frenchman will very soon substitute instead of Conquest and Democracy.
Having experienced that the jealousy of wealth, and of cultivated
understanding, which is inherent in a pure Democracy, makes it the most
ignorant of all forms of government, while the multitude and the avidity of its
agents makes it the most expensive, they will direct all their wishes toward
one less burdensome, more simple in its arrangements, and more powerful in its
protection; in short, they will fly for refuge to the arms of a Monarchy.

I do not deny that this concluding scene of the French Revolution may be more
or less delayed by different measures, and particularly by a peace; but the
proposition which I have undertaken to examine, does not relate to the
termination of the Revolution, but to that of the War: whether, if it be
protracted, any thing can possibly delay much longer the annihilation of the
paper-money, which, on the part of the French, is its only support; and whether
Great Britain should lose sight of this circumstance.

The case of America, however, is seemingly an example which directly
contradicts all these conclusions by the sure test of experience; and may
possibly influence many opinions in this country.

Those who consider it as a ca^e in point, will reply to me: -- Your
calculations may be true, and the assignats may fall to nothing, even sooner
than is expected; and yet your conclusions may be false and illusive. A similar
illusion led us to persist in the American war. At a great expense we
persevered, till at last the paper-money there was much more depreciated than
that of France has yet been, or perhaps ever will be; and yet, at that very
time, the Congress was able to augment its forces, instead of diminishing them.
To what purpose did we oppose our real to their artificial treasure? The 140
millions which we spent, enabled us only to spin out the war, which the
Americans carried on against us with increasing success. They surmounted all
obstacles, made an advantageous peace; and now, that hardly twelve years have
elapsed, their public credit is restored, their revenues greatly exceed their
expenses, and their future prosperity seems incalculable.

This representation is true, so far as it applies to America, and so far only;
for between that country and France there is no sort of analogy. What
resemblance is there between America, engaged in a contest at home, by no means
expensive, and in which all Europe was on her side; and France obstinately
persisting in a foreign war, in which her finances are opposed by almost all
the wealth of Europe? What resemblance between a Congress, representing
property by the principal proprietors, supported gratuitously by the armies and
fleets of France, Spain, and Holland, who made her cause their own -- and the
French Convention, a mob, appointed by a mob; which, so far from having a
single ally, has been obliged to spend very large sums in purchasing the
inactivity of several of the governments which she had not provoked to take
part against her? The Congress, when the depreciation of their paper currency
made it requisite to negociate foreign loans, had France and Holland ready to
guarantee them, and immense tracts of unappropriated land to offer as a
security; a property which, with some moderate taxes, has proved an ample fund
for discharging their debt, and of course has raised it to its original value.
But where are the persons who will now advance any money to the French
Convention? Where are the Governments which will guarantee the repayment? and
what is the security which it can offer? In her struggle for independence,
America was not at one twelfth part of the expense of her antagonist; while
France, on the contrary, spends at present eight or ten times as much as the
whole Coalition against her. In America the expenses both of her friends and
her enemies increased very much her circulating specie; but in France gold and
silver have almost vanished. Paper-money was indeed depreciated in America; but
it was the provincial money which fell almost to nothing, and never recovered
itself; while that issued by the Congress never lost three-fourths of its
original value, and was restored to it by means of which France is wholly
destitute.

But indeed what possible resemblance can be discovered between America, with
resources constantly improving, even during the contest, by a reproduction of
the necessaries of life, far greater than the consumption of her own people;
resources directed all along by the same leaders, men previously practiced in
the arts of government, to one uniform object, and in a war at home -- and
France, with wants continually increasing, with reproduction greatly reduced,
continually changing its leaders, and its arrangements; and fighting at a
distance, m^rely for aggrandisement by conquests, much more expensive to
preserve, than difficult to make? -- What resemblance between the French, who
have hardly advanced a step without some novelty in wickedness, and whose
successes, by a natural consequence, give full scope to domestic strife; and
the Americans whose union was cemented by danger, who regulated their conduct
as much as possible by the established laws of civilized nations, and who were
anxious not to disgrace their cause by the licentious ferocity of savages?

Any comparison of the situation, resources, and the conduct of these two
nations, proves that they resemble one another in nothing, but that each was
distressed by a revolutionary struggle; which the one had means of bringing to
a successful conclusion, of which the other is totally destitute. A
contemplation of the progress of the American Revolution proves that paper
money is not a permanent resource; and the circumstances attending that of
France prove that, when her paper-money fails, she will find no substitute.

I cannot too often repeat that nothing short of this failure will convince the
French of the absolute necessity of agreeing to a full restitution of their
conquests. Whatever may be the military events of the war, this object will be
obtained by the perseverance of the Allies; and upon it depends the only
reasonable hope they now have of terminating it on equitable and safe
conditions.

A Peace on such conditions, I consider as so inestimably valuable, and as so
certain a reward of fortitude on their part, that even if we were to begin this
campaign with the melancholy certainty that at the end of it there would be no
material alteration in the military situation of the two armies, -- yet still,
no sacrifices should be spared, because no sacrifices can be too great, when
the object is to drive back and confine within their own country these modern
Goths and Vandals, who have already conceived the design of overrunning the
rest of Europe. At present indeed they seem to have suspended their design; but
the national character of the French will never allow them to relinquish it, if
an example of disunion, and humiliating concession, should ever give them a
prospect of success; and reduce the rest of Europe, either to the necessity of
becoming their Allies, and thereby gradually falling into the deplorable
situation of those islands which under that name submitted to the domineering
insolence of the democracy of Athens; or of maintaining a perpetual state of
warfare, in defense of their independence, against French violence and French
intrigue.

CHAPTER III.
Of the pecuniary Resources of Great Britain, her Revenue, her Commerce, her
Taxes, her Debt, and her Credit.

IN attempting to form a conjecture of the probable issue of a war, merely from
a view of the pecuniary resources of the contending Powers, it is not enough to
show that those of one of the parties are on the point of being totally
exhausted, unless we also prove that those of its antagonist are in such a
state as to enable it still to continue the contest.

To avoid any imputation of blending resources which may possibly be thought
doubtful, with those which we can demonstrate to be real; in calculating the
means which the Allies have of paying the future expenses of the war, we will
only take into the account those of Great Britain, and will even suppose it
possible that the whole of them must be furnished by her. It will hardly be
denied but that, if money can be found, the allied Powers can furnish a
military force sufficient to maintain a war of posts, at least till the
impending distress of the French obliges them to retreat. -- Now admitting that
even the whole sum necessary for such a purpose, must be advanced by
Great Britain; and that, in consequence, she would be obliged to raise 25
millions sterling, per annum, during the continuance of the war; the
circumstances which I am about to enumerate, will enable us to form a judgment
how far she is competent to such an expense.

1st, The following is a statement of her Commerce to the end of 1794.
Imports. Exports. Year 1794 22,288,000 26,734,000 -- 1793 19,256,000
20,390,000 Excess of 1794 over 1793 3,032,000 6,344,000 Average of four years
preceding 1794 19,429,000 22,036,000 Excess of 1794, over the average of 1791,
2, and 3 2,859,000 4,698,000 Average of the four last years of peace 19,070,000
21,774,000 Excess of 1794 over the last-mentioned average 3,218,000 4,960,000
2dly, Her revenue in 1794, affected as it was by some temporary interruptions
to the arrival of her trade, amounted to 16,385,000 The amount of her Peace
expenditure, according to the latest careful and attentive investigation by a
Committee of the House of Commons, in 1791, including the annual million, was
15,969,000 Add a sum now commonly set aside, in addition to the above million
200,000 Total Peace expenditure 16,169,000 Excess of Revenue in 1794, above a
Peace expenditure 216,000

The wise and important provision, in the act of 1787, for consolidating all
the funds and revenues of the country, which renders it necessary to lay before
Parliament, the amount of all taxes imposed for paying the interest of money
borrowed, has enabled us to ascertain, by the accounts laid before the House of
Commons, that the income of the burdens laid upon the public, since that time,
is more than sufficient to pay the charge incurred by new loans, and even to
provide for the payment of the interest of the debt incurred, which is not
funded.

In the above expenditure, it will be observed, is included the annual million
applied by Mr. Pitt's bill, which passed in 1786; by the operation of which,
with the application of an additional sum, as above stated also, since 1792, of
200,000 l. together with the falling in of annuities, there was paid off, of
the national debt, on the 5th of January 1795, 14,912,400 l. of the capital;
and the sum now annually applied for the reduction of the debt, is, in the
whole, 1,965,992 l. which will necessarily continue to increase from the
interest of the debt paid off, annuities falling in, etc. etc. etc.

3dly, The nation, instead of being obliged to suspend the operations of this
fund during the war, has not only found no difficulty in borrowing 33,500,000
l. sterling, for that purpose, in the last three years; but has laid new taxes
adequate to pay the interest of this new debt, and to augment the above fund in
a due proportion to the augmentation of the debt, by an addition of 1 per cent.
per ann. on every 100 l. of capital created in conformity with the provisions
contained in the act passed in 1792. -- And though these new taxes are
calculated as likely to produce the immense sum of 2,785,000 l. Of this sum,
the taxes imposed in 1791 make a part, amounting to 635,000 l. but they were
then temporary, and were to cease on the payment of the sum then raised on
Exchequer Bills, to defray the expense of the Spanish Armament: they were made
perpetual in 1793 and 1794. -- They would otherwise have ceased about the end
of the present year.
per ann. yet, in no instance have they excited less opposition or discontent.

4thly, The usual effect of war is, that while the consumption of national
wealth increases, the springs are diminished by which the reservoir is
replenished; and yet in the year 1794, the commercial balance in favor of
Great Britain amounted to 4,446,000 l. no less than 2,704,000 l. more than the
average of the four prosperous years of peace, which immediately preceded the
war.

Nor does this favorable commercial balance arise merely from the difference
between exports and imports, each of which have diminished; but it is between
exports and imports, each most rapidly increasing even under the pressure of
the war. The exports of last year are 4,960,000 l. greater than the average of
the four years preceding the war; a demonstration that the internal activity of
the kingdom is not materially affected by the war. -- And the imports were
3,218,000 l. more than during the same four years; a demonstration how little
injury the French are able to do to the trade of Great Britain, when compared
with the advantage which it derives from their wilful annihilation of their own.

And this, notwithstanding such a number of men have been taken from their
common employments, that her army is now greater than in any former period by
more than eighty thousand men: and if unusual means have been adopted to
procure sailors for her navy, it has been because the usual means have been
less rigorously enforced, because the navy too is greater and more numerous
than at any former period, and because the commerce continuing far more
extensive than in any former war, necessarily retains a far greater number of
sailors.

4thly, Notwithstanding the increase of the debt, the addition of L.2,785,000
to the taxes since 1791, the immense current expenses of the war, and its
disasters I speak of disasters on the Continent, because there only the war an
with any propriety be called disastrous. At sea, the British ^avy has every
where been triumphant. We made conquests ^^om France in both the Indies, and
have no where lost any ^^rritory. Corsica by our means has been emancipated
from ^rench domination, and has been assisted in adopting a form (...)
government fitted to her circumstances. I do not call this a ^^nquest from
France; because no friend of freedom or justice ^n ever have considered a
country so recently, so violently subju^ted by that nation, as an integral part
of its territory.
on the continent; yet now, in the third year of it, the stocks continue higher
than they were at the same period of the last war with France; so that Mr. Pit
has made his loan at 1 per cent less interest, and on conditions in other
respects more favorable, than that made by Lord North, in the corresponding
period of the former war. Money too is so plenty, that the subscribers to this
loan have taken an unusual advantage of the discount allowed, as on former
occasions, for prompt payment, and advanced more than ten millions, soon after
the deposit, instead of waiting to pay that sum by the regulated instalments.

This concise view of the present resources of Great Britain, is drawn from
well-known facts, and authentic accounts; and is, I imagine, quite enough to
decide on her ability to continue the war as long as it can, by any possible
means, be protracted by her enemy.

But what (it may be said) is all this to the purpose? Consider how all the
springs of the machine are strained; Reflections on Peace, p. 30.
the whole is kept in motion merely by public credit, and that very credit is
an instrument of public ruin: for it has cursed Great Britain with a national
debt; a gulf which, instead of being filled up, is continually growing wider
and wider, and into which this vain nation is falling, which believes herself
the richest in Europe, only because all Europe does not contain so much money
as she owes herself.

Nearly such as this was the language of Dr. Price at about the same period of
the last war; and which has been so completely refuted by experience. These
antiquated declamations on the national debt of Great Britain, which are still
so fashionable abroad among the partisans of the French, may be completely
answered, by observing -- 1st, That she cannot be distressed by a sudden call
upon her for the capital of the debt, because it is not demandable; 2dly, That
effectual means have been provided for its extinction; and, 3dly, That the
payment of the interest is perfectly secure. When we wish to ascertain which of
two individuals is in the best circumstances, we do not limit ourselves to the
observation that one of them has a mortgage on his estate, while that of the
other is unencumbered; but if the first, after deducting the interest of his
mortgage, has still the greater income, we can have no doubt that of the two he
is the richer.

But another objection is fashionable with the same class of political
arithmeticians, on the continent. -- If (say they) the taxes of Great Britain,
of which the produce has hitherto been adequate to her present debt, go on
increasing continually in a proportion adequate to the increase of that debt;
if, notwithstanding their present immense amount, they are added to year after
year; they must at last become more insupportably heavy than those taxes which
have occasioned insurrections in other countries; and can it be expected that
the people will then so patiently submit to them? And, besides, if this
pretended public wealth results entirely from privations to which the
individuals who compose the State must submit, the whole is merely a confusion
of ideas.

Either I am very much mistaken, or there is no other confusion than what
results from mis-stating the argument; which may be easily put in a clearer
point of view by considering, that the comparative burden of taxes on any
families or nations, is not to be estimated by the sterling amount of the sums
which they pay, but by the proportion which those sums respectively bear to the
incomes which they derive from property or industry.

Let this rule be applied to the taxes paid by the people of Great Britain; and
it will be found that though their amount, when compared with the population,
is perhaps greater than in any considerable country, Holland excepted, yet
there is no country which supports its government almost entirely by public
contributions, The words which supports its government almost entirely by
public contributions, are introduced into the text, because in some countries
the whole, and in others a great part, of the public expenses are paid by the
revenue of lands belonging to the State; for instance, the militia of Sweden,
and almost the whole public expenses of some of the Swiss Cantons.
where the burden is so lightly felt: the weight which sinks inferior animals
to the earth, is hardly perceived when borne by the elephant. But, in fact, the
people of Great Britain feel less than any other the burden of taxation, for
the following reasons: 1st, It is the only country where those who are poor pay
less in proportion to their incomes than these who are rich. 2dly, This takes
place in a wise gradation, from the lowest to the highest of the community;
many taxes being assessed in an increasing ratio, regulated by circumstances
which indicate a proportionate increase of wealth, and others being of a nature
which confines their operation almost exclusively to the opulent. 3dly, There
is no country where the mode of collecting them is so little vexatious, or the
means of providing for the demand, so ready; in consequence of a facility in
exchanging property, or procuring money on its credit, which in most other
countries is unknown. It may urged as an objection to my argument, that the
great proprietors of Germany and Italy pay much less in proportion than those
of the same class and description in England: but this objection does not meet
my argument, and indeed proceeds upon a misapprehension of it. What I mean is,
that it is not the positive weight borne by any individual in Great Britain,
that gives such an advantage to the system of taxation adopted in that country,
over that which prevails in every other part of Europe; but it is the equity
with which the public burden is distributed in proportion to the abilities of
those who are to bear it.

This equitable principle of taxation is every year more and more attended to;
and its operation is such, that there is good reason to believe, that the great
laboring body of the community, whose expenses, reckoned by families, are
generally from twenty to thirty pounds a year, do not pay more to the State
than at the rate of three per cent. -- If we assume the next class as made up
of those who, by families, expend from thirty to fifty pounds a year, and which
includes the higher order of artizans, inferior farmers and tradesmen, etc.
what they contribute may be averaged at about five or six per cent. -- The rate
of contribution goes on in a continually increasing progression to the highest
classes, so that the families included in them, which if their revenue arises
exclusively from real property, and they spend the whole of it, do not pay to
the State less than from thirty to fifty per cent.

The effect of a wise distribution of taxes (provided the revenue derived from
them returns to the community) is such, that they bear heavily on no
individual, because a general circulation divides that revenue in such a way,
that each man's income improves in proportion as he contributes. Not that this
circumstance, which is true only to a certain extent, should operate as an
encouragement to lay on additional burdens, or make Government indifferent as
to the manner in which they are laid on; on the contrary, it must not be
forgotten, that taxes, particularly when laid on the poor, diminish the means
of reproduction, and consequently the resources of taxation, which it is of
such importance to reserve for extraordinary emergencies.

This hypothesis, I am aware, involves a question of mere political economy,
and may be more or less contested. But to return to the main question, whether
those classes of society, which in Great Britain bear the greatest share of the
burden of taxes, are not able to support an increase of that burden, and even
willing to do it; in answer to this question, I appeal to the following
circumstances. That the taxes of the present session, amounting to 1,645,000 l.
sterling a year, fall almost exclusively on those classes, and yet no taxes
ever met with less opposition: That the benevolent institutions supported by
public subscription, which in this country are infinitely more numerous than in
any other, indicate the wealth as well as the charitable disposition of the
country, which was never more universal, or more abundant, than during the late
severe winter. If the incomes of the rich were injuriously diminished, the
inclination might have remained, but the means would have been wanting; whereas
those contributions were so great, particularly in towns, that many persons
think the poor were even better provided for, than in common winters, when they
could work with more convenience.

As there can be no stronger proof of the opinion which they who support the
greater part of the burden of the war, entertain of the necessity (under the
present circumstances) of continuing it, than their cheerfully submitting to an
addition of taxes, to the annual amount of 2,785,000 l, imposed within the
short space of three years; so there can hardly be a stronger proof of the
wealth of this nation, and of the increase of that wealth, notwithstanding the
war, than that scarce any of those works which increase the resources of a
nation, by facilitating reproduction, such as canals, etc. etc. have either
been suspended, or carried on with less activity, than before the war. The
capital which the war has hitherto diverted out of its channel, is not that
which is usually employed in increasing the wealth of a country, by
facilitating the means of reproduction; but it is principally that which is
usually spent in increasing the comforts, and adding to the elegancies of life.

But to return to the question, from which I perhaps appear to have been
wandering: there are two other ways of determining whether the English nation,
taken at large, is more or less taxed than others.

The first is, to compare the annual revenues of the inhabitants, with the sum
which they pay to the State. Now, many political calculators estimate the
annual reproduction of Great Britain (meaning the whole income derived from
lands, industry, and money) at nearly double the amount of that of France, in
her days of prosperity; and they support this estimate by the circumstance that
Great Britain, after having supplied its own consumption, exported a surplus
produce twice as great as that of France, which amounted only to about twelve
millions sterling; whereas the ex^orts of Great Britain amounted, in 1792, to
twenty-five millions sterling. But let us even suppose the incomes of the two
nations only equal; then, as the public revenue of France, before the
revolution, amounted to about twenty-four millions sterling, and that of
Great Britain, before the war, to about sixteen millions, it is clear that the
former, even admitting the incomes of the two kingdoms to be equal, paid
124/100 while the latter paid no more than 16/100. But admitting what was
probably the fact, that the income of Great Britain was double that of France,
the sum actually raised upon the former, would be to that raised upon the
latter, in the proportion of 8/100 to 24/100, that is, in proportion of one to
three.

If this mode of comparison should appear uncertain, there is another more
sure, and which leads to a conclusion still more favorable to Great Britain;
it is, to compare the sum she pays to Government, with the balance of her
trade. Thus if Great Britain in the year 1792, increased, I do not say her
circulating specie, which is not to the purpose, but her productive capital, to
the amount of 5,245,842 l. sterling, by the balance of her foreign trade; this
balance amounted to nearly one third of all that was paid to Government. And
here another observation should be made, that this annual augmentation of the
public wealth, increases the means of paying the public contributions in the
succeeding year.

Next to England, France was the State whose commercial balance was the most
favorable, and Necker supposed that it amounted annually to near three
millions sterling: the French therefore had to add to the profit they derived
from their foreign trade more than seven times its amount, in order to pay the
public contributions, whereas Great Britain has only to add twice as much.

Let the other nations of Europe, who talk of the heavy taxes of Great Britain,
submit their own to the same test.


If these reasons are inconclusive, we must admit that the Savoyards, who,
though the amount of their taxes, compared with their population, was trifling;
yet, comparing that amount with their poverty, were perhaps the most aggrieved
by them of any people in Europe; that they must be considered as being taxed
only one twelfth part as heavily as Great Britain, because, in proportion to
their number, their taxes were but one twelfth part as productive.

The only way of judging in what degree the taxes in any country are burdensome
to the people, and to what extent they may be increased upon emergencies, is,
first to ascertain the actual opulence of that country, and then investigate
the sources of that opulence, in order to discover whether they are likely to
become more abundant, and to be permanent. If such an investigation gives
reason to believe that the opulence of Great Britain has increased in any
period to a given extent, her inhabitants need not be alarmed, if at the end of
that period they find her public burdens increased in a proportionate extent.

The value of the reproductions in Great Britain, and of the accumulation of
every species of wealth within her, has been for many years increasing with a
rapidity which has refuted the presages of melancholy politicians, and excited
the envy of her neighbors; and in such a situation, she ought not so much to
be afraid of sacrifices which her prosperity enables her to make, as to be
cautious, that neither the violence of her enemies, nor the indiscreet
impatience of the advocates of immediate peace, succeed in depriving her of
those sources from which her prosperity is derived. They are, at home, her
agriculture and her manufactures, protected and encouraged by her Constitution;
and abroad, her commerce, of which the balance of power in Europe is the shield.

Europe is the best market for her commerce; and her access to that market upon
equal terms, as well as the opulence of those who trade with her in it, and
which constitutes the value of it, depend, immediately, upon the tranquillity
and independence of the nations which inhabit it; and ultimately, on the
balance of power, by which that tranquillity and independence is essentially
protected; so that the principal source of British opulence, that stream which
fertilizes her fields, and moves the various mechanism of her mines, and
manufactures, may be lost for ever, if she suffers the most formidable nation
in Europe to increase an influence, always hostilely directed, by any
augmentation of her territory; or by allowing her to retain any political
ascendency which she has gained by her present success. The culpable lassitude
which could purchase peace on such conditions, would certainly be punished by a
decay of foreign trade, and a diminution of internal wealth, as rapid as its
late increase has been.

God forbid that I should ever become the advocate of war on any other
occasion, but when the object is self-preservation! -- No one is more persuaded
that even a successful termination of a just and defensive war, is so far from
adding to the prosperity of the conquerors, that it greatly counteracts it --
cutting off with the present generation, and its comforts, the sources of
future population, and future enjoyments; drenching the earth with tears and
blood; and producing for the victors, as well as the vanquished, nothing but
regret and repentance. A political and military view of what wars of invasion
have cost the aggressors since the balance of power has been attended to in
Europe, would, if well done, be a valuable monitor to nations and princes. The
most successful of them perhaps was that which gave the late King of Prussia
possession of Silesia; an acquisition which, however, besides the original war
of conquest, cost him a seven years devastation and depopulation of his
paternal dominions; and which, after all, would hardly have been retained till
this time, but for the particular interest which the Germanic body has in
strengthening the second of its members in point of power, at the expense of
the strongest.

And as to the French, though hitherto so successful, do they imagine that even
if a peace should now be made with them, leaving them in possession of their
conquests, it would be more durable, or that possession less destructively
contested on the first opportunity, than that of Silesia was with Frederic? Do
they think that the Princes from whom those conquests are made, and those to
whom the power of France is an object of alarm, will not, on the first
consciousness of returning strength on their part, and of debility on the part
of their enemies, league together again to drive them back to their former
boundary? How is it that they do not yet observe that the measures which they
are pursuing can lead to nothing more than a peace in name; but, in fact, a
mere jealous suspension of war; and that the perseverance of the British
Government is a demonstration that the peace which it wishes for, is not a
truce, a mere cessation of hostilities, till means can be found to renew them
with greater advantage, but a peace which will be sincere and durable.

In fact, it is the ambition of territorial aggrandizement, that inborn passion
of France, which at present induces her to detach, one by one, the Powers who
are at war with her, by partial compromises. The leaders of that nation well
know that the British Government will never allow the territorial
aggrandisement of France in a general Congress for Peace; and therefore their
object is to secure the quiet possession of the conquests which they wish to
retain, by previous and partial treaties.

If this be really their motive, let us examine the good policy of it. For the
precarious possession of a few desolated provinces, the French condemn
themselves to persist in a contest with the most formidable member of the
league against them; to remain with harbors blocked up, provisions
intercepted; and entangled in a species of war, for which, of all others, they
are the most unfit; and for which, of all others, they have the fewest internal
means of providing the materials, and consequently can derive the least
assistance from their assignats.

They have not perhaps yet discovered that, in proportion as their plan of
partial treaties is adopted, Great Britain becomes relieved from the most
burdensome part of the war. Once freed by the defection of her Allies from the
obligation to make a common cause with them, she would be left free to exert
all her force in the way most advantageous to herself. Though the iron frontier
of France has proved impenetrable to the armies of Europe, yet her coasts are
no where inaccessible. The distant possessions of France must inevitably become
a permanent acquisition to Great Britain: 1st, Because she would be under no
obligation to restore them, as the condition of any restitution to be made by
France; 2dly, Because the conquests once made, by ruining the trade, and
consequently destroying the nursery of the marine of France, would deprive her
of the means of ever regaining them; 3dly, Because those distant possessions
having little or no influence on the balance of power in Europe, France would
never be materially supported by the great Continental Powers in her attempt to
regain them.

Another circumstance which they overlook, is the small value of their
conquests, when compared with that of the possessions which in that case they
must lose, the one not being in their full extent one-fourth part as valuable
as the other We find by the report of Johannot, made the 22d of December, that
the returns from their colonies are now suspended, which by the same report
amounted, in 1788, to 235 millions (9,791,666 l. sterling).

Soon perhaps the Convention will find that their people will open their eyes
to this circumstance, and the words of Mr. Necker, will every where be
repeated. What would be the consequence, if by neglecting such valuable
possessions, or by losing them, France should find herself deprived of that
balance of commerce, which she annually gains by exporting the produce of her
colonies? What would be the consequence, if, besides this, she should be
obliged to purchase from other nations, that part of their produce which she
wants for her own consumption? Such a Revolution would send out of France
annually more specie than she now receives. Administr. of Fin. Vol. II. chapter 3.

But the absurdity of the present leaders of the French, is not greater than
the injustice with which the Author of Reflections on Peace reproaches Mr. Pit
with not being frightened at the very riches of Great Britain, which have only
been accumulated by the ruin of her Allies. p. 30.

If ever Great Britain gave incontestable proofs of moral rectitude and
disinterestedness, it is surely in the present war. I appeal to the sincere
exertions she has made, and the lives and the treasure she has sacrificed to
preserve Holland from the ruin to which France had devoted it. That ruin is
consummated, and the French have sung their songs of triumph; but it will not
be long ere they find out that they have done Great Britain the most signal
service; and that, by attacking the territory of the United Provinces, and
getting possession of it, they have given her a double opportunity to do
herself honor by defending her commercial rival sincerely, though
unsuccessfully; and to enrich herself by the present suspension of the Dutch
trade, -- an advantage which the late alliance between the French and Batavian
Republics will give the English a right to extend as far as possible; and which
is certainly far more valuable than any pillage which the French have obtained
under the name of Requ^sitions, or any ultimate profit which they can hope from
the alliance they have dictated.


But surely the question is not whether the war is mischievous to
Great Britain; for no one can doubt it. Still less can it be a question whether
peace is desirable; for who is there wicked enough to deny it? But it is to
promote the duration of peace, by preferring of two evils (to one or the other
of which we are compelled to submit) that which will most effectually
contribute to its solidity. And this question clearly hinges on the four points
which I have attempted to examine. 1st, Whether the preservation of the sources
of British prosperity, does not essentially depend on the equipoise, the
independence, and the tranquillity of Europe? 2dly, Whether that equipoise will
not be absolutely destroyed, and her independence and tranquillity be
continually in danger, from the moment that France is left in possession of any
part of her conquests? 3dly, Whether the near annihilation of the only resource
which, during the war, she can make productive, does not give a better chance
of depriving her of her conquests by perseverance? 4thly, Whether the resources
of Great Britain alone are not fully adequate to the expenses of the war,
during any probable calculation of its continuance; and whether their condition
is such, as to give the French any shadow of reason for the hope which they so
fondly cherish, of accomplishing their ruin, by protracting the war; a hope
which has instigated a great part of their unprecedented exertions; and which
now is the only probable cause of their apparent unwillingness to terminate the
war, at least with Great Britain.

I am aware that many persons on the Continent, who know no more of
Great Britain than what they read in the parliamentary debates, believe
literally all the melancholy predictions of Opposition, and all those tales of
misfortune, on which, as usual, so much stress is laid, whenever those who are
adverse to the measures or the members of Administration, think proper to paint
the disastrous effects of a war which they blame, and the immediate urgency of
a peace which they recommend. Struck, no doubt, with the eloquence with which
Mr. Fox has described the abyss into which the obstinacy of Administration is
plunging this country, by prolonging so hopeless a war -- the Author of
Reflections on Peace brings him forward to corroborate the evidence of the
dangers of every kind, internal as well as external, from which nothing but a
peace can preserve Great Britain.

So much respect is due to the authority of Mr. Fox, that I would readily let
the opinion of the fidelity of my statement of the resources of Great Britain
rest on his testimony. I go farther: -- if Mr. Fox had been at the head of
administration, and it had been proved to him that the French were determined
to retain any part of their conquests; that the leaders of the Convention do
not desire a general peace, or at least that they do not wish for it but by
partial ones; that if they no longer persist in declaring that they will not
sign it but on the ruins of the modern Carthage, yet they still tell their
countrymen that the true guarantee of universal peace is to trace with a strong
hand the limits of their Republic See the speech of Cambaceres, March 3, 1795,
; or, if the leaders of the Convention persist in maintaining that Nature had
decreed the Mediterranean shall belong to France See Barrere's Speech, Aug. 20,
1794.
-- I very much doubt whether Mr. Fox would admit the authority of such a
demarcation on one side by Nature, and on the other with a strong hand by the
armies of France. I rather imagine that, if such a map of France were offered
him for his signature, he would not have the least difficulty in affirming on
his part, that, rather than submit to such terms, Great Britain ought to
continue her present expense for years to come; that she is able, and will be
able to do so; and that she must not put the evils which she has already borne,
or may still be obliged to bear, in competition with the far greater, though
not so immediate evils which they enable her to avoid. I believe too, that,
instead of fancying that multiplied disasters would wear out Europe and England
within a year Reflections on Peace, p. 23.
, Mr. Fox would exert all his talents to prevent those disasters, by doubling
the military exertions of the country, if necessary; and would not consent to
sheath the sword, until, holding it with a strong hand, he had traced the
limits of the French Republic; that is, until he had deprived her of all her
conquests, and destroyed her influence in Holland. I am led to this opinion by
his decided approbation of the conduct of Mr. Pit in 1787 for taking an active
part, in concert with Prussia, against the Anti-Stadholderian party in Holland.
He not only went so far as to call that party usurpers; At the risk perhaps of
being thought presumptuous, I will not dissemble that the conduct of the
British Minister, on that occasion, has always appeared to me to be less
distinguished by his usual wisdom and foresight, than any other of his measures.

It is not for having interfered in the Dutch Revolution that I think him to
blame; for in that he was fully justified in the previous interference and
absurd intrigues of that weak, but busy Minister, the Count de Vergennes, who
took the same pains to carry Democracy to excess in Holland, as to crush the
limited Democracy of Geneva. But did Great Britain, after destroying the French
interest in Holland, avail herself of her influence with the Dutch, as she
might have done, to induce them to adopt a form of government better adapted to
the interests of both nations? This I doubted long before the events which have
lately happened, and which have changed those doubts to certainty. If I venture
to explain my reasons now, it is because I think it cannot be long before the
same circumstances will recur.

The greater part of the Dutch Patriots were men of real integrity. The object
which they meant to gain was liberty; and they set out with very good
intentions, but in a road of which they had very little knowledge. They
complained of the authority of the Stadtholder as a yoke; and did not discover
that if it was a yoke, the reason of its being so was because it was possessed
of certain powers by no means suited to his situation as Supreme Chief, and
which he might be tempted to misuse; while at the same time he was not allowed
other prerogatives, much more essential to that situation, and which can only
be employed to the public advantage. They exclaimed against Great Britain, and
accused her of meaning to make the House of Orange among them what the House of
Hanover is here; and the prejudice of party hindered them from seeing that the
greatest possible service which she could have rendered them, would have been
precisely to have deserved this accusation, by inducing the Stadtholder to
exchange his political powers, for the prerogatives of the British Kings, and
persuading the people at large that the exchange would be for its advantage.

This inestimable use I have thought that the British Minister might possibly
have made of the immense influence he had in the Revolution of 1787. That
Revolution terminated only in the momentary defeat of a numerous party; whereas
it might have ended in a solid improvement of the situation of the House of
Orange, and of the people, satisfying almost equally both parties, and
consolidating the connection between the two countries.

So noble an enterprise would, no doubt, have been subject to many difficulties
in the execution; but which might, I imagine, have been surmounted by judicious
conduct, and lenient measures. The triumphant party was so completely under the
influence of Great Britain and Prussia, that it could not have resisted, even
if it could be supposed so ignorant of its own interests as to have attempted
it. As to the other party, it thought of nothing but escaping the consequences
of defeat; and I am much deceived if those who composed it would not then have
accepted the English Constitution with transport. I am still more mistaken if
that Constitution, once in activity, would have allowed itself to have been
supplanted by the Tree of French Liberty.

However, another opportunity may soon offer. Heretofore the Hollanders have
complained of the Stadtholderian Aristocracy; they have now experienced the far
greater oppression of the Democracy of 1795: now more than ever they may be
disposed to unite in forming a rational Constitution, protecting them from
both; and the best pattern they can imitate is the British Constitution, which
it would have been still more easy to introduce in Holland than in France.


but he added, that it was not an object with him to investigate scrupulously
which of the two parties in Holland was most in the right. It was sufficient
for him and for the House to consider which party in the Republic of the United
Provinces was most inclined to be friendly to Great Britain, and to renew the
natural alliance with this country.

He reminded the House how repeatedly he had urged the treachery of France in
the exertion of her influence in foreign States, even by arguments which had
frequently been thought too strong; -- how often he had urged his apprehensions
of the views of aggrandisement entertained by her, of her perfidious system of
politics, and her adroit perseverance in intriguing, to gain an influence in
the governments in her neighborhood, and of the extreme danger of trusting to
her professions of good faith. As for him, (added he) he did not wish to rest
upon French declarations, or upon any French professions, whether perfectly
made, or clearly expressed or not.

On the present occasion, he gave his full assent to the address, which he
considered as a public avowal from the Throne, and as public an acknowledgment
on the part of that House, that those systems of politics, which had, at
preceding periods, been called romantic, were serious systems, and such as it
was the true interest of the country to be governed by; systems established on
that sound and solid political maxim, that Great Britain ought to look to the
situation of affairs upon the Continent, and to take such measures, upon every
change of circumstances abroad, as should tend best to preserve the balance of
power in Europe. Upon that maxim he had founded all his political conduct; and
convinced as he was of its justness, he should continue to adhere to it, and
consequently could not withhold his ready and sincere assent to an address
admitting the maxim so completely. It was now confessed by Government, that it
was necessary to come to the lower orders of the people, those who were
laboring under the heaviest burdens, those who paid for their candles, their
windows, and all the various necessaries of life, and say -- Severely taxed as
we know you are, you must nevertheless contribute something toward the expense
of keeping political power upon a balance in Europe. This was open and manly;
it was dictated by sound policy. Let therefore the expense of effecting and
enforcing the late measures in the Republic of Holland have been what it might,
he should think the money well laid out, and would give any assistance in his
power to the voting it cheerfully and freely.

He had always thought it his duty, and the duty of every member of Parliament,
to consider himself as the Representative of the people of Great Britain, and
to attend to the interests of Britons, let them be where, in what country, and
at what distance they might. Vide Parliamentary Register, November 27, 1787.


Do the French flatter themselves that a Statesman who in 1787 held this
language, will in 1795 come forward in their favor, either as Minister, or as
an Englishman? Reflections on Peace, p. vi.
If Mr. Fox were now Minister, and the Author of the Reflections on Peace had
advised him, instead of Mr. Pit, to accelerate a pacification by noble
sacrifices; had conjured him not to exhaust the nation in a retrograde
struggle, Idem, p. 9.
but to yield to the French as to one of those scourges in nature to which
mankind submit from necessity; Reflections on Peace, p. 9.
I cannot help thinking that Mr. Fox, if in that situation, would reply,
perhaps in that Author's own words -- England should consider the dangers of
Europe as her own cause, and give up the absurd hope of continuing unshaken
above the ruins of social order. Idem, p. 29.


No! I cannot be persuaded that if Mr. Fox were charged with the destiny of the
British dominions, he would think it either honorable or prudent to desert the
cause of the Allies, at least so long as they do not desert it themselves.

But were the advocate for peace to think of talking to him of the contagion of
French principles in England, and of those malcontents who in every country are
the Allies of Revolution; Idem, p. 8.
Mr. Fox, who ought to know that the French provoked the war principally
because they mistook the language of the Opposition for the language of
revolution, must smile to find that so absurd a mistake still induces them to
persevere in it. He knows, and has triumphed in saying it, that the British
Constitution never gave such proofs of its strength and stability, as now, when
the French Revolution has shaken almost all the rest of Europe. While, every
where else, the former notions of government have been supplanted, or at least
disturbed, the great body of Britons has, with a zeal and unanimity almost
without example, shown their veneration for the constitution of their
ancestors, by their exertions in its defense. No one knows this better than Mr.
Fox, who has constantly blamed the Associations for its protection, constantly
affirmed that there was not even a shadow of danger, and that its strength
might be exhausted by such unnecessary exertions; many of whose friends have
been patriots enough to suspend for the present their projects of reform,
convinced that if some of the inhabitants of the edifice only suspected that
the foundations were undermining, it was a sufficient reason for not busying
themselves about its decorations.

The Author of Reflections on Peace insinuates that there may be other chances
and other events in the course of the war, which may lead the inhabitants of
the edifice to prefer a negotiation with its enemies, to the glory of being
buried under its ruins. Reflections on Peace, p. 31.


But what are these chances which await Great Britain, if she prolongs this
contest? What are these events beyond the reach of human foresight, and yet
possibly within the reach of French exertions? -- Is an invasion of this island
meant? a scheme of landing here that swarm of Frenchmen whose lives are not at
all regarded, Idem, p. 21.
whom the Convention will turn adrift here, under the fallacious hope of being
joined by an immense number of partisans, but with the real intention of
exposing them to certain death? Idem, p. 37.


The Administration is preparing against such an event, as is their duty: but
as to the danger of a descent, which no one here believes will happen; if ever
the French should be wild enough to attempt it, and unfortunate enough to
effect it, they may assure themselves beforehand, that they will not find here
a sinking and distracted nation, as in Holland; that the same spirit which they
themselves felt in the plains of Chalons, will unite the inhabitants of these
islands, to a man, against any foreign invaders; and that the troops of
republicans who will meet them, will be just as numerous as those vast bodies
of royalists who waited for nothing but the appearance of the Duke of Brunswick
to fly to his standard. If, from the Oak of Britain, a few leaves be shaken by
the storm; if a few friends, light as they, fall from the Constitution; yet its
branches will not bend before the blast. -- Any hurry which such a descent
might occasion, would be the effect of animation, not of terror; every sword
would fly to the place of danger as by polar attraction; every petty jealousy,
every party distinction, would be extinguished; every man would devote himself
for his country. A descent might possibly spread through some small district
the devastation of barbarians: in a village or two the demons of discord might
dance round their tree of anarchy; for a decade or two, the worshippers of God
might be driven from his temples: but indignation would repel the invaders; the
ocean would close upon them; children's children would listen to their crimes
and to their fate; and the names of Frenchman, Anarchist, and Atheist, be
united in detestation for ever.

There can be no danger which Britain need decline; there can be no sacrifices
wanted which are beyond her ability to make: and will she then, herself secure,
united, armed, and opulent, desert her Allies, and leave them impoverished,
weakened, divided, and despoiled? Regard for herself and for Europe, even
benevolence to future generations in France, obliges her to compel the present
generation to renounce all its conquests. Love of peace obliges her to think of
no other, than one which can be sincere and solid: I repeat it, and I think I
have proved it, that such a peace can only be signed on the former frontiers of
France.

Should some of the Allies, by the events of war, find themselves again on
those frontiers; should they, elated by success, attempt once more to pass
them, once more become invaders, and try to dictate laws to France; -- should
political writers again propose a war of subjugation, and talk of chasing the
Monster of Anarchy to his den! -- then it may not be unseasonable to say that
the misshapen edifice which has been raised on the ruins of law, of morals,
and of religion, in France, can never be more effectually destroyed, than by
those who built it; and that, by leaving them to themselves, we really leave
them to the most dangerous enemies of their revolution. Then it will be
seasonable to appeal to lessons taught by an experiment, which no one would
wish to try over again. Then the wise and the truly pacific, in every country,
will join in requesting the Author of the Reflections on Peace, to exert all
his eloquence in supporting the cry of nations, and contributing to the triumph
of humanity, by putting a stop to the effusion of blood. But till then, I
conjure him and those who feel as he appears to do, to listen to the voice of
reason, and reject the dangerous suggestions of impatience. On the energy and
steadiness of the British character depends at this important moment the fate
of the Christian world. The prudence which is recommended would be disgraceful
pusillanimity. The peace which Great Britain is solicited to purchase from
France, by suffering her to retain but a portion of her conquests, would be a
preparation for new wars in Europe, new invasions of Germany, and new taxes at
home. Such a peace would entail on future generations, bloodshed and expense,
beyond comparison more than can possibly now be wanted to bring this war
(though at present so disastrous) to a safe and honorable c^nclusion.

CHAPTER IV.
Insurmountable Obstacles prevent France from remaining a Republic. It is of
the utmost importance to her to avoid an elective Chief; and to return to a
Monarchy, hereditary, but limited.

WILL the Republic, one, indivisible, and democratic, be established in France?
Will that great political body divide itself into Cantons, confederated like
Swisserland? Will it adopt an elective Chief like the United States of America?
Will not the French go back to their Constitution of 1791? Will they not, when
weary of change, seek a refuge in their former despotism? Will they not imitate
the hereditary and limited Monarchy of Great Britain?

The first of these questions is the only one on which I think we may, as yet,
give a decided judgment; and if, with respect to that, I venture an opinion,
after so many speculations have failed, it is because I am convinced that the
third year of the French Republic has furnished data from which we can almost
with certainty affirm that the curtain will soon drop before this Republican
Drama.

Let it not be said that their language is as republican as ever; for, as to
the French nation, what signifies the opinion of today, compared with the
events which may change it tomorrow? Besides, I am very much deceived, if by
this time there are not, even at Paris, many more royalists, concealed under
the disguise of republicans, than there were republicans four years ago under
the disguise of royalists. I have for some time suspected that even the present
le^ders of the Convention are not so republican as they pretend; for if they
were, they surely would not dream of extending the territory of France,
already, beyond a doubt, so large as to be an insurmountable difficulty in the
way of their system.

If those leaders were ever sincerely attached to that system, it could only be
in the commencement of their revolutionary career; for the misery, the fears,
and the personal dangers which those who survive of the Girondist faction have
undergone, must have opened their eyes long before the public distress was
great enough to open the eyes of the multitude. I would ask those Frenchmen of
character and principle, who became Democrats only from exaggerated notions of
human virtue, -- do they still believe that the virtues and the talents which
secure admiration and deference in private life, will be equally preeminent and
commanding in a crowd? I would refer this question to the conscience of that
member of the Convention who, about three months ago, once more solicited his
colleagues to hasten the magnificent enterprise of forming a Democracy of
twenty-four millions of men; or rather, I would decide it by that same member's
eloquent descriptions in his discourse on terror. Every page of the history of
every great Republic, will decide it; for there virtue is seen suffering and
silenced, while the selfish passions only display themselves, and triumph.

One truth by this time the French ought to have learned in their school of
adversity -- that they have, in no respect whatever, the moral character which
is indispensable for a popular government. To be fit for it, a nation must have
education and moral habits unknown in France, and which can only be acquired by
a long use of liberty; and in some degree even by its abuses. A republican
ought to have that sort of discernment which can distinguish between faction
and patriotism; between those who would agitate the people, and those who would
protect them: he ought to have modesty enough to reverence the experience of
age, and to give place on all occasions to superior talents. A republican
government requires the strictest and most constant observation of social
duties; it requires that parental and conjugal authority, that every domestic
virtue, should come in aid of public force; it requires the moderated warmth
which animates debate, and the wise circumspection which restrains it within
due limits. A Republic, to support itself, must consist of a people which knows
where to stop, when party degenerates into faction; -- of a people austere in
manners, grave in character, not hasty in giving its confidence, or changing
its opinions; a people which has either the phlegm of the Dutch, the tardiness
of the Swiss, the sagacity of Genoa, the prudence of Venice, or the information
which America has derived from the English school of Liberty. If ever the
French should attain to so many qualities foreign to their nature, it will be a
most extraordinary metamorphosis; one which nothing can ever effect but the
gradual operation of a free Monarchy. Let them however once enter that port,
and I am convinced they will not leave it again, but to return in a very short
time, as the English did, and moor in it for ever.

If they should be so fortunate as to secure themselves in that harbor, how
much will they lament that they ever took the Republican Author of the Social
Contract for their first guide to liberty, who, of all political writers, had
least studied and least understood the nature of mixed monarchy, and
representative governments? The latter, if we are to believe him, are derived
from the unjust and absurd system of feudal government. Admitting this to be
true, what does it prove, but that even the worst forms are capable of being
improved into the best by gradual correction?
The Sovereignty of the People cannot be represented; the People is not free
but during the election of its representatives; as soon as they are elected, it
is a slave, it is nothing.

Here we see at once liberty confounded with authothority, nor can this be
wondered at in a man who considered liberty and tranquillity as incompatible.
We shall soon observe that another erroneous assertion of the same writer,
Republics only possess Liberty, arises from a similar confusion of Despotism
and mixed Monarchy.

If, after commencing, in his Social Contract, by preferring small States to
great ones, Rousseau had confined to the former, his advice to adopt the
republican form of government as being the best for them, this would have been
consistent. The only way in which the partisans of the Social Contract can
defend its author, is by repeating what he says himself, that he did not wish
for any but small States. But a work written with such an impression on his
mind should rather have been called a Manual for small States, than the Social
Contract. Such a restriction might possibly have prevented his disciples from
undertaking the magnificent enterprise of a Democracy of twenty-four millions.
But when, afterward, with his mind always full of Sparta and Geneva, he
states the monarchical form as in every respect inferior to the Republican;
when he constantly recommends to great nations all those vexatious precautions
which are the security of small ones, and endeavors to startle them at even
the shadow of a supreme, hereditary chief; then he misapplies all his
observations, and finds himself out of his sphere, for he is always wide of the
question.

Kings, he says, always desire to be absolute. But have not Senates, National
Assemblies, and any sort of popular bodies, the same desire? And when they gain
their point, is their domination less oppressive than that of an absolute
Monarch?

So obvious a remark, one should have supposed, would have led Rousseau to
examine seriously, to which the necessary powers of government may be confided,
with the best means of preventing their abuse, whether to a King, a Senate, or
the People? and to a still more important question -- Whether the best way of
preventing the abuse is not, to divide those powers between all three with a
sort of equality? But such an enquiry might have brought Rousseau to the
question of Free Monarchies, See the 8th chapter of the Social Contract, where
he perpetually contrasts f^^e States with Monarchies, and afterward includes
all the latter under the word Despotism.
of which he seems to have hardly suspected the existence.

Every one, he adds, knows what follows, when Kings employ substitutes. A thing
much better known is, that Kings can never do without them; and when they try
to do without them, it is so much the worse for their subjects. But what sort
of political authority is there where they are not necessary? The people of
France, that Nation of Kings! have not they too employed substitutes? have they
been less numerous, more enlightened, less expensive, or more moderate, than
those of their last unfortunate King?

There must then, he says, be intermediate orders; and consequently there must
be Princes, Grandees, and Nobility. -- And where is the great misfortune of
this, while they form an impregnable barrier This is Rousseau's own expression
in speaking of the English Peerage; and one would think, from it, that he
understood its Constitution. Unfortunately it is in a romance that he
introduces it, after having attacked it in his political works. In the
sixty-second letter of his New Eloisa, Vol. I, he makes an English Peer say, We
are not the slaves of the Prince, but his friends; we are not the tyrants of
the people, but its chiefs. Guardians of liberty, supporters of our country,
and pillars of the throne, we form an insuperable barrier between the people
and the King. Our first duty is to the nation; our second, to the Prince who
governs it. We do not consult his will, but his prerogative. Supreme ministers
of the laws in the House of Peers, and sometimes even Legislators, we do
justice equally to the King and to the people; and we allow no one to say, God
and my sword, but God and my right.

Here we have a declamatory period, containing a great deal of truth, but
certainly not accurately describing the parliamentary duties of the House of
Peers; which are -- in their judicial character to decide definitively on
appeals; to sit as a Court of Justice on impeachments by the Commons; and on
criminal prosecutions of any of their own members, upon the universal principle
of English jurisprudence, that every man should be tried by his Peers. But
their more common duties are, as Legislators, to frame bills of intended laws
on any subject, not implicating in any way taxation, which are then referred to
the House of Commons for amendment, approbation, or rejection; to examine,
amend, reject, or approve bills originating in the Lower House. Rousseau's
mistake consists in confounding the Parliament of Great Britain with the French
Parliaments, whose ordinary functions were those of Courts of Justice, and who
were very seldom called upon to exercise any legislative power (if legislative
power it could be called) by registering or refusing to register the King's
edicts. Of them he might have truly said, that they were supreme Ministers of
the Laws, and sometimes Legislators.


between the King and the People? while they c^^ protect, but have no power to
oppress; and while admission to them is open to those born in any other rank?
Thus modified, they excite emulation, in a much greater degree than envy.

Rousseau continues -- A Minister of real merit in a Monarchy, is almost as
rare as a fool at the head of a Republican Government. With what degree of
truth this applies to absolute Monarchies, it is not at present worth while to
enquire; but if Rousseau had chosen to look to the British Monarchy, he might
have seen, that a man of eminent and acknowledged merit, however obscure or low
his birth, is almost as sure of rising to a high situation, as he would be sure
of being excluded from it in the greater part of modern Republics; while, on
the conrary, a man destitute of abilities, however high his rank, can never
have much political consequence. Here we always see at the helm of
administration, either the man whom public opinion ranks first in ability, or
one whom it considers as equal or little inferior to the first: and the less
favored candidate cannot be considered as unfortunate, nor the State a
sufferer: for though he does not direct the course and the ship, yet he watches
the conduct of the pilot, with the jealous vigilance of a rival, and, if he can
convict him of mismanagement, is sure to be put in his place.

Hereditary crowns (Rousseau still goes on) expose a nation to have monsters
and fools at its head. Such an event is not impossible, and, I acknowledge, is
distressing: but human wisdom cannot devise a better provision against this
evil than the checks of a limited Monarchy. The great object of that system is,
to give the State rather an ostensible than real chief; and to deposit in other
hands, such an influence over his appointment of Ministers, that the nation may
securely confide in their abilities; and, whatever benefit it may derive from
his virtues, may have little or nothing to fear from his vices. And, not to
mention the tempestuous interregnums where crowns are elective, if it be true
that by that system a fool rarely sits on the throne, it is equally true that
intrigue is the only way to it: intrigue almost always elevates to it some man
of dangerous ambition; frequently some mean instrument of the enemies of his
country, who raise him to the throne for the purpose of subjugating it.

Princes (Rousseau goes on) are either men of narrow capacity, or bad
principles, when they come to the throne, or the throne soon makes them so. My
answer to this new objection is the same as to a former one; that a limited
Monarchy, foreseeing the possibility of these two cases, provides against the
inconveniences of both. In fact, it provides so perfect a security against the
immorality of the supreme Chief, that I should be almost disposed to be more
apprehensive of his virtues if too splendid, than of his vices. With such a
Constitution, let the crown be placed on the head of a woman, or a child, it is
comparatively of little consequence, so it be placed somewhere, and previously
settled. In truth, though the Monarch holds the scepter, and in the choice of
those whom he employs as his servants is under no legal restraint whatever, yet
in the exercise of that choice he is necessarily so much swayed by prudential
considerations, that he not unfrequently finds himself obliged to give up his
own wishes in the nomination of his Ministers, and to be guided in it by
preeminence of talents and public opinion.

We must then come to this conclusion, adds Rousseau; we must declare that the
King can do no wrong. And what is there so alarming in this fiction (if it can
be called a fiction), when effectual precautions have been taken to prevent his
doing any wrong; when his subjects are better able to resist an attack, than he
is to make it; and when he can do no act of government without his Ministers,
and of course the whole responsibility falls upon them?

"If it be so," the partisans of the Social Contract will reply where is the
use of this regal pomp, and of the immense burden of a Civil List? The answer
may be contained in a very few words. To avoid civil wars, and reconcile what
Rousseau considered as not to be reconciled, Liberty and Peace; to prevent the
birth of ambition; to save the people from the terrible convulsions which a
great State is exposed to, whenever the first place in its Government is
vacant; to save it from a constant and violent succession of Syllas, Cromwells,
and Robespierres One of the most anti-ministerial publications which has lately
appeared in England, has the following passage: I say, so fearless of
misrepresentation; for my letters prove that I am no enemy to Kings, who are
formed to give great consistence to an old government, in consequence of having
a deep stake in it, and who, by pre-occupying the post of ambition, serve to
quiet the attempts of all pretenders; for as to the expense of Kings, it is to
be held as nothing to a great State, and especially if it is the price of
tranquillity. Calm Observer, p. xxxvii.

This author is perfectly right in the observation contained in the preceding
sentence: in Great Britain the whole civil list, considerable as the sum is,
does not amount to more than one per cent. of the income of the people,
computing it at the lowest rate; but, upon a much more probable conjecture, not
to per cent. And this is the only fair way of comparing the civil expenses of
any two countries. But that civil list is not (as many foreigners imagine, and
as is sometimes insinuated at home) exclusively employed to support the majesty
of the throne; but is strictly a civil, and not a royal list including the
stipends of a very great number of persons in the service of the State, in
offices without which no sort of government can exist; such as Judges,
Secretaries, Ambassadors, etc. etc.




But not to dwell any longer at present on the objections of the too eloquent
Rousseau, I will refer his adherents to the work of his and my countryman, Mr.
De Lolme -- a work which cannot be too much valued, and which contains whatever
the profoundest reasoning can add to those best of all possible proofs of the
advantages of a limited Monarchy, the prosperity of the country which has
adopted it, and the uninterrupted liberty and tranquillity of its inhabitants.

There is a book of another Genevan, not less valuable, and particularly
adapted to the French; but which unfortunately did not reach them till they
were no longer in a state to comprehend it. The book I mean is, a Treatise on
the Executive Power of great States, by Mr. Necker.

Besides these, there is another work still more complete, and if possible
better calculated for the present situation of France, where preservation is
now not so much the object, as renovation: it is the Defense of the American
Constitutions, by the celebrated Mr. Adams, the present Vice President of the
Congress of the United States. I do not know whether it has yet been
translated; but if it has not, it would be doing a real service to the French,
to give them an opportunity of reading it; because it will demonstrate to them
that liberty cannot exist, but where the executive, legislative, and judicial
powers, are altogether distinct; that at all events their preposterous union
must be prevented; and that hitherto the British is the only Constitution which
has succeeded in doing it.

Mr. Adams makes no secret, that the whole of his doctrine is derived from that
source; I contend (says Mr. Adams) that the English Constitution is, in theory,
the most stupendous fabric of human invention, for the adjustment of the
balance, and the prevention of its vibration; and that the Americans ought to
be applauded, instead of censured, for imitating it as far as they have. Not
the formation of languages, not the whole art of ship-building does more honor
to the human understanding than this system of government. The Americans have
not indeed imitated it, in giving a negative upon their Legislative to the
Executive Power: in this respect their balances are incomplete, very much, I
confess, to my mortification; in other respects they have some of them fallen
short of perfection, by giving the choice of some militia officers, etc. etc.
to the people; these are, however, small matters at present. A Defense of the
Constitutions and Government of the United State^ of America, by J. Adams, Vol.
I. p. 70.
but he does not confine his support of it to the happy effects of that
Constitution in Britain; he gives an abridged history of all the nations,
ancient and modern, who have thought themselves free; and he proves, that
whenever they have lost their liberty or their independence, it has been
because they did not know how to associate Aristocracy with Democracy, or to
place either of them under the protection of one supreme but limited Chief.

I need not say that by such a Chief, Mr. Adams does not mean, either that
shadow of Royalty appointed by the French Constitution of 1791, a King in name,
but in fact nothing more than an expensive and useless pensioner; nor the
office of Stadtholder in Holland, to which, in contradiction to common sense,
no powers belong, but those which the people is most interested in reserving to
itself, because it is able to exercise them itself without inconvenience. They
have given the Stadtholder the right of appointing and removing the civil
magistrates of the towns; but they have not allowed him any one of those powers
for the exercise of which the office should have been constituted; such as to
declare war, to make peace, to nominate Ambassadors, Generals, Judges, etc. to
have a negative upon every proposal of a new law; and, if he sanctions it, to
enforce its execution. Mr. Adams speaks of no Chief but one, decorated with
these attributes of Royalty. Such a Chief may have the modest appellation of
President, may be called Stadtholder, or King, or Protector, the name signifies
nothing; the important object is, that he be invested with every prerogative of
the Chief Magistrate of Great Britain and of America: and who can tell whether
Holland would have been conquered, or even attacked, if she had had a Chief to
defend her, invested with similar authority?

What! (some of the French will say, with their usual air of triumph before
victory) is the absurd institution of a single supreme Chief, reduced to find
its best defenders in three apostate Republicans! The association is odd, and I
agree that the idea may have some truth; but so much the worse for Republics
properly so called, if whatever is odious in the terms of apostate Republican
belongs to the latter word only; for the real or pretended apostasy of these
three authors, proves nothing but that they have learned by experience a truth
which Abbe Sieyes formerly boasted of having discovered by the mere force of
meditation, when he said he had gone through Republics without finding them
free, or at least without finding in them the union of Liberty and Law.

This little digression I have been led to by a few words in the Reflections on
Peace -- If, says that Author, the Moderate party triumphs; if in the
Constitution of America a form of government can be found which is really
applicable to France; the principles of universal justice, and the austere
virtues of a Republic, will soon be established there. By this remark the
Author evidently means to recommend to France a Constitution perfectly similar
to that of the American States. I know of no plan which they can adopt so
likely to perpetuate their misfortunes, or which would at least protract them
as long as such a system would be endured. I admit that there is the same
reason for calling the American Republic a veiled Monarchy, as for calling the
British Monarchy a disguised Republic; but I once more repeat, that the name is
nothing to the purpose; for besides that this veiled Monarchy is elective, the
numerous functions which the people exercise under their different
Constitutions in the United States, are in no respect applicable at present to
the French, who, in my opinion, are far from being ripe for the full exercise
of the rights which belong to the people under the British Constitution. The
time may come when they will be worthy of such a Constitution; but to qualify
them for it will not certainly be the work of a day; and their progress must be
like that of the English themselves, -- from the rigor of an almost unlimited
Monarchy, to a form of government in which the subject enjoys rights gradually
acquired, and the Sovereign submits to restrictions gradually imposed. What
enlightened friend of liberty would think of permitting the people of France to
be present at the parliamentary debates, as the English are? In England no
mischief arises from this indulgence, because the profoundest and most
respectful silence is always observed; nor is their presence any restraint on
the speakers. So completely, indeed, is it an indulgence, that any member
whatever may, without consulting, and even contrary to the wishes of the rest,
order the galleries to be cleared. But were it possible for an equal number of
Frenchmen to be silent, and to refrain from murmurs or applauses, yet the mere
circumstance of their presence would intoxicate half their Senate; and the
debates would soon degenerate into rhetorical declamations, addressed, not to
the chair, but to the galleries, and more calculated to gain popularity than to
serve the country.

Again, can any one think that the press, at present, should be as little
restrained in France as it is in England? From the manner in which Marat
employed it, and from the destructive influence it gave him, we may judge
whether what is wholesome for one nation, will not be, perhaps, for many years,
a poison to the other. The liberty of the French, at present, is like a
spirituous liquor given for the first time to a young savage; the effect of it
is madness: experience, however, and habit, will teach him how much he may
drink of it, to raise his spirits and strength, without defeating his purpose.




How is it possible that a sensible writer could ever consider the institution
of a Supreme Elective Chief as applicable to the French? -- But the Americans
find it so convenient! True; but their experiment is but of yesterday, and may
be successful only so long as they have a Washington; and such men are
phenomenon as seldom seen in a Republic, as a Vespasian, or a Titus, in an
absolute Monarchy. And no one will venture to predict that they will always
have tranquil elections of respectable Chiefs; they may indeed, while they
continue cool, poor, Mr. Adams, though he approves of an elective chief for
America, in her present circumstances, as much as of an hereditary one for
Great Britain, seems to think, that at some future period the Americans will do
well to substitute a King for a President. In future ages, says he, if the
present States become great nations, rich, powerful, and luxurious, as well as
numerous, their own feelings and good sense will dictate to them what to do;
they will make transitions to a nearer resemblance of the British Constitution,
by a fresh Convention, without the smallest interruption to liberty. But this
will never become necessary, until great quantities of property shall get into
few hands. P. 70 and 71.
industrious, and free from formidable and intriguing neighbors: my earnest
wish is, that they may long be happy under a Republican King like Washington,
and that their elections may continue as peaceable and unanimous as his have
been. It is a new experiment; and if it succeeds, will, no doubt, be one of the
most brilliant events in the history of man. But reason revolts at the idea of
an elective head for a Republic of Frenchmen; for a people who may produce many
a genius like Voltaire, before it produces a Washington, or educates, or even
discovers the merits of a man of modesty, foresight, circumspection, and
moderation equal to his. But let the French above all things beware of an
elective Chief! let them adopt any part of the American Constitution but that.
Every election would revive their present convulsions, and condemn them, first
to the divisions, and at last to the dreadful catastrophe of Poland.

What an idea is this! -- recommending an elective Chief to the French; to that
vain, inconstant, restless, impetuous nation, for ever fretting with self-love;
where every one feels it essent^^ to his happiness to be above the rest;
Reflections on Peace, p. 7.
and if he is not first in his own little circle, thinks himself the last, and
feels injured, insulted, and debased. If there is in the world a nation
absolutely incapable of acknowledging superior abilities (I do not mean by
momentary and clamorous applause, but by lasting approbation), I maintain that
it is the French.

Always violent in hatred and in affection, and equally inconstant in both;
applauding without measure, and execrating without restraint; during the whole
of their republican career, what sort of fidelity have they shown to any of
their leaders? The history of their Revolution marks their character more
strongly than ever. The worshippers of their oppressors! the slaves of power!
canonising today the monster of yesterday, and depositing his ashes in their
sacrilegious Pantheon, that they may rake them up and give them to the winds
tomorrow! consistent in nothing but their jealousy of authority, and their
rapturous admiration of every demagogue who comes forward to throw down the
idol which themselves have raised! Marat -- Brissot -- Roberspierre -- Barrere
-- what were all these but successive tyrants of France, who each improved upon
the despotism of his predecessor, and each, during his momentary reign, ruled
with unlimited sway, until some newer cruelty, some more ingenious system of
oppression supplanted him?

Necker! the first object of their idolatry, a Minister of purity and
integrity, virtues which his errors can never efface; what has been his lot? La
Fayette; who never appeared in public without being applauded like a demi-god;
him they reduced to the alternative of choosing between the cruel injustice of
his present fate, and the fury of his fickle adorers at home. The demagogues
who have succeeded each other so quickly that Paris itself can hardly reckon up
their names; the shouts of applause with which their followers have constantly
insulted them as they went to the place of execution -- all prove what I have
asserted. One demagogue indeed has died in the full possession of their favor
-- Marat! congenial friend of the people of Paris! And to one more only have
they shown any thing like fidelity, the only one whose popularity has lasted a
twelvemonth, the only one whose fall his partisans endeavored to prevent --
Robespierre, who decimated the nation, and found out the art of conciliating
their affections, while he ruled them with a rod of iron! and it is to a people
such as this, that a periodical and free election of a supreme Chief is
recommended! A people who can feel no severer punishment than to be obliged to
make and elect governors from among their equals, and to avow their own
inferiority by the acknowledgement of a superior from among themselves. Such an
avowal as this, says the Author of Reflections, etc. is not to be expected from
the French: by what inconceivable contradiction then can he imagine that the
French will quietly repeat it every four years, by adopting the American
Constitution, in which the Presidency is elective? Such an avowal will never be
extorted from them but by the sword of the most fortunate candidate, or the
gold of the foreign nations who may take an interest in the event. Austria or
Great Britain will influence the election at their pleasure, and the nation
will be as far from independence as from tranquillity; nor will it ever secure
either, till it restores royalty in a family whose superiority it has been
habituated to acknowledge, but with restrictions which may limit, without too
much reducing it.

Then, and not till then, the various struggles for superiority to which the
revolution has given birth, if they are not quieted, will at least be limited
in their object; for the place aimed at will no longer be the throne, but
something by the side of it. Then the French, of their own accord, will return
to their former habits of obedience as easily as a river which has been forced
out of its channel returns to it when the obstacle is removed. They will again
attach themselves without difficulty, and even with ardour, to a name which for
so many centuries has commanded their respect, which flatters their vanity by
recalling so many glorious events, and in their present frenzy occasionally
excites, in the Convention itself, emotions of admiration and affection. As a
Frenchman, said Rhull, the 23d of April, in the Convention, I do myself honor
in citing the memorable conduct of King John I. I move that honorable mention
be made of it. Can we have proposed to renounce the immense succession of glory
attached to the monarchy? Must we no longer be allowed to pronounce with
respect the names of Louis XII. and Henry IV.?
Their very treason against their late unfortunate Sovereign will increase
their fidelity to his posterity. Never will the people feel the blessings of
freedom, without recollecting that their King is descended from that patriot
Monarch who first called himself a citizen of France, who sincerely desired to
be the restorer of liberty, and was its martyr. Never will the vanity of
Frenchmen cease to assume merit from the virtues of Henry IV. and if that
vanity is become more irritable since it has tasted republican equality, it
will the more easily console itself, because it then will only have to give
place to what they will call the accident of birth, or the chance of fortune.
Even mediocrity of talents in the reigning family will not be without its
consolation: Montesquieu, with whose writings they are now so much
dissatisfied, but who perfectly understood the character of his countrymen,
seems to have had it in view when he says, to elect by lot is a method which
hurts the pride of nobody.

The Polish nation, more than any other, resembles the French in impetuosity,
in fickleness, inconsistency, party-spirit, and military courage. What have
been the effects of elective monarchy in that country? A perpetual and bloody
struggle between the great families, during which, though the people has acted
with zeal, yet its interests have been constantly neglected; ambition has been
sometimes gratified, but oftener disappointed; the country has been desolated;
and the domination of Russia, first introduced under the disguise of
protection, has at last been avowed by open subjugation.

What a singular contrast may some future historian draw, when he relates the
events which have lately happened in Europe! "This period," he may say, is
remarkable for two dreadful events, equally unforeseen, and both of them
injurious to liberty. The Poles, too late enlightened by the consequences of
the destructive right of electing their Kings, made a noble effort to renounce
the title of Republicans, which till then had been their pride. Far from
suffering themselves to be seduced by the political reveries of Rousseau, whose
dying advice to them was to attach themselves more and more to their republican
forms, and never to give up the right of electing their supreme chief; but
reduce him, by little and little, to a mere image of a King -- far from being
missed by such suggestions, they at last begun to have true notions of liberty,
and directed their political views to a Constitution approaching to that of
Great Britain. Hardly was the standard of real liberty raised among them,
before all their scandalous competitions were forgotten, and the proudest of
their aristocracy ranged themselves under the banners of Kosciusko, in defense
of a Constitution which controuled their own ambition, and was full of happy
prospects for the people. If in the enfeebled state of that nation there was
any thing like a hope of success in their attempt to substitute a rational
Constitution for a turbulent Aristocracy and an elective Monarchy, it certainly
was the ability and intrepid moderation of their leader. He failed in "One
thing in your customs shocks me," says Rousseau to the Poles, and appears to me
quite opposite to the genius of your Constitution: it is, to see it so far
suspended, and almost annihilated, on the death of the King, as that all the
tribunals are shut up on that occasion; as if the administration of justice
depended so much on the life of the King, as that the death of the one must be
the destruction of the other. It ought to be exactly the reverse: on the death
of the King every thing should go on as if he were alive; one ought hardly to
perceive that a part of the machine is wanting, considering how little
essential that piece is to its solidity. Gouvernement de Pologne, Chap. xvi.

How many absurdities are contained in these few lines! Royalty, in Rousseau's
opinion, is little essential, even to a large political machine! Was it his
intention, in advising the Poles to retain it in their government, to teach
them how to do without it, or to consider it as dangerous?

In pointing out this strange mistake of Rousseau, in his work on Poland, it
would be great injustice not to acknowledge the high merit of almost all the
rest of that work. I consider it, if I may be allowed the expression, as the
best antidote to his Social Contract. In the latter, Rousseau was wandering in
an ideal world; but afterward his political judgment was matured, and his
information on the subject became much more extensive. Observe how cautiously,
in his former work, he passes by all his abstract principles, or at least with
what uncommon prudence he modifies them, so as to adapt them to the
circumstances of the Poles. Preserve every thing, he says to them, overturn
nothing; correct at first only that which essentially wants correction, and
that which will enable you gradually to improve the rest. Let the French
meditate on that excellent work, and then ask themselves what would have been
the author's advice to them, if he had been called upon to give to their
nation, as well as to the Poles, instructions for a new Constitution.

If this political writer, whose eloquence has given him such an influence over
the opinions of the age, had but lived long enough in England to observe the
practical effects of her Constitution, how much might it have contributed to
introduce true liberty on the Continent?


the attempt, and the independence of his country did not outlive his
captivity. The Polish nation is extinct; but the last page of her annals is the
most honorable; for no people ever showed themselves more worthy of
independence than they did at the very moment when they lost it; and from the
struggle they made to preserve it, posterity may infer the use they would have
made of it.

In this glorious effort the Poles had but one avowed ally; and, will it be
credited? that ally was France! France, who was at that time employed in
destroying her own hereditary and prosperous monarchy, and endeavoring to
establish on its ruins the competition of equals, and to kindle the very
passions which Poland was endeavoring to extinguish! The latter wished to
preserve nobility, and to make the monarchy hereditary; the former overturned
an hereditary throne, and destroyed the nobility which supported it. The Poles
were anxious for a limited government, resembling the British Constitution; the
French never spoke of that Constitution but with the disdain which usually
accompanies ignorance, and rejected every attempt to introduce it.

This striking contrast the French either will not, or cannot observe. But,
instead of advising them to imitate America, the friends of social order would
do better to direct their attention to the annals of Poland; and endeavor to
convince them that liberty does not depend on making the laws and the rulers of
a nation subject to the people, but in making the people and their rulers
subject to law; and that, in a great nation, a limited monarchy is the only way
to unite liberty with authority; for a vacancy of the first place in any
government is a source of inevitable competition, discord, and civil war.

After having refuted the opinion of Rousseau in favor of elective monarchies,
I ought not to omit, that attached as he was to a republican government, yet it
would have been the last of systems which he would have recommended to the
French; knowing, as he did, the capricious levity of their character; and
always asserting, as he did, that republican liberty cannot be maintained but
by austere manners, and the most rigid virtue.

How much it is to be regretted that he could not foresee that the French would
be the first to adopt his principles! that they would be the first to put
themselves under the heavy yoke of a Republican Government! and that, with a
view to realise his fanciful theories, they would, with their usual
inconsiderate levity, take upon them a burden under the weight of which they
have sunk! And how much it is to be regretted that he cannot now take a view of
the nation which, for these last four years, has been raising altars to his
system!

How would it revive the contempt which he always had for the Parisians, if he
were to hear them call themselves his disciples? No doubt, he would exclaim
with indignation, Observe that people of children! that mob of pretended
philosophers! that seminary of mutiny! No sooner can they abandon themselves to
a spirit of faction, than they give it the sacred name of Liberty. Its
representatives are but conspirators, and they call themselves a Senate; just
as they give the name of laws to their numerous and bloody proscriptions!
Senseless people! They wish to be free, and yet know not how to be just!* No
sooner did they see their beneficent King perish on the scaffold, than they
cried in their delirium, 'Thank heaven! we are now Republicans! it was time.'
-- Republicans! -- yes, just as, after having discovered a way of robbing
themselves, they became, in their own opinion, the richest nation of the
universe. When, afterward, misconduct and misery reduced them to the coarsest
fare, then they fancied themselves Spartans! 'This,' they cried, 'is the black
broth of Lycurgus, and now we are true Spartans.' -- Spartans! -- I only wait
the day when they will again be scourged by a lieutenant of the police -- with
what transports will they cry, 'At last we breathe again; we are once more
Frenchmen!

I own I am very far from agreeing with those who imagine that they can ever
again be Frenchmen in that sense of the word. Whether they will be better or
worse, I cannot say; but I am as much convinced that they can never be
compelled to submit again patiently to the old system, as I am that they will
not continue to submit to their new one. The seeds of Liberty are universally
planted; their growth may be These are Abbe Sieyes' words: he applied them to
the Constituent Assembly, when it seized the lands of the Clergy. And this is
the man who has a leading influence in the present Convention, which has robbed
them of half the stipends that the Assembly suffered them to enjoy, and has
completely stripped, not only the family of Bourbon, but 3 or 400,000 families
besides!
checked, but cannot be eradicated. The first productions may be harsh and
unfit for the use of man; but a better sort may be grafted, may become
habituated to the climate; and, in a course of time, they may taste the
blessings of cultivated Liberty.

Sooner or later the French must be free, but I would by no means pretend to
fix the time. Their quarrels, their reconciliations, their dislikes, their
caresses, every thing is so sudden and so violent, that, ere we can guess what
they will do in any instance, we find they have done it. Who would have
ventured to foretell that they would oblige Louis XVI. to swear to a
Constitution before it was made? that the very steps to the altar of
Confederation on which he took that oath, would have led him to the scaffold;
and that the Judges who condemned him for infringing that Constitution, would
themselves trample it under foot amid the acclamations of the very people who
once affected to be enthusiasts in its favor? At the time when Robespierre
triumphed over the Federalists, and thought that he had put all their leaders
to death, ^^o would have thought that Federalism would again raise its head in
the very Convention which had proscribed it? Who could have foreseen that the
intrepid Charette would have ranged himself under the banners of the regicides;
or that they would have proclaimed him Lieutenant General of La Vendee? And yet
all these events are but of yesterday; and since we can no longer doubt that
the great body of the French desire some new change, and since any change must
be for their advantage, who will be bold enough to affirm, that, before this
year is at an end, the word Republican will not be as much execrated in France
as the word Jacobin is now?

Among the various conjectures to which the present situation of France
naturally gives birth, there is one which I feel a pleasure in entertaining, if
not as the most probable, yet as certainly the most favorable to that country.
It is, that the nation, weary of the present Convention, indignant at its
scandalous conduct, and shocked at the misery which it has brought and still
brings upon their country, will oblige it to dissolve itself, to make room for
those Members of the Constituent Assembly who still survive; substituting men
who were only guilty of errors, instead of men whose whole conduct has been
full of crimes. Could the scattered remains of that body be but sincerely
reconciled; could they be brought to forgive one another; could Malouet,
Cazales, La Fayette, Beaumetz, Mounier, Lally, Montesquiou, D' Andre, now
assemble, after this terrible lesson of misfortune, with that knowledge of
mankind, and those habits of reflection, which are taught by experience; with
distrust of those theories and speculations in which they formerly so much
confided; how different would their language now be to the people! Once little
better than rhetoricians, they might now be fit to be statesmen. No doubt their
very first act would be to set aside their own absurd Constitution of 1791, too
republican for a Monarchy, too monarchical for a Republic. No doubt they would
think that the most effectual mode of securing liberty, is by ensuring
obedience to legal authority. They commenced their political career with a
declaration that France renounced all wa^s for the purpose of conquest: if
again in power, it may be expected that their first measure would be to restore
the conquests made during their proscription; their sincerity would not be
doubted, and a peace with France would then be equally easy and secure. This
great point once accomplished, they might then employ themselves in that
important work, which the present leaders, though willing, cannot safely
undertake; and which they have not power enough either to promote, or to
prevent; though they are constantly exclaiming, in contradiction to their own
consciences, that it is impossible. But the oftener they repeat in the
Convention that they are not at all alarmed or afraid of the commencing cry of
royalty, the more evident it is that they observe its progress.

For that happy moment when this commencing cry shall run from one end of
France to the other, all Frenchmen who are friends to Monarchy should prepare
themselves by uniting together, without attending to any slight shades of
difference in their opinions on the subject. But the first object of them all
should be to unite themselves to that respectable party of converted
Republicans, who now hate Democracy as sincerely as they adored it before they
were acquainted with it.

And since the press has hitherto so much influenced the fluctuating opinions
of the French, all those authors, who like M -- are yet attached to France by
endearing recollections of former connection, or by the ties of interest, should
take advantage of the first moment which such a change in that nation will
allow, to bring back its attention to the discussion with which it began, and
which was not decided by argument, but declamation; that of a supreme
hereditary Executive Power, and a Legislative Body, consisting of two distinct
Houses.

The surest way to accelerate this desirable event, would be to enlighten the
French nation, with respect to some great errors in their notions of the
British Constitution; the object which they ought always to have kept in view.
Their present leaders endeavor to confirm them in those errors; because they
believe, and with reason, that their power depends on keeping the people in
ignorance of the way to true liberty; an object to which they know that nothing
conduces more than representing the English as (to use their own expression)
slaves at home, and tyrants on the seas. How happy should I be, if I could in
any degree accelerate liberty in the one nation, by doing justice to the
enjoyment of it in the other!

CHAPTER V.
Of some Prejudices of the French respecting the British Constitution.

AMONG the great number of well-informed men in France, before the present
Revolution, nothing was more uncommon than to find any who had tolerably
correct ideas of the British Constitution; and it must be owned that in general
the English who traveled there took no great pains to inform them on the
subject. Whether it is that the English are too much inclined to believe that
few foreigners can comprehend the principles of so complicated system; or that,
with a view to complete the contrast between the character of the two nations,
the English studiously affect to be indifferent to the opinion of foreigners;
or that, from a principle of humanity, they are unwilling, when abroad, to
remind other nations of their want of liberty; and on that account are afraid
of expressing too strongly the conviction which is interwoven in every thought,
and manifested in every action of an Englishman, that he, and he only, is free.

Till Mr. De Lolme published his work, those of the French who had any opinion
at all on the subject, were almost all extravagant in praising the British
Constitution, or equally extravagant in condemning it.

The former considered it as a system truly divine, unconnected with any human
passions, the perfection of political virtue; while, on the contrary, it goes
so entirely upon a consciousness of human imperfection, that it may very
properly be called a complete system of human correction. It does not proceed
upon the impossible speculation of eradicating the passions, or governing
without them; but its arrangements are adapted to limit their career, to direct
them to the benefit of social life, and even to govern by their assistance.

Next came the censurers, who formed their judgments, partly from writers as
ignorant as themselves; and partly from the parliamentary debates, in which
they understood every hyperbolical, metaphorical, or declamatory expression, in
a literal sense.

First they gravely told you that the King is always carrying on a secret war
against the Constitution; which has very little other meaning than that the
Constitution has provided effectually against open hostilities.

Next they told you that the House of Peers is evidently a sort of advanced
post to the Crown, where the Nobles act the part of sentinels ana spies; --
that the Peerage is evidently a satellite of the Crown, and only serves to
strengthen it against the nation. Now, no one disputes but that the Peers are
intended to guard the Crown, and that their situation does make them a sort of
advanced post for its protection; but that post is defensive only: they have no
privileges which give them the smallest power of attacking the constitutional
rights of the Commons; and their political influence, as a body, depends as
much on preventing the despotism, as on maintaining the prerogatives of the
Crown.

No matter, say the French of the present day; an hereditary Nobility is
nothing but a great imposition upon society; it is an infringement of those
equal rights which all men derive from nature. But admitting it is so, does it
not prevent many other greater, and more dangerous infringements? Are not
eminent talents an infringement made by nature herself, of that perfect
equality of right which is the foundation-stone in the new systems of
government? Can any human regulations prevent that Aristocracy of talents This
Aristocracy was the first which offended French vanity, after it was supposed
that the titled and privileged Aristocracy was annihilated. In some sitting of
the present Convention, but on what occasion I do not recollect, a member rose
to move That Louvet should not be suffered to crush it with the weight of the
Aristocracy of his talents.
complained of in the Convention? Can we conceive a society which can prevent
the Aristocracy of riches? and does not this latter even increase in proportion
as a State is well governed? Is it less greedy, or more enlightened, than an
hereditary Nobility? Is not this latter species of Aristocracy the best, indeed
the only counterpoise, in a great State, to the former? Is the arrogance of
upstarts less grating to the people, from among whom they came, or is their
familiar insolence less insulting, than the haughty distance of an hereditary
Nobility?

Certainly there is in the British Constitution, a Nobility, or rather an
hereditary Peerage; I will add too, that the single privilege which it
possesses, is by its nature much superior to the whole multitude of petty
privileges belonging to the nobles of all other countries in Europe: and let
the French mention, if they can, any of the privileges of the British Peerage
which are burdensome to the people, or in any way injurious to it.

The French are much mistaken, if they think that in this country wealth is
enough to procure nobility; or that, if wealth could purchase it, it would give
that exemption from taxes which is the ordinary consequence of it in most other
countries. The British Peerage can hardly be said to possess more than one
exclusive privilege, As members of one of the Houses of Parliament, Peers are
exempt from arrest for debt; but their property may be seized for the use of
their creditors, without any distinction even of the Princes of the Blood.

And though the Peers have the privilege of being tried by their own body for
criminal offenses, yet their punishment, if convicted, is the same as that of a
commoner. Henry V. while Prince of Wales, was imprisoned by order of a Judge,
of the name of Gascoyne, for having assaulted him on the Bench. Should any
foreigner consider this example as of too remote a date, they may be referred
to another. While this publication was writing, an English Peer was under
imprisonment by sentence of the Court of King's Bench, for having published a
libel on an Attorney, in a news-paper.


which no doubt is a very great one, and that is, the hereditary right of
succeeding to a seat in the House of Lords. I acknowledge that this is a
privilege of great importance: but before it is censured as improper, it may be
worth considering whether that hereditary succession has not a strong tendency
to defend the fundamental principles of the Constitution, as well as to
preserve certain great maxims of State, which might else be in danger, in case
of the coincidence of a general election, with any violent popular agitation.
No one can be ignorant of the effect which popular agitation must always have,
in a greater or less degree, on an assembly elected by the people. The most
zealous friend even of Democracy will not deny, that it often prevents sound
judgment, and that any check upon its innovating spirit is wise, and should be
adopted.

It should be recollected that the British Peers are by no means numerous The
House of Lords consists at present of 274 members, including the Bishops and
the sixteen Scotch Peers. The French Nobility was certainly blind to its own
interests, in not endeavoring to screen itself from the storm, before it was
too late, by introducing into France, instead of their useless privileges, a
representation of their body in a house analogous to the British House of
Lords; either partly hereditary and partly elective, or else entirely elective.

On this Note the Translator wishes to remark, that he doubts whether an
elective representation of any particular class in a State, especially if
periodical, has not a tendency to create a distinct interest by no means
consistent with the common good. In the present instance, an hereditary Upper
House, formed by a selection from the French Nobility, would certainly be more
favorable to the ascendancy of a Lower House, representing the People, than a
periodically-elective representation of the Nobility, and perhaps than any
other species of Senate which can be invented. A periodical or occasional
election of representatives of the Aristocracy of a country, under whatever
name or form, gives it one common interest, and a disposition to act in concert
for supporting it: whereas the British Constitution divides the Aristocratic
influence, by having a small political Aristocracy distinct from, and not
dependent upon, that general Aristocracy, which is founded in ancient family,
and extensive landed property; which, in a tranquil state of society, no
possible arrangements can long prevent; and which no political folly can be
greater than the adoption of any regulations for preventing.

The Nobles of the present generation in France, who are really men of ancient
families and extensive possessions, and who must necessarily have been excluded
from all immediate chance of the Peerage, might, from prejudice of habit, feel
themselves degraded; but their posterity would feel the advantage of the full
influence of a superiority derived from those circumstances, unimpaired by any
artificial distinctions, or any privileges tending to excite the jealousy of
the people, and keep the two parties in a state of perpetual political warfare.
But whatever might be decided as to the mode of forming an Upper House, the
members of it should on no account, if elective, be all at once renewed, or be
elected for a short period.


enough to eclipse the people; that, as the bulk of the estate usually goes
with the title, their fortune gives them the means of a good education; and
that, as their privilege is limited to judicial and political functions, it is
only by a good education, and by the knowledge and the decorum of character,
requisite in those functions, that they can hope to derive any material
advantage from their privilege. Education and practice create ability; and one
may judge from this circumstance only, that, as a body, the British Nobility
can never present, what is but too often seen in other countries, ignorance,
pride, and poverty united. The same circumstance too gives them the ability to
manage their private affairs better than the Nobility of other countries; and
obliges them to be more attentive to character, because their consequence
depends so much on public opinion.

Nor is this all: for the younger branches of their families, by being blended
with the general mass, form a durable connection between the Commons to whom
they belong, and the Peers from whom they are sprung.

This is the kind of Nobility which the Constituent Assembly should have
endeavored to substitute, when, in their first delirium, they agitated the
fatal decree which suppressed the rank of Nobility in France; a decree which,
in its consequences, occasioned the destruction of those who had the misfortune
to be of that order: for it led to the erection of all those bloody tribunals
which sent them to the scaffold.

But, at that important crisis, nothing would have more effectually quieted the
fears and dissipated the jealousy of the Tiers Etat, than telling them, that
though there is an order of Nobility established in England, yet in point of
taxation, or in any other respect, there is no difference between them and the
Commons; that the word Commoner has no debasing sense attached to it, nor is a
noble family considered as disgraced by an alliance with one of that class: The
original is, "there are no words in the language of that nation for roture and
mesalliance." -- The observation is perfectly just, and accounts for the
paraphrase to which the Translator has been obliged to resort, in order to
express the author's meaning.
that seats in the House of Peers are often the reward of distinguished
talents; and that those who are so introduced into it, are not treated as
upstarts and intruders, but with the respect due to their merit; and that, at
the very time where the National Assembly was declaiming against the haughty
House of Peers, the two individuals of that body who were next, in point of
rank, to the Royal Family, were both born of parents not above the middle class
of life. One of them, the late Lord Chancellor, when according to the rules of
the House of Peers he delivered in his pedigree, only mentioned in it the names
of his father and mother. The deference to his opinion has not been less,
because his pedigree was not longer.
It is not now, perhaps, too late to present the following observation to the
Tiers Etat of France, which has often excited my own admiration; I mean, that
Great Britain, where, without doubt, Nobility is more valuable, and therefore
more desirable than in any other country, is yet the only one where there are a
number of ancient and opulent families who have little or no inclination to be
raised to that rank. Such is the effect of a Constitution which makes every
rank respectable, and which can bestow its honors without humbling those who
do not partake of them!

But, in fact, those who declaim, in France, against the British Constitution,
inveigh chiefly against the House of Commons. That House," say they, holds the
strings of the purse; and if it is clamorous at any time, it is only with the
hope of having its mouth stopped with gold. Thanks to the civil list, which it
occasionally takes care to increase, the Ministers have always the means of
bribing its members, and making them vote just as they please. If they do not
give them money, they give them places; and when they have made their bargains,
they can, with impunity, set public opinion at defiance.

Some truth perhaps there is in this, mingled with a great deal of error; and a
few explanations are necessary, to distinguish the one from the other.

Without doubt, there exists a ministerial influence; and partly by conferring
places, partly by promising them, that influence is very extensive. But before
it is blamed, three points should be considered: 1st, Whether a majority of the
members are under that influence? 2dly, Whether that influence, to the extent
under which it exists, is more pernicious than useful? 3dly, Whether it can be
exerted in cases which affect the liberty of the nation?

With a view to a solution of these questions, I shall consider the House of
Commons as divided into three classes. The first is composed of those who
support the Minister, either from considerations of personal attachment, or as
holding places under Government, or as looking forwards to them. The second
class includes the Opposition, and consists of those who wish to supplant the
Ministry, and of their intimate connexions, who would follow them into power,
and participate in their administration. The third consists of those who are
not desirous of taking an active part in government, whose ambition is to show
the pride of independence, and to watch over the interests of the nation,
without caring much which party is at the helm. -- This class is usually more
numerous than the Opposition, but perhaps less so than the immediate friends of
Administration; and is a kind of neutral power, joining sometim^s the one,
sometimes the other party, as it thinks most for the public good, and is sure
to carry victory with it. On unimportant questions it thinks it a duty not to
oppose Administration, even though not entirely satisfied with it; This is not
only true of those members who are independent of party, but even, in many
instances, of those who happen to be in Opposition; who, with whatever violence
they may attack the members of Administration and their measures, yet, on
common occasions, consider it as a maxim not to impede the ordinary progress of
Government.
but if it be dissatisfied on important questions, it then exerts its whole
influence, and the Minister must give way to it.

This is what deceives foreigners, when they think that the majority is
entirely composed of the ministerial party; though in fact the object of a very
large proportion of that majority is, not to support the Minister, but only the
Government. The members who consider themselves as independent of both parties,
no doubt, cannot be exempt from the partialities of human nature; and may, from
various circumstances, have a preference for men or for measures, which may
incline them more to one party than to the other; but their object is to act
without being under the influence of either.

Whether Mr. Pit or Mr. Fox be at the head of affairs, is not with them the
most material point; but that the interests of the nation do not suffer, and
that the rights of their constituents are not infringed -- This class is
particularly attentive to the public opinion; and though it checks the current
of it when proceeding too much from popular agitation, yet it always adopts it,
when clear and decided; and always succeeds in obliging the Minister, either to
change his measures, or to quit his place, if he obstinately perseveres in them.

A majority must not be condemned in the mass as corrupt, unless that majority
supports the Minister on important questions, with the same implicit confidence
as in the common business of government: but that is by no means the case: for,
not to go any farther back than the present administration of Mr. Pit, if
foreigners think that his name, his place, and his abilities, are magnets which
draw to him on every occasion an invincible majority, it is perhaps because
they have not observed that even Mr. Pit, whom they consider as so
all-powerful, has several times been in a minority; and that several times, on
having proposed measures which he considered as important, but to which the
public opinion was hostile, the very members who so generally support him, have
strongly opposed him, and obliged him to withdraw them. Thus, the Ministers, in
1791, stopped their preparations for war against Russia; and Mr. Pit himself
proposed the repeal of the shop-tax, etc. etc. etc.

If against this it is alleged, that the American war was prolonged in
opposition to the general wish of the nation; I answer, that the American war
was at first extremely popular, and still more so when France took part in it;
but as soon as it was become decidedly unpopular, the majority of the House of
Commons opposed Lord North, and obliged him to resign; so that the example
confirms the assertion, instead of contradicting it. The peace which terminated
that war, confirms it in a still more striking manner. It is now generally
acknowledged that Lord Shelburne, who negociated that peace, did his country a
most essential service by it; yet, at the time when it was concluded, it
occasioned a great deal of discontent; the result was, that the House of
Commons again sacrificed the Ministry to the public opinion.




More than one instance can be mentioned, when the influence of the Ministry
Several instances of this might be mentioned; among others, the project of
extensive fortifications on the seacoast, which was rejected principally upon
the grounds that it would increase ministerial influence; and that it tended to
an augmentation of the army, at the expense of the navy, which the English,
with so much reason, call the wooden walls of their Island.
could not contend against the independence of Parliament; and when Mr. Pit
submitted to the representatives of the people, just as they submit to their
constituents, not in the heat of popular agitation, but upon calm and
deliberate consideration.

Another complaint is, that this House represents the people unequally. This is
not denied; It is much more easy to discover an imperfection, than to apply a
remedy. An imperfection in theory, no doubt it is; but it may be questioned
whether it is so in practice. Mr. De Lolme says nothing on the subject; and Mr.
Adams says no more than this: If the people are not equally represented in the
House of Commons, this is a departure in practice from theory; if the Lords
return members of the House of Commons, this is an additional disturbance of
the balance: whether the Crown and the people, in such a case, will not see the
necessity of uniting in a remedy, are questions beyond my pretensions.

I certainly agree with Mr. Adams, that the representation of the people in the
House of Commons is not agreeable to the usually-received theory of
representation; but I go no farther with him. For a little observation will
show that this abuse in theory receives a great many useful modifications in
practice; and one is astonished to discover in it interests counterbalancing
one another, which writers upon the subject have neglected to mention. For
instance, I am much inclined to believe, that if the last project of
parliamentary reform which came before the House of Commons had been adopted,
an absolute preponderance in that House would have been given to the ancient
and opulent families. That perhaps might have do^^ no harm; but yet, it must be
observed, that the rotten borough^, as they are called, give an opportunity to
many men of merit, with moderate fortunes, and little popular interest, of
coming into Parliament, who would otherwise hardly find admission there. In
what way but this did both Mr. Pit and Mr. Fox begin their parliamentary
career so young, in which both of them have rendered such essential services to
their country? -- But I abstain from entering into a question which, like Mr.
Adams, I feel to be above my pretensions, and which it would perhaps be
unbecoming in a foreigner to attempt to discuss.

Though the Author declines entering into the question, the Translator, as an
Englishman, may be allowed to introduce a few remarks on so essential a part of
the government of his country as the Constitution of the House of Commons. It
strikes him that perhaps that even the theories of representation, which are
usually adopted, are not free from imperfection in consequence of more
attention being given to the form than to the utility of the institution. If in
any instance utility is the chief object, then the consideration of the most
effectual means of promoting that utility should be principally attended to;
and if those means are not morally wrong, they must be politically right. What
then, I think, might theoretically be wished for, in an Assembly representing
the people, is, 1st, That the persons composing it should be influenced by
public opinion, on all subjects, where the circumstances are so much within the
scope of general observation that the judgment of the public can be found and
decisive; 2dly, That they should not be under the control of popular
agitations; 3dly, That no particular description or class of the people should
have a dangerously-preponderating influence over them.

In theory then, the construction of a national representative body should be
such, that amid the rivalries of different occupations, and of different ranks,
no one should have a preponderance over ^^e others. If either population,
landed property, commerce, or ^anufactures, have such a preponderance, the
decisions of the ^^ected body must be proportionably partial; and without
commenting on the injustice, it is enough to consider the impolicy of such a
system. -- If again an attempt is made, as in some small Republics it has been
made, to give to each description of persons a right of electing a fixed
proportion of the whole elected body; this most evidently constitutes it, in a
way which forms a demarcation of the different interests, and by which the
representatives become rather the agents and committees of their respective
constituents, than men acting with one common motive, to one common end -- the
public good.

Without entering into a detailed application of these observations to the
British House of Commons, I will only observe, that the very different
construction of the electoral bodies, and the preponderance of different ranks
and occupations in different electoral bodies, actually give a representation
of each, and in a certain degree a representation by each; while, at the same
time, this is done without at all marking out the different descriptions of
people, as by a census; without proclaiming hostilities between them; and with
such shades of difference as prevent the preponderance of any one description,
to the injury of the rest. Such practically is the British House of Commons:
how far the proportionate influence of each class is such as best contributes
to the common good, the experience of its conduct will determine better than
any abstract speculation; and that will most evidently prove, 1st, That the
persons composing it are influenced by public opinion on all subjects where the
circumstances are so much within the scope of general observation that the
judgment of the public can be found and decisive; 2dly, That they are not under
the control of popular agitations; and, 3dly, That no particular description
or class of the people has a dangerously preponderating influence there.

From effects which are beneficial, we should look back to their causes; and
instead of substituting new causes, with a view to greater perfection, we
should consider by what means any causes already productive of useful effects
may be made more extensively useful. Improvements, whether mechanical, moral,
or political, are not made by adopting ^he language of proj^ctors, "Such or
such effects will be prod^ced; let us try:" but by following the conduct of
those who say. Such or such eff^cts have been produced; let us, if possible,
discover ^he cause. A mind formed by this practice of investigation, moves, it
may be said, only step by step; but then every step is progress^^^ -- While the
projector is wandering backward and forward in ^he w^^ds of conjecture,
inventing what has perhaps been long ago superceded by inventions more perfect,
and contesting what corrector knowledge can demonstrate, the other is securely
advancing beyond the utmost reach of previously-accumulated experience. Look to
the contemplative and retrospective habits of the one nat^on, and the lively
imagination and precipitate co^fid^nce of the other; and the difference in the
political conduct of the French and English, may be easily traced to the moral
difference of the^r characters, of which indeed the political, strictly
speaking, is but a part.


but it is much more to the purpose to consider, whether it does not represent
the opinion of the people, with as much fidelity, as a more equal
representation would; and whether, considering the number of its members, their
property, their education, and their personal influence with their constituents
as well as with Government, the House of Commons is not the best informed, and
the most independent public assembly in the Universe.

"But, if it were so," some of the French will say, how could that gradual
increase of the influence of the Crown arise, of which we have heard so much?
and what necessity was there for that solemn declaration of the House of
Commons in 1780, that the influence of the Crown has increased, is increasing,
and ought to be diminished. What has constantly been observed with respect to
that vote is so evident, that no additional arguments are necessary to remove
this objection. That vote displaced the Minister, and is itself a proof that
the influence complained of did not exist to the degree stated, and is too weak
to oppose public opinion. And as to the increase of that influence, the
following list of Acts of Parliament passed during the present reign, may
assist our judgment on that point.

1. That which (by the desire of his present Majesty) set bounds to the civil
list, and placed the administration of that revenue in hands that are
accountable to Parliament.

2. That which (by the like desire) increased the independence of the Judges,
by continuing them in their places, notwithstanding a demise of the crown.

3. The Nullum Tempus Act, as it is generally called, by which the statutes of
limitations were extended to the Crown. An immense acquisition in a country
where property is every thing.

4. The Act, usually called Mr. Grenville's Bill, which passed in 1770, and
which rescues the decisions on controverted elections from any ministerial
influence, by referring them to committees elected by ballot, and acting upon
oath.

5. The Act passed in 1782, by which every person who holds a contract under
Government is rendered incapable of sitting in the House of Commons.

6. Another Act passed in the same year, by which were suppressed a number of
places long since established, and very lucrative; and by which the power of
the Crown, with respect to granting pensions, was limited.

7. Another Act of the same year, which excluded a great number of persons
holding appointments under Government from voting at elections for members of
parliament.

8. The Act which passed three years ago, and which was intended to give
additional security to the Liberty of the Press, by ascertaining the right of
the Jury in prosecutions for libels, to decide not only upon the fact of
publishing, but also upon the inno^ence or criminality of the publication. No
doubt, if I were better informed on the subject, I should be able to mention
other laws, not so important perhaps, yet tending more or less to the same
object. A long chapter would be necessary, to point out the great number of
acts of regulation which have passed in the same period for correcting internal
imperfections or abuses, and improving the condition of the people. But,
without confining myself to Great Britain, if I extend my views to the conduct
of its government with respect to conquered nations, its liberality toward
Canada and Corsica is sufficiently known; and with regard to India, it is
absolutely unknown upon the continent, that, under the administration of Lord
Cornwallis, not only the interior custom-houses which had existed from time
immemorial in Bengal, to the great oppress^^n of trade, were totally abolished;
but the permanent right of territorial property, never before known in that
country, was first granted to the native landholders (who under the Mogul
government only possessed their estates by a yearly settlement). Such a
blessing bestowed upon fifteen millions of people would have been alone
sufficient to immortalize any administration. The statesmen of France who are
continually inveighing against the oppressions exercised by the English in
India, either from ignorance or want of candor, never think proper to bring
this act to light; perhaps, lest the contrast should be remarked between such a
conduct and that of their own Convention, which, under the pretense of liberty,
has robbed almost an equal number of its fellow-citizens of the property they
enjoyed before the Revolution.


These restrictions and limitations have been so far from weakening the
strength of Government, that they have tended very considerably to increase it,
by increasing the confidence of the public, which is too well assured of its
freedom, and too conscious of its strength, to be terrified or imposed upon by
those who for their own purposes, would wish to keep it in a state of constant
alarm. The nation at large cares very little who is Minister; and is, perhaps,
less attentive to his conduct than it would otherwise be, if it did not know
that the Opposition is ever on the watch for opportunities to recommend itself
to favor, by giving notice of the slightest appearance of danger; and if it
did not also know that the independent party in Parliament is ever at hand to
interfere, and to prevent the danger (if there be any) from becoming fatal.

Whence come so many important ameliorations, and within so short a space of
time, but from a principle in the Constitution which renders it capable of
self-improvement, as well as self-protection? It cannot be that the Parliament,
though unequally elected, either is so corrupt, or so disposed to indulge
corruption, as is sometimes believed: this principle in the Constitution puts
it out of danger of those convulsions which regeneration has occasioned in
France, and gives it a slow, but sure, and uninterrupted tendency toward every
sort of amelioration; and makes it what D'Argenson called the perfection of
Government, a perpetual innovation.

This chain of happy alterations sufficiently proves, in my opinion, that the
construction of the British Parliament disposes it, of its own will, to adopt
measures of improvement depending on times and circumstances; for it must be
observed, that none of these measures were forced upon it by any popular
commotions, and all of them were well considered and deliberately adopted.

Instead of such a Constitution, containing a principle of self-improvement,
Abbe Sieyes has influenced the opinions of the French Nation in favor of the
American system of Conventions. In his discourse on the Veto, he seems to pity
the ignorance of the English in not discovering so infallible a political
remedy; whereas the very security of the British Constitution arises precisely
from its never wanting it; from there being a well-constructed and
well-balanced Legislature, and from this Legislature being altogether unlimited
in the use of its powers. Conventions, whether occasional, or periodical,
answer no other end but to produce a public fermentation, to which ambitious
men will look forward, and by which they will endeavor to advance themseves by
sowing trouble and discord: their tendency is to diminish the confidence of the
people in their regular Legislative Assemblies; to impede public business by
perpetual doubts of their competency to treat it; to transfer the formation of
a constitutional law, of which that body can best determine the propriety, to a
Conventional Assembly, which can neither have the same general experience, nor
the same means of judging of the convenience or necessity of the proposition.
-- Besides, whenever a Convention meets, every thing must necessarily be in
commotion; all ideas are revolutionary, and sober deliberation is at an end. A
Convention, and especially a French Convention, would think it a point of
honor not to part without doing something; and innovations would be made,
merely to avoid the disgrace of not having innovated. Not one of these
inconveniences attends the British Parliament, which enjoys the plenitude of
legislative power. None contest its authority; it has no distinct political
body behind it, to suspend, or modify, or reverse its decrees; and it is always
able to change the existing laws, or adapt them to circumstances.

It is really astonishing that experience has not yet corrected this erroneous
opinion of the French on the nature of Conventions. By the new plan which
Cambaceres lately presented, it may be observed that they still retain the
absurd notion of limiting the powers of the legislative body, and of not
permitting it to touch any of the constitutional laws. If they still persist in
having Conventions, either extraordinary or periodical, they may be assured
that Revolution must succeed Revolution, and the nation be perpetually on the
eve of civil war.

What I have said respecting the British Constitution, as it appears in
practice, I am sensible, is but an imperfect sketch; for the subject, even if I
were capable of treating it more accurately, is much too extensive, as well as
too profound, for the limits of a pamphlet, written in haste, and on the spur
of the occasion. My only object, in this Chapter, has been to turn the
attention of the French to the absurdity of that declamatory abuse of the
British Constitution, which, for five years past, has been employed to
prejudice them against it, and induce them to think it as vicious in practice,
as it is perfect in theory. All I desire is, to be able to correct some of the
prevailing errors among them on this subject, and to induce them to believe it
worth a fuller examination, and to read the publications which develope the
elements of it. The most complete work on this subject is certainly that of Mr.
De Lolme; none more clearly explains its principles, or is more explicit, on
the manner in which its different branches are a check upon one another, and on
the security it gives to personal liberty.

In France, I hardly know more than two authors who have comprehended, or have
done justice to it; It is plain that Montesquiou admired the British
Constitution, and was well acquainted with its excellencies; but perhaps he
thought it prudent not to disclose them in France.

Lately, in the Constituent Assembly, some of the most distinguished members of
that body, Malouet, Mounier, and Lally, recommended it, and proposed the
adoption of it; but the quickness with which they were silenced, sufficiently
proves, how little the French were at that time prepared for a political
Revolution.


I mean, Mr. Necker, and Mr. de Calonne. Of those, the former has undoubtedly
considered the subject with most attention, and understands it best; and he too
can say, with Mr. De Lolme: -- "Born in a free State, though of a small extent,
I not only have a native love of liberty, but have heard all the questions
discussed which relate to it. -- Is not the vital principle the same in an
insect, as in an elephant? Is any one less able to study the republic of
beavers, because he has long been employed in studying that of the bees?" Mr.
de Calonne's residence in England gave him an opportunity of seeing the British
Constitution in practice; and he openly recommended it to his countrymen,
without recollecting that they would probably answer: " Genius invents, and
scorns to imitate; we will not condescend to tread in the footsteps of the
English."

It is a circumstance worthy remarking, that the two first writers who
attempted to recommend the British Constitution to the French, were rival
Ministers of Finance. Opposite and hostile on every other subject; in this, and
in this only, they agree, that the British Constitution, which both have
studied, and both admire, may by some modifications be gradually introduced
into France.

Perhaps the most unfortunate step of the Constituent Assembly, is one for
which it has been very little censured; I mean, its having voted the Monarchy,
exactly as the Convention has since voted the Republic, -- by acclamation. If
that Assembly had but calmly and gravely debated the important question of
limited Monarchy; such a discussion, if carried to a sufficient extent, and
closely investigated, might have shown the French a great number of valuable
political truths, which they were at that time still capable of attending to,
and which might then have made a deep and lasting impression. But another
opportunity may soon offer. Equally dissatisfied with the extremes of absolute
Monarchy, and lawless Democracy, it is impossible but that the great majority
of the nation should now wish for something between both. France, by the reflux
of public opinion, may be brought back to the leaders with whom she began, and
whose wish was a limited Monarchy: if that should ever happen, it is to be
hoped that dear-bought experience will have taught them to deliberate before
they decide.

CONCLUSION.
PEACE is the universal and earnest prayer of all the Powers at war with
France. Why will not the French then at last see the abyss into which the
obstinacy of the present Convention is precipitating them? Can it be possible
that they still deceive themselves? Do they still imagine that a government can
be renovated amid the din of arms, and the dangers of war? or that famine at
home can be prevented, by employing the strength of their country in
maintaining a precarious possession of desolated conquests?

What can they hope to gain by prolonging this bloody contest? Is it glory?
They have already borne down all opposition. Do they wish for more conquests?
Those they have already made have injured them more than a diminution of
territory would have done. What then prevents them? False shame. They will not
submit to the humiliation of restitution. But which is least humiliating -- a
retreat from choice, or a retreat from evident necessity? What humiliation can
there be in restoring what they have taken, to enemies whom they have
vanquished? And as to Great Britain, can they doubt a moment but that such an
unequivocal proof of their pacific disposition would produce a similar
disposition in her? Do they fear that the Princes at war with them will take
advantage of such restitutions, to renew the contest on the frontier? That
frontier of iron is an impenetrable security against any such enterprise.
Europe is more than ever convinced of the defensive strength of France, and the
military spirit of its inhabitants. They need fear nothing but from themselves;
none but themselves will ever be able to desolate that fertile country, destroy
its population, and deaden its industry; none but themselves can ever make her
the prey of conquerors, by making her too feeble for resistance.

Six months have elapsed since their leaders avowed that the nation longs for
internal tranquillity, and the happiness it gives. This has been openly avowed
in the Convention itself; and yet not one step has been taken by that body,
that indicates a desire of peace with Britain; without which, internal
tranquillity is impossible. The Convention not only sees, but publishes to the
world, the destitute condition of France; and yet, instead of making any
advances toward the only peace which can give them a chance of relief from
abroad for the want they feel at home, they persist in representing a war at
sea against Great Britain, as absolutely necessary. Observe what Pelet says of
the views of the Committees, as to Great Britain, in a statement of the
interior and exterior situation of France; which the Convention ordered to be
printed, April the 8th. -- " We hoped to have no longer more than one NECESSARY
war to support; that is, a war at sea against England, whose power and
insolence our united force would he sufficient to crush. Is it by such language
that the leaders of the Convention mean to disarm Britain and her Allies!

If such language could disarm the English, I imagine that hereafter their
pride would not often be talked of! Impartial persons may decide which of the
two nations is at present most infected with this vice, by comparing the
declarations of the Convention, and the speeches and reports printed by its
order, with the vote of both Houses of Parliament -- " That they rely on the
desire uniformly manifested by his Majesty, to effect a pacification on just
and honorable grounds, with any Government in France, under whatever form,
which shall appear capable of maintaining the accustomed relations of peace and
amity with other countries. If the Convention had wished at all for peace with
England, this gave an opening, which, if it had been followed by some equally
conciliatory counter-declaration, might have probably led to additional proofs
of a disposition to treat, on the part of this country. But the more this
country desires a peace, the more active the Convention is in taking measures
to make it impossible. A sufficient proof of this is the inflammatory
proclamation addressed by it on the 29th of May, to the Toulon fleet.

Brave Seamen! War, war with the English! It is they who seek to divide you,
and to corrupt you. It is they who, afraid to encounter you at sea, have
endeavored to detain you in port. WAR, WAR, with the English!

It is worth observing, that nearly at the time when the Convention was thus
proclaiming war against the English, the two Houses of Parliament were debating
whether it would not be proper to make further advances toward a
reconciliation.


It is, I acknowledge, absolutely necessary to the ambition of those who lead
the Convention, and to the existence of the Republic they have made; for they
still retain the spirit, though they dare not, as a body, avow the language of
their incendiary decree of the 19th of November, 1792. This decree, it is well
known, was the work of the Girondist party, which is now again triumphant, and
which acting upon it in its fullest extent, in the affair with Geneva, refused
to ratify a treaty, by declaring, that the only one admissible was a
communication of principles. Though the authors of that decree have suffered it
to sleep, yet, every now and then, they discover their intention of bringing it
into action again whenever it suits their convenience. Of this, I think, the
following ludicrous transactions in the Convention, on the 26th and 27th of
April, are clear evidence.

On the 26th, Gregoire concluded a pompous harangue, by proposing a declaration
of the Rights of Nations, much in the same style as that of the Rights of Man.

The 4th Article declares, that nations, when at war, should do one another as
little mischief as possible; and this extremely philanthropic article was
applauded by the very same men who have been barbarians enough to send a
squadron to destroy the humane establishment of Sierra Leone; the object of
which was a generous attempt to prevent, what they talk so much of preventing
-- Slavery.

The 14th Article declares, that treaties which have for their object an
offensive war, are high treason against the family of mankind. And this too,
the Convention applauded, though they well knew that at that very time their
Deputies were contracting an offensive as well as defensive alliance with the
United Provinces.

The 7th Article declares, that a nation has no right to interfere in the
government of other nations. What is meant by government, the next article
explains; which expressly declares, THAT NO GOVERNMENTS ARE CONFORMABLE TO THE
RIGHTS OF NATIONS, BUT ONLY SUCH AS ARE FOUNDED ON LIBERTY AND EQUALITY.

The next day, however, Merlin of Douay mounted the tribune in great haste, and
announced in the name of the Committee of Public Safety, That all Europe having
heard their declaration, never to examine, much less never to censure, the
fundamental principles, or the organization of foreign governments; it is
material to the Republic, and possibly to the safety of all Europe, to repeal
the decree of the preceding evening, that ordered the printing of a speech, and
of a declaration of the rights of nations which had been read in that Assembly.
The Committee, said he, has observed in both, principles which you cannot AVOW.
I need not mention what might be the consequences of such opinions spread
through Europe in the present moment.

"As it is imagined that my speech contains something improper," said Gregoire,
I second the motion; but I ought to mention, that perhaps, by this time, it has
appeared in some of the papers; which was really ^he case, for care had been
taken to insert it in the Moniteur.

I may, perhaps, be told, that these ought to be considered as two additional
recanta^^^ns. But are these recantations much less alarming than the decree?
Neither the spirit of this declaration, nor the intentions of the propagandist,
Gregoire, are censured. They are pa^e as the mind of its author, said Merlin:
the declaration is withdrawn for no other reason but because it is ill-timed;
because this is not the MOMENT to avow such an opinion to Europe.


Amity with Great Britain might teach their people the means of obtaining true
liberty. The declaimers in the Convention are for ever talking of a war with
Great Britain, and yet for ever confessing their inability to maintain it.
Their first and last resource must soon be at an end: and yet still they can
say, with an air of surprise, The English Ministry feign a belief that France
is exhausted. The English Ministry, then, is not to believe their own
declarations; and is unable to observe with what hasty steps France is now
verifying the remark of La Reveillere, about three months ago, in the
Convention: Revolution follows Revolution; and, when the whole circle is gone
round, we come back to the point from which we set out -- Despotism.

Every sitting of the Convention, every debate proves that the Republic is
already falling to pieces, and that its ruin is inevitable. One day the
conquerors of the Bastille come to announce to the Convention, that they almost
regret what they have sacrificed for the Republic. Then comes a Section to ask
for bread! while another orders it to make haste, and restore the assignats to
their original credit. A third comes with a request which is not less
impossible, to clear up the inextricable labyrinth of the finances. A fourth
protests against the Democratic Constitution of May, 1793, to which that
Section had sworn fidelity; and insists, that it is a virtue to break a wicked
oath. The unhappy people at last begins to open its eyes, and will soon find
that revolution and equality have reduced it to penury, famine, and perjury.

What then are we to think of the caution with which the Author of Reflections
on Peace has avoided saying a word on the finances of France? After speaking of
England as a cultivated country, which trembles under the feet of Mr. Pit, why
did not she strengthen her argument, by displaying the means which France has
in reserve for continuing a war, which, we are to believe, will, if continued,
aggrandize her still more than at present, by conquests more extensive. A few
words on the subject she does say, (p. 7): As to the treasures of the
Convention, they are the fortune of ^very individual in France; and her
supplies are the productions of her own soil. Cambon's report to the
Convention, which is quoted, page 41, will give us the amount of the voluntary
donations which have been extorted from the people, and prove how willing
individuals are to replenish its treasury. But a still better foundation for
forming an opinion on that subject, because more recent, and from ^he ruling
party, is the brilliant discourse of Pelet, the 8th of last April, which was
printed by order of the Convention. After citing, word for word, some passages
from this favorite publication, the Reflections on Peace, and, among others,
that which I have just quoted, he adds, with the thoughtlessness of a true
Frenchman: These pompous terms -- public good, and love of our country, are in
every one's mouth; yet few of us think it honorable to be virtuous and poor;
all want to be rich. The most dangerous enemy we have, is an unfeeling and
BARBAROUS SELFISHNESS. The dearness of every sort of commodity is beyond
calculation; a month, a day, an hour raises the price to a degree which proves
the most alarming and immoral avarice, a real dearth, the want of public
confidence, dissatisfaction with the present, and fear of the future. WHERE
WILL THIS ALARMING PROGRESSION END? Not with partial peaces; not while the
strength of their country is exhausted in defending conquests; not till there
is real amity with Great Britain. -- And yet in this same speech, which I
imagine he did not wish should be unheard of in London, he still proposes to
crush England!

I wish I had no greater complaint against my opponent than errors of
thoughtlessness, and such concealments as these. But what can excuse her
gratifying her passion for making an impression on the Continent, by
insinuating that the British Parliament rejects a peace for no other reason,
but that perhaps Mr. Pit must resign the conduct of the negotiation into other
hands. A peace, says M --, would recall Mr. Fox to the Ministry: Mr. Pitt's
only alarm arises from this dilemma. Is it for the nation to think as he does?
Cannot England exist, unless Mr. Pit be the Minister? Reflections on Peace, p.
31.


On this subject M -- may be perfectly easy: whether the nation prefer Mr. Pit
or Mr. Fox; at any rate, it will not allow France, or the friends of France, to
dictate who shall be its negociator. And as to the existence of England, it
does not so absolutely depend on either the one or the other. Great as the
talents of both are, the kingdom is not quite so destitute of men of ability,
judgment, and integrity, as that it must cease to be a nation if it loses them
both. The great body of the nation which supports the war, and which is accused
of supporting it only for the sake of Mr. Pit, has not so entirely lost its
usual strong sense and sound judgment, as not to discover plain facts, which do
not want splendid talents to point them out, and which the most splendid
talents cannot disguise. -- That the French were the aggressors in this war;
that the misery to which it has reduced them, and of which modern times cannot
furnish another example, renders them absolutely unable to carry it on, against
the British dominions, with any advantage; and that, in point of equity, the
aggressors should first offer to terminate hostilities, and, if sacrifices are
to be made, should be the first to make them. The inhabitants of these islands
are not children in the school of politics; sound judgment, formed by long
practice of political discussion, has convinced them, that Britain must, at any
risk, prevent the aggrandisement of France, and leave nothing undone to
preserve the balance of power in Europe.

Self-evident as these propositions are, we now hear them called with contempt,
the old-fashioned maxims of an antiquated system; and the British Parliament
has of course, either from corruption or ignorance, been blind for more than a
century. Can it then have no other reasons for supporting Mr. Pit, but a
scramble for places? Can its firm adherence to the present Ministry, be no
otherwise accounted for, than by reducing the first Senate in the universe, to
the circle in a lady's dressing room at Versailles, where M -- cannot be
ignorant that formerly all public business was discussed; where the change of a
headdress, or of a General -- a new tax, or a party of pleasure -- where all
important questions were settled with equal solemnity; where intrigue decided
every thing; turned out a Minister, appointed his successor; and settled what
foreign quarrel would be most convenient to prolong the administration of the
favorite of the day?

And it is at the foot of the mountains of Swisserland that these strange
insinuations are hasarded! Does an author at that distance presume to speak so
confidently and so lightly of the disposition and sentiments of a great nation,
of intrigues which direct the deliberations of its Parliament, and personal
motives which influence its Ministers? -- Not contented with having recourse to
such groundless assertions, she conjures up supernatural aid. Shade of Lord
Chatham, appear from the bottom of thy tomb, and demand back thy name from thy
son! A name to which that son has not added less celebrity, than it received
from his father, who expired while conjuring his country to oppose the
aggrandisement of France! The present generation, which with respect to him is
posterity, venerates his character, for having sacrificed the favors of a
Court, to the interests of the Nation. The time perhaps is not far distant,
when the same generation will say: "His son is, if possible, greater; he has
not hesitated to risk his own popularity for her safety."

Such suggestions as M -- has ventured to use, especially addressed as they are
to the French, can answer no other purpose than to perpetuate their animosity
against Mr. Pit, and induce them to believe all that their leaders continue to
tell them of his destructive intentions. -- How much more worthy of a
philosophic writer would it be, ^^ endeavor to remove these pernicious
prejudices against him, which are the real causes of the continuation of the
war with England? Why not show them the free Constitution which Corsica has
adopted, since her emancipation from France; and which is surely a sufficient
proof that no idea is entertained in this country, of compelling other nations
to adopt the letter of her own Constitution, or of enslaving any people who
wish to be free? But what is at present carefully concealed from the French,
and which, notwithstanding it is of the utmost importance they should know, is,
that the present war neither is, nor ever has been, on the part of this
country, a war of ambition, or envy, but of mere self-defence: there is not a
man in it, with any pretensions to good sense, who has joined in the war on any
other ground than a conviction of its necessity; who does not sincerely regret
that there is still the same necessity of continuing it; who does not think it
the best policy this country can adopt, to make, if possible, a lasting peace
with France; and does not sincerely wish that the latter should be happy and
tranquil, neither disturbed by her neighbors, nor extending her frontiers at
their expense.

I know well that the Committees of the Convention need not be informed of
these truths. -- They have been aware of them a long time; and the only reason
why they conceal them from the people is, to have one pretense more for
protracting the war. But as it is plain that their object, in protracting the
war, is to preserve their own political existence, and to retard the return of
the armies; to put off the dreadful day when they will be made to account for
all the blood which has been so unnecessarily shed abroad, and so basely shed
at home; the armies should be excited to accelerate the work of peace, and give
freedom to their country.

Soldiers of France! why do you delay to disconcert the murderous hopes of your
chiefs? See you not that those perverse men persist in directing your attention
to foreign countries, for no other reason but to prevent you from living to see
the devastation which they have spread through your own? What can you hope for,
either good, or glorious, or free, from your present Convention, which one of
its own members so justly called a machine for making decrees? Have not almost
all its members, at one time or other, been the servile agents of the monsters
on whom it is now so convenient to lay their own guilt? Think you that those
men can give food to your country, who have dragged your laborers to war? Can
they provide clothing for you, who have banished your manufacturers; or
shelter, whose decrees have laid your cities in ruins? Can such men give new
life to France; or will you trust to them the regeneration of your Government?
Does not all they have made you suffer, tell you, that by you only she can be
saved; not from foreign enemies, but from her worst enemies at home? Repeated
victories have sufficiently proved your valor: it is now time to claim the
reward of it, from your country. Tell her that the best rewards she can bestow
upon you, are Freedom and Peace. -- Freedom, equally secured from Despots and
from Demagogues, by limitation, distribution, and permanence of authority. --
Peace, secured from interruption, not by a wide extended frontier, unfortified,
and unwillingly conceded; not by the precarious submission of conquered
provinces; but by your own internal strength, which will revive with your
internal tranquillity. -- Return then to your country; to the friends from whom
you have been dragged, to gratify an insane ambition; cultivate once more the
fields which discord has laid waste; and give bread once more to helpless age,
and infancy.

Not till your return, will you be able to judge of those nations whom your
leaders represent as bent on your destruction. On your ancient frontiers, and
there only, you may enter together the temple of Religion as a temple of Peace:
mutually undeceived, and mutually weary of carnage, you will then break with
transports the trumpet of war; and there at last you will substitute for your
sanguinary hymns, this sublime song of that holy and beautiful Religion, which
your present Chiefs, in their impious delirium, have attempted to banish from
mankind --

On Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men. POSTSCRIPT.
June 6, 1795.
THE original of this Translation having been sent to the press more than a
month ago; and various circumstances having happened in the interval, to prove
the moderation of my calculations, and the truth of my hypothesis; it may not
be useless to give a summary view of those events, which I shall divide under
two principal heads.

1st, The Fall of the Assignats. 2d, The Fall of the Republic.

Fall of the Assignats.
Every debate of the Convention on this subject proves, that, far from having
been betrayed into any exaggeration, I was even more moderate than was
necessary, in the greater part of the inductions which I made in the Second
Chapter, relative to the progressively-increasing emissions, the rapid
depreciation, and the probable annihilation of the assignats.

With an intention of avoiding any sort of exaggeration, I only assumed that
the remaining expense of the present year, might require an emission of
assignats in the proportion of the month of Nivose, and that such an emission
would add about five milliards to the mass. But it now appears that the
deficiency of the two months of Pluviose and Germinal was Of Pluviose, 443
millions of livres. Of Germinal, 660 millions of livres.


So that assignats to the amount of very nearly forty-four millions sterling
must have been issued, to discharge the expenses of those two months only. From
every appearance, we have reason to think, that the month of Floreal, which
ended on the 20th of May, must have required an emission of a milliard. So
that, instead of withdrawing four milliards of the old assignats from
circulation (a measure which, last December, the Convention allowed to be
indispensable), it will have added, between that time and the 20th of May,
about three milliards to the seven or eight which were then in circulation.
And, as to the progressive loss of their remaining value, I said (page the
28th) that, if they continue to fall at the rate of 5 per cent. every two
months, in a very short time they will not be worth circulating. But as, during
a Revolution, circumstances may happen to defeat the most plausible
conjectures, I allowed that this event might be delayed to the end of the year,
or beyond it. The highest calculations however have proved nearest to the
truth; for, from the last accounts received from different provinces of France,
it appears that, between the end of March and the end of May, the assignats
lost more than one half of their remaining value.

If we add to the abovementioned circumstances, that those who have purchased
the confiscated property, become daily more insecure, and, from what Chenier
said on the 1st of May, are already considered as sacrilegious; we may, I
think, fairly conclude, that the time is not far distant, when the Convention
will no longer find dupes enough to speculate in those purchases, or to take
its assignats. The time probably is not far distant, when the latter will be
treated like some of the provincial paper in America, which at last was thrown
away as useless, when no one could be found to take it at the thousandth part
of its nominal value.

In confirmation of what I have already said on this subject, I shall cite,
verbatim, a part of a speech made by Dupuis the 7th of April, in the Convention.

The plate for printing assignats was found infinitely more convenient than an
assessment of taxes; and without any longer calculating expenses, the
Constituent Assembly transmitted this faithful plate to the Legislative
Assembly, who passed it on to us. With it, those Assemblies transmitted the
burden of public debt, infinitely more heavy than they received it; and
bequeathed us a war, with all its expenses, and with responsibility for their
error. In creating a new species of money, our predecessors thought of the
means of beginning a Revolution, BUT DID NOT THINK OF ANY FOR FINISHING IT.

We are yet to learn what means the Convention will find to finish the
Revolution, and terminate the war with Great Britain, which, it says, was
bequeathed to it by the preceding Assemblies.

All the persons coming from France agree in saying, that the general opinion
against the duration of the Republic, shows itself most decidedly in the sale
of the confiscations. Monastic property, it is said, is still bought with
eagerness and confidence; and next to that, the property of the church. As to
the Crown lands, it is difficult to find purchasers for them; and as to the
estates of the emigrants, still fewer persons will have any thing to do with
them: besides this, a marked difference is made between property confiscated by
the Constituent, and by the succeeding Assemblies.

Such shades of opinion on this subject, can only proceed from a general
impression, that the Convention is at its last gasp, that all it has done will
perish with it, and the Republic no longer exist. To keep out of sight the
symptoms of dissolution, the Convention have formed a scheme of selling the
houses and buildings belonging to the emigrants, by way of lottery, in order to
get rid of them at once, and to avoid those distinctions which the public
opinion makes respecting them. I very much doubt whether this lottery will ever
be filled. But if the property should ever pass to those who purchase tickets;
and if they should keep possession of their prizes for any length of time, they
will indeed be more fortunate than wise.

That it will be impossible, or at least very difficult, to fill such a
lottery, appears to be the opinion of the Committee of Finance: for when the
scheme of a lottery was adopted, that Committee proposed other schemes quite as
impossible, which would, as it said, withdraw in a very short time the sum of
assignats necessary to be taken out of circulation.

These schemes were in number no less than 15. It would be useless to enter
into a detail of them, or to show their absurdity: I shall only repeat what was
said on the subject by Bourdon de l'Oise, the 21st of April.

This morning a project of finance has been distributed among you. Many of my
colleagues, and myself, intend to dispute seven eighths of it. Formerly, when
you traded with all Europe, you had not a fourth part of the currency you have
at present; and now that it is increased four fifths, you have no trade but
with yourselves. This cannot last. It is clearly demonstrated, that nothing
FETTERS our Revolution so much as the FINANCES.

With the hope of extricating themselves from this situation, the Convention
thought fit to reject the propositions of Johannot, made in the name of the
Committee of Finance, The following passages are extracted from Johannot's
Report.

All your power cannot, by any exertion of authority, remedy the discredit of
your money, or promissory notes; though those promissory notes have a real and
sufficient security,

Every thing demonstrates that the difference between paper-money and specie is
independent of the will of the Legislature.

So long as that natural difference exists, it will be impossible to hinder the
citizens from attending to it in their transactions with each other. They must
not be placed in a dilemma between truth and law. The distinction in bargains
as payable in specie or in assignats, must necessarily take place; and for that
reason should be left without restrictions, that the legislative power may not
be committed.

It would be absurd to deny that there is an actual difference between standard
silver and paper-money. A course of exchange between them exists, but is
continually varying more and more to our disadvantage.

All our efforts should be directed to re-establish the balance between the
receipt and the ordinary expenditure. It results from the present state of
things, that the discredit of the assignats considerably augment our expenses,
while our receipts remain the same, or rather diminish, in consequence of this
discredit. The public treasure is exhausted, without any means of replenishing
it in equal proportion. One of the consequences of the revolution is, that we
pay salaries to a greater number of agents than all the rest of Europe put
together.

Johannot composed this report about the same time that the part of this work
was written, which relates to the assignats; and a fuller confirmation of my
assertions cannot be desired.

One would hardly have expected to find in a report which contains so much
plain truth, such absurdities as the following.

If the war should last two years larger, there will still remain of the funds
destined for supporting it, a sum amounting to several milliards; which, after
the peace, may be applied to the useful purpose of discharging the
constitutional debt.

If it should not be quite sufficient, experience has more than ever proved the
utility of a sinking fund. That mode might be applied to extinguish
progressively all the public debt.

We propose to you then, to make assignats to the amount of three milliards; to
decree, that beyond this quantity none shall ever be made or issued; and
publicly to destroy the instruments for making them. These three milliards,
thus made, only by way of precaution, will never be issued; or, at most, only
in part.

After this, follows the enumeration of 15 operations of finance which he
proposes; and then he adds,

It is no longer time to do things by halves; we must advance toward a
regeneration with the same perseverance as for eighteen months past we have
been going to destruction.

We shall finish by the same observation with which we began -- That the
security of the finances depends on a firm and stable government. So long as
that remains uncertain, nothing can be proposed to you respecting them but
inefficient theories.


and adopt two others, more immediate in their effect, but not less desperate.
The first destroyed the currency of near two milliards of assignats of the
royal impression, by decreeing that they should no longer be admitted but in
payment for national property. By the second, the Convention decreed, that
every citizen shall be empowered to demand from the directory of his district,
any part of the national domains of which the sale is not already commenced, on
payment of 75 times the rent of those lands in the year 1790. The property
shall be adjudged to the purchasers on the day of demand, or that immediately
following, on condition that the purchase-money shall be made good in three
monthly payments, etc. When this decree was made, the crown of six livres sold
for 105 livres in assignats; so that 75,000 in assignats could be procured for
4,285 (omitting the fraction) in specie: and an estate which would return 1000
livres in 1790, may now be bought of the Convention for a little more than four
and a quarter years purchase in specie. So that the Convention is reduced to
sell its best estates at about a seventh part of the price which they bore
before the revolution; or more properly, to offer them to sale; because there
is little reason to believe that they will find many purchasers, even on those
terms.

The degree in which the French themselves are alarmed at the present situation
of their finances, mey be judged by the following extract from the Courier
Universel, published at Paris the 24th of May. The spectacle which France
presents at this moment is horrible. The Government cannot pay its creditors;
the debtors to the State cannot pay the Government; and the citizens cannot pay
one another. This is the necessary consequence of uncertainty and arbitrary
rule, the unfortunate result of repeated and extravagant emissions of
assignats, and of the diminution and disappearance of specie.

Fall of the Republic.
The fall of the Republic is as rapid as that of the Assignats; and every
incident, since the publication of this pamphlet, corroborates the assertion in
page 35, that the Republic will perish, as the Monarchy perished, by the ruin
of its finances. The myriads who have hitherto supported this system from
self-interest, will soon find, that there can be no more confiscations to
pillage; and that republican salaries are no very tempting bribe, when paid in
republican money.

The present system, unable to give protection to those who have property, and
unable to gratify the avidity of those who desire it, is evidently hastening to
a dissolution. There is one indication of the prevailing belief at Paris, that
Royalty will soon be re-established, which appears to me almost infallible; I
mean the marked preference given to ^he assignats which were issued during the
Monarchy. La Croix complained in the Convention, on the 6th of May, that a
republican assignat of 10 ^ivres was publicly exchanged for a royal assignat of
5. This circumstance, together with the reluctance shown by purchasers to
speculate in estates confiscated since the dissolution of the Constituent
Assembly, prove, not only a prevailing expectation of the re-establishment of
Royalty; but more than this, an opinion that every power that has been
exercised in the mean time, will be considered as usurpation, and all its acts
rescinded. No wonder that Le Sage, shortly after this complaint by La Croix,
exclaimed in the Convention, We have had our Cromwell; let us take care that we
have not our Charles the Second.

In order to conceal, as much as possible, this evidence of the public opinion,
the Convention found itself reduced to the necessity of stopping the
circulation of all the royal assignats: a measure which increased the
irritation of the populace, and contributed very considerably to the struggle
which took place at Paris, between ^^e different factions, on the 22d, 23d, and
24th of May. Persons who have but superficially considered the war of factions,
and the history of republics, may possibly imagine that victory implies
strength; and that the existing system in France is likely to be more durable,
from the issue of this formidable attack. But, in fact, this very victory, both
from its necessary effect on the defeated party, and from the means by which it
was gained, will probably contribute to increase the silent but rooted aversion
to the Convention.

The defeated party are the Jacobins and their instruments; the leaders without
principle, the instruments ferocious, desperate, and irritated to madness, by
disappointment and want. The same instruments, and the same practices, were
resorted to against the Convention as against Louis XVI. The Conquerors of the
Bastille, the Fauxbourgs of St. Marceau and St. Antoine, the men who dragged
the late unfortunate King from Versailles, the furious bands of the tenth of
August, the murderers of the second of September, the very populace to which
the Convention owed its existence, were, on this occasion, employed to destroy
it. The same system of insurrection was adopted; the National Gens-d'Armes, the
Pretorian Guard of the Convention, were seduced (as the Royal Guards were in
the first insurrection), and joined the conspirators. However, the victory of
the Convention was complete: the Gens-d'Armes were cashiered, and the populace
of Paris entirely disarmed.

The Convention owed its victory to the armed force of Paris, which had lately
been established for the very purpose of repressing the Jacobin faction; and to
the dread of the ferocious outrages of that faction, which united all parties,
oftensibly to support the Convention but really for their own preservation.

As those who conducted the conspiracy against Robespierre formed a coalition
with the Girondists; so, on this occasion, the Convention was obliged to have
recourse even to suspected Royalists for support: and as that first victory
over the Jacobin faction, gradually, but inevitably, led to the restoration of
the Girondists; so, from exactly the same causes, this second victory will
probably lead to the restoration of Royalty.

This event the Girondists will, no doubt, use every endeavor to prevent; and
it is not impossible but that the Constitution which they are now framing may
be so far accommodated to present circumstances as to postpone it: but what
probability is there that the third Constitution will last longer than the
first or the second? In proportion as the new Government resembles those
established in America, it may, for a time, satisfy the more moderate friends
of Monarchy; but a system so inconsistent with the prejudices, and so opposite
to the habits of the French, cannot long subsist. No barrier can long prevent
the reflux of popular opinion; and between that system and Royalty there is
nothing intermediate.

If it is objected, that the cry of Royalty was not heard amid this violent
tumult; this very circumstance I think an additional argument in favor of my
opinion. No one can deny that the Royalists are numerous at Paris; and their
not appearing as a distinct party, on this occasion, is the strongest of proofs
that their measures are systematically conducted. The Girondists were not heard
of as a party, at the time of Robespierre's defeat; their principles were
strongly disavowed for a long time after it; and it was but step by step that
they gradually returned to power But that return, though opposed by every
effort o^ many of those who contributed to that first victor^ over the violent
Jacobins, and who wished to retai^ the temporary influence which it gave them,
could not ultimately be prevented. The Royalists are now what the Girondists
were then: prudent, and taught by misfortunes, they have assisted the weaker to
destroy the more powerful of their enemies; and have not risked the issue of a
battle against the Jacobins, by premature cries of Royalty. From the populace,
defeated, disarmed, but irreconcilably irritated, the present leaders of the
Convention can no longer look for assistance; and from the armed force which
has now saved them, they can look for assistance no longer than while that
force finds it convenient to give it.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3, Line 1, for it, read her -- its, read her.

-- 4, -- 5, a^le so.

-- 8, -- 2, for belligent, read belligerent.

-- 9, -- 21, for these, read those.

Note, for even though, read if -- or to, read and who will.

-- 10, -- 2, for yet, read but.

-- 12, -- 11, for declaration, read declarations.

-- 14, -- 1, for designed, read deigned.

-- 16, -- 6, for those, read these.

-- 18, -- 27, 38, for Louis XVI, read Louis XIV.

-- 19, -- 1, for thirst of dominion, read love of military glory.

-- 20, -- 36, dele the second be.

-- 21, -- 1, dele additional.

-- 23, -- 7, Note, for cultivate, read work.

-- 26, -- 10, dele though it was.

-- 27, dele the first note.

-- 28, -- 30, read the assignat^ will not be worth the trouble of circulating.

-- 29, -- 4, for they are, read it is.

-- 30, -- 21, 22, for legislature, read legislation.

-- 33, dele the first note.

-- 35, -- 17, for HER, read ITS. 24, dele a security.

-- 36, -- 36, Note, for circumstances, read facts.

39, dele even.

-- 9, -- 36, dele but.

-- 8, -- 32, dele thereby.

-- 35, read or to that of.

-- 53, -- 3, Note, read We have made.

-- 56, -- 22, -- dele which.

-- 65, -- 16, -- for it, read he.

-- 71, -- 12 and 15, for his, read her; for him read her; for he read she.

-- 89, -- 3, for he, read she.


