Every Man his own DOCTOR; OR THE POOR MAN's FAMILY PHYSICIAN* PRESCRIBING
Plain, safe, and easy means to cure ^^^mselves, of the most disorders incident
to this climate* with very little charge, the medicines being the growth of
this country, and about almost every man's PLANTATION.

BY THOMAS JOHNSON*

SALISBURY: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, 1798.

Introduction.
THIS treatise prescribes plain, safe, and easy means for persons in every
capacity, and to cure themselves of most, if not all the most grievous and
dangerous disorders our country is incident to, and with very little charge;
the medicine being chiefly this country growth, and on every man's plantation;
and those that are imported are cheap, and may be had from almost every Doctor
and Apothecary's shop, so that every man may get and keep the imported ones by
him, and send his son or servant and get and prepare them of our own growth; by
which means he may be cured, if cura^le,

"But many shapes of death, and many are the ways that leads to his grim cave;
dismal, yet to sense more terrible at the entrance than within, some as thou
say by violent stroke shall die. By fire, flood, famine; by intemperance
more in meats and drinks which on the earth shall bring diseases dire! And
Doctors still more terrible." Milton.

The most acceptable service we can render to God, is beneficience to man.
There are three ways of benefitting our fellow creatures; we may be useful to
their souls by good instruction and example; we may be helpful to their bodies
by feeding the hungry, and clothing the naked; we can aid them in their
fortunes by encouraging industry, and prescribing easy remedies to the sick;
and in this we shall relieve the distressed; which in a word is doing all the
good we can to our fellow creatures. These are the ways of improving our
talents, which God has entrusted us with; and we must expect hereafter to give
an account how we have employed them.

I wish it were in my power to serve mankind more than I do, but alas! Vain
wish: how often did I publish in the Virginia Gazatte in the time of the great
distress of the Flux, (I believe in the year 1773) and two hundred and
sixty-four receipts I had printed, and gave out in the year 1774; from which
instructions numbers have testified of the good received, both in being
preserved from catching, as well as well as being restored to perfect health,
when beyond all hopes of recovery, which gave me great encouragement to write;
but the troubles of the late war, and being in an unsettled situation, has
prevented one, though it* has laid long and heavy on my mind: yet I have put it
off till now, I pray God it may be accepted and blessed of him, of which I make
no doubt as he so graciously accepted the widows mite. I publish this treatise
to lead the poor in the pleasant path of health, and when they have the
misfortune to be sick, to show them the cheapest, easiest, safest, and best way
to get well again.

The lower part of our country are subject to more disorders than the upland,
there being so many swamps, marshes, bogs, and the overflowing of fresh water
rivers, from which proceeds fogs, a damp air, with loathsome and bad scents,
from which proceed agues, and followed with long inward fevers, dropsies,
coughs, pleurasy, consumptions, and with many others which the upland is not so
subject to; yet our upland is not exempt from all disorders; for because of
swearing, the Land mourns, says the good old prophet Jeremiah many hundred
years ago: so our upland is afflicted as well as the low, and with the
rheumatism, fluxes, cancers, and with a dismal train of other disorders which
make a sad havoc all over our states. Is it possible to see these calamities
rage without the tenderest compassion? Surely, what can be more melancholy than
to have so many poor people perish for want of using timely means for their
preservation? They neglect to take any remedy till their case is grown
desperate, and death begins to stare them in the face. They consider not that a
moderate skill may recover them in the beginning of a distemper while he has
strength to go through all the necessary operations, but when the whole college
should not be able to save him after his spirits are sunk, and all the
principles of life are nearly extinguished.

This unhappy distemper occasions a great deal of mortality, and what makes the
misfortune the greater, is, that it falls heavier on the younger sort who are
most liable to harringing distempers. Indeed some would be glad of assistance
if they did not think the remedy nearly as had as the disorder; for our doctors
are so exorbitant in their fees whether they kill or cure, that the patient had
rather trust to his constitution than run the risque of beggaring his family:

These considerations made me, count it a work of charity, and public spirit to
communicate to these extensive states, and particularly the poor the method of
curing themselves when they shall fall into any of our common disorders. For
their great encouragement, the remedies I shall prescribe may be procured at
little trouble and expense, being for the most part such as grow on their own
plantations, or may be easily procured.

Providence has been so good as to furnish almost every country with medicines
proper for the distempers incident to the climate, and such domestic remedies
are always sufficient for the cures of such disorders, if a right use be made,
with the blessing of God. Their cases are seldom completed, but proceed for
the most part from cold, or such slight transgressions in such ailments; the
symptoms cannot easily be mistaken, nor is the cure difficult: all the secret
lies in taking the distemper in time, and this will be the most necessary,
because most disorders that happen from cold, are exceedingly violent, and call
aloud for speedy assistance. Always remember, that the sooner any disorder is
taken in hand, the easier the cure; because nature is strong and able to
cooperate with the medicines they take -- nor can we hope, that Heaven will
assist us in our calamities unless we endeavor at the same time to assist
ourselves.

In setting down the following prescriptions, I have been cautions of not
talking like an Apothecary, that is, of using hard words that perhaps neither
my patient nor I my self understands, not have I taken them lightly upon trust,
but I am able to recommend most of them upon more than thirteen years
experience; for the rest I have creditable authority for. In the mean time, I
hope none will object like Noeman, the Syrian, to the easiness of any of these
remedies; but rather rejoice that any can have so great a blessing, so very
cheap; and in truth people must love difficulty extreemly well to slight health
for being gained with little for my own body, being sickly brought me easily
into a capacity to know that health was the greatest of all earthly blessings*
and truly he was never sick that does not believe it than first I studied the
human body, and secondly, I considered that all medicines were compounded of
herbs, roots, barks, flower, and seeds and this first let me to work in
studying the nature of simples; most of which I knew by sight before. Then I
consulted with my two brothers, Doctor Reason, and Doctor Experience, and took
a voy^ge to visit my mother Nature, by whose advice, together with the help of
Doctor Diligence, and the blessing of the God. I at last gained my desire, and
being warned by Mr. Honesty, a stranger in the present days, to publish it to
the world, I have done it.

But, you will say, what need had I to have wrote on this subject when so many
famous and learned men have wrote so much already. To this I answer of a truth;
much have been wrote, but in so high a style, that the poor could not
understand it; and I write for the poor, yet I make no doubt but the rich will
be glad to make use of this treatise for many of the disorders that are herein
mentioned, the Doctors call incurable; and besides, if the rich send for the
Doctor very time a child or a servant is sick, it will take their whole income:
and what then will pay their taxes, and cloth them? Secondly, before the
Doctor could be got, perhaps the patient might die, and if not he might suffer
greatly.

There are many parts that there is no Doctor to be got at all; now you see a
reason for it: a reason it is said, makes a man differ from a beast, because
out of thy thoughts God should not pass his image stamped, is on every weed and
grass if you please to make use of this little treatise. I make no doubt but it
will answer your desired effect; and then I am sure you will not think your
money thrown away, nor spent in vain; but I hope you will give all the praise
to God, which is the ardent wish of the public's friend and humble servant.

THOMAS JOHNSON.

THE POOR MAN's FAMILY PHYSICIAN.
HEAD ACH
COMMONLY proceeds from colds, and from the sun, or from a foul stomach. The
Sun pain commonly rises and falls with the Sun, which may be known after one or
two days; and if this should be the cause, cup on each temple, and on the mould
of the head, and take Snuff prepared as follows: take half an ounce of common
snuff, add to it one hundred drops of the compound spirits of lavender, and
fifty drops of camphorated spirits; mix them well together, and take plentiful
as common snuff, but for the common head ach, only take the above mentioned
snuff; either of these drops may do, but best mixed together.

SORE EYES:
Take Roman vitrial, commonly called the blue stone, about the sixth part of a
nutmeg: burn it as you do alum, then take a hen's egg, roast it in embers very
hard, careful without bursting open one end, take out the yolk, pound the blue
stone to fine powder, and put it in the egg, fill it up with clean spring
water, let it st^nd twelve hours to dissolve, then poor it off very gently in a
clean vessel, sover it close again and let it stand six hours, then pour it off
again very gently into a clean glass vessel clear from all drugs, let it stand
six hours longer, then pour it into a clean phial and let it stand for use; let
the patient, when in bed, have a drop dropped on each eye, keeping them shut till
morning to prevent smarting; but if from many years standing, or proceeded from
any uncommon cause, bleed 12 oz. next morning take a purge of Exdubes, the
white walnut pills of the upland country will answer the same purpose: let this
be done once a week for three weeks, drinking the following decoction, viz.
take white Shoemake root, the inside of white oak bark, the inside of poplar
root bark; one handful of each, the same as Woods Ditiny, put them into a
gallon of water, reduce it to two quarts over a slow fire, let the patient
drink a tea-cup full night and morning, let his diet be light wheat bread, and
drink Molasses small beer, or pure spring water.

QUINSEY.
This is a fearful disorder and hurries people speedily to their long home;
this is known by various ways, sometimes a swelling on the outside of the
throat very much, and very sore within; sometimes swelling within, and
sometimes swelling about the palate of the mouth, and decaying if it should
swell outwardly o^ inwardly, apply the following poultice: take old sheep dung,
boil it in milk, apply it to the outside of the throat, for the inward
application take two handfulls of red rout, called by some reds hank; wash them
clean, boil them in two gallons of clean water till reduced to half a pint,
strain it through a cloth very clean, add to it three table spoon^u^ls of the
juice of sage, the same of sharp vinegar, the same of good rum, three thimbles
full of fine salt, the same of the flower of alum, and three table spoonf^lls
of honey; simmer it a little over a moderate fire, then bottle it up for use;
let the patient have his throat wash^d three or four times a day, very clean,
with a mop made of a fine linen rag: this will not only heal the ulcers, but
stop the mortification also -- and will cure all kinds of sore throats

N. B. It will also be proper in the quinsey, to bleed in the foot.

SCURVY IN THE GUMS.
Take one handful of black jack bark, the inside, two handfuls of red root, one
handful of bamboo brier root, one ditto black brier root, one handful of golden
rod root, or tops; add to this four gallons of clean water in a copper vessel;
reduce it slowly over the fire to one pint, strain it off clean, and add to
this two spoonfuls of sage juice, half a spoonful of the flower of alum, three
spoonfuls of apple brandy, and three spoonfuls of sharp cydar vinegar; mix
these well together, and bottle it up for use to dress the teeth, pour a little
in a spoon, wrap a rag round your finger, and dip it in this balsom, and rub
your teeth and gums well, three times a day for three days, then take a
penknife, and before a glass press down your gums as close as you can, and then
scrape off the black scarf, if there be any on the teeth, then wash again as
before mentioned for three days, and this being done will effect the cure.

WHIT TOW.
Chew the bark of Sassafras root, and apply can poulties constantly. This will
draw, break, and cure it the soonest, safest, and easiest of any thing that I
know.

CHOLICK.
This is a kind of dry gripes. The patient is generally costive and feverish,
though sometimes neither; but a griping in the bowels or stomach, and sometimes
shooting into different parts of the body, shoulders, and back. For this
grievous complaint, take as follows: the inside of white oak bark, the inside
of poplar root, root bark of each, one small handful, the same of woods ditiny,
properly called bitiny, put these in two gallons of water, and reduce it over a
slow fire to one; then bottle it up for use: of this take a teacup full as hot
as you can drink it, adding to it fifteen drops of the compound spirits of
lavender: if it does not give ease in five or six minutes, take a second in
like manner, and also to the third, which will certainly give ease; but to root
out the disorder entirely, take the same medicine about three times a day for
three orlour weeks; living only on what is fresh, light and easy of digestion,
and abstaining from spirituous liquors during said time.

RHEUMATISM.
In the first place, plunge yourself all over in cold water, the colder the
better, early in the morning: let the patient be taken out immediately, and
covered with five or six blankets, to sweat for three hours. As soon as in bed,
give the patient half a pint of rosemary tea very warm, if to be had; if not,
give a pint of cold water. If the patient should not sweat freely, cover the
head, which will be more effectual after swea^ing; for the space of the above
mentioned time, take of the blankets one at a time until the sweat is
sufficiently abated, and the patient co^d. Then be careful of catching cold,
and take the following preparation: viz. haf a pint of the flower of black
mustard seed, put it in a pint of wine, and the longer it steeps the better;
let it be well shook together, and give the patient a table spoonful morning
and night, and prepare the following oil for the part effected: viz. half a
bushel of sassafras roots washed clean, put them into a copper still, fill the
still with clean water, and still it off, from which you will draw an oil;
bottle it up for use, and rub on the part effected two or three drops at going
to bed: be very cautious in using this oil, l^st you do more harm than good;
for it is exceeding strong and penetrating. This will also cure the Sc^^ttle,
or hip Gout*

PUTRID FEVER.
This is so much like the pleurasy, it is hard to distinguish; therefore it
does much damage before it is discerned; but remember the pleurasy pain: it
generally flies from place to place, some hours before it settles; but the camp
fever generally strikes in one fixed place: either head, neck, shoulders,
breast, side, or back, and attended with a very high fever; and wherever it
strikes, it decays in a few hours if violent, without immediate remedy for this
disorder. When discovered, give a tea spoonful of the spirits of camphire, with
twenty drops of the compound spirits of lavender, three or four times a day;
give also (...) times a spoonful at ^ time of the flower of china, viz. any
broker china ware pounded to powder, or take the following preparation; take of
while oak bark and p^plar root bark, of the inside of each a sma^l handful, the
same of woo is bitiny, called ditiny; put the whole in two gallons of water,
reduce it over a small fire to one, and bottle it up for use. Give the patient
a tea cup full four times a day, let his constant drink be water fresh from the
well or spring. It will be good in the last prescription, to give a vomit of
good tartaramattick, and should the patient at first have a very sick stomach,
work it off with warm water, and apply a plaster of the flour of mustard feed
to the feet and hands, mixed with with sharp vinegar, till the fever abates. If
the patient should be very low-spirited, as they generally are, and to every
teacup fifteen drops of the compound spirits of lavender.

SLOW FEVER.
In this disorder a person is commonly taken as with the pleurasy, must
commonly wi^h an ague, though not always, and then followed with a very high
fever which is never off during his sickness; but only turns inwardly and then
outwardly again, which you may discover by a very low quick pulse, and then a
very high one; sometimes one cheek red, and then the other for this disorder
bleed when the fever is high ten ounces. The evening following give a sweat of
rosemary tea, at least a pint, and half if the patient can take it; increase
the sweat in the night by giving a little more of the same, and if need be the
next day, give the patient as follows: viz. take of white oak bark, poplar
root bark, of the inside, one small hand^ul of each, the same of woods bitiny,
by some called ditiny; put the whole in two g^llons of water, and reduce it
over a slow fire to one. Give the patient a tea-cup full every three hours in
the day, adding to every cup fifteen drops of the spirits of lavender, if to be
had, let his drink be balm or sinquefoot tea, or water fresh from the spring,
and diet light, and easy of digestion.

HICKUP.
Take dill leaves or seeds, boil them in water, and give the patient a
table-spoon full as often as you shall see an occasion. The seed is like
fennel, but of a blue green color; but the growth is not half as large, and
the leaves much smaller.

CANCER.
Take a pound of the bark of sassafras root, half a pound of the bark of
dogwood root, a pound of the bark of shoemaker root, a pound of the bark of
Spanish oak, and a handful of black snake root; put them in a pot with a gallon
of best rum, cover it close, let it stew half away, then take it off, and cool
to blood warm, then strain it thro^^h a coarse cloth into a clean b^s^n, then
take (...) vitriol as large as a nutmeg, and take the bigness of a small walnut
in alum; beat them fine together, and add two spoonfuls of honey: mix them
well together, then mix it with the aforesaid decoction, and every time you
dress the wound shake it well together. Take (...) and add to it one third
water, and it will be fit for use; with this touch the part effected with a
feather, and then put lint on the wound, dipped in the aforesaid compound
medicine, and cover it with a sheet of lead enclosed in linen. A cancer must
be was^ed with ^^m, and water must not touch it. This is the surest, safest,
and easiest that ever I found out.

CANCER.
Take the inside of red o^k bark, and burn it to ashes in a clean place; put
this in a pot with water, and boil it very strong; let it settle clean, and let
it settle again and again, till it is very clear: then boil it away to a salve,
and of this spread a plaster the exact size of the cancer, which will take it
out in twelve hours. Then wash it with rum and honey, and cover it with a dry
lint and a plaster of dry lead pretty stiff.

CANCER.
This may be taken out only with soft soap, ^age, and ^a^t, and cured with
common salve, or as any other sore is cured.

YAWS.
Take half a pound of sassaparilla and half a pound of china, which may be had
from a doctor or apothecary's shop. Take and boil it one whole day in three
gallons of water, let your pot lid be nicely fitted, and plaster round with
wheat flower dough. Give the patient a gill and a half if grown, morning and
evening before and after he eats, let his diet be light wheat bread, and
nothing else; and drink nothing but molasses beer, and continue six weeks. Take
a purge before and after.

WHITE SWELLING.
The first symptoms of this disorder appears with a large swelling, and a
redness with a white spot in the middle, easily to be discovered. The best way
to treat this fatal disorder, is to scatter it at the first appearance thereof,
which is done as follows; take James town weeds and bruize it, add to this the
flower of brimstone and a little hogs lard, of which apply as a poultice, which
will certainly scatter it if the matter is not collected; but if it will not
scatter, chew the bark of sassafras roots, and apply it as a poultice
constantly; which will bring it forward, ripen and break it, and afterward
cure it; but if it should prove fatal, and will not break, let it be lanced and
linted, and sullenged every day with weak lie until it is thoroughly cleansed,
then sullenged with a little rum and honey, after the lime water. Let the
patients diet be light and easy of digestion, and drink molasses small beer,
and take a purge once a week But if it be an old swelling which appears mortal,
by which the bone may be damaged, apply a pledged dipped in weak lie, which will
scale the bane in ten or thirteen days, and bring a callous. During this cure
let the patient take the following decoction to keep under the fevers and
prevent a mortification: take one handful o^ the inside of white oa^ bark, one
handful of the inside or poplar root bark, and one handful of bitiny, put them
in a gallon of water and reduce it to two quarts in a copper vessel, of which
let the patient take a tea cup full three times a day.

CHOLICK.
Take one ounce of Jerusalem oak seed, an ounce of common snake root, each in
fine powder, put them in one quart of honey, stew it to a sirrup, of this take
the quantity of nutmeg night and morning. Be cautious of taking cold while
taking this medicine, for it will keep you in a continual sweat.

CHOLICK.
Steep indian turnip and cumphrey root, and poplar root bark, one ounce of each
in one quart of whiskey, of this drink a dram every morning till well. This
will cure the most inveterate cholick though ever so long standing.

DRY GRIPES.
Take half an ounce of rheubarb, half an ounce of jallop, one ounce of cream of
tarter, one ounce of tarter, one ounce of (...), two spoonfuls of sweet
anniseed or fennel seed; pound all these together in a mortar, and put them in
a quart of good rum or brandy: sat them in the sun or by the fire shaking it
well two or three times a day, and give a dram glass morning and evening: but
first give a vomit of hypecacuana or tarter.

DRY GRIPES.
This is a violent gryping in the bowels with a sick stomach and vomiting, and
high fevers, and very costive; so that nothing can go through them. For this
violent disorder take two or three spoonfulls at a time of Bears oil, or
according as their stomach will bear till it goes through them; if this is not
to be had, take half a pint of linseed oil, the same of honey or molasses, stew
them together, of this take a spoonful at a time till it goes through, and if
this is not to be had, boil one handful of mullen seed in molasses or honey;
take a spoonful at a time till it goes through, and if this should fail, take
a quantity of mulberry root, boil it to a strong decoction, and of this take
two or three spoonfullls at a time till it goes through. To cool the fevers, if
any, take the following decoction: take the inside of white oak bark, the
inside of poplar root bark, of each one handful, and of woods bitiny the like
quantity; boil them in two gallons of water till reduced to one; and let the
patient take a tea-cup full three times a day.

GRAVEL OR STONE IN THE BLADDER.
For a sudden it of the gravel take a small handful of camomile flowers, boil
them in posset, and of this take a tea-cup full once in an hour. Posset is milk
turned with wine, rum or brandy; but wine is best. You will take out the curd
and boil them in the whey; but to root out this disorder, catch the water from
under a grindstone where tools are ground, and take a tablespoon full two or
three times a day, or take Turlingtons balsom of life three or four times a
day, twenty drops at a time in a glass of wine; but it is better in the above
mentioned posset.

INWARD FEVERS.
This is the most troublesome disorder of any, because attended with a deal of
laziness, which brings on poverty, and frequently ends in a dropsy. For this
troublesome and shameful disorder, take as follows: one handful of white oak
bark, one do. of poplar root, one do. of woods bitiny; boil them in two gallons
of water down to one, let the patient take half a pint three times a day, and
let his diet be light wheat bread, and drink molasses small beer.

N. B. Let the patient first bleed and take a purge once a week till well.

AGUE AND FEVER.
Take half an ounce of Jesuits bark in fine powder, salts of steel and black
pepper, of each the eighth part of an ounce, mix these well together with
molasses or honey, mix it well into a thick mush, and take as much as will lie
upon the point of a large case knife three or four times a day when the fever
is off. The same will care the intermitting fever: the intermitting fever in
what is commonly called the dump ague.

DROPSEY AND KEEKSEY.
Take the inside of white oak bark, of poplar root do. of each one handful, the
same of woods bitiny, put them into two gallons of water, and reduce it to one
over a slow fire; let the patient take half a pint three times a day; let his
diet be light wheat bread, and drink molasses small beer. Water must not be
drank on no account whatever; but remember always to take a purge once a week.
When the swelling is entirely gone, let the patient eat any thing light and
fresh, and drink hard cider, adding to every quart two tea-spoonfulls of alum,
and quench a hot iron in it: it is good to ride about and be much shook in a
cart or rough going carriage. During the cure let the patient take every
morning early, when there is no purge taken, a small thimble full of the
following powder mixed with sugar, or as you please: take old rusty iron, lay it
on a clean harth, and make on it a fire of good hickory wood; when the wood is
burnt out, take the iron and beat off the rust on a clean place; then brush up
the rust and beat it to a fine powder, and keep it for use, giving as above
mentioned: this will not only enripen the bleed, but cause a good wind, and
color also. The Keeksey may be cured the same way.

BLOODY FLUX.
First give a purge of peach syrrup, prepared thus: take half a peck of peach
leaves, (...) a gallon of water till reduced to a quart, (...) it well with
molasses or a little brown sugar stew it again a little, and give the patient
two large table-spoonfulls if a grown person: if this should not work in an
hour, give another spoonful; this continue till it purges, and continue the
working of the purge for twenty-four hours. This will cure, if taken in time;
but if the f^ux should return after the purge is worked off, and the patient
should be much griped, take a tea-spoonfull of common snake root, the same of
ginger, the same of calamas, (called by some cinnamon flag) and the same of
poplar root bark, all in fine powder; put them in a half pint of rum or brandy,
and a half pint of water, sweeten it with loaf sugar, and give the patient
every time he is griped a tea-cup fall as hot as he can drink it, which will
immediately give ease. When the griping is quite stopped, take one handful of
white oak bark, the same of poplar root bark, of the inside, and one handful of
woods bitiny, boil them in two gallons of water till reduced to one, give the
patient a tea-cup full blood warm four or five times a day for three days; then
take one handful of sweet gum root, one do. of presimmon bark, the inside, one
do. of red root, boil them in two gallons of water till reduced to one, and
give in like manner as in the above mentioned decoction till well. Yet if the
patient finds no amendment in four or five days, but grows worse at night, let
him eat a slice of cheese; then give one grain of gum opium made in a pill with
brown sugar: after taking this pill, perhaps the patient will rest all night;
in the morning let the patient eat a little thickened milk and bread, and
another slice of cheese; then give one grain of opium, again continue this
three days; then let it alone twenty-four hours to see if the lax is stopped; if
it is not stopped, give one grain of the opium in like manner night and morning
till well: opium will as when the preparation of the gum roots will not. If the
patient should be troubled with a sick stomach and vomiting when first taken,
give a vomit of tartaremetick, or ipecacuana, and work it off with water gruel,
and then proceed as above mentioned. But if the patient should be costive,
(called in common bound) give the above mentioned purge of peach syrrup; let
the patient drink the peach leaf, or sage tea; let his diet be salt beef, salt
bacon, salt fish, or mutton broth; but be sure touch not fresh beef, fresh
fish, chicken broth, nor colewortks; and eat and drink nothing but what is
warm, and eat as often as possible, though against the appetite; but touch no
kind of fruit nor any thing that is four; but if a woman with child falls under
this dangerous disorder, to prevent her miscarriage, let her take one handful
of tansey, one do. of life everlasting, steep them in a quart of wine, rum, or
brandy; but I prefer wine as best; let her drink a small dram glass of this
mixture three or four times a day, which will certainly prevent a miscarriage
in this and most all other cases.

It is good for every person strictly to watch their children when they are
getting well of the flax when it draws near the full or change of the moon, for
the worms are apt to rise and kill the child, perhaps when thought out of all
danger, which may be known by a hacking cough, or the child often putting the
hand to his throat, or complaining of something choking them. In this case,
give the child without delay, a tea-spoonfull of the juice of sage, or the same
of the juice of tausey or wormwood eight or ten times a day, till the danger is
over; for I have cause to believe that as many children die by the worms in the
flux, or on the first full or changing of the moon is die by the flux.

If a person should be troubled with a faintiness, which is often the ease in
the flux, give the patient twenty drops of the compound spirits of lavender on
a little piece of loaf sugar, if to be ^ud, if not, give the same quantity of
drops in a little warm tea, or ten drops of the essence of peppermint. These
medicines you will get in the apothecary's shop. The gum opium will do when the
preparation of sweet gum root and persimon bark will not, and sweet gum root
and persimon bark will do when the gum opium fails: therefore where the flux is
very bad, give two grains of the gum opium in the evening, and the gum root and
persimon bark in the day, as is above mentioned.

VENEREAL DISORDER, OR CLAP.
First bleed ten ounces, and then take a purge of pelexdiobous, then take one
handful of Spanish oak bark, the inside, two handfuls of white shoemake root,
two haddfuls of pine bark, the inside, two handfuls of blue burtleberry roots,
beil them in two gallons of water, and reduce it to one; let the patient take
half a pint of this three times a day, take one ounce of roman vitriol,
commonly called bluestone, beat it to a fine powder, put it into two quarts of
good rum, give the patient a wine glass full every morning, take a purge of
pelexdiobous, or salts, once a week; let his diet be light wheat bread, and
drink molasses small beer, and be cautious of getting cold. Let his sores, if
any, be carefully washed with the above mentioned decoction.

SORE LEGS, OR ULCERS.
Bleed, then take a purge of exdubes, and if there be any dead or rotten flesh,
apply the following powder: take paltoon root, by s^^e called indian paint,
wa^h it dry, beat it to a f^^e powder, with this powder cover the sore close,
lay on it a lint, and then a plaster, dress it once in twenty-four hours,
washing it with chamber lie and alum salt as hot as can be borne. If the dead
or rotten flesh is clean out, then apply a dry lint, and cover it with a
plaster of white lead; but if there still remains any rotten flesh, apply the
powders again, until it is clean; but if it be in deep ulcers, ^^^^enge it with
the aforesaid chamber lie and salt; but if the bone be decayed to scale it,
apply a pledges dipped in weak lie, this will scale the bone and bring a calls in
fifteen or eighteen days: then wash it with the above chamber-lye, and salt,
and apply lint covered with a plaster of white lead; but if white lead cannot
be got, make a salve as follows: take mellowle^, white plantain, and pars^^y,
mutton suet, soft tur^^^^ip^ and bees wax: stew them together till the herb is
crisp, and be cautious of burnings of this spread a plaster, and cover the
wound as aforesaid. For a common sore leg or green wound, wash with
chamber-lye, and alum salt. This will also cure any ulcer or carbuncle.

BITE OF A SPIDER.
Take hedge mustard seed, or common mustard seed, grind it to a fine powder,
put in a quart of wine if to be had, if not, rum or brandy grog will do: give a
table-spoon full three or four times a day. Hedge mustard is nearly like common
mustard, but smaller leaf, and seed grows in waste ground and hedges.

TO PREVENT CATCHING THE FLUX, O^ OTHER DISORDERS.
Take the inside of white oak bark and of poplar root bark, of each one
handful, one handful of woods bitiny, boil them in two gallons of water till
reduced to one, and take a tea-cup full three times a day. The flux may be
taken and lie in some people fifteen days before it breaks out; therefore if
any persons have been with the flux, they may not think themselves safe till
that time is past, though they have taken those medicines agreeable to the
directions, and continue so to do, they may go in amongst it day by day,
without the least danger; and so I believe that they may amongst any other
disorders.

IMMODERATE LAX.
Take maple bark, called by some butterwood, boil it in milk, let the patient
drink half a pint three or four times a day, or he may use it for his constant
drink: let his diet be mutton broth, or of chicken, or of any dry food that is
not salt, and eat biscuit at any time, burn oyster shells or bucks horn in the
(...), and beat them to powder; of this let the patient take dry four or five
times a day; but if he does not choose the above milk for his constant drink,
let him have wine and water, claret is best*

GRAVEL.
Take red onions and horse mint, the juice of each a table-spoon full three or
four times a day: this will bring (...) and small stones.

HEART-BURN.
Take magnessia, the quantity of a nutmeg, or as much as will lie on the point
of a case knife in a half pint of warm water.

FRETS IN CHILDREN.
This is occasioned by wind, either in the bowels or stomach. For this take as
follows: one handful of white oak bark, the same of poplar root bark, of each
the inside, and the same of woods bitiny; boil them in two gallons of water,
and reduce it to one. You may give a child of twenty-four hours old a tea-spoon
full at a time, and of a month old, half a table spoon full, sweetened with
sugar once a quarter of an hour, for three or four times. This will assuredly
cure them, and you may give it with the greatest safety.

TO DRAW OUT THORNS OR SPLINTERS.
Apply snake skin soked in water.

LOOSE OR ACHING TEETH.
Boil a decoction of sullendine, gargle it in your mouth, and if it is hallow,
put a little of the powder in the hollow; perhaps it will cure sooner than you
would suppose.

YELLOW JAUNDICE.
Steep black cherry bark in hard cider, and drink a tea-cup full of it three
times a day. This I believe will cure the black jaundice also.

FELMS ON THE EYES.
Drop in them the juice of sullendine two or three times a day, and if it be
too sharp mix with it a little breast milk.

BLEEDING PILES.
Boil the juice of nettles and sugar together, and take two ounces of it at a
time.

PAIN IN THE BACK.
Bleed in the calf of the leg, or take bean shells and burn them in a clean
place, mix it with hogs lard and anoint the back therewith: it will soon cure,
and strengthen it too; but if this should fail, make a scarcloth of elecampane
root and ^^^^ock root boiled in water, bind this on the back three or four
days, then take it off and anoint the back with the above ointment again.

BITE OF A RATTLE-SNAKE.
Take the juice of green plantain, a spoonful at a time; it will assuage the
swelling almost as fast as it swelled, or St. Andrews cross in like manner, or
wild sage boiled in milk.

HISTERICKS.
Take one handful of the inside of white oak bark and do. poplar root, and the
same of woods bitiny; put them in two gallons of water, and reduce it over the
fire to one: take a tea-cup full four times a day, adding to every cup twenty
drops of the compound spirits of lavender. Live on light and fresh food.

POLYPUS IN THE NOSE.
Sauff the flour of alum often in the day, dissolve alum in brandy, dip a rap
in it, and put it up the nose at going to bed every night.

BLEEDING AT THE MOUTH AND NOSE.
Take water flag roots, dry and beat it to fine powder, and snuff it up the
nose, or put it in the mouth. Cord the thighs and arms; perhaps the thighs will
do, or snuff the flour of alum, or let a person blow the flour of alum up the
nose with a quill.

VOMITING, OR SPITTING BLOOD.
Take St. John's wart leaver, flowers or seeds; boll them in vine and drink
often in the day.

FITS, OR TURNING OF THE BRAINS.
Take lavender when it is in flour, hore-^ound, fennel, and asparagus roots;
boil them together, and take a tea-cup full three times a day.

FAINTNESS.
Take twenty drops of the compound spirits of lavender, on a piece of loaf
sugar as big as a nutmeg, or five drops of the essence of peppermint, in a
spoonful of water.

FITS, OR FALLING SICKNESS.
Take two tea-spoons full of the flour of missettor in a glass of wine three or
four times a day for forty days together.

SHRUNK SINEWS.
Stew a quantity of earth worms in hogs lard, or fresh butter, and bathe
therewith, rubbing it well.

WEAK BACK.
Fry clary in pancakes, and eat them every day, or boil a decoction of the
same, and drink often.

BRUISE OR FRESH WOUND.
Mash comphrey roots, and apply a poultice of the same immediately; but it is
far better boiled in milk.

BROKEN BONE.
Beat camphrey roots and the white of an egg together, spread it on toe, and if
you mix a little of the spirits of turpentine, the better; lay it all around
the limb, and wet it often with sharp vinegar. This will cure without any
further application.

N. B. Be sure to first set the bone; then, if you please, the white of an egg
and sharp vinegar well beaten together, so lay it round the limb, and often wet
it with vinegar.

MELANCHOLY DISORDERS.
Take a handful of dodder, steep it in claret wine, and of this give a glass
four times a day. This is also good for the trembling of the heart. Dodder
grows in high as well as low grounds or bushes, without root or leaf, called by
many love vine.

GOUT, TO EASE.
Make a poultice of comphrey, and spread it on leather, and by it on the part
effected.

CONSUMPTION AND ASTHMA.
The cause of this disorder generally proceeds from cold, which throws the
person into a fever; it is for want of timely application that it settles on
the lungs, and impears them, which increases until they ulcerate for this
charming disorder; strike first at the root, thus: take white oak bark, poplar
root bark, the inside of each one handful, and the same of woods bitiny; put
them in one gallon of clean water, and reduce it to two quarts; of this take a
tea-cup full four times a day sweetened with brown sugar; take this for two
weaks, eating nothing but what is fresh and light and easy of digestion. Then
make a syrrup as follows: take white oak bark, poplar root bark, of each one
handful of the inside, one handful of beach bark, one do, elecampane roots, the
same quantity of stick liquorice, the same of sage, featherfew, hore-hound,
sweet fennel seed, sweet anniseed, colts fool, mullin, and woods bitiny, of
each one handful, and make a syrrup as follows: put them in a clean copper or
bell-metal vessel, adding two gallons of clean water; reduce it over a slow
fire to one, strain it off through an oznaburg cloth, and add to this measure
for measure of good brown sugar; dissolve it well, and strain it again; put it
in a clean vessel and stew it to the thickness of honey, which you will know by
cooling it a little in a spoon: of this syrrup you will take a large tea-spoon
full four or five times a day, and always break fast on acorn coffee, thus:
take white oak acorns when fully ripe, and peal off the shells and split them:
dry them in a pot carefully without burning them, prepare and make use of them
as coffee, and dine on nothing but what is fresh and light: drink pure water
fresh from the spring or well; but if the patient has been much accustomed to
strong drink, let him live entirely on milk and light wheat bread, adding
always to his food a little good rum or breakfast on tea, made thus: take the
inside of timber white oak bark that is soft and sweetened carefully, dry it
before the fire, and make use of it as other tea. It is best in March or April.

BURN, OR SCALD.
Plunge into cold water two or three hours, or apply a cloth dipped in milk and
water, and change it often as it gets warm. Either of these are safe and easy.

CHOPPED LIPS.
Rub your finger behind your ears or any other part of the head where it is
greasy, and rub them frequently: it will keep them well, soft, and smooth.

BLEEDING AT THE NOSE.
C^rd the thighs tight, or go into cold water.

CORNS TO CURE.
Apply a piece of dry cotton every morning, keeping them close trimmed.

COUGH.
For an old dry cough, or a cough after the meazles, take one spoonful of
linseed oil, three spoonfulls of molasses, and three tea-spoons full of the
flower of alum: mix these well together, take one tea-spoon full at going to
bed, and be careful of taking it too fast. This will certainly cure.

HOOPING-COUGH.
This same syrrup that is prepared for the consumption or any part, is the
preparation.

TETTER, OR RING-WORM
Anoint over with the spirits of sulphur; and if it proves painful, wash it
with milk and water.

SWOONING OF FAINTY FITS.
Take a handful of burnet, and steep it in a bottle of wine, (claret is best)
and of this drink a glass two or three times a day. The constant use of burnet
keeps the body in health, and the spirits in vigor.

INWARD WOUNDS.
Boil comphrey in wine, and drink a glass two of there times a day, or as you
shall see occasion. Woods bitiny is also good, taken in like manner.

WORMS.
Boil four ounces of quicksilver in a quart of water an hour, and bottle it up
for use, and give a gill morning and night. You may use the quicksilver again
and again.

LOATHING OF MEAT OR COLD STOMACH.
For a cold stomach that cannot digest the food kind, drink bitiny tea for
breakfast, or for a constant drink, or eat it in broth daily, or take it in a
syrrup. It it good for inward bruises occasioned by falls from horses, or other
ways taken inwardly as aforesaid. It is also good for ruptures or busonness.
The decoction gargled in the mouth eases the tooth ach, and is very good for
women in child bearing, causing a speedy delivery,

POISON.
Woods bitiny, wild hore-haund, green plantain, wild plumb roots, ground ivy,
angelico, black brier ^oots, allocampane, velvet mallow leaves or roots hedge
mustard, rue, southernwood, quince roots or leaves, ground pine, and common
horehound, or any of those that can be most conveniently got: boil them in two
gallons of water till reduced to one, give the patient half a pint three times
a day, and eat nothing salt or greasy, nor sweet milk; but let their diet be
light wheat bread and drink molasses small beer, and nothing else, and this
continue until the patient is entirely well. If the patient should smell a
qince often it will strenghten his head and heart.

PLEURASY.
This comes various ways, sometimes with an ague, followed with a sharp fever,
and pain in the side, back, breast, head, or neck, and sometimes without an
ague, but with a pain and fever; Bleed ten ounces, apply a plaster of red
pepper to the place effected, if it be not the head, and drink linseed tea: let
your diet be light and easy of digestion; but if it proves obstinate, bleed
again, and if the fever continues high, and the pain too, take a sweat of
seneca snake root; but if it seems to be fatal, blister the fleshy parts of the
arms above the elbows, and sweat again; but it is very seldom bleeding and
sweating* will do without blisters; but i^ in the head and neck, cup on the
mould of the head; but when there happens violent pain in the breast, with cold
flesh, a low pulse, and a great weakness, fore bear bleeding, but give a sweat
of seneca snake root, and endeavor to raise a sweat, and after a sweat, bleed,
if the pain continues. Prepare your snake-root thus: boil half an ounce pretty
strong in water, then add a little rum and sugar, and give a table spoon full
at a time, once in half an hour till the patient sweats. When the pain ceases,
give for the fever the following decoction: take white oak bark, poplar root
bark, of each the inside, one handful, and of woods bitiny the same; boil them
in one gallon of water till reduced to two quarts; of this give the patient a
tea-cup full three times a day, and if you think proper you may sweeten it. If
you will add fifteen drops of the compound spirits of lavender it will be the
better.

SPRAIN.
As soon as possible put the part effected into cold water for half an hour,
then cover the place with a poultice of clay, well tempered with sharp vinegar:
when the first grows dry, add a second, and then a third. In the mean time,
take sharp vinegar, or neats-foot oil, and brandy; stew them together, then
take off the poultice with a brown paper, with the mixture; and lay it all over
the joint, thus continued till well.

WORMS IN CHILDREN.
Take a thimble full of the powder of the leaf of bearfoot, for a child of a
year old: it is a strong purge, and will work itself off* The child must not
touch any thing salt or greasy, nor drink cold water for two days after. This
is a sure cure for worms; but it must be given on the full and changes of the
moon. Bearfoot is a garden herb, and has a leaf like a bear's foot.

PAIN IN THE BACK.
Make a scarcloth as follows: powder the dried root of comphrey and common
snake root, and take the ashes of bean hulls; mix them with as much turpentine
as will spread a plaster for your back, and lay it on hot, and it will soon
give ease,

PAIN IN THE EAR, AND DEAFNESS.
Take out the pulp of a large onion, and a good deal of the inside; fill it
half full of rattle-snakes oil, and place it on a grid-iron over life coals,
stew it, then strain it off, and at going to bed drop two drops in the ear,
very warm, and stop it with black wool; repeat it six or seven times and you
will find relief.

TO STOP BLOOD.
Take half a gill of brandy, casteel s^op the size of a hickory nut, and potash
the size of a nutmeg; scrape the soap first, dissolve it in the brandy, add the
pot ash, shake it well together, and keep it close stopped in a vial for use.
Apply a little warm on a lint to a bleading vessel, and the blood will
immediately congeal.

WORMS.
Give a tea-spoon full of camphorated spirits, three mornings before and after
the full and change of the (...)*

INFLAMMATION.
Apply white oak mush or wormwood, boiled in milk, or swamp moss boiled in
milk, or dry Indian corn meal, or swamp lilly leaves fresh from the herb, or
red pepper stewed in water, and bathe therewith.

TO PREVENT A MORTIFICATION.
Take Jesuits bark, a tea-spoon full at a time, five times in the day in a
glass of milk; but if this cannot be had, take white oak bark, poplar root
bark, of each one handful, and woods bitiny the same; boil them in two gallons
of water till reduced to one, and of this drink a tea-cup full five times a
day. This will answer equally as well as the bark.

SWELLED BELLY AND STOMACH, with bad complexion of old or young KEEKSEY.
Take old rusty iron hoops, or any rusty iron, lay it on a clean harth and make
a good fire on it with green hickory wood, let the wood burn out, and the iron
cold; then take it up, and with a hammer beat off all the rust in a clean
place, then take up the rust and beat it fine in a spice mortar, then put it up
for use, and give the patient a thimble full nine mornings, then omi: three
mornings, then give nine mornings more, then omit three mornings again, then
give nine mornings more, and the patient will be well. During the first nine
days the patient must eat nothing but light wheat bread, and drink nothing but
molasses small beer, the other days he may eat any thing fresh, if it be not
greasy, nor milk, and drink beer as aforesaid; if beer is not to be had, put a
little white oak bark in a basin, a little poplar root bark, and a little
bitiny; steve this a little, and drink it instead of beer.

APPETITE LOST.
Give the aforesaid rust in the same manner, only the patient may eat any thing
he pleases.

WORMS IN CHILDREN.
Take one handful of chaney root, boil it well, and give the child half a
tea-cup full two or three times before and after the full and changing or the
moon.

WORMS IN CHILDREN.
Boil honey-locusts in water, very strong; a little child will eat this with
bread morning and night. Before thi^ is a safe and easy cure, if the locusts
are not to be had: the roots will do as well, sweetened with brown sugar or
molasses.

GRAVEL.
Take sumack root that bears berries, a large double handful, red oak bark, a
small handful, rich weed or rattle-weed, three small roots, four or five
inches, sassafras roots, two small pieces, each four or five inches. Boil all
in three gallons of water until they are boiled better than half, and let the
person drink as much as he can, and use this drink two days; then take common
red plantain, one small handful, white plantain and large assinart, one handful
of each, make it into tea, and drink one gill every day for some time, or until
the persons water comes freely: then quit this last tea, and continue using the
first for some considerable time

WHITE RING-WORM, OR SCALD HEAD.
Take two leaves of green tobacco, one tablespoon full of the flower of white
ginger, and half a pound of fresh butter that n^^er was salted: stew them well
over a slow fire and keep it for use, anointing the place therewith.

RHEUMATIC PAINS.
Take a beet's gall, and a spoonful of black pepper in fine powder; put them in
a pint of good rum, set it by the fire twenty-four hours, and shake it often;
then bathe the part effected before the fire night and morning, wrapping the
part effected in warm flannel.

INWARD FEVERS.
Take a tea-spoonful of the flour of brimstone at going to bed, and in the day
drink sinquefoot tea,

HEADACHE.
Take a handful of wormwood, tansey, or rosemary; fry it in sharp vinegar, wrap
it in a fine cloth, and apply it to the place effected as hot as it can be
endured, and it will give immediate relief.

TOOTHACHE:
Put it the hollow, if any, a little powder made of agrimony roots and spread a
plaster with the salve made with agrimony root, white plantain, and
blood-wart, and lay it on the outside of the face against the tooth, This
generally cures in a short time; and the plaster frequently cures of itself.

BACK-ACH, OR PAIN IN THE BACK.
Make a searcloth of elecampane and burdock root, lay it on the back three days
before it is removed, then take it off and anoint it with ointment made thus:
burn a quantity of bean hulls on a clean place, and mix up the ashes with hogs
lard, and anoint the back twice a day for ten days.

MALIGNANT FEVER.
This fever comes with a vomiting and lax, and and a pain in the head. This
hurries men to their long homes very speedily; therefore it calls for an
immediate relief -- for this violent disorder give the salts of wormwood, the
size of a large pea dissolved in vinegar and water: if it does not stop, repeat
the dose till it does stop, then for the pain in the head, take a handful of
wormwood, rosemary, or tansey, and fry it in vinegar; then wrap it in a linen
cloth and bind it to the head as hot as it can be borne, and for the lax boil
red root in water till it is very strong, and give the patient half a
tea-cupful three or four times a day, and after if need be, which will stop the
lax: you many add to the dose, or take from it if you please, or according to
the age of the patient. Then for fevers, look for the drink prescribed for
fevers.

AGUE AND FEVER.
Take Jesuits barks in fine powder, half a table spoonful at a time, put it in
a wine glass, put to it as much spirits of any kind as will wet the bark, then
fill the glass with water, and drink it off, and do this two or three times a
day when the fever is off. This will cure in two or three days, and often times
in one: the intermitting fever, called by some the dumb ague, is cured the same
way. If they should be troubled with the casting of the stomach or vomiting,
give them the size of a pe^ of the salts of wormwood in a spoonful of water,
and repeat it till it stops.

GRAVEL.
Take a bandful of silk-weed root, and boil it in a quart of hard cider till
reduced to a pint, and of this drink a tea-cupful three times a day. Silk weed
grows with a round stalk two or three feet high with two leaves, one set
against the other; at the top grows a large bunch of white flowers, and in the
middle of every flower is a small black speck: often the flowers come with one
or two long pointed pods, inside of which is when ripe, a quantity of fine
white down like silk, covered over with a ^^t seed, like scales in the winter
when the weed is dead; the bark will peal of, and is as strong as hemp.

ULCER, OR SORE LEGS.
If there be dead or rotten flesh in it, boil post oak bark, and wash it with
the water; sprinkle a little posipet in it till the dead flesh is clean out,
then wash it twice a day with the spirits of camphire made with whiskey, and
lay over it a plaster of salve made in the following manner: take a small
handful of agrimony roots, the same of white plantain, the same of blood wart,
a quarter of a pound of mutton suet, two ounces of soft turpentine, and the
some of bees wax* stew them together till the herbs are crisp, and then keep it
for use. This will cure any sore leg or old ulcer, provided the patient will
bleed and purge once a week, and eat nothing but light wheat bread, and drink
nothing but molasses small beer, and take a tea-cupful of the decoction of
white sumack root, and Spanish oak bark, boiled strong, every morning and
night. Agrimony is a wild herb, the nearest like single tansey of any thing I
know; and bood-wart is about the size of white plantain, and grows much like
it, only the underside is of a deep purple color, and grows on poor ground, as
plantain also does.

PILES.
The piles are little knots swelling up around the fundament, and sometimes
inside, with violent pains running up in the bowels. For this disorder take
half a pint of (...) cider vinegar, an ounce of salt, and a tea-spoonful of the
flour of alum; with this pickle wash the fundament four or five times a day,
till well.

TO TAKE FEVERS OUT OF WOMEN'S BREASTS.
Take a large handful of herb true love and boil it in two quarts of water till
half is boiled away, then take out the herb, and put in the water a pound of
fresh butter that never was salted, and then boil it till all the water is
clean boiled out, then keep it for use, and if any woman's breast is inflamed,
(called in common a fever) and if she will anoint with this oil, it will
immediately ease the pain, and take out the fever, and dissolve the curdled
milk; and if they be ulcerated, it will cure in a little time: yea, it will
give case in pain in all kinds of swellings, and scatter the swelling to this
herb. This is so great a friend to nature that it may well be called true love:
it is a garden herb, and must be sowed every year, and gathered when the under
leaves begin to drop off. I know of none of this herb in all these states, not
the feed, but what I have got, and one person more; which seed I intend to have
sowed, and give away; and I hope that every one, into whose hands it may come,
will do the like till it be spread over the United States: yea, over the whole
world. This is so sweet an herb, that it will perfume the whole garden where it
grows.

TO STOP A MORTIFICATON.
Give Jesuits bark in fine powder, two larg^ tea spoonfuls at a time in milk,
whey, or milk or water, five times in a day; and every nigh^ give a pill of
opium the size of a large ^uch shot or a very (...). This pill may be made up
with a little brown sugar.

CONSUMPTION AND ASTHMA.
Take white oak bark, and poplar root bark, of both the inside, one handful,
c^mphrey root, and elecampane root, of each one handful, and elder roots the
same; hyssop and spice wood one handful; to every handful add a pint of spring
water, boil it till half the water is boiled away, then add to every pint of
this decoction, a pound of good brown sugar, then strain it through a cloth and
stew it again to the thickness of honey, which yon will know by cooling it a
little in a spoon, then keep it for use, and of this syrrup take a
table-spoonful three or four times a day. Let the patient eat nothing but light
wheat bread and milk, let the milk be warm from the cow, and drink milk and
water in like manner: and for this purpose put a red (...) up in your yard, and
feed her well on cut rye, and rye meal, mixed together, If the patient has been
much used to spirits he may put a little in his drink. Always remember to ride
out in the fresh air as much as i^ convenient, in fair weather; and in the mean
time, take Indian turnip ^ry it, and put two ounces in a quart of good whiskey,
and of this take a small dr^m morning and night.

TETTER, OR RING-WORM.
Anoint with a feather with the spirits of ^lphor, and if it should give much
pain, w^t it with a little milk and water. Spirits of sulphur is to be got only
of a doctor or apothecary's shop. On anoint it with the same ointment
prescribed for the white ringworm or scald head.

SPRAIN.
Apply fine tow wet with the white of an egg and sharp vinegar, then cover that
with pumpkin guts, or scraped pumpkin.

INFLAMMATION.
Apply scraped pumpkin as a poultice, and when it dries apply a fresh, till the
fever is cut.

GRUBS IN HORSES.
Bleed in the mouth first, then give the following preparation: take indigo,
the size of a nutmeg, pound it to powder, put it into a pint of milk, and give
him this mixture before he is done bleeding.

GRUBS.
To know the grubs in horses from a common belly-ach: when a horse has the
grubs he will not eat, and will frequently lay down, and will lay his head to
his side. When this is the case, bleed in the mouth immediately; and as soon as
done bleeding, or before, give the following p^eparation: take half a pint of
apple brandy, add to this two shoots of gunpowder, and half as much the flour
of alum; mash the powder, and mix it well together. This I expect will save
the horse.

GRUBS.
Take a gallon of hard cider, or vinegar, put to this a handful of tansey
roots, a gil^ of fine salt, and two table-spoonfuls of the flour of alum; put
them together, and boil the cider away to half a gallon: first bleed the horse
in the mouth, and before he is quite done bleeding, give him half a pint of
this preparation.

SLEEPY STAGGERS.
Bleed in the neck three times in a day, take a large quantity at each time for
two days, third day twice, and give the following decoction: take of white oak
bark and poplar root bark, the inside of each a handful, and the same of woods
bitiny; boil them in two gallons of water down to one, give a pint at a time
three times a day for three days, and if they live they will be mending the
fourth day. If you cannot get the mouth open, pour it in at the nose; and if
you choose, you may give a decoction of St. Andrews cross*

SLEEPY STAGGERS.
Bleed freely, and give a table-spoonful of the spirits of turpentine two or
three times a day.

MAW WORMS.
They are frequently discovered by the horses stamping in the stable in the
winter. For this take a pint of new milk, a pint of sweet oil, and a pint of
molasses; mix them well together, first bleed in the mouth, and then drench the
horse with this mixture. This will also cure grubs in horses.

GRUBS IN HORSES.
Steep one pint of hen-dung in three pints of ^hamber lie all night, keep the
horse up all night also, and in the morning bleed him in the mouth; and while
he is bleeding, pour off very clean, half a pint of the chamber-lye, add to
this half an ounce of indigo, and drench the horse before he is done bleeding.

GRUBS.
Give one table-spoonful of the flour of indigo in any kind of spirits

HOOKS.
When first discovered, beat alum salt fine, and blow in the eyes with a
quill, or spirt spring water in his eyes.

BAD STOMACH,
Give in ounce of copperas dissolved in a pint of vinegar and water, or hard
cider, or frequently put copperas and vinegar in their food.

SWEANEY.
This is a wasting away of the flesh from off the bones, both in man and beast,
without pain or much soreness. Either the leg, thigh, or arm of, man, and in
the shoulder of a horse, so wasting the flesh away till they lose the use of
the limb. For this stew a good handful of earth-warms in fresh butter that
never was salted, with a little green rye, or rye flour, or mashed rye, and
anoint the place once a day, and the flesh will come again, and the limb will
be well as before; but it will be as long getting well as it was coming.

YELLOW WATER, OR DROPSY IN HORSES.
The yellow water, or dropsy in horses, is known by the horse becoming very
sluggish and apt to stumble; his hide will be fast to his ribs, and his mane
and tail will put out much easier than common. When this is the case, delay no
time; but put your horse up in the stable all night without any food, and in
the morning give the following mixture* take a table-spoonful of indigo, and
strike it smooth off, the same of copperas, the same of saltpeter, and the
same of alum: put these into half a pint of any kind of spirits or vinegar, or
hard cider, and drench the horse fasting. Then put him in the stable again, and
as soon as it can be prepared, give him three times a day a pint of the
following decoction, with half a table-spoonful of saltpeter and copperas in
it: take a handful of dogwood root, the same of sassafras root, the same of
poplar root bark, the same of elder root, the same of spice wood, the same of
woods bitiny, and four handfuls of peach leaves, root, of bark, boiled strong.
His food must be oats, or cut straw mixed with a little rye meal, if to be had,
if not, corn meal will do, and wet it with the same decoction. A vessel with
the same must be set by him to drink, for he must drink no water: neither let
the rain or dew fall on him. Let him be at liberty in a lot in the day time, if
fair.

HOOPING-COUGH.
Take one pint of honey, one pint of water, one handful of polly podum, of the
oak, one handful of missettor of the honey laeast tree, if to be had, if not,
any other will do; s^ew these to a syrrup, and give the patient one
table-spoonful morning and night, or four times a day if occasion shall require.

FAINTNESS.
For this, either in sickness or without, give the person when fainty, twenty
drops of the compound spirits of lavander on a piece of loaf sugar, or in any
kind of tea; or ten drops of the essence of peppermint.

GOLD.
I would advise every body when they first discover a cold, to bleed eight or
ten ounces, which is half a pint or three gills, and at going to bed, take a
sweat of rosemary or hyssop tea, with a little spirits in it sufficient for a
grown person. In the low country yeopon toddy will answer the same purpose.
This will preserve health, when if let alone might prove fatal. Or, at going to
bed put your feet six inches deep in water, as hot as you can bare it, bathe
them well; then, take them out wipe them dry, get into bed without your feet
touch any thing cold, then take the above mentioned sweat, this will do without
bleeding.

ULCER OR OLD SORE.
First bleed, then for three nights at going to bed, take two grains of
calamin^ eating no milk, nor nothing salt nor greasy; in this time the teeth
and gums will get very sore, then the third morning take a dose of salts, and
work it off; and if there is any dead or rotten flesh in the sore, cut a quill
like a tooth pick, with this take a little pissippet and jarring it with the
point of a knife, springle a little over the sore, which will cleanse the sore
and cause it to ma^^er: in the sore lay a little line, or a little fine toe
finely carded, over that toe a plaster of the following salve: take four
ounces of mutton feet, two ounces of soft turpentine, and as much beeswax as
will make it stiff enough for a plaster, add to this one handful of white
plantain, one handful of bloodwort, one handful of agrimony, stew them all
together till the herbs are crips, then keep it for use. -- Agrimony is the
nearest like single tansey, their any wild herb I have ever seen, and bloodwort
grows on poor ground, as well as white plantain and is nearly of the same size,
but the underside i^ of a deep purple color. During the cure eat light wheat
bread and nothing else, and drink molasses (...), if to be had, if not take one
handful of white oak bark, one handful of poplar root bark, of each the
inside, one handful of woods bitiny, stew it a little on the coals and keep it
for your constant drink, during the cure drink every morning half a pint of the
following diet drink; boil a strong decoction of spanish oak bark poplar root
bark, and sumake root, and keep it for use. If the sore should be troubled with
an itching, rue it with a little canphire steep it whiskey, which will kill the
itching humor.

TOOTHACHE.
Take white plantain, bloodwort and agrimony of each one handful, mutton suet
four ounces, soft turpentine one ounce, and as much beeswax as will make it fit
for a plaster, stew these together till the herbs are crips, then squeeze them
out, and keep it for use, of this spread a plaster of the size of a dollar,
and lay it on the face against the tooth that achs, and it will cure it in half
an hour, that is more or less. White plantain is well known almost by every
person, bloodwort is about the same size, only the under side of the leaves is
of a deap purple color, agrimony is the most like single tansey, of any wild
herbs I know, and always buds at the root for the next year.

PAIN IN THE STOMACH.
Take an english pipe that is very black by smoking, break the stem close to
the bole, and break the ba^e o^f close to the black ring, then take the black
part of the pipe, and beat it to a very fine powder, put the powder into half a
pint of worm water, stew is well and drink it off.

BELLY-ACH IN CHILDREN.
Give a table-spoonfull of salt and water, make it very strong, this will give
immediate ease.

VOMITING OR CASTING OF THE STOMACH.
Give the size of a pea of the salts of wormwood, disolved in a spoonful of
water or vinegar and water, if it does not stop the first time, give the second
and third time till it does stop.

CONSUMPTION.
Take timber white oak bark, poplar root bark, sassafras root bark, of each the
inside, one handful; of woods bittiny one handful, beach bark the same, boil
them in two gallons of water till reduced to one, keep it for use, take a
tea-cupfull three times a day, sweetened with the following preparation: split
a nutmeg, toast it well beat it to a fine powder, add to it a quarter of a
pound of loaf sugar well ground together in a mortar: let his diet be light rye
bread, and milk warm from the cow, (red cow milk is the best) and drink milk
and water, and if the patient has been used to spirit, put a little in his
drink, but if he has not been used to spirits, touch none, and be sure eat nor
drink nothing cold and for this purpose keep a red cow in the yard, and fe^d
her on cut rye and rye meal, and be sure you ride in the open air in fair
weather.

COSTIVENESS.
Take one table-spoonfull of jesuits bark in fine powder, one tea-spoonfull of
rhubarb in fine powder, grind them together in a mortar, take one tea-spoonfull
morning, noon, and night.

ITCH.
Take a double handful of dock root scrapt clean and beaten, itch-grass,
called by some cow itch, by others bullfilick, scrape it clean also, for it is
the outside skin that terrifyes: boil them in one gallon of water till reduced
to one quart, add to this one quart of a pound of mutton suet, boil them
together till the water is all gone, take it of the fire, then add to that one
ounce of sweet gum, then stew it till it is well mixed; with this anoint the
sores till well.

BROKEN BONE.
If it be a leg, thigh, or arm, be sure to set the bone as soon as possible
before it swells, for after it swells it can not be done well, if it can be done
at least, and for this prepare as follows: let one or two persons take hold of
the patient, and hold the foot if it be a leg or thigh, and pull till one leg
is as long as the other, let another hold the broken bone, and carefully place
the bones together, when it is set wrap it up till the following bandage is
prepared: stitch two pieces of linen together with a nice white oak split
between them, about half an inch a sunder; like stays, are made making holes
along the edges, then prepare and dress it as follows; take the white of an
egg and sharp vinegar, and beat them well together, card fine toe well in bats,
dip them in it and lay allround the wound then wrap the bandage round, and lace
it as stays are lac^b then prepare a box with a bottom and two sides, and
carefully laying it in and dress it with the white of an egg and vinegar, as it
gets dry. -- If it be hot weather keep it cool, and if it is cold weather keep
it warm, if the bone breaks through the skin, so that it cannot be got in again
saw it off, and then put in the remaining part carefully, observing that the
limb is straight, then add to the above mentioned egg and vinegar a little
tincture of mirrh, to heal the outward wound. And to prevent an inflammation,
give the patient half a table-spoonfull of jesuits bark in fine powder, four
times a day, and every other night one grain of opium, as long as there is any
danger.

PLEURASY.
Boil a pot full of broom-straw, and pine tops and life -- everlasting, then
put it in a tub, place the patient by it with his head over it, cover him over
with a blanket, let him sweat a few minutes then put him to bed cover him up,
be careful he gets no cold; if need be you may do this two or three times a
day.

WIND-CHOLICK.
Take for a month a gill of good molasses' morning and night, and I make no
doubt but you will find relief.

INTERNAL WOUNDS IN THE BREAST OR BOWELS.
Boil comphrey roots in claret wine, take a table-spoonfull four times a day.

FEVERS.
In all fevers if the patient should be costive, called in common bound; it is
expedient to give a glister, which may be prepared thus: boil creeping mallows
in clean water, sweeten it with brown sugar or molasses, add to this a little
hogs grease,

It is expedient that every housekeeper, should keep by him a lancet,
clister-pipe, and sullenger, that the time may not be spent in getning them, at
ought to be spent in using them.

Thus: having gone through the most of the common complaints, to which the
inhabitants of our states are subject to, and prescribed such safe and easy
cures, as will generally succeed if timely applied. Yet I am far from
pretending that any of them are infallible, we all know that death strikes so
strong in some cases, that all physic are in vain; yet if curable and you will
follow these directions, you need not doubt a cure, in the mean time I make no
question, but some of my brothers Quacks will make themselves merry with these
prescriptions; remember well what the wise man says, I said of laughter i^ i^
man, and of mirth it is a folly! -- Again, some men are so proud and invious,
that they would have no body to know any thing but themselves, the one I hope
will shortly learn better manners, and the other be a burden too heavy for the
earth long to bear. Though after all, it is not impossible that they may do by
some of these medicines, just as the English do by the French fashion, laugh at
them first, and make use of them afterward. The within mentioned disorders,
are the most fatal and troublesome we are afflicted within these states. I have
been as short as I could, the remedies I have prescribed are almost all of our
own growth, there being very few imparted medecines, and them are so cheap,
that if it happens to not cure my patient, I am sure it will not ruin himself,
and surely man cannot say, he does very unfairly, when there is so little to
pay, either to the doctor or apothicary; neither do I make my patients belly an
apothicary's shop.

Index.
AGUE and Fever Page. 12 Ague and Fever Page. 34 Apetite lost Page. 31
Back-ach, or pain in the Back Page. 33 Bad stomach Page. 41 Belly-ach in
children Page. 45 Bite of a Spider Page. 17 Bite of a Rattle Snake Page. 20
Bleeding piles Page. 20 Bleeding at the mouth and nose Page. 21 Bleeding at the
nose Page. 25 Bloody Flux Page. 13 Blood to stop Page. 29 Bruise or fresh wound
Page. 22 Broken bone Page. 22 Broken bone Page. 46 Burn or Scald Page. 25
Cancer Page. 7 Cancer Page. 8 Cholick Page. ^^ Cholick Page. 10 Chopped lips
Page. 25 Cold Page. 42 Consumption and Asthma Page. 23 Consumption, etc. Page.
37 do. do. Page. 45 Corns to cure Page. 25 Coogh Page. 25 Costivness Page. 45
Dry Gripes Page. 10 Dry Gripes Page. 11 Dropsy and Keeksey Page. 12 Faintiness
Page. 22 Faintiness Page. 42 Fevers Page. 47 Fevers out of women's breast to
take Page. 36 Felms on the Eyes Page. 20 Fits or turning of the Brain Page. 21
Fits or falling sickness Page. 22 Frets in Children Page. 19 Gout to ease the
pain Page. 23 Gravel or stone in the Bladder Page. 11 do. Page. 12 do. do:
Page. 31 do. do. do. Page. 34 Grubs in horses Page. 38 do, Page. 39 do. do.
Page. 40 Headache Page. 1 and 32 Heart burn Page. 19 Histericks Page. 20 Hickup
Page. 7 Hooks Page. 40 Hooping Cough Page. 25 do Page. 42 Immoderate lax Page.
18 Inward Fevers Page. 12 do. Page. 32 Inward Wounds Page. 26 Inflammation Page.
30 and 38 Internal wounds in the breast or bowels Page. 47 Itch Page. 46
Loathing of meat, or cold stomach Page. 26 Loose or aching teeth Page. 19
Malignant fevers Page. 33 Maw worms Page. 40 Melancholy disorders Page. 23
Mortification to prevent Page. 30 do. to stop Page. 36 Pain in the back Page.
20 do. Page. 29 Pain in the Ear, and deafness Page. 29 Pain in the stomach
Page. 44 Piles Page. 35 Poison Page. 27 Pleurasy Page. 27 do. Page. 47 Polypus
in the nose Page. 21 Quinsey Page. 2 Rheumatism Page. 4 Rheumatic pains Page.
32 Sore Eyes Page. 1 Sore legs, or Ulcers. Page. 16 Shrunk Sinews. Page. 22
Slow Fever. Page. 6 Sprain. Page. 28 Sleepy Staggers. Page. 39 Scurvy in the
gums. Page. 3 Sweany. Page. 41 Swelled bellies and Stomach with bad
Complections of old or young Keeksey. Page. 30 Swoonig or fainty-fits Page. 26
Tetter or Ringworm. Page. 26 Tetter or Ringworm. Page. 37 Toothache. Page. 33
and 44 Thorns or Splinters, to draw out. Page. 19 Ulcers or sore Legs. Page. 35
Ulcers or old Sores. Page. 43 Venereal Disorders or Clap. Page. 16 Vomiting or
Spitting Blood. Page. 21 Vomiting or Casting of the Stomach. Page. 45 Weak
Back. Page. 22 White Ring Worm, or Scald Head. Page. 32 White Swelling. Page. 9
Whittow. Page. 3 Wind-Cholick. Page. 47 Worms. Page. 26 and 2^ Worms in
Children. Page. 28 dito. dito. Page. 31 Yaws. Page. 8 Yellow Jaundice. Page. 19
Yellow Water, or Dropsy in Horses. Page. 41
FINIS.

