COURT FOR THE Trial of Impeachments and the Correction of Errors: ISAAC
GOUVERNEUR and PETER KEMBLE, Appellants; AND LOUIS LEGUEN, Respondent: CASE, ON
THE PART OF LOUIS LEGUEN, the Respondent.

Printed by Charles R. and George Webster.

NOTE.
The Figures in the Margin refer to the Pages in the printed Special Verdict.

CASE.
THIS is an action of assumpsit, brought by Louis LeGuen against Gouverneur and
Kemble, for their negligence and misconduct as his factors or agents. -- The
cause was tried at the bar of the supreme court in the city of New York, in
October last, when a special verdict was found and damages assessed at dolls.
119,30266/100 -- In January term last the supreme court gave judgment for the
plff. Louis LeGuen. To reverse which judgment the said G. and K. have brought a
writ of error.

The declaration and plea may be seen at large in the printed copies of the
record which have been delivered -- Of the facts found by the special verdict,
the following are presumed to be those which are essential to the decision of
the cause.

See printed special verdict page 11, 12.
That L. LeGuen, being a native and citizen of France, was, on the 13th April,
1795, the proprietor of 687 bales of cotton and 24 casks and 38 cases of
indigo, which had before that time been delivered to G. and K. as his factors,
to sell for his best advantage, on the usual commission.

That G. and K. by the intervention and express consent and direction of
LeGuen, and as his factors, on the said 13th April, sold the said articles to
Gomez, Lopez and Rivera, for L48, 966:6, on the terms specified in a contract
executed by them and by the said G. and K. of which the following is the
substance.

See the contract, page 12, 13.
That the said Gomez and Co. had agreed to charter the ship-White-Fox, to
proceed from the port of New York to Havre-de-Grace and Hamburgh, for L2000
sterling, payable in London. They agreed to purchase from the said G. and K.
(and to load in the said vessel) the said cotton at 3s. per lb. and the indigo
at 16s. per lb. payable, in their joint notes of hand, twelve months after
date, with ten months interest thereon at six per cent. subject to the
following conditions:

1. That Gomez and Co. should have the property all covered by insurance; and
that the policies for such insurance should be lodged with G. and K. as a
collateral security for the payment of the notes.

2. That the first proceeds of the sales in France or elsewhere should be
applied to the payment of the notes, to abate the growing interest.

3. That the purchasers should return the necessary depositions and
certificates of the goods being landed in a foreign country, to enable G. and
K. to recover the drawback of the duties for their benefit. The purchasers
relinquish all interest in the said drawback, and engage that the cotton and
indigo should be on board on or before the 25th May then next.

4. That the said G. and K. might have it in their option to receive the whole
or a part of the amount of the said notes at Havre-de-Grace, or at any port the
said ship might discharge at in Europe; which the said Gomez and Co. engaged to
pay in specie out of the proceeds of the sales of the cotton and indigo,
together with a premium of five per cent. for receiving it in Europe. G. and K.
on their parts, were to make endorsements on the notes when advice of such
payments should be received. Penalty 20,000 dollars.

That the said cotton and indigo were thereupon delivered to the said Gomez and
Co. who gave their joint promissory notes L48,966:6, being the amount for which
the said cotton and indigo were sold, payable as specified in the said contract.

That the said articles were entered for exportation at the custom-house in the
district of New York, and that G. and K. thereupon received a custom-house
debenture for L4,834:15, equal to 12,086 ^^/100 dolls. payable on the 15th
August then following, and executed a bond to the United States in the penalty
of dolls. 12,086.87 conditioned to land the said goods in some foreign port,
and to produce the regular evidence thereof within twelve months.

That the purchasers executed with Dederick Kohne, sailing-master of the ship
there discharged, and the remainder in Hamburgh,

At the foot of the charter party is a receipt for L290 sterling, paid on
account of

That G. and K. by two several bonds, in penalties amounting to 20,352 ^^/100
dolls. bearing date the 4th and 28th May, became bound for the performance of
the covenants contained in the charter party on the part of Gomez and Co. But
this does not appear to have been necessary for the interest of Mr. L.G. nor to
have been done at his request.

Page 25.
That G. and K. caused insurances upon the said Cotton and Indigo to be made in
their own names, from the port of New York to two ports in Europe, and paid the
premiums thereon to wit 7,367 dollars. -- But this does not appear to have been
done by the said G. and K. for the interest, or at the request of the said
LeGuen.

In the policies of the said insurances, was this note -- The vessel is neutral
and the property warranted American -- proof of interest to be made here only,
and not to be bound by any foreign adjudication.

Mr. LeGuen finding the said G. and K. evasive and disobliging in their
conduct, and beginning to apprehend that they wished to embarrass him in the
management of his property; in order to obtain an explicit avowal of their
intentions Page 23.
wrote to them on the 30th May, after referring to the preceding disagreement
with respect to the means to be taken to insure payment for the cotton and
indigo -- He directs them to insist, 1st, on that condition of the sale which
requires that the property should be completely covered by insurance (the
insurance being then deficient by 7,367 dollars) 2d, That they should give no
order for the disposal of the proceeds of the cargo without his knowledge and
consent, that he might avail himself of the 4th article in the contract, to
receive the proceeds in Havre or Hamburg.

Afterward, but on the same day, an interview was had between LeGuen and G.
and K. -- Mr. LeGuen repeated the injunctions that he might settle it to their
entire satisfaction and discharge, and demanded a copy of the contract and an
authorization to receive his money in Europe, represented to them that the
cargo and ought not therefore to be burdened either with the freight money or
premium of insurance; and page 59 of the printed special verdict, it appears,
that by the customs of Normandy, which province includes Havre de Grace, the
vendor has a lien for the purchase money on goods sold until again sold and
delivered, and that LeGuen might have prevented a removal of the goods from
thence, if there was danger of loss. The said G. and K. nevertheless
disregarded all the requests and injunctions of Mr. LeGuen, and even in his
presence encouraged the purchasers to depart with the ship White-Fox, and as
they pleased -- and that the said Gomez actually sailed with the said cargo in
the ship White-Fox on the following day.

that they had even refused to name an agent in Europe to take care of his
property, offers yet to cooperate with them, and proposes to join with them in
taking legal advice as to the steps to be pursued.

To which G. and K. reply, by a letter of the same date, enclosing their
account s 6 d, alleging that they are responsible for the charter money in
L.3733:6:8 and refusing to give him any authorization until they should be paid
this imaginary balance, and secured for this voluntary guarantee.

In the same letter they intimate, that

From the 6th to the 15th, Mr. LeGuen reiterated his demands with different
modifications -- Messrs. G. and K. continue to refuse, (...) talk of their
advances and responsibilities, and, without making any further specific offers,
insist that they have a right to direct all the moneys to be returned from and
in their letter of 10th June set up for the first time, the penalty of 20,000
dollars contained in the contract as an additional reason why they refuse to
give the authorization.

determined at all events to retain his whole property until the winding up of
the specculation of Gomez and Co. That they wantonly deprive him of the benefit
of the election to receive his money in Europe and defeat all his projects --
He protests against this conduct, and demands for the furnish him with an
authenticated copy of the contract of sale, and a competent authorization to
receive at the port of discharge whatever sum shall remain of the proceeds of
the goods sold to Gomez and Co. -- after first deducting and reserving such sum
as they the said G. and K.

G. and K. in their reply, insist on their right to retain in their hands the
whole property, notes and contract until LeGuen shall give them satisfactory
security in this country for all their claims and responsibilities, and they
reject his offers. On the in encouraging the buyers to depart -- in withholding
their accounts and the knowledge of their claims against him until the ship had
sailed: By declaring that they took all upon themselves and refusing to allow
him any intervention in the direction of his own property -- He demands only a
certified copy or the contract.

To this letter G. and K. give no answer!

That sundry other letters from the 1st October 1795, to the 28th March, passed
between the parties, and are set forth in the special verdict page 43 to 59.

to make him to obtain possession of the proceeds See LG's letter of 19 Dec.
page 54 and that of G. and K. of 23. page 56.
of the cotton and indigo on the condition of giving them security for their
claims against all contingent demands, to which LeGuen by a letter of the 15th
of that month acceded; but, G. and K. afterward declined to give effect to
this their own proposal.

In a letter of the 2d Jan. G. and K. inform LeGuen, that they were about to
send a power to Smith and Atkinson of London, as it was probable the property
would be removed to London, instead of Lubert and Dumas of Hamburgh, and that
they would pursue the necessary steps to touch as much of the money as could be
done in Europe, not doubting of his approbation.

In answer, Mr. LeGuen declines to assume any special risk on the subject,
seeing that the going with the cargo from Hamburgh to London, changes
essentially

The jury have also found, that on the 6 June, '95, the said LeGuen was
indebted to G. and K. in L4795 6 3; that they had in their hands a custom house
debenture, the property of the said Louis, payable in August following, for
L.4834 15, which would leave a balance of L.39 8 10, due to the said L. LeGuen;
but the jury twenty-one pounds and three pence, on the general balance of their
account -- That G. and K. received the amount of the debenture when it became
due, and that the bonds which they entered into at the custom-house were
cancelled on the 1 April '96.

That G. and K. did not, at any time previous to the 1 Dec. '95, elect to
receive the proceeds of the cotton and indigo in Europe -- but did on the 22
Dec. elect to receive them in Hamburgh, and on the 2 Jan. '96, elect to receive
them in London.

That the result of a careful examination of the facts found by the verdict is,
that the advances and responsibilities of G. and K. for Mr. LeGuen, which they
make the pretext for detaining from him so large a property, are reducible, the
advances to the above trifling sum of twenty-one pounds and three pence, and
the responsibilities to the bond given to the custom-house for twelve thousand
and eighty-six dollars and eighty-seven cents, which was sure to be cancelled
upon producing evidence of the landing of the goods abroad. Nevertheless,
Gouverneur and Kemble had then actually received commissions to the amount of
three thousand seven hundred and eighty-two dollars and five cents.

That it does not appear from any thing contained in the special verdict, nor
is it to be inferred from any thing even offered to be proven, that G. and K.
will be losers; but considering the monstrous benefit arising from the use of
so large a sum of money -- considering that they have at length succeeded in
placing the property in the hands of their friends, Smith and Atkinson, of
London -- considering that, in the last resort, Gomez and Co. are, as alleged
by G. and K. men of property and responsibility -- considering also, that a
recovery in this action by LeGuen, will vest the notes and property in
Gouverneur and Kemble; it is fairly to be presumed, that they have seen and
known how to secure not only an indemnification, but profit by their misconduct.

LeGuen nevertheless very naturally determined to look to the responsibility of
Gouverneur and Kemble, rather than to the proceeds of the goods, however
sufficient they might be, because he knew the assertion of his right to them,
would subject them to sequestration by the British government, in consequence
of his character of Alien -- Enemy.

THE COUNSEL for Louis LeGuen will urge and maintain,

1. That every contract made by a factor for the sale of goods is for the
benefit of his principal, and forms a contract between the principal and the
purchaser, and that every contract made by a factor for his own benefit with
the property of the principal, is a violation of his duty and a fraud against
the principal.

2. That every factor is bound generally to obey the orders of his principal,
and particularly to use his endeavors to carry into effect any contract by him
made for the benefit of his principal.

3. That therefore, if a contract should stipulate an advantage to depend on an
election to be made, that election being itself a privilege or benefit, is to
be exercised for the principal and is subject to his control and direction.

4. That in the present case, the right of election to receive the purchase
money in Europe, was a right which G. and K. ought to have exercised for the
benefit of their principal, according to his direction and request, especially
as he was thereby to receive a premium or advance of price of five per cent,
equal to 612031/100 dollars.

5. That this position and inference are the more obvious in the present case,
Because, the factors could neither have stipulated nor exercised such a right
without the consent of their principal -- Because, the contract was made by the
intervention and express direction of LeGuen -- Because, it was his avowed
object to transfer his property to France, of which country he was a native and
citizen -- because at Havre deGrace, to which port the ship was bound, he would
have had a lien on the property which would have enabled him to have taken
precautions important to his security; and because it is absurd to suppose that
all these advantages could be defeated at the mere pleasure of the factors and
in defiance of the direction of the principal.

6. That the acknowledged lien which a factor has on the property entrusted to
him for his advances and responsibilities can form no objection to the demand
of LeGuen in the present case, because,

That lien like every other right is liable to be modified or abolished by the
agreement of the parties either express or implied --

That it is not in its nature local, but depends wholly on the place of payment;

That G. and K. by becoming parties to a contract for the benefit of LeGuen,
co^^aining a right of election to receive in foreign parts the moneys to arise
from the proceeds, virtually agreed to give effect to this right and to
exercise his lien at the place of payment --

That if payment had been positively stipulated at Havre or Hamburgh, no doubt
could have arisen but that, after reserving enough to cover their advances and
responsibilities, they would have been obliged to pay the overplus there to
LeGuen; and in such case, to have contended that they would have had a right to
bring back the whole amount of the sales to New York at his expense and risk,
to cover themselves for a sum which might not amount to one thousandth part of
it, would be an absurdity too glaring to be endured -- that a right of election
to receive in a foreign port, brings the matter to the same issue -- when that
election was made, the foreign port became the place of payment, and there only
could the lien of the factors be exercised.

That it is an invariable maxim in law, that he who agrees to an end agrees to
the MEANS. G. and K. might have refused to enter into the contract on such
terms, but having assented, having executed the contract, they were bound not
to impede the performance of it.

That G. and K. could have given the authority required of them by LeGuen, in
so special a form and with such cooperation of an agent named by themselves,
as would have secured to them the full benefit of their lieu.

And lastly it will be demonstrated that upon the construction contended for by
G. and K. they and their agents may keep the whole property in their hands
forever.

With respect to the measure and amount of damages, for the respondent, it will
be contended,

1. That the rules of law prescribe the measure of damages in all cases in
which they are not merely contingent -- Thus in promissory notes and other
liquidated demands, the legal interest -- on foreign bills 20 per cent -- on
inland bills 5 per cent; without any enquiry into the special damage which the
party may have actually sustained. Thus in actions of trover, however slight
the damage, the party is compelled to pay the whole value of the subject of
which he has made an improper use -- Thus finally, in every case of a factor
or trustee, the damages are invariably the whole value of the property which
may have been affected by his neglect or misconduct; as in a case of
acknowledged authority, if a factor be instructed to sell at a credit of 30
days and he sell at a credit of 31, he is instantly liable for the value of the
whole, although the purchaser prove insolvent within the thirty days; because a
violation of his duty relating to the whole -- If he had sold a part only, he
would in like manner have been liable for that part. So if a trustee be
directed to put out money on real property and lend it on personal security,
however competent, he is instantly answerable personally for the whole. No
enquiry is made or would be allowed as to the actual or probable damage
sustained: the factor and the trustee are deemed to have taken the
responsibility upon themselves.

2. That the application of this obvious principle is peculiarly necessary in
the present case, because of the impossibility of ascertaining or calculating
the events which may have affected the views and interest of the parties --
that if LeGuen should prove on the one part that he could have made half a
million of dollars by the receipt of his money in Havre; and by his presence in
aiding the sales, could have also ensured a profit to Gomez and Co. -- and G.
and K. on the other part should prove that they had reason to believe that a
better market could be had at Hamburgh; a court ought to pronounce, as has been
done by the supreme court, that all such proof would be irrelevant and could
tend only to introduce confusion and uncertainty; the only object of enquiry
being, have G. and K. neglected or disobeyed the orders of their principal --
if so, does their neglect or misconduct relate to the whole or a part only of
the property; if to the whole they are liable for the whole, if to a part for
that part only. (...) ^ther evidence was admissible to ex^^^guish or mitigate
the damages, but that the price in the sale was fraudulent -- that the property
had been lost before the default -- that the principal had released the whole
or part, or had been wholly or partially compensated -- neither of which points
was in any sort attempted to be proved.

3. That a default which gives a right of action, necessarily carries with it
the rule of compensation or damages, as an incident, and which cannot therefore
in any degree depend on future events and contingencies.

4. That as the default in the present instance related to the whole property,
and defeated the essential part of the sale, G. and K. thereby substituted
themselves to the purchasers, and took upon themselves the risk of future
contingencies: That the amount for which the property sold is the proper and
only standard of value (...) of damages, and that on any other prin^^^^^ there
could be no rule of damage in (...) ^resent case; the events which took place
subsequently to the default offering only a field for vague and unlimited
conjecture.

5. That in the cases mentioned under the first head, and in many others, the
law fixes the rule of damages, which will regulate and control the verdict of
a jury -- That when the parties agree the value, this value is the rule -- That
where an agent, by his assumption or default, puts himself in the place of
another with whom he has settled the value, the value so settled shall govern
as against him.

6. That consequently the amount for which the goods were sold to Gomez, Lopez
and Rivera, together with five per cent for receiving in Europe, is the
principal sum for which G. and K. became liable for their default.

The foregoing general propositions will be illustrated by arguments and
analogies, which it is hoped will fully evince their soundness, and the
^^^priety of the judgment of the ^^^^eme court.

The objections in point of form, with which G. and K. may attempt to embarrass
the cause, would not be worthy of notice in this state of the business, even if
they could be anticipated. They will, without difficulty, be disposed of in the
course of the argument.

Gouverneur and Kemble to LeGuen, DR. Amount of sales to Gomez and Co. L.48,
966 6 0 5 per cent for receiving in Europe 2,448 0 0 L51,414 6 0 Deduct L.20 0
3, being the balance due G. and K. on 15 Aug. '95, in case they are allowed a
commission on the debenture, 20 0 3 L.51, 394 5 9 To interest at 6 per cent per
annum, from 13 June '95, to 13 April '96, 10 months, 2, 569 14 0 To interest
from 13 April 1796, to 13 March 1798, one year and 11 months, at seven per
cent, 7, 240 1 9 L.61, 204 1 6

Equal to 153,010 dollars 18 cents, Calculated agreeably to the opinion and
directions of the Supreme Court.

payable on the 15th August then following, and executed a bond to the United
States in the penalty of dolls. 12,086. 87 conditioned to land the said goods
in some foreign port, and to produce the regular evidence thereof within twelve
months.

That the purchasers executed with Dederick Kohne, sailing-master of the ship
there discharged, remainder in Hamburgh, in good bills of exchange on London at
sixty days.

At the foot of the charter party is a receipt for L290 sterling, paid on
account of

That G. and K. by two several bonds, bearing date the 4th and 28th May, became
bound for the performance of the in Europe, was a right which G. and K. ought
to have exercised for the benefit of their principal, according to his
direction and request, especially as he was thereby to receive a premium or
advance of price of five per cent.

5. That this position and inference are the more obvious in the present case,
Because, the factors could neither have stipulated nor exercised such a right
without the consent of their principal -- Because, the contract was made by the
intervention and express direction of LeGuen -- Because, it was his avowed
object to transfer his property to France, of which country he was a native and
citizen -- because at Havre deGrace, to which port the ship was bound, he would
have had a lien on the property which would have enabled him to have taken
precautions important to his security; and because it is absurd to suppose that
all these advantages could be defeated at the mere pleasure of the factors and
in defiance of the direction of the principal.

That G. and K. could have given the authority required of them by LeGuen, in
so special a form and with such cooperation of an agent named by themselves,
as would have secured to them the full benefit of their lien.

With respect to the measure and amount of damages, for the respondent, it will
be contended,

1. That the rules of law prescribe the measure of damages in all cases in
which they are not merely contingent -- Thus in promissory notes and other
liquidated demands, the legal interest -- on foreign bills 20 per cent -- on
inland bills 5 per cent; without any enquiry into the special damage which the
party may have actually sustained. Thus in actions of trover, however slight
the damage, the party is compelled to pay the whole value of the subject of
which he has made an improper use -- Thus finally, in every case of a factor
or trustee, the damages are invariably the whole value of the property which
may have been affected by his neglect or misconduct; as in a case of
acknowledged authority, if a factor be instructed to sell at a credit of 30
days and he sell at a credit of 31, he is instantly liable for the value of the
whole, although the purchaser prove insolvent within the thirty days; because a
violation of his duty relating to the whole -- If he had sold a part only, he
would in like manner have been liable for that part. So if a trustee be
directed to put out money on real property and lend it on personal security,
however competent, he is instantly answerable personally for the whole. No
enquiry is made or would be allowed as to the actual or probable damage
sustained: the factor and the trustee are deemed to have taken the
responsibility upon themselves.

2. That the application of this obvious principle is peculiarly necessary in
the present case, because of the impossibility of ascertaining or calculating
the events which may have affected the views and interest of the parties --
that if LeGuen should prove on the one part that he could have made half a
million of dollars by the receipt of his money in Havre; and by his presence in
aiding the sales, could have also ensured a profit to Gomez and Co. -- and G.
and K. on the other part should prove that they had reason to believe that a
better market could be had at Hamburgh; a court ought to pronounce, as has been
done by the supreme court, that all such proof would be irrelevant and could
tend only to introduce confusion and uncertainty; the only object of enquiry
being, have G. and K. neglected or disobeyed the orders of their principal --
if so, does their neglect or misconduct relate to the whole or a part only of
the property; if to the whole they are liable for the whole, if to a part for
that part only. No other evidence was admissible to extinguishing or mitigate
the damages, but that the price in the sale was fraudulent -- that the property
had been lost before the default -- that the principal had released the whole
or part, or had been wholly or partially compensated -- neither of which points
was in any sort attempted to be proved.

3. That a default which gives a right of action, necessarily carries with it
the rule of compensation or damages, as an incident, and which cannot therefore
in any degree depend on future events and contingencies.

4. That as the default in the present instance related to the whole property,
and defeated the essential part of the sale, G. and K. thereby substituted
themselves to the purchasers, and took upon themselves the risk of future
contingencies: That the amount for which the property sold is the proper and
only standard of value and of damages, and that on any other principle there
could be no rule of damage in the present case; the events which took place
subsequently to the default offering only a field for vague and unlimited
conjecture.

5. That in the cases mentioned under the first head, and in many others, the
law fixes the rule of damages, which will regulate and control the verdict of
a jury -- That when, the parties agree the value, this value is the rule --
That where an agent, by his assumption or default, puts himself in the place of
another with whom he has settled the value, the value so settled shall govern
as against him.

6. That consequently the amount for which the goods were sold to Gomez, Lopez
and Rivera, together with five per cent for receiving in Europe, is the
principal sum for which G. and K. became liable for their default.

The foregoing general propositions will be illustrated by arguments and
analogies, which it is hoped will fully evince their soundness, and the
propriety of the judgment of the supreme court.

The little objections in point of form, with which G. and K. may attempt to
embarrass the cause, would not be worthy of notice in this state of the
business, even if they could be anticipated. They will, without difficulty, be
disposed of in the course of the argument.


