The important concerns of Ministers, and the People of their charge, at the
day of Judgment.

ILLUSTRATED IN A SERMON, delivered at Rutland, ORANGE SOCIETY; August 22d,
1797, at the interment of the Rev. Abraham Carpenter, THEIR WORTHY PASTOR.

BY LEMUEL HAYNES, PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN RUTLAND, VERMON^.

PRINTED AT RUTLAND, 1798.

THESSALONIANS, 11. 19. For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing?
are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming?
THE second coming of Christ is a source of peculiar joy and consolation to the
people of God: it is a day in which their hopes and expectations will be fully
answered. Tribulation attends the good man while in this life; the scenes of
divine providence are mysterious, and many things unaccountable and
insignificant without a day of judgment; they will* then be explained and
adjusted to the joy and admiration of all who love Christ's appearing. Many of
the events that take place in this life, stand in a solemn relation to the
judgment day, and none more so than the gospel ministry; hence it is that the
attention of the true servants of Christ is so much taken up with a future
state. St. Paul being detained from the Church of Thessalonica* sends this
epistle as a token of his love and respect to them; in which he anticipates
that blessed period, when he should meet them at the bar of Christ, which would
afford such joy and satisfaction as to more then compensate for all their
sorrow, more especially for his being prevented a personal inteview with those
to whom he wrote. For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not
even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? We have two
very important ideas suggested in the words. One is, that ministers and their
people must meet each other at the day of judgment. -- The second is, that
although ministers are often separated from their hearers in this life, yet the
people of God among whom a pious preacher finish^s his work, will be a cause or
crown of peculiar joy and satisfaction at the second coming of Christ.

With respect to the first point we may observe, to give us a striking contrast
between this and the coming world, we are in the present state subject to many
vicissitudes.

What changes are taking place in empires, states, societies, and families? In
nothing is this more observable than in matters relating to ministers and the
people of their charge. A persecuting spirit, that prevailed in the apostolic
age, was often a mean of parting friends, and especially of driving preachers
from churches: the same cause has had influence in every age of the church; but
if religious societies are so happy, as to escape such a calamity, yet it
pleases the Great Head of the church in his sovereign wisdom, to separate
ministers and their people by death; this gives feeling to a pious preacher,
and in some degree has influence in every sermon he delivers. That all mankind
will be collected before the bar of Christ, to see the great and intricate
affairs of the universe adjusted, is a plain dictate of reason and scripture;
but that many will meet there as having mutual concerns with each other, is
evident. -- More especially, ministers and the people once committed to their
charge, doubtless will appear in some sense as distinct societies, as having
particular and personal matters to attend to. -- This supposes that they will
have a knowledge of each other: for without this the purposes of their meeting
in such a manner could not be answered. How far this will extend, or by what
means it will be conveyed, is too curious to enquire. It seems, unless we are
able by some means to distinguish those from others with whom we have been
intimate in this life, the designs of a future judgment will in some measure be
frustrated. The great end of that day is to illustrate divine truth, or make
that appear conspicuous to created intelligence; to effect this, God will make
use of mankind as instruments; this is the method he takes in this life, and
doubtless it will be most eligible in the world to come. For our acquaintance
to be summoned as witnesses for or against us at this court, will perhaps be the
best means to administer conviction. In this way the great God can speak in
language easy for finite creatures to understand. One design of the world,
being divided into distinct societies and communities, is doubtless to prepare
matters for the day of judgment. The relation between ministers and people is
such as ^enders them capable of saying much about each other; in this way the
justice and mercy of God will be illustrated, divine proceedings vindicated,
and every mouth stopped. It is our conduct in this life that will direct divine
proceeding toward us at the final judgment; that the equity of God's
administrations may appear, it is necessary that our characters be clearly
investigated. The salvation and damnation of many souls will be through the
instrumentality of faithful and unfaithful watchmen: this is an idea contained
in the charge God gave to Ezekiel, 32d Chapter. It will be necessary that the
motives by which ministers have been influenced in their work, be brought out
to view: for without sincerity of heart they can never execute their office
with any degree of true faithfulness, and are an high affront to God, and a
vile imposition on the people.

At the day of judgment the doctrines with which a minister has entertained his
hearers must be examined. However, doctrinal preaching may be discarded by many
and such words as metaphysical abstruse, etc. are often made use of to obstruct
free and candid enquiry. Yet it is evident that one great end of the gospel
ministry is to disseminate right sentiments; hence it is that Paul so often
exhorts Timothy to take heed to his doctrine. Sound doctrine, as well as good
practice is necessary to constitute the christian character; whosoever
transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of Christ has not God, 2 John, 9.

A careful inquiry will be made whether an empty parade of learning, elegancy
o^ (...), etc. have been the main things with which a people have been
entertained; tending only to gratify vain curiosity, and to fix the attention
of the hearers on the Speaker. This made St. Paul contemn such a mode of
preaching, and determine not to know any thing save Jesus Christ, and him
crusified, 1. Cor. 2. 2. Whether vague equivocal expressions have been used to
convey, or rather to obscure the truths of the gospel; by which any thing, and
almost every thing may be understood. This is causing the trumpet to give an
uncertain found; and has no tendency to impress, or give feeling to the mind,
as is the case with the words of the wise, being as goads and nails, Eccle. 12.
11. -- Whether to please men has had greater influence in our composing and
deliver our sermons and the glory of God and the good of souls. People will be
examined at the bar of Christ, whether they have not been dealt plainly with --
Been told their characters and danger -- That they are wholly opposed to God,
destitute of every thing that is holy, or morally good. -- That they are by
nature under the curse of God's law, exposed every moment to endless woe --
That they are hopeless and helpless in themselves -- The necessity of the
renewing influences of the spirit -- The nature of their imputency, that it
consists in an evil heart; that therefore they are altogether inexcusable, and
are criminal in proportion to the degree of their inability -- That nothing
short of repentance toward God, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, is the
immediate duty of all that hear the gospel.

Ministers and their people must meet before the Judgment Seat of Christ to
give an account whether the true character of God has in any good measure been
investigated -- As a sin hating and sin revenging God -- As one who in his
sovereign wisdom and goodness has elected some to everlasting life, and others
for the display of his power and justice to eternal death -- That he governs
all things by a fixed unalterable plan. That of him, and to him, and through
him are all things.

Without this, the character of God is kept out of sight, people left in the
dark, and ar^ not able to determine whether they love or hate the true God.

It must be known whether people have had the character and work of the
Redeemer set before then -- The design of his sufferings; the efficacy of his
blood, and the necessity of our union to him. The manner in which divine truth
has been delivered, will be a matter worthy of serious examination at that day;
Whether with that earnestness and servor, becoming the vast importance and
so-solemnity of gospel truth, tending to effect the mind. The deportment, or
examples of ministers among their people will be closely attended to: their
private visits, exhortations and reproofs, holy desires and wrestlings for the
souls of their hearers, will not escape public notice; the improvement that
people have made of such advantages will be bro't into public view.

How often people have attended on the ministration of the word, and the manner
how, will he matters of serious concern at the judgment day. Those excuses that
men make for neglecting public worship, will be weighed in a just scale.
Whether people have so far contributed to the temporal support of their
ministers as to enable them to devote themselves to the service of Christ: or
by too great neglect, have not obstructed the gospel, robbed God, wounded their
own souls.

It will be useful that the time of a ministers continuance among a people be
known, as it will serve to set the characters of gospel despisers in a true
point of light. That ministers and the people of their charge will meet each
other at the bar of Christ is suggested in my text, and in other parts of the
sacred writings. -- It has already been observed, that in this way truth will
appear conspicuous, and the conduct of God will be vindicated, and the designs
of a judgment-day in the best manner answered. It may further be observed, that
the matters relating to the gospel ministry are of such magnitude that it
appears important that they be attended to; they concern a judgment day, and an
eternal state. When ministers and people meet in the house of God it is an
acknowledgment that they believe in a future state of retribution, and is a
sort of appeal to the day of judgment. The influence of a faithful, or
unfaithful minster is such as to effect unborn ages; it will commonly determine
the sentiments and characters of their successors; and in this way they may be
doing good or evil after they are dead and even to the second coming of Christ.
That God's hatred toward false teachers, and against those who choose them,
together with their criminality may appear, it will be necessary that these
matters are laid open at the tribunal of Christ. -- As a proof of the matter
under consideration I may only add: That there always has been an important
controversy in a greater or less degree between ministers and part of their
people; it is so with faithful preachers and some of their hearers; wicked men
oppose the doctrines they preach, and will not be convinced. Unfaithful
preachers, they have advocates and opposers; the dispute involved the character
of Christ, it cannot be settled in this world: how necessary that ministers and
people meet at the great day, to have the matter decided, the doctrines of
Christ vindicated, and the characters of ministers or people exonerated?

II. Another important idea contained in the text is, That the church, or
people of God, among whom a faithful minister finishes his work, will be a
cause, or crown of peculiar joy or rejoicing at the coming of Christ. It will
be matter of great satisfaction to set down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
other saints at that day; but the scriptures represent that godly ministers
will derive peculiar joy from the pious part of their congregations. Dan. 12.
3, 2. Cor. 1. 14. Phil. 2. 16. Reflecting on past providence, will be a source
of great joy at the day of judgment: and as many things have taken place
between a minister and his people in which they are more particularly
conversant and interested, when they come to be explained, it will afford
special joy and admiration, as they have been companions in tribulations, so
now it is likely they will be in a more peculiar sense copartners in joy, and
help each other in magnifying the Lord for special favors, and displays of
divine power and grace on their behalf.

The prayers and struggles of pious teachers have been for Zion in general, and
for those over whom the Holy Ghost has made them overseers in particular: Now
God will give their hearers who have been converted through their
instrumentality as a kind of reward and fruit of their travel or labor. When it
appears that God has made use of the true ministers of Christ for the
conversion (...) some of the souls once committed to their charge, it will
excite wonder joy, and humility in the minds of pious teachers, that God should
deign to honor them as instruments of such glorious work, by which they will be
^led to adore sovereign grace, and condescending love. As it is often through
the painful labors of Christ's servants that souls are bro't home to God,
doubtless he will approve of such virtues by confering signal honors on such
who have turned many to righteousness, who will shine as stars forever and ever.

Pious people will give such account of their faithful teachers as will meet
with approbation of God, which will be expressed by that heavenly plaudit.
"Well done good and faithful servant! Their mutual accounts will be given up
with joy, and not with grief, Hebrews 13. 17. The hopes and expectations of
such ministers are great, as the apostle suggests in the text -- For what is
our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? are no^ even ye? etc. He speaks of it
as the earnest hope and expectation of all Christ's ministers, by calling it
our hope. They reflect with pleasure on the approaching happy moment, and when
it comes it will greatly gratify their holy desires.

That it will be possible to hold equal communion with all the saints,
especially at one time in the invisible world, perhaps is not admissible. It
appears that the wicked, who have been associates in sin here, will be
companions of torments hereafter, Luke 16. 28.

They are to be gathered like the standing ^orn, and to be bound in bundles to
burn. -- It is more than possible that the righteous who have lived together in
this life, will have a more intimate access to each other in the world to come.

If it will be useful for them to meet in some sense as distinct societies,
perhaps it will subserve the interest of the universe that they in a degr^ee
continue so -- It is the character of the true church of Ch^^^t that they treat
his ministers with respect in this life, accounting them as the ministers of
Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God, 1. Cor. 4. 1. They help them in
their work, 2. Cor. 1. 11. God will in the great day reward people for such
kindness; as hereby they express their love to Christ, Mat. 25. 40. This will
gratify the benevolent feelings of Christ's servants; at the same time fill
them with holy admiration, and deep humility, that what has been done to such
poor sinful creatures should be taken notice of.

Ministers and the people of their charge will assist each other, and be united
in bringing a verdict against the wicked and impenitent, among whom they lived
while on earth. The saints are to judge the world, 1. Cor. 6. 2. One way by
which they will do this, will doubtless be to declare before angels and men
that they know about them, or their conduct ^n this life. An attachment to
divine justice will make this delightful work. Ministers just declare what and
how they have preached to them, and the bad improvement they have made of the
gospel, so far as it has come under their observation; how they have despised
and mocked the messengers of the Lord, contemned his word and ordinances. Pious
hearers can witness to the same things, and in this way the mutual testimony of
godly ministers and people will be strengthened and supported, and divine
proceedings against impenitent sinners vindicated. Thus (...) a crown of joy to
her faith^^^ (...)*

IMPROVEMENT.
1. WE may infer from this subject, that the gospel ministry is of God, and
that we ought to seek its welfare, and use suitable exertions for its support.

Does scripture and reason dictate that it is of so much importance, especially
as it relates to a judgment day, we may conclude that God would not do without
it, and we may see divine wisdom and goodness in the institution. Nothing more
conducive of divine glory, and salutary to men, than the preaching of the
gospel. -- Without these glad tidings are proclaimed, the Incarnation of Christ
is vain. Nothing but opposition to God, and disregard to his glory, will make
them indifferent to the preaching of the gospel. A rejection of Christ and his
ministers, have commonly vice, and open prophanity, for their inseparable
companions. The opposition that the impenitent part of mankind have made to the
servants of Christ, has doubtless in some measure had its rise from a
consciousness that they must meet them at the bar of Christ, to their
disadvantage.

We may conclude that since the gospel ministry is so very useful, that it will
be continued to the end of the world.

2. When a faithful minister is taken away it ought seriously to be regarded.
But few ways perhaps that God shows greater displeasure against a people than
in calling his ambassadors home. By this he threatens to put an end to his
treaty of peace, and become irreconcilable. It may sometimes be the case that
God has no more chosen or elect ones among them. When Paul and Barrabas were
preaching at Antioch, as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed, then
they departed, Acts 13. All the encouragement for a minister to preach among a
people, so far as the salvation of souls ought to be a motive, is the doctrine
of election. After the death of a faithful minister there is less hope of a
people.

We may further observe, when it is considered, that we are to meet them no
more in the house of God, to hear them declare unto us the words of
reconciliation; but our next interview will be at the tribunal of Christ, to
hear them testify, for or against us, how affecting the consideration! It is
more solemn to die than if we had never been favored with the gospel ministry.
People, whether they hear, or forbear, shall know to their joy, or sorrow, that
there has been a prophet among them, Ezekiel. 2 5.

3. The subject affords (...) direction how ministers should preach, and how a
people ought to hear, viz. with death and judgment in view. It is this that
makes preaching and hearing a serious matter, and renders the house of God so
very solemn. We must soon meet before the bar of Christ, and perhaps before the
next Sabbath, to have our sermons and our hearing examined, by him who is
infinite in knowledge, and is present in every congregation. Did we always
consider these things, it would tend to abolish that coldness, drowsiness and
indifference, that too often attend the ministers of the gospel, and that
formal spirit which is too apparent among hearers. How would it check that
levity of mind, and disorderly behavior, that presumptuous creatures often
indulge in the house of God. How dreadful is this place! -- (...) a reflection
suitable on all occcasions, and more especially when we meet for public
devotion.

4. The surviving widow and children will for a moment suffer the word of
exhortation. Are not you in some sense his hope and joy? Was it not a
reflection that tended to smooth the rugged road through death, that he should
meet you before the bar of Christ, and that you would be a crown of rejoicing
in that day? If ministers and people are to meet each other before the tribunal
of Christ, as having special business together, then we may conclude that this
will be the case with particular families, such as husbands and wives, parents
and children; you can say much about each other upon that occasion, having for
so long a time composed one family on earth.

You, who are this day called to mourn* must give an account how you have
improved his public and more private admotions: and especially this providence.
The present occasion, however solemn, will appear more so at the great day.
Consider, that although he is gone to return no more, yet God the source of
consolation ever lives -- His promises are always new to the widow and
fatherless. That God who gave, has taken him away. But still he lives in
another state, and is more useful to the universe, than he could be in this
world. God's people always die in the best time, manner, and place. You have
only time to take up the body and bury it, set your houses in order, and follow
him. Manifest your love to the deceased by preparing to meet him, and make his
heart glad in the day of the Lord Jesus. Contemplate the rectitude of divine
government, and a future world, and b^ still.

Let the children remember, that to have pious faithful parent taken away, is
an unspeakable loss. Your father has done much for your bodies, but we trust
more for your souls; never, never forget his prayers and admonitions. Can you,
dare you meet him at the bar of Christ in impenitence? Should this be the case,
instead of those endearing and parental caresses that you have r^^ived from him
in this life, be will join with the judge of all in saying, depart! He will
declare what he has done for you* and condemn you. Let your mother experience
that tender regard and kind assistance, during her short continuance with you,
as becomes dutiful obedient children. Make her heart glad by a holy life, and
let your father live daily before her eyes, in your pious examples.

Let me say a word to the Church, and congregation in this place: -- Dear
Friends, I am not a stranger to those mournful sensations that the present
melancholy providence tends to inspire. I trust I am a hearty mourner with you,
and am a share in your loss.

By the foregoing observations you have eason to conclude that you have lost a
faithf^ul minister.

You cannot forget those solemn and affectionate warnings that he has given you
from the desk: Nor those pious examples he has set before you. He has preached
his last sermon. Your next meeting must be before the tribunal of Christ, where
those sermons you have heard him deliver in this life, will come to view, and
the improvement you have made of them. Will you, my brethren, be his crown of
rejoicing in that day? If you were his hope and joy in this life, you doubtless
are still. It is with satisfaction we trust that he this moment looks foward to
that day, when he expects to see this the dear people once committed to his
charge; and doubtless he hopes to meet some of you as crowns of rejoicing. Oh!
do not disappoint the hope, and expectations of your Rev. Pastor. Manifest your
love to him by imitating his holy examples, and by having those heavenly
instructions, that he so often inculcated, always in remembrance; and by
preparing to give him joy in the day of the Lord Jesus. Examine what
improvement you have made of the gospel ministry while you had it: and whether
too great inattention has not had influence in its being removed. Have you ever
experienced the power and efficacy of the gospel upon your own souls* Have you
by the holy spirit been formed into the moral likeness of the blessed God, and
into the image of his son Jesus? Or have you been contented with the mere form
of Godliness? Have you not through sloth and unbelief, neglected attending on
the preaching of the gospel, during the residence of your pastor among you? Oh!
what account will such gospel despisers have to give another day! Consider, I
entreat you, how dreadful it will be to have these things bro't into view, when
you come to meet your ministe* who was once, and perhaps is now an eye-w^^ess
of your conduct* and will testify against you to your everlasting
conde^menation!

Your minister, though dead, now speaks. He preaches a most solemn lecture to
us all this day on mortality.

You will, as it were, hear his voice when you look on the place of public
worship, where he and you so often attended -- When you look on his grave,
which is here among you -- and when you look to the second coming of Christ.
Think often of that day. -- Let the Sabbath, and worship of God, be still dear
unto you; and remember him who has spoken unto you the word of God: whose faith
follow.



MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE OF THE REV. ABRAHAM CARPENTER.
HE was born on the 23d of Sept. 1739* at Rehoboth, Massachusetts: was son of
Mr. Abiel Carpenter of that place; who was a man of piety and industry; by
which means his family received a religious education* the fruit of which was
conspicuous in his children, especially in his son, the subject of these
memoirs, who dates his conversion in the 23d year of his age, when he became a
member of the church under the pastoral care of the Rev. Mr. Rogerson. He was
married to Miss Elizabeth Bliss, daughter of Mr. John Bliss of Rehoboth, in his
21st year. They had ten children, four sons and six daughters; their mother and
six children only survive.

In his 24th year he moved to Killingsly, in Connecticut, where he resided
eight years, and commenced a preacher of the gospel. -- Soon after he removed
to Plainfield, N. Hampshire, where he had a call to settle in the work of the
gospel ministry, which he accepted; and continued pastor of a church there for
15 years, and was much esteemed by his people and acquaintance.

Some divisions arising in the town respecting a place to build a Meeting
House, together with a great depreciation of numbers in the church, an
ecclesiastical council was called, and for the reasons above, thought it
expedient to dismiss him from his pastoral relation to that people.

The church at the same time cordially united in Recommending him, as one who
had approved himself able and faithful in his work, during the time of his
having exercised the pastoral care of the church among them. The council at the
same time concurred with the church in recommending their pastor, so far as
their acquaintance would admit. This appears from a result of council left
among Mr. Carpenter's papers. He removed to Rutland, State of Vermont, March 13
1789, and was again settled in the work of the ministy, and discharged the
duties to which he was called, to the great satisfaction of his people, and
gained the love and esteem of all who knew him. But few give greater evidence
of this love to Christ and the souls of men, than Mr. Carpenter, both in his
public ministry, and private deportment. He always discovered that simplicity
and cheerfulness, mixed with christian sobriety, as endeared him to all his
acquaintance, to th^se especially with whom he conversed, we may say without
flattery, that he was a rare example of piety. His health evidently began to
decline several months before his death, which at times impeded his public
ministry -- Love to his divine master and to the souls of men, often urged him
on beyond his strength. For some weeks before his death, he was much troubled
with a billious disorder, to which he had been much subject, which greatly
debilitated his constitution, but had in some measure recovered; when he was
seized with a violent diarrhoea, which carried him off on the evening of the
(...) August, 1797, in his 58th year. He was speechless for some time previous
to his exit; but while able to speak, manifested the most placid resignation to
the will of God; earnestly exhorted others to prepare for death; He said, he
had no will as to living or dying, but chos^ to submit the matter to that God,
to whom belong the issues of life and death, that the great truths that he had
preached to others, were those on which he could now venture his soul for
eternity, that he had no desire to outlive his usefulness.

We trust he has fallen asleep in Jesus.


