A REMARKABLE NARRATIVE OF AN EXPEDITION AGAINST THE INDIANS

^^TH AN ACCOUNT OF THE ^^^BAROUS EXECUTION OF COL. CRAW FORD, AND DR. KNIGHT'S
ESCAPE FROM CAPTIVITY.

PRINTED FOR CHAPMAN WHITCOMB

A NARRATIVE etc.
ABOUT the latter end of the month of March, or the beginning of April of the
year 1782, the western indians began to make incursions upon the frontier of
Ohio, Washington, Youghagany and Westmoreland counties, which has been their
constant practice ever since the (...)mmencement of the present war be(...)
(...) United States and Great Britain.

In consequence of these predat(...) (...), the principal officers of th(...)
(...) mentioned counties, viz. Colonels, (...) (...)liamson (...)nd Marshal,
tried every meth(...) (...) their power to set on foot an expedition (...)
(...)against the Wyandot towns, which they (...) effect no other way than by
giving all (...) (...)sible encouragement to volunteers. (...) plan was as
follows. Every man (...) himself with a horse, a gun, and (...) months
provisions, should be exempted (...) two tours of militia duty. Likewise every
one who had been plundered by the Indians, should if the plunder could be fond
at their towns, have it again, prove(...)g his property: and all horses lost on
the expedition by unavoidable accident were to be replaced by horses taken in
the enemy's country.

The time appointed for the rendezvous, or general meeting of the volunteers,
was fixed to be on the 20th May, and the place, the old Mingoe town on the west
side of the river Ohio, about forty miles below Fort Pit by land, and I think
about 75 by water.

Col. Crawford was solicited by the General voice of these western counties and
districts to command the expedition. He accordingly set out as volunteer and
came to Fort Pit two days before the time appointed for the assembling of the
men. As there was no surgeon yet appointed to go with the expedition, Col.
Crawford begged the favor of Genesis Irvine to permit me to accompany him, (my
consent having been previously asked) to which the General agreed provided Col.
Gibson did not object.

Having obtained permission of the Colonel I left Fort Pitton Tuesday, May 1st,
and the next day about one in the afternoon arrived at the Mingoe bottom. The
volunteers had not all crossed the river until Friday morning the 24th then
they distributed themselves into eighteen companies, choosing their captains by
vote.

There were chosen also, one Col. Commandant, four field and one brigade-major.

There were four hundred and sixty five who voted.

We began our march of Saturday May 25th, making almost a due west course, and
and on the 4th, day reached the old Moravian town upon the river Muskingum,
about 60 miles from the river Ohio. Some of the men having lost their horses on
the night preceding returned home. Tuesday the 28th in the evening, Major
Brenton, and Captain Bean, went some distance from camp to reconnoitre: Having
gone about one quarter of a mile they saw two India is up on whom they fired,
and then returned to camp* This was the first place in which we were discovered
as we understood afterward. On Thursday the 4th, of June, which was the
eleventh day of our march, about one o'clock we came to the spot where the town
of Sandusky formerly stood: the inhabitants had moved 18 miles lower down the
creek, near the lower Sandusky; but as neither our guides nor any that were
with us, had known any thing of their removal we began to conjecture that there
were no Indian towns nearer than the lower Sandusky, which was at least 40
miles distant.

However, after refreshing our horses, we advanced on in search of some of
their settlements but had scarcely got the distance of three or four miles from
the old town when a number of our men expressed their desire to return, some of
them alleging they had only five day's provision: upon which the field
officers and Captains, determined, in council, to proceed that afternoon, and
no longer. Previous to the calling of this council, a small party of light
horse had been sent forward to reconnoitre.

I shall here remark, by the way, that there are a great many extensive plains
in that country; the woods in general grow very thin, free from brush and
underwood; so that light horsemen may advance a considerable distance before
an army without being much exposed to the enemy.

Just as the council ended, an express returned from the above mentioned party
of light horse with intelligence, *that they had been about three miles in
front, and had seen a large body of Indians running toward them. -- In a short
time we saw the rest of the light horse, who joined us, and having gone one
mile further met a number of Indians who had partly gotten possesion of a piece
of woods before us, whilst they were in the plains; but our men alighting from
their horses and rushing into the woods, soon obliged them to retreat from the
place.

The enemy being by this time reinforced, flanked to the right, and part of
them coming in our rear, quickly made the action more serious. The firing
continued very warm on both sides from four o'clock until the dusk of the
evening: each party maintaining its ground. Next morning about six o'clock some
guns were discharged at the distance of two or three hundred yards* which
continued till day, doing little or no execution on either side.

The field officers then assembled and a greed as the enemy were every moment
increasing, and we had already a number wounded, to retreat that night. The
whole body was to form into three lines, keeping the wounded in the center.

We had four killed and twenty three wounded, of the latter, seven very
dangerously, on which account as many biers were got ready to carry them; most
of the rest were slightly wounded, none so bad but they could ride on
horseback. After dark the officers went on the out posts, and brought in all
the men as expeditiously as they could* Just as the troops were about to form,
several guns were fired by the enemy, upon which some of our men spoke our and
said, our intention was discovered by the Indians who were siting alarm guns.
Upon which some in front hurried off, and the rest immediately followed,
leaving the seven men that were dangerously wounded, some of whom however got
off on horseback, by means of some good friends who waited for, and assisted
them.

We had not got a quarter of a mile from the field of action, when I heard Col.
Crawford calling for his son John Crawford his sON-in-law Maj. Harrison, Maj
Rose and William Crawford, his nephews, upon which I came up and told him I
believed they were before us -- He asked was that the Docter? I told him it
was; he then replied they were not in front, and begged of me not to leave him
-- I promised him I would not.

We then waited and continued calling for these men till the troops had passed
us.

The Col. told me his horse had almost given out, that he could not keep up
with the troops, and wished some of his friends to remain with him: he then
exclaimed against the militia for riding off in such an irregular manner, and
leaving some of the wounded behind, contrary to his orders*

Presently there came two men riding after us, one of them an old man, the
other a lad: we enquired if they had seen any of the above persons? they
answered they had not.

By this time there was a very hot firing before us, and as we judged, near
where, our main body must have been. Our course was then nearly south-west, but
changing it, we went north about two miles, the two men remaining in company
with us* Judging ourselves, to be now out of the enemy's lines, we took an east
course, taking care to keep at the distance of fifteen or twenty yards apart,
and directing ourselves by the north star.

The old man often lagged behind, and when this was the case never failed to
call for us to halt for him. When we were near the Sandusky Creek he fell one
hundred yards behind and bawled out, as usual, for us to halt. While we were
preparing to reprimand him for making a noise, I heard an Indian holloe, as I
thouht 150 yards from the man, and partly behind him; and after this we did not
hear the man call again, neither did he ever come upto us any more. It was now
past midnight, and about daybreak Col. Crawford's and the young man's horses
gave out, and they left them.

We pursued our journey east ward, and about two o'clock fell in with Capt.
Biggs, who had carried Lieut* Ashly from the fiield of action who had been
dangerously wounded. We then went on about the space of an hour, when a heavy
rain coming on, we concluded it was best to encamp, as we were encumbered with
the wounded officer.

We then barked four or five trees, made an encampment and a fire in which
place we remained that night. Next morning we again prosecuted our journey, and
having gone about three miles, found a deer which had been recently killed. The
meat was sliced from the bones and bundled up in the skin, with a tomahawk
lying by it. We carried all with us and in advancing about one mile further,
espying the smoke of a fire. We then gave the wounded officer into the charge
of the young man, desiring him to stay behind whilst the Colonel, the Captain,
and myself, walked up as cautiously as we could toward the fire. When we came
to it, we concluded from several circumstances some of our people had encamped
there the preceding night. We then went about roasting the venison, and when
just about to march observed one of our men coming upon our tracks He seemed at
first very shy, but having called to him he came up and told us he was the
person who killed the deer, but upon hearing us come up, was afraid of Indians,
hid in a thicket and made off. Upon this we gave him some bread and roasted
venison and proceeded all together on our journey: about two o'clock we came
upon the paths by which we had gone out. Capt. Biggs and myself did not think
it safe to keep the road. but the Colonel said the Indians would not follow the
troops farther than the plains, which we were considerably past. As the wounded
officer rode Capt. Biggs' horse I let the Captain mine, the Colonel and myself
went about one hundred yards in front, the Captain and the wonded officer in
the center, and the two young men behind. After we had traveled about one mile
and a half, several Indians started up within fifteen or twenty steps of the
Colonel and me. As we at first discovered only three I immediately got behind a
large black oak, made ready my piece and raised it up to take sight, when the
Colonel called to me twice not to fire: upon that one of the Indians ran up to
the colonel and took him by the hand.

They were Delaware Indians of the Wingenim tribe. Captain. Biggs fired amongst
them but did no execution; they then told us to call these people and make them
come, else they would go and kill them; which the Colonel did but they four got
off and escaped for that time.

The Colonel and I were taken to the Indian camp, which was about half a mile
from the place where, we were captured.

On Sunday evening five Delawares who had posted themselves at some distance
further on the road, brought back to the camp, where we lay, Captain Biggs and
Lieutenant Ashley's scalps with an Indian scalp which Captain Biggs had taken
in the field of action* They also brought in Biggs' horse and mine, they told
us the other two men got away from them.

Monday morning the tenth of June, we were paraded to march to Sandusky, about
33 miles distant: they had eleven prisoners of us and four scalps, the Indians
being seventeen in number. Col. Crawford was very desirous to see a certain
Simeon Girty, who lived among the Indians, and was on that account permitted to
go to town the same night, with two warriors to guard him having orders at the
same time to pass by the place where the Colonel had turned out his horse that
they might if possible, find him.

The rest of us were taken as far as the old town, which was within eight miles
of the new.

Tuesday morning, the 11th, Col. Crawford was brought out on purpose to be
marched in with the other prisoners. I asked the Colonel if he had seen Mr.
Girty? he told me he had, and that Girty had promised to do every thing in his
power for him, but that the Indians were very much enraged against the
prisoners: particularly Capt. Pipe, one of the Chiefs He likewise told me that
Girty had informed him that his son-in-law, Col. Harrison and his Nephew
William Crawford, were made prisoners by the Shawanese, but had been pardoned.
This Capt. Pipe had come from the towns about an hour before Col. Crawford, and
had painted all the prisoner's faces black.

As he was painting me he told me I should go to the Shawanese towns and see my
friends.

When the Col. arrived he painted him black also, told him he was glad to see
him and that he would have him shaved when he came to see his friends at the
Wyandot town. When we marched the Colonel and I were kept back between Pipe and
Wyngenim, the two Deleware chiefs, the other nine prisoners were sent forward
with another party of Indians. As we went a long we saw four of the prisoners
lying by the path tomabawked and scalped, some of them were at the distance of
half a mile from each other When we arrived within half a mile of the place
where the Colonel was executed, we overtook the five prisoners that remained
alive: The Indians had caused them to sit down on the ground, as they did, also
the Col. and me at some distance from them, I was there given in charge to an
Indian fellow to be taken to the Shawanese towns.

In the place where we were now made to sit down there was a number of squaws
and boys who fell on the five prisoners tomahawked them. There was a certain
John M'Kinley amongst the prisoners, formerly an officer in the 13th, Virginia
regiment, whose head an old squaw cut off, and the Indians kicked it about upon
the ground. The young Indian fellows came often where the Colonel and I were
and dashed the scalps in our faces. We were then conducted along toward the
place where the Colonel was afterward executed: When we came within about half
a mile of the place, Simeon Girty met us, with several Indians on horseback: He
spoke to the Colonel, but as I was about one hundred and fifty yards behind
could not hear what passed between them.

Almost every Indian we met struck us either with sticks or their fists. Girty
waited till I was brought up, and asked was that Doctor? -- I told him, yes,
and went toward him reaching out my hand, but he bid me begone, and called me
a damned rascal; upon which the fellow who had me in charge pulled me along.

Girty rode up after me and told me I was to go to the Shawanese towns.

When we were come to the fire the Colonel was stripped naked, ordered to sit
down by the fire, and then they beat him with sticks and their fists. Presently
after I was treated in the same manner. They then tied a rope to the foot of a
post about fifteen feet high, bound the Colonels hands behind his back and
fastened the rope to the ligature between his wrists.

The rope was long enough either to sit down or walk round the post once or
twice and return the same way. The Colonel then called to Girty and asked if
they intended to burn him? Girty answered yes. The Colonel said he would take
it patiently. Upon this Capt. Pipe a Delaware Chief, made a speech to the
Indians viz. about thirty or forty men, sixty or seventy squaws and boys.

When the speech was finished they all yelled a hedious and hearty assent to
what had been said. The Indian men then took up their guns and shot powder into
the Colonel's body, from his feet as far up as his neck. I think not less than
seventy loads were discharged upon his naked body. They then crowded about him,
and to the best of my observation, cut off his ears: when the throng had
dispersed a little I saw the blood running from both sides of his head in
consequence thereof.

The fire was about six or seven yards from the post to which the Colonel was
tied: it was made of small hickory poles, burnt quite through in the middle,
each end of the poles remaining about six feet in length. Three or four Indians
by turns would take up, individually, one of these burning pieces of wood and
apply it to his naked body, already burned black with powder. These tomentors
presented themselves on every side of him, so that which ever way he ran round
the post they met him with the burning faggots and poles. Some of the squaws
look broad boards upon which they would put a quantity of burning coals and hot
embers, and throw on him, so that in a short time he had nothing but coals of
fire and hot ashes to walk upon. In the midst of these extreme tortures he
called to Simeon Girty and begged of him to shoot him: But Girty making no
answer he called to him again. Girty then by way of derision, told the Colonel
he had no gun, at the same time turning about to an Indian who was behind him,
laughed heartily and by all his gestures seemed delighted at the horrid scene.

Girty then came up to me and bade me prepare for death. He said, however, I
was not to die at that place, but to be burnt at the Shawanese towns. He swore
by G -- d I need not expect to escape death, but should suffer it in all its
extremities.

He then observed that some prisoners had given him to understand that if our
people had him they would not hurt him; for his part, he said, he did not
believe it, but desired to know my opinion of the matter; but being at that
time in great anguish and distress for the torments the Colonel was suffering
before my eyes, as well as the expectation of undergoing the same fate in two
days. I made little or no answer. He expressed a great deal of ill will for
Col. Gibson, and said he was one of his greatest enemies, and more to the same
purpose, to all which I paid very little attention.

Col. Crawford at this period of his sufferings, besought the Almighty to have
mercy on his soul, spoke very low, and bore his torments with the most manly
fortitude. He continued in all the extremities of pain for an hour and three
quarters or two hours longer, as near as I can judge, when at last being almost
spent he lay down on his belly: They then scalped him and repeatedly threw the
scalp in my face, te ling me "that was my great Captain." -- An old squaw
(whose appearance every way answered the ideas people entertain of the devil)
got a ^^ard, took a parcel of coals and ashes and laid them on his back and
head after he had been scalped: He then raised himself upon his feet and began
to walk round the post: They next put a burning stick to him as usual, but he
seemed more insensible of pain than before.

The Indian fellow who had me in charge, now took me away to Capt. Pipe's
house, about three quarters of a mile from the place of the Colonel's
execution. I was bound all night and thus prevented from seeing the last of the
horrid spectacle. Next morning, being June 12th, the Indian untied me, painted
me black, and we set off for the S^^wanese town, which he told me was somewhat
less than forty miles from that place. We soon came to the spot where the
Colonel was burnt (...) was partly in our way; I saw his bones ^^ying amongst
the remains of the fire, almost burnt to ashes, I suppose after he was dead the
had laid his body on the fire.

The Indian told me, that was my Big Captain and gave the scalp halloo. He was
on horseback and drove me before him.

I pretended to this Indian I was ignorant of the death I was to die at the
Shawanese town, affected as cheerful a countenance as possible and asked him if
we were not to live together as brothers in one house when we should get to the
town? He seemed well pleased, and said, yes. He then asked me if I could make a
wigwam? I told him I could -- he then seemed more friendly -- we went that day
as near as I can judge about 25 miles, the course partly south west -- The
Indian told me we should next day come to the town the sun being in such a
direction, pointing nearly south.

At night when we went to rest I attempted very often to unite myself, but the
Indian was Extremely vigilent and scarce ever shut his eyes that night. About
day break he got up and untied me: He next began to mend up the fire, and as
the gnats were troublesome I asked him if I should make a smoke behind him? he
said, yes, I then took the end of a dogwood (...) which had been burnt down to
about eighteen inches in length: It was the longest stick I could find, yet too
small for the purpose I had in view: then I picked up another smaller stick and
taking a coal of fire between them went behind him: then turning suddenly about
I struck him on the head with all the force I was master of; which so stunned
him that he fell forwards with both his hands into the fire, but seeing him
recover and get up, I seized his gun while he ran off howling in a most fearful
manner -- I followed him with a determination to shoot him down, but pulling
back the cock of the gun with great violence I believe I broke the main spring.
I pursued him, however about thirty yards still endeavoring to fire the gun,
but could not; then going back to the fire I took his blanket, a pair of new
mokkisons, his hoppes, powder horn, bullet bag, (together with the gun) and
marched off, directing my course toward the five o'clock mark; about half an
hour before sunset I came to the plains which I think are about sixteen miles
wide. I laid me down in a thicket till dark, and then by the assistance of the
north star made my way through them and got into the woods before morning. I
proceeded on the next day about noon crossed the paths by which our troops had
none out: These paths are nearly east and west but I went due north all that
afternoon with a view to avoid the enemy.

In the evening I began to be very faint, and no wonder; I had been six days a
prisoner; the last two days of which I had eat nothing, and but very little the
first three or four: There were wild gooseberries in abundance in the woods,
but being unripe required mastication, which at that time I was not able to
perform on account of a blow received from an Indian on the jaw with the back
of a tomahawk: There was a weed that grew plentifully in that place, the juice
of which I knew to be grateful and nourishing; I gathered a bundle of the same,
took up my lodging under a large spreading beach tree and having sucked
plentifully of the juice, went to sleep. Next day I made a due east course
which I generally kept the rest of my journey.

I often imagined my gun was only wood bound and tried every method I could
devise to unscrew the lock but never could effect it having no knife nor any
thing sitting for the purpose; I had now the satisfaction to find my jaw began
to mend and in four or five days could chew any vegetable proper for
nourishment, but finding my gun only a useless burden left her in the
wilderness. I had no apparatus for making fire to sleep by so that I could get
but little rest for the gnats and musquetoes; there are likewise a great many
swamps in the beach ridge which occasioned me very often to lie wet: -- This
ridge through which I traveled is about twenty miles broad, the ground in
general very there are, however, very few springs, yet wells might easily be
dug in all parts of that ridge; the timber on it is very lofty, but it is no
easy matter to make a strait course through the same the moss growing as high
upon the south side of the trees as on the north. There are a great many white
oaks, ash and hickory trees that grow among the beach timber; there are
likewise some places on the ridge, perhaps for three or four continued miles
where there is little or no beach, and in such spots, black, white oak, ash,
and hickory abound. Sugar trees grow there also to a very great bulk: The soil
is remarkably good, the ground a little uneven, with some small rivulets and a
few springs. When I got out of the beach ridge and near the river Muskingum the
lands were more broken but equally as rich; abounding with brooks and springs
of water: There are also several small creeks that empty into that river the
bed of which is more than a mile wide in many oaks, walnut, hickory and sugar
trees in the greatest abundance. In all parts of the country through which I
came the game was very plenty, viz. deer, turkies and pheasants. I likewise saw
a great many vestiges of bears and and some elks.

I crossed the river Muskingum about three or four miles below Fort Laurence,
and crossing all the paths aimed for the Ohio river. All his time my food was
gooseberries, young nettles, the juice of herbs, a few service berries, and
some May apples, likewise, two young blackbirds and a turripine which I
devoured raw. When my food sat heavy on my stomach I used to eat a little wild
ginger which put all to rights.

I came upon Ohio river about five miles below Fort M'Intosh in the evening of
the 21st, day after I had made my escape, and on the 22d, about seven o'clock
in the morning, being the 4th, day of July, arrived safe, though very much
fatigued, at the Fort.

A SHORT MEMOIR OF THE WITHIN MENTIONED COL. CRAWFORD.
COL. CRAWFORD, was about 50 years of age, had been an old warrior against the
savages. He distinguished himself early as a volunteer in the last war, and was
taken notice of by Col. (now Gen) Washington, who procured for him the
Commission of Ensign. As a Partisan he showed himself very active, and was
greatly successful: He took several Indian towns, and did great service in
scouting, patrolling and defending the frontiers. At the commencement of this
war he raised a regiment in the back country by his own exertions; He had the
Commission of Col. in the Continental army, and acted bravely on several
occasions in the years '76, '77, and at other times. He held his Commission at
the time he took command of the militia, in the aforesaid expedition against
the Indians; most probably he had it with him when he was taken: He was a man
of good judgment singular good nature, great humanity and remarkable for his
hospitality to strangers; no man therefore could be more regretted than the
worthy and amiable Crawford.


