THE CASE OF ROBERT JAMES, WITH THE Particulars OF HIS TRIAL, OBSERVATIONS, AND
Depositions, TAKEN SINCE.

NEW YORK: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR. 1799.

THE CASE OF ROBERT JAMES.
WHEN a private individual, who has been convicted by the laws of the country,
attempts to intrude his particular concerns upon the notice of the public, it
will be expected that some motive should be assigned to justify his claim to
their attention; how far my case may merit such attention, I must leave to be
determined by the candor and impartial justice of a generous and enlightened
people.

After residing in this city four years, during which time I have experienced
the sweets of friendship, the estimation of many worthy citizens, and the
benefits arising from the Constitution, I humbly submit with all due deference
and respect, it will appear that I have fallen a victim to perjury and
conspiracy, my property brought with me to this country has also been taken
from me without any legal authority whatever.

I have been involuntarily drawn into various suits at law to recover back such
property, part of it taken under executions at the suit of Mrs. Cullen's
creditors by the sheriff, who assured me he was unwilling to do it, as he had
no doubt of its being mine, and refused to execute the process; but those
creditors had indemnified him and insisted upon such proceedings, although Mrs.
Cullen is very considerably indebted to me, and I was under the disagreable
necessity of surrendering her to a prison in order to avoid being fixed as her
bail.

After this, diverse persons in my absence entered my house, and not only took
the remainder of my furniture, but also all my papers, Deeds, Bonds, Bills,
Bank Notes, and articles of great value to me, no longer considering me under
the protection of the law; and in order to justify such measures and obtain my
conviction, diverse reports were circulated respecting my conduct in England,
that were not only injurious to my character, but dangerous to my safety, which
I have reason to believe had great weight with persons in high and respectable
situations, and that it had an influence on the minds of the jury no person who
heard my trial can doubt; and I am very confident that no other man would have
been convicted on such evidence; and although my property was taken without any
legal authority, my council informs me I have no other mode of recovering it;
but by actions at law, and cannot proceed without giving security for costs,
therefore the parties feel themselves confident of retaining it for ever. No
attempts were made to take such property until after the present charge. I am
confident that no man ever was tried under such a load of prejudice, unmerried
difficulties, and embarrasments, although I had contracted no debts, and my
character for four years had stood unimpeached, and at my trial there was no
attempt to impeach it from any matter that had ever happened in this country;
but in order to fix a prejudice on the minds of the jury, it will appear from
the evidence hereafter stated, an attempt was made to impeach my general
character in England by three persons, one of them was proved perjured, as will
also appear by the evidence.

I am ready to admit that I have had my failings in common with other men, and
in a greater degree than many; but I have not merited this prosecution, nor the
unjust proceedings and reports which have been taken and so industriously
circulated against me, either by my conduct in this or any country; and I
humbly submit that the calling of witnesses to impeach my general character in
England, by general reports, from which it is impossible for any man to justify
himself, was improper, and is contrary to the established rules of evidence; in
proof of which I shall take the liberty of mentioning one of the greatest law
authorities that any country ever produced, (Lord Mansfield's) viz. That in all
cases the general characters of witnesses are material and may be impeached,
but the character of the Defendant upon his trial shall not be impeached though
he may call witnesses in support of it. The jury are sworn to try the matter in
question and are to do justice to all men alike, therefore if a defendant is
known to be a bad character the jury ought to be very cautious not to receive
an unfavourable impression to prejudice their minds against him by any matter
but that before the court; and the rules of law appear to be the same in this
country founded upon the laws and practice of the courts in England, but the
rules of evidence I conceive must be unsettled from the following circumstance:
-- Upon my Trial, Coats was a witness for the prosecution, but my council
insisted that he was not a competent witness, being called to prove that though
he accepted the bill he did not believe there was such a person as the drawer,
which in fact was to controvert the instrument he had signed. The honorable
judges on the bench were Lewis, Benson, and Kent; judges Benson and Kent were
of opinion he was competent and judge Benson observed that he thought all
witnesses competent, on the part of the people, but that their credibility
should be strictly attended to; Judge Lewis differed from them, and was of
opinion he was not competent; but as the other judges were of a contrary
opinion he must be examined. Before my trial I had applied to know the names of
the witnesses against me, which was refused; therefore I applied to the court
for them to be examined separate and apart, out of the hearing of each other;
but to my great surprise the attorney general would not consent to this, and
the court refused to order it, although I submit it is the only mode of
detecting improper evidence, which I was confident must be intended, being
conscious of my own innocence; this is never objected to in the courts of
England; and upon a common assault tried in this city before the honorable Mr.
Harrison, the recorder, it was ordered at the instance of the defendant, and
upon the assistant attorney general, saying it was a very unusual request. The
learned ^ecorder replied, "He should always think it his duty to order it when
required;" the refusal was a very great and singular hardship, as I had no
knowledge of who were to be the witnesses nor what was intended to be sworn
against me; had such request been complied with, I have every reason to believe
there would have been much greater contradictions in the evidence which I shall
state, and leave it to be determined how far they were entitled to credit under
all the circumstances, and whether the witnesses to impeach my general
character in England were entitled to greater credit than those witnesses of
known honor and respectab^^ity, who proved they had known me from my first
arrival in this country, to have always lived in affluence, not distressed in
my circumstances, but always appeared to have money at command to assist my
friends and had often assisted them, (not as a broker) -- and here I must beg
leave to observe that I then had many friends, because I was in affluence,
without troubles or in wants of assistance. But in my present unhappy situation
I have no friend nor can I reasonably expect it, when I reflect upon human
nature, and the undue means made use of to injure my character; my property
taken from me, shut up within the walls of a prison from all society, to linger
under an ignominious judgment. In such a situation who can I look up to as a
friend, or how can I appeal to those laws for redress which I have been found
guilty of violating? yet as it has pleased Almighty God to spare my Life, and
raise me as it were from the grave, when my spirits were so much depressed, and
my health impaired by such conviction, that I neither wished for, or expected
it. I feel it a duty I owe not only to myself, my family, and former
connections, but to the people at large, to show by what means I have been
convic^^, and to use my endeavors by every just and legal means in my power,
to wipe off the stigma which otherwise would be entailed upon me and my family
for ever, and if possible to obtain a further enquiry, when I am confident that
not only my innocence would be made manifest, but that I have been convicted by
conspiracy and perjury; not that I mean by such appeal to impeach the justice
of the court or jury by whom I was tried, nor any reflection upon the honorable
gentleman who conducted the prosecution, which is far from my intention, but
with all due deference and respect. I have down with the greatest submission,
in hopes of proving they have been deceived and imposed upon: nor is it my
intention to make any further comments on the characters of the witnesses than
what arises from the nature of their testimony, convinced that however bad
their characters may appear, it would be no justification of my own, and shall
here take the liberty of stating the words of the honorable judge Lewis, viz.
That he could not reconcile the evidence of Coats and Smith, unless under an
idea that I must have thought it no crime the putting a fictitious name to a
bill of exchange. But at the time he passed sentence, upon my asserting my
innocence, and that I was convicted by perjury, that the evidence of Coats and
Smith upon whose testimony I was convicted was false in every respect, he
replied that he could see no reason for their swearing false to convict me, but
if I could manifest my innocence, the governor would pardon me I trust that the
reasons for their swearing false, and motives for wishing to convict me, will
hereafter fully appear, and also that I had no interest or concern whatever in
the forging or negociating the bill, or to receive any profit or advantage from
it; I had not passed or indorsed the bill, yet was called upon to prove who was
the drawer upon Mr. Coats, and who indorsed it to Mrs. Cullen, she was the
only person to prove by what means she became possessed of the bill, therefore
I called her as a witness, the attorney general objected to her being examined,
as she also was indicted, but has since been tried and acquitted; if I had not
been thus deprived of her testimony I could have proved all that was required,
which appears by her deposition made since my trial, and I feel confident that
under all the circumstances, upon duly considering the testimony of Coats and
Smith, it appears so improbable that it will not obtain credit; those who know
me never could believe them, unless they supposed me entirely deprived of my
senses; my council and Mrs. Cullen's also, pressed for her trial to come on
first, which was objected to; bysuch means any innocent person may be convicted
where such witnesses are concerned; it is only to indict the party who can
prove his innocence and not permit them to be tried first. In England, upon
several persons being included all in one indictment where the prosecutor could
only make out a case against part, those affected called for an acquittal of
the others before they entered upon their defense in order to have the benefit
of their testimony, which was ordered; this was upon an indictment for a
conspiracy, and I submit the law is the same in every other case, and would be
dangerous to establish a contrary doctrine. I shall proceed to state all the
evidence in substance and effect given upon my trial, to the best of my
judgment with candor and impartiality; and although I do not conceive my
character in England ought to have any connection with this business, I shall
relate the circumstances upon which my enemies grounded such reports to obtain
my ruin, and do most solemnly declare in the presence of Almighty God, and
those to whom this case will be submitted, that truth and candor shall be my
guide through the whole of this statement, and as my abilities are very unequal
to direct my pen with that energy I wish, particularly in my present situation,
without advice or assistance, I shall not attempt to embellish either my case
or my conduct through life, which in some instances have been exceptionable,
but I trust not such as would induce such uncharitable conclusion, or that I
could never after become a good member of society. I shall lay myself open and
submit to the justice, discernment and liberal sentiments of an enlightened
people, and shall mention the places of abode of the witnesses for such enquiry
as may be thought proper, that it may be judged how far under all the
circumstances they deserve credit, and under a conviction so obtained, whether
the rigid rules of law render it necessary that I should remain shut up in a
prison, without further enquiry, from all society, to linger out the remainder
of my days in ignominy and disgrace.

N. B. It has been reported that I was an attorney in England, but I never was.
My wife's father was a master in chancery, and I became some little acquainted
with the law and practice of the courts.

The Judges on the Bench were, LEWIS, BENSON AND KENT.

The indictment was for forging and uttering a Bill of Exchange, with intent to
defraud John Coats, also with intent to defraud Christopher Irvin.

The bill of exchange being produced, was nearly in the words and figures
following:

Philadelphia, October 3, 1797. SIR,
Forty days after date pay to Mr. John Wicks or order, two hundred dollars for
value received, and place it to the account of

SIR, Your humble servant, THOMAS SMITH.
Indorsed, by JOHN WICKS, E. CULLEN.
Accepted, JOHN COATS.

To Mr. John Coats, merchant, Pearl-Street, New York.
John Coats being called as a witness, was objected to by defendant's council,
as not being a competent witness; but after very long arguments, Judges Benson
and Kent were of opinion he was competent, Judge Lewis was of a different
opinion, but that he must be examined agreeable to the opinion of the other
Judges.

The defendant then applied to the court for the witnesses to be examined
separate and apart, out of the hearing of each other, -- this was refused.

JOHN COATS, a prisoner for debt at defendant's suit.
That about the month of October, Mr. James asked him to accept two bills which
he wanted to settle some debts of Mrs. Cullen's -- that he did not like to
accept them, but James said he would take care of them -- that they were drawn
by a friend of his at Philadelphia -- that he accepted them but did not observe
by whom they were drawn -- that he did not know the drawer; the bill produced
was one of them, the other was for 250 dollars -- that he was afterward uneasy
about it, and requested Mr. Smith, a friend of his, to call with him upon
James, as he had frequently desired James to inform him who was the drawer and
indorser, but he put him off, saying they were friends of his and he would take
care of them -- that Smith called with him at James's house, he was very civil,
and produced the bill for 250 dollars and tore off the acceptance and gave it
him, said he would get the other, but the holder was out of town -- that he
then desired to know who was the drawer and indorser; James laughed, and said
it would be difficult to find them -- the bills were both the same hand
writing, drawn and indorsed the same, except the sum which was for 250 dollars
-- that his first knowledge of James was taking out a warrant against him for
six shillings, after that James lent him 100 dollars for a friend of his, which
he paid him and offered to pay for the use, which he would not take, but said
you may some time or another serve me -- that he was first induced to believe
the bill forged, as they appeared to be wrote with ink of the same color as his
acceptance, which he wrote in James's parlor -- said the bill was drawn and
indorsed with ink the same color as his acceptance, was sure it appeared so by
the bill (which was then produced, and upon examination appeared all different
inks and hand writings) -- that he never said he would hang James or that he
wished to see him hanged -- that he did not a short time before the trial take
James by the arm and request him to be friends and bare no malice -- that no
such thing ever passed -- never begged to be friends -- admitted he was bail
about the month of October and justified, and that James prevented his having
the three-fourth act, and had arrested him upon the note produced, (which was
for 100 dollars, on Robert Charnley, indorsed by Coats, Smith and Daniels,
with Smith's name struck through with a pen) -- that he purchased hats of
James, and gave him a note on Mr. Smith for 24 dollars at 90 days -- admitted
the note (which was produced, both bills passed due and unpaid) -- admitted he
had not put them in his schedule to take the benefit of the act, nor the forged
bill in question, but admitted he was liable for it -- said that as he and
Smith were going home from James's, Smith told him that James acknowledged he
drew the bills himself.

JAMES SMITH, a hackney coachman and tavern-keeper, Vanderwater-Street,
Pearl-Street; his real name is ARROWSMITH, wa^ sued by defendant.
That Mr. Coats informed him he had accepted two bills for James and was
afraid he should be in trouble -- that he blamed him -- would not go with him
unless he promised to have no words -- ^e went with him to James's house at his
request, desired him to ^ake notice of what passed. Coats asked James about
the bills, who was the drawer and indorser; Coats was angry but James laughed,
and said it would be difficult to find them, for he w^ote them himself, and
thought it a very good trick, but he pro^ced one of the bills and burnt it;
that was for 250 dollars, in every respect the same as the one produced, dated,
drawn and indorsed the same. James was a man of address, a sensible man (being
asked by James's council if he was not a cunning man,) he said that he was a
very cunning man -- the note for 24 dollars being produced, admitted he gave it
for some hats Coats bought of James, that he sued him for it, and that Daniels
was bound for him; recollected the bill for 100 dollars (with the name struck
through,) said that Mr. James was always very civil to him and had often
invited him to drink wine at his house, had often called and drank wine with
him.

CHRISTOPHER IRVIN.
That he received the bill of Mrs. Cullen for payment, of some goods she had of
him some months before, that he paid her the balance (about 50 dollars) -- that
she informed him the bill was good, and he told her he would take it upon her
knowledge of the parties; she did not indorse it until some days after she was
applied to for that purpose -- that he believed James informed his attorney
where to find Coats -- that he saw James at the hall when the witness was
attending to go before the alderman, who told him if he called on Mrs. Cullen,
believed she would settle that bill -- that he answered it is a very odd
business from the account Coats gives of it. James answered I know nothing of
it.

Mr. HYSLOP, merchant, New York.
That Mrs. Cullen paid him a bill drawn, accepted and indorsed the same as the
one produced, that the sum was 255 dollars that she was indebted to him, and he
gave her a note for the balance (about 50 dollars) -- that he did not much like
the bill, therefore made his note payable when that bill was paid -- that Mrs.
Cullen afterward informed him she could not pass his note, not being made
negociable, and desired to have the bill back as she had a friend would give
her the cash for that; he informed her he could find no such person as the
drawer and did not much like it, but she said it was a good bill; he returned
it and she returned his note.

The witnesses were now called for the defendant.

ROBERT STEWART, Esquire merchant, New York.
That he knew the witness Coats -- that he was a character below mediocrity --
not a good character -- would not believe him on his oath.

Mrs. TILLY.
That Coats was her tenant -- had used her very ill -- was a very bad
character -- removed without paying his rent -- would not believe him on his
oath.

JOHN BORRIS, the keeper of Symonds's tavern, Wall-Street
That he was present at the debtor's prison when James was going out, having
been to see Mrs. Cullen; Coats was a prisoner and took James by the arm,
requested he would shake hands with him and be friends, and bare no malice for
what had passed, James pulled his arm away, would not speak to him; when he was
gone Coats swore he would hang the villain -- often heard him swear he would
hang James if he could -- that he was a damned villain -- ought to have been
hanged 20 years ago -- That he kept him in prison and prevented his taking the
benefit of the act -- that he would not take Coates's oath for twopence --
that he informed James of Coates's threats.

JAMES REYNOLDS, Dr. WILLIAM BARTLETT, JOSEPH GEORGE.
That the witnesses often heard Coats swear he would hang James, and say he
was a damned villain -- ought to have been hanged 20 years ago -- would hang
him if he could -- that he had prevented his taking the benefit of the act.

The witness Reynolds. -- That he was present when Coats was ordered to be put
into the dungeon -- that he damned and blasted the Sheriff, and all his people,
all the judges and courts in the country -- and that he did not care a damn for
any of them.

MARY POTTER, late servant to Mrs. Cullen, sent for from Trenton.
That she was present when Mrs. Cullen received a letter with two bills from
Philadelphia, sent her by Wicks -- that she knew Mr. Wicks, who was at Mrs.
Cullen's about 14 months ago, and purchased goods of her -- was sure he was in
her debt. -- Upon cross-examination she was so confused, never being examined
as a witness before, that her testimony was of no service.

ELIZABETH POTTER, JANE ANDERSON.
That the witnesses knew Mr. Wicks, he was at Mrs. Cullen's about 14 months ago
-- the witness Potter recollecting his purchasing goods of Mrs. Cullen -- had
reason to believe he was in her debt -- did not board with her.

JAMES MAITLAND, Esquire merchant, New York, SAMUEL FORBUS, Gent. New York.
That they had known James from his first arrival in this country -- lived in
the same house with him -- had reason to believe him a man of property -- was
always ready to lend money, had often lent to them, and knew of his frequently
lending to other friends -- lived in affluence as a gentleman -- kept a good
horse and had a house well furnished -- had no reason to believe him distressed
-- did not act as a broker, but appearep to lend his own money -- Mr. Maitland
said that he knew the women who had been examined -- that they lived in the
same house with him -- believed them very good characters, always believed them
very good girls, never heard any person say any thing against them.

EDWARD BUTMAN, stable keeper.
That James's horse had stood in his stable upwards of one year -- was one of
the best horses in the city, worth five hundred dollars -- remembered his
buying him and that he purchased another horse at the same time, which he
afterward parted with, after that he purchased a chair and wanted to purchase
another horse -- well knew that he paid for them all -- appeared as a gentleman
-- always ready to pay for every thing -- often paid him before it was due, and
had lent him money several times -- offered a little while ago to lend him five
hundred dollars, having mentioned the want of not being able to collect money
-- that the horse was then in his stable and the property of Mr. James, who had
a house well furnished -- always appeared and behaved as a gentleman in every
respect.

WILLIAM L. ROSE, Esquire attorney, New York, noted the bill for Mr. IRVIN.
That when he noted the bill, he saw James, who advised him to arrest Coats,
as the only means of getting the bill paid, as Mrs. Cullen was unable to pay --
promised if he heard of Coats to let him know -- that some time after James
called at his office and informed him Coats was in town, to be found at
Smith's, and advised his being arrested -- that he was at Smith's, the bill was
put in his hands by Mr. Irvin, for the purpose of suing Coats -- is not
certain whether he sued out a writ against him or not.

Witnesses were new called to impeach defendant's character.

DAVID JOHN DANIELS, keeps a tavern, New-Slip, near the (...) real name JOHN
JENKINS.
T(...)es in England -- that he was a man that bore a b(...) was then asked
whether he never went by at (...)ers) -- that he never went by any other
(...)nd -- never went by the name of Jenkins -- his (...) Jenkins, but Daniels.

-- NOT, -- TOMLINSON, keeper of the Circus Coffee House.

That they knew James in England -- his general character was bad -- Not
stated that he used to bring quitam actions against Lottery Office keepers.

-- COSTER, Esquire merchant, Pearl-Street.
That he knew the witness Daniels -- that his name was Jenkins -- that was his
name in England -- had no doubt but was positive he always went by the name of
John Jenkins -- was a very bad character -- would not believe him on his oath.

JAMES CARRUTHERS, from London.
That he well knew the witness Daniels in London -- that he kept a public house
in Fleet-Lane, within the rules of the Fleet Prison, where he (the witness) had
the misfortune to be a prisoner and often went to his house -- that his name
was John Jenkins -- he never went by any other name than Jenkins in London --
his name was over his door -- positively not mistaken -- was acquainted with
him, and never knew him by any other name than John Jenkins.

There were several witnesses now called in support of Coates's character, but
I have not their names, they had known him and had dealings with him, that he
behaved honestly to them and knew nothing against him.

Having stated the substance and effect of all the evidence given on the trial,
with all due deference I beg leave to submit the following observations, to
show the improbability of the testimony of John Coats and James Smith, and of
my committing the offense.

It will be readily admitted there are few men will ever commit a bad act,
particularly when attended with such penal consequences, without some prospect
of advantage, and here could be none to me, and to Mrs. Cullen would have been
the height of injustice and cruelty, without any assistance except delaying
the payment of two hundred dollars for forty days, and then subject her not
only to be sued but to an indictment, when it was proved beyond all doubt that
I had it in my power to assist her with cash if I thought proper; but suppose I
had wished her to negociate such bills, for a dollar I might have procured half
a dozen names that would have done as well as fictitious ones, and then the law
could not have affected her or me. But suppose me capable of such cruelty,
injustice, and folly, can it be believed that I should have been so great an
idiot as to acknowledge it to Coats, the very person it was intended to
deceive, and in the presence of his friend Smith, when there could be no
evidence against me; therefore to answer no other purpose than to expose
myself, and after this, go and inform Mr. Rose where to find him, and
recommended that gentleman to arrest him for payment of the bill I had
acknowledged to have forged and promised to take care of; surely this cannot be
believed of a man of great address, and very cunning man as Smith proved me; or
that such a man would make him his companion and confident, and often invite
him to drink wine at his house. I will do Mr. Smith the justice to say that his
person, address and appearance is not likely to deceive or subject him to the
confidence or acquaintance of any man who wishes to support either character,
credit, or a genteel appearance; every person is respectable that performs the
duties of his situation; but such a man as Mr. Smith (I shall only say a
hackney coachman) would feel very awkward to be made the companion and
confident of such person as he described me. I am confident the observation
must be very striking to those who know us. But if this was the case why should
I ^ue Mr. Smith for only twenty four dollars, after I was charged with this
forgery? He did not give evidence to obtain the warrant nor in any manner
appeared in the business until the morning of trial: surely if I had made such
confession in his presence, I must have known it, and having entrusted him with
a secret of so much importance, should have continued him my friend and
companion; and it was clearly proved that I had it in my power to be friends
with Mr. Coats a short time before my trial. Mr. Borris proved, and many other
respectable witnesses can prove, that, Coats took me by the arm and begged I
would shake hands and be friends, and bare no malice for what had passed; he
well knew the effect this must have had on the minds of the jury, and on being
asked the question, positively denied it, also denied that he ever damned me
for preventing his taking the benefit of the three fourth act, or for keeping
him in prison, or said that he would hang me if he could, all which I can prove
by at least six witnesses. However, Mr. Borris proved sufficient to show that I
might have made friends with him before the trial. It would have been a
fortunate circumstance for me if I had been guilty, in which case I should have
made friends with Coats, and then Smith would never have been heard of as a
witness; but confident of my innocence I spurned at his attempt to shake hands,
and not only continued him in prison but prevented his taking the benefit of
the three fourth act, for which Mr. Smith was his petitioning creditor, for
near three hundred pounds, yet could not pay me a note of twenty four dollars,
but after judgment against him, procured his friend David John Daniels to be
bail for his g^tting the forty days which the act allows upon security to men
unable to pay; when I attended and prevented Coats having the benefit of the
act I declared in the presence of Peter Jay Munro, Esquire who also attended to
opp^^e him, that I would ever prevent his taking the benefit of that act, as it
appeared by his schedule delivered in upon oath that he had been insolvent
upwards of two years, owed three thousand pounds, and had not a shilling to
give up to his creditors, although only a few months before he had been bail in
a great number of actions and justified himself worth large sums of money after
payment of all his debts. Mr. Munro also knows the degree of credit due to the
testimony of him and Smith, as he calls himself, but whose real name is
Arrowsmith, which can be proved by Arthur C. Beaumont, Esquire and by the bail
prises in that name. Colonel Moreton and the justices of the ten pound court,
well knew Smith's real name, at least what he used to go by, and the degree of
credit due to him, Coats, and their friend David John Daniels.

Since I have been convicted, Colonel Moreton had the goodness to inform me he
well knew them, and would not take their oaths for a penny. But they have taken
a very effectual means of preventing my giving them any further opposition, or
proceeding to recover my property. I submit that such circumstances, and what
will hereafter appear, involves great suspicion on the testimony of such men,
particularly as Coats proves himself not only implicated, but the principal in
the crime he has fixed on me: He accepts bills drawn upon him in the name of
Thomas Smith, and upon being pressed for payment, he insist upon it there is no
such person as the drawer, and six months after they are due goes before a
magistrate and depose that he accepted the bill in question for me, and he
suspected there was no such person as Thomas Smith the drawer. But finding that
he could not frighten me by such step, and that such evidence would not be
sufficient to convict me, he brings forward his friend Smith at the trial, and
they prove, not suspect, but that I acknowledged the bills drawn by me, and
that there was no such person as either the drawer or indorser. And also that a
bill for two hundred and fifty dollars, Coats said I tore off his acceptance
and gave him, but Smith stated the bill was burnt; Smith also proved that I
acknowledged writing the bill myself, Coats only that Smith told him I said
so. But what could induce them both to make a mistake in the amount of the bill
destroyed, yet both agreed in such mistake, viz. that the sum was 250 dollars.
Mr. Hyslop, a merchant of respectability, proved that he was in possession of
the bill for some days, and the sum was 255 dollars; his surely is a strong
circumstance to induce a belief they had agreed upon the testimony they were to
give, though they differed in some respects. Coats in his evidence states, his
first acquaintance with me, was taking out a warrant against me for six
shillings, (which is the truth, as will be hereafter explained.) This is a
pretty strong reason for believing he would not rely uopn the honor of such a
man, who would not pay six shillings without a warrant; yet after this accepts
two bills for 450 dollars without any receipt, or undertaking to show, though
he had no knowledge of the drawer -- did not believe there was any such person;
by what means was he to recover the money from me, supposing he had paid the
bills. My confession in the presence of Smith is stated to have been long after
such acceptance, but my saying I would provide for them was sufficient, yet had
before proved I had not the honor to pay six shillings. Can any man believe
such evidence? But it is said why don't I bring forward the drawer, whom I
never knew or heard of, and whether there is such a man in existence or not I
cannot tell; the indors^r I have seen, but never had any acquaintance or
connections with him. The accepter of a bill is presumed to know the drawer,
and the person who pass a bill is presumed to know from whom they received it,
which appears by the last indorsement; but will the law permit the accepter of
a bill to prove the drawer upon whom he please? If this is law no man is safe,
and opens a very wide field for fraud. What man after my conviction would
endeavor to compel the payment of a bill, or resist the vile proceedings of
such men. I who never had the least concern with the bill am called upon to
prove who drew it upon Coats, and also who passed it to Mrs. Cullen, who I was
not permitted to call upon as a witness, because they had thought proper to
indict her also, or she would have proved who she received it from, and for
whom Mr. Coats accepted it. Mrs. Cullen's servants proved that Wicks the
indorser was indebted to her, and she has since mentioned a circumstance which
puts that matter past all doubt. In the month of January, 1798, ^he delivered
upon oath a schedule of all her estate and effects, ^^ich is in the recorder's
office; by which it appears that Wicks, (...)ndorser of the bill, was indebted
to her 500 dollars at that time and the charge of forgery was never heard of
until the month of April following. My council (General Hamilton.) desired Mrs.
Cullen's trial to be brought on first, which was her request (...); but the
Attorney General answered, "gentlemen, I know (...) you are at, but James must
be tried first." The learned gen(...) desired he would not suppose them at any
thing but what app^ed and said there was the appearance of great prejudice,
wh(...) did not like. And I must here beg leave to observe, at the (...) when I
applied to the honorable gentleman to be my council, (...) informed me, that if
it appeared on the otrial I was guilty, (...)as the most improper person I
could emply, for in such case (...) would say nothing for me, which I readily
consented to, and great satisfaction when I reflect upon his great exertions in
my behalf; to mention his abilities, philanthropy, and benevolence, (...)
unnecessary, they are universally known to far surpass the panegyric of the
most able writer; therefore I shall only say I feel (...)teful sense of the
obligations I am under, for his great and disinterested exertions, and humane
attention and offers of service since my trial. I hope the Attorney General
will also pardon me for mentioning another circumstance, as it entitles me to a
very pointed observation: -- Only two or three days before he presented the
indictment against me, he assured me and my council, Mr. Riker, that there was
no prosecution intended against me, there was no evidence to affect me, and
told me he should not have been surprised if the recorder had discharged me
upon my own recogniza^ce. (...) said he should present an indictment against
Mrs. Cullen; I informed him that if he did my evidence would acquit her, for I
knew Wicks the indorser, and ^as much surprised that he did not think it more
proper to ind^ct Coats, who from his own affidavit before the magistrate
appeared to be the principal, by accepting a bill that was false, which was
uttering it, and without such acceptance no other person could have passed it.
I was in court when the bill of indictment was presented against me, and
informed Mr. Riker, who assured me I must be mistaken, for the Attorney General
was incapable of such deception. I mean no imputation upon that honorable
gentleman, who I also believe is incapable of endeavoring to entrap or deceive
any man; but it warrants this inference, that he was not then acquainted with
Smith's evidence, knew of no other than what appeared by the depositions before
the magistrate on which the warrant was obtained. I have strong reasons for
believing the bills drawn for the purpose of imposing on Mrs. Cullen, by the
contrivance of Coats and Wicks, to get more goods from her. If I had
acknowledged forging this bill and promised to pay it, why did Coats and Smith
apply to me five months after, to purchase some hats, which they heard I had
(...) dispose of, and at length they prevailed on me to sell Coats w(...) came
to twenty four dollars. I would not sell them on his (...) credit; therefore
this proves my opinion of him, and on ^eir joint credit only for twenty four
dollars, so as to recover i(...)e ten pound court: Smith's note was given for
payment at ni^^^y days, which I sued him for in the ten pound court, and
(...)en I had judgment, made oath of danger, which compelled hi(...) to give
security for payment at forty days. He then three(...)ed revenge, but little did
I expect he meant thus to revenge himself. Daniels became his security, this
was only a short time before my trial, but it is probable they would have given
such note if I was to provide cash to take up the forged bill. I ^^all now
explain the circumstance of the warrant, and how C^^tes afterward became
indebted to me: he had a power of a^^orney to collect debts of Robert
Cha^ley's, and applied to ^e for three dollars and a quarter; there was six
shillings charged for an oil-skin for my hat which I had paid; this I informed
him, and on the following day he called, said it was a mistake of Mr.
Charnley's. I paid him two dollars and a half, he gave me a receipt in full,
and the next day or two, sent a constable with a warrant for six shillings
more, which I paid the constable rather than go over to the justices upon such
a ^^illing matter -- Some months after this he called upon me, to inform me Mr.
Charnley was in great distress, all his goods at Newark had been attached by
the Sheriff to the amount of five hundred dollars for about seventy, which if I
would advance should all be placed in my hands as a security. At this time I
had a note of Charnley's passed due and unpaid; with a view of securing this
note to be paid, I consented, and went to Newark and paid the money, on Mrs.
Charnley's promise (her husband being absent) that all the property should be
sent to my house; but she afterward informed the Coats took care she should
not perform her promise, and had not only kept all the goods but her clothes
likewise; this is all I ever had to do with Coats except selling him the hats,
for which I had Smith's note indorsed by him.

I shall now state how I came by the note on Charnley, which was indorsed by
Coats, Smith and David John Daniels, to whom I gave the cash -- Daniels I had
known in England by the name of John Jenkins, and he was acquainted with a
circumstance there I wished not to be known in this country, fearful of being
censured (which I had ever been careful to avoid) by those not acquainted with
the particulars, which I shall hereafter state. He applied to me in great
distress, just discharged from New York gaol, and requested I would give him
cash for that note which was at thirty days; I gave him the cash, and when it
became due he brought me another exactly the same, but at sixty days, which I
received, and gave him the other; I also lent him twenty five dollars to
purchase some cloth to make me some clothes, as he is a tailor, but he thought
proper to keep the money. When this note became due, not being paid, which was
the 29th of October 1797, (three weeks after the date of the forged bill) I
gave it to Arthur C. Beaumont, Esquire attorney in this city, and desired hi^ to
give Notice to the Indorsers of the Non-payment, which he did, except to
Coatcs, who had absconded; I threatened to sue Smith, when he called upon me,
which I believe was the first time I ever saw him, and assured me that the
indorsement was not his hard writing, that Daniels had forged it; this I
communicated to Mr. Beaumont, who informed me they were a bad set, that his
name was Arrowsmith, but assured me Smith did not deny it is being his writing
when he gave him notice of the non-payment; rather than have any words with
such people, I consented to strike his name off upon Daniel's paying me the
twenty five dollars he owed me, and on his promise to pay the bill soon, which
he acknowledged was not Smith's writing, that Smith's wife wrote it; this is
the note I sued Coats for. -- Another (...) cumstance will prove my opinion of
Coats. A few days before the time, he pretends to have accepted the forged
bills for me. William T. Broom, Esquire Attorney at Law in this city, informed me
that Daniels had applied to him to accept Coats as Bail for a man he had
arrested, stated him to be a good man and that I knew him; I informed Mr. Broom
that I was surprised he should mention my name, as I assured him that I knew
very little of him, and what I did know was not much in his favor; advised him
not to take him; as I would not. Surely this had not the appearance of my
wishing to raise money or pass bills on Coate's credit, in which case I should
certainly have given him a good character. It will appear upon enquiry, that
Coats, Smith and Daniels, were common hired bail, and bail for each other
whenever arrested. Coats was bail for Mrs. Cullen, for which she has since
informed me he extorted money from her, and imposed upon her these bills I have
no doubt. As to David John Daniels, whose name is John Jenkins, as will appear
by the evidence of Mr. Coster, merchant, Pearl-Street, made his escape from the
Fleet Prison in London, about three years ago, and came over to this country in
the name of Daniels, as a servant to Mr. John Watson, a prisoner in the State
Prison, who was arrested soon after his arrival in this country for a large sum
of money; when Daniels presented himself before the judge as bail, and offered
(and I believe did) to swear himself worth ten thousand pounds or thereabouts;
but Mr. Coster, who was the agent employed against Watson, attended, and proved
all I have mentioned, and can prove much more; upon which he was rejected.
Daniels not being able to get any more money from me, and my refusing to
countenance several very dishonorable matters which he proposed, began to be
very troublesome, until at length I forbid him my house. He then distributed
diverse inflamatory papers, which he stuck up at my house and several other
places, for which I sued out a writ against him in the mayor's court, and upon
my trial had the consummate impudence to appear as a witness to impeach my
character in England, although he had some time before informed Judge Pendleton
as I was riding past, that he knew me in England, was a very respectable man
there, of great property. -- It fully appears from the evidence of Mr. Borris,
that he informed me of Coate's threats a short time before my trial, at which
time I was at full liberty, and must have known of my acknowledgements to him
and his friend Smith if I had ever made them. Surely this was sufficient to
alarm a guilty man, and send him from a place where he had no particular
business to call his attention and attendance; no family connection whatever.
But if my own safety was so very indiffererent; wi(...) believed also that I
could be so cruel to Mrs. Cullen, with (...) fatherless children, to surrender
her to prison that she also might be indicted, when I had it in my power, not
only to go myself but send her away also, and not only refuse to be friends
with men capable of doing us so much injury, but proceed to irritate them by
every means in my power; all this must be reconciled as the conduct of a man of
address, a very cunning man, to induce a belief of my guilt. I feel for that
poor woman and her children, more than myself, for sending her to prison where
she yet remains for debt, and has been sued for the very bill I am found guilty
of forging; many attempts were made use of to induce her to believe I had ill
treated her, and to swear false against me; but not with standing her
sufferings, which she might have avoided by such means, she resisted the
attempt with indignation, and has made an affidavit of all the facts which
hereafter appears; at the time the indictment was found, on being taken into
court, I requested to be tried immediately, which the Attorney General
declined, but upon my consulting with council, though they assured me there was
no danger, recommended me to send to Trenton for the servant, who knew of Mrs.
Cullen's receiving the bill in a letter from Wicks, as they heard it was
intended to prove the bill my hand writing; but Mr. Riker, who is well
acquainted with my hand writing, obtained a sight of the bill, and assured me
it had no resemblance of my writing, but he heard Coats was to prove it,
therefore recommended my having such persons in court as knew my writing, and
also to the character of Coats, to those points only my witnesses were
subpoenaed. At the trial this was not attempted, but Coats stated, that his
inducement for believing the bills forged, was in consequence of their being
wrote with ink all of the same color as his acceptance, which he wrote in my
parlor; being asked more particularly whether he meant the bill produced, he
answered yes, that the drawing, and indorsements, appeared wrote all with ink
of the same color as his acceptance, but the bill being produced proved this
to be false; the acceptance, drawing, and indorsement, were all different
colored ink, and hand writings, this is a clear proof of perjury, without any
evidence whatever. Another circumstance will prove him perjured without the
assistance of evidence; his schedule delivered upon oath in or about the month
of April last, proves him to have been insolvent for two years before. His
affidavits made in the Mayor's Court from the month of July 1797, to January
1798, states himself worth double the sums after paying all his debts, for
which he then became bail; therefore I trust no person can believe him, or his
friends Smith and Daniels worthy of credit. I submit that I have not only
proved this, and their being all connected to ruin me, but also that they
actually committed perjury to convict me; without any allusion to those
matters, which renders their testimony so extremely improbable, that it is
utterly impossible to believe their evidence; I also submit that I have clearly
shown their motives and interests in my conviction, and for their circulating
such false and wicked reports to injure me; but for such reports I am ready to
believe (what is so commonly spoken of and believed,) that no other man would
have been convicted upon such evidence, nor would any such attempt have been
made on any other man; my character being destroyed, was a sufficient ground
work for my ruin, a bad man is supposed capable of every thing, however
improbable; the circumstance that gave weight to such impeachment of my
character, is as follows: In the year 1790 a friend of mine, a debtor in the
Fleet Prison, London, upon some trifling dispute with the keeper, was put into
a damp dungeon; being a bad constitution, he sent for his doctor, who assured
the keeper that if he was continued there it would cause his death, he refused
to release him; I obtained order of Lord Loughborough to release him, who was
then chief justice of the common plea, but having been kept seventeen days in
such confinement, he lingered for about a month and died; upon his death he
requested me to bring forward a prosecution for the good of others, which was
done by subscription. I was very active in it though not a witness, and
presented an indictment against the keeper for murder, which was found a true
bill, but one of the principal witnesses being taken very ill, and the court
refusing to put off the trial, he was acquitted, and then the keeper indicted
me, the doctor of the deceased, and several other persons for a conspiracy: he
also indicted me and several others for effecting the escape of a prisoner;
upon the first indictment we were tried and acquitted, after the examination of
all the keeper's witnesses, without being called upon for a defense, which I
begged the court would enter upon, assuring them I was then prepared to prove
the murder, but this was refused; I was discharged from the other indictment
upon my own recognizance, but was afterward tried and convicted, upon an
affidavit being read supposed to be made by the prisoners who escaped, which
was afterward proved to be false and forged; the keeper was therefore
discharged from employment, and I received his Majesty's most gracious pardon.

At this time Daniels, in the name of Jenkins, was the keeper of the Tap at
Newgate. This prosecution against the keeper caused me a number of very
powerful enemies, (which every man is subject to that resist such persons)
particularly amongst some Lottery Office Keepers, who paid the Keeper a yearly
stipend for having their names on his books as debtors, and living in the
rules, this being some protection for them they carried on unlawful insurances
in the lottery; I ordered Suits to be commenced against them, and recovered
many penalties; they then charged me with receiving such penalties, and
settling some of the suits without leave of the court. I was called upon to
answer that charge; and upon such answer I was indicted, upon an Indictment
containing twenty three counts, and gave one hundred pounds bail; but having
such a host of enemies by the advice of my Friends, I paid the 1001. and agreed
to leave the country for a little time, as I had been in the contest for
several years; but this did not satisfy. One of the Lottery office keepers was
also the printer of a Newspaper; he caused a number of illiberal paragraphs to
be inserted in many of the newspapers and magazines to prejudice such persons
as were not acquainted with me or the circumstance, which I have reason to
believe was to prevent my return. The circumstance of the indictment for murder
gave me great trouble and many enemies, yet I shall ever consider it as a
meritorious act, which gives me pleasure on reflection. I have now fully stated
what brought me acquainted with Daniels, and have given my enemies such power
over me, and also the color to such reports, and would proceed to state every
circumstance of my life, but fear I have already tired the patience of the
reader, being entirely unconnected with the present matter. With respect to my
character in this country (except my connection with Daniels) no man can
impeach, and those in England, I have fully stated that can with truth be
alleged against me. Many respectable persons in England will not only prove
that they believed my character has been impeached unjustly, but that I ever
acted honorably, and did not leave my country in debt.

I shall now beg leave to submit a few general observations, to show that if
the evidence was true, which I trust can never be supposed it does not appear
sufficient to warrant a conviction for forgery, and uttering a bill of exchange
with intent to defraud. Coats proved that he accepted the bill for me, and
that I promised to provide for it. Smith that I acknowledged in his presence to
have both drawn and indorsed it. This was not imitating the hand writing of any
man, because they prove there is no such person; at all events it cannot be
pretended to defraud Coats, who states he accepted it for me. Then who was it
to defraud? not Mr. Irvin -- I never negociated it to him or any person
whatever, nor is there any attempt to prove that I did, for what appears to the
contrary it might have been taken from my desk by some person and passed away
without my knowledge -- Would this have subjected me to any prosecution, under
the act to prevent forgeries commiting with intent to defraud? I submit not,
and that the commiting a Forgery is no Offense, unless with intent to defraud.
Suppose I had made such bill with intent to pass it, and upon reflection saw
the bad consequences attending it, and altered my mind, could I be said to have
committed an offense within that act. Supposing all the evidence true, I
conceive it was no proof of my guilt; whether I was guilty or innocent could
only be proved by Mrs. Cullen; she uttered the bill, and was to account how she
came by it. I am presumed to be guilty because my character was impeached. -- I
will readily admit the writing of a fictitious name upon a bill with intent to
defraud, is an offense within the act, but that intent must be proved by an
attempt to obtain property or credit, either for himself or another. I submit
there never was a conviction before, either in this country or in England, for
a man's writing a fictitious name upon a bill or slip of paper, to answer no
purpose whatever. There was no attempt to prove the bill my hand writing, or
that I ever received or attempted to obtain any profit or advantage from it,
only the accepter proves he does not know the drawer, his friend proves that I
confessed I wrote it myself.

I shall content myself with the observations I have made, and proceed to state
the depositions of Mrs. Cullen and her servants, first earnestly soliciting the
pardon of those gentlemen whose names I have found necessary to introduce, and
for such parts as may appear immaterial and unconnected: and shall now conclude
by appealing to the candor and impartiality of every man of this free and
independent country, renowned for justice, wisdom, humanity, and liberal
sentiments, heretofore revered as an asylum and security from unjust
persecutions, in full confidence that no sophistry, artful insinuations or
illiberal reports, will influence their opinions, but consider it as a case
that may soon be their own, and that the establishment of such a verdict so
obtained, would render a very dangerous precedent in this commercial country.

With all due respect, I beg leave to subscribe myself The public's obliged and
obedient Servant,

ROBERT JAMES.
STATE PRISON, January 31, 1799.
City of New York, Supreme Court, The People versus Robert James, FOR FORGERY.
Eliza Cullen, of the city of New York, widow, late boarding-house keeper,
being duly sworn, upon her oath says, That in the month of October, in the
year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety seven, this deponent
received by the post from Philadelphia, a letter with two bills of exchange,
drawn as appeared at Philadelphia in the name of Thomas Smith, payable to John
Wicks or order, the one for 200 dollars, and the other for 255 dollars, and to
the best of this deponent's recollection, they were drawn at forty and fifty
five days after date, and directed to Mr. John Coats, merchant, Pearl-street,
New York, that they were sent by John Wicks to this deponent in part payment of
500 dollars due from him to this deponent, and indorsed by the said John Wicks;
that deponent's servant Mary Potter, delivered the said letter with the bills
enclosed to this deponent, and on the day deponent received them, or on the
next day, the said John Coats called at this deponent's then house in
Wall-street, that being unwell not able to go down stairs, this deponent
delivered the said bills to another of deponent's servants, Elizabeth Potter,
with instructions for to get the said John Coats to accept them: she soon
returned with them accepted, and deponent requested the said Robert James, the
defendant, to give cash for them, which he refused, and deponent paid the bill
for 200 dollars to Carruthers and Irwin, in discharge of a debt deponent owed
to them of 150 dollars or thereabouts, and they paid the balance, and deponent
indorsed the said bill, for which this deponent has been sued since the
conviction of the said Robert James, who had not any interest whatever in the
said bill, nor no interest or concern in this deponent's negociating it, nor
did he know the time when or to whom the said bill was negociated, nor had the
said Robert James any interest or concern in the other bill which was for 255
dollars, which deponent paid to Mr. Hyslop in discharge of a debt deponent owed
him, but he afterward returned it to this deponent, saying, he did not like
Coats and could not bear any satisfactory account of the drawer, and says,
that the said Coats soon after absconded from his house in Pearl-Street, and
removed his furniture in the night without paying his rent, as deponent was
informed, and verily believes, therefore deponent thought proper to return the
bill for 255 dollars by the post, directed to John Wicks, to be left at the
Post Office, Philadelphia, and positively says that Robert James never had any
interest or concern in the said bill which deponent returned to Philadelphia as
aforesaid, so that what Coats and Smith gave evidence upon said James's trial
respecting the bill being destroyed in their presence must be entirely false
and unfounded, and positively says that before deponent paid away either of
the said bills Coats assured her were very good, and that Smith the drawer was
a merchant living at Philadelphia, and was a very good man, but that he would
take care to pay them when due, and wanted this deponent to let him have some
other goods which Wicks had wrote for, desiring deponent to deliver them to
Coats, which deponent refused until the bills were paid, and deponent has
never heard from Wicks since but has reason to believe Coats is connected with
him, and says, that after the bill for 200 dollars was due, Coats assured
deponent it should be paid, but deponent about three months after was
surrendered to prison by the said Robert James the defendant, who was bail for
deponent in several suits, and deponent has been in prison ever since, and was
tried for uttering the said bill knowing it to be forged, but acquitted, and
says, that John Wicks the Indorser of that bill, was indebted 500 dollars to
deponent, as may be seen by this deponent's schedule in Mr. Harrison the
recorder's office, delivered and sworn to several months before any charge was
made of forging said bill, either against deponent or the said James; and
deponent says, she has reason to believe the said charge was founded in
malice, to extort money from the said James, or some other undue purpose, as a
short time before his trial the said Coats, in the presence of this deponent,
her daughter, Mr. John Borris and several other persons, took the said Robert
James by the arm and requested to shake hands and be friends and bare no nalice
for what had passed, which James refused, or to speak with him: and he the said
Coats then swore he would be revenged of him, and says, that the said Robert
James boarded with deponent about four years, appeared to be a man of fortune,
and paid ready money for every thing, kept and appeared to have no other than
gen^ee^ acquaintances; says, that James Smith never appeared to be his
acquaintance, recollects his calling two or three times respecting some bill,
but never was asked to drink wine, and deponent believes he never did drink in
the house, or deponent must have known it, or would have heard it from one of
her servants, who always had the keys in deponent's absence; that deponent had
several executions in her house, by which means all her papers has been lost
and destroyed; and that if deponent had been tried first, which by her council
she applied for, would have given evidence as herein stated, although several
applications were made to this deponent, prior to the trial to induce this
deponent to give contrary evidence, as it was intimated to this deponent that
the said James had treated deponent very ill, and was endeavoring to fix the
whole matter upon this deponent, who always stated the same as in this
affidavit to her council and every other person, and that he was entirely
innocent, which deponent has good and sufficient reasons for believing; and
deponent says, that the said Robert James is a considerable creditor of the
deponent's, and his property, which never did belong to this deponent, has been
taken in execution by deponent's creditors, in discharge of executions issued
against this deponent.

ELIZA CULLEN.
Sworn the 16th Jan. 1799, before me, ROBERT BENSON, Commissioner, etc.

City of New York, Supreme Court, The People versus Robert James, FOR FORGERY.
Mary Potter, late servant to Eliza Cullen, boarding-house keeper, being du^y
sworn, upon her oath says -- That she well remembers John Wicks, and has
reason to believe he was indebted to her; and in or about the month of October,
1797; this deponent delivered a letter from the post-man to the said Eliza
Cullen, that on opening the letter she said that Wicks had been as good as his
word, and had sent her two bills, or she expressed herself to that effect; that
deponent saw the two bills, and they were drawn upon John Coats, and indorsed
John Wicks; that this deponent lived in the house as servant with the said
Eliza Cullen during the time the said Robert James boarded with her, which was
near four years, until the month of December, 1797, when deponent left her and
went to live at Trenton, where deponent resided until she was sent for to be a
witness on the trial of the said Robert James, when deponent was so very much
confused by the council, (never being examined as a witness before) and being
so much alarmed at the unfortunate situations of Eliza Cullen and Robert James,
that she is induced to believe her evidence was of no service to him, not being
able to speak what the knew; but this deponent's character is well known at
Trenton and in this city, and believes that no person who does know her will
believe her capable of swearing to a falsehood; and deponent says, she has
reason to believe that the evidence given by Coats and Smith was false; that
during the time this deponent resided in the house, Smith never appeared to be
an acquaintance of the said Robert James's, nor never drank in the house to
this deponent's knowledge or belief, remember his calling twice only respecting
the payment of some money, but did not appear as a man likely to be the
acquaintance of James, whose acquaintances appeared to be gentlemen of
respectability, of which description the said Smith did not appear; and if the
said Smith had drank wine in the house, as he stated in his evidence, it must
have been known by Eliza Cullen, Elizabeth Potter, or this deponent, one of
whom always had the keys of the wine; and says, that the said James always
appeared as a man of fortune, that had money to pay for every thing he had, as
deponent has reason to believe, as no person ever called a second time for
money to the knowledge or belief of this deponent.

MARY POTTER.
Sworn the 16th Jan. 1799, before me, ROBERT BENSON, Commissioner, etc.

City of New York, Supreme Court, The People versus Robert James, FOR FORGERY.
Elizabeth Potter, late servant to Eliza Cullen, being duly sworn, upon her
oath says, That she well remembers John Wicks, and has reason to believe he
was indebted to the said Mrs. Cullen for goods purchased of her; and in or
about the month of October, 1797, deponent informed her as she was in her
bed-room up-stairs, that Mr. Coats was in the parlour below, that she then
gave her two bills to carry down for him to accept; that deponent delivered
them to the defendant Robert James, who was in the parlour, and he gave them to
the said Coats, who read them over, and said they were right, and wrote upon
them, who after writing on them the said Coats himself delivered said bills
back to this deponent, and the said Robert James looked at them to see they
were right, but did not appear by their conversation to have any concern
whatever therein, but presenting them to said Coats agreeable to deponent's
request, and deponent took them back to the said Eliza Cullen; and says, that
Smith, the person who gave evidence against the said Robert James, never called
upon him more than two or three times to the deponent's knowledge or belief,
which deponent understood the first time was respecting the payment of some
bill, and the last time he called deponent was present, and he joined in a note
with Coats for 24 dollars for the payment of some hats, as James refused to
let Coats have them on his note only, that he wanted more, but James refused,
and to the best of deponent's recollection this was in the month of March last;
but he never appeared as the friend or acquaintance of Mr. James, nor as a man
from his appearance likely to be so, as Mr. James' acquaintance all appeared
gentlemen of respectability; nor did the said Smith ever drink a glass of wine
in the house to the knowledge or belief of this deponent; and says, that the
said James boarded with Mrs. Cullen for near four years, during which time this
deponent lived in the house as a servant, that Mr. James always appeared as a
man of fortune that paid for every thing as he had it, and no person was ever
sent away without their money to the knowledge or belief of this deponent, who
has every reason to believe him perfectly innocent of the charge for which he
has been convicted, and that the evidence given against him by Coats and
Smith' was false.

ELIZABETH POTTER. her X Mark.
Sworn the 16th Jan. 1799, before me, ROBERT BENSON, Commissioner, etc.

FINIS

