The JUSTICE of GOD in the DAMNATION of SINNERS. ILLUSTRATED IN A SERMON. TO
WHICH IS ADDED A FAREWELL SERMON; BY JONATHAN EDWARDS, A. M. Delivered at
NORTHAMPTON, June 22d, 1750. AFTER THE PEOPLE'S PUBLIC REJECTION OF HIM AS
THEIR MINISTER, AND RENOUNCING THEIR RELATION TO HIM AS PASTOR OF THE CHURCH.

PRINTED AT NORTHAMPTON, BY DANIEL WRIGHT and Co. For SIMEON BUTLER.

SERMON I. The Justice of God in the Damnation of Sinners.
ROMANS iii.19. -- That every mouth may be stopped. --


THE main subject of the doctrinal part of this epistle, is the free grace of
God in the salvation of men by Jesus Christ; especially as it appears in the
doctrine of justification by faith alone. And the more clearly to evince this
doctrine, and show the reason of it, the apostle, in the first place,
establishes that point, that no flesh living can be justified by the deeds of
the law. And to prove it, he is very large and particular in showing, that all
mankind, not only Gentiles but Jews, are under sin, and so under the
condemnation of the law; which is what he insists upon from the beginning of
the epistle to this place. He first begins with the Gentiles; and in the first
chapter shows that they are under sin, by setting forth the exceeding
corruptions and horrid wickedness that overspread the Gentile world: And then
through the second chapter, and the former part of this third chapter, to the
text and following verse, he shows the same of the Jews, that they also are in
the same circumstances with the Gentiles in this regard. They had an high
thought of themselves, because they were God's covenant people, and
circumcised, and the children of Abraham. They despised the Gentiles as
polluted, condemned, and accursed; but looked on themselves, on account of
their external privileges, and ceremonial and moral righteousness, as a pure
and holy people, and the children of God; as the apostle observes in the second
chapter. It was therefore strange doctrine to them, that they also were unclean
and guilty in God's sight, and under the condemnation and curse of the law. The
apostle does therefore, on account of their strong prejudices against such
doctrine, the more particularly insist upon it, and shows that they are no
better than the Gentiles; as in the 9th verse of this chapter, "What then? are
we better than they? "No, in no wise? for we have before proved both Jews and
Gentiles, that they are all under sin." And, to convince them of it, he then
produces certain passages out of their own law, or the Old Testament, (whose
authority they pretended a great regard to) from the 9th verse to the verse
wherein is our text. And it may be observed, that the apostle, First, cites
certain passages to prove that mankind are all corrupt, in the 10th, 11th, and
12th, verses; "As it is written. There is none righteous, no not one: There is
none that understands, there is none that seeks after God. They are all
gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable, there is none that
does good, no not one." Secondly, The passages he cites next, are to prove,
that not only all are corrupt, but each one wholly corrupt, as it were all over
unclean, from the crown of his head to the soles of his feet; and therefore
several particular parts of the body are mentioned, as the throat, the tongue,
the lips, the mouth, the feet, verses, 13.14.15.: "Their throat is an open
sepulcher: with their tongues they have used deceit; the poison of asps is
under their lips; whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness: Their feet are
swift to shed blood." And, Thirdly, He quotes other passages to show, that each
one is not only all over corrupt, but corrupt to a desperate degree, in the
16th, 17th, and 18th verses; in which the exceeding degree of their corruption
is shown, Both by affirming and denying: By affirmatively expressing the most
pernicious nature and tendency of their wickedness, in the 16th verse:
"Destruction and misery are in their ways." And there by denying all good or
godliness of them, in the 17th and 18th verses, "And the way of peace have they
not known: There is no fear of God before their eyes." And then, lest the Jews
should think these passages of their law do not concern them, and that only the
Gentiles are intended in them, the apostle shows in the verse of the text, not
only that they are not exempt, but that they especially must be understood:
"Now we know that whatsoever things the law says, it says to them who are
under the law." By those that are under the law is meant the Jews; and the
Gentiles by those that are without law; as appears by the 18th verse of the
preceding chapter. There is special reason to understand the law, as speaking
to and of them, to whom it was immediately given. And therefore the Jews would
be unreasonable in exempting themselves. And if we examine the places of the
Old Testament whence these passages are taken, we shall see plainly that
special respect is had to the wickedness of the people of that nation, in every
one of them. So that the law shuts all up in universal and desperate
wickedness, that every mouth may be stopp^d; the mouths of the Jews, as well as
of the Gentiles, notwithstanding all those privileges by which they were
distinguished from the Gentiles.

The things that the law says, are sufficient to stop the mouths of all
mankind, in two respects.

1. To stop them from boasting of their righteousness, as the Jews were wont to
do; as the apostle observes in the 23d verse of the preceding chapter. -- That
the apostle has respect to stopping their mouths in this respect, appears by
the 27th verse of the context, "Where is boasting then? It is excluded." The
law stops our mouths from making of any plea for life, or the favor of God, or
any positive good, from our own righteousness.

2. To stop them from making any excuse for ourselves or objection against the
execution of the sentence of the law, or the infliction of the punishment that
it threatens. That this is intended, appears by the words immediately
following, "That all the world may become guilty before God." That is, that
they may appear to be guilty, and stand convicted before God, and justly liable
to the condemnation of his law, as guilty of death, according to the Jewish way
of speaking.

And thus the apostle proves, that no flesh can be justified in God's sight by
the deeds of the law; as he draws the conclusion in the following verse; and so
prepares the way for the establishing of the great doctrine of justification by
faith alone, which he proceeds to do in the next verse to that, and in the
following part of the chapter, and of the epistle.

DOCTRINE.
"It is just with God eternally to cast off and destroy sinners."

-- For this is the punishment which the law condemns to; which the things that
the law says, may well stop every mouth from all manner of objection against.

The truth of this doctrine may appear by the joint consideration of two
things, viz. Man's sinfulness, and God's sovereignty.

I. It appears from the consideration of man's sinfulness. And that whether we
consider the infinitely evil nature of all sin, or how much sin men are guilty
of.

1. If we consider the infinite evil and heinousness of sin in general, it is
not unjust in God to inflict what punishment is deserved; because the very
notion of deserving any punishment is, that it may be justly inflicted: A
deserved punishment and a just punishment are the same thing. To say that one
deserves such a punishment, and yet to say that he does not justly deserve it,
is a contradiction; and if he justly deserves it; then it may be justly
inflicted.

Every crime or fault deserves a greater or lesser punishment, in proportion as
the crime itself is greater or less. If any fault deserves punishment, then so
much the greater the fault, so much the greater is the punishment deserved. The
faulty nature of any thing is the formal ground and reason of its desert of
punishment; and therefore the more any thing has of this nature, the more
punishment it deserves. And therefore the terribleness of the degree of
punishment, let it be never so terrible, is no argument against the justice of
it, if the proportion does but hold between the heinousness of the crime and
the dreadfulness of the punishment; so that if there be any such thing as a
fault infinitely heinous, it will follow that it is just to inflict a
punishment for it that is infinitely dreadful.

A crime is more or less heinous, according as we are under greater or lesser
obligations to the contrary. This is self-evident; because it is herein that
the criminalness or faultiness of any thing consists, that it is contrary to
what we are obliged or bound to, or what ought to be in us. So the faultiness
of one being's hating another, is in proportion to his obligation to love him.
The crime of one being's despising and casting contempt on another, is
proportionably more or less heinous, as he was under greater or lesser
obligations to honor him. The fault of disobeying another, is greater or less,
as any one is under greater or lesser obligations to obey him. And therefore if
there be any being that we are under infinite obligations to love, and honor,
and obey, the contrary toward him must be infinitely faulty.

Our obligation to love, honor, and obey any being, is in proportion to his
loveliness, honourableness, and authority; for that is the very meaning of the
words. When we say any one is very lovely, it is the same as to say, that he is
one very much to be loved: Or if we say, such a one is more honorable than
another, the meaning of the words is, that he is one that we are more obliged
to honor. If we say any one has great authority over us, it is the same as to
say* that he has great right to our subjection and obedience.

But God is a being infinitely lovely, because he has infinite excellency and
beauty. To have infinite excellency and beauty, is the same thing as to have
infinite loveliness. He is a Being of infinite greatness, majesty and glory;
and therefore is infinitely honorable. He is infinitely exalted above the
greatest potentates of the earth, and highest angels in heaven; and therefore
is infinitely more honorable than they. His authority over us is infinite; and
the ground of his right to our obedience is infinitely strong; for he is
infinitely worthy to be obeyed in himself, and we have an absolute, universal,
and infinite dependence upon him.

So that sin against God, being a violation of infinite obligations, must be a
crime infinitely heinous, and so deserving of infinite punishment. -- Nothing
is more agreeable to the common sense of mankind, than that sins committed
against any one, must be proportionably heinous to the dignity of the being
offended and abused; as it is also agreeable to the word of God, 1 Samuel ii.25.
"If one man sin against another, the judge shall judge him;" (i. e. shall judge
him, and inflict a finite punishment, such as finite judges can inflict;) "but
if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?" This was the
aggravation of sin that made Joseph afraid of it, Genesis xxxix.9. "How shall I
commit this great wickedness, and sin against God?" This was the aggravation of
David's sin, in comparison of which he esteemed all others as nothing, because
they were infinitely exceeded by it. Psalm li.4. "Against thee, thee only, have
I sinned." -- The eternity of the punishment of ungodly men renders it
infinite; and it renders it no more than infinite; and therefore renders no
more than proportionable to the heinousness of what they are guilty of.

If there be any evil or faultiness in sin against God, there is certainly
infinite evil: For if it be any fault at all, it has an infinite aggravation,
viz. that it is against an infinite object. If it be ever so small upon other
accounts, yet if it be any thing, it has one infinite dimension; and so is an
infinite evil. Which may be illustrated by this: If we suppose a thing to have
infinite length, but no breadth and thickness, but to be only a mere
mathematical line, it is nothing: But if it have any breadth and thickness at
all, though never so small, yet if it have but one infinite dimension, viz.
that of length, the quantity of it is infinite; it exceeds the quantity of any
thing, however broad, thick and long, wherein these dimensions are all finite.

So that the objections that are made against the infinite punishment of sin,
from the necessity, or rather previous certainty of the futurition of sin,
arising from the decree of God, or unavoidable original corruption of nature,
if they argue any thing, do not argue against the infiniteness of the degree of
the faultiness of sin directly, and no otherwise than they argue against any
faultiness at all: For if this necessity or certainty leaves any evil at all in
sin, that fault must be infinite by reason of the infinite object.

But every such objector as would argue from hence, that there is no fault at
all in sin, confutes himself, and shows his own insincerity in his objection.
For at the same time that he objects, that men's acts are necessary, from God's
decrees, and original sin, and that this kind of necessity is inconsistent with
faultiness in the act, his own practice shows that he does not believe what he
objects to be true: Otherwise why does he at all blame men? Or why are such
persons at all displeased with men, for abusive, injurious and ungrateful acts
toward them? Whatever they pretend, by this they show that indeed they do
believe that there is no necessity in men's acts, from divine decrees, or
corruption of nature, that is inconsistent with blame. And if their objection
be this, That this previous certainty is by God's own ordering, and that where
God orders an antecedent certainty of acts, he transfers all the fault from the
actor on himself; their practice shows, that at the same time they do not
believe this, but fully believe the contrary: For when they are abused by men,
they are displeased with men, and not with God only.

The light of nature teaches all mankind, that when an injury is voluntary, it
is faulty, without any manner of consideration of what there might be
previously to determine the futurition of that evil act of the will. And it
really teaches this as much to those that object and cavil most as to others;
as their universal practice shows. By which it appears, that such objections
are insincere and perverse. Men will mention others corrupt nature in their own
case, or when they are injured, as a thing that aggravates their crime, and
that wherein their faultiness partly consists. How common is it for persons,
when they look on themselves greatly injured by another, to inveigh against
him, and aggravate his baseness, by saying, "He is a man of a most perverse
spirit: He is naturally of a selfish, niggardly or proud and haughty temper: He
is one of a base and vile disposition." And yet men's natural corrupt
dispositions are mentioned as an excuse for them, with respect to their sins
against God, and as if they rendered them blameless.

2. That it is just with God eternally to cast off wicked men, may more
abundantly appear, if we consider how much sin they are guilty of. From what
has been already said, it appears, that if men were guilty of sin but in one
particular, that is sufficient ground of their eternal rejection and
condemnation: If they are sinners, that is enough: Merely this might be
sufficient to keep them from ever lifting up their heads, and cause them to
smite on their breasts, with the publican that cried "God be merciful to me a
sinner." But sinful men are not only thus, but they are full of sin; full of
principles of sin, and full of acts of sin: Their guilt is like great
mountains, heaped one upon another, till the pile is grown up to heaven. They
are totally corrupt, in every part, in all their faculties; and all the
principles of their nature, their understandings, and wills; and in all their
dispositions and affections, their heads, their hearts, are totally depraved;
all the members of their bodies are only instruments of sin; and all their
senses, seeing, healing, tasting, etc. are only inlets and outlets of sin,
channels of corruption. There is nothing but sin, no good at all. Romans vii.18.
"In me, that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing." There is all manner of
wickedness. There are the seeds of the greatest and blackest crimes. There are
principles of all sorts of wickedness against men; and there is all wickedness
against God. There is pride; there is enmity; there is contempt; there is
quarrelling; there is Atheism; there is blasphemy. There are these things in
exceeding strength; the heart is under the power of them, is sold under sin,
and is a perfect slave to it. There is hardheartedness, hardness greater than
that of a rock, or an adamant stone. There is obstinacy and perverseness,
incorrigibleness and inflexibleness in sin, that will not be overcome by
threatenings or promises, by awakenings or encouragements, by judgments or
mercies, neither by that which is terrifying, nor that which is winning: The
very blood of God will not win the heart of a wicked man.

And there is actual wickednesses without number or measure. There are breaches
of every command, in thought, word and deed; a life full of sin; days and
nights filled up with sin; mercies abused, and frowns despised; mercy and
justice, and all the divine perfections, trampled on; and the honor of each
person in the Trinity trod in the dirt. Now if one sinful word or thought has
so much evil in it, as to deserve eternal destruction, how do they deserve to
be eternally cast off and destroyed, that are guilty of so much sin!

II. If with man's sinfulness, we consider God's sovereignty, it may serve
further to clear God's justice in the eternal rejection and condemnation of
sinners, from men's cavils and objections. I shall not now pretend to determine
precisely, what things are, and what things are not, proper acts and exercises
of God's holy sovereignty; but only, that God's sovereignty extends to the
following things.

1. That such is God's sovereign power and right, that he is originally under
no obligation to keep men from sinning; but may in his providence permit and
leave them to sin. He was not obliged to keep either angels or men from
falling. It is unreasonable to suppose, that God should be obliged, if he makes
a reasonable creature capable of knowing his will, and receiving a law from
him, and being subject to his moral government, at the same time to make it
impossible for him to sin, or break his law. For if God be obliged to this, it
destroys all use of any commands, laws, promises or threatenings, and the very
notion of any moral government of God over those reasonable creatures. For to
what purpose would it be, for God to give such and such laws, and declare his
holy will to a creature, and annex promises and threatenings to move him to his
duty, and make him careful to perform it, if the creature at the same time has
this to think of, that God is obliged to make it impossible for him to break
his laws? How can God's threatenings move to care or watchfulness, when, at the
same time, God is oobliged to render it impossible that he should be exposed to
the threatenings? Or, to what purpose is it for God to give a law at all? For
according to this supposition, it is God, and not the creature, that is under
law. It is the lawgivers care, and not the subjects, to see that his law is
obeyed; and this care is what the lawgiver is absolutely obliged to. If God be
obliged never to permit a creature to fall, there is an end of all divine laws,
or government, or authority of God over the creature; there can be no manner of
use of these things.

God may permit sin, though the being of sin will certainly ensue on that
permission: And so, by permission, he may dispose and order the event. If there
were any such thing as chance, or mere contingence, and the very notion of it
did not carry a gross absurdity, (as might easily be shown that it does), it
would have been very unfit, that God should have left it to mere chance,
whether man should fall or no. For chance, if there should be any such thing,
is undesigning and blind. And certainly it is more fit that an event of so
great importance, and that is attended with such an infinite train of great
consequences, should be disposed and ordered by infinite wisdom, than that it
should be left to blind chance.

If it be said, that God need not have interposed to render it impossible for
man to sin, and yet not leave it to mere contingence or blind chance neither;
but might have left it with man's free will, to determine whether to sin or no:
I answer, if God did leave it to man's free will, without any sort of disposal,
or ordering in the case, whence it should be previously certain how that free
will should determine, then still that first determination of the will must be
merely contingent or by chance. It could not have any antecedent act of the
will to determine it; for I speak now of the very first act or motion of the
will, respecting the affair that may be looked upon as the prime ground and
highest source of the event. To suppose this to be determined by a foregoing
act is a contradiction. God's disposing this determination of the will by his
permission, does not at all infringe the liberty of the creature. It is in no
respect any more inconsistent with liberty, than mere chance or contingence.
For if the determination of the will be from blind, undesigning chance, it is
no more from the agent himself, or from the will itself, than if we suppose, in
the ease, a wise, divine disposal by permission.

2. It was fit that it should be at the ordering of the divine wisdom, and good
pleasure, whether every particular man should stand for himself, or whether the
first father of mankind should be appointed as the moral and federal head and
representative of the rest. If God has not Liberty in this matter to determine
either of these two as he pleases, it must be because determining that the
first father of men should represent the rest, and not that every one should
stand for himself, is injurious to mankind. For if it be not injurious to
mankind, how is it unjust? But it is not injurious to mankind; for there is
nothing in the nature of the case itself, that makes it better for mankind that
each man should stand for himself, than that all should be represented by their
common father; as the least reflection or consideration will convince any one.
And if there be nothing in the nature of the thing that makes the former better
for mankind than the latter, then it will follow, that mankind are not hurt in
God's choosing and appointing the latter, rather than the former; or, which is
the same thing, that it is not injurious to mankind.

3. When men are fallen, and become sinful, God by his sovereignty has a right
to determine about their redemption as he pleases. He has a right to determine
whether he will redeem any or no. He might, if he had pleased, have left all to
perish, or might have redeemed all. Or, he may redeem some, and leave others;
and if he does so, he may take whom he pleases, and leave whom he pleases. To
suppose that all have forfeited his favor, and deserved to perish, and to
suppose that he may not leave any one individual of them to perish, implies a
contradiction; because it supposes that such an one has a claim to God's
favor, and is not justly liable to perish; which is contrary to the
supposition.

It is meet that God should order all these things according to his own
pleasure. By reason of his greatness and glory, by which he is infinitely above
all, he is worthy to be sovereign, and that his pleasure should in all things
take place: He is worthy that he should make himself his end, and that he
should make nothing but his own wisdom his rule in pursuing that end, without
asking leave or counsel of any, and without giving any account of any of his
matters. It is fit that he that is absolutely perfect, and infinitely wise, and
the fountain of all wisdom, should determine every thing by his own will, even
things of the greatest importance, such as the eternal salvation or damnation
of sinners. It is meet that he should be thus sovereign, because he is the
first being, the eternal being, whence all other beings are. He is the creator
of all things; and all are absolutely and universally dependent on him; and
therefore it is meet that he should act as the sovereign possessor of heaven
and earth.

APPLICATION.
In the improvement of this doctrine, I would first direct myself to sinners
that are afraid of damnation, in a use of conviction. This may be matter of
conviction to you, that it would be just and righteous with God eternally to
reject and destroy you. This is what you are in danger of: You that are a
Christless sinner, are a poor condemned creature: God's wrath still abides upon
you; and the sentence of condemnation lies upon you: You are in God's hands,
and it is uncertain what he will do with you. You are afraid what will become
of you: You are afraid that it will be your portion to suffer eternal burnings;
and your fears are not without grounds; you have reason to tremble every
moment. But let you be never so much afraid of it, let eternal damnation be
never so dreadful, yet it is just: God may nevertheless do it, and be
righteous* and holy, and glorious in it. Though eternal damnation be what you
cannot bear, and how much soever your heart shrinks at the thoughts of it, yet
God's justice may be glorious in it. The dreadfulness of the thing on your
part, and the greatness of your dread of it, do not render it the less
righteous on God's part. If you think otherwise* it is a sign that you do not
see yourself, that you are not sensible what sin is, nor how much of it you
have been guilty of. Therefore, for your conviction, be directed,

First, To look over your past life: inquire at the mouth of conscience, and
hear what that has to testify concerning it. Consider what you are, what light
you have had, and what means you have lived under: And yet how have you behaved
yourself! What have those many days and nights, that you have lived, been
filled up with? How have those years, that have rolled over your heads, one
after another, been spent? What has the sun shone upon you for, from day to
day, while you have improved his light to serve Satan by it? What has God kept
your breath in your nostrils for, and given you meat and drink, from day to day
for, that you have spent that life and strength that have been, supported by
them, in opposing God, and rebellion against him?

How many sorts of wickedness have you been guilty of? How manifold have been
the abominations of your life? What profaneness and contempt of God has been
exercised by you? How little regard have you had to the Scriptures, to the word
preached, to Sabbaths and sacraments? How profanely have you talked, many of
you, about those things that are holy? After what manner have many of you kept
God's holy day, not regarding the holiness of the time, not caring what you
thought of in it? Yea, you have not only spent the time in worldly, vain, and
unprofitable thoughts, but in immoral thoughts; pleasing yourself with the
reflection on past acts of wickedness, and in contriving new acts. Have not you
spent much holy time in gratifying your lusts in your imaginations; yea, not
only holy time, but the very time of God's public worship, when you have
appeared in God's more immediate presence? How have you not only not attended
to the worship, but have in the mean time been feasting your lusts, and
wallowing yourself in abominable uncleanness? How many Sabbaths have you spent,
one after another, in a most wretched manner? Some of you not only in worldly
and wicked thoughts, but also a very wicked outward behavior! When you on
Sabbath days have got along with your wicked companions, how has holy time been
treated among you! What kind of conversation has there been! Yea, how have some
of you* by a very indecent carriage, openly dishonored and cast contempt on
the sacred services of God's house, and holy day! And what you have done some
of you alone, what wicked practices there have been in secret, even in holy
time, God and your own consciences know.

And how have you behaved yourself in the time of family prayer! And what a
trade have many of you made of absenting yourselves from the worship of the
families you belong to, for the sake of vain company! And how have you
continued in the neglect of secret prayer! therein wilfully living in a known
sin, going abreast against as plain a command as any in the Bible! Have you not
been one that has cast off fear, and restrained prayer before God?

What wicked carriage have some of you been guilty of toward your parents! How
far have you been from paying that honor to them that God has required! Have
you not even harbored ill will and malice toward them? And when they have
displeased you, have wished evil to them? Yea, and shown your vile spirit in
your behavior? And it is well if you have not mocked them behind their backs;
and, like the accursed Ham and Canaan, derided your parents nakedness instead
of covering it, and hiding your eyes from it. Have not some of you often
disobeyed your parents, yea, and refused to be subject to them? Is it not a
wonder of mercy and forbearance, that that has not before now been accomplished
on you, in Prove. xxx.17. "The eye that mocketh at his father, and refuses to
obey his mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young
eagles shall eat it."

What revenge and malice have you been guilty of toward your neighbors? How
have you indulged this spirit of the devil, hating others, and wishing evil to
them, rejoicing when evil befell them, and grieving at others prosperity, and
lived in such a way for a long time! Have not some of you allowed a passionate
furious spirit, and behaved yourselves in your anger more like wild beasts than
like Christians!

What covetousness has been in many of you? Such has been your inordinate love
of the world, and care about the things of it, that it has taken up your heart;
you have allowed no room for God and religion; you have minded the world more
than your eternal salvation. For the vanities of the world you have neglected
reading, praying, and meditation: For the things of the world you have broken
the Sabbath: For the world you have spent a great deal of your time in
quarrelling: For the world you have envied and hated your neighbor: For the
world you have cast God, and Christ, and heaven, behind your back: For the
world you have sold your own soul: You have as it were drowned your soul in
worldly cares and desires: You have been a mere earth worm, that is never in
its element but when grovelling and buried in the earth.

How much of a spirit of pride has appeared in you, which is in a peculiar
manner the spirit and condemnation of the devil! How have some of you vaunted
yourselves in your apparel! Others in their riches! Others in their knowledge
and abilities! How has it galled you to see others above you! How much has it
gone against the grain for you to give others their due honor! And how have
you shown your pride by setting up your wills, and in opposing others, and
stirring up and promoting division, and a party spirit in public affairs!

How sensual have you been! Are there not some here that have debased
themselves below the dignity of human nature, by wallowing in sensual
filthiness, as swine in the mire, or as filthy vermin feeding with delight on
rotten carrion? What intemperance have some you been guilty of! How much of
your precious time have you spent away at the tavern, and in drinking companies
when you ought to have been at home seeking God and your salvation in your
families and closets!

And what abominable lasciviousness have some of you been guilty of! How have
you indulged yourself from day to day, and from night to night, in all manner
of unclean imaginations! Has not your soul been filled with them, till it has
become an hold of foul spirits, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird?
What foul mouthed persons have some of you been, often in lewd and lascivious
talk and unclean songs, wherein were things not fit to be spoken! And such
company, where such conversation has been carried on, has been your delight.
And what unclean acts and practices have you defiled yourself with! God and
your own consciences know what abominable lasciviousness you have practiced in
things not fit to be named, when you have been alone; when you ought to have
been reading, or meditating, or on your knees before God in secret prayer. And
how have you corrupted others, as well as polluted yourselves! What vile
uncleanness have you practiced in company! What abominations have you been
guilty of in the dark! Such as the apostle doubtless had respect to in Ephesians. v.
12. "For it is a shame even to speak of those things that are done of them in
secret." Some of you have corrupted others, and done what in you lay to undo
their souls, (if you have not actually done it); and by your vile practices and
examples have made room for Satan, and invited his presence, and established
his interest, in the town where you have lived.

What lying have some of you been guilty of, especially in your childhood! And
have not your heart and lips often disagreed since you came to riper years?
What fraud, and deceit, and unfaithfulness, have many of you practiced in your
dealings with your neighbors that your own heart is conscious to, if you have
not have been noted for it by others!

And how have some of you behaved yourselves in your family relations! How have
you neglected your children's souls! And not only so, but have corrupted their
minds by your bad examples; and instead of training them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, have rather brought them up in the devil's service!

How have some of you attended that sacred ordinance of the Lord's supper
without any manner of serious preparation, and in a careless flighty frame of
spirits, and chiefly to comply with custom! Have you not ventured to put the
sacred symbols of the body and blood of Christ into your mouth, while at the
same time you lived in ways of known sins, and intended no other than still to
go on in the same wicked practices? And, it may be, have sat at the Lord's
table with rancour in your heart against some of your brethren that you have
sat there with. You have come even to that holy feast of love among God's
children, with the leaven of malice and envy in your heart; and so have eat and
drank judgment to yourself.

What stupidity and sottishness has attended your course of wickedness; which
has appeared in your obstinacy under awakening dispensations of God's word and
providence. And how have some of you backslidden after you have set out in
religion, and quenched God's Spirit after he had been striving with you! And
what unsteadiness, and slothfulness, and great misimprovement of God's
strivings with you, have you been chargeable with, that have long been the
subject of them!

Now, can you think when you have thus behaved yourself, that God is obliged to
show you mercy? Are you not after all this ashamed to talk of its being hard
with God to cast you off? Does it become one that has lived such a life to open
his mouth to excuse himself, or object against God's justice in his
condemnation, or to complain of it as hard in God not to give him converting
and pardoning grace, and make him his child, and bestow on him eternal life! Or
to talk of his duties and great pains in religion, and such like things, as if
such performances were worthy to be accepted, and to draw God's heart to such a
creature! If this has been your manner, does it not show how little you have
considered yourself, and how little a sense you have had of your own sinfulness?

Secondly, Be directed to consider, if God should eternally reject and destroy
you, what an agreeableness and exact mutual answerableness there would be
between God's so dealing with you, and your spirit and behavior. There would
not only be an equality, but a similitude. God declares, that his dealings with
men shall be suitable to their disposition and practice. Psalm xviii.25.26.
"With the merciful man, thou will show thyself merciful; With an upright man,
thou will show thyself upright: With the pure, thou will show thyself pure; and
with the froward, thou will show thyself froward." How much soever you dread
damnation, and are affrighted and concerned at the thoughts of it; yet if God
should indeed eternally damn you, you would but be met with in your own way;
you would be dealt with exactly according to your own dealing; God would but
measure to you in the same measure in which you mete. Surely it is but fair
that you should be made to buy in the same measure in which you sell.

Here I would particularly show, 1. That if God should eternally destroy you,
it would be agreeable to your treatment of God. 2. That it would be agreeable
to your treatment of Jesus Christ. 3. That it would be agreeable to your
behavior toward your neighbors. 4. That it would be according to your own
foolish behavior toward yourself.

I. If God should for ever cast you off, it would be exactly agreeable to your
treatment of him. That you may be sensible of this, consider,

1. You never have exercised the least degree of love to God; and therefore it
would be agreeable to your treatment of him if he should never express any love
to you. When God converts and saves a sinner, it is a wonderful and unspeakable
manifestation of divine love. When a poor lost soul is brought home to Christ,
and has all his sins forgiven him, and is made a child of God, it will take up
a whole eternity to express and declare the greatness of that love. And why
should God be obliged to express such wonderful love to you, who never
exercised the least degree of love to him in all your life? You never have
loved God, who is infinitely glorious and lovely; and why then is God under
obligation to love you, who are all over deformed and loathsome as a filthy
worm, or rather a hateful viper? You have no benevolence in your heart toward
God; you never rejoiced in God's happiness; if he had been miserable, and that
had been possible, you would have liked it as well as if he were happy; you
would not have cared how miserable he was, nor mourned for it, any more than
you now do for the devil's being miserable: And why then should God be looked
upon as obliged to take so much care for your happiness, as to do such great
things for it, as he does for those that are saved? Or why should God be called
hard, in case he should not be careful to save you from misery? You care not
what becomes of God's glory; you are not distressed how much soever his honor
seems to suffer in the world: And why should God care any more for your
welfare? Has it not been so, that if you could but promote your private
interest, and gratify your own lusts, you cared not how much the glory of God
suffered? And why may not God advance his own glory in the ruin of your
welfare, not caring how much your interest suffers by it? You never so much as
stirred one step, sincerely making the glory of God your end, or acting from
real respect to him: And why then is it hard if God do nor do such great things
for you, as the changing your nature* raising you from spiritual death to life,
conquering the powers of darkness for you, translating you out of the kingdom
of darkness into the kingdom of his dear son, delivering you from eternal
misery, and bestowing eternal glory upon you? You do not use to be willing to
deny yourself for God; you never cared to put yourself out of your way for
Christ: Whenever any thing cross or difficult came in your way, that the glory
of God was concerned in, it has been your manner to shun it, and excuse
yourself from it: You did not care to hurt yourself for Christ, that you did
not see worthy of it: And why then must it be looked upon as such a hard and
cruel thing, if Christ had not been pleased to spill his blood and be tormented
to death for such a sinner.

2. You have slighted and made light of God; and why then may not God justly
slight you? When sinners are sensible in some measure of their misery, they are
ready to think it hard that God will take no more notice of them; that he will
see them in such a lamentable, distressed condition, beholding their burdens
and tears, and seem to slight it, and manifest no pity to them. Their souls
they think are precious: It would be a dreadful thing if they should perish,
and burn in hell forever. They do not see through it, that God should make so
light of their salvation. But then, ought they not to consider, that as their
souls are precious, so is God's honor precious? The honor of the infinite
God, the great King of heaven and earth, is a thing of as great importance,
(and surely may justly be so esteemed by God) as the happiness of you, a poor
little worm. But yet you have slighted that honor of God, and valued it no
more than the dirt under your feet. You have been told that such and such
things were contrary to the will of an holy God, and against his honor; but
you cared not for that. God called upon you, and exhorted you to be more tender
of his honor; but you went on without regarding him. Thus have you slighted
God! And yet, is it hard that God should slight you? Are you more honorable
than God, that he must be obliged to make much of you, how light soever you
make of him and his glory?

And you have not only slighted God in time past, but you slight him still. You
indeed now make a pretense and show of honoring him in your prayers, and
attendance on other external duties, and by a sober countenance, and seeming
devoutness in your words and behavior; but it is all mere dissembling. That
downcast look and seeming reverence, is not from any honor you have to God in
your heart, though you would have it go so, and would have God take it so. You
that have not believed in Christ, have not the least jot of honor to God; that
show of it is merely forced, and what you are driven to by fear, like those
mentioned in Psalm lxvi.3. "Through the greatness of thy power shall thine
enemies submit themselves to thee." In the original it is, "shall lie unto
thee;" that is, yield feigned submission, and dissemble respect and honor to
thee. There is a rod held over you that makes you seem to pay such respect to
God. This religion and devotion, even the very appearance of it, would soon be
gone, and all vanish away, if that were removed. Sometimes it may be you weep
in your prayers, and in your hearing sermons, and hope God will take notice of
it, and take it for some honor; but he sees it to be all hypocrisy. You weep
for yourself; you are afraid of hell; and do you think that that is worthy that
God should take much notice of you, because you can cry when you are in danger
of being damned: when at the same time you indeed care nothing for God's honor.

Seeing you thus disregard so great a God, is it a heinous thing for God to
flight you, a little, wretched, despicable creature; a worm, a mere nothing,
and less than nothing; a vile insect, that has risen up in contempt against the
Majesty of heaven and earth?

3. Why should God be looked upon as obliged to bestow salvation upon you, when
you have been so ungrateful for the mercies he has bestowed upon you already?
God has tried you with a great deal of kindness, and he never has sincerely
been thanked by you for any of it. God has watched over you, and preserved you,
and provided for you, and followed you with mercy all your days; and yet you
have continued sinning against him. He has given you food and raiment, but you
have improved both in the service of sin. He has preserved you while you slept;
but when you arose, it was to return to the old trade of sinning, God,
notwithstanding this ingratitude, has still continued his mercy; but his
kindness has never won your heart, or brought you to a more grateful behavior
toward him. It may be you have received many remarkable mercies, recoveries
from sickness, or preservations of your life, when at one time and another
exposed by accidents, when if you had died, you would have gone directly to
hell: But you never had any true thankfulness for any of these mercies. God has
kept you out of hell, and continued your day of grace, and the offers of
salvation, this so long a time; and that, it may be, while you did not regard
your own salvation so much as to go in secret and ask God for it: And now God
has greatly added to his mercy to you, by giving you the strivings of his
Spirit, whereby you have a most precious opportunity for your salvation in your
hands. But what thanks has God received for it? What kind of returns have you
made for all this kindness? As God has multiplied mercies, so have you
multiplied provocations.

And yet now are you ready to quarrel for mercy, and to find fault with God,
not only that he does not bestow more mercy, but to contend with him, because
he does not bestow infinite mercy upon you, heaven with all it contains, and
even himself, for your eternal portion. What ideas have you of yourself, that
you think God is obliged to do so much for you, though you treat him never so
ungratefully for his kindness that you have been followed with all the days of
your life?

4. You have voluntarily chosen to be with Satan in his enmity and opposition
to God; how justly therefore might you be with him in his punishment? You did
not choose to be on God's side, but rather chose to side with the devil, and
have obstinately continued in it, against God's often repeated calls and
counsels. You have chosen rather to hearken to Satan than to God, and would be
with him in his work: You have given yourself up to him, to be subject to his
power and government, in opposition to God. How justly therefore may God also
give you up to him, and leave you in his power, to accomplish your ruin? Seeing
you have yielded yourself to his will, to do as he would have you, surely God
may leave you in his hands to execute his will upon you If men will be with
God's enemy, and on his side, why is God obliged to redeem them out of his
hands, when they have done his work? Doubtless you would be glad to serve the
devil, and be God's enemy while you live, and then to have God year friend, and
to deliver you from the devil, when you come to die. But will God be unjust if
he deals otherwise by you? No surely! It will be altogether and perfectly just,
that you should have your portion with him with whom you have chosen your work;
and that you should be in his possession to whose dominion you have yielded
yourself; and if you cry to God for deliverance, he may most justly give you
that answer, Judges x.14. "Go to the gods which ye have chosen."

5. Consider how often you have refused to hear God's calls to you, and how
just it would therefore be, if he should refuse to hear you when you call upon
him. You are ready, it may be, to complain that you have often prayed, and
earnestly begged of God to show you mercy, and yet have no answer of prayer:
One says, I have been constant in prayer for so many years, and God has not
heard me. Another says, I have done what I can; I have prayed as earnestly as I
am able; I do not see how I can do more; and it will seem hard if after all I
am denied. But do you consider how often God has called, and you have denied
him? God has called earnestly and for a long time; he has called, and called
again in his word and in his providence, and you have refused. You was not
uneasy for fear you should not show regard enough to his calls. You let him
call as loud, and as long as he would; for your part, you had no leisure to
attend to what he said; you had other business to mind; you had these and those
lusts to gratify and please, and worldly concerns to attend; you could not
afford to stand considering of what God had to say to you. When the ministers
of Christ that he sent on that errand, have stood and pleaded with you, in his
name, Sabbath after Sabbath, and have even spent their strength in it, how
little was you moved by it! It did not alter you, but you went on still as you
used to do; when you went away, you returned again to your sins, to your
lasciviousness, to your vain mirth, to your covetousness, to your intemperance,
and that has been the language of your heart and practice. Exodus v.2. "Who is
the Lord, that I should obey his voice?" Was it no crime for you to refuse to
hear when God called; and yet is it now very hard that God does not hear your
earnest calls, and that though your calling on God be not from any respect to
him, but merely from self-love? The devil would beg as earnestly as you, if he
had any hope to get salvation by it, and a thousand times as earnestly, and yet
be as much of a devil as he is now. Are your calls more worthy to be heard than
God's? Or is God more obliged to regard what you say to him, than you to regard
his commands, counsels, and invitations to you? What can have more justice in
it than that, in Prove. i.24, etc. "Because I have called, and ye refused, I
have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at naught all
my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I will also laugh at your calamity, I
will mock when your fear comes; when your fear comes as desolation, and your
destruction comes as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you.
Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early,
but they shall not find me."

6. Have you not taken encouragement to sin against God, on that very
presumption, that God would show you mercy when you fought it? And may not God
justly refuse you that mercy that you have so presumed upon? That has been what
you have flattered yourself with, and that which has made you bold to disobey
God, viz. that though you did so, yet God would show you mercy when you cried
earnestly to him for it: How righteous therefore would it be in God, to
disappoint such a wicked presumption? It was upon that very hope that you dared
to affront the Majesty of heaven so dreadfully as you have done; and can you
now be so sottish as to think that God is obliged not to frustrate that hope?

When a sinner takes encouragement to neglect that secret prayer that God has
commanded, and to gratify his lusts, and to live a carnal, vain life, and
thwart God, and run upon him, and contemn him to his face, thinking with
himself, "If I do so, God would not damn me; he is a merciful God, and
therefore when I seek his mercy he will bestow it upon me;" must God be
accounted hard because he will not do according to such a sinner's presumption?
Cannot he be excused from showing such a sinner mercy when he is pleased to
seek it, without incurring the charge of being unjust? If this be the case, God
has no liberty to vindicate his own honor and majesty; but must lay himself
open to all manner of affronts, and yield himself up to the abuses of vile men,
and lot them disobey, despise, and dishonor him as much as they will; and when
they have done, his mercy and pardoning grace must not be in his own power and
at his own disposal, but he must be obliged to dispense it at their call: He
must take these bold and vile contemners of his majesty, when it suits them to
ask it, and must forgive all their sins, and not only so, but must adopt them
into his family, and make them his children, and bestow eternal glory upon
them. What mean, low, and strange thoughts have such men of God, as think thus
of him?

Consider that you have injured God the more, and have been the worse enemy to
him, for his being a merciful God. So have you treated that attribute of God's
mercy! How just is it therefore that you never should have any benefit of that
attribute!

There is something peculiarly heinous in sinning against the mercy of God more
than other attributes. There is such base and horrid, ingratitude, in being the
worse to God, because he is a being of infinite goodness and grace, that it
above all things renders wickedness vile and detestable. This ought to win us,
and engage us to serve God better; but instead of that, to sin against him the
more, has something inexpressibly bad in it, and does in a peculiar manner
enhance guilt, and incense wrath; as seems to be intimated in Romans ii.4.5. "Or
despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering;
not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? But after thy
hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day
of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God."

The greater the mercy of God is, the more should you be engaged to love him,
and live to his glory. But it has been contrariwise with you; the consideration
of the mercies of God being so exceeding great, is the thing wherewith you have
encouraged yourself in sin. You have heard that the mercy of God was without
bounds, that it was sufficient to pardon the greatest sinner, and you have upon
that very account ventured to be a very great sinner. Though it was very
offensive to God, though you heard that God infinitely hated sin, and that such
practices as you went on in were exceeding contrary to his nature, will, and
glory, yet that did not make you uneasy; you heard that he was a very merciful
God, and had grace enough to pardon you, and so cared not how offensive your
sins were to him. How long have some of you gone on in sin, and what great sins
have some of you been guilty of, on that presumption! Your own conscience can
give testimony to it, that this has made you refuse God's calls, and has made
you regardless of his repeated commands. Now how righteous would it be if God
should swear in his wrath, that you should never be the better for his being
infinitely merciful!

Your ingratitude has been the greater, that you have not only abused the
attribute of God's mercy, taking encouragement from it to continue in sin, but
you have thus abused this mercy, under that very notion of its being exercised
toward you, in a supposition that God would exercise infinite mercy to you in
particular; which consideration should have especially endeared God to you. You
have taken encouragement to sin the more, from that consideration, that Christ
came into the world and died to save sinners; that thanks has Christ had from
you, for enduring such a tormenting death for his enemies! Now, how justly
might it be so, that God should refuse that you should ever be the better for
his Son's laying down his life! It was because of these things that you put off
seeking salvation: You would take the pleasures of sin still longer, hardening
yourself with that, that mercy was infinite, and it would not be too late, if
you sought it afterward; now, how justly may God disappoint you in this, and
order it so that it shall be too late!

7. How have some of you risen up against God, and in the frame of your minds
opposed him in his sovereign dispensations! And how justly upon that account
might God oppose you, and set himself against you! You never yet would submit
to God; never could willingly comply with it, that God should have dominion
over the world, and that he should govern it for his own glory, according to
his own wisdom. You, a poor worm, a potsherd, a broken piece of an earthen
vessel, have dared to find fault and quarrel with God. Isaiah,.xlv.9. "Woe to
him that strives with his maker. Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of
the earth: Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What make thou?" But
yet you have ventured to do it. Romans ix.20. Who art thou, O man, that reply
against God?" But yet you have thought you was big enough; you have taken upon
you to call God to an account, why he does thus and thus; you have said to
Jehovah, What do thou?

If you have been restrained by fear from openly venting your opposition and
enmity of heart against God's government, yet it has been in you; you have not
been quiet in the frame of your mind; you have had the heart of a viper within,
and have been ready to spit venom at God: And it is well if sometimes you have
not actually done it, by tolerating blasphemous thoughts and malignant risings
of heart against him; yea, and the frame of your heart in some measure appeared
in an impatient and fretful behavior.

Now, seeing you have thus opposed God, how just is it that God should oppose
you? Or is it because you are so much better, and so much greater than God,
that it is a crime for God to make that opposition against you that you do
against him? Do you think you ought to appropriate the liberty of making
opposition to yourself as being your prerogative, so that you may be an enemy
to God, but God must by no means be an enemy to you, but must be looked upon
under obligation nevertheless to help you, and save you by his blood, and
bestow his best blessings upon you?

Consider how in the frame of your mind you have thwarted God in those very
exercises of mercy toward others that you are seeking for yourself. God's
exercising his infinite grace toward your neighbors, has put you into an ill
frame, and it may be, set you into a mere tumult of mind: How justly therefore
may God refuse ever to exercise that mercy toward you! Have you not thus
opposed God's showing mercy to others, even at the very time when you pretended
to be earnest with God for pity and help for yourself? Yea, and while you was
endeavoring to get something wherewith to recommend yourself to God? And will
you look to God still with a challenge of mercy, and contend with him for it
notwithstanding? Can you who have such an heart, and have thus behaved
yourself, (...) God for any other than mere sovereign mercy?

II. If you should be forever cast off by God, it would be agreeable to your
treatment (...) Jesus Christ. It would have been just with God if he had cast
you off forever, without ever making you the offer of a Savior. But God has
not done that; but has provided a Savior for sinners, and offered him to you,
even his own Son Jesus Christ, who is the only Savior of men: All that be not
forever cast off are saved by him: God offers men salvation through him, and
has promised us, that if we come to him, we shall not be cast off. But you have
treated, and still treat this Savior after such a manner, that if you should
be eternally cast off by God, it would be most agreeable to your behavior
toward him; which appears by this, viz.

"That you reject Christ, and will not have him for your Savior."

If God offers you a Savior from deserved punishment, and you will not receive
him, then surely it is just that you should go without a Savior. Or is God
obliged, because you do not like this Savior, to provide you another? If, when
he has given an infinitely honorable and glorious person, even his only
begotten Son, to be a sacrifice for sin, in the fire of his wrath, and so
provided salvation, and this Savior is offered to you, you be not suited in
him, and refuse to accept of him, is God therefore unjust if he does not save
you? Is he obliged to save you in a way of your own choosing, because you do
not like the way of his choosing? Or will you charge Christ with injustice
because he does not become your Savior, when at the same time you will not
have him when he offers himself to you, and beseeches you to accept of him as
your Savior?

I am sensible that by this time many persons are ready to open their mouths in
objection against this. If all should speak what they now think, we should hear
a murmuring all over the meetinghouse, and one and another would say, "I cannot
see how this can be, that I be not willing that Christ should be my Savior,
when I would give all the world that he was my Savior: How is it possible that
I should not be willing to have Christ for my Savior, when this is what I am
seeking after, and praying for, and striving for, as for my life?"

Here therefore I would endeavor to convince you, that you are under a gross
mistake in this matter. And, 1 st, I would endeavor to show the weakness of
the grounds of your mistake. And 2 dly, To demonstrate to you, that you have
rejected, and do wilfully reject Jesus Christ.

1. That you may see the weakness of the grounds of your mistake, consider,

1 st, There is a great deal of difference between a willingness not to be
damned, and a being willing to receive Christ for your Savior. You have the
former; there is no doubt to be made of that: Nobody supposes that you love
misery so well as to choose an eternity of it; and so doubtless you are willing
to be saved from eternal misery. But that is a very different thing from being
willing to come to Christ: Persons very commonly mistake the one for the other,
but they are quite two things. You may love the deliverance, but hate the
deliverer. You tell of a willingness; but consider what is the object of that
willingness: It does not respect Christ; the way of salvation by him is not at
all the object of it; but it is wholly terminated on your escape from misery.
The inclination of your will goes no farther than self, it never reaches
Christ. You are willing not to be miserable; that is, you love yourself, and
there your will and choice terminate. And it is but a vain pretense and
delusion to say or think, that you are willing to accept of Christ.

2 d, There is certainly a great deal of difference between a forced compliance
and a free willingness. Force and freedom cannot consist together. Now that
willingness that you tell of, whereby you think you are willing to have Christ
for a Savior, is merely a forced thing. Your heart does not go out after
Christ of itself, but you are forced and driven to seek an interest in him.
Christ has no share at all in your heart; there is no manner of closing of the
heart with him. This forced compliance is not what Christ seeks of you; he
seeks a free and willing acceptance, Psalm cx.3. "Thy people shall be willing
in the day of thy power." He seeks not that you should receive him against your
will, but with a free will. He seeks entertainment in your heart and choice. --
And,

If you refuse thus to receive Christ, how just is it that Christ should refuse
to receive you? How reasonable are Christ's terms, who offers to save all those
that willingly, or with a good will, accept of him for their Savior! Who can
rationally expect that Christ should force himself upon any man to be his
Savior? Or what can be looked for more reasonable, than that all that would be
saved by Christ, should heartily and freely entertain him? And surely it would
be very dishonorable for Christ to offer himself upon lower terms.

But I would now proceed,

2. To show that it is really so, that you are not willing to have Christ for a
Savior. To convince you of it, consider,

1 st, How is it possible that you should be willing to accept of Christ as a
Savior from the desert of a punishment that you are not sensible you have
deserved. If you are truly willing to accept of Christ as a Savior, it must be
as a sacrifice to make atonement for your guilt: Christ came into the world on
this errand, to offer himself as an atonement, to answer for our desert of
punishment. But how is it possible that you should be willing to accept of
Christ as an atonement for that guilt that you be not sensible that you have?
How can you be willing to have Christ for a Savior from a desert of hell? If
you have not really deserved everlasting burnings in hell, then the very offer
of an atonement for such a desert is an imposition up-you on. If you have no
such guilt upon you, then the very offer of a satisfaction for that guilt is an
injury, because it implies in it a charge of guilt that you are free from. Now
therefore it is impossible that a man that is not convinced of his guilt can be
willing to accept of an offer; because he cannot be willing to accept the
charge that the offer implies: That he looks upon as injurious. A man that is
not convinced that he has deserved so dreadful a punishment, cannot willingly
submit to be charged with it: If he thinks he is willing, it is but a mere
forced, feigned business; because in his heart he looks upon himself greatly
injured; and therefore he cannot freely accept of Christ, under that notion of
a Savior from that guilt, and from the desert of such a punishment; for such
an acceptance is an implicit owning that he does deserve such a punishment.

I do not say, but that men may be willing to be saved from an undeserved
punishment; they may rather not suffer it than suffer it: But a man cannot be
willing to accept one at God's hands, under the notion of a Savior from
punishment deserved from him, that he thinks he has not deserved* it is
impossible that any one should freely allow a Savior under that notion* Such
an one cannot like the way of salvation by Christ; For if he thinks he has not
deserved hell, then he will think that freedom from hell is a debt; and
therefore cannot willingly and heartily receive it as a free gift. -- If a king
should condemn a man to some exceeding tormenting death, which the condemned
person thought himself not deserving of, but looked upon the sentence unjust
and cruel, and the king, when the time of execution drew nigh, should offer him
his pardon, under the notion of a very great act of grace and clemency, the
condemned person never could willingly and heartily allow it under that notion,
because he judged himself unjustly condemned.

Now by this it is evident that you are not willing to accept of Christ as your
Savior; because you never yet had such a sense of your own sinfulness, and
such a conviction of your great guilt in God's sight, as to be indeed convinced
that you lay justly condemned to the punishment of hell. You never was
convinced that you had forfeited all favor, and was in God's hands and at his
sovereign and arbitrary disposal, to be either destroyed or saved, just as he
pleased. You never yet was convinced of the sovereignty of God. Hence are there
so many objections arising against the justice of your punishment from original
sin, and from God's decrees, from mercy shown to others, and the like.

2 d, That you be not sincerely willing to accept of Christ as your Savior,
appears by this, That you never have been convinced that he is sufficient for
the work of your salvation. You never had a sight or sense of any such
excellency or worthiness in Christ, as should give such great value to his
blood and his mediation with God, as that it was sufficient to be accepted for
such exceeding guilty creatures, and those that have so provoked God, and
exposed themselves to such amazing wrath. A saying it is so, and a customary
yielding and allowing it to be as others say, is a very different thing from
being really convinced of it, and a being made sensible of it in your own
heart. The sufficiency of Christ depends upon, or rather consists in his
excellency. It is because he is so excellent a person that his blood is of
sufficient value to atone for sin, and it is hence that his obedience is so
worthy in God's sight; it is also hence that his intercession is so prevalent;
and therefore those that never had any spiritual sight or sense of Christ's
excellency, cannot be sensible of his sufficiency.

And that sinners be not convinced that Christ is sufficient for the work he
has undertaken, appears most manifestly when they are under great convictions
of their sin, and danger of God's wrath. Though it may be before they thought
they could allow Christ to be sufficient, (for it is easy to allow any one to
be sufficient for our defense at a time when we see no danger) yet when they
come to be sensible of their guilt and God's wrath, what discouraging thoughts
do they entertain! How are they ready to draw toward despair, as if there were
no hope or help for such wicked creatures as they! The reason is, They have no
apprehension or sense of any other way that God's majesty can be vindicated,
but only in their misery. To tell them of the blood of Christ signifies
nothing, it does not relieve their sinking, despairing hearts. This makes it
most evident that they are not convinced that Christ is sufficient to be their
Mediator.

And as long as they are unconvinced of this, it is impossible they should be
willing to accept of him as their Mediator and Savior. A man in distressing
fear will not willingly betake himself to a fort that he judges not sufficient
to defend him from the enemy. A man will not willingly venture out into the
ocean in a ship that he suspects is leaky, and will sink before he gets through
his voyage.

3 d, It is evident that you are not willing to have Christ for your Savior,
because you have so mean an opinion of him, that you durst not trust his
faithfulness. One that undertakes to be the Savior of souls had need be
faithful; for if he fails in such a trust, how great is the loss! But you are
not convinced of Christ's faithfulness; as is evident, because at such times as
when you are in a considerable measure sensible of your guilt and God's anger,
you cannot he convinced that Christ is willing to accept of you, or that he
stands ready to receive you* if you should come to him, though Christ so much
invites you to come to him* and has so fully declared that he will not reject
you, if you do come; as particularly, John, vi.37.: "Him that comes to me, I
will in no wise cast out." Now, there is no man can be heartily willing to
trust his eternal welfare in the hands of an unfaithful person, or one whose
faithfulness he suspects.

4 th, You are not willing to be saved in that way by Christ, as is evident,
because you are not willing that your own goodness should be set at naught. In
the way of salvation by Christ, men's own goodness is wholly set at naught;
there is no account at all made of it. Now you cannot be willing to be saved in
a way, wherein your own goodness is set at naught, as is evident by that, that
you make much of it yourself. You make much of your prayers and pains in
religion, and are often thinking of them; how considerable do they appear to
you, when you look back upon them! And how much are some of you in thinking how
much more you have done than some others, and in expecting some respect or
regard that God should manifest to what you do: Now, if you make so much of
what you do yourself, it is impossible that you should be freely willing that
God should make nothing of it. As we may see in other things; if a man is proud
of a great estate, or if he values himself much upon his honorable office, or
his great abilities, it is impossible that he should like it, and heartily
approve of it, that others should make light of these things and despise them.

Seeing therefore that it is so evident that you refuse to accept of Christ as
your Savior, why is Christ to be blamed that he does not save you? Christ has
offered himself to you to be your Savior in time past, and he continues
offering himself still, and you continue to reject him, and yet complain that
he does not save you. -- So strangely unreasonable, and inconsistent with
themselves, are gospel sinners!

But I expect that there are many of you that in your hearts still object; Your
mouths be not stopped. -- Such an objection as this, is probably now in the
hearts of many here present.

Object. If it be so, that I am not willing to have Christ for my Savior, yet
I cannot make myself willing.

But I would give an answer to this objection by laying down two things, that
must be acknowledged to be exceeding evident.

1. It is no excuse, that you cannot receive Christ of yourself, unless you
would if you could. This is so evident of itself, that it scarce needs any
proof. Certainly, if persons would not if they could, it is just the same thing
as to the blame that lies upon them, whether they can or cannot. If you were
willing, and then found that you could not, your being unable would alter the
case, and might be some excuse; because then the defect would not be in your
will, but only in your ability: But as long as you will not, it is no matter
what the ability is, whether you have ability or no ability.

If you be not willing to accept of Christ, it will follow that you have no
sincere willingness to be willing; because the will always necessarily approves
of, and rests in its own acts. To suppose the contrary would be to suppose a
contradiction; it would be to suppose that a man's will is contrary to itself,
or that he wills contrary to what he himself wills. So that as you are not
willing to come to Christ, and cannot make yourself willing, so you have no
sincere desire to be willing; and therefore may most justly perish without a
Savior. There is no excuse at all for you; for say what you will about your
inability, the seat of your blame lies in your perverse will, that is an enemy
to the Savior. It is in vain for you to tell of your want of power, as long as
your will is found defective. If a man should hate you, and devour you, and
exalt himself, and smite you in the face, and tell you that he did it
voluntarily, and because he had a mind to, but only should tell you at the same
time, that he hated you so much, that he could not help choosing and willing so
to do, would you take it the more patiently for that? Would not your
indignation be rather stirred up the more?

2. If you would be willing if you could, that is no excuse, unless your
willingness to be willing be sincere. That which is hypocritical, and does not
come from the heart, but is merely forced, ought wholly to be set aside, as
worthy of no consideration; and that because common sense teaches, that that
which is not hearty but hypocritical is indeed nothing, being only a show of
what is not; but that which is good for nothing, ought to go for nothing. But
if you set aside all that is not free, and call nothing a willingness, but a
free, hearty willingness, then see how the case stands, and whether or no you
have not lost all your excuse for standing out against the calls of the gospel.
You say you would make yourself willing to accept if you could; but it is not
from any good principle that you are willing for that; it is not from any free
inclination, or true respect to Christ, or any love to your duty, or any spirit
of obedience, or from the influence of any manner of real respect, or tendency
in your heart, toward any thing that is good, or from any other principle than
such as is in the hearts of devils, and would make them have the same sort of
willingness in the same circumstances. It is therefore evident, that there can
be no goodness in that woulding to be willing to come to Christ: And that which
has no goodness, cannot be an excuse for any badness. If there be no good in
it, then it signifies nothing, and weighs nothing, when put into the scales to
counterbalance that which is bad.

Sinners therefore spend their time in foolish arguing and objecting, making
much o^ that which is good for nothing, making those excuses that be not worth
offering. It is in vain to keep making objections: You stand justly condemned:
The blame lies all at your door: Thrust it off from you as often as you will,
it will return upon you: Sew fig leaves as long as you will, your nakedness
will appear: You continue wilfully and wickedly rejecting Jesus Christ, and
will not have him for your Savior, and therefore it is sottish madness in you
to charge Christ with injustice that he does not save you.

Here is the sin of unbelief! Thus the guilt of that great sin lies upon you!
If you never had thus treated a Savior, you might most justly have been damned
to all eternity: It would but be exactly agreeable to your treatment of God.
But besides this, when God, notwithstanding, has offered you his own dear Son,
to save you from this endless misery you had deserved, and not only so, but to
make you happy eternally in the enjoyment of himself you refused him, and would
not have him for your Savior, and still refuse to comply with the offers of
the gospel; what can render any person more inexcusable? If you should now
perish forever, what can you have to say?

Hereby the justice of God in your destruction appears in two respects.

1. It is more abundantly manifest that it is just that you should be
destroyed. Justice never appears so conspicuous as it does after refused and
abused mercy. Justice in damnation appears abundantly the more clear and
bright, after a wilful rejection of offered salvation. What can an offenced
prince do more than freely offer pardon to a condemned malefactor? And if he
refuses to accept of it, will any one say that his execution is unjust?

2. God's justice evil appear in your greater destruction. Besides the guilt
that you would have had if a Savior never had been offered, you bring that
great additional guilt upon you, of most ungratefully refusing offered
deliverance. What more base and vile treatment of God can there be, than for
you, when justly condemned to eternal misery, and ready to be executed, and God
graciously sends his own Son, who comes and knocks at your door with a pardon
in his hand, and not only a pardon, but a deed of eternal glory; I say, what
can be worse, than for you, out of dislike and enmity against God and his Son,
to refuse to accept those benefits at his hands! How justly may the anger of
God be greatly incensed and increased by it! When a sinner thus ungratefully
rejects mercy, his last error is worse that the first; this is more heinous
than all his former rebellion, and may justly bring down more fearful wrath
upon him.

The heinousness of this sin of rejecting a Savior especially appears in two
things,

1. The greatness of the benefits offered; which appears in the greatness of
the deliverance, which is from inexpressible degrees of corruption and
wickedness of heart and life, the least degree of which is infinitely evil: and
from misery that is everlasting; and in the greatness and glory of the
inheritance purchased and offered, Heb. ii.3. "How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation?"

2. The wonderfulness of the way in which these benefits are procured and
offered. That God should lay help on his own Son, when our case was so
deplorable that help could be had in no mere creature; and that he should
undertake for us, and should come into the world, and take upon him our nature,
and should not only appear in a low state of life, but should die such a death,
and endure such torments and contempt for sinners while enemies, how wonderful
is it! And what tongue or pen can set forth the greatness of the ingratitude,
baseness, and perverseness that there is in it, when a perishing sinner that is
in the most extreme necessity of salvation, rejects it, after it is procured in
such a way as this! That so glorious a person should be thus treated, and that
when he comes on so gracious an errand! That he should stand so long offering
himself and calling and inviting, as he has done to many of you, and all to no
purpose, but all the while be set at naught! Surely you might justly be cast
into hell without one more offer of a Savior! Yea, and thrust down into the
lowest hell! Herein you have exceeded the very devils; for they never rejected
the offers of such glorious mercy; no, nor of any mercy at all. This will be
the distinguishing condemnation of gospel sinners, John, iii.18. "He that
believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name
of the only begotten Son of God."

That outward smoothness of your carriage toward Christ, that appearance of
respect to him in your looks, your speeches, and gestures, do not argue but
that you set him at naught in your heart. There may be much of these outward
shows of respect, and yet you be like Judas, that betrayed the Son of man with
a kiss; and like those mockers that bowed the knee before him, and at the same
time spit in his face.

III. If God should forever cast you off and destroy you, it would be agreeable
to your treatment of others; it would be no other than what would be exactly
answerable to your behavior toward your fellow creatures, that have the same
human nature, and are naturally in the same circumstances with you, and that
you ought to love as yourself. And that appears especially in two things.

1. You have many of you been opposite in your spirit to the salvation of
others. There are several ways that natural men manifest a spirit of opposition
against the salvation of other's souls. It sometimes appears by a fear that
their companions, acquaintance, and equals, will obtain mercy, and so become
unspeakably happier than they. It is sometimes manifested by an uneasiness at
the news of others having hopefully obtained. It appears when persons envy
others for it, and dislike them the more, and disrelish their talk, and avoid
their company, and cannot bear to hear their religious discourse, and
especially to receive warnings and counsels from them. And it oftentimes
appears by their backwardness to entertain charitable thoughts of them, and
their being difficultly brought to believe that it is really so, that they have
obtained mercy, and a forwardness to listen to any thing that seems to
contradict it. The devil hated to own Job's sincerity, Job. i.7. etc. and chap.
ii. verses 3.4.5. There appears very often much of this spirit of the devil in
natural men. Sometimes they are ready to make a ridicule of others pretended
godliness: They speak of the ground of other's hopes, as the enemies of the
Jews did of the wall that they built. Neh. iv.3. "Now Tobiah the Ammonite was
by him, and he said* That which they build, if a fox go up, he shall even break
down their stone wall." There are many that join with Sanballat and Tobiah, and
are of the same spirit with them. There always was, and always will be, an
enmity betwixt the seed of the serpent and the seed of the woman. It appeared
in Cain, who hated his brother, because he was more acceptable to God than
himself: and it appears still in these times* and in this place. There are many
that are like the elder brother, who could not bear it that the prodigal when
he returned should be received with such joy and good entertainment, and was
put into a fret by it, both against his brother that had returned, and his
father that made him so welcome. Luke. xv.

Thus have many of you been opposite to the salvation of others, that stand in
as great necessity of it as you. You have been against their being delivered
from everlasting misery, that can bear it no better than you; not because their
salvation would do you any hurt, or their damnation help you, any otherwise
than as it would gratify that vile spirit that is so much like the spirit of
the devil, who, because he is miserable himself, is unwilling that others
should be happy. How just therefore is it that God should be opposite to your
salvation? If you have so little love or mercy in you as to begrudge your
neighbor's salvation, whom you have no cause to hate, but the law of God and
nature requires you to love, why is God bound to exercise such infinite love
and mercy to you, as to save you at the price of his own blood, that he is no
way bound to love, but that have deserved his hatred a thousand and a thousand
times? You are not willing that others should be converted, that have behaved
themselves injuriously toward you; and yet, will you count it hard if God does
not bestow converting grace upon you that have deserved ten thousand times as
ill of God, as ever any of your neighbors have of you? You are opposite to
God's showing mercy to th^se, and those that you think have been vicious
persons, and are very unworthy of such mercy. Is others unworthiness a just
reason why God should not bestow mercy on them? And yet will God be hard, if,
notwithstanding all your unworthiness, and the abominableness of your spirit
and practice in his sight, he does not show you mercy? You would have God
bestow liberally on you, and upbraid not; but yet when he shows mercy to
others, you are ready to upbraid as soon as you hear of it; you immediately are
thinking with yourself how ill they have behaved themselves; and it may be your
mouths on this occasion are open, enumerating and aggravating the sins they
have been guilty of. You would have God bury all your faults, and wholly blot
out all your transgressions; but yet if he bestows mercy on others, it may be
you will take that occasion to rake up all their old faults that you can think
of. You do not much reflect on and condemn yourself for your baseness and
unjust spirit toward others, in your opposition to their salvation; you do not
quarrel with yourself, and condemn yourself for this; but yet you in your heart
will quarrel with God, and condemn him, and fret at his dispensations, because
you think he seems opposite to showing mercy to you. One would think that the
consideration of these things should forever stop your mouth.

2. Consider how you have promoted other's damnation. Many of you, by the bad
examples you have set, by corrupting the minds of others, by your sinful
conversation, by leading them into sin, or strengthening them in sin, and by
the mischief that you have done in human society other ways that might be
mentioned, have been guilty of those things that have tended to others
damnation. You have heretofore appeared on the side of sin and Satan, and have
behaved yourself so as much to strengthen their interest, and have been many
ways accessory to other's sins, have hardened other's hearts, and thereby have
done what has tended to the ruin of their souls.

And without doubt there are those here present that have been in a great
measure the means of other's damnation. Though it is true that it is determined
of God who he will save, and who not, from all eternity, yet one man may really
be a means of other's damnation as well as salvation. Christ charges the
scribes and Pharisees with this, Matthew. xxiii.13. "Ye shut up the kingdom of
heaven against men; for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them
that are entering, to go in." We have no reason to think that this congregation
has none in it that are cursed from day to day by poor souls that are roaring
out in hell, whose damnation they have been a means of, or have greatly
contributed to.

There are many that contribute to their own children's damnation, by
neglecting their education, and setting them bad examples, and bringing them up
in sinful ways: They take some care of their bodies, but take but little care
of their poor souls; they provide for them bread to eat, but deny them the
bread of life, that their famishing souls stand in need of. And are there no
such parents here that have thus treated their children? If their children be
not gone to hell, it is no thanks to them; it is not because they have not done
what has tended to their destruction. Seeing therefore you have had no more
regard to other's salvation, and have promoted their damnation* how justly
might God leave you to perish yourself?

IV. If God should eternally cast you off, it would but be agreeable to your
own behavior toward yourself: And that in two respects:

1. In being so careless of your own salvation. You have refused to take care
for your salvation, as God has counseled and commanded you from time to time;
and why may not God neglect it, now you seek it of him? Is God obliged to be
more careful of your happiness, than you are either of your own happiness or
his glory? Is God bound to take that care for you, out of love to you, that you
will not take for yourself, either from love to yourself, or regard to his
authority? How long, and how greatly, have you neglected the welfare of your
precious soul, refusing to take pains and deny yourself, or put yourself a
little out of your way for your salvation, while God has been calling upon you!
Neither your duty to God, nor love to your own soul, were enough to induce you
to do little things for your own eternal welfare; and yet do you now expect
that God should do great things, putting forth almighty power, and exercising
infinite mercy for it? You was urged to take care for your salvation, and not
to put it off: You was told that that was the best time before you grew older*
and that it might be, if you would put it off, God would not hear you
afterward; but yet you would not hearken; you would run the venture of it. Now
how justly might God order it so, that it should be too late, leaving you to
seek in vain? You was told, that you would repent of it if you delayed; but you
would not hear: How justly therefore may God give you cause to repent of it, by
refusing to show you mercy now? If God sees you going on in ways contrary to
his commands and his glory, and requires you to forsake them, and tells you
that they are ways that tend to the destruction of your own soul, and therefore
counsels you to avoid them, and you refuse; how just would it be if God should
be provoked by it, henceforward to be as careless of the good of your soul as
you are yourself?

2. You have not only neglected your salvation, but you have wilfully taken
direct courses to undo yourself. You have gone on in those ways and practices
that have directly tended to your damnation and have been perverse and
obstinate in it. You cannot plead ignorance; you had all the light set before
you that you could desire: God told you that you was undoing yourself; but yet
you would do it: He told you that the path you was going in led to destruction,
and counseled you to avoid it; but you would not hearken: How justly therefore
may God leave you to be undone! You have obstinately persisted to travel in the
way that leads to hell for a long time, contrary to God's continual counsels
and commands, till it may be at length you are got almost to your journey's
end, and are come near to hell's gate, and so begin to be sensible of your
danger and misery; and now account it unjust and hard if God will not deliver
you! You have destroyed yourself, and destroyed yourself wilfully, contrary to
God's repeated counsels, yea, and destroyed yourself in fighting against God:
Now therefore, why do you blame any but yourself if you are destroyed? If you
will undo yourself in opposing God, and while God opposes you by his calls and
counsels. and, it may be, too, by the convictions of his Spirit, what can you
object against it, if God now leaves you to be undone? You would have your own
way, and did not like that God should oppose you in it, and your way was to
ruin your own soul: How just therefore is it, if, now at length, God ceases to
oppose you, and falls in with you, and lets your soul be ruined; and as you
would destroy yourself, so should put to his hand to destroy you too! The ways
you went on in had a natural tendency to your misery: If you would drink poison
in opposition to God, and in contempt of him and his advice, who can you blame
but yourself if you are poisoned, and so perish? If you would run into the fire
against all restraints both of God's mercy and authority, you must even blame
yourself if you are burnt.

Thus I have proposed some things to your consideration, which, if you are not
exceeding blind, senseless, and perverse, will stop your month, and convince
you that you stand justly condemned before God, and that he would in no wise
deal hardly with you, but altogether justly, in denying you any mercy, and in
refusing to hear your prayers, let you pray never so earnestly, and never so
often, and continue in it never so long; and that God may utterly disregard
your tears and moans, your heavy heart, your earnest desires, and great
endeavors; and that he may cast you into eternal destruction, without any
regard to your welfare, denying you converting grace, and giving you over to
Satan, and at last cast you into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone,
to be there to eternity, having no rest day nor night, for ever glorifying his
justice upon you, in the presence of the holy angels, and the presence of the
Lamb.

Object. But here many may still object, (for I am sensible it is an hard thing
to stop sinners mouth's,) "God shows mercy to others that have done these
things as well as I, yea, that have done a great deal worse than I."

Ans. 1. That does not prove that God is any way bound to show mercy to you, or
them either. If God does bestow it on others, he does not bestow it on them
because he is bound to bestow it: He might if he had pleased, with glorious
justice, have denied it them. If God bestows it on some, that does not prove
that he is bound to bestow it on any; and if he is bound to bestow it on none,
then he is not bound to bestow it on you. God is in debt to none; and if he
gives to some that he is not in debt to, because it is his pleasure, that does
not bring him into debt to others. It alters not the case as to you at all,
whether others have it or have it not: You do not deserve damnation the less,
than if mercy never had been bestowed on any at all. Matthew. xx.15. "Is thine
eye evil, because mine is good?"

2. If this objection be good, then the exercise of God's mercy is not in his
own right, and his grace is not his own to give That which God may not dispose
of as he pleases, is not his own; for that which is one's own, is at his own
disposal: but if it be not God's own, then he is not capable of making a gift
or present of it to any one; it is impossible to give a debt.

What is it that you would make of God? Must the great God be tied up to that,
that he must not use his own pleasure in bestowing his own gifts, but if he
bestows them on one, must be looked upon obliged to bestow them on another? Is
not God worthy to have the same right, with respect to the gifts of his grace,
that a man has to his money or goods? Is it because God is not so great, and
should be more in subjection than man, that this cannot be allowed him? If any
of you see cause to show kindness to a neighbor, do all the rest of your
neighbors come to you, and tell you, that you owe them so much as you have
given to such a man? But this is the way that you deal with God, as though God
were not worthy to have as absolute a property in his goods, as you have in
yours.

At this rate God cannot make a present of any thing; he has nothing of his own
to bestow: if he has a mind to show peculiar favor to some, or to lay some
particular persons under peculiar obligations to him, he cannot do it; because
he has no special gift, that his creatures stand in great need of, and that
would tend greatly to their happiness, at his own disposal. If this be the
case, why do you pray to God to bestow saving grace upon you? If God does not
do fairly to deny it you, because he bestows it on others, then it is not worth
your while to pray for it, but you may go and tell him that he has bestowed it
on these and those, as bad or worse than you, and so demand it of him as a
debt. -- And at this rate persons never need to thank God for salvation, when
it is bestowed; for what occasion is there to thank God for that which was not
at his own disposal, and that he could not fairly have denied? The thing at
bottom is, that men have low thoughts of God, and high thoughts of themselves;
and therefore it is that they look upon God as having so little right, and they
so much. -- Matthew. xx.1^. "Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine
own?

3. God may justly show greater respect to others than to you, for you have
shown greater respect to others than to God. -- You have shown greater respect
to men than to God: You have rather chosen to offend God than offend men. God
only shows a greater respect to others, that are by nature your equals, than to
you; but you have shown a greater respect to those that are infinitely inferior
to God than to him. You have shown a greater regard to wicked men than to God;
you have honored them more, loved them better, and adhered to them rather than
to him. Yea, you have honored the devil, in many respects, more than God: you
have chosen his will and his interest, rather than God's will and his glory:
you have chosen a little worldly pelf, rather than God: you have set more by a
vile lust than by him: you have chosen these things, and rejected God: You have
set your heart on these things, and cast God behind your back: And where is the
injustice if God is pleased to show greater respect to others than to you, or
if he chooses others and rejects you? You have shown great respect to vile and
worthless things, and no respect to God's glory; and why may not God set his
love on others, and have no respect to your happiness? You have shown great
respect to others and not to God, that you are laid under infinite obligations
to respect above all; and why may not God show respect to others, and not to
you, that never have laid him under the least obligation?

And will you not be ashamed, notwithstanding all these things, still to open
your mouth, to object and cavil about the decrees of God, and other things that
you cannot fully understand. Let the decrees of God be what they will, that
alters not the case as to your liberty, any more than if God had only
foreknown. And why is God to blame for decreeing things? How unbecoming an
infinitely wise Being would it have been to have made a world, and let things
run at random, without disposing events, or fore-ordering how they should come
to pass? And what is that to you, how God has fore-ordered things as long as
your constant experience teaches you, that that does not hinder your liberty,
or your doing what you choose to do. This you know, and your daily practice and
behavior amongst men declares that you are fully sensible of it, with respect
to yourself and others: And still to object, because there are some things in
Gods dispensations above your understanding, is exceeding unreasonable. Your
own conscience charges you with great guilt, and with those things that have
been mentioned, let the secret things of God be what they will. Your conscience
charges you with those vile dispositions, and that base behavior toward God,
that you would at any time most highly resent in your neighbor toward you,
and that not a whit the less for any concern those secret counsels and
mysterious dispensations of God may have in the matter. It is in vain for you
to exalt yourself against an infinitely great, and holy, and just God. If you
continue in it, it will be to your eternal shame and confusion, when hereafter
you shall see at whose door all the blame of your misery lies.

I will finish what I have to say to natural men in the application of this
doctrine, with a caution not to improve the doctrine to discouragement. For
though it would be righteous in God for ever to cast you off, and destroy you,
yet it will also be just in God to save you in and through Christ, who has made
complete satisfaction for all sin. Romans iii.25.26. "Whom God has set forth to
be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for
the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God; to
declare, I say, at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and the
justifier of him which believes in Jesus." Yea, God may through this Mediator,
not only justly, but honorably, show you mercy. The blood of Christ is so
precious, that it is fully sufficient to pay that debt that you have
contracted, and perfectly to vindicate the divine Majesty from all that
dishonor that has been cast upon it, by those many great sins of yours that
have been mentioned. It was as great, and indeed a much greater thing, for
Christ to die, than it would have been for you and all mankind to have burnt in
hell to all eternity. Of such dignity and excellency is Christ in the eyes of
God, that, seeing he has suffered so much for poor sinners, God is willing to
be at peace with them, however vile and unworthy they have been, and on how
many accounts soever the punishment would be just. So that you need not be at
all discouraged from seeking mercy, for there is enough in Christ.

Indeed it would not become the glory of God's majesty to show mercy to you
that have been so sinful and vile a creature, for any thing that you have done,
for such worthless and despicable things as your prayers, and other religious
performances; it would be very dishonorable and unworthy of God so to do, and
it is in vain to expect it: He will show mercy only on Christ's account, and
that, according to his sovereign pleasure, on whom he pleases, when he pleases,
and in what manner he pleases. You cannot bring him under obligation by your
works; do what you will, he will not look on himself obliged. But if it be his
pleasure, he can honorably show mercy through Christ to any sinner of you all,
not one in this congregation excepted.

Therefore here is encouragement for you still to seek and wait,
notwithstanding all your wickedness; agreeable to Samuel's speech to the
children of Israel, when they were terrified with the thunder and rain that God
sent, and their guilt stared them in the face, 1 Samuel xii.20. "Fear not; ye
have done all this wickedness; yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but
serve the Lord with all your hearts."

I would conclude this discourse by improving the doctrine, in the second
place, very briefly to put the godly in mind of the freeness and wonderfulness
of the grace of God toward them. For such were some of you. -- The case was
just so with you as you have heard; you had such a wicked heart, you lived such
a wicked life, and it would have been most just with God for ever to have cast
you off: but he has had mercy upon you; he has made his glorious grace appear
in your everlasting salvation. You behaved yourself so as you have heard
toward God: You had no love to God; but yet he has exercised unspeakable love
to you: You have contemned God, and set light by him; but so great a value has
God's grace set on you and your happiness, that you have been redeemed at the
price of the blood of his own Son: You chose to be with Satan in his service;
but yet God has made you a joint heir with Christ of his glory. You was
ungrateful for past mercies; but yet God not only continued those mercies, but
bestowed unspeakably greater mercies upon you: You refused to hear when God
called; but yet God heard you when you called: You abused the infiniteness of
God's mercy to encourage yourself in sin against God: but yet God has
manifested the infiniteness of that mercy, in the exercises of it toward you*
You have rejected Christ, and set him at naught; and yet he is become your
Savior* You have neglected your own salvation; but God has not neglected it;
You have destroyed yourself; but yet in God has been your help. God has
magnified his free grace toward you, and not to others; because he has chosen
you, and it has pleased him to set his love upon you.

O! what cause is here for praise? What obligations are upon you to bless the
Lord, who has dealt bountifully with you, and to magnify his holy name? What
cause for you to praise him in humility, to walk humbly before God, and to be
conformed to that in Ezekiel. xvi.63.: "That thou may remember and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am
pacified toward thee for all that thou have done, says the Lord God!" You
should never open your mouth in boasting, or self-justification: You should lie
the lower before God for his mercy to you. But you have reason, the more
abundantly for your past sins, to open your mouth in God's praises, that they
may be continually in your mouth, both here and to all eternity, for his rich,
unspeakable, and sovereign mercy to you, whereby he, and he alone, has made
you to differ from others.

PREFACE TO THE FAREWELL SERMON.
IT is not unlikely, that some of the readers of the following Sermon may be
inquisitive concerning the circumstances of the difference between me and the
people of Northampton, that issued in that separation between me and them which
occasioned the preaching of this farewell sermon. -- There is, by no means,
room here for a full account of that matter: But yet it seems to be proper, and
even necessary, here to correct some gross misrepresentations, which have been
abundantly, and (it is to be feared) by some affectedly and industriously made,
of that difference: Such as, that I insisted on persons being assured of their
being in a state of salvation, in order to my admitting them into the church:
that I required a particular relation of the method and order of a person's
inward experience, and of the time and manner of his conversion, as the test of
his (...) for Christian communion; yea, that I have undertaken to set up a pure
church, and to make an exact and certain distinction between saints and
hypocrites, by a pretended infalliable discerning the state of men's souls:
that in these things I had fallen in with those wild people, (...) have lately
appeared in New England, (...) and that I myself was become a grand Seperatist;
that I arrogated all the power of judging of the qualifications of candidates
for communion wholly to myself, and insisted on acting by my sole authority, in
the admission of members into the church* etc.

In opposition to these slanderous representations, I shall at present only
give my reader an account of some things which I laid before the council, that
separated between me and my people, in order to their having a just and full
account of my principles, relating to the affair in controversy.

Long before the sitting of the council, my people had sent to the Reverend Mr
Clark of Salem village, desiring him to write in opposition to my principles.
Which gave me occasion to write to Mr Clark, that might have true information
what my principles were. And in the time of the sitting of the council, I did,
for their information, make a public declaration of my principles before them
and the church, in the meeting house, of the same import with that in my letter
to Mr Clark, and very much in the same words. And then, afterward, sent in to
the council in writing, an extract of that letter, containing the information I
had given Mr Clark, in the very words of my letter to him, that the council
might read and consider it at their leisure, and have a more certain and
satisfactory knowledge what my principles were. The extract which I sent in to
them was in the following words.

"I am often, and I do not know but pretty generally, in the country,
represented as of a new and odd opinion with respect to the terms of Christian
communion, and as being for introducing a peculiar way of my own. Whereas, I do
not perceive that I differ at all from the scheme of Dr Watts, in his book
entitled, The rational Foundation of a Christian Church, and the Terms of
Christian Communion; which, he says, is the common sentiment and practice of
all reformed churches. I had not seen this book of Dr Watt's when I published
what I have written on the subject. But yet, I think my sentiments, as I have
expressed them, are as exactly agreeable to what he lays down, as if I had been
his pupil. Nor do I at all go beyond what Dr Doddridge plainly shows to be his
sentiments, in his Rise and Progress of Religion* and his Sermons on
Regeneration, and his Paraphase and Notes on the New Testament. Nor indeed,
Sir, when I consider the sentiments you have expressed in your letters to Major
Pomroy and Mr Billing, can I perceive but that they come exactly to the same
thing that I maintain. You suppose, the sacraments are not converting
ordinances: But that, as seals of the covenant, they presuppose conversion,
especially in the adult; and that it is visible saintship, or* in other words,
a credible profession of faith and repentance, a solemn consent to the gospel
covenant, joined with a good conversation, and competent measure of Christian
knowledge, is what gives a gospel right to all sacred ordinances: But that it
is necessary to those that come to these ordinances, and in those that profess
a consent to the gospel covenant, that they be sincere in their profession, or
at least should think themselvss so. -- The great things which I have scrupled
in the established method of this church's proceeding, and which I dare no
longer go on in, is their publicly assenting to the form of words rehearsed on
occasion of their admission to the communion, without pretending thereby to
mean any such thing as an hearty consent to the terms of the gospel covenant,
or to mean any such faith or repentance as belong to the covenant of grace, and
are the grand conditions of that covenant: It being, at the same time that the
words are used, their known and established principle, which they openly
profess and proceed upon, that men may and ought to use these words, and mean
no such thing, but something else of a nature far inferior; which I think they
have no distinct determinate notion of; but something cosistent with their
knowing that they do not choose God as their chief good, but love the world more
than him, and that they do not give themselves up entirely to God, but make
reserves; and in short, knowing that they do not heartily consent to the gospel
covenant, but live still under the reigning power of the love of the world, and
(...) to God and Christ. So that the words of their public profession,
according to their (...) established use, (...) to be of the nature of any
profession of gospel faith and repentance, or any proper compliance with the
covenant: For it is their profession, that the words, as used, mean no such
thing. The words used under these circumstances, do at least fail of being a
credible profession of these things. -- I can conceive of no such virtue in a
certain set of words, that it is proper, merely on the making these sounds, to
admit persons to Christian sacraments, without any regard to any pretended
meaning of these sounds: Nor can I think, that any institution of Christ has
established any such terms of admission into the Christian Church. -- It does
not belong to the controversy between me and my people, how particular or large
the profession should be, that is required. I should not choose to be confined
to exact limits as to that matter: But rather than contend, I should content
myself with a few words, briefly expressing the cardinal virtues or acts
implied in a hearty compliance with the covenant, made (as should appear by
inquiry into the person's doctrinal knowledge) understandingly; if there were
an external conversation agreeable thereto: Yea, I should think, that such a
person, solemnly making such a profession, had a right to be received as the
object of a public charity, however he himself might scruple his own
conversion, on account of his not remembering the time, not knowing, the method
of his conversion, or finding so much remaining sin, (...), (if his own
scruples did not hinder his coming to the Lord's table) I should think the
minister or church had (...) right to (...) such a profess^^, though he should
say he did not think himself converted. For I call that a profession of
godliness, which is a profession of the great things wherein godliness
consists, and not a profession of his own opinion of his good estate."

Northampton, May 7, 1750.

Thus far my letter to Mr. Clark.

The council having heard that I had made certain draughts of the covenant, or
forms of a public profession of religion which I stood ready to accept of from
the candidates for church communion, they, for their (...) information, sent
for them. Accordingly I sent them four distinct draughts or forms, which I had
drawn up about a twelvemonth before, as what I stood ready to accept of (any
one of them) rather than contend, and brake with my people.

The two shortest of these forms are here inserted for the satisfaction of the
reader. They are as follows.

"I hope I do truly find a heart to give up myself wholly to God, according to
the tenor of that covenant of grace which was sealed in my baptism; and to walk
in a way of that obediance to all the commandments of God, which the covenant
of grace requires, as long as I live."

Another,

"I hope I truly find in my heart a willingness to comply with all the
commandments of God which require me to give up myself wholly to him, and to
serve him with my body and my spirit. And do accordingly now promise to walk in
a way of obedience to all the commandments of God, as long as I live."

Such kind of professions as these I stood ready to accept, rather than contend
and break with my people. Not but that I think it much more convenient, that
ordinarily the public profession of religion that is made by Christians, should
be much fuller and more particular. And that (as I hinted in my letter to Mr
Clark) I should not choose to be tied up to any certain form of words, but to
have liberty to vary the expressions of a public profession, the more exactly
to suit the sentiments and experience of the professor, that it might be a more
just and free expression of what each one finds in his heart.

And moreover it must be noted, that I ever insisted on it, that it belonged to
me as a pastor, before a profession was accepted, to have full liberty to
instruct the candidate in the meaning of the terms of it, and in the nature of
the things proposed to be professed; and to inquire into his doctrinal
understanding of these things, according to my best discretion; and to caution
the person, as I should think needful, against rashness in making such a
profession, or doing it mainly for the credit of himself or his family, or from
any secular views whatsoever, and to put him on serious self-examination, and
searching his own heart, and prayer to God to search and enlighten him, that he
may not be hypocritical and deceived in the professiom he makes; withal
pointing forth to him the many ways in which professors are liable to be
deceived.

Nor do I think it improper for a minister in such a case, to inquire and know
of the candidate what can be remembered of the circumstances of his Christian
experience; as this may tend much to illustrate his profession, and give a
minister great advantage for proper instructions: though a particular knowledge
and remembrance of the time and method of the first conversion to God, is not
to be made the test of a person's sincerity, nor insisted on as necessary in
order to his being received into full charity. Not that I think it at all
improper or unprofitable, that in some special cases, a declaration of the
particular circumstances of a person's first awakening, and the manner of his
convictions, illuminations, and comforts, should be publicly exhibited before
the whole congregation, on occasion of his admission into the church; though
this be not demanded as necessary to admission. I ever declared against
insisting on a relation of experiences, in this sense (viz. a relation of the
particular time and steps of the operation of the Spirit, in first conversion,)
as the term of communion: Yet, if by a relation of experiences, be meant a
declaration of experience of the great things wrought, wherein true grace and
the essential acts and habits of holiness consist* in this sense, I think an
account of a person's experiences necessary in order to his admission into full
communion in the church. But that in whatever inquiries are made, and whatever
account is given, neither minister nor church are to set up themselvess as
searchers, of hearts, but are to accept the serious solemn profession of the
well-instructed professor, of a good life, as best able to determine what he
finds in his own heart.

These things may serve in some measure to set right those of my readers who
have been misled in their apprehensions of the state of the controversy between
me and my people, by the forementioned misrepresentations.

A FAREWELL SERMON.
2 COR. i.14. As also you have acknowledged us in part, that we are your
rejoicing, even as ye also are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus.


THE apostle, in the preceding part of the chapter, declares what great
troubles he met with in the course of his ministry. In the text, and two
foregoing verses, he declares what were his comforts and supports under the
troubles he met with. There are four things in particular.

1. That he had approved himself to his own conscience, verse. 12. "For our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had
our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you-wards."

2. Another thing he speaks of as matter of comfort, is, that as he had
approved himself to his own conscience, so he had also to the consciences of
his hearers, the Corinthians, whom he now wrote to* and that they should
approve of him at the day of judgment.

3. The hope he had of seeing the blessed fruit of his labors and sufferings
in the ministry, in their happiness and glory, in that great day of accounts.

4. That, in his ministry among the Corinthians, he had approved himself to his
Judge, who would approve and reward his faithfulness in that day.

These three last particulars are signified in my text, and the preceding
verse; and indeed all the four are implied in the text: it is implied, that the
Corinthians had acknowledged him as their spiritual Father, and as one that had
been faithful among them, and as the means of their future joy and glory at the
day of judgment, and one whom they should then see, and have a joyful meeting
with as such. It is implied, that the apostle expected at that time to have a
joyful meeting with them before the Judge, and with joy to behold their glory,
as the fruit of his labors; and so they would be his rejoicing. It is implied
also, that he then expected to be approved of the great Judge, when he and they
should meet together before him; and that he would then acknowledge his
fidelity, and that this had been the means of their glory; and that thus he
would, as it were, give them to him as his crown of rejoicing. But this the
apostle could not hope for, unless he had the testimony of his own conscience
in his favor. And therefore the words do imply, in the strongest manner, that
he had approved himself to his own conscience.

There is one thing implied in each of these particulars, and in every part of
the text, which is that point I shall make the subject of my present discourse,
viz.

DOCTRINE.
"Ministers, and the people that have been under their care, must meet one
another before Christ's tribunal at the day of judgment."

Ministers, and the people that have been under their care, must be parted in
this world, how well soever they have been united: If they are not separated
before, they must be parted by death; and they may be separated while life is
continued. We live in a world of change, where nothing is certain or stable;
and where a little time, a few revolutions of the sun, brings to pass strange
things, surprising alterations, in particular persons, in families, in towns
and churches, in countries and nations. It often happens, that those who seem
most united, in a little time are most disunited, and at the greatest distance.
-- Thus ministers and people, between whom there has been the greatest mutual
regard and strictest union, may not only differ in their judgments, and be
alienated in affection, but one may rend from the other, and all relation
between them be dissolved; the minister may be removed to a distant place, and
they may never have any more to do one with another, in this world. -- But if
it be so, there is one meeting more that they must have, and that is in the
last great day of accounts.

Here I would show,

I. In what manner ministers, and the people which have been under their care,
shall meet one another at the day of judgment.

II. For what purposes.

III. For what reasons God has so ordered it, that ministers and their people
shall then meet together in such a manner, and for such purposes.

I. I would show, in some particulars, in what manner ministers and the people
which have been under their care, shall meet one another at the day of
judgment. Concerning this, I would observe two things in general.

1. That they shall not then meet only as all mankind must then meet, but there
will be something peculiar in the manner of their meeting.

2. That their meeting together at that time shall be very different from what
used to be in the house of God in this world.

1. They shall all not meet at that day merely as all the world must then meet
together. I would observe a difference in two things.

(1.) As to a clear actual view, and distinct knowledge and notice of each
other.

Although the whole world will be then present, all mankind of all generations
gathered in one vast assembly, with all of the angelic nature, both elect and
fallen angels; yet we need not suppose that every one will have a distinct and
particular knowledge of each individual of the whole assembled multitude, which
will undoubtedly consist of many millions of millions. Though it is probable
that men's capacities will be much greater than in their present state* yet
they will not be infinite: Though their understanding and comprehension will be
vastly extended, yet men will not be deified. There will probably be a very
enlarged view that particular persons will have of the various parts and
members of that vast assembly, and so of the proceedings of that great day; but
yet it must needs be, that according to the nature of finite minds, some
persons and some things, at that day, shall fall more under the notice of
particular persons than others; and this (as we may well suppose) according as
they shall have a nearer concern with some than others in the transactions of
the day. There will be special reason why those who have had special concerns
together in this world, in their state of probation, and whose mutual affairs
will be then to be tried and judged, should especially be set in one another's
view. Thus we may suppose, that rulers and subjects, earthly judges and those
whom they have judged, neighbors who have had mutual converse, dealings, and
contests, heads of families and their children and servants, shall then meet,
and in a peculiar distinction be set together. And especially will it be thus
with ministers and their people. It is evident by the text, that these shall be
in each other's view, shall distinctly know each, other, and shall have
particular notice one of another at that time.

(2.) They shall meet together, as having special concern one with another in
the great transactions of that day.

Although they shall meet the whole world at that time, yet they will not have
any immediate and particular concern with all. Yea, the far greater part of
those who shall then be gathered together, will be such as they have had no
intercourse with in their state of probation, and so will have no mutual
concerns to be judged of. But as to ministers and the people that have been
under their care, they will be such as have had much immediate concern one with
another, in matters of the greatest moment that ever mankind have to do one
with another in. Therefore they especially must meet, and be brought together
before the Judge, as having special concern one with another in the design and
business of that great day of accounts.

Thus their meeting, as to the manner of it, will be diverse from the meeting
of mankind in general.

2. Their meeting at the day of judgment will be very diverse from their
meetings one with another in this world.

Ministers and their people, while their relation continues, often meet
together in this world: They are wont to meet from Sabbath to Sabbath, and at
other times, for the public worship of God, and administration, of ordinances,
and the solemn services of God's house: And besides these meetings, they have
also occasions to meet for the determining and managing their ecclesiastical
affairs, for the exercise of church discipline, and the settling and adjusting
those things which concern the purity and good order of public administrations.
But their meeting at the day of judgment will be exceeding diverse, in its
manner and circumstances, from any such meetings and interviews as they have
one with another in the present state. I would observe how, in a few
particulars.

(1.) Now they meet together in a preparatory mutable state, but then in an
unchangable state.

Now sinners in the congregation meet their minister in a state wherein they
are capable of a saving change, capable of being turned, through God's blessing
on the ministrations and labors of their pastor, from the power of Satan unto
God; and being brought out of a state of guilt, condemnation and wrath, to a
state of peace and favor with God, to the enjoyment of the privileges of his
children, and a title to their eternal inheritance. And saints now meet their
minister with great remains of corruption, and sometimes under great spiritual
difficulties and affliction: And therefore are yet the proper subjects of means
of an happy alteration of their state, consisting in a greater freedom from
these things, which they have reason to hope for in the way of an attendance on
ordinances, and of which God is pleased commonly to make his ministers the
instruments. And ministers and their people now meet in order to the bringing
to pass such happy changes; they are the great benefits sought in their solemn
meetings in this world.

But when they shall meet together at the day of judgment, it will be far
otherwise. They will not then meet in order to the use of means for the
bringing to effect any such changes; for they will all meet in an unchangeable
state. Sinners will be in an unchangeable state: They who then shall be under
the guilt and power of sin, and have the wrath of God abiding on them, shall be
beyond all remedy or possibility of change, and shall meet their ministers
without any hopes of relief or remedy, or getting any good by their means. And
as for the saints, they will be already perfectly delivered from all their
before remaining corruption, temptation, and calamities of every kind, and set
for ever out of their reach; and no deliverance, no happy alteration, will
remain to be accomplished in the way of the use of means of grace, under the
administrations of ministers. It will then be pronounced, "He that is unjust,
let him be unjust still; and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he
that is righteous, let him be righteous still; and he that is holy, let him be
holy still."

(2.) Then they shall meet together in a state of clear, certain, and
infallible light.

Ministers are set as guides and teachers, and are represented in Scripture as
lights set up in the churches; and in the present state meet their people from
time to time in order to instruct and enlighten them, to correct their
mistakes, and to be a voice behind them, when they turn aside to the right hand
or the left, saying, "This is the way, walk in it;" to evince end confirm the
truth by exhibiting the proper evidences of it, and to refute errors and
corrupt opinions, to convince the erroneous, and establish the doubting. But
when Christ shall come to judgment, every error and false opinion shall be
detected; all deceit and delusion shall vanish away before the light of that
day, as the darkness of the night vanishes at the appearance of the rising sun;
and every doctrine of the word of God shall then appear in full evidence, and
none shall remain unconvinced; all shall know the truth with the greatest
certainty, and there shall be no mistakes to rectify.

Now ministers and their people may disagree in their judgments concerning
some matters of religion, and may sometimes meet to confer together concerning
those things wherein they differ, and to hear the reasons that may be offered
on one side and the other; and all may be ineffectual as to any conviction of
the truth: they may meet and part again no more agreed than before; and that
side which was in the wrong, may remain so still: Sometimes the meetings of
ministers with their people, in such a case of disagreeing sentiments, are
attended with unhappy debate and controversy, managed with much prejudice and
want of candor: not tending to light and conviction* but rather to confirm and
increase darkness, and establish opposition to the truth, and alienation of
affection one from another. But when they shall hereafter meet together, at the
day of judgment, before the tribunal of the great Judge, the mind and will of
Christ will be made known; and there shall no longer be any debate or
difference of opinions; the evidence of the truth shall appear beyond all
dispute, and all controversies shall be finally and for ever decided.

Now ministers meet their people in order to enlighten and awaken the
consciences of sinners; setting before them the great evil and danger of sin,
the strictness of God's law, their own wickedness of heart and practice, the
great guilt they are under, the wrath that abides upon them, and their
impotence, blindness, poverty, and helpless and undone condition: But all is
often in vain; they remain still, notwithstanding all their ministers can say,
stupid and unawakened, and their consciences unconvinced. But it will not be so
at their last meeting at the day of judgment; sinners, when they shall meet
their minister before their great Judge, will not meet him with a stupid
conscience: They will then be fully convinced of the truth of those things
which they formerly heard from him, concerning the greatness and terrible
majesty of God, his holiness, and hatred of sin, and his awful justice in
punishing of it, the strictness of his law, and the dreadfulness and truth of
his threatenings, and their own unspeakable guilt and misery: And they shall
never more be insensible of these things: The eyes of conscience will now be
fully enlightened, and never shall be blinded again: The mouth of conscience
shall now be opened, and never shall be shut any more.

Now ministers me^^ with their people, in public and private, in order to
enlighten them concerning the state of their souls; to open and apply the rules
of God's word to them, in order to their searching their own hearts, and
discerning the state that they are in: But now ministers have no infallible
discerning the state of the souls of their people; and the most skilful of them
are liable to mistakes, and often are mistaken in things of this nature: nor
are the people able certainly to know the state of their minister, or another's
state; very often those pass among them for saints, and, it may be, eminent
saints, that are grand hypocrites; and on the other hand, those are sometimes
censured* or hardly received into their charity, that are indeed some of God's
jewels. And nothing is more common than for men to be mistaken concerning their
own state: Many that are abominable to God, and the children of his wrath,
think highly of themselves, as his precious saints and dear children. Yea,
there is reason to think, that often some that are most bold in their
confidence of their safe and happy state, and think themselves not only true
saints, but the most eminent saints in the congregation, are in a peculiar
manner a smoke in God's nose. And thus it undoubtedly often is in those
congregations where the word of God is most faithfully dispensed,
notwithstanding all that ministers can say in their clearest explications, and
most searching applications of the doctrines and rules of God's word to the
souls of their hearers, in their meetings one with another. But in the day of
judgment they shall have another sort of meeting; then the secrets of every
heart shall be made manifest, and every man's state shall be perfectly known. 1
Cor. iv.5. "Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who
both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest
the counsels of the hearts: And then shall every man have praise of God." Then
none shall be deceived concerning his own state, nor shall be any more in doubt
about it. There shall be an eternal end to all the self-conceit and vain hopes
of deluded hypocrites, and all the doubts and fears of sincere Christians. --
And then shall all know the state of one another's souls: The people shall know
whether their minister has been sincere and faithful, and the minister shall
know the state of every one of their people, and to whom the word and
ordinances of God have been a savor of life unto life, and to whom a savor of
death unto death.

Now in this present state it often happens, that when ministers and people
meet together to debate and manage their ecclesiastical affairs, especially in
a state of controversy, they are ready to judge and censure one another with
regard to each others views and designs, and the principles and ends that each
is influenced by; and are greatly mistaken in their judgment, and wrong one
another in their censures: But at that future meeting, things will be set in a
true and perfect light, and the principles and aims that every one has acted
from, shall be certainly known; and there will be an end to all errors of this
kind, and all unrighteous censures.

(3.) In this world, ministers and their people often meet together to hear of
and wait upon an unseen Lord; but at the day of judgment, they shall meet in
his most immediate and visible presence.

Ministers, who now often meet their people to preach to them the King eternal,
immortal, and invisible, to convince them that there is a God, and declare to
them what manner of being he is, and to convince them that he governs, and will
judge the world, and that there is a future state of rewards and punishments,
and to preach to them a Christ in heaven, at the right hand of God, in an
unseen world, shall then meet their people in the most immediate sensible
presence of this great God, Savior, and Judge, appearing in the most plain,
visible, and open manner, with great glory, with all his holy angels* before
them and the whole world. They shall not meet them to hear about an absent
Christ, an unseen Lord, and future Judge; but to appear before that Judge, and
as being set together in the presence of that supreme Lord, in his immense
glory and awful majesty, whom they have heard so often of, in their meetings
together on earth.

(4.) The meeting at the last day, of ministers, and the people that have been
under their care, will not be attended by any one with a careless heedless
heart.

With such an heart are their meetings often attended in this world by many
persons, having little regard to him whom they pretend unitedly to adore in the
solemn duties of his public worship, taking little heed to their own thoughts
or frame of their minds, not attending to the business they are engaged in, or
considering the end for which they are come together. -- But the meeting at
that great day will be very different: there will not be one careless heart, no
sleeping, no wandering of mind from the great concern of the meeting, no
inattentiveness to the business of the day, no regardlessness of the presence
they are in, or of those great things which they shall hear from Christ at that
meeting, or that they formerly heard from him, and of him, by their ministers,
in their meetings in a state of trial, or which they shall now hear their
ministers declaring concerning them before their judge.

Having observed these things, concerning the manner and circumstances of this
future meeting of ministers and the people that have been under their care,
before the tribunal of Christ at the day of judgment, I now proceed,

II. To observe to what purposes they shall then meet.

1. To give an account, before the great Judge, of their behavior one to
another, in the relation they stood in to each other in this world.

Ministers are sent forth by Christ to their people on his business, are his
servants and messengers; and, when they have finished their service, they must
return to their master to give him an account of what they have done, and of
the entertainment they have had in performing their ministry. Thus we find, in
Luke, xiv.16. -- 21. That when the servant who was sent forth to call the
guests to the great supper, had done his errand, and finished his appointed
service, he returned to his master, and gave him an account of what he had
done, and of the entertainment he had received. And when the master, being
angry, sent his servant to others, he returns again, and gives his master an
account of his conduct and success. So we read, in Heb. xiii.17. of ministers
or rulers in the house of God, "that watch for souls, as those that must give
account." And we see by the forementioned Luke xiv. that ministers must give an
account to their master, not only of their own behavior in the discharge of
their office, but also of their peoples reception of them, and of the treatment
they have met with among them.

And therefore, as they will be called to give an account of both, they shall
give an account at the great day of accounts, in the presence of their people;
they and their people being both present before their Judge.

Faithful ministers will then give an account with joy, concerning those who
have received them well, and made a good improvement of their ministry; and
these will be given them, at that day, as their crown of rejoicing. And, at the
same time, they will give an account of the ill treatment of such as have not
well received them and their messages from Christ: they will meet these, not as
they used to do in this world, to counsel and warn them, but to bear witness
against them; and as their judges, and assessors with Christ, to condemn them.
And, on the other hand, the people will, at that day, rise up in judgment
against wicked and unfaithful ministers, who have sought their own temporal
interest more than the good of the souls of their flock.

2. At that time ministers, and the people who have been under their care,
shall meet together before Christ, that he may judge between them, as to any
controversies which have subsisted between them in this world.

So it very often comes to pass in this evil world, that great differences and
controversies arise between ministers and the people that are under their
pastoral care. Though they are under the greatest obligations to live in peace,
above persons in almost any relation whatever; and although contests and
dissentions between persons so related are the most unhappy and terrible in
their consequences, on many accounts, of any sort of contentions; yet how
frequent have such contentions been? Sometimes a people contest with their
ministers about their doctrine, sometimes about their administrations and
conduct, and sometimes about their maintenance; and sometimes such contests
continue a long time; and sometimes they are decided in this world, according
to the prevailing interest of one party or the other, rather than by the word
of God, and the reason of things; and sometimes such controversies never have
any proper determination in this world.

But at the day of judgment there will be a full, perfect, and everlasting
decision of them* The infalliable Judge, the infinite fountain of light, truth,
and justice, will judge between the contending parties, and will declare what
is the truth, who is in the right, and what is agreeable to his mind and will.
And in order hereto, the parties must stand together before him at the last
day; which will be the great day of finishing and determining all
controversies, rectifying all mistakes, and abolishing all unrighteous
judgments, errors, and confusions, which have before subsisted in the world of
mankind.

3. Ministers, and the people that have been under their care, must meet
together at that time to receive an eternal sentence and retribution from the
Judge, in the presence of each other, according to their behavior in the
relation they stood in, one to another in the present state.

The Judge will not only declare justice, but he will do justice between
ministers and their people. He will declare what is right between them,
approving him that has been just and faithful, and condemning the unjust; and
perfect truth and equity shall take place in the sentence which he passes, in
the rewards he bestows, and the punishments which he inflicts. There shall be a
glorious reward to faithful ministers; to those who have been successful. Dan.
xii.3. "And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament,
and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars forever and ever:" And
also to those who have been faithful, and yet not successful; Isai. xlix.4.
"Then I said, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught; yet
surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my reward with my God." And those who
have well received and entertained them shall be gloriously rewarded; Matthew.
x.40.41. "He that receives you, receives me; and he that receives me,
receives him that sent me. He that receives a prophet in the name of a
prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward; and he that receives a righteous
man, in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward."
Such people, and their faithful ministers, shall he each other's crown of
rejoicing. 1 These. ii.19.20. "For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of
rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
coming? For ye are our glory and joy." And in the text, We are your rejoicing,
as ye also are ours, in the day of the Lord Jesus. But they that evil-intreat
Christ's faithful ministers* especially in that wherein they are faithful,
shall be severely punished; Matthew. x.14.15. "And whosoever shall not receive
you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or city, shake off
the dust of your feet. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for
the sinners of Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day of judgment, than for that city."
Deuteronomy. xxxiii.8. -- 11. "And of Levi he said* Let thy Thummim and thy Urim be
with thy holy one. -- They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law
-- bless, Lord, his substance, and accept the work of his hands* smite through
the loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they
rise not again." On the other hand, those ministers who are found to have been
unfaithful, shall have a most terrible punishment. See Ezekiel. xxxiii.6. Matthew.
xxiii.1. -- 3^.

Thus justice shall be administered at the great day to ministers and their
people: And to that end they shall meet together, that they may not only
receive justice to themselves* but see justice done to the other party: For
this is the end of that great day, to reveal or declare the righteous judgment
of God; Romans ii.5. Ministers shall have justice done them, and they shall see
justice done to their people: And the people shall receive justice themselves
from their Judge, and shall see justice done to their minister. -- And so all
things will be adjusted and settled for ever between them* every one being
sentenced and recompensed according to his works, either in receiving and
wearing a crown of eternal joy and glory, or in suffering everlasting shame and
pain.

I come now to the next thing proposed, viz.

III. To give some reasons why we may suppose God has so ordered it, that
ministers, and the people that have been under their care, shall meet together
at the day of judgment, in such a manner and for such purposes.

There are two things which I would now observe.

1. The mutual concerns of ministers and their people are of the greatest
importance.

The Scripture declares, that God will bring every work into judgment, with
every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. It is fit that
all the concerns, and all the behavior of mankind, both public and private,
should be brought at last before God's tribunal, and finally determined by an
infallible Judge* But it is especially requisite that it should be thus, as to
affairs of very great importance.

Now the mutual concerns of a Christian minister and his church and
congregation, are of the vastest importance: in many respects* of much greater
moment than the temporal concerns of the greatest earthly monarchs, and their
kingdoms or empires. It is of vast consequence how ministers discharge their
office, and conduct themselves toward their people in the work of the
ministry, and in affairs appertaining to it. It is also a matter of vast
importance, how a people receive and entertain a faithful minister of Christ,
and what improvement they make of his ministry. These things have a more
immediate and direct respect to the great and last end for which man was made,
and the eternal welfare of mankind, than any of the temporal concerns of men,
whether public or private. And therefore it is especially fit that these
affairs should be brought into judgment, and openly determined and settled in
truth and righteousness; and that to this end, ministers and their people
should meet together before the omniscient and infallible Judge.

2. The mutual concerns of ministers and their people have a special relation
to the main things appertaining to the day of judgment.

They have a special relation to that great and divine person who then will
appear as Judge. Ministers are his messengers, sent forth by him; and, in their
office and administrations among their people, represent his person, stand in
his stead, as those that are sent to declare his mind, to do his work, and to
speak and act in his name: And therefore it is especially fit that they should
return to him to give an account of their work and success. The king is judge
of all his subjects, they are all accountable to him: But it is more especially
requisite that the king's ministers, who are especially entrusted with the
administrations of his kingdom, and that are sent forth on some special
negotiation, should return to him, to give an account of themselves, and their
discharge of their trust, and the reception they have met with.

Ministers are not only messengers of the person who at the last day will
appear as Judge, but the errand they are sent upon, and the affairs they have
committed to them as his ministers, do most immediately concern his honor, and
the interest: of his kingdom: The work they are sent upon is to promote the
designs of his administration and government; and therefore their business with
their people has a near relation to the day of judgment* for the great end of
that day is completely to settle and establish the affairs of his kingdom, to
adjust all things that pertain to it, that every thing that is opposite to the
interests of his kingdom may be removed, and that every thing which contributes
to the completeness and glory of it may be perfected and confirmed, that this
great King may receive his due honor and glory.

Again, the mutual concerns of ministers and their people have a direct
relation to the concerns of the day of judgment, as the business of ministers
with their people is to promote the eternal salvation of the souls of men, and
their escape from eternal damnation; and the day of judgment is the day
appointed for that end, openly to decide and settle men's eternal state, to fix
some in a state of eternal salvation, and to bring their salvation to its
utmost consummation, and to fix others in a state of everlasting damnation and
most perfect misery. The mutual concerns of ministers and people have a most
direct relation to the day of judgment, as the very design of the work of the
ministry is the people's preparation for that day: Ministers are sent to warn
them of the approach of that day, to forewarn them of the dreadful sentence
then to be pronounced on the wicked, and declare to them the blessed sentence
then to be pronounced on the righteous, and to use means with them that they
may escape the wrath which is then to come on the ungodly, and obtain the
reward then to be bestowed on the saints.

And as the mutual concerns of ministers and their people have so ^^ear and
direct a relation to that day, it is especially fit that those concerns should
be brought into that day, and there settled and issued; and that in order to
this, ministers and their people should meet and appear together before the
great Judge at that day.

APPLICATION.
The improvement I would make of the things which have been observed, is to
lead the people here present, who have been under my pastoral care, to some
reflections, and give them some advice suitable to our present circumstances;
relating to what has been lately done in order to our being separated, as to
the relation we have heretofore stood in one to another; but expecting to meet
each other before the great tribunal at the day of judgment.

The deep and serious consideration of that our future most solemn meeting, is
certainly most suitable at such a time as this* there having so lately been
that done, which, in all probability, will (as to the relation we have
heretofore stood in) be followed with an everlasting separation.

How often have we met together in the house of God in this relation? how often
have I spoken to you, instructed, counseled, warned, directed, and fed you,
and administered ordinances among you, as the people which were committed to my
care, and whose precious souls I had the charge of? but in all probability,
this never will be again.

The prophet Jeremiah, (chap. xxxv.3.) puts the people in mind how long he had
labored among them in the work of the ministry: "From the thirteenth year of
Josiah, the son of Amon, king of Judah, even unto this day (that is, the three
and twentieth year) the word of the Lord came unto me, and I have spoken unto
you, rising early and speaking." I am not about to compare myself with the
prophet Jeremiah; but in this respect I can say as he did, that "I have spoken
the word of God to you, unto the three and twentieth year, rising early and
speaking." It was three and twenty years, the 15th day of last Februray, since
I have labored in the work of the ministry, in the relation of a pastor to
this church and congregation. -- And though my strength has been weakness,
having always labored under great infirmity of body, besides my insufficiency
for so great a charge in other respects, yet I have not spared my feeble
strength, but have exerted it for the good of your souls. I can appeal to you,
as the apostle does to his hearers, Gal. iv.13. "Ye know how through infirmity
of the flesh, I preached the gospel unto you." I have spent the prime of my
life and strength in labors for your eternal welfare. You are my witnesses,
that what strength I have had, I have not neglected in idleness, nor laid out
in prosecuting worldly schemes, and managing temporal affairs, for the
advancement of my outward estate, and aggrandizing myself and family; but have
given myself to the work of the ministry, laboring in it night and day, rising
early, and applying myself to this great business to which Christ appointed me.
I have found the work of the ministry among you to be a great work indeed, a
work of exceeding care, labor, and difficulty: Many have been the heavy
burdens that I have borne in it, which my strength has been very unequal to.
God called me to bear these burdens; and I bless his name, that he has so
supported me as to keep me from sinking under them, and that his power herein
has been manifested in my weakness; so that although I have often been troubled
on every side, yet I have not been distressed; perplexed, but not in despair;
cast down, but not destroyed.

But now I have reason to think my work is finished which I had to do as your
minister: You have publicly rejected me, and my opportunities cease.

How highly, therefore, does it now become us, to consider of that time when we
must meet one another before the chief Shepherd? When I must give an account of
my stewardship, of the service I have done for, and the reception and treatment
I have had among the people he sent me to: And you must give an account of your
own conduct toward me* and the improvement you have made of these three and
twenty years of my ministry. For then both you and I must appear together, and
we both must give an account, in order to an infallible righteous and eternal
sentence to be passed upon us, by him who will judge us with respect to all
that we have said or done in our meetings here, all our conduct one toward
another, in the house of God and elsewhere, on Sabbath days and on other days;
who will try our hearts, and manifest our thoughts, and the principles and
frames of our minds, will judge us with respect to all the controversies which
have subsisted between us, with the strictest impartiality, and will examine
our treatment of each other in those controversies: There is nothing covered,
that shall not be revealed, nor hid, which shall not be known; all will be
examined in the searching penetrating light of God's omniscience and glory, and
by him whose eyes are as a flame of fire; and truth and right shall be made
plainly to appear, being stripped of every veil; and all error, falsehood,
unrighteousness, and injury shall be laid open, stripped of every disguise;
every specious pretense, every cavil, and all false reasoning, shall vanish in
a moment, as not being able to bear the light of that day. -- And then our
hearts will be turned inside out, and the secrets of them will be made more
plainly to appear than our outward actions do now. Then it shall appear what
the ends are which we have aimed at, what have been the governing principles
which we have acted from, and what have been the dispositions we have
exerercised in our ecclesiastical disputes and contests. Then it will appear,
whether I acted uprightly, and from a truly conscientious careful regard to my
duty to my great Lord and Master, in some former ecclesiastical controversies,
which have been attended with exceeding unhappy circumstances and consequences:
It will appear whether there was any just cause for the resentment which was
manifested on those occasions. And then our late grand controversy, concerning
the qualifications necessary for admission to the privileges of members, in
complete standing, in the visible church of Christ, will be examined and judged
in all its parts and circumstances, and the whole set forth in a clear,
certain, and perfect light. Then it will appear whether the doctrine which I
have preached and published concerning this matter be Christ's own doctrine,
whether he will not own it as one of the precious truths which have proceeded
from his own mouth, and vindicate and honor as such before the whole universe.
Then it will appear what is meant by "the man that comes without the
wedding garment;" for that is the day spoken of* Matthew. xxii.13. "wherein such
an one shall be bound hand and foot, and cast into outer darkness, where shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth." And then it will appear whether, in
declaring this doctrine, and acting agreeable to it, and in my general conduct
in the affair, I have been influenced from any regard to my own temporal
interest, or honor, or desire to appear wiser than others; or have acted from
any sinister secular views whatsoever; and whether what I have done has not
been from a careful, strict, and tender regard to the will of my Lord and
Master, and because I dare not offend him, being satisfied what his will was,
after a long, diligent, impartial, and prayerful inquiry; having this
constantly in view and prospect, to engage me to great solicitude not rashly to
determine truth to be on this side of the question where I am now persuaded it
is, that such a determination would not be for my temporal interest, but every
way against it, bringing a long series of extreme difficulties, and plunging me
into an abyss of trouble and sorrow. And then it will appear whether my people
have done their duty to their pastor with respect to this matter, whether they
have shown a right temper and spirit on this occasion; whether they have done
me justice in hearing, attending to, and considering what I had to say in
evidence of what I believed and taught as part of the counsel of God* whether I
have been treated with that impartiality, candor, and regard which the just
judge esteemed due; and whether, in the many steps which have been taken, and
the many things that have been said and done in the course of this controversy,
righteousness, and charity, and Christian decorum has been maintained; or if
otherwise, to how great a degree these things have been violated. Then every
step of the conduct of each of us in this affair, from first to last, and the
spirit we have exercised in all, shall be examined and manifested, and our own
consciences will speak plain and loud, and each of us shall be convinced, and
the world shall know; and never shall there be any more mistake,
misrepresentation, or misapprehension of the affair to eternity.

This controversy is now probably brought to an issue between you and me as to
this world; it has issued in the event of the week before last: But it must
have another decision at that great day, which certainly will come, when you
and I shall meet together before the great judgment seat: And therefore I leave
it to that time, and shall say no more about it at present.

But I would now proceed to address myself particular to several sorts of
persons.

I. To those who are professors of godliness amongst us.

I would now call you to a serious consideration of that great day wherein you
must meet him who has heretofore been your pastor, before the Judge whose eyes
are as a flame of fire.

I have endeavored, according to my best ability, to search the word of God,
with regard to the distinguishing notes of true piety, those by which persons
might best discover their state, and most surely and clearly judge of
themselves. And these rules and marks I have from time to time applied to you,
in the preaching of the word, to the utmost of my skill, and in the most plain
and searching manner that I have been able, in order to the detecting the
deceived hypocrite, and establishing the hopes and comforts of the sincere. And
yet it is to be feared, that after all that I have done, I now leave some of
you in a deceived deluded state; for it is not to be supposed that among
several hundred professors, none are deceived.

Henceforward I am like to have no more opportunity to take the care and charge
of your souls, to examine and search them. But still I entreat you to remember
and consider the rules which I have often laid down to you during my ministry,
with a solemn regard to the future day when you and I must meet together before
our Judge; when the use of examination you have heard from me must be rehearsed
again before you, and those rules of trial must be tried, and it will appear
whether they have been good or not; and it will also appear whether you have
impartially heard them, and tried yourselves by them; and the Judge himself,
who is infallible, will try both you and me: And after this none will be
deceived concerning the state of their souls:

I have often put you in mind, that whatever your pretenses to experiences,
discoveries, comforts, and joys, have been, at that day every one will be
judged according to his works; and then you will find it so.

May you have a minister of greater knowledge of the word of God, and better
acquaintance with soul cases, and of greater skill in applying himself to
souls, whose discourses may be more searching and convincing; that such of you
as have held fast deceit under my preaching, may have your eyes opened by his;
that you may be undeceived before that great day.

What means and helps for instruction and self-examination you may hereafter
have is uncertain; but one thing is certain, that the time is short, your
opportunity for rectifying mistakes in so important a concern will soon come to
an end. We live in a world of great changes. -- There is now a great change
come to pass; you have withdrawn yourselves from my ministry, under which you
have continued for so many years: But the time is coming, and will soon come,
when you will pass out of time into eternity; and so will pass from under all
means of grace whatsoever.

The greater part of you who are professors of godliness have, (to use the
phrase of the apostle,) "acknowledged me in part:" You have heretofore
acknowledged me to be your spiritual father, the instrument of the greatest
good to you that ever is, or can be obtained by any of the children of men.
Consider of that day when you and I shall meet before our Judge, when it shall
be examined whether you have had from me the treatment which is due to
spiritual children, and whether you have treated me as you ought to have
treated a spiritual father. As the relation of a natural parent brings great
obligations on children in the sight of God; so much more, in many respects,
does the relation of a spiritual father bring great obligations on such whose
conversion and eternal salvation they suppose God has made them the instruments
of: 1 Cor. iv.15. "For though you have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet
have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus* I have begotten you through the
gospel."

II. Now I am taking my leave of this people, I would apply myself to such
among them as I leave in a Christless, graceless condition; and would call on
such seriously to consider of that solemn day when they and I must meet before
the Judge of the world.

My parting with you is in some respects in a peculiar manner a melancholy
parting; in as much as I leave you in most melancholy circumstances; because I
leave you in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, having the wrath of
God abiding on you, and remaining under condemnation to everlasting misery and
destruction. Seeing I must leave you, it would have been a comfortable and
happy circumstance of our parting, if I had left you in Christ, safe and
blessed in that sure refuge and glorious rest of the saints. But it is
otherwise, I leave you far off, aliens and strangers, wretched subjects, and
captives of sin and Satan, and prisoners of vindictive justice; without Christ,
and without God in the world.

Your consciences hear me witness, that while I had opportunity, I have not
ceased to warn you, and set before you your danger. I have studied to represent
the misery and necessity of your circumstances in the clearest manner possible.
I have tried all ways that I could think of tending to awaken your consciences,
and make you sensible of the necessity of your improving your time, and being
speedy in dying from the wrath to come, and thorough in the use of means for
your escape and safety, I have diligently endeavored to find out and use the
most powerful motives to persuade you to take care for your own welfare and
salvation. I have not only endeavored to awaken you, that you might be moved
with fear, but I have used my utmost endeavors to win you: I have fought out
acceptable words, that if possible I might prevail upon you to forsake sin, and
turn to God, and accept of Christ as your Savior and Lord. I have spent my
strength very much in these things. But yet, with regard to you whom I am now
speaking to, I have not been successful: But have this day reason to complain
in those words, Jer. vi.29. "The bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed of the
fire, the founder melts in vain, for the wicked are not plucked away." It is
to be feared that all my labors, as to many of you, have served to no other
purpose but to harden you; and that the word which I have preached, instead of
being a favor of life unto life* has been a favor of death unto death. Though
I shall not have any account to give for the future of such as have openly and
resolutely renounced my ministry, as of a betrustment committed to me; yet
remember you must give account for yourselves, of your care of your own souls,
and your improvement of all means past and future, through your whole lives.
God only knows what will become of your poor perishing souls, what means you
may hereafter enjoy, or what disadvantages and temptations you may be under.
May God in mercy grant, that however all past means have been unsuccessful, you
may have future means which may have a new effect; and that the word of God, as
it shall be hereafter dispensed to you, may prove as the fire and the hammer
that breaks the rock in pieces. However, let me now at parting exhort and
beseech you not wholly to forget the warnings you have had while under my
ministry. -- When you and I shall meet at the day of judgment, then you will
remember them: The sight of me your former minister, on that occasion, will
soon revive them in your memory; and that in a very affecting manner. O do not
let that be the first time that they are so revived!

You and I are now parting one from another as to this world; let us labor
that we may not be parted after our meeting at the last day. If I have been
your faithful pastor, (which will that day appear, whether I have or not) then
I shall be acquitted, and shall ascend with Christ. O do your part, that in
such a case, it may not be so, that you should be forced eternally to part from
me, and all that have been faithful in Christ Jesus. This is a sorrowful
parting that now is between you and me; but that would be a more sorrowful
parting to you than this. This you may perhaps bear without being much affected
with it, if you are not glad of it; but such a parting in that day will most
deeply, sensibly, and dreadfully, affect you.

III. I would address myself to those who are under some awakenings.

Blessed be God that there are some such, and that (although I have reason to
fear I leave multitudes in this large congregation in a Christless state) yet I
do not leave them all in total stupidity and carelessness about their souls.
Some of you, that I have reason to hope are under some awakenings, have
acquainted me with your circumstances; which has a tendency to cause me, now I
am leaving you, to take my leave of you with peculiar concern for you. What
will be the issue of your present exercise of mind I know not: But it will be
known at that day, when you and I shall meet before the judgment seat of
Christ. Therefore now be much in consideration of that day.

Now I am parting with this flock, I would once more press upon you the
counsels I have heretofore given, to take heed of being slighty in so great a
concern, to be thorough and in good earnest in the affair, and to beware of
backsliding, to hold on and hold out to the end. And cry mightily to God, that
these great changes that pass over this church and congregation do not prove
your overthrow* There is great temptations in them; and the devil will
undoubtedly seek to make his advantage of them, if possible, to cause your
present convictions and endeavors to be abortive. You had need to double your
diligence, and watch and pray, lest you be overcome by temptation.

Whoever may hereafter stand related to you as your spiritual guide, my desire
and prayer is, that the great Shepherd of the sheep would have a special
respect to you, and be your guide, (for there is none teaches like him,) and
that he who is the infinite fountain of light, would "open your eyes, and turn
you from darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto God; that you
may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them that are
sanctified, through faith that is in Christ;" that so, in that great day, when
I shall meet you again before your Judge and mine, we may meet in joyful and
glorious circumstances, never to be separated any more.

IV. I would apply myself to the young people of the congregation.

Since I have been settled in the work of the ministry in this place. I have
ever had a perculiar concern for the souls of the young people, and a desire
that religion might flourish among them; and have especially exerted myself in
order to it; because I knew the special opportunity they have beyond others,
and that ordinarily those whom God intended mercy for were brought to fear and
love him in their youth. And it has ever appeared to me a peculiarly amiable
thing, to see young people walking in the ways of virtue and Christian piety,
having their hearts purified and sweetened with a principle of divine love. And
it has appeared a thing exceeding beautiful, and what would be much to the
adorning and happiness of the town, if the young people could be persuaded,
when they meet together, to converse as Christians, and as the children of God;
avoiding impurity, levity, and extravagance; keeping strictly to rules of
virtue, and conversing together of the things of God, and Christ, and heaven.
-- This is what I have longed for: And it has been exceeding grievous to me
when I have heard of vice, vanity, and disorder among our youth. And so far as
I know my heart, it was from hence that I formerly led this church to some
measures, for the suppressing vice among our young people, which gave so great
offense, and by which I became so obnoxious. I have fought the good and not the
hurt of our young people. I have desired their truest honor and happiness, and
not their reproach; knowing that true virtue and religion tended not only to
the glory and felicity of young people in another world, but their greatest
peace and prosperity, and highest dignity and honor, in this world; and above
all things to sweeten, and render pleasant and delightful, even the days of
youth.

But whether I have loved you, and sought your good more or less, yet God in
his providence, now calling me to part with you, committing your souls to him
who once committed the pastoral care of them to me, nothing remains, but only
(as I am now taking my leave of you) earnestly to beseech you, from love to
yourselves, if you have none to me, not to despise and forget the warnings and
counsels I have so often given you; remembering the day when you and I most
meet again before the great Judge of quick and dead; when it will appear
whether the things I have taught you were true, whether the counsels I have
given you were good, and whether I truly sought your good, and whether you have
well improved my endeavors.

I have, from time to time, earnestly warned you against frolicking (as it is
called,) and some other liberties commonly taken by young people in the land.
-- And whatever some may say in justification of such liberties and customs,
and may laugh at warnings against them, I now leave you my parting testimony
against such things; not doubting but God will approve and confirm it in that
day when we shall meet before them.

V. I would apply myself to the children of the congregation, the lambs of this
flock, who have been so long under my care.

I have just now said that I have had a peculiar concern for the young people;
and in so saying, I did not intend to exclude you. You are in youth, and in the
most early youth: And therefore I have been sensible, that if those that were
young had a precious opportunity for their soul's good, you who are very young,
had, in many respects, a peculiarly precious opportunity. And accordingly I
have not neglected you: I have endeavored to do the part of a faithful
shepherd, in feeding the lambs as well as the sheep. Christ did once commit the
care of your souls to me as your minister; and you know, dear children, how I
have instructed you, and warned you from time to time: You know how I have
often called you together for that end; and some of you, sometimes, have seemed
to be affected with what I have said to you. But I am afraid it has had no
saving effect as to many of you; but that you remain still in an unconverted
condition, without any real saving work wrought in your souls, convincing you
thoroughly of your sin and misery, causing you to see the great evil of sin,
and to mourn for it, and hate it above all things; and giving you a sense of
the excellency of the Lord Jesus Christ, bringing you with all your hearts to
cleave to him as your Savior, weaning your hearts from the world, and causing
you to love God above all, and to delight in holiness more than in all the
pleasant things of this earth: And so that I now leave you in a miserable
condition, having no interest in Christ, and so under the awful displeasure and
anger of God, and in danger of going down to the pit of eternal misery.

But now I must bid you farewell: I must leave you in the hands of God: I can
do no more for you than to pray for you. Only I desire you not to forget, but
often think of the counsels and warnings I have given you, and the endeavors I
have used, that your souls might be saved from everlasting destruction.

Dear children, I leave you in an evil world, that is full of snares and
temptations. God only knows what will become of you. This the Scripture has
told us, that there are but few saved; and we have abundant confirmation of it
from what we see. This we see, that children die as well as others: Multitudes
die before they grow up; and of those that grow up, comparatively few ever give
good evidence of saving conversion to God. I pray God to pity you, and take
care of you, and provide for you the best means for the good of your souls; and
that God himself would undertake for you, to be your heavenly Father, and the
mighty Redeemer of your immortal souls. Do not neglect to pray for yourselves:
Take heed you be not of the number of those who cast off fear, and restrain
prayer before God. Constantly pray to God in secret; and often remember that
great day when you must appear before the judgment seat of Christ, and meet
your minister there, who has so often counseled and warned you.

I conclude with a few words of advice to all in general, in some particulars,
which are of great importance in order to the future welfare and prosperity of
this church and congregation.

1. One thing that greatly concerns you, as you would be an happy people, is
the maintaining of family order.

We have had great disputes how the church ought to be regulated; and indeed
the subject of these disputes was of great importance: But the due regulation
of your families is of no less, and, in some respects, of much greater
importance. -- Every Christian family ought to be as it were a little church,
consecrated to Christ, and wholly influenced and governed by his rules. And
family education and order are some of the chief of the means of grace. If
these fail, all other means are like to prove ineffectual. If these are duly
maintained, all the means of grace will be like to prosper and be successful.

Let me now therefore, once more, before I finally cease to speak to this
congregation, repeat, and earnestly press the counsel which I have often urged
on heads of families here, while I was their pastor, to great painfulness, in
teaching, warning, and directing their children; bringing them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord; beginning early, where there is yet
opportunity, and maintaining a constant diligence in labors of this kind*
Remembering that, as you would not have all your instructions and counsels
ineffectual, there must be government as well as instructions, which must be
maintained with an even hand, and steady resolution, as a guard to the religion
and morals of the family, and the support of its good order. Take heed that it
be not with any of you as it was with Eli of old, who reproved his children,
but restrained them not; and that, by this means, you do not bring the like
curse on your families as he did on his.

And let children obey their parents, and yield to their instructions, and
submit to their orders, as they would inherit a blessing and not a curse. For
we have reason to think, from many things in the word of God, that nothing has
a greater tendency to bring a curse on persons in this world, and on all their
temporal concerns, than an undutiful, unsubmissive, disorderly behavior in
children toward their parents.

2. As you would seek the future prosperity of this society, it is of vast
importance that you should avoid contention.

A contentious people will be a miserable people. The contentions which have
been among you, since I first became your pastor, have been one of the greatest
burdens I have labored under in the course of my ministry: Not only the
contentions you have had with me, but those which you have had one with
another, about your lands, and other concerns. Because I knew that contention,
heat of spirit, evil-speaking, and things of the like nature, were directly
contrary to the spirit of Christianity, and did, in a peculiar manner, tend to
drive away God's Spirit from a people, and to render all means of grace
ineffectual, as well as to destroy a people's outward comfort and welfare.

Let me therefore earnestly exhort you, as you would seek your own future good,
hereafter to watch against a contentious spirit. "If you would see good days,
seek peace, and ensue it." 1 Pet. iii.10.11. Let the contentions which has
lately been about the terms of Christian communion, as it has been the greatest
of your contention, so be the last of them. I would, now I am preaching my
farewell sermon, say to you, as the apostle to the Corinthians, 2 Cor.
xiii.11.: "Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect: Be of one mind: Live in
peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you."

And here I would particularly advise those that have adhered to me in the late
controversy, to watch over their spirits, and avoid all bitterness toward
others. -- Your temptations are, in some respects, the greatest; because what
has been lately done is grievous to you. But however wrong you may think others
have done, maintain, with great diligence and watchfulness, a Christian
meekness and sedateness of spirit; and labor, in this respect, to excel others
who are of the contrary part. And this will be the best victory: For "he that
rules his spirit, is better than he that takes a city." Therefore let nothing
be done through strife or vainglory. Indulge no revengeful spirit in any wise;
but watch and pray against it: and, by all means in your power, seek the
prosperity of this town: And never think you behave yourselves as becomes
Christians, but when you sincerely, sensibly, and fervently love all men, of
whatever party or opinion, and whether friendly or unkind, just or injurious,
to you or your friends, or to the cause and kingdom of Christ.

3. Another thing that vastly concerns the future prosperity of the town, is,
that you should watch against the encroachments of error; and particularly
Arminianism, and doctrines of like tendency.

You were, many of you, as I well remember, much alarmed with the apprehensions
of the danger of the prevailing of these corrupt principles, near sixteen years
ago. But the danger then was small in comparison of what appears now. These
doctrines at this day are much more prevalent than they were then: The progress
they have made in the land, within this seven years, seems to have been vastly
greater than at any time in the like space before: And they are still
prevailing and creeping into almost all parts of the land, threatening the
utter ruin of the credit of those doctrines which are the peculiar glory of the
gospel, and the interests of vital piety. And I have of late perceived some
things among yourselves, that show that you are far from being out of danger,
but on the contrary remarkably exposed. The older people may perhaps think
themselves sufficiently fortified against infection* But it is fit that all
should beware of self confidence and carnal security, and should remember those
needful warnings of sacred writ, "Be not high minded, but fear; and let him
that stands, take heed lest he fall." But let the case of the older people be
as it will, the rising generation are doubtless greatly exposed. These
principles are exceeding taking with corrupt nature, and are what young people,
at least such as have not their hearts established with grace, are easily led
away with.

And if these principles should greatly prevail in this town, as they very
lately have done in another large town I could name, formerly greatly noted for
religion, and so for a long time, it will threaten the spiritual and eternal
ruin of this people, in the present and future generations. Therefore you have
need of the greatest and most diligent care and watchfulness with respect to
this matter.

4. Another thing which I would advise to, that you may hereafter be a
prosperous people, is, that you would give yourselves much to prayer.

God is the fountain of all bessing and prosperity, and he will be sought to
for his blessing. I would therefore advise you not only to be constant in
secret and family prayer, and in the public worship of God in his house, but
also often to assemble yourselves in private praying societies. I would advise
all such as are grieved for the afflictions of Joseph, and sensibly affected
with the calamities of this town, of whatever opinon they be with relation to
the subject of our late controversy, often to meet together for prayer, and to
cry to God for his mercy to themselves, and mercy to this town, and mercy to
Zion and the people of God in general through the world.

5. The last article of advice I would give (which doubtless does greatly
concern your prosperity) is, that you would take great care with regard to the
settlement of a minister, to see to it who, or what manner of person he is that
you settle; and particularly in these two respects.

(1.) That he be a man of thoroughly sound principles, in the scheme of
doctrine which he maintains.

This you will stand in the greatest need of, especially at such a day of
corruption as this is. And in order to obtain such a one, you had need to
exercise extraordinary care and prudence. -- I know the danger. I know the
manner of many young gentlemen of corrupt principles, their ways of concealing
themselves, the fair specious disguises they are wont to put on, by which they
deceive others, to maintain their own credit, and get themselves into others
confidence and improvement, and secure and establish their own interest, until
they see a convenient opportunity to begin more openly to broach and propagate
their corrupt tenets.

(2.) Labor to obtain a man who has an established character, as a person of
serious religion and fervent piety.

It is of vast importance that those who are settled in this work should be men
of true piety, at all times, and in all places; but more especially at some
times, and in some towns and churches. And this present time, which is a time
wherein religion is in danger, by so many corruptions in doctrine and practice,
is in a peculiar manner a day wherein such ministers are necessary. Nothing
else but sincere piety of heart is at all to be depended on, at such a time as
this, as a security to a young man, just coming into the world, from the
prevailing infection, or thoroughly to engage him in proper and successful
endeavors to withstand and oppose the torrent of error, and prejudice, against
the high mysterious evangelical doctrines of the religion of Jesus Christ, and
their genuine effects in true experimental religion. And this place is a place
that does peculiarly need such a minister, for reasons obvious to all.

If you should happen to settle a minister who knows nothing truly of Christ,
and the way of salvation by him, nothing experimentally of the nature of vital
religion; alas, how will you be exposed as sheep without a shepherd! Here is
need of one in this place, who shall be eminently fit to stand in the gap, and
make up the hedge, and who shall be as the chariots of Israel, and the horsemen
thereof. You need one that shall stand as a champion in the cause of truth and
the power of godliness.

Having briefly mentioned these important articles of advice, nothing remains,
but that I now take my leave of you, and bid you all, farewell; wishing and
praying for your best prosperity. I would now commend your immortal souls to
him, who formerly committed them to me, expecting the day, when I must meet you
again before him, who is the Judge of quick and dead. I desire that I may never
forget this people, who have been so long my special charge, and that I may
never cease fervently to pray for your prosperity. May God bless you with a
faithful pastor, one that is well acquainted with his mind and will, thoroughly
warning sinners, wisely and skilfully searching professors, and conducting you
in the way to eternal blessedness. May you have truly a burning and shining
light set up in this candlestick; and may you, not only for a season, but
during his whole life, and that a long life, be willing to rejoice in his light.

And let me be remembered in the prayers of all God's people that are of a calm
spirit, and are peaceable and faithful in Israel, of whatever opinion they may
be with respect to terms of church communion.

And let us all remember, and never forget our future solemn meeting on that
great day of the Lord; the day of infallible decision and of the everlasting
and unalterable sentence. Amen.

FINIS.
Simeon Butler, Bookseller and Stationer. OPPOSITE THE COURT HOUSE, NORTHAMPTON.
KEEPS Constantly for sale, a large and general assortment of BOOKS, in most
branches of useful and polite Literature, where Libraries may be supplied on as
good terms as in Boston, or New York.

LIKEWISE,

The following Books suitable for Country Stores, viz. Webster's and Perry's,
Spelling Books, Perry's Dictionaries, Dwight's Geography's, Pike's Arithmetic,
a great variety of Small Histories, Childrens' Books, Account Books, etc. etc.

N. B. Any of the above articles, are given in exchange for Rags.


