THE IMPORTANCE OF RIGHT VIEWS IN MATRIMONY, SET FORTH IN A SERMON, Delivered
March 19, 1800, at Pittsfield Meeting House, Rockingham County, State of
Newhampshire, at the Celebration of MARRIAGE between SAMUEL G. BISHOP, Preacher
of the GOSPEL, Son of BILLS BISHOP of Connecticut, deceased, and ABIGAIL TUCK,
the youngest Daughter of the late Reverend JOHN TUCK, of Epsom. deceased.

By the Reverend JOSIAH CARPENTER, A. M. Pastor of the Congregational Church in
Chichester.

"Marriage is honorable in all."

Some courteous Angel tell me where,
What distant land, the unknown Fair,
Or distant sea, detains?
Swift as the wheel of nature rolls,
I Would fly to meet and mingle souls,
And ^ar the joyful chain.
AFTER THE SERMON FOLLOWS The MARRIAGE COVENANT, together with Important
Directions to Youth for Living and Dying.

Printed at GILMANTON, 1800.

HEBREWS xiii. Chap. 4 ver. Marriage is honorable in all.
THE great business of human life, is to gain the mastery of corrupt desires,
and bring our hearts to the constant exercise of pure and holy ones: and this
is the most honorable attainment any can expect to arrive to. Honor and
happiness mankind universally thirst for; but the true idea of (...) honor and
happiness are, is not always conceived of; nor is the right way to obtain it,
universally adopted True honor and happiness consist in loving GOD and
universal being, as themselves. -- Man's temper is naturally morose; and hatred
is the spontaneous product; there are passionate feelings in men, which produce
a kind of exercise called love; but it is a very different kind from what is
required; it is often productive of disgrace rather than honor, and pain rather
than happiness. GOD has in mercy wisely appointed means to soften and change
men's tempers, and fit their hearts for tender and good affections; in order to
lessen the burdens of life and sweeten its bitter ingredients, the institution
of MARRIAGE. which GOD has appointed, often has its beneficial effects upon the
feelings and hearts of men; as well as in civil society in general -- and it is
pronounced honorable for all persons to attend to it -- "It is not good for man
to be alone -- two are better than one, because they have a good reward for
their labor. And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him, and a
threefold cord is not quickly broken."

AND in all ages of the world, down to the present day, the greater part, yea
almost all regular, well disposed people, have made use of the institution of
Marriage; and the ostensible reason of GOD'S appointing it, was to preserve
purity of life and manners, render each sex a comfort, blessing and joy to one
another, by their mutual aid and friendship -- continue a succession of lives
upon the earth, and increase in numbers till time shall be no more.

MARRIAGE is honorable (undoubtedly) in its institution among all people: but
to have people become an honor to it, and honored by it, depends upon their
views in it, and right improvement of it. And now, that we may have a right
understanding and proper views of the institution of Marriage, and improve the
present occasion aright, the first object will be to show what marriage is,
second, point out why marriage is honorable, and what views people ought to
have in it; thirdly, attend to a few inferences and addresses from the subject.

(...) we are to show what Marriage is -- MARRIAGE is a m^ contract, in which
the parties give themselves to each other; manifesting their regard, affection
and love. Marriage has been called by many a Civil Contract, in which a man and
woman unite together for life. But I am rather inclined to think it ought to be
called a Religious Contract from the comment CHRIST gave upon MOSES'S giving
bills of divorce. -- But, whatever people cast it, civil or religious, it is an
important and interesting connection: and for this cause, GOD made them male
and female and they leave father and mother, and covenant together, and of
twain become one. Covenants are of little ^se for the safety and happiness of
the parties, unless they feel what they profess, and practice what they
covenant. What makes covenants valid or beneficial to the parties, is having a
real affection of heart one for the other, and the same views in each mind to
act up to the spirit of the contract, and being united or one in their minds.
The blessed Redeemer prayed that his disciples and followers might be one with
him, as he was one with the Father. There was a covenant between the Father and
Son, in the work of Redemption: And Christ prayed for a oneness in his
followers with him, knowing that if the same mind was in them which he
p^ssessed, his yoke would be easy upon them, and his burden light, i. e. they
would go on to fulfill all duty toward one another, with cheerfulness and love;
hence persons, really married in a proper sense, not only make promises by word
of mouth, and pass the visible ceremony, but there is a real union of bea^, a
strong affection for each other, like that which subsisted between David and
Jonathan. I do not see how important, graceless persons are to be depended upon
in marriage: for having no higher principle than that of selfishness, are
liable to be turned or alienated by adverse providence -- yet I doubt not it
is so ordered that many times natural affection (the basis of which is ^shness)
makes life tolerably comfortable in this world; like the old heathen
philosophers' religion, or modern ^ee will (...); or in other words, Ar^nism.
But I leave this enquiry with the following observation, every peni^, humble,
enlightened soul, must desire to have an humble, penitent, enlightened partner,
and whoever has not we pray they may have. To return --

MARRIAGE is a covenant union between a man and woman, which GOD makes use of
to represent his union and connection between himself and church. -- It
represents the covenant of mercy, wh^ in he graciously promises to be the God
of his people, and t^ ^rgive and sanctify them through the merits of Jesus
Christ, by the influences of his Spirit, and so make them a willing people to
himself: I will (...) ^fulness and in living kin^s, and in ^ies, and (...)
shall know the Land -- Hosea 2.19 -- Again. Jeremiah 3, 14. T^, ^ding (...) L^,
for (...) mar^ (...) yo^.

THE union between the husband and wife, strikingly represents the connection
between Christian ^e church, as Ephesians 3.32.3^.^^ I^ we (...) ^y, and of his
(...) a man (...) his wife, and they (...) -- T^ a great mystery; but I speak
(...) -- Hence Marriage supposes union together in the visible form of outward
ceremony, and drawn into union (...) compact by the inward affection and love
of soul glowing in their hearts one for the other; and this makes Marriage
delightful, and the connection sweet, and lays a good foundation for comfort,
while life shall last. But to know the heart and feel what we profess, is an
important matter in all we transact, and stamps dignity upon what is done. But
this leads me to the 2d head, viz. to show why Marriage is honorable, and what
views people ought to have in it --

1st. MARRIAGE is honorable, in that it is beneficial and for the happiness of
individuals; but more especially for the general good and use of the world; and
as it is lawful in itself, both by civil and divine statutes, it must be
reputable and highly commendable for people to celebrate the ordinance. Having
a benevolent, strong inclination to do good; and a resolute, active mind to
pursue it; and going on to do whatsoever our hands find to do, in our day and
generation, by the will of GOD, is the great thing which really does, or ever
ought to raise men's reputation, and make them honorable in the earth.

2dly. MARRIAGE is honorable, because GOD has appointed it. Any thing which is
appointed as the effect of perfect wisdom and goodness, must be an honorable
appointment; and from what CHRIST relates in the 19th of Matthew, from the 4th
to the 10th verse, and the 10th of Mark, from the 6th to the 10th verse -- the
words in both books are nearly the same -- containing an answer to the
cavilling Scribes -- I will repeat the words in Mark; From the beginning of
creation, God made them male and female. For this cause shall a man leave his
father and mother, and cleave to his wife; and they twain shall be one flesh;
so then they are no more twain but one flesh -- What therefore God has joined
together, let no man put asunder. And the inspired Apostle in our text, says
plainly, Marriage is honorable in all; and the bed undefiled: but whoremongers
and adulterers GOD will judge. I think it is plain GOD instituted Marriage from
the creation, and ever meant it should be practiced; and it is honorable for
all persons to practice it; but irregular connections, or unlawful, disorderly
unions between the sexes, GOD will judge, and punish all who do not keep up to
the strict rules of decency and order. Order and decency are ever to be
regarded in what people transact; passionate feelings and irregular desires,
are not to have the reigns of government; GOD is a GOD of order; and for people
to do right in marrying, they should enter into the Marriage covenant, with
humble, thankful, believing hearts, rejoicing in the Divine Goodness, intending
to serve GOD better, and be more extensively useful in their day and generation
-- And hence, whenever the probable appearance of usefulness and duty is
greater by union, than to live single, people ought to marry, and not
otherwise. This was Paul^s way of reasoning upon the subject. Have I not a
right to lead about a wife, or sister, as other Apostles? It was lawful, but
not expedient -- for the then distressed state of the Church, it was not best
to marry -- But marriage always was honorable in its institution; and for the
good of society in general; but at some times it may not be expedient.

3dly. WE now proceed to show more particularly what views people ought to have
in marrying. "Whatsoever we do, eat or drink, or whatsoever, we are commanded
to do all to the glory of GOD." Then it will follow, whether we marry or not,
we must do all to the glory of GOD; live, not to ourselves, but to him who died
for us and rose again. It is evident all thoughts, words and actions have a
near connection with future happiness or misery -- according to the words of
our Blessed Savior, For every idle word shall man give account thereof in the
day of judgment. To be able to answer for our conduct hereafter, and act
honorably in what we do, the thing we perform must be lawful, or right in its
nature, and our intentions good in doing of it -- To have right intentions in
what we perform, the greatest good must be aimed at. To please our own fancies,
or gratify a selfish design is inconsistent with the character of an
accountable creature; to use the ordinance of marriage right, therefore, it is
as essentially necessary, that our design be to glorify GOD, and not act with a
view to please ourselves, as in using any other ordinance. Whoever then would
enter into the covenant of Marriage, and hope for a divine blessing in it,
receive honor by it, and be an honor to it, must weigh well his circumstances,
whether it be lawful and expedient; if found to be, then are my views right in
doing it; can I change my state with a real design and intention to serve and
honor my Creator; and be more extensively useful in the world? If I can do
thus, understandingly, then Marriage, is honorable to a person, and the Divine
design is complied with in it.

MOSES, we read, for the hardness of men's hearts gave bills of divorce; but
from the beginning it was not so. Persons ought to act understandingly, and
then live together in love; being married in the Lord, and never think of
parting till death dissolves the connection, and so sanctify the ordinance, and
it will be an honor to be married. But to do as some have done, form a
passionate, inconsiderate connection; and afterward live in contention; such
dishonor themselves and the ordinance, and they had better not marry, than be
guilty of such an abuse. Many ordinances, which are good in themselves and
appointed for the happiness and benefit of people, are greatly dishonored and
abused, by the rash, unruly desires of those, who rush into them without a
right preparation of heart.

IMPROVEMENT.
1st. WE learn from our subject, that it is the duty of people, to have special
and particular reference to the Divine Honor, in all their pursuits and actions
of life; there is not any object which accountable creatures may pursue and
please GOD, unless the ultimate end of the pursuit be the divine glory. This is
evidently the case, in the use of all ordinances civil and religious. The
improvement of time, all favors, privileges, and mercies, must be received with
gratitude; giving glory to GOD; and realizing our constant dependence for every
blessing, and hence all inconsiderate, rash, unmeaning conduct is highly
reprovable in all persons. We ought to look well to the end of things in the
beginning; see if possible what will be the following consequences. But in an
especial manner, see to it that our motives are good, and our minds not blinded
by selfish, corrupt desires. -- This is the way to have the eye single, and the
body full of light -- And the way to be blessings in the world, and do good in
our day and generation; perform that which is well pleasing in the sight of
GOD, and lay up a good treasure against the time to come.

2dly. IS the divine glory and happiness of man, the great object of pursuit,
as has been shown, at which we all ought to aim? Let this subject call up our
attention to a thorough examination of ourselves; and upon a strict review of
our intentions and conduct; we may easily learn, whether we are serving the
great Creator, who is GOD over all, blessed forever; or the creature, which is
idolatry. And this is an important matter, for us to know; for upon the
acquisition of this knowledge, happiness or misery will surely be the result.
They who know they love GOD, go on with a cheerful heart to give glory to his
name, and feel interested in the good of mankind; have a firm foundation laid,
for comfort and increasing felicity; because there are no changes in the object
of their hopes, the overflowing fountain of all goodness ever supplys them: and
their hearts are established, trusting in the Lord; being warmed, strengthened
and comforted in their minds; are happy in the good service of the Most High.
While creature disciples, or selfish idolaters, are pursuing after that which
they never will find, and in chase of something which does not exist, in the
way they hope to overtake it. Misery then must be the portion of all who trust
in earthly enjoyments. For earthly things were not made to satisfy immortal
souls, or fill the place of spiritual enjoyments. But before I dismiss this
subject, permit me an address upon the present agreeable, important occasion:
the Celebration of Marriage.

AND first, observe the scenes we are now acting are swiftly passing away.
Marriage is a temporal blessing; but soon we shall be beyond such scenes as
this. The greatest of instructors has told us, that in the future state there
is neither marriage, nor giving in marriage; but regenerated souls, shall be as
Angels of God in heaven, i. e. nothing of this temporary bodily marriage we now
use; but an holy union of soul with Christ; and all holy beings, and all such
as love and serve GOD here, shall sit down at the Marriage Supper there. And
now may it not be highly proper, to query with ourselves* who have been and are
about to pass the scene of temporary Marriage -- are we spiritually married to
Christ? and do we all love, and endeavor to live upon, and act up to, the
Covenant of Grace, as required of us in the Bible? or do we live in the world
together like heirs of the grace of life? It is truly important, to fulfill the
Law of Love, and seek to promote each others happiness; and especially to
encourage one another in the duties of Christianity. To have the privilege of
living together, in the world, in the mutual exercise of love and friendship;
bearing one another's burden, assisting and comforting in all the cares and
trials of life; is not a small favor. But to dwell together in the other
world, as Angels of Light, is an infinitely grater favor; and if we love not
our wives, husbands, and brethren, and dwell not together with them in love,
whom we have seen; how can we expect we love GOD, whom we have not seen? or
that we shall dwell together in the eternal world, and be happy? O then let us
all try to do right; and wherever there are any wrong feelings of heart,
suppress them; or a want of love, let it spring up and grow; as expressed,
Colossans 3.18. Husbands love your wives, and be not bitter against them; and
ye wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as is fit in the Lord.

LOVE sweetens every bitter woe,
Strengthens each feeble arm;
While piercing pains and sorrows flow,
Caused by an envious storm.
Gentle submission has more weight,
To cure the soul that is sour,
Than art, or sophistry, or hate,
Or any female power,
Let all your conduct then be mild,
And every action just;
Integrity and virtue shine,
And none may you distrust.
3dly. AN address to the unmarried, and I shall end. I trust you have been
attentively treasuring up what has been said upon the present subject, and soon
will be spectators of the short ceremony of Marriage. Knowing something of the
vanity of childhood, and the heedless, inconsiderate state of mind, common in
youth; and especially, considering the wild, passionate, intoxicated feelings,
common in all of every age, when thinking, talking and contracting about
matrimony; and though a matter of very great importance, for our happiness in
this life, and as nearly connected with future felicity, as any other temporary
matter -- I would endeavor to call up your attention to think m^re seriously
and act more wisely, upon the subject, than some who have lived before you have
done. ^n every thing, we ought to act so as to be able to answer it, at the
judgment seat of Christ. And for this end, to keep your minds within the bounds
of decency. David's words are well adapted in the 16 Ps. 8 ver. I have set the
Lord always before me; because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.
Persons who view themselves in the presence of GOD, though they may, and ought
to attend to Matrimony, or any other lawful, honorable pursuit, as
circumstances require; yet they will act with great deference, and constant
respect to his honor in whose presence they view themselves; and it will be a
constant check to all light, vain, foolish conduct, and would save young
persons many sorrowful hours, and painful reflections, which are often suffered
from the loss of virtue and honor. O! then pay a particular attention to your
conduct and characters; and watch against every snare and sin, which do most
easily beset you -- And remember the words of the great instructor of Israel.
For every idle word shall men give account thereof in the day of judgment. It
will surely be for your honor, happiness, and best intere^t, both in this and
the future world, to live in the fear of GOD, and cease from all vain conduct
and frothy conversation, and seek first the kingdom of GOD, and his
righteousness. -- Purity of heart and innocence of mind afford great comfort
and peace -- Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see GOD -- But be
not deceived, (my young friends) neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind -- nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall
inherit the kingdom of GOD -- 1st Corinthians, 6th chap. 9.10.

YOU are now looking forward (no doubt) many of you with raised expectations
and your friends high hopes with you -- But do not let your exalted
imaginations expose you to the rude winds and waves of an ensnaring world --
take heed to your ways, and remember your Creator in the days of your youth --
think more of another world than of this; of being married to Christ in an
everlasting covenant; of an interest in heaven; than of temporal covenants and
worldly enjoyments -- We were made for eternity; this world is not our home;
the deeds now doing must soon be answered for -- It becomes us then, young
people, to watch and be sober, make conscience of what we do; consider of our
way and be wise, and go in the path of understanding -- The fear of the Lord is
the beginning of wisdom -- a good understanding have all they who keep his
commandments -- take advice then, beloved, and cleanse your ways by taking heed
according to the word of God -- and follow the example of the blessed Redeemer,
who as he grow in years and stature, grew in favor both with God and man -- Go
then, and do likewise, and walk in wisdom's ways, which are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths peace -- And may the blessing of the Most High
rest on you all, and all your enjoyments. AMEN.

THE MARRIAGE COVENANT.
Mr. Groom, please to take Mrs. Bride by the hand -- Before God, Angels, and
these witnesses, you take the woman you have by the hand to be your lawful
weded wife; and do promise to live with her, to provide for her in sickness and
in health; and to forsake all others, and cleave unto her only; and to be a
kind, tender, faithful and loving husband to her until death shall part you;
taking the word of God for your rule -- this you promise -- Please to lose your
hands -- Mrs. Bride, please to take Mr. Groom by the hand -- before God,
Angels, and these witnesses, you take the man you have by the hand to be your
lawful weded husband; and do promise to live with him, to do for him, in
sickness and in health, and to forsake all others and cleave unto him only, and
to be a kind, tender, faithful obedient and loving wife unto him, until death
shall part you, taking the word of God for your rule -- this you promise -- I
do then, by the authority committed to me, pronounce you to be lawful husband
and wife, and what God has joined together, let not man put asunder.

Important Directions to Youth for Living and Dying.
My Young Friends,
I PRESUME you desire to be happy here and hereafter; and my present design is
to direct you how to attain it -- 1. Never trust to your own understanding in
the things of this world, when you can have the advice of a wise and faithful
friend; nor dare venture the all-important concerns of your souls, and your
eternal welfare in the world to come, upon the dim light of nature, and the
dictates of your own reason -- since the word of GOD, and the advice of Heaven
is in your hands -- vain and thoughtless indeed are those children of pride,
who choose to turn heathens and infidels, in the midst of enlightened America;
who live upon the mere religion of nature and their own stock, when they have
been trained up among all the superior advantages of Christianity and Divine
Revelation. -- 2. Whatever your circumstances may be in this world, yet value
your Bible as your best treasure; and whatever may be your employment here, yet
look upon Religion as your best business: For your Bible contains eternal life
in it, and all the riches of the upper world, and by possessing true Religion
is the only way to become a possessor of them -- 3. To direct your carriage
toward God, read attentively and repeatedly the book of Psalms; David was a man
of sincere and eminent devotion -- to behave aright among men, become
acquainted with the whole writings of Solomon, for he was a man of great
experience and eminent wisdom -- and to perfect your directions in both, peruse
thoroughly the gospels and epistles, and in short the whole of the Bible, for
you will find the best of rules and choicest of examples there, and such as are
particularly suited to the christian life. -- 4. As a man, maintain strict
temperance and sobriety, by a wise government of your appetites and passions;
as a neighbor, influence all around you to be your friends by a temper and
carriage made up of prudence and goodness; and let the poor have a share in all
your yearly profi^s; as a trader, keep that golden sentence of our Savior ever
before you, "whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, do ye also unto
them. -- 5. Make the precepts of scripture your constant rule of duty; and
heaven and a crown of unfading glory is promised to the faithful and obedient.
-- 6. In every affair of life begin with GOD, first consult him in every thing
that you do; view him as the author of all your blessings, seek him as your
best friend and your eter^al portion; trust in him; daily surrender yourself to
him, love him with your whole heart; serve him with sincerity and delight, and
learn that you cannot live a day without GOD in the world. -- 7. Learn that you
be an indigent, need^ creature, a sinner; but you be, or ought to be, a
Christian, a disciple of the lovely Jesus; but never think you know Christ or
yourself, as you ought, until you find a daily need of him, for righteousness
and strength, for pardon and sanctification, and let him be your constant
in^ducer to the Great God, and realize that no man can come to the Father but
by him. -- 8. Make prayer a pleasure and not a task; esteem that day, hour, or
minute lost, or wasted, that by worldly cares you save out of the public
worship of GOD, and the devotional duties of the closer, or any necessary
services of GOD and godliness -- 9. See that you watch and labor, as well as
pray, for the hand of the diligent and the blessing of GOD united, that makes
rich in time and eternity; set a double guard wherever you feel or suspect an
enemy at hand; the world without and the heart within, have so much flattery
and deceit in them, that we must keep a sharp eye upon both, left you are led
into mischief and deceived by them. -- Honor, profit and pleasure have
sometimes been called the world's trin^ty, they are its three chief idols, each
of them is sufficient to draw a soul off from GOD, and ruin it forever;
remember that the honor that comes from GOD, and the approbation of heaven and
your own conscience, are infini^ely more valuable than all the esteem and
applause of men; dare not venture one step out of the road of heaven, for fear
of being laughed at for walking strictly in it; it is a poor religion indeed
that cannot stand against a just; what shall it profit you to gain the whole
world, and lose your soul? He that loves pleasure, shall be a poor man; he
that loves wine and oil, shall not be rich; it is a character of a most
degenerate age, given by St. Paul, when men become lovers of pleasure more than
lovers of GOD, and that fleshly lusts war against the soul, is St. Peter's
caveat or warning to the Christians of his time. -- 11. Preserve your
conscience soft and sensible; take heed that under any scruple, doubt or
temptation, whatsoever, you never let any reasonings satisfy your conscience,
which will not be a sufficient apology to the great Judge at the last day --
12. Ever realize that this is a vain and deceitful world, therefore prepare to
meet disappointment, and in every ruffling storm without, possess your soul in
patience, and let all be calm and serene within; clouds and tempests are only
found in the lower skies; the heavens above are ever b^ght and clear; let your
heart and hopes dwell much in these serene regions, live as a stranger on
earth, but as a citizen of heaven, if you will maintain a soul at ease. -- 13.
Remember that in the highest exercise of faith and love to God, there is still
a lack or want, which is sin, therefore let repentance toward God, and faith in
the Lord Jesus Christ, be your daily work. 14. Ever realize the utter
uncertainty of every thing in this life, and of life itself; and put nothing
off till tomorrow which you can conveniently do to day; d^^ato^y persons are
frequently exposed to surprise and hu^y, ^et the concerns of your soul, your
shops, your farms, and your trade, and your religion, be always in such order
as far as possible, that death at a short warning may be no occasion of a
disquieting tumult in your spirit, have peace ^n life, in death, and happiness
beyond. -- 15 Read these directions once a day, or at least once a week until
they are wrought in your very soul and temper; walk by ^hese rules, and trust
will be placed in you; copy out ^hese counsels in your life, and you will make
your friends easy and comfortable, and render yourself truly beneficial, worthy
and happy.

From your friendly monitor, BENEVOLENCE.


