A true and remarkable ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE AND TRANCE OF Dr. GEORGE DE
BENNEVILLE, Late of Germantown, Pennsylvania Who departed this life in March,
1793, aged nearly ninety years. Including what he saw and heard, during a
trance of forty-two hours (...) in the regions of happiness and misery.
Together with a short account of his cruel persecution in France for preaching
the gospel.

Translated from the French of his own (...), To which is prefixed A
RECOMMENDATORY PREFACE BY THE Rev. E. WINCHESTER.

NORRISTOWN: PRINTED AND SOLD BY DAVID SOWER. 1800.

PREFACE.
I BLESS God that I was ever acquainted with Doctor GEORGE DE BENNEVILLE, for
such an humble, pious, loving man I have scarcely ever seen in my pilgrimage
through life. -- To such as consider this account as romantic, absurd, and
inconsistent, I shall only say, "that if they had known the author as well as I
did, I doubt not they would have thought of him in a good measure as I do." I
think it impossible that a man of his piety, humility, benevolence, and
universal good character, should have been guilty of deliberately imposing upon
mankind; and from the very nature and circumstances of the case, I cannot see
how it is possible that he should be imposed upon himself. I have no doubt of
the truth of this relation myself, and have delivered it faithfully as I
received it. I consider myself hastening to the bar of God, where I expect very
shortly to give up my account to the Judge of all the earth, and therefore God
forbid that I should ever practice deceptions or impositions on my fellow
creatures.

ELHANNAN WINCHESTER.

O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?

Dr. GEORGE DE BENNEVILLE, was born 1703, died in '93, aged 90 years.



LIFE AND TRANCE OF Doctor George De Benneville.
I GEORGE DE BENEVILLE, was born in London, July 26th, 1703. My father George
De Benneville was a French refugee, persecuted for his religion. He retired
with his family and connections into England upon the invitation of his majesty
king William, who took a tender care of them, and employed them at his court.

My mother was of the Granville family. She had nine children in five years
after marriage, having twins four years successively, and I being the last, she
died as soon as I was born. She knew that she would die at that time, and
therefore she was very often drawn whilst she was pregnant, to pray for me, and
it appears that the Lord heard her prayers and granted her requests.

I was also very young when my father died, and was brought up by one of my
uncles. After the death of my mother, Queen Anne herself provided me a nurse,
and she had the care of my first years.

When arrived at the age of twelve years, I was very wild believing myself to
be of a different mass from mankind in general, and by this fond imagination I
was self-exalted, and believed-myself to be more than other men: but God soon
convinced me to the contrary.

As it was designed that I should learn navigation, I was sent to sea in a
vessel of war belonging to a little fleet bound to the coast of Barbary with
presents, and to renew the peace with Algiers, Tunis, and Tripolis. Being
arrived at Algiers, as I walked upon deck I saw some Moors who brought some
refreshments to fell; one of them slipped down and tore a piece out of one of
his legs, two of his companions having lain him on the deck. each of them
kissed the wound, shedding tears upon it, then turned toward the rising of the
sun, they cried in such a manner that I was much moved with anger at their
making such a noise, and ordered my waiter to bring them before me. Upon
demanding the reason of their noise, the preceived that I was angry, asked my
pardon, and told me the cause was owing to one of their brothers having hurt
his leg by a fall, and that they kissed the wound in order to sympathize with
him, and likewise shed tears upon it and took part with him, and as tears were
saltish, they were a good remedy to heal the same; and the reason of their
turning toward the sun's rising was to invoke him who created the sun to have
compassion upon their poor brother, and prayed he would please to heal him. Up,
on that I was so convinced, and moved within, that I thought my heart would
break, and that my life was about to leave me; my eyes with tears, and I felt
such an internal condemnation, that I was obliged to cry out and say, "Are
these Heathens? No; I confess before God they are Christians, and I myself am a
Heathen!" Behold the first conviction that the grace of our Sovereign Good
employed: he was pleased to convince a white person by blacks! one who carried
the name of a christian by a pagan, and who was obliged to confess himself but
a heathen. But that was soon overcome and forgot. But God who always seeks to
convince and save his poor creatures, did not leave his poor wandering sheep;
for some time after my return home, being present by invitation at a ball, and
having over heated myself. I order my servant to prepare linens for me to
change, and as I was putting it on, I fell into a fainting fit, and had a
vision of myself, burning as a firebrand in hell, and coming to myself; again,
I cried out, "I am damned!" Prayers were desired in the French Churches for one
who had lost his senses and was melancholy -- The ministers often visited me,
and would fain have made me believe that I had not committed any very great
sins, and that I had behaved according to my rank and station. Then I was
obliged to answer them, that if they had no other things than those to tell me,
they could answer no pur-pose but as fig leaves to cover my shame, and my
damnable estate: that it was in vain to come and visit me with such comfort,
for that I felt myself condemned. Then they answered me in another manner than
before, saying, since I would not receive their remonstrances it might be
looked upon as a mark that peradventure I was destined from the beginning to
condemnation.

Then they gave me up and came no more to visit me -- After that I continued in
the state of condemnation during the space of fifteen months, believing that
all the world but myself might be saved, and that I never could be saved,
because my sins, as I thought, were too many and too great to be forgiven. At
length after the fifteen months were expired, after having passed through many
temptations, it happened to me one day having laid myself down to repose that I
was awakened out of my sleep, and heard a voice within me, which pronounced the
sentence of my condemnation, and left me no room to hope. I then discovered the
root of all my sins and iniquities within my heart: that discovery brought me
into an extreme agony Despair entered into my soul, which was now pressed on
all sides with misery, caused especially by such great unbelief and hardness of
heart, which was the most insupportable of all my troubles; I could discover no
remedy for my disease, but thought that my sentence of damnation was going to
be executed: the sorrow of my soul was even to death: I desired to die, but
death fled from me: I could find no remedy but to leave myself to the justice
of my judge for a condemned criminal as I was: I knew that his judgments were
just, and that I had merited much more than I felt.

Thus abandoning myself to justice, and waiting for its accomplishment in me, I
discover between justice, and me the criminal, one of a most majestic
appearance, whose beauty, brightness, and grandeur can never be discribed: he
cast such a look of love on me as penetrated through me, the fire of which so
embraced my soul that I loved him again with the same love. He persuaded me in
my, heart that he was my Savior, Mediator and Reconciliator, and while I
thought thereon, he began to intercede for me in this manner, saying, "My
father, behold me with thy paternal regard, I have made expiation for this
sinner, who has received in himself the sentence of condemnation. I have taken
human nature for him. I have suffered all kind of ignominy for him. I have shed
my blood even to the last drop for him. I have suffered the shameful death of
the cross for him. I have descended into the abyss of hell for him, that I
might deliver him. I have been put to death for his offenses, and raised again
for his justification, and where his sins abound, our grace abounds much more.
Oh! my heavenly father, pardon this poor sinner, and cause thy mercy to come to
him." The judge or justice had nothing more to say. The sentence disappeared.
Then I heard his eternal universal voice, which penetrated through me with
divine power, saying, "Take courage my son, thy sins are forgiven thee."
Immediately all the burden of my sins and iniquities was gone, all the stings
and reproaches ceased in a moment, a living faith came in their stead, and the
tears of sorrow were all wiped from my eyes; I cast myself at the feet of my
mediator, reconciler, savior, and intercessor, and embraced him with an
enlivening faith, melting into tears of love, humility, and nothingness.

Oh! my Lord and my God, thou have saved me through pure grace; what shall I
render to thee for all thy benefits? Oh! my divine love, whom I honor and
adore, give me a pure a holy heart, filled with thy virtues and thy love, even
such as thou would that I should have; and renew a right spirit within my
breast. Now know that thy mavelous mercy has given me a savior before I knew
my danger and slavery; a physician who had the care of my disease before that I
felt or knew the same; a redeemer who undertook to pay the debt that I was
neither willing nor able to pay. Oh! my benefactor, guide me by the efficacy of
thy spirit to walk in the way of thy truth and universal love. Teach me thy
eternal and universal word; speak my Lord and my God, for thy servant hears.
Give me thy grace, oh my divine love, that I may have the eyes of my faith
fixed constantly upon thee, and that I may follow thee whethersoever thou
may please to lead me. That thy holy will may be accomplished in time and
eternity, to the praise of thy glory, and my complete salvation.

O my dear soul, sink, thyself down into nothingness and the deepest
humiliation, and adore in spirit and in truth; honor the ocean of love, and the
great wonders of the wisdom and power of thy God, who has employed all these
boundless in comprehensible miracles to restore and to save thee, and not thee
only, but all the human species, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Oh! the depth of
the riches, both of the wisdom and power of God, how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out: for of him and through him, and for
him are all things. To him be glory eternal.

In the present case his goodness shines. for God has loved me before that I
was born. Oh! what grace. God himself has loved me in my fallen estate, whence
I was wholly lost. Oh! what mercy: God has even loved me when I was altogether
unworthy, and that freely too. -- Oh! what love.

He has given me his well-beloved son: and in giving his beloved son, he has
given me his paternal heart: and at the time that he took human nature, he
became my parent, that by this parentage he might oblige himself to have a
right to love and to have the care of me. I feel him the just, for my offenses
and wickedness which he had taken to bear as his own, brought before the most
righteous judgment seat, where he himself alone paid the last penny of the
dreadful debt of all the world. I beheld him upon the cross deface and destroy
the obligation that was against me, and after that he entered once for all into
the holy place by his own blood, having obtained eternal redemption for me.
Approach then now, Oh! my soul, love him which have loved thee fist. Love him
eternally, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy might, who
has made thee to know by experience the great mysteries of his holy love,
respecting all his creatures. -- Hallelujah -- Amen.

O what an alteration from being a child of darkness to a child of light; now I
know in whom I have believed, and desire to consecrate myself to my Lord, my
Sovereign Good, the remainder of my days.

My conversion made a great noise among the people, for they saw me praising
and adoring my divine Savior on all occasions, and before all company where I
came without exception; calling and exhorting each one to submit to the love of
God, just as they found themselves, and although their sins were many and
great, his grace was geater to receive and pardon, but that we must come as we
are, for he is the beginning and the end of the conversion of all the human
species, and whosoever is not converted by him, and to him, is not converted at
all.

The French ministers were very uneasy at what they heard concerning me,
doubting that I was not a true protestant, and therefore they demanded a
written confession of my faith; I told them paper would suffer any thing to be
written upon it, truth or falsehood, but that I was not ashamed to confess with
my mouth what I believed in my heart, and that if they would let me know when
they would meet together, I would be ready to appear before them to give them
an account of my faith, and the wonders which the most holy trinity had wrought
within me.

The time was fixed and I appeared before them. They asked me many questions,
but we could not agree, for they held predestination, and I held the restoraon
of all souls; because having myself been the chief of sinners, and that God,
through Jesus Christ, by the efficacy of his holy spirit, had granted me mercy
and the pardon of all my sins, and had plucked me as a brand out of hell, I
could not have a doubt but the whole World would be saved by the same power.
They answered me that I must not take it ill that they could not own me as a
member of their church. I replied, that I was very well content to be cast out,
and that my consolation was, that they were not able to blot my name out of the
book of life.

Soon after I got acquainted with some persons who led a very retired life,
having received a deep knowledge of themselves through grace: we sometimes met
together, but we soon were persecuted with reproach.

After that I received a voice of grace inwardly to go and preach the gospel in
France; I resisted it more than once or twice, fearing persecution. but I was
struck with a sickness and had pain like the agony of death, was ready to die,
and knowing it was because I had not hearkened to that voice that had called me
to bear witness to the truth of France, I humbled myself before my God through
Jesus Christ my Lord, asked pardon for my offenses, and promising to submit
myself to follow his voice, upon which I was immediately healed; and grew more
robust than I had ever been before. Then I heard his voice once more, calling
me to go to France to preach the gospel, and I found myself obliged in my soul
to follow the voice, through with fear and trembling.

I took passage at Dover for Calais, and immediately upon my arrival I began to
preach and proclaim the good news in the market, even the eternal salvation by
Jesus Christ within us, and that each one of us might be saved by pure grace,
and that whosoever knowing himself, feeling the burden of his iniquities,
having recourse to Jesus Christ, refining himself without reserve, with all his
sins, even had he found himself in his damnable estate, should be delivered,
and obtain the pardon of all his sins.

As soon as I had done I was taken before a magistrate, who made me to know
that my conduct was contrary to the stature of the king: I was then conducted
to prison, where I was no sooner arrived than all the fear of persecution
vanished; my soul was strengthened in the Lord Jesus; I felt the love of my
divine savior very near accompained with his divine light. After some days had
past, I was brought before the justice, and examined by what order I preached;
I told him who I was, and that I was drawn by the special grace of my God in
Jesus Christ, by the power of his holy spirit, to teach the nations, and that
for refusing to obey the voice of my God I was taken very sick. While they were
examining me there came in an old man with a white beard; all the justices
saluted him: he said to them, have nothing to do with this person, for I have
suffered much this night past on his account, and retired immediately.

I was then condemed to eight days imprisonment, as it was the first time, and
to be conducted by the servant of the magistrate out of the bounds of the city,
letting me know that if I was found employed in the same manner a second time,
my life would be in danger.

I was about 17 years of age when I began to preach in France. In this manner I
employed two years in that kingdom, preaching the gospel in high and low
Normandy, the country of my father, for he was born in the city of Rouan.

There were many ministers of us together; Monsr. Durant, de la Chevrette;
Dumoulin, L'Achar, etc. We met together in mountains and woods, to the number
of 400 where God very often wrought great wonder by the power of the gospel,
among men and women, and even boys and girls, of the age of twelve or fifteen
years, that did not even know how to read or write. -- They were convinced by
the power of grace, and began to proclaim the gospel with a most marvelous
strength of spirit, without any fear, being embraced by love divine.

We were many times taken prisoners during the two years, sometimes by means of
our own brothers, who would go and inform the soldiers in the mashelsey where
we were met together.

Many of us were hanged, others whiped by the hands of the hangman, and branded
with a hot iron; all their goods confiscated, and they sent on boad the
galleys, but all that did not weaken us, but on the the contrary, the grace of
our divine love strengthened us to a wonder.

At last we were surrounned by a party of soldiers one day when we were assemby
the side of Dieppe, where many of us were taken prisoners, among whom was
myself, and a Mr. Durant, a young man about 24 years of age, of Geneoa.

After a month imprisonment we were condemned to die, he to be hanged, and I to
have my headcut off. We were conducted together to the place of execution; he
sung the 116 psalm when on the ladder, and died joyfully.

I was then conducted to the scaffold, my eyes were ordered to be bound to
prevent my seeing, but upon my earnest request that was omitted.

I then fell upon my knees, and praying the Lord that he would not require my
blood at their hands, as they knew not what they did; my soul was filled with
exceeding joy. The executioner bound my hands, and while he was employed in so
doing a courier arrived from the king, which was Louis XV, with a reprieve for
the criminal. Immediately the joy of my heart was gone, and darkness entered
into my soul. I was then reconducted to prison at Paris, where I was confined
sometime before I was liberated through the intercession of the queen.

Many things happened to me during my exile in France, and the time of my
confinement One may easily discover here, that the grace of our God never
leaves those who trust in him and are faithful, until death.

After my releasement I retired into Germany, where I began to learn the
language with great difficulty. I found many souls who were convinced by grace,
and who led a very retired life among the French refugees at Bulin, Madeburg.
Brandeburg, Brunswick in the Palatinate, Hamburg, Altona, Stade, Gluckstadt,
Bremen, the country of Hanover, in Flanders, Brabant, the low land of Holland,
the country of Waldenses and many other places.

I found work all round, souls who desired to be saved. I had also a large
acquaintance among the nobility in Germany, and Holland; we had a large
communion of brethern and sisters in Jesus Christ our Lord.

I was wholly employed in traveling from place to place, in visiting the
brethern and preaching to the nations, in the German, French, and Dutch
language. There were many assemblies of brethern all around: in some places we
had liberty, and where that could not be had publicly, we met secretly in
particular families; but nevertheless grace wrought wonders in convincing
souls, and leading them to a real deep knowledge of themselves, and of the
damnable estate into which all men are plunged by nature, for none can obtain
salvation without being first damned in themselves.

I was much concerned about the salvation of souls, and their estate deeply
effected me. I had also an acquaintance with a company gentry, who dwelt
together near Siegen, some of them were married, but only dwelt together as
brethern and sisters. The baron of Peuchink, the lord of Fleishbein; and the
court of marsey, who was employed in writing books, which are printed in French
and German. They led a very retired life, filled with love and friendship to
all the world, without bound, and were very charitable both to friends and
enemies.

Our acquaintance with each other happened in a wonderful manner. -- One day
brother Marsey had a vision concerning me, when I had arrived in the
Palatinate, being about twenty leagues from him. I was drawn by grace, being
engaged in prostrating myself in spirit before the presence of the most holy
trinity, and having a vision, I discovered a mavelous throne with seven
foot-stools, upon each footstool were two candlesticks of gold, and upon the
throne I saw a greater table with seven candlesticks of gold placed in a round
figure upon it.; then I saw many with robes, whiter than snow, who stood up
near the candlesticks of gold on each side of the foot-stools and around the
table. Immediately the candlesticks were lighted and chairs were brought that
each one might set down, then they began to honor the most high, so that my
soul was lest in admiration: then altogether bending their knees, the whole
company adored the most holy trinity; the vision vanished in an instant, and I
came to myself.

Some little time after my brother Marsey sent a letter to me, written after
this manner.

My well beloved and dear brother in Jesus Christ our Lord, the most holy
trinity discovers many wonders to his children, who are rooted upon the rock of
deliverance, and have their eyes of faith fixed upon their sovereign good; he
honors them with his universal presence, and embraces them with the fire of
heavenly love; as I have been favored with the consolation of seeing you in
his holy Presence, I hope you will not deny that communion in the body that we
have had together in spirit, to the praise of the glory of our God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, by the efficacy of his holy spirit. -- Thus wishes and dwells
for ever, MARSEY your Brother, united by the grace of God, Amen."

After I had passed about 18 years in Germany, and Holland, I became sickly of
a consumptive disorder, occasioned by being greatly concerned for the salvation
of souls, and much disquited because the greatest part by far walked in the
ways of perverseness, and neglected their conversion, which causad me great
trouble, and I took it so to heart that I believed my happiness would be
incomplete, while one creature remained miserable. Sometimes I was little
comforted within by grace insome manner, but that did not last long.

I dwelt at that time in the country with the brethern near the city of Mons,
an Haguiauth near the border of France, in the emperor's dominions.

My fever increased to such a manner as reduced me almost to a skeleton, so
that they were obliged to feed me as an infant. While I lay in this weak
situation, I was favored through grace with many visions: in one it appeared to
me that I was conducted into a fine plain, filled with all kinds of fruit
trees, agreeable both to the sight and smell, loaded wiih all kinds of the most
delicious fruits, which came to my mouth, and satisfied me as with a river of
pleasure: same time I beheld the inhabitants, they were beautiful beyond
expression, clothed in garments as white as snow. They were filled with
humility, and their friendship and love was toward all beings: they saluted me
with the most profound reverence and most lovely air, saying to me with the
voice of love, which penetrated through me: -- "Dear soul take courage, be
comforted, for in a little time you shall see the wonders of God, in the
restoration of all the human species, without excepcion."

The weakness of my body so increased that I was certain of dying. I exhorted
my breathern to be faithful unto death,! to be steadfast, immovable, and to be
always turning inward with an enlivening faith, to behold with a fixed
attention the Lamb of God, with believing eyes, and to hearken to his eternal
word within them, and that then they should receive of the fullness of Christ's
grace upon grace, by which they should be strengthened to abide steadfast unto
the end.

As I had communion with many assemblies of brethern, but in particular with
that connected with my dear brother Marsey; the brethern there had a vision of
my death and sent brother Marsey to see me.

When he arrived he found me in the agonies of death: he embraced me with a
kiss of peace and love, and saluted me in the name of the brethern, who
recommended themselves to me, and desired that I would remember them before the
throne of God and the Lamb.

He then took leave of me and I felt myself die by degrees, and exactly at
midnight I was separated from my body, and saw the people occupied in washing
it, according to the custom of the country. I had a great desire to be freed
from the sight of my body, and immediately I was drawn up as in a cloud, and
beheld great wonders where I passed, impossible to be written or expressed. I
quickly came to a place which appeared to my eyes as a level plain, so
extensive that my sight was not able to reach its limits, filled with all sorts
of delightful fruit trees, agreeable to behold, and which sent forth such
fragrant odours that all the air was filled as with incense. In this place I
found that I had two guardians, one at my right hand, and the other at my left,
exceeding beautiful beyond expression, whose boundless friendship and love
seemed to penetrate through all my inward parts. -- They had wings, and
resembled angels, having shining bodies and white garments.

He that was at my right hand came before me and said -- "My dear soul and my
dear brother, take courage, the most holy trinity has favored you to be
comforted with an everlasting and universal consolation, by discovering to you
how, and in what manner he will restore all his creatures without exception, to
the praise of his glory, and their eternal salvation; and you shall be witness
of this, and shall rejoice in singing and triumph with all the children of God,
therefore as a reward for the friendship and love that you have borne for your
neighbors, on whose accounts you had many extreme griefs, and shed many tears,
which shall be all wiped away from your eyes by God himself, who shall turn all
your griefs to exceeding great gladness." Then he took his place at my right
hand. After that the second guardian who was at my left hand appeared before
me, and spoke thus: "My dear soul, my dear brother, be of good cheer, thou
shall be strengthened and comforted after your griefs, with an universal and
eternal consolation -- You must be prepared to pass through the seven
habitations of the damned; be of good courage, and prepare yourself to feel
something of their sufferings, but be turned inward deeply, during the time,
and you shall thereby be preserved." Then he took his place at my left hand:
immediately we were lifted up in the air, and sometime after we arrived in a
dark obscure place, where nothing but weeping, lamentation, and gnashing of
teeth, could be understood. A dreadful place, as being the repository of all
sorts of damned souls, under condemnation with the torments, pains, griefs and
sufferings which their sins had merited, for each one had his works to follow
him in death. All iniquities and sins were reduced to seven classes or
habitations: there was an eternal confusion there, that which one made the
other destroyed.

The duellist, in his fire of anger burns against his enemy, and they pass as a
firebrand of hell, one through the other.

You might see fornicators, idoliters, adulterers, thieves, the covetous,
drunkards, slanderers, ravishers, etc. each being laboring and being employed
with his sins and iniquities. One might also see all kind of conditions of men,
divines, deputies, controvertors, advocates, judges, lawyers, and in a word one
might discover whatsoever any of them had done upon earth. In each habitation,
I discovered that those who were abased and that appeared sorrowful for their
sins, were separated from the others of their sort that were not yet so. I was
then conducted into each of the seven habitations of the damned, where I knew
one I had been acquainted with upon earth. I discovered also that he had an
habitation among the damned, and that they were able to see the elect from that
habitation where he was, but were not able to pass through, because there was a
great gulf between them, so that all are obliged to dwell where they are.

It is impossible to describe my condition. as I had great compassion toward
the sufferers. inasmuch as I had part of their sufferings.

After we had passed through we were lifted up some distance from the place,
where we reposed ourselves; and a messenger was sent to us, who watered or
refreshed us as with a river of pleasure, saying eat my beloveed and drink my
friends, to refresh yourselves after all your toils and pains; my dear soul,
and my dear brother, (addressing himself to me) the most holy trinity always
works wonders in all times within his poor creatures without exception, and he
will order for a time and half a time, that you shall return into your earthly
tabernacle, to publish, and proclaim to the people of the world an universal
gospel, that shall restore in it is time all the human species without exception
to it is honor and to the glory of it is most holy triniry. -- Hallelujah.

Beholding the messenger attentively, I discovered that he had a most glorious
body, dressed in a robe whiter than snow, filled with the most exalted love and
friendship, joined with the deepest humility, which penetrated me through and
through, and suddenly there was heard a great multitude of the heavenly host,
and the messenger said, as he flew to join the same, with a sweet voice --
"Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty, who was, and is, and who is to
come."

The multitude were innumerable, and there was one who surpassed in granduer,
beauty, brightness, majesty, magnificence and excellence, all the others; even
the son of the living God, being the brighiness of his glory, and the express
image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he
had by himself purged our sins, sat down at the right hand of the majesty on
high.

As the multitude approached the glory caused us to fall down, and to adore in
spirit and in truth the son of the living God, who marched in the midst of the
multiutude.

After they had passed us, we were lifted up, and caused to follow them, for
the air carried us the way they went, in a different manner than before. Oh!
the wonders of our God! When we arrived in the place of the seven habitations
of the damned, we could preceive no more darkness, obscurity, pains, torments,
lamentations, afflictions, nor gnashing of teeth; all were still and quiet, and
an agreeable sweetness appeared through the whole. Then all the heavenly host
shouted with one voice and said, "An eternal and everlasting deliverance, an
eternal and everlasting restoration, universal and everlasting restitution of
all things." Then all the multitude adored the most holy trinity, and sung the
song of the Lamb, even the song of the triumph for the victory gained by him,
in the most harmonious manner, and at the end, all the multitude being upon
their knees, said with a loud voice, "Great and mavelous are thy works, O
Lord, God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, Oh! King of Saints;" Presently
they passed through the seven habitations of the damned, and a multitude were
delivered from each, and being clothed in white robes. they followed the
heavenly host, praising and glorifying the most high for their deliverance; one
might know them amongst the others: they all retired by a different way than
that which they came. The messenger then came and conducted us into a most
wonderful place, and ordered my two guardians to conduct me into five celestial
mansions, where the Lord's elect abide; and then to reconduct me to dwell yet a
time and a half time in my earthly habitation, and to preach to the lower world
the universal everlasting gospel; and that the most Holy Trinity has a pure
universal love toward all the human race, without exception, and to each in
particular; then turning himself toward me he said, my dear suol thou shall be
favored of the most Holy Trinity, to be conducted by thy guardians, who shall
never leave thee: when thou shall have need of their counsel; thou need but
to call them; and they shall be day and night present at thy service; they
shall conduct thee into five of the heavenly mansions at this time, where thou
shall partake in a certain degree, of the celestial glory as much as thy spirit
shall be able to receive, as not being yet sanctified and purified
sufficiently, and then thou shall be reconducted into thine earthly tabernacle,
for a time and half a time, and shall preach to the lower world the universal
everlasting gospel, and that the most Holy Trinity has a pure universal love
toward all the human race without exception, and toward each one in
particular.

The fountain of grace bless and preserve thee, and cause his face to shine
upon and in thee. and enlighten thine understanding both in time and in
eternity. -- Amen. Our knees bending of their own accord, he laid his hand upon
my head, and blessed me, and immediately took wing, and swiftly fled away-

After that my guardians conducted me into five celestial habitations, where I
discovered many wonders. Some had greater brightness, glory, and majesty than
others, and as the places were, so were the inhabitants; some were clothed in
garments whiter than snow; others had transparent bodies, and others again had
white bodies resembling crystal. It is impossible to express these things.
They were moved by boundless burning love, rising up, and then plunging
themselves into the deepest humility: all their motions were penetrating, being
filled with love and friendship. -- their actions and manners are strengthened
and animated with brightness, being filled with light as with the rays of the
sun; it was the fire of heavenly love, which by inflaming all their hearts,
causes them all to burn in the same fire, and to be animated by the same
spirit. They have no need of any way of speaking there, but the language and
motions of eternal and universal love without words for their actions, their
motions speak more than all words. I was then conducted into five habitations
of the elect. At the first a great multitude came before us with songs to the
honor and glory of the most high, and of the victory gained over the damned.
They received us with triumph, great zeal, love and friendship, saluting us
with profound humility, and conducting us into a large room: there was a great
table covered and furnished with all sorts of fruit, not only pleasant to
behold but also exceeding delicious to the taste.

In the mean while we were taking our repast, the celestial multitudes formed
songs, and sung psalms of praise and thanksgiving to the most holy trinity.
After that we were conducted into all the five celestial habitations, (that I
was to see) where I saw many wonders, impossible to describe. First many
thrones lifted up of inexpressible beauty and magnificence; upon one of these
thrones I beheld the Royal High Priest, surrounded with exceeding great
brightness, and clothed in most excellent majesty, being employed in kind
intercession before his father, for all the human species, pleading the
sufficiency of his blood-sheding to deliver and sanctify a thousand such worlds
as ours. All the elect, with the heavenly spirits, joined their intercession
with that of their Royal High Priest, the only chief king, being reconcilers,
saviors, and restores in the same spirit. -- This mutual intercession appeared
like incence ascending on high into the sanctuary of the Lord. Over against the
throne I discovered Adam, with Eve, rejoicing in the only mediator between God
and men, and adoring together the most Holy Trinity for the deliverance of
their children out of the great miseries and eternal condemnation into which
their sin and fall had brought them, and upon their bended knees adoring the
only mediator for the intercession he makes in behalf of mankind. Also I beheld
a multitude of spirits flying and enflamed with the fire of heavenly love,
while we adored, humbled in nothingness, rendering our religious homage to the
most high for his intercession and the deliverance of all mankind. Then my
guardian, who was at my right hand, coming before me, said thus, "Dear soul, my
dear brother, do you see these spirtis flying, who came in great multitudes,
and who are vanished in the spirit of love, and gratitude, humbled and
self-annihilated as it were, adoring before the throne of grace, and praying to
the savior for the intercessions he has made for them. These are lately
delivered from the infernal prisons; it is for them that the tincture of the
blood of Jesus Christ has been shed even to the last drop, notwithstanding
they had dwelt a long time shut up in the place of the damned, under the power
of the second death, and have passed through many agonies, pains and
tribulations. -- Upon that I perceived that Adam and Eve approached, and Adam
spoke to me after this manner: -- "My dear brother, rejoice with universal and
eternal joy, as you are favored with the heavenly visions! it is in this manner
that our adorable Royal High Priest, Mediator, and intercessor, shall restore
all my descendents to the glory of our God, and their eternal and universal
salvation for the kingdom of eternal love has power sufficient to draw all
mankind out of their bondage, and to exclaim and say; O death, where is thy
sting, etc. But my dear brother, this love of our God in Jesus Christ, by the
power of his holy spirit, shall not only gain the victory over all the human
species, but also surmount or over flow the kingdom of Satan, entirely, with
all the principalities of the fallen angels' and shall bring them back in their
first glory, which they have had in the beginning. I will make all things new
said the Lord of Hosts, and the end shall return into its beginning O my Lord
and my God, what greart wonders have thou caused to pass before mine eyes! who
am I O my God, dust and ashes, an ungreatful and rebellious creature. I should
not dare to lift mine eyes toward the heavens if the blood of Jesus Christ thy
son did not plead for me. My soul rejoices and is glad, she shouts for joy: O
my God, whom I adore, love and respect: before whom I desire to be without
ceasing, self-annihilated at thy feet. O my God and my Love, the seraphims and
cherubims burning with the fire of thy heavenly love, adore and honor thee:
give me thy grace also, O my God, that I may be consumed before thee, while I
sing the majesty, glory, and the memory of God, who has created and redeemed
me. I would praise him incessantly, not in shadow or figure, but in reality and
truth. I would continue devoted to thee, and always be swollowed up in the
ocean of love without a wish to leave it.

Being in this manner conducted into five celestial habitations, I discovered
many mysteries, saw many miracles, and beheld the wonders of the most Holy
Trinity among the children, the elect, the heavenly inhabitants, and perceiving
how some surpassed others in brightness, light, splendour, and majesty, in
friendship, love, humiliation and self-abasement, concerning of which things my
tongue is too feeble to speak, and my pen to write. I adore the mavelous ways
of my God, with all the happy spirits.

Many thrones, places, edifices, temples, and buildings were erected in all
parts, with fruit trees intermixed, rivers of pleasure gliding along through the
celestial land, which appeared like a garden of heaven, even the paradise of
God. It is the court of King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, which the eye has
not seen nor the ear heard, and which the hearts of men have not received; it
is the celestial globe where the New Jerusalem or mount Sion is placed' where
the bosom of Abraham is; where the sufferers who came out of their tribulations
are refreshed, and rejoice, forgeting all their miseries; being come out of
their purifications, they are made to rejoice in Sion: O magnificent globe! O
thou city of the great God! stately city of this place! where shall a mortal
find convenient phrases to lisp out a little of thy glory and splendour? it is
the glory and magnificence of the most holy trinity, where God is pleased to
manifest himself in his pomp and beauty. The blessed angels there have their
employment in serving God; they compose the court of the Great King; O my God I
am not able to express that which penetrates me, of the granduer, magnificence,
spendor, pomp, and majesty of thy dwellings, and of the inhabitants in those
transparent places. hallelujah and victory for ever. -- AMEN.

Then my guardians took me up, and reconducted me to the house from whence I
came, where I perceived the people assem,+bled, and discovering my body in the
coffin, I was reunited with the same, and found myself lodged within my
earthly tabernacle, and coming to myself, I knew my dear brother Marsey, and
many others, who gave me an account of my being 25 hours in the coffin, and 17
hour before they put me in the coffin, which altogether made 42 hours: to me
they seemed as many years; beginning then to preach the universal gospel, I was
presently put into prison. but soon set at liberty again. I visited all my
brethern, preached the gospel and taking leave of them all, because that my God
and Sovereign Good called me to go into America and preach the gospel there, I
took my departure for the same in the 38th year of my age, and it is 41 years
since I first arrived here. The 28th of July next, 1782, I shall be 79 years of
age, blessed be the name of the Lord for ever.

FINIS.

