Sinners Directed to Hear and Fear, and do no more so Wickedly. Being an
Impartial Account of the Inhumane and Barbarous Murder, Committed by Jeremiah
Meacham, On his Wife and her Sister, at Newport on Rhode Island, March 22d.
1715. With some Account of his Life, Trial, Carriage before and after
Condemnation; his Confession, Prayers, and Last Dying Words at the Place of
Execution, which was April the 12 th. 1715.

Also a SERMON Preached in his Hearing: On Psalm LI. 17.

By Mr. Nathaniel Clap, Minister of the Gospel in Newport, Rhode Island.

Boston, Printed by J. Allen, for N. Boon, at the Sign of the Bible in
Cornhill, 1715.

A Narrative OF Jeremiah Meacham.
THE Man that occasioned the Preaching of the Ensuing Sermon, was Born at, or
near Salem, and Lived there, and in several other places of Boston Province
near half his Days, before he came into Rhode Island Colony, where he Married
and continued, until he was more than Forty Years Old.

Furnished with a good Natural Understanding, and a strong Memory: Such a
Religious Education was bestowed upon him in his younger time, and such
powerful influences of the Spirit of God accompanied the Means of Grace enjoyed
by him; that he appeared, in the Opinion of some, remarkable for his Religious
Conversation, before he began to cast off Religion.

But when he had abandoned the Society of those that were visibly Godly, and
became associated with some that were openly wicked (in Providence:) He quickly
grew woefully indifferent about the things of Godliness, and more and more
inclinable unto the ways of wickedness; neglecting the Public Worship of God,
Profaning the Lord's Day, speaking worse than he should have done about some of
the Duties of Christianity.

Yet when he came to be Master of a Family, (in Newport) he attended
Family Prayer (as he said) above a year; but afterward that was omitted, (as he
told) by reason of some difference in his Family. Whatever he did about Closet
Prayer.

Having for some time neglected the Religious Observation of the Christian
Sabbath, he pretended some concernment about the Seventh Day, but never
appeared conscientious in observing that day; nor could he own, that he had
renounced his Infant Baptism; nor had he worn off all the good impressions,
made on his Soul, by the Means of Grace afforded to him in his Childhood. And
all this while, he was generally esteemed exemplarily exact in his Dealings,
and punctual to his Promises, about his Worldly Affairs; He could boast among
his Neighbors about this part of Moral Honesty: Though they could charge him too
truly with speaking too largely sometimes in his Romantic Discourses.

But he seldom or never seemed altogether free from some terrible reflections
upon his Conscience, for his Apostasy from God. And it has been thought that
his Convictions about some Concerns of his Soul, mixed with some vexations
about his Affairs in the World, brought him into a grievous hurry, which by
degrees boiled up into a sort of a raging fury: And keeping out of the way of
suitable directions for his Soul, his troubles of mind grew so intolerable,
that he told some, that he was weary of his Life.

And the Enemies of Souls doubtless were not wanting in their endeavors with
him, to carry all things the wrong way. For he said, he was advised, To drink
away his troubles; To kill his troubles of mind by drinking of Strong Drink to
exeess: And he owned, That he had tried several times, what this way would do;
but he found by sad experience, that this was not the right way to get ease,
for the troubles of his mind returned as the Spirits of the Drink removed.

Things grew so uncomfortable with him, that he loved not Home; he thought that
all his Neighbors looked strangely upon him; he pretended that he feared some
body designed mischief against him, and that he should be slain. Every day
seemed unto him as it if would be the last day of his life: And he asked of
others, if they knew of no contrivance against him.

The Day before he committed his Murders, he appeared mightily distressed,
walking about in a very great agony, a great part of that day, choosing to be at
the Neighbors. But on the said day of his Murders, (22 d. 1 m) he got and sat
upon his House, with a Penknife in his hand, for several hours, if discoursing
sometimes with those that came near him, seeming afraid some or other would
hurt him; Others feared more that he would hurt himself; none seemed much to
fear that he intended any hurt to any body else. And he declared, that he would
hurt neither Man, Woman nor Child, if they would let him alone.

After he came down from his House top into his Chamber, he kept there most
part of the Afternoon of that day, until after Sun set; and then his Wife, and
her Sister, upon his invitation, going up to him, urging of him to go down with
them, or striving with him to keep him from hurting of himself; it seems that
then he struck his Wife in her throat with his Penknife; and then struck her
and her Sister down with an Ax (that he had carried up, and he had also Charged
his Gun; but made no use of that, in his Murders) how many blows he gave them,
is not known: But the dreadful marks of several remained on their miserably
mangled Bodies.

When he had murdered them, he stood watchfully upon his Guard, with his Ax in
hand, threatening all that offered to come up Stairs; knocked one man down with
his bloody Ax. Others endeavoring to apprehend him, by breaking up the Chamber
Floor under him, and the Roof over him; he labored to defend himself, as if
against the worst Enemies. And when they carried some Fire, flaming to light
their way before them, he snatched away the Fire, and laid it among some
combustible matter, and got ready more, and quickly kindled a great Fire in the
midst of the Chamber, as if he chose rather to Burn himself alive, and the deal
Bodies with him than to be taken: but finding the Chamber quickly growing too
hot for him, and he being very hot with constant motion; he sprung out headlong
at the Window among the People, that were now surrounding of his House.

At some time or other, in these hurries it seems, he had cut his own throat;
but fearing that death would not come soon enough that way, and finding that he
could not bear burning to death; it was thought, he was willing to try, if he
could dash himself to pieces, by throwing himself out at the Window; by which
he also hurt his head, if no other part of his Body; but his Wounds were near
healed, before he came to Dye.

After his Apprehension, he seemed for some time too stupid and softish, and
willing to palliate his Murders, pretending fear that others intended to Murder
him; and that he did what, he did in an hurry.

And when he was carried next day to see the Murdered Bodies, he acknowledged
that it was a sad sight; but none seemed more unconcerned at the sadness of the
sight than he, that had most reason of all to be sadly concerned at such an
amazing Spectacle.

In the time of his Imprisonment, he remained too long wonderfully insensible
about the miserable condition of his Soul, yet mighty ready to resent
provocations; whereof it must be confessed, that he had enough. Too many
persons coming to him, and some of them none of the best, nor upon the best
designs, very much hindered the well improvement of his flying time, to the
best advantage: Notwithstanding he seemed under continual expectation that he
must dye for his Murders; and was desirous of the Prayers and Counsels, that he
though it might be for his benefit, and willing to Read and Hear good Books to
direct and assist, and excite his Preparation for Death; but seemed most of all
to prize the Holy Bible; and by degrees came to a better sense of his
lamentable Circumstances, and frequently declared that he valued not this
World, if he might be well prepared for a better; and was observed several
times in Prison to warn others that came near him to Shun those ways of Sins,
that he had found pernicious to himself; and was mightily concerned for the
Welfare of his poor Children, that they might be bro't up in the fear of God,
and brought under the wings and the bonds of the Covenant of Grace. The still
more hopeful tokens of a real work of Saving Grace upon his own heart would
have been very desirable; though he was not without repeated entreaties of
Prayer, that he might be made thoroughly sensible of his Wickedness, and prepared
for Pardon through the Blood of Christ.

At his Trial, (^ D. 2 M 1715.) he could not deny the Murders, but pleaded,
that he was not himself, and so knew not what he did, when he committed them.
Though he could remember the circumstances of the Murders. And his Neighbors
generally thought that he knew what he was doing, notwithstanding his being in
such an hurry; none seemed at any lost about his being brought in Guilty.

After his Condemnation (9 D. 2 M.) he seemed more pensive and penitent than
ever before, in all the time of his Imprisonment. Expressing his desires to
submit to the Will of God, praying, that God would prepare him for his Will;
desiring the prayers, and the helps of others, for such Preparation; bewailing
and lamenting his own miserable Condition, as well as the distresses occasioned
by him, unto his Relations; and particularly unto his Aged Parents, and his
little Children; for whom he desired not only the Compassions of Heaven, but
also the endeavors of his Friends upon Earth, for the good of their Souls.

In the last night that he lived, he seemed most of all concerned about his
Condition, mourning as if his heart were indeed ready to break; pouring out his
sighs and groans before God; willing to hear his attendants read in good Books,
and especially in the Bible. Asking their Prayers for and with him, that he
might be prepared for his approaching End.

As the time of his Execution drew near, he manifested no reluctance to attend
it; only he complained, that the time between the Sentence and his Death was
very short; ben he was told, that it was much longer than what he allowed unto
those whom he had murdered, and that he had lived longer by near three weeks,
than he would have suffered himself to have lived, had he been left unto his
own will.

He desired that God would furnish him with Courage to Glorify his Name, and
Encounter the Terrors of Death.

As he drew near to the Place of his Execution, he seemed mightily amazed; but
so recovered, as to utter several things, that were by some accounted
considerable; some of them are preserved.

But in all the Expressions that he uttered, when he came to Die, he pretended
unto no more hopes concerning the good State of his Soul, than what might be
implied in his desires of an absolute Resignation to the Will of God; with
entire dependence on the free Grace, the Infinite Sovereign Mercy of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

But now he is gone from among the Living; it becomes all the Living to hope
the best they can concerning him, and to leave Secret Things with the Lord, to
whom they belong; and to mind the revealed Will of God about their own Duty,
for the good of their own Souls, and the Souls of others, whom they are yet
capable of benefiting; and to make the best improvement they can of all such
Tragical Examples, for their own advantage; and to learn by the harms of
others, to keep clear from the like harms, and make sure about their own
seasonable Preparation for the end of all the Living; and constantly remember
the repeated and memorable Admonition of our Blessed Redeemer, in Luke 13.3, 5.
Suppose ye, that these who have sufferd so sad things, are therefore greater
Sinners than others. I tell you, no; but except you Repent, you shall all
likewise perish. And,

Oh! That all People might be Warned against needlessly forsaking the Holy
Ordinances of God, and the faithful Ambassadors of Christ, lest they run
themselves into more terrible distresses, than they can easily imagine, among
their Ungodly Companions, who will not be able to help them out of their
Distresses, when they have left God, and God has left them.

This poor man acknowledged in the time of his Imprisonment, that he had
forsaken God, and God had forsaken him, and then every thing seemed against
him, and he wished, ' Oh! that I had thought of any faithful Friend, to whom I
could have been willing to have gone for advice, in the time of my Distress.
But he could own, that he lived so, that he was afraid or ashamed of coming
into the presence of any such Friend. He bitterly bewailed his leaving the
Means of Grace that he had enjoyed in his Youth.

And, Oh! that all People might be warned against wickedly grieving the Holy
Spirit of God, by Sinning against the light of their own Consciences; doing of
those ill things, that they know should not be done; or not doing those good
things, that they know should be done: For if the Holy Spirit goes from a Soul,
then comes the Evil Spirit to that Soul; and when he comes, he will be a Spirit
of Slumber, as long as he can, to keep the Soul secure in a state, and in some
way of Sin: But when he can keep the Soul no longer secure, but the Soul must,
by some means or other be awakened, to see something of its own forlorn
Condition; then he will be a Spirit of Terror, and will fill the Soul, wherein
he dwells, with terrible Distress, that may at length issue in horrible
despair. This poor man could say, that he feared that he should be Damned at
last; and thought sometimes that he would strive to be as wicked as the Devil
could make him; and yielded to every desperate Conclusions about his own Soul,
(as has been reported) long before his Murders.

And, Oh! That all People might be effectualy warned against all beginnings of
declensions from God; and to take heed, left there be in any of them, an evil
heart of Unbelief, in departing from the Living God; lest they find the Lord
casting them off for ever, and his Soul taking no pleasure in them. For when
People begin to decline from God, and from Good, they know not where they shall
stop: They know not what Mischiefs and Miseries they are apace running into;
nor how soon they shall be overwhelmed with astonishing Desolations.

This poor man left this awful Warning with his Neighbors, and told them
several times, that he could well remember, that when he began to cast off the
Fear of God, and leave the practices of Godliness, indulging himself in Evil
Courses, he as little thought as any of them all, that he should so soon come
to such a miserable End. Let them then, that think they stand, take heed lest
the fall: And therefore Commit the keeping of their Souls to God, in
Well-doing, as unto a Faithful Creator.

PEople of all Persuasions here, had manifested their Charitable Compassions
toward him. The Episcopal Minister has frequently Visited him in Prison, with
his Counsels and Prayers. One of the Ancientest Men among the Antipaedo
Baptists Accompanied him, and Prayed with him near his Last Moments. From the
Quakers he had a Letter of Advice, to Evidence Unfeigned Repentance, and to
Consider, There is Mercy with the Lord, that He may be Feared.

At the Execution of Jeremiah Meacham, (at Newport on Rhode Island) April the
12th. 1715.
HE declared, that being dissatisfyed in his mind, some time in the beginning
of the last year, concerning something about Religion, he could not obtain the
satisfaction that he desired, from those whom he applied himself unto: Then
some uneasiness in his Family was occasioned or increased, partly through his own
coffeehouse: After this, he though it his Neighbors looked strangely upon him;
and he feared some body or other designed to do some mischief unto him. And
every day seemed unto him, as if it were the last day that he should live,
until the 22d day of March last; when, (after abundance of hurry in his mind,
for several days,) he got upon his House, and sat there some time, with a
Penknife in his hand, as afraid of his life; then came into his House; and for
the most part of the Afternoon of that day, he kept in his Chamber, until near
darkish; then he desired his Wife to come up to him, (if she desired her Sister
to come up) and while he threatened all others that offered to come up to him,
with an Ax in his hand, (bidding them to stand off,) and his Wife and Sister
endeavored to persuade him to go down, or else endeavored to hinder him from
hurting of himself; then he struck the dreadful, cruel, mortal blows upon those
his dear Relations, without any malice or hatred (as he said) or forethought
of mischief to either of them; (although several Evidences at his Trial before
the Court, had positively declared, that he had used very uncomfortable
Carriage and Language toward his Wife, long before that time:) Then he read
some things that he had got written, for the Warning of all People; saying,
that he as little thought as any of them all, that ever he should come into
such lamentable Circumstances; and therefore would have them to take heed to
themselves, that they might, none of them, come to such an Untimely End. In the
Paper that he read, were contained such as these things following.

AS a poor Miserable Sinner, going into the Eternal World, not knowing as yet,
what will become of my Precious Immortal Soul; but desiring, entirely to rely
on the rich and free Grace of God in the Lord Jesus Christ for all Salvation.

I earnestly wish, that all People may take Warning by me, to shun all ways of
Sinning against God.

I wish, that they may beware of beginning to forsake the Lord; That they may
be careful in attending all the Duties of Religion, Secret, Private, and
Public; That they they may take heed to their Ways, that they Sin not with
their Tongues, but be in the Fear of the Lord all the day long.

I wish that Young People may Remember their Creator in the Days of their
Youth; and avoid all Sinful Disobedience to their Superiors; and early comply
with the offers of the Gospel, and the Motions of the Spirit of God, that they
may not provoke the Lord, as I have done.

I wish, that Married People may keep clear from all Contention in their
Families, and from all Coffeehouse with the Condition wherein God has
placed them, and may help one another forward in the way toward Heaven.

I desire to justify the Glorious God, in all that he orders for me,
submitting to his Will; and to acknowledge the Justice of the Honorable
Government, in the Sentence of Death passed upon me: For I must own, that I
deserve to Die for my horrible Wickedness.

I desire to forgive all that have any way injured me; and that God may forgive
them all, as heartily, (so far as I know mine own heart) as I desire that God
may forgive me; and that they may forgive me, whom I have grievously injured.
Oh! Let all Christians pray for me.

Jeremiah Meacham.
12th D. 2d M. 1715
Having read the preceding things, desiring leave to present his Petitions to
Heaven, he made the following prayer, (as it was taken in short hand.)
O Most Great and Glorious Lord God, who did Create Heaven and Earth; Lord,
I acknowledge that thou have the disposing of all things; Lord, I desire that
thou would make me such an one, as thou would have me to be. And Lord, I
pray that thou would blot out all my sins, that they may be blotted out of
thy book, that they may never rise up in Judgment against me; Lord, I
acknowledge, that thou might a long time ago, have sent me into Eternity,
which I am now going into. And therefore Lord, I pray thee that thou would
now blot out all my transgressions, for thy names sake and forgive all the
Iniquity that is in me. And Lord, I Pray thee, be with all that are here, and
bless them. And be with me, that am just going out of this World into the
Eternal Ocean: Receive me, O Lord, into thy Heavenly Kingdom, to be at thy
right Hand, where is pleasure for-evermore: And Lord, be with my Children, that
have niether Father nor Mother to look after them; be as Father and Mother unto
them: Lord, have Mercy on them and on me, for the sake of thy Son the Lord
Jesus Christ. The God of Peace, that brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus
Christ, make me perfect in every good work through Jesus Christ; The Grace of
the Lord Jesus Christ be with me now and for-evermore.

After he had been recommended by the Prayers of others, unto the Mercies of
Heaven; He Prayed again for himself, thus,

O O Most Great and Glorious Lord God, who art a God that do hear, Prayers;
Lord, pardon my Sin, now or never; now for ever; Now I am going out of this
World into Eternity; Lord Jesus, thou wast made Sin, who know no Sin, that
Sinners might be made Righteous through thee: Thou art the Way, the Truth and the
Life; There is no way to be Saved, but only in and through thee; Lord, when my
Breath is gone, I pray thee to receive my Soul: And be pleased that I may have
a right to a Mansion in Heaven among thy Saints. Lord, be pleased to pardon
every one of my sins; not only this great Sin, but every Sin: And if there be
any one Sin, that is not remembered, and so is not* Repented of: Lord, be
pleased this very moment, to forgive that Sin, that it may never rise up in
Judgment against me: And, Lord, be pleased to enable me to go through what I must
endure, and that I, may* arrive at the Shore of Eternal Felicity; Blot out all
my Iniquity, that I may be prepared for the Blessed and Glorious Inheritance in
Heaven, reserved for them, who are kept by the mighty power of God; through
Faith unto Salvation.

After his Eyes had been covered, he desired, that he might once more see the
Sun: Then Expressed himself to this purpose; Lord, as thou have made the Sun,
that glorious Body to shine in the Firmament; I pray thee, let the Sun of
Righteousness graciously shine upon my Distressed Soul.

And after declaring his desire to Commit his Soul into the Merciful Hands of
the Glorious Redeemer; and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit! He was turned
off; leaving it is thought, several thousands of Spectators to learn
Righteousness by the Tremendous and Astonishing Dispensations of God.

BY the Request of the Reverend Nathaniel Clap, who was Present at the
aforesaid Execution, with my Self; I have Perused the Foregoing Dying Words of
the Criminal; and presume they are as near the Truth, as could be taken at that
time.

Samuel Cranston, Govr.
Newport on Rhode Island, April 15 th. 1715.
A Broken Heart, Acceptable with GOD through Christ.
PSALM. LI.17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit; a broken and a
contrite Heart, O GOD, thou will not Despise.


TO understand the intention of any Text of Sacred Scripture, it is frequently
advantageous to consider the Occasion of the Text, and compare it with other
Texts, and with the whole current of the Scripture.

The Occasion of this Text, we may learn from the Title of the Psalm wherein we
find it, compared with the eleventh and twelfth Chapters of the second Book of
Samuel. There we find, that David, a man after God's own Heart, was left unto
very infandous, horrendous Crimes: Not only execrable Adultery, but also horrid
Murder, and very ungodly endeavors to conceal those Wickednesses; were among
his Crimes. The best of Saints may fall into the worst of Sins, if God leave
them to themselves. [Then what great Sins may graceless Sinners fall into,
while under the power, and in the possession of Satan!] Yea, the best of Saints
may continue a long time under the guilt of their Sins, that they fall into:
How long! David continued a long time under the guilt of his Crimes; it does
not appear that there was any evidence of any Repentance for his Wickedness,
for a long space after his crimes were committed. But after a long time, the
Lord sent his Minister, Nathan, to David, to convince him of his Wickedness,
and to bring him to Repentance. It is very sure, that Sinners will never think
of repentance of Sin, or turning to God, if the Lord should not call, or look
after them; Our first Father Adam thought not of repenting of Sin, before the
Lord called after him; and the Apostle Peter thought not of repenting of his
Sin, before the Lord looked upon him. The God of all Grace in our Lord Jesus
Christ, with infinite Compassion to miserable Sinners, calls after them, to
repent and turn to him, from all their transgressions, with hopes of Pardon for
the sake of Christ. Thus it is with all that live under the Gospel: And God
will certainly recover from their falls those that are Saints indeed, He will
not suffer them to perish for ever in their Sins, how great and sad soever have
been their falls. They shall be recovered before they dye; So was David. When
the Minister of God had brought him to a sight and a sense of his Wickedness,
them David acknowledges that he had sinned. He acknowledged his Wickedness with
a repenting Soul; God helping him to repent with brokenness of Heart; with an
heart broken for Sin, and from Sin.

A Promise of Pardon is immediately proposed unto the repenting Sinner: The
Lord has put away thy Sin, thou shall not dye. God is ready to bring home
pardon to the truly Penitent. Sinners cannot be more forward in repenting of
their Sins, than God in pardoning of their Souls, and making them sensible of
his pardoning mercy upon their expressing of their unfeigned Repentance. Thou,
Lord art Good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy to all that call
upon thee, that call upon thee in truth.

But after the Minister of God had finished his Message from the Lord unto
David, then David composed this Psalm, for the use of the Church of God in all
After-Ages. When sinful persons become repenting Sinners, they will be
concerned for the Glory of God, and for the good of others They will be
desirous that God might be Glorified by themselves, and they will be willing to
do all they can for the Glory of God, and they will be willing to excite others
to Glorify God; and therefore to excite them to Repentance, that they may
Glorify God. And they will be desirous that their own Repentance may be as much
known as ever their Wickedness has been known. The Sin of David, was by the
wonderful Providence of God brought into open view, before the World; so that
the Enemies of the Lord thereupon took occasion to blaspheme the Holy Name of
God. Therefore David was willing that his Repentance might be openly and
publicly known, that God might be thereby Glorified; that his dishonor might
as much as possible, be prevented; that if the People of God should be
reproached, and so the Name of God be dishonored by any wicked People,
twitting of Godly People, and telling of them. Ay, see what your David has
done, what detestable Impieties he has been guilty of, and how abominably
wicked he has been, yet he is one of your great Saints: The People of God
might be able truly to reply, It Is true, we cannot but own it with shame and
with grief, that David was guilty of great Sins against God. But we are also
sure, that he did truly repent of his great Sins: God gave him grace to repent,
and to evidence his repentance before the World, we have an excellent Psalm of
his own composing upon that very occasion, that shows that he was truly
penitent. The fifty first Psalm is an everlasting testimony to all Generations,
that David was concerned to Glorify God, by evidencing of his Repentance.

This will be the disposition of all true Penitents: They will be desirous,
that all their godly Neighbors may be furnished with sufficient evidences of
their unfeigned Repentance for all their Wickedness, that they may be able to
do something to stop the mouths of the blaspheming enemies of the Lord, that
are glad of any occasions to reproach his Holy Name.

The scope of repenting David in this Psalm, is to desire of God that his Sins
might be all pardoned, and his Adultry and his Murder, and that he might be
cleansed from Original Pollution, and might be made sensible of the pardon of
all his Sins, and prepared to praise God for the forgiveness of his Wickedness;
and he promises unto the Lord, that upon his comfortable apprehension of the
pardon of his sin, by the restoring of the joy of the Holy Spirit unto him, he
would endeavor to promote the Glory of God, by furthering the Conversion of
other Sinners. And he shows an earnest desire for the Prosperity of the People
of God: He knew that he had exceedingly grieved them by his Miscarriages, and
he was concerned that they might share with him in his Consolations upon his
Reconciliation with God* Penitent Sinners that have grieved others by their
Sins, will be desirous that others may have occasion to rejoice in their
Repentance.

In our Context, we find the penitent Sinner declaring what would not satisfy
God for his offenses. None of the Sacrifices appointed by God in the Ceremonial
Law, to be offered by his People, in their External Worship, could satisfy for
the wrongs that were done by Sin to the Majesty of Heaven: The Wrath of God
could not be pacified by them, nor could they remove the guilt of sin from the
Soul of the Sinner. The blood of Bulls and of Goats could never take away Sins.
This David fully understood, and he plainly declares to the World his firm
belief, that none of the Levitical Sacrifices could make full satisfaction to
Divine Justice for the sins of any person but they had a respect unto some
other thing. Then he declares what Sacrifices would be acceptable with God. The
Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit. May not this principally refer unto our
Lord Jesus Christ, who being made a Sacrifice unto the Divine Justice, had his
Spirit grievously broken by the wrath of God, while he was offering up himself
a Sacrifice for the Sins of his People? He could say before he came to dye, My
Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; and when he came to dye, he
poured out his Soul unto death. His very Soul within him was dreadfully broken
by the Anger of GOD, which he endured for the sake of his People, that they
might be delivered from the Wrath to come. And although he were the eternally
beloved Son of God, yet appearing as the Surety for Sinners, the Wrath of God
broke his very Spirit within him. And because he was the Eternally Beloved Son
of God, therefore he was the Sacrifice of God; a Sacrifice accepted with God,
as well as appointed by God; Yea; he was himself God, truly and really God. The
very Person that was offered a Sacrifice for Sin, was God Though he suffered only
as Man, the Divine Nature being incapable of suffering, yet the Person that
suffered was truly God over all blessed for ever: And so the Sacrifice of such
an One, was of infinite value and virtue, and for that reason might be styled,
The Sacrifices of God. For, besure the Lord Jesus Christ was of more value
infinitely than all the other Sacrifices that were appointed by God to be
offered; He was the Antytipe of them all, and as good as ten hundred thousand
millions of such Sacrifices. Yea, infinitely better than all other Sacrifices.
Thus being as good as all, better than all, he might be called Sacrifices. And
he was a Sacrifice of such value as to satisfy for the sins of all that will
accept of him for their Sacrifice, let them be never so many Souls; and he is a
Sacrifice of such value, as to satisfy for all their Sins, if they believe on
him, let their Sins be never so many; so may the Son of God be styled, the
Sacrifices of God. He is the Propitiation for the sins of the whole World, both
Jews and Gentiles, that believe in him as their Savior; He is a Sacrifice for
them all, for all their sins. Yea, such is the sufficiency of the Merit of the
Sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ, that if all the Sinners in the world would
believe on him, there is merit enough in his Blood to satisfy for all their
sins: Of such value is his Blood, and therefore might he be called the
Sacrifices of God. His Spirit having been broken, he is the Sacrifices of God.
Through him other things may be accepted with God. For it follows in our Text, A
broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise^ If the heart of a
Sinner be broken for Sin, and from Sin, God will not despise that heart, but he
will for the sake of the Sacrifices of God, show favor to one that has such
an heart. For there is more intended than is expressed in the words. God will
not despise a broken heart, that is; He will greatly delight in such an heart,
such an heart will be acceptable with him. Though Sinners do not deserve the
favor of God by their brokenness of heart, yet their brokenness of heart does
prepare Sinners for the favor of God; and he will certainly show his favor to
them, who have their hearts rightly broken with Evangelical Contrition.

This then must be our present Doctrine.

DOCTRINE.
The Broken Heart of a Repenting Sinner, is acceptable with the Glorious God
through Jesus Christ. The Glorious God will show favor for the sake of Christ
unto a Penitent Sinner that has a Broken Heart.

If a Sinner would be received into the favor of God, for the sake of Christ,
then let his Repentance of Sin, be sure to go so far, as to break his heart
for, and from Sin.

We have two Enquiries to consider under this Doctrine.

Enquiry 1.
What is implied in that Brokenness of Heart, which will be acceptable with the
Glorious God through Jesus Christ, and what will attend such a Brokenness of
Heart?

ANSWER:
To this we may answer; Six things must be attended, and a seventh must not be
omitted by the Penitent Sinner, that would have a broken Heart acceptable with
the Glorious God through Jesus Christ. Let all people consider the things now to
be offered; and certainly the poor Condemned Prisoner, under a Sentence of
Death, not likely to enjoy another Sabbath, before his passage into the Eternal
World, will reckon himself under peculiar Obligations to consider these things,
to direct him to that brokenness of heart, that will be acceptable with God
through Christ: Poor man, Hearing for your last, hear for your Life, your Life;
The Life of your precious immortal Soul is concerned in what you are now
hearing. And let all hear so, that their Souls may live; Hear so that you may
find what you hear.

1. There must be some ILLUMINATION of the Mind, where there is that brokenness
of Heart that will be acceptable with God through Christ. The Understanding
must be enlightened if the heart be rightly broken. If the heart be never so
much distressed, oppressed, Bruised and broken by dreadful terrors* by fearful
horrors, by amazing affrightments, by astonishing expectations of the Wrath of
GOD, just ready to be poured down upon the Soul; yet if there be no light in
the mind, the heart is not rightly broken; If the mind be full of darkness,
there may be some sort of brokenness of heart, but not that which will be
acceptable with God. Therefore must there be some illumination of the
Understanding, to see something about those Truths of God, that will show why
the heart of a Sinner should be broken. The broken hearted Sinner will have
some understanding and consideration about the righteousness and the holiness
of God, about the odiousness and heinousness of sin, about the justice and the
strictness of the Law of God, that is broken by sin; about the certainty of the
threatenings of the Law of God against sin, about the dreadfulness of the
punishment threatened for sin, by the Law, and about the unavoidableness of the
punishment threatened, without full satisfaction to the Law, which cannot be
without a perfect righteousness every way answering the Law; but no such
righteousness can he had besides the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ;
nor can this Righteousness be had without faith in Christ; and where there is
true saving faith in Christ, there must and will be unfeigned repentance that
breaks the heart for, and from sin Such as these things must have some
consideration in the Penitent Sinner, that will have his heart so broken, as to
be accepted with God: Therefore must there be not only some acquaintance with
the Law of God, but also some consideration what that Law requires, and what
that Law forbids: Thence might the Penitent say, as in Romans 7.7. I had not
known sin, but by the law; by the law is the knowledge of sin. Sinners must
have their minds enlightened in the Law of God, that they may come to see their
sins, before they will have their hearts broken so as to be acceptable with
God. The eyes of Sinners must be opened so as to see something of their
miserable condition, before their hearts will be rightly broken. Light must
break into their Souls, that they may see how things are in their Souls, before
their hearts will be rightly broken. The Law must be considered, and the Author
of the Law, that Sin against the Law may appear unto Sinners to be exceeding
sinful, before their hearts will be duly broken for, and from sin. If the heart
of the Sinner be duly broken, then will the Repenting Sinner be able truly to
say, Now I see something of the Righteousness of the Holy God, and I must
acknowledge the holiness of his righteous Law; his Law is holy, just and good,
therefore Sin which breaks that Law, must be an evil and a bitter thing.

Examine then upon this Article as we pass along, and consider, every Soul. Is
your Understanding so enlightened as to see the righteousness and the holiness
of God; to see the odiousness and the heinousness of Sin; to see the justice
and the strictness of the Law of God; to see the certainty of the threatenings
of the Law, to see the dreadfulness of the punishment threatened by the Law upon
the breakers of the Law; to see the inevitableness of the threatened punishment,
without a full satisfaction to the Law, which cannot be without a perfect
Righteousness, every way answering the Law; and that there is no such
Righteousness to be had, besides the Righteousness of Christ, and this cannot
be had without faith in him; and this faith must be attended with unfeigned
Repentance, to which belongs brokenness of heart for, and from Sin? Do you see
something about the reality of these things? If you see nothing about them, it
is not likely that your hearts will be rightly broken: But if your minds are
enlightened so as to see, and consider and realize these and such things, there
is room to hope that something is doing toward breaking of your hearts with a
Gospel Contrition.

But then,

II. There must be some CONVICTION upon the Conscience, where there is that
brokenness of heart that will be acceptable with God through Christ. This
Conviction does consist in a personal and particular application of guilt and
wrath unto the Sinners own Soul, so as to bring the Sinner to an acknowledgment
like this; If the Word of God be true, then my Soul is in a miserable
Condition. For as long as notions abide in the head as airy, empty
speculations, without coming down into the heart, with a powerful impression
upon the Soul, Sinners never have their hearts duly broken; let their notions
be never so good and right. The Righteousness of God, and his Holiness, the
justice and strictness of his Law may be acknowledged, sin may be considered as
an evil and hateful thing; but the Sinner will not be affected with the
evilness and the hatefulness of sin, without some Conviction upon the
Conscience, whereby a sense of the evil of sin is brought nigh unto the Soul,
and the weight of sin is laid upon the Soul. For as the heaviest weights while
at a distance, will not bruise nor break, but when they are laid upon us, then
they may bruise and break us: Thus while Sinners consider of the evil in sin at
a distance, without any application of the guilt of Sin to their own Souls, in
their considerations, they will not have their sinful heart rightly broken.
Therefore is there a necessity of that thing, in John 16.8. The Spirit
convincing of sin. There must be a work of the Holy Spirit of God, bringing
home conviction upon the Soul of the Sinner, so as to lay something of the
weight of guilt upon the Soul, in order to a right brokenness of heart. The
Sinner must come to acknowledge, I know Sin to be in it self an evil thing,
because it is a transgression of the just law of a Good God, and I feel my self
guilty of such evil before the Lord; I have transgressed the Law of God, the
guilt of Sin lies upon my Soul; and I am sensible of something of the burden
of sin. So it must be with the Sinner, that his heart may be rightly broken.
David might be produced as an instance of this. He might hear abundance of
Sermons Preached about Repentance, while he was under the guilt of sin, but
none of them seemed to break his heart, until the Holy Spirit of God, by a
particular application of the Truth of God in the Ministry of the Prophet
Nathan said, You David are the man that is guilty of all the Wickedness that
you have condemned; for you have done so and so, and have broken the Laws of
God, and have deserved the Wrath and Curse of God, the guilt of Sin lies upon
your Soul. This particular application, by the Holy Spirit of God, in the
Ministry of the Prophet began to make some tendency toward the breaking of the
heart of sinful David. And so, when the Spirit of God will please to set home
Conviction upon the Conscience of the guilty Sinner, and bring him to see and
own that he has been guilty of those things for which the Wrath of God is
denounced in the Law of God, against the Children of Disobedience, who break
that Law; then may there be some room to hope that the heart will be rightly
broken.

Examine then upon this Article, and consider, every Soul; Have you not only
had your Understanding Illuminated about the truth of God, referring unto the
Evil of Sin, so as to see, that Sin in it self is an evil thing and a bitter;
but have you also had such a Conviction upon your Conscience, that you do feel
the burden of Sin? Do you feel the dreadful weight of the guilt of sin upon
your Soul? Is your Soul burdened with the guilt of sin? If there be no such
Conviction upon the Conscience, it is no wonder if there be no brokenness of
heart. But if there be such Conviction upon the Conscience, then is there
something done toward breaking of the heart. But there must be still something
more done, before the heart will be rightly broken, so as to be acceptable with
God. For,

III. There must be a distressing AFFLICTION of Soul, attending of this
Conviction upon the Conscience, where there is the brokenness of heart, that
will be acceptable with God through Jesus Christ. The Soul must be made so
sensible of the burden of Sin, as to be affected, and grievously afflicted with
that dreadful burden, before the heart is duly broken. Persons may acknowledge
that Sin is Evil, and they may be sensible, that sin has done much evil to
them, and that it deserves the Wrath and Curse of God for ever; and they may be
convinced, that they are guilty of sin, that abundance of guilt lies upon their
Souls; and yet they may not be very much afflicted in their Souls, because of
their sins: their sins may seem somewhat burdensome, yet they are but light
burdens to them, or tolerable; they can still bear the burden of their sins;
the burden of sin is not altogether insupportable, at least they think that
they are able to endure it a little longer. The hearts of these Sinners be not
duly broken. For if the heart be rightly broken for sin, the Soul must be
distressed and afflicted, because of the burden of sin, so as to be able to say
like him, in Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine
iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up; they are
more than the hairs of mine head, therefore my heart fails me: Or like him,
in Psalm. 38.4. Mine iniquities are gone over my head as an heavy burden, too
heavy for me to bear. When Sinners come to this, then is there some room to
hope that their sinful hearts will be rightly broken; but as long as they can
bear the burden of their sins besure they have not that brokenness of heart
that will be acceptable with God; for a wounded Spirit who can bear? If the
heart be rightly broken, it cannot easily bear up under the burden of sin: The
burden of sin will sink the broken heart so as to make it long for deliverance
from that burden. Sinners may know and own, that Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
Lying, Stealing, profane Swearing and Cursing, and Blaspheming the Name of
God, Sabbath-breaking, Disobedience to Superiors, and Malice, Envy,
Discontent, as well as Murder and other heinous Crimes, are great sins before
God; but as long as they do not acknowledge themselves guilty of any of these
Crimes, their hearts will not be broken, how guilty soever they are of these
Crimes. Yea, Sinners may know and own themselves to be guilty of these and
those crimes; Conscience may tell one person, You are a Drunkard; another
person, You walk in some way of Uncleanness? another person, You are guilty of
Lying or Stealing, or profane Swearing, Cursing; another person, You are a
Sabbath-breaker, disobedient to Superiors, guilty of Malice, Envy, Dsicontent,
or some other Wickedness. But if Sinners can bear these and such intimations of
Conscience unto them, without feeling any such heavy burden, but what they can
bear up their Spirits under it, their hearts be not rightly broken. Sinners may
be convinced, without being converted. This is plain. The Hearers of the
Apostle Peter, when they were told of their Wickedness in Crucifying the Lord
Jesus Christ, They were pricked to their hearts; their hearts began to be
rightly broken. But the Hearers of the Martyr Stephen, while they were told of
their wickedness in resisting the Holy Spirit, they were cut to the heart.
Their hearts were after a manner bruised, and pierced, and vexed, but not
rightly broken. They went on still in Wickedness. Thence it appears that
Sinners may have some sense of sin, without having their hearts rightly broken
for, and from sin. There may be some knowledge, and acknowledgment of the evil
that is in sin, as well as of the evil that comes by sin, without any right
brokenness of heart: But where there is a right brokenness of heart, there will
be affliction of Soul, because of the burden of sin: Conscience must not only
be convinced, but must also be quickened and excited to do its duty toward the
convinced Sinner; to make the Sinner consider with trembling, I have provoked
the righteous and holy God, and exposed my self unto his terrible displeasure:
What shall I do to escape the Wrath of God? Conscience reveals the Wrath of God
unto the Sinner, when the heart is rightly broken, so as to make the Soul of
the Sinner full of distress and anguish, and to have secret wishes like these:
Oh, that I had never been! Oh, that I had never Sinned as I have done! Oh, that
I might cease to be; or my Sin taken away, so as to lie no longer upon my Soul!
Oh, that I might escape the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, that is due to me for
Sin! How can I dwell with Devouring Fire! How shall I dwell with Everlasting
Burnings? What shall I do to be Saved? Such Operations of the Spirit of God
working by Conscience, are in the Souls of the Sinners that have their sinful
hearts rightly broken for sin. There must be some work of the Law upon the
Soul, to bring the Sinner into distress by reason of sin. The Law of God, or
the Spirit of God by the Law, must rouse up the Sinner, to smite him and lash
him for sin, before there will be that brokenness of heart, that will be
acceptable to God.

Indeed, there will not be the like degrees of distress in the Souls of all
Sinners, that have their hearts duly broken for Sin.

Some Sinners may have greater terrors, and of longer continuance than others.

God may work more gradually with some than with others; for the holy Spirit of
God is an arbitrary Agent: He may act how he pleases, and where and when he
pleases. The wind blows where it lists, and so the Spirit of God may work
as he pleases. And so some secure Sinners may be awakened out of their sinful
Security, as with a strong Wind, or a loud Voice, or as with dreadful Thunders,
that may seem at once to break their sinful Hearts all to shivers. They may
like the Apostle Paul in his conviction, be struck down by the mighty power of
God, or like the convinced Jailer, be struck with dreadful Fear, what will
become of their Souls for ever. And some of these may be speedily raised up and
revived and comforted and strengthened, and have their Eyes opened quickly, and
their Souls refreshed and filled with abundance of sweet Consolations from God.
Others may lie longer under bitter distress of Soul. The terrors of God may
abide upon them and seem to drink up their Spirits. They may go mourning under
the burden of their Sins a long time, and may walk in heaviness of Soul, until
they cry out, Will the Lord cast off for ever, will he be favorable no more?
God may for holy Reasons, keep them long under trouble of Soul. Sometimes to
make them own that his Grace is free, or to make them cry the more fervently
for his Grace, or to make them prize comfort the more, and to be the more
thankful for it, when it is bestowed, or to prepare them for the greater
Consolations. Other secure Sinners may be awakened out of their sinful
Security, as with a small Wind, or a still Voice, or as with pleasant Whispers,
that seem to delight their Souls: The Lord may secretly open their Hearts to
receive his Grace, and as when Samuel was to be set about the work of God, the
Lord called him in such a manner, that there seemed no greater concernment or
amazement than what had been usual upon his Spirit: So may some Sinners be
brought home to God with less pressure from the burden of their Sins than some
other Sinners. And of these there may be some that have comfort quickly
bestowed upon them, in the light of Gods countenance lifted up over their
Souls. They may lie but a short time under their distress of Soul by reason of
the burden of their Sins. Others may have their distresses abiding longer upon
them. They may continue a great while under the work of the Spirit, as a Spirit
of bondage, before they find him working as a Spirit of Adoption upon their
Souls. But still we must besure that all Sinners that have their Hearts broken
so as to be accepted with God, feel Sin to be a grievous burden to their
Souls. They are made willing to get rid of that burden. They cannot bear to
think of lying under the burden of Sin. The burden of Sin is of all burdens the
most intolerable. And if they understand that they must wait upon God in the
use of the means of Grace for the influences of his holy Spirit, to draw them
to the Lord Jesus Christ for Salvation; They will pray in secret and with
others, and desire others to pray for them, and if they can, with them; They
will, (if they can) read the Word of God, and hear his Word, and beg of God, to
set home his truths upon their Souls, that their Souls may be still more
burdened with Sin, that they may still be more sensible of their burden, so
as to be made really willing to part with Sin. They will pray that God would
for the sake of Christ by his holy Spirit, apply the pardoning, softning,
healing Blood of Christ unto their Souls, and unite their Souls to Christ by a
living Faith, and make an everlasting separation between their Souls and their
Sins, that their Souls might enjoy deliverance from all their Sins, for ever.
Thus it will be with them, whose Hearts be rightly broken for Sin.

Examine then upon this Article and consider, every Soul; Are you so burdened
with Sin, so Afflicted for Sin, that you are willing to be separated eternally
from all Sin? Would it rejoice your Souls, if you might now be delivered from
so bitter an evil as the being of Sin in your Soul, and might have no more Sin
for ever? If there be nothing of this, nothing like this, there is no right
brokenness of Heart. But if there be a willingness to be separated from all Sin
for ever; and a gladness that God will use any means to separate from Sin, then
is there some room to hope that the Heart begins to be broken. Affliction of
Soul by reason of the burden of Sin, will drive the repenting Sinner to
Supplication before the Lord for deliverance from Sin with hopes of Pardon for
the sake of Christ, if the Heart ever be so broken as to be accepted with the
Lord: But these things must be accompanied with another thing: For

(IV.) HUMILIATION before the Lord, will be where there is that brokenness of
Heart that will be acceptable with God through Christ. Indeed herein does chiefly
consist the essence of that brokenness of heart, that God will not despise:
when the Heart comes to be so humble as to submit and subject it self entirely
unto the divine will, to say, Let the Lord do to me as seems good unto him.
Then the Heart begins to be rightly broken, when the will of the Sinner is
resigned unto, and resolved and as it were dissolved into the will of the
Creator. An humble Heart is a broken Heart. The broken hearted Sinner may
acknowledge according to that, in Lam. 3.19. Remembering my Affliction and my
Misery, the Wormwood and the Gall, my Soul has them still in remembrance, and
is humbled in me. Then a broken Heart must be an humbled Heart. And there must
shame and grief, as well as resignation to the will of God, and confession of
Sin to God and others, in that humiliation that will attend a broken Heart. The
broken hearted Sinner must be ashamed that ever he should so grievously offend
so gracious and merciful a God, as the Lord has been unto him. Shame and
blushing should cover his Soul, when he looks unto the Lord against whom he
has Sinned and he should be able truly to say, Lord, I am ashamed to look up
to thee, because of my Sinfulness. And he must be grieved for that he has
dishonored God, the Father, wounded God the Son, grieved the holy spirit of
God, and wronged his own Soul, and occasioned mischief to others by sinning
against God; And he should be able truly to say, I am exceeding sorry, for that
I ever sinned against God. Oh, that I had not so sinned, Oh, that I might no
more sin as I have done! Then there must follow such a submission to God, as to
be willing that what methods God sees best, may be taken for deliverance and
preservation from Sin. The broken Heart must be willing to yield to God in
every thing, and to say upon the hardest and saddest things, The will of the
Lord be done The Heart is not sufficiently broken, as long as there is any
continued reluctance or opposition to the will of God: See the Language of the
brokenhearted sinner, in Jer. 31 19. Thou has chastised me and I was
chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke; Turn thou me, and I shall be
turned, for thou art the Lord my God: Surely after I was turned, I repented,
and after I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh; I was ashamed yea, even
confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my Youth. And there must be
confession of Sin to God Psalm. 32.5. Jam. 5.16. Such an humble Heart must that
broken Heart be that is accepted with the glorious God. Thence when Penitent
Sinners come to have their hearts truly broken, they are so humble, that they
can bear any wrongs, mischiefs, injuries, indignities from any of their
Fellow Creatures, because of their sins against God: Thence all the trou-of
this Life are accounted but small troubles unto Penitent Sinners; because they
are humbled so, as to see that they deserve greater and sorer than ever they
have endured. They will own, It is of the Lord's mercy that we are not
consumed. And they will be thankful for the least mercies, considering that
they deserve no mercy, but are less than the least of all the mercies of God;
and will say, As long as I am out of Hell, I have cause to be thankful to God
for his mercy to my Soul: Whatever God pleases to do with me, he is just in
all. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his Works. These
things will be in the Humiliation of the Repenting Sinner, whose Broken Heart
will be accepted with God through Christ. Then,

Examine upon this, and Consider, every Soul, Are you so humbled before the
Lord, that you can sincerely submit to the Will of GOD? Are you willing that
God should do what he will with you, so that he will preserve you from
dishonouring his Holy Name, and save you from Hell; and improve you to Glorify
him here, and in Heaven for ever? If there be nothing of this Humiliation
before the Lord, there is not that brokenness of heart that will be accepted
with God. But if there be such Humiliation before the Lord, then the heart
begins to be well broken; but if it be so broken, there will another thing be
accompanying these things. For,

V. INDIGNATION toward Sin will be, where there is that brokenness of heart
that the Glorious God will accept. For if Sin has broke the heart, and if the
heart be broken for, and from Sin, there must be an hatred of Sin; Sin will be
abhorred by a broken heart: The brokenhearted Sinner thinks about Sin, Oh, It
is a vile thing! And this hatred unto sin must be an universal hatred against
all sins; for small, secret, spiritual sins must be hated as well as great,
open, more sensible and visible sins; yea, if the heart be rightly broken, some
one particular stream of sin will carry the Soul unto the consideration of the
spring of Sin, the fountain of Original Corruption; so that the Sinner will be
able to say, with shame and sorrow, and bitterness of Soul, as David, Psalm.
51.5. In Iniquity was I shapen, and conceived in Sin. He must own, Sin dwells
in me; my heart is full of sin, and therefore is there just reason for it to be
broken; I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. He must be able to say,
I hate every false way, I hate vain thoughts. I allow the Law to be spiritual,
and to reach to my Soul, and to all the aims and frames of my Soul; and
therefore should I be displeased at spiritual sins, and mourn for the sinful
inclinations and dispositions of my Soul; and hate sin so, as to abstain from
all appearance of evil. Yea, the brokenhearted Sinner will bewail and lament
his condition in those terms, in Romans 7.24. O wretched one that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death! He will not be satisfied as long as he
has any remainders of In-dwelling Corruption: All sin has bitterness in it,
and therefore does he hate all sin with a bitter, and a vehement, implacable,
irreconcilable hatred. For this hatred unto sin, must be a continual hatred,
as well as universal. Sin must never be loved, allowed, tolerated in a broken
heart, which God will accept. Then,

Examine upon this, and consider, Every Soul; Do you hate, and abhor, and
abominate every Sin: Cannot you endure to be defiled with any Sin? Would it be
the rejoicing of your Soul, if you might presently be delivered from the very
being of sin? If there be nothing of this indignation toward sin, there is no
brokenness of heart that will be accepted with God. But if there be such
indignation against all sin, then does the heart begin to be broken; then will
follow another desirable thing, whereby a right brokenness of heart will be
evidenced. For,

VI. RESOLUTION against all Sin, and for Holiness by the Grace of God in
Christ, belongs to a broken heart, that God will accept. The Penitent Sinner,
whose heart is rightly broken, is able to say, as in Psalm. 119.100. I have
sworn, and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments: And is
willing to say, What have I any more to do with Idols? I have done iniquity,
but let me do it no more. So it must be with Penitent Sinners, that have their
hearts broken for, and from sin: There must be in their broken, hearts, a
purpose against their sins, and a purpose for serving God; and the resolutions
of brokenhearted Sinners against Sin, and for Holiness must pass into
executions: They must purpose what is good, and perform what they purpose, if
their hearts be so broken as they should be, in order for the Divine
Acceptance. Then,

Examine upon this Article, and Consider, Every Soul; Do you sincerely resolve
against all sin, and for God and Holiness? And is it the desire and purpose of
your Souls to forsake all Ungodliness, and to walk in the ways of Religion? By
the Grace of God in Christ, can you truly say, the constant, settled intention
of my Soul is, that abandoning the ways of wickedness, I will entertain the
things of Godliness? Do you sincerely and constantly intend to depart from all
evil, and to do good? Is it the main design of your Soul, to be cleansing from
all filthiness of flesh and of spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God?
If there be no such resolution against sin, and for holiness, there is no right
brokenness of heart* but if there be such a resolution against sin. and for
holiness, then is there some tendency toward that brokenness that God will
accept for the sake of Christ.

There are six things to be remembered and practiced about the brokenness of
heart, that will be acceptable with God. But the seventh Article which must not
be neglected nor forgotten, is this,

VII. Where there is that brokenness of heart* that will be acceptable with
God, there must be an APPREHENSION of the pardoning mercy of God in the Lord
Jesus Christ With a consideration of that, in Psalm. 130.4. There is forgiveness
with the Lord, that he may be feared. For whatever illumination upon the
Understanding, whatever Conviction upon the Conscience, whatever distressing
affliction upon the Soul, whatever Humiliation before God, and whatever
indignation toward Sin, or what resolution soever against sin, and for
holiness, there may be in seemingly penitent Sinners; yet if there be no
thoughts of Christ, no consideration about the Son of God made with his broken
spirit, the Sacrifices of God; if no apprehension of the mercy of God in Jesus
Christ, there can be no brokenness of heart; for God out of Christ, will be a
consuming fire to Sinners; their sinful hearts may indeed be broken by that
fire, but not so, as to be accepted with God, and received into his favor; but
if the heart be rightly broken, there must be that thing, in Zech. 12.10. A
looking upon him that was pierced, because of Sin. Such a look must cause
bitterness of Soul, and brokenness of heart in Penitent Sinners. To think, we
have pierced the heart of the dearly beloved Son of God, by our sins, this must
break our sinful hearts, if they are ever duly broken. We have had some
intimations that our Lord Jesus Christ has been the Sacrifices of God, and
that his heart was broken, because of our sins. Our sins have broken the heart
of Christ. But we must consider him, that our hearts may be broken: Consider
him who was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, and
upon him was the chastisement of our peace, and by whose stripes we may be
healed. Consider the heartbreaking distress that our Lord Jesus Christ
underwent for the sake of miserable sinners; Whole the Lord laid upon Him the
Iniquity of us all. Consider what he endured when his heart was broken within
him, and melted like wax, and he was poured like water, and his Soul was sore
amazed, even unto death; and he prayed, O my Father, if it be possible, let
this Cup pass from me: And after that cried out, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? The holy heart of the Son of God was broken so, that he offered
prayers and supplications, and strong crying with tears, before God. Yea, his
heart was so broken, that he sweat great drops of blood in his agony before his
Crucifixion; but after this, his side was pierced with a spear, so that blood
came from his heart. But why was all this? Wherefore was the heart of the Son
of God so broken? It was that Sinners might have their sinful hearts broken so
as to be prepared for the pardoning mercy of God. And it was that the Justice
of God might be satisfied, and their Souls delivered from the guilt and filth
of sin. The heart of Christ was broken, that his Blood might be applied to
believing Sinners, for the remission of their sins, and the salvation of their
Souls, These things must be considered by Sinners; and they must have, a
realizing apprehension about the readiness and willingness of the Glorious God
to receive brokenhearted Sinners into his favor for the sake of Christ. If
God spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not
with him freely give us all things. If God has broken the heart of his Son for
us, will he not heal our hearts, upon our seeking to him? Thus we must consider
that our hearts may be rightly broken. Our eyes must be unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, for all the blessings and benefits of broken hearts; if we will be
accepted with God. We must look unto Christ for all the good that is bestowed
in, and with a broken heart. By the merit of his heart blood, must our hearts
be broken for, and from our sins, and healed when so broken; and the acceptance
of our brokenness of heart with God, must be ascribed unto him, whose heart was
fore broken: For we may not expect to be accepted with God, merely because our
sinful herrts are broken, so as to be willing to he delivered and separated
from sin: For if we have no interest in the Lord Jesus Christ, we cannot by any
means be admitted into the favor of God, nor accepted in his right, though our
hearts were never so much broken; for we must constantly remember that, in 1
Pet 2.5. Spiritual Sacrifice acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ. When we try to
offer broken hearts for sacrifices unto God, we must look for acceptance of
them through Jesus Christ. And when ever we desire the mercy of a broken heart,
or the mercies promised with such an heart, we must behold our Lord Jesus
Christ purchasing all for us; and believe that God the Father is willing, for
the sake of his Son, by his Holy Spirit, to bestow upon us all the good things
belonging to a broken heart, if we are but willing to receive those good
things; and if we are made thus willing, we are obliged unto a brokenhearted
Redeemer for that willingness. He has purchased and procured that willingness
for us, and bestowed it on us. Thus must there be an apprehension of the
pardoning mercy of God in Christ, where there is the brokenness of heart that
God will accept.

Hereupon Examine then every Soul, and consider, Have you a due regard unto the
Lord Jesus Christ, in all your sorrow for Sin? Do you look for acceptance of
your serious endeavors about repentance on the account of the Lord Jesus
Christ! Or do you think to deserve or obtain the Mercies of God, by your
brokenness of Heart? Or do you think to prepare your selves for Union with
Christ, by getting your Hearts more broken by your endeavors in your own
strength? Certainly if you have had no regard unto Jesus Christ in your essays
to get your Hearts broken, or if you have not eyed him, as the author and
finisher of this benefit, you have yet no right brokenness of Heart. If the
blood of Christ has not been applied unto your Souls, by the holy Spirit of
God bringing home the sense of Gods love in Jesus Christ to your Souls, and
helping you to believe in Christ, you cannot be sure that your Hearts have been
rightly broken. But if our understandings have been so illuminated as to see
the justice and strictness of the holy law of the righteous God, and the
odiousnest and the heinousness of all sin against that Law, and the
dreadfulness, and the certainty of the punishment threatened by that Law,
against all the breakers of that Law, without a full satisfaction to that law
by a perfect Righteousness; and if we have such conviction upon our
Consciences, that the burden of Sin lies heavily upon our Souls, and our Souls
are so distressed and afflicted with that burden, that we are so humbled,
grieved and ashamed, that we have sinned, and willing to submit unto any terms,
that God shall prescribe, that we may be delivered from Sin; and if we abhor
all Sin, resolve and purpose against it with all our Hearts, relying on Christ
for strength to avoid and conquer all Sin; and if we have a continual
apprehension of the pardoning mercy of God, in the Lord Jesus Christ, with
faith in his Blood, and are continually concerned for assurance of an Interest
in that Mercy, on the account of Christ; and our Souls do more and more long
for more full assurance of our Union and Communion with Christ, and our Souls
are more and more swallowed up in love unto the Lord Jesus Christ, and in
Admiration of his Love to our Souls; and we ascribe unto him the Glory of all
the good that ever we enjoyed, or desire to enjoy; and are continually studying
and contriving to show our thankfulness unto God for giving Christ unto us; and
our thankfulness unto Christ, for what he has been willing to do and bear for
our good, and if we long for Heaven, because there we shall be employed in
glorifying of the Lord Jesus Christ for ever; Then we have something of the
brokenness of Heart, that will appear acceptable with the glorious God through
Jesus Christ.

Enquiry II.
Why is such-brokenness of heart acceptable with God? And how it appears to be
so?

Answ 1. Sin is pardoned and the Soul subdued unto God when the Heart is thus
broken. Therefore is this brokenness of Heart acceptable with God. We read in
Isaiah 1.18. About them that are willing and obedient, so have their Hearts
broken, Though their Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be white as Snow; though they
be red as Crimson, they shall be as Wool. The meaning is, they shall be all
Pardoned, and the Souls of the Sinners purifyed, as well as justified. Then the
clamor of their Sins, will be Silenced, and they shall not hinder the course
of the Mercies of God, unto their Souls. We find in Isa. 59.2. It is declared
to some, Your Iniquities have separated between you and your God, your Sins
have hid his face from you that he will not hear. But if their Sins are
pardoned, then Sinners may have access to God through Jesus Christ: And when the
wall of separation is made by Sin, between God and our Souls is removed, then
will there be a free passage for mercy to our Souls. Then will God manifest
unto our Souls, that he does receive us into his favor and so our broken
Hearts will appear not to be despised, but accepted with the Lord.

2. God is appeased unto Sinners, and well pleased with them for the sake of
Christ, when their Hearts be so broken. Their wills are brought into Gods will
in brokenness of Heart, and therefore will he not despise their broken Hearts,
being reconciled unto their persons. The great contest between God and Sinners,
it is this, Who shall have their Will, God or Sinners? But when the Hearts of
Sinners are duly broken, then they yield to God. They consent that he should
have his will. He has attained his end upon them, and brought them to a
submission to his pleasure, and so he is attoned to them; Thence will God have
delight in broken Hearts, and make his abode in them, as in Isa. 57.5. The high
and lofty one that Inhabiteth Eternity, dwells with him that is of a contrite
and humble Spirit, and he will revive and comfort them that are so. And he says
in Isa. 66. To this man will I look, that is of a contrite Spirit, and that
trembles at my Word. When the Heart of Ephraim was broken so as to bewail and
bemoan his miserable condition, then says the Lord in Jer. 31.20. Is Ephraim my
dear Son, I do earnestly remember him still, my bowels are troubled for him, I
will surely have mercy on him, says the Lord. God being reconciled unto
Sinners, will surely accept their broken Hearts, and be well pleased with them

3 The heart of God appears in a manner broken with compassion toward Miserable
Sinners, when their sinful hearts do appear to be duly broken. But if His Heart
be broken and opened with compassion toward Sinners, then be sure, he will not
despise their brokenness of Heart. We read in Judges 10.16. The People of God
had grievously sinned against the Lord, Miseries came upon them for their Sins,
they prayed unto the Lord for deliverance from their miseries, the Lord brought
them to such a brokenness of heart that they complied with his will, Then it
follows, The Soul of the Lord was grieved for the Misery of Israel.

By these things we may learn a little what means that brokenness of Heart
which God will not despise, and That and Why such brokenness of Heart will be
acceptable with God through Jesus Christ.

USE 1. We might hence Learn, The folly of all Sinners that harden their heart
against God, that will not comply with his Will. They shall not, they cannot
prosper; for none ever yet prospered in hardening themselves against God. God
evermore, overcomes all those that harden themselves against him. Remember
Pharaoh! If the Hearts of Sinners be not broken by the means of Grace in the
time of his patience, they will certainly be dreadfully broken by the Wrath of
God in the day of Vengeance. Would Sinners consent to have their Hearts broken
by the means that God has appointed for the breaking of them, they would find
that the Lord would take pleasure in them; He delights in broken Hearts, but as
long as poor Sinners do refuse to have their Hearts broken, they find their
bands are made stronger and stronger: The distresses of their Soul grow more
and more terrible. Was it not so with David, in Psalm. 32.3. Where he says While
I kept silent (from confessing of Sin to God:) my bones waxed old through my
roaring all the day. But when his Heart was broken so, as to be willing to
confess his Sin to God; Then he found relief in, release from his trouble of
Soul. Therefore should Sinners be willing to have their Hearts broken so as to
be prepared for the sense of the pardoning mercy of God in Christ Jesus. For
obstinacy and obduracy in Sin will never be comfortable to Sinners. But,

2. Hence we may learn, what we must do, that we may find acceptance with God
through Christ. We must must get our understandings illuminated in the truths of
God, our Consciences convicted about the guilt of Sin, our Souls affected and
afflicted with the burden of Sin; labor for Humiliation before God,
indignation toward Sin, resolution against all Sin and for Holiness; but, be
sure, in all and with all, yea, above and before all, that we do, we must
maintain a due regard unto the Lord Jesus Christ in our Souls. This thing is
not mentioned last, because it should be attended last, for it should be
attended with all the other things that are implied in brokenness of Heart; we
shall do nothing well about getting broken Hearts, that will be acceptable with
God, unless we have our eyes to Christ in all. We must not imagine to get our
Hearts broken that we may come to Christ, but we must come to Christ for
brokenness of Heart: We must look on him whose Heart has been pierced and
broken by our Sins, that our Heart may be broken for our Sins, and from our
Sins. But,

3. Let all of us be advised to take right method for such brokenness of Heart
as will be acceptable with God through Christ: Those methods have been propounded
to you all.

And what has been propounded unto all, must now be very particularly applied
unto one person here, that has no ground to hope, that he shall ever come any
more into this House, after this day.

Poor Man, Be now advised, in the Name and Fear of the glorious and eternal
God, to be now earnestly concerned for such a broken Heart as God will not
despise,

None of us all have any reason to despise despise you, in your present
deplorable Circumstances; while we must all own our selves to be miserable
Sinners, and the uncontroleable Sovereignty of the Most High God, is to be
acknowledged, in the differences that are made in our Circumstances* Your Case
might have been my Case or the Case of any other person here, if the Sovereign
Lord of all had so pleased. But now the Holy Providence of God, has ordered me
to the heartbreaking work of speaking unto you, in his Name; to promote in you
such a broken heart as may by his Grace, be prepared for the Consolations of
God: Let me with all due Compassion to you, be faithful to God, and to my own
Soul, and to your Soul and to the Souls of all the People, that I am Preaching
unto, while I am Preaching particularly unto you, and to help you in your great
work of getting a Broken Heart. Besides all the other things that have been
more generally Offered unto all, for their Consideration and Improvement; there
may two or three things be now Offered unto your more peculiar Consideration;
but the sum of them is not unfit to be considered by all the Congregation.

I. Consider the Sins, the great Sins, the heinous and many Sins, that you have
been guilty of, in the sight of the Glorious and Heart-searching God; that your
heart may be broken by the consideration of these your Sins. Your sins are, God
knows what, and how many; you know more than is possible for any of your
Neighbors to know, though your Neighbors know enough, to affect all their
hearts, if they were not exceeding hard, and some of them have seemed to be
mightily affected with the consideration of those your sins, which they have
known. Then be sure the consideration of your sins, that you know your self to
be guilty of in the sight of God, should break your own heart. You ought
seriously and solemnly to consider the sins which your heart is privy to; all
the sins that your Conscience can justly charge you with, and the sins that you
may justly believe in your own heart, have provoked the pure eyes of the
Glorious God, to leave you unto the great Sins, for which you are Condemned to
Dye before your time; the time, which you might in a course of nature have
lived unto; and the time which you might have desired to live unto. You are not
to live unto that time, that you might now desire, because you have been wicked
overmuch. And be sure, you should consider with heartbreaking distresses,
those your sins that have been more observable than others unto your
Neighbors; and you should confess and bewail those your sins before the World
as well as before the Lord, with bitter lamentations: Your forsaking of God,
neglecting his Worship, and Profaning the Lord's Day; and all your sins of
Speech, that you can call to mind. These are doubtless among the evils, that
have incensed Heaven against you, so as to leave unto your great
transgressions. But, Oh, how great are these your Transgression! The Sin of
Murder, you know, is a Crying Sin. So the Lord told Cain, The voice of thy
Brothers Blood cries to me from the Ground It is a Crime, not only against
Christian Charity, but also against common Humanity. They seem to lay aside
Humane Nature, that are guilty of the Crime. It is against the Law of man, as
well as against the Law of God: All Nations that have any thing of Civility
among them, do abhor the Crime. It is against the Natural Conscience; thence it
brings horror upon the minds of them, that are guilty of it; unless they are
amazingly stupify'd. The Heathens thought, A Murderer, Vengeance will not
suffer him to live. The Crime defaces the Image of God, which Humane Creatures
bear; and therefore God said unto all the Children of Noah, Genesis 9.6. Whosoever
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, [The Civil Magistrate
should take care, to punish the Murderer with Death] for in the Image of God
made he man The Crime defiles the Land, where it is committed; and the Land
cannot be cleansed without the death of the Murderer: And therefore is it
commanded, in Prove. 28.17. A man that does violence to the blood of any person,
shall flee to the Pit, let no man stay him. There must be all convenient speed
in the Executien of the Murderer. Indeed, reasonable time should be allowed for
preparation for Death; and merciful persons are willing such time should be
allowed; but there cannot be allowed very long time, so great is the sin. Yea,
by this sin* Humane Creatures do sink themselves beneath the very Beasts of the
Earth; for the Beasts of the Field will not ordinarily kill one another of
their own kind. Yea, more sad; by the Sin of Murder, the Children of men do
dreadfully resemble the Devils of Hell; the Fiends of darkness. Murderers may
justly be called, the Children of the Devil. In Job. 8.44. He is called a
Murderer: and Murderers, by imitation are his Children; Murder is his work. But
if Murder be so great a sin, then what may you think of your own sin, that is
more than a single or a double Murder: For you have not only murdered others,
but also endeavored to murder your self; Did I say, that you endeavored to
murder your self? Alas! You have been guilty of self-murder, not only in
attempting to murder your self, (cutting your own Throat) but also you have
actually and barbarously murdered your Wife, that by the Ordinance of God, was
one with your self; in Marriage made one flesh with you; and you should have
loved her, as your self, as your life; (yea more than you seemed to love your
own life) and been willing to venture your own life, thousands of times, had
there been occasion, for the preservation of her life. But instead thereof, you
have inhumanely put an end to her life, and to the life of her (and your)
Sister, with dreadful strokes, and with cruel stabs; and have thereby given
occasion for all their Relations, and all your Relations, to have their hearts
filled and broken with bitter sorrows all their days. Don't this break your
heart! But besides this, You have occasioned Confusion and Consternation
throughout the whole Town Yea, filled the whole Land with amazement, with
astonishment. You have defiled the Land with Blood, and it cannot be cleansed
from its defilement, without your Death. You must be made a Sacrifice unto
Justice, or God would be angry at the Land. So great are your Sins. Will not
this break your heart? The Law of God, in Numb. 35.16. was, That if a man
should smite any person with an instrument of Iron, (so that he Dye) he is a
Murderer and the Murderer shall surely be put to Death. But it seems, that you
have used two Instruments of Iron (a Penknife and an Ax) for the destruction
of two persons, whom you should have loved as your life, and been willing to
have exposed your own life, to have preserved either of theirs. But you have
destroyed them, without giving them any time to make preparation for Eternity,
into which you have hurried them after a dreadful manner. If it were true, that
you saw not what you did, after the first mortal blows, it would be no wonder.
For what Eyes, unless the Eyes of Dragons or Tigers could look on, to see such
Cruelty! such Barbarity! such Inhumanity! such Devilism! Oh, Consider such
things, to break your heart; and mourn for that your heart has been so hard;
no more broken for your sin, than it has been ever since your Apprehension,
before your Condemnation, whatever it has been since the Sentence of Death was
passed upon you. Oh, that you may not appear so without the fear of God, while
you are under Condemnation, as to have your heart unbroken for your detestable
Abominations! But, Oh! Try to set your Sins in Order before your Eyes. Consider
them with their mighty aggravations. And forget not Original Sin; be able to
say truly with him, in Psalm. 51.3. I acknowledge my transgression, my sin is
ever before me. This may be one means to break your own heart; and be sure, if
your sins are before your face, and you mourn for them with bitterness of Soul,
and brokenness of heart, looking unto the Blood of Jesus for the cleansing of
them: This will be a desirable token that God will cast them behind his back,
and forgive and forget them, and remember them no more. Will not these things
break your heart? Then,

II. Consider the woes, the sad woes, the grievous and many woes, that you are
exposed unto, by reason of your Sins, that your Heart may be broken for your
Sins, that have deserved these woes. Oh, consider what woes are already come,
and what woes you may still plainly see certainly coming! The distress on your
Body, though you may sometimes have endured grievous pains, for awhile; The
disgrace on your name, though you have brought grievous reproach thereupon; These
are nothing! nothing, to the other woes deserved by sin. You have brought
grievous and lasting trouble upon your Relations: How must their Hearts be
broken with distress, while they live? (The Infinitely, compassionate Lord,
show his tender compassions to every of them and support their Souls under
their heavy Sorrows) How must they be distressed while they consider what is
come and coming upon you! Will not this break your Heart! To think, your are
bringing the gray hairs of your aged Father, with bitter Sorrow, to the Grave?
To think, that you have brought misery upon your poor Children, so that wicked
People may say to them, Your Father Murdered your Mother and your Aunt; don't
your Heart break to think, what disgrace you have bro't on your name, and so
trouble on the Souls of your Friends from Generation to Generation, after your
Soul is gone into the other World?

But Oh, what woes have you brought upon your own Soul! You have surrendered
your Soul into the hands of Satan, the destroyer of Souls, after a dreadful
manner. Satan has filled your Heart and hardened your Heart, and Oh! How
dreadfully maintained a possession of your Heart! Oh! that your sinful Heart
might be broken, that the Devil might no longer find any lodging, any shelter
there! That the Lord Jesus Christ by his holy Spirit might take possession of
your broken Heart, so as to mend it and heal it, with his precious Blood! But,
Oh! Still consider what woes you have brought on your own Soul, in shortning
your Time, in greatning your Guilt, and have now procured this woe to your
Soul, that it must quickly be hurried out of your Body into the Eternal World,
to appear before the awful judgment seat of God. And if you dye before your
Heart be broken, there will still be more terrible woes, than all these woes:
All the Woes and Sorrows and Miseries and Calamities of your whole Life, they
will be nothing at all, compared with the dreadful woes, that you must
experience immediately upon the separation of your Soul from your Body; your
Soul it must fall into the hands of the living God; whose angry Hands it is a
fearful thing to fall into; and he will suffer it to fall into the hands, the
jaws of the destroyers of Souls: The Fiends of darkness will seiz upon it. And
it must be shut up in a dark, doleful, fiery, smoaky Prison, till the Great Day
of Judgment; then must your Soul be reunited with your Body, to appear before
the tremendous Tribunal of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of the whole
World of Angels and men. But if you are then found without an heart that has
been broken for, and from Sin, before you dye; if Sin be then found fixed upon
your Soul, and your heart then appear to have been fixed and hardened in sin
all your life, then you must hear a Sentence passed upon you, that will make
the very Angels of Heaven to tremble: The Judge of the whole World will then
say, Depart, under the Curse of God into Everlasting Fire, with the Devil and
his Angels. Then there will be no room for a, Lord have mercy upon your Soul.
But your Soul must, with your Body, go into Eternal Misery. But, Oh, how do you
think to bear up under the Wrath of God, for ever and ever! Who knows the power
of God's Anger? Men don't know, Angels don't know. The Anger of God overturns
the Mountains, those Pillars of Heaven tremble at his rebukes; How then can you
think of dwelling with Devouring Fire, and with Everlasting Burnings without
having your heart broken by such thoughts! Does not your very Soul within you,
begin to shake, and quake, and to quiver with horror, upon the fore-thoughts
of these terrible things? To lie for ever in Hell, where the Wrath of the Lord
of Hosts, like a stream of brimstone, will be for ever kindling the Fire. Oh,
dreadful, dreadful! A man, that I have understood was once upon this Island,
but dyed in another place for Murder; before he dyed, he cried out to this
purpose, I have been* said he, before the roaring Canon, among drawn Swords.
Bullets flying about my ears, and Death staring me in the face* but I never
knew what fear meant, before I came to consider the Eternal Wrath of the
Almighty God, that will be poured out upon my Soul in the other World, if I die
impenitent: But when I come to consider this Wrath, it makes me to shiver with
horror Another man, that dyed in this Town, had his Conscience awakened so
before he died, that he made the Standers by to tremble, when he cried out in
my Hearing, O Torment, Torment, Torment like fire in my Soul! Oh, Consider the
Wrath to come! to come, the Wrath which will be for ever coming, and yet never
all come upon the miserable Soul of the Sinner that has not his heart broken
for, and from Sin, before he dies* Ah, Jeremiah, You may lament with the words
of your Namesake the Weeping Prophet, in the third Chapter of his Lamentations.
I am one that has seen affliction by the rod of his wrath. He has brought me
into darkness, and not into light; his hand is against me all the day. And you
have reason to say, My Soul has cause to be troubled; there is reason for you
to be troubled exceedingly; You know not of any other man that ever was in such
lamentable Circumstances, as you are now in. You are already very miserable;
but Oh what is to follow, will be more dreadful, than all that is come!
inexpressibly more dreadful, if your heart be not so broken, as to be prepared
for the healing blood of the Lord Jesus Christ before you Dye. Can your heart
endure to be banished from the Gracious Presence of God for ever? and pun shed
with an everlasting destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and the Glory of
his Power; because you refuse to accept of Christ with a broken heart?

But I have one thing more to offer to your Consideration, for the breaking of
your heart; and if that thing will not break your heart, what will? No
Consideration will do it. But your heart will remain eternally under
obduration, if the consideration of that thing will do nothing toward the
breaking of it. God will break you sore in the place of Dragons, and cover you
with more, than the shadow of Death for ever, if this consideration make no
impression on you. The very substance of Death, of Eternal Death, in
Everlasting Separation from all good; and in your enduring of inconceivable
vexation within your Soul for ever and ever, must be your portion; if the
consideration of what is now to be proposed, will make no impression upon you,
to break your heart. But if your heart begin to be already broken, the
consideration of what is now to be offered, will certainly be for yout
advantage; it will promote the great work already begun. Prepare then to
consider, what is presently to be mentioned: Lift up your Soul now to the Lord.
Beg of him for the sake of Christ, by his Grace, to help you unto suitable
Considerations, upon what is now to be considered.

III. Consider, the Lord Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God, the Redeemer of
Souls has endured very grievous Woes, and Sorrows, and Miseries, and
astonishing Calamities for the sake of Sinners. That such as your Sins might be
pardoned, that such Sinners as you might be received into the favor of God;
and have his Blood applied unto their sinful hearts, for the softning of them,
and the breaking of them into godly Repentance; and this Blood of the Son of
God, that has been shed, is freely offered unto you in the Glorious Gospel of
God, our Savior, which is now Preached in your hearing: This Blood of Christ
is freely Offered unto you, for the remission of your sins, if you will but
accept the Offer: though you have been guilty of shedding Blood in a dreadful
manner. And if this Blood be applied unto your Soul, it will still the dreadful
cry of the Blood of your dearest Relations, that has made, or will certainly
make a dreadful cry upon the through awakening of your guilty Conscience. But,
Oh! Be amazed, be filled with everlasting Admirations. Don't the Angels of God
wonder at this, that the Blood of the Eternal Savior of Souls, may be offered
unto an horrible Murderer, that has dreadfully shed the innocent blood of
those, for whom he should have been willing, to have spent the last drop of his
own blood, for the preservation of their lives! Oh! remember the advice, in
Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus, consider him; Consider what Christ endured for
Sinners; that such miserable Sinners as you and I, and the rest of us are, even
the vilest of us all, might have our sinful hearts broken for, and from Sin, so
as to be Saved from Eternal Miseries. He endured the Cross, despising the
shame; he endured the contradiction of Sinners, that we Sinners might be
delivered from eternal shame, and eternal pain, Oh, Think what the Redeemer of
Souls underwent, for to redeem Sinners. He that was holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners, that never had guile found in his mouth, never did any
thing amiss, went about doing good; and when he came to dye, no fault at all
could be found in him; yet he appearing in the room of Sinners, it pleased the
Lord to bruise him, and to put him to grief* and he made his Soul an offering
for sin, bearing the rage of men* the fury of Devils, and the Anger of his
Eternal Father; hanging for several hours, nailed unto the Cross, and his
precious blood running from several parts of his Body; and then at last, his
heart-blood fetched away from him; that the hard hearts of Sinners might be
softened so, as to be broken for their Sins, that they might be healed with
that Blood. And consider, O miserable Malefactor, consider the Son of God was
numbered with Transgressors, hanged with Malefactors, to show, that the vilest
of Malefactors, might have benefit by his Blood, if they do with unfeignedly
repenting, broken, bleeding hearts accept of that Blood. And his Blood was shed
for the Remission of the Sins of notorious Malefactors, that they might have
granted unto them Repentance unto Life, Repentance unto Salvation. You know
that one of the Malefactors that was Crucified with Him, had benefit by his
Blood immediately after it was shed; and so may you now, and you will have
Eternal Benefit by that Blood, if your heart be duly broken. For behold the
pardoning, healing, softning, heart melting Blood of the Son of God is now
still offered unto you, and it is your duty now to accept the Offer. And is not
the Holy Spirit of God, working now upon your Soul, at least inclining you to
some desires, that this Blood might be made beneficial to your Soul? Oh, Strike
in with the present motions of the Spirit of God! Comply presently with the
first and the least motions of that Holy Spirit; immediately comply now, after
all your sinful delays. Your sinful delays to accept of the pardoning Blood of
Christ Offered unto you in the Gospel, may be among the Crimes, that have
provoked the Holy Spirit of God to leave you unto the Capital Crimes, for which
you are Condemned to Dye, and unto all that hardness of heart, which you have
lately too much discovered. Forty years have you grieved the Spirit of God:
Grieve Him no longer. But, Oh! Be humbled before the Lord, for your having so
long delayed to accept the offered Blood of Christ, for the Salvation of your
Soul; and be very thankful to the God of Patience, that you may have yet one
Offer more of that Blood. The Soul-justifying and Heart-purifying Blood of the
Son of God is yet Offered unto your Soul, and you are coming apace, near unto
the last time, that ever that Blood will be Offered. O reject not the Offer;
tremble to continue refusing the Offer any longer. Delay no longer to comply
with the Offers of the Gospel of Christ, and the Motions of the Holy Spirit of
God. Behold, now is the accepted time! Behold, now is the Day of Salvation!
your Salvation is yet possible, no contrary Doctrine is here Preached:
Therefore Now hear the Voice of God this day, that it may not quickly be for
ever too late. Your Crimes are, some of them, Bloody Crimes. And you have now
heard much, about the Blood of the Son of God, for the expiation of these
Crimes. And this Blood has been Offered unto you, and you have been urged to
accept the Offer of that Blood, and to consent presently and immediately, that
the Blood of the Lamb of God may be applied unto your Soul. Now consent with
all your heart, and with a broken heart, that the Lord Jesus Christ may have
your sinful heart, and wash it from all your Sins with his own Blood: O
Consent, before you go out of this House, and before you stir from the place,
the spot where you are. And mourn before the Lord, that you have been so long
unwilling to consent. But if you hope you are now at all willing to consent, be
thankful to the Lord that has made you willing. Own his Grace in making you
willing, praise him for his Grace. Keep good motions alive in your Soul, if you
are come to your self, to a right mind* But if you fear, that you are not yet
willing to consent, Oh be grieved for that your unwillingness, be impatient
while so unwilling; Own the Righteousness of God in leaving you to such
hardness of heart; Beg of him, to glorify his Free Grace wonderfully, in
making of you willing to have your Sins pardoned, your Soul cured of its
maladies, by the Blood of Christ, for the glory of his Grace for ever. And that
I may be faithful to you, as well as earnest with you: Be assured, That if the
Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, ever does any saving good unto your Soul, your
heart will be more broken than ever it has appeared to have been before this
day, since your Imprisonment. God knows what has been really. But if your
heart be really, and appear savingly broken, so as to satisfy all people, that
you are truly penitent; there must be some other tokens of that brokenness of
heart, than have yet appeared. Your heart must be so broken, as to pour forth,
if not tears, yet sighs and groans of unfeigned Repentance: You will repent of
sin, you cannot but repent of sin, confessing and bewailing your sins before the
Lord, if your heart be broken by the application of the Blood of the Lord Jesus
Christ unto your Soul. And you must be willing with heartbreaking agonies to
warn others to take heed of sinning against the Lord of you havedone. You must
be concerned for the Glory of God in your Salvation before you Die, if your
heart be rightly broken by the Blood of Christ. But if your heart be not so
broken before you Die* then, within a few days, you must be dreadfully broken
for ever, between the Milstones of the Indignation of the Almighty God. But if
your heart be rightly broken, then will you be prepared for the Consolations of
God: And that you may by a right brokenness of heart be prepared for those
Consolations; the People of God will be ready to offer their Supplications to
the Lord. We must pray to the Glorious God, who has made your heart, that he
would take your heart into his own hands, that he would break it as it should
be broken, that it may be changed, cleansed, framed, formed, new-made, and
molded according to his own Holy Will. And we must pray, That all of our own
sinful hearts, may be suitably affected and broken, as they should be, by our
Consideration of your deplorable Circumstances. And therefore I must with a few
words, now address the rest of the Congregation, that we may, by the Grace of
Christ, be prepared to pour out our Supplications before the Lord for your
Soul, and for our own Souls.

O People of God, Consider, what reason there is for all of us to have our
sinful Hearts broken this day, before the Lord. Never was there such a terrible
Spectacle, in your Congregation, before this day, nor in your Colony, if there
has any thing like it, ever been in this Country. Should it not break our
Hearts to think that ever the righteous and holy God, should be so provoked, as
to suffer the Dragons of the bottomless pit, so far to break loose among us, as
they have done, to occasion such bloody, fiery desolations,? We ought to
consider, what means the heat of this anger of the Lord? And all People should
search and try their Souls, and their ways and turn to the Lord; and pray him
to turn away from his fierce anger, that has been burning against us. And let
all of us consider and examine our selves, and see how far we have our selves
had an hand in pulling down the anger of God that has been pouring down among
us. If any one person here should say, I am sure that I have had no hand in
pulling down the anger of God; it might be justly feared that person have been
guilty, of some great wickedness, that can be so insensible, so inconsiderate,
so unconcerned, so hard hearted. We must all remember and realize unto our
selves that we are all of us miserable Sinners, born Sinners, with hearts full
of Sin, have lived sinfully, filled our lives with Sin. Who of us all can say,
I have made my Heart clean? I am Pure from my Sin? We are all by Nature
Children of Wrath: As vile as the vilest. They that by the grace of God in
Chirst have been kept clearest, and farthest, and most free from outrageous
wickedness, yet have cause to mourn before that Lord, and to beg that he would
cleanse our selves from secret faults, that are before his face; and the sin of
our Heart that is in the light of his countenance. And who can say, how far God
may remember against us our common Sins, that are too unlamented? How many
People think well of themselves and would have others think so of them too,
because they are not guilty, as they pretend, of any more than the common Sins
of the times, not considering that God may, for the punishment of common Sins,
leave Sinners unto uncommon Sins, that they may be hung up in Irons for the
warning or succeeding Ages, to take heed of common Sins? But if we were never
so clear from the common Sins of the times, yet this would not assure us, that
we have no hand in pulling down the anger of God. There was an holy minister of
God, as faithful in the discharge of his Duty, for ought we know, as ever any
Minister had been; but when that Faithful Minister of God beheld the glorious
Majesty of Heaven, appearing in his Holiness, going to pour out his Wrath upon
a snful People, for their great wickedness, he cried out, Woe is me, for I am a
Man of unclean Lips, and I dwell among a People of unclean Lips. It seems that
he feared, he had not always maintained that faihfulness, that should have been
maintained, in testifying against the Sins that provoked the Wrath of Heaven
against a sinful People. But, besure, all of us may fear, that God is
manifesting his displeasure against every one of us, in what he has lately in
his Soverreignty, permitted, among us. We have no reason to say, it is, because
that such a person has been, a greater Sinner than all others of the
Neighbors, and therefore has God left such a person to be guilty of Capital
Sins. But we should rather say, let all of us repent of our own Sins, that we
may not provoke the Lord, to leave us also unto destructive Iniquity. All
People should hear and fear that they may no more do any such wickedness. Other
Congregations in the Town, may have reason to consider how far they are
concerned, in minding the dispensations of God. But be sure, now God has, in
his holy Providence, brought this terrible Spectacle into our Congregation;
certainly it becomes all of us, to consider and examine our selves, and be very
humble before God, for our own Sins, and very thankful to God, that we have
been so far preserved by the restraints of God, from destroying our selves, or
being destroyed by others, and be very careful to take heed about all our ways,
that we may not provoke the Lord to leave us unto our own Lusts, or unto the
Temptations of Satan. We should fall if we were not upheld. Provoke not the
Lord to withdraw his upholding Grace. Make sure of a change of Heart and of a
real Union with Christ, and of Pardon for all Sins past; walk humbly and
closely with God, rely on Christ for Help, to do so. Be in the Fear of the Lord
all the day long. Shun all occasions of Sin, all tendencies to Sin. Be much in
Supplication to the Lord. And if God has made us, by his Grace in Christ,
ready and willing to pour out our Supplications before him, for the blessings
and benefits of broken Hearts, for our selves and others, it is an hopeful
token, that he has begun to bestow, and will go on to bestow those good things
upon us: For the Lord has not forsaken the Souls of them that are seeking of
him; He will fulfill the desires of them that Fear him; He has not said to the
Seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain. If God incline our Hearts to ask for good
things, there is room for us to hope that he has prepared his Ear to hear us.
If sincere Prayers break out of our Hearts for more brokenness of Heart, then
do our Hearts begin to be rightly broken. Then may we consider for our
everlasting encouragement, those good and sweet words in Psalm. 34.18. The Lord
is nigh to them, that are of a broken Heart, and saves the Contrite of Spirit.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Nicholas Boon, at the Sign of the Bible in
Cornhill, Boston.
A New Edition of, The Token for Children: Being an Exact Account of the
Conversion, Holy Lives, and Joyful Deaths of several Young Children. By James
Janeway. To which is added, A Token for the Children of New England. With
Additions.

SEven Sermons. I. Of the Unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost: Or the Sin
unto Death. II. The Saints Duty and Exercise, in two Parts: Being an
Exhortation to, and Direction for Prayer. III. The Accepted Time, and Day of
Salvation. IV. The End of Time, and Beginning of Eternity. V. Joshua's
Resolution to Serve the Lord* VI. The Way to Heaven made Plain. VII The Future
State of Man: Or, A Treatise of the Resurrection. By Robert Russel.

THE Day of Doom: Or, A Poetical Description of the Great and Last Judgment:
With a Short Discourse about Eternity. With several other Poems. The Sixth
Edition. By Michael Wigglesworth. To which is Added, A Character of the Author.
By C. M. D. D.

A Man of his Word. A very brief Essay, On Fidelity in keeping of Promises and
Engagements. Declaring How and Why, a Good Man will be as Good as his Word.
With a Touch upon some Weighty CASES, relating to it. By Cotton Mather, D. D.

A Guide to Christ: Or, The Way of Directing Souls that are under the Work of
Conversion. Compiled for the help of Young Ministers; and may be Serviceable to
Private Christians, who are Enquiring the Way to Zion. By Solomon Stoddard,
Pastor of Northampton: With an Epistle Prefixed, By Dr. Increase Mather.


