THE KINGS FAVOR, THE Parliaments Justice, AND The Subjects Joy.

Expressed In His Majesty's care for the Kingdom. The Parliaments for
endeavoring.

AND The Commons sedulity in propagating the same.

Written and avowed by Richard Newrobe, Gent.

LONDON Printed by John Hammond. 1641.

Great Britains Joy, FOR The long desired and happy Union between the King and
Parliament.
To the great Comfort of all true Protestants, and the astonishment of Papists,
Pope, and DEVIL.
HItherto the endeavors of both King, Parliament and Subjects, have been to
redress those evils, and expulse such pernicious designs as have been
endeavored against us by the malignant party of this Kingdom; which although
never so sedulous and vigilant, yet have the dangers by them invented, always
found a repercussion upon their own heads, through the care of this
State-governing Parliament, and although they have been very diligent in sowing
weeds of divisions amongst us; yet our worthy Gardiners have pulled them up by
the roots, that the Flowers of Religion, loyalty, faith and fidelity, might
flourish, through the removal of our adversaries, since that our disconsolate
cares have been so invoked to provide for resistance of these aforesaid evils,
how welcome and acceptable would the news of a remedy be? The Cite that so
long has been troubled, frighted and perturbed with civil commotions, and
inexpressible dangers, how would it show forth the garlands of good will, the
Plumes of Peace, and Ensigns of Loyalty, upon so happy an alteration? How
would the Protestant rejoice, and as it were be involved in gladness, to see
the Papists and their heretical adherents, either converted or ashamed? Such
is the news I mean to treat on, so happy as it goes beyond expression to
nominate, and as real as it seems happy. These grievances have principally
been inverted upon us by his Majesty's disagreeing with the Parliament, by the
persuasions of some who were but seeming wel-wishers to the State. To change
these occasions of sorrow into happiness, His Majesty has been pleased,
considering the manifold inconveniences that he might incur upon his
Kingdom and himself, by losing the affections of his Subjects, by this so
ominous accounted disseveration, has been since graciously pleased to unite
himself with all alacrity and of his own free will with them for the
consummation of his Subjects good s^^ling of a perfect peace, and dissolving
all doubts concerning the former disagreement for ever, as follows.

That whereas the continual perturbance of the times had proved grievous and
burdensome unto him, in respect of the conversant commotions arising through
his Non-residence with them at London, his Majesty was resowed for a speedy
return, thereby to confiscate and abolish these their sorrows: As also that
his hopes of and concerning this gracious message on Monday, being the
fourteenth of February last, should have produced some such effect, as by
offering what was fit on their parts to do: as also for this Majesty to granr,
might beget a mutual confidence in each other; His Majesty therefore further
desired that those his good hopes might not be frustrated, and so his
endeavors prove vain and to no purpose; but rather that they would with
sedulous diligence labor to strengthen and enable them any way to debilitate
or weaken the same reciprocal conjunction, or mutual laborious cooperation.

And furthermore, forasmuch as this his Kingdom of England was very much
distressed, and in continual fear through the want of exercised force (though
for soldier there be sufficient, and by reason that his Maties chief
Fortresses toward the seacoasts were unfortified, and so the less able to
make resistance against invasion, they having manifested as much unto his
Majesty, and in care of his Realm, and preservation of the secure peace and
tranquillity of his subjects. He Royally desired that the present Parliament
would speedily set about, and expeditiously contrive a remedy; and he in that,
as in all other reasonable motions, as far as might stand with his Honor,
would mutually join in assistance toward the rectifying of the same.

As for the Petitions of several Counties delivered and humbly preferred to
the Parliament, for the relief of these and other such like grievances of his
Kingdom, most especially concerning the grounds of Protestant Religion; which
has been abused, and little set by, since the Bishops introducing, bringing
in, and forcibly maintaining, contrary to the consciences, of the well-affected
Protestants, of superstitious and Papisticall ceremonies, his Majesty was
graciously pleased with zeal and firm devotion to the truth, to importune a
reformation of the same, thereby to gain his subjects love and affection, and
procure them so long-look'd for and ever to be desired peace.

To the which end, Wren, and the other Bishops found tardy, and to be
delinquents concerning this occasion in and against the safety of the State,
and propagaring of Religion, that seeing they were found guilty, and the matter
of so high consequence (as concerning their censure, it was ordered) that they
being the Metropolitans of the Church, and principal Clergy of the Kingdom,
they should be delivered over to the upper House, to receive censure from the
Honorable Peers, concerning their misdemeanors, the which his Majesty
earnestly desired, and consented unto.

Thus was the Unity begun, which we daily pray to continue.

FINIS.

