A most worthy SPEECH SPOKEN By the Right Honorable, and renowned Soldier,
Lieutenant General LESLEY, to the Scottish Army, at their marching over Tweed
into Scotland, wherein is propounded several Propositions concerning the
Kingdom of England, and the Covenant.

Together, with the gallant Answer of the Officers and Soldiers in the Scottish
Army; and their taking of a new Oath, and breaking the Standards of every
Regiment, upon their advance into their own Kingdom.

APpointed to be printed, and published for general satisfaction of the
Kingdom of England, Feb. 26.

LONDON Printed for James Douglas. 16^7.

A SPEECH SPOKEN By his Excellency General LEVEN, to all his Officers and
Soldiers, at the disbanding of his Army
SIR,
THis I suppose will be the last which I shall give you of intelligence, in
Relation to Northern affairs; and blessed be God, that has brought things
there to so good an issue: Our mourning is now turned to music, the voice of
the Turtle is now heard in our Land. God grant we may see the things that
belongs to our peace in ths our day.

Thursday the 11. instant, the Rear of the Scotch Army marched over Tweed at
Kelsey and Barwick, and the next day the town of Barwick was quitted, and the
Garrison dismantled, according to agreement: the six Regiments of their horse,
which were appointed to disband, had their Rendezvous at Kelsey, where they
were required. 1. To deliver up their Arms. 2. To take an oath to this effect:
To offer no injury to the Country in their passage to their several Homes; to
be faithful to the Covenant and cause of both Kingdoms, and not to engage
with any against them: At first, they refused; but at last were induced to
accept of them; partly by the means of their Lieut. Genesis David Lesly, and
partly by the incitements of their Ministers.

Both of these were necessary, if we consider the constitution of some of those
who were disbanded, who resolved to join with Kilketto, being much incensed at
their proceeding.

Upon the taking the Oath, and delivering up their pistols, they had pay upon
the place, some one, some two, some 3 months pay, according to the years of
their service. This done, the Lieut. Genesis very nobly and freely required of
them, if they had any thing to say of him, or any other of their Officers; they
answered no: thereupon they broke the Standards of every Regiment, and so were
all dispierced toward their several homes; except those who were selected for
a New Model, who chose the best pistols (of those delivered up) for themselves.
Most of these are of the Arguile party, officers and soldiers, yet some of
them unwilling to continue in arms.

The new Model is fourteen hundred Horse, and five thousand Foot. The
Hamiltonians are much discontented at this.

I might acquaint you with the spoil and plunder they made in Northumberland,
and their not paying of quarters from the coming of the first 100000. l. till
this time; but I had rather these and the like complements were buried: there
will be disorders in the best governed Bodies, Courts, Camps, City, and
Country, none are exempted: the best Instrument is sometimes out of tune: Love
covers a multitude of sins: its the want of that which first occasions the
offense; and then in others raises slanders, whence arise all the clamors and
scandals against this Army, but only from want of affections: sure the army
has deserved better from them, and might have had better words a year since,
when an Enemy was in the field. But now the work is done, how are they
slighted: the general cry is now for a disbanding; and for my part (and I
think diverse others of quality in the Army would be of my mind) it should be
the first thing I would petition for, seeing now it is only set up as a mark
for every tongue set on fire to dart forth their malice against, and every
Malignant Priest, and upstart Levite, to raise and write slanders, to fill
Gangrenaes Volumes. Sir, I have no more at present, only I remain,

Nottingham, Feb. 19. Your affectionate friend, W. C.

The Copy of another Letter from Holmby, concerning the proceedings of the
Kings Majesty with the Commissioners.
SIR,
SInce the coming of the Kings Majesty to Holmby, there has been a great
dispute between his Majesty, and the English Divines, strong Arguments were
held by the King, in defense of the Liturgy and Episcopal Government; but many
gallant Reasons were propounded to his Majesty, (for convincing of his
conscience, and clearing of his Judgment (by that Reverend Divine, Mr. Stephen
Marshal; giving many learned and strong Reasons in defense of the Government,
now established within the Kingdom of England, by the Authority of both houses
of Parliament: But (as yet) the business lies in dispense, and his Majesty
has further declared, that he cannot give his Royal assent, for the
confirming and enacting of the Presbyteriall Government; until such time, as he
has conferred with some of his own Chaplains, about the same, his Conscience
being tender (in every respect) for the preservation of the Protestant
Religion; And to that end, has sent a Message to the Parliament, to desire a
Conference with certain Episcopal Divines, about satisfiing of his Majesty in
some scruples about the Presbyterian Government. Diverse deep and solid
questions the King has propounded to the Divines at Holmby, but (as yet) not
satisfied by them, about some Queries given in by his Majesty to them.

The King continues (still) very pleasant, being very cheerful, merry, and
familiar, only he desires to come to, or near the City of London. But he has
gallant quarters, and excellent accommodation, there being plenty of
provisions, both for his Majesty, and his attendants. Sir, no more at present,
but that I subscribe my self,

Yours, to his power, F. Simpson.
Holmby-house, Feb, 22.

