AN OCCASIONAL DIALOGUE AT A COFFEE-HOVSE, BETWEEN PHILANAX BRITANNICUS, AND
CALOPHILUS ANGLUS, TWO LOYAL English Gentlemen, Sincere Lovers of JUSTICE,
TRVTH, and their NATIONS HONOR.

Authore COFFO-PHILO.

Printed in the Year, M.DC.LXVII.

An Occasional Dialogue at a COFFEE-HOUSE, between Philanax Britannicus, and
Calophilus Anglus, two Loyal English Gentlemen, Sincere Lovers of Truth,
Justice, and their Nations Honor.
Phil. MY old Friend Calophilus, I joy to see you, and to have this Opportunity
of some Communication with you, concerning the present general Distempers.


Call. My Noble friend, were we both employed in the Nations highest Concerns,
and of greatest Abilities to discharge, with all resolute Integrity, our Trust,
they are but weak Remedies that Humane Endeavors can apply to State-Maladies.
The best Antidote I know to prevent the poison of Common Injustice, and procure
a blessing from Heaven, is, For those in Public Authority, to improve, with
all diligence, their power to redress particular Injuries, and relieve the
oppressed from the Oppressor, and him that is too strong for him; which, in
time, by Induction, will amount to a Catholic cure, and therefore let us
descend to more particular passages.


Phil. Dear Sir, the frequent Revolutions and Subversions of all Kingdoms and
States in the Universe, upon defection from the Rules of Justice, are
sufficient demonstrations of your Assertion, by that irrefragable argument of
experience in all Ages; and since Generals do arise from many Particulars,
which are nearest to Sense, I commend your judgment; and the rather, that
thereby you mind me of the promise you made, when we last met at the
Coffee-house, that we should discourse the Affair of the Lord Gerard, and Carr,
now on the Theater; and I desire to understand what this Carr is, and what his
Transactions have been; for, I only know him by the Lord Gerards Report.


Call. Sir, I thank you for your remembrance, and shall readily give what
satisfaction I may, in relating the truth concerning Carr; and shall gladly
receive from a person of your Ingenuity, any further Information, in reference
to the Transactions between the Lord Gerard and him; wherein, be assured, I
shall affirm nothing on Carrs behalf, but what I am persuaded will be proved by
Witnesses: nor shall I utter any thing touching the Lord Gerard, but apparent
Truths. Carr I have known near Twenty three years, when a Scholar at
Westminster School, whence he was preferred to be Page to a person of Honor,
who intending to give him the education of France, sent him thither; but
Providence so disposed, that his Master dying, his Relict, the Lady, ingrost
the whole Estate, and, as yet, detains the Legacies given both to Carr, and
others; whereupon, he endeavors for a Livelihood to learn a Trade; which
proving not suitable to his Genius, he becomes a Solicitor; and, at last, was
sworn an Attorney of the Earl of Southampton's Court of St. Giles; and was next
employed by the Worshipful Company of Brewers, his good Masters: both which
Employs, afforded him and his Family a comfortable subsistence. And here I must
mind you of one passage which Carr managed, much to the honor of the Brewers
Company, and manifestation of his own Integrity: which was, That when General
Monck declared in Scotland against the proceedings of Lambert, and the
pretended Committee of Safety, the Brewers finding defect in the Laws of the
Excise, there being in that juncture of time no Law for Collecting that duty,
which that Loyal Company improves for the advantage of General Monck's design,
calling a Common Hall, which consisted of near 226 Master-Brewers, whereof not
Ten proved Disloyal; and there they resolved to pay no more Excise, until it
were Established by Act of Parliament, then impossible. Whereupon, issues the
severe Orders of Lambert's Army, for every Brewer to have Soldiers quartered
upon him, so to compel them to pay the Excise; but they resolve to suffer all
might be imposed by those Tyrants, rather than comply, or support them with
money; the only want whereof, proved the utter ruin of Lambert's Army; and
caused their unexpected Retreat from Newcastle, and the adjacent quarters, They
quartered close.
where the Inhabitants were ready to cut their Throats in their Beds, for
forcing Victuals and Fodder from them in such abundance, without any
satisfaction.

But to return to the Brewers negotiation upon this design of Lamberts Army
upon them; Sir Samuel Sterlyn of London, Sir William Green Baronet, of
Westminster, Emery Hill of Westminster, and John Breden Alderman of London,
consulting with a few others of that Company, Penned and Printed a Paper,
Entitled, Brick without Straw: And each Brewer, by frequent Arguments,
prevailed with the Soldiers that quartered at their respective Houses, to
stand for a Free Parliament. And then Mr. Carr, with the assistance of Sir
Edmund Godfrey, Mr. Will. Carr went then Incognito, by the name of Morgan; yet
had like to have been Trapan'd: and his brother Steph. Carr was constrained to
abscond two Months.
Sir William Green, Sir Samuel Sterlyn, Alderman Breden, and Emery Hill, did
Print a Declaration for a Free Parliament, with 800 Inhabitants hands of
Westminster to it; which Mr. Carr presented to the General upon the Road, as he
came out of Scotland, though the then prevalent Powers did offer 100 l. to
discover the Author of that Declaration.


Phil. But Sir, I am yet to seek what this Carr is, and have heard, he was a
Servant to Scott; by whose means, he procured the Clerks place of the Sewers
for Westminster and Middlesex.


Call. To answer your desires, my Noble friend, I must tell you, I have heard of
some of the Carrs of Ford-Castle in Northumberland (the best Family I know of
that name in England) acknowledge him for their near Relation: And as to the
story of his being Scotts man, to my knowledge it is a mere Fiction; for his
acquaintance with Scott, was upon the score of his being Solicitor for the
Brewers, and so necessitated to make application to him, who was Chairman of
that Committee appointed to hear the Brewers grievances: But it is evident, that
by Carrs solicitation, Scott was prevailed with to procure the release of some
of the Kings faithful Friends; by name, Sir Samuel Starlyn, Henry Howard of
Barks, and Dame Mary Howard out of the Tower: And many of the Loyal Party did
employ Carr to get them discharged of Imprisonment; others, for Passes to go
beyond Seas; which he performed with much care and uprightness, as the Earl of
Ancrum, and others have certified. And it is remarkable, that Carr bestir'd
himself with so much zeal for His Majesty's happy Restoration, that his Grace
the Duke of Albemarte, that Father of his Country, Honor of his Nation, and
Pattern of Loyalty, whom God has signally blessed in his greatest Undertakings,
has largely certified Carrs activity, and Loyal endeavors in that Service;
insomuch, That he went with Sir Thomas Clarges to Breda, where first he became
known to the Lord Gerard, as I am informed.


Phil. My dear Friend, since you are pleased to wade so far in this Discourse,
let me give you the trouble to satisfy me how Carr became Clerk of the Guard
under the Lord Gerard; for I now perceive, he had better, and more safe
Employments, than to rake after a Livelihood in a place of so much Temptation,
Corruption and Hazard, under so harsh a Master; for (to speak ingeniously) we
that have followed the Court, have had sad experience of his Lordships
passionate miscarriages; and do know, that no Servant did ever thrive under
him, nor any Transaction prosper in his own management, witness the Welsh
Affair; the ill success whereof, proved fatal to that Renowned Prince, His late
Majesty of blessed Memory. To which I may add, That dangerous and prodigiously
desperate Revolt at Newark, no less Enormity.


Call. Pardon my interruption, for I think strange you say, that none of my
Lords servants have enriched themselves, since their Employments are of so
great a Trust; for I have heard say, That when William Laws, a near servant of
his Lordships, was killed at Chester, the Lord Gerard mist Ten thousand pounds
in Jewels and Money! And that one Bedell, who left his Lordships service,
Cozened him of God knows not what, (and some say) nor his Lordship neither! Yet
I find the same Bedell afterward admitted into the Lord Ashley Cooper's
service, who gave him such Preferment, as became a generous Master to a
faithful Servant; and it is reported, with like truth, That Carr went away from
his Lordship with Twenty thousand pounds: And now I shall proceed, to give you
an account of Carrs Seven years Apprentiship under the Lord Gerard, and the
Guard.

Sir, In that happy year of Englands Jubilee 1660, Carr being at Breda, was
presented to His Majesty, as one worthy of, and fit for Employ; at that time
his Evil Star (as he usually calls it) directs him to the Lord Gerards
knowledge, who, after two or three days time, desires Carr to present him with
the Module of Cromwell's Guard, who had by him most of the Establishment of that
Army; which he did, but the Rules did not altogether please his Lordship: Yet
Carr was presently employed at the Hague, to List a Lifeguard to be
Established in England, at Ten shillings per diem each Guardman, as was then
reported. And now Carr was proffered a more proper Employment for him under the
Lord Chancellor, whose counsel he has often, since, wished he had followed;
for his Lordship was pleased to tell Carr, though then but a stranger, the
Guards would never prove what the Lord Gerard said they would be, which many an
undone younger Brother has since found by woeful experience: But the Lord
Gerard told Carr he was a Fool to look for any other place, for that of the
Guard should be a profitable Employ; I presume his Lordship meant to himself,
as by the sequel appears; for I have heard it will be proved, He exacts 2000 l.
a year out of the Gentlemen over and above the just Pay belonging to his
Lordship, which is converted into French Bees, Clothes, and Kickshaws Alamode,
and Carr bore all the blame, burden, and many curses to boot.


Phil. I pray Sir, tell me how this Money was exacted unjustly? let me know the
particulars.


Call. The Guard consisted for three quarters of a year of 800 Gentlemen,
modestly counted, before there was any establishment, or put into Pay; at the
establishment, the 800 were reduced to 200, and here began Carr's misery; for
those only were established, who could and did present, as Ben. Gostin, who
gave a Jepan Trunk, and Cabinets, with other things, and lent the Lady Gerard
250 l. not yet paid, as I am credibly informed; And here it is necessary
likewise that I give you a relish of those that bought their places: John
Parson the Brewers Son, for 100 l. was with great difficulty established;
William Crowder for a Diamond Ring. Mr. Man for 50 l. Mr. Hill for 50 l. And
Mr. Richard ^luellin for 200 l. was established a Titular Marshal by a Captain
General of the Guards; And likewise there was Snape the Kings Farrier, who gave
the sum of 80 l. to be a Titular Farrier to the Guard, and poor Thomas Woodall,
for all his Cabinet to the Lady, and his several Treats, was turned out, and
his place sold for 250 l. to Nathaniel Hubbard; but every Gentleman, whether
Loyal or not, must pay 5 l. for his preheminency and privilege on a bit of
Parchment, subscribed Charles Gerard, with a large Coat of Arms to it, and a
good peniworth too; for some paid 50 l. for the same Ticket, to serve for a
Protection against a Ne exeat Regnum; as I. G. and Alderman Waynwright did, and
more decayed Citizens, and others, still protected against the Law, though of
Posthumus Priestmans grain.


Phil. But, I pray you Sir, How can the Lord Gerard answer the keeping in of
such young men, who never served the King, but rather against Him? as John
Lewin, who was Lockart 's man at Dunkirk; and was turned away, for Cozening a
Serving-man of Ten shillings, which was given for a Cheshire Cheese, presented
to Lockart, as Sir Gilbert Gerard has often told me, and many others. And
Whitworth (a Pedlar that sold Tobacco up and down the Country) who bore Arms
against his King in Sir George Booth 's business; and whose father, was that
famous Sequestrator, and seller of the Kings, and His Loyal Subjects Lands in
Cheshire.


Call. Sir, I perceive you know these particular persons, and passages; but the
Reasons why they are continued, I shall leave to his Lordships discovery, who
best knows those Mysteries: But, if you ask me, Why others, His Majesty's Loyal
Subjects, were turned out? It Is said, by persons of Credit, That Richard
Pastow, now Foot-Souldier in the Tower, was turned out, because he took a
Papist Priest that had Ruined many Families. Major Conquest, because no
Boon-grace. Another, because he limped with the Wounds he received in His
Majesty's Service. And one, because he could, or would not wear a Perriwig. And
another, because he could not sit a Horse, being a Justee. One, because a
Damned English Clown. Another, for not having Shoppo Cordbeck. And some, for
being Superannueted; as Sir Horatio Carry, Colonel Pretty, and Mr. Gilmore, whom
Sir Philip Howard received afterward into his Troop, to his Honor, as young
enough to perform Duty, being recommended to him by the charitable Gallantry of
the Renowned General.


Phil. But, Sir, Is it true what is hinted, That the Lord Gerard should reap
Profits out of the Soldiers Belts, Hooses and Feathers?


Call. All I can say to that Sir, is, That I will deliver nothing concerning the
Lord Gerard upon common Fame, which proves often true; nor will I suffer my
Judgment to be swayed by Vox Populi, though reputed Vox Dei; but will present
you with some particulars herein: As, first, Gladwin the Belt-maker of the New
Exchange, gave his Lordship 50 l. out of the Belts: And Mr. Walters the Sadler,
gave 100 l. out of the Hooses: And out of the Feathers which came from France
for the Guard, his Lordship got largely; besides 20 l. for his man Dickett, who
went over to buy them, and his Lordships French Gallantry for his Equip at the
Coronation. And here I must take the liberty to give you some particular
Instances, in Answer to a former Question of yours, which was, How his Lordship
could raise his Exactions personally upon the Gentlemen of the Guard? First,
Mr. Francis Cornwell had 14 Months pay drawn from him at twice. John Briars
once, four Months, and another time two Months pay. Colonel Pretty, and Major
Cooper, each a Musters pay deducted from them. Mr. Edward Thornebrough, five
Months pay, because he fought with Richard Hallins; and Hallins, four Months
pay, for fighting with Thornebrough. Mr. Read, because he did not fight, nine
Months pay. And Mr. William because he would not fight, had six Months pay
subtracted from him; and so fight, or not fight, this Plow must go: Nay, out
of the very Horses feeding at the Guard, there must be a dark Lanthorn
agreement for some petty gain, which William Barker can very well tell, and
has confessed the hardship received from -- But this is not all, his Lordships
Agents, menial Servants, and Witnesses, made use of upon what hard terms, God
and his Lordship best knows, must be gratified with some By-profits, and Pay,
to the King and Subjects cost: viz. famous Thomas Colt, my Lords old servant
and Gentleman of the Horse, must have 50 l. to put in Miles Michell; his Agent
Mr. Dobson must be constantly in Pay, but never at Duty: both the Hollinsheads,
though living in Lancashire and Cheshire, Mr. Whitworth, Mr. Dickett, with
other his Lordships servants, who have no Wages, but constant Guards-pay. All
this is over and above the 2000 l. per Annum exacted, as before; and many a
Boon Jour for my Lady. And here I must reflect with much reluctance upon that
great mischief and disgrace has befallen the poor Gentlemen of the Guard, by
stopping altogether, or delaying their Pay; for when at their friends costs
equipt out for the Guard, Riding so long without Pay, some, to supply their
present pressing necessities, have been put to shameful shifts; others, to Rob
on the Highway, for which some of them have been hanged, as Mr. Atkinson, and
Mr. Cotter: Others, condemned, as W. S. H. B. and I. O. who got Pardons.


Phil. My worthy friend, you strike me with astonishment to think that this
should be so, which must of necessity come to pass, by the grand abuse and
strange mismanagement of His Majesty's Pay, which (to my own knowledge) is the
most, and most ready Pay in the World; and is therefore the fitter for young
Gentlemen of good Families to give them a competent subsistence, and honorable
Military education, and such chiefly ought to be admitted into the Guards.


Call. Now Sir you mind me of another great disparagement put upon the Guard,
for quite contrary to what you say, persons of meanest Birth, and sordid
Conversation, and Citizens that have Outlived their Estates and Esteems, are
entertained in the Guard for their Money, and there protected against the Laws
of this Kingdom, and their Creditors just and due Demands; which sometimes
tends to the Ruin of the Creditors; if not so, yet they are commonly exposed
to a great deal of trouble and loss; I could instance in Alderman Waynwright,
and several others. But I must break off this Discourse for a little while, my
dear friend, because I have a mind to a Pipe of Tobacco, and a Dish of Coffee,
and then we will discourse further.


Phil. Well Sir, now since your Pipe is out, and you have taken your Dish, I
would desire you to satisfy me in one thing, which I shall propose to you,
Whether or no Carr was not Jack in many Offices under the Lord Gerard, beside
Clerk of the Guard?


Call. Yes Sir, Mr. Carr I well know, did often solicit the Lord Gerards other
Affairs to his cost, and lent, and procured Money for him, when none else
would, or could: 200 l. he lent his Lordship when he came first for England,
yet unpaid; and I am sure the Lady often borrowed Money of Mr. Carr, sometimes
on her Jewels, which her Ladyship once pawned at Mr. Carrs house, and soon
after desired to borrow them for a Dancing night; but the Jewels cut such a
Caper, that Carr never saw them, nor his Money to this day, but was forced to
take her Ladyships Bill for payment Alamode, and is yet out of his Money, which
is No boon English fashion. And one passage more I know certainly, That Carr
having a House in Covent Garden, which he Let to Sir John Talbott for 100 l.
Fine, and certain Rent, whereof he received a piece of old Gold in earnest; but
was, by the Lord Gerards imperious importunity, compelled to be unjust, and
break his promise with Sir John Talbott, whose favor, and friendship, thereby
he lost, and Money to boot: For when the Lord Gerard got interest in the house,
he sold the Lease thereof for 500 l. profit, to Sir Thomas Draper.


Phil. I am exceedingly perplexed, my most faithful Friend, to hear what you
assert concerning the Lord Gerard, and make so clearly out; and was always
afraid, that a man of his Lordships temper, should be employed in such high
Trusts, which by his Ambition and Covetousness, might be perverted to the
Disservice of the Nation, and Disobliging the Subject, and especially the Loyal
Military Gentlemen, by his indecorous Austerity; for the Rules of general
Reason never lose their force when put in practice; Vis non corrigit sed
irritat, non coercit, sed provocat violentia: But Sir, though Recrimination is
no defense, I hear Carr much blamed concerning the Military Ground taken from
that Corporation.


Call. Concerning that, Carr does publicly Aver, That the Lord Gerard only
purchasing a Lease from Haines, Wilcocke, and others, Terre-Tenants to that
Company; which though now expired, under color thereof, his Lordship has
plucked down, and altered much of that Freehold, destroyed the Library, and
imbezeled the Goods belonging to the Company; and though Carr at that instant
might be somewhat subservient to his Lordships impetuous Commands, and thereby
(undeservedly) lost much of his Neighbors love; he both will, and can assist
the Company in regaining their Estates: to which, he openly declares, he will
contribute his utmost endeavors, which I conceive is all the satisfaction can
be desired in that particular: And truly Sir, I am both ashamed, and grieved to
hear what is reported concerning the Lord Gerard's management of the business
of Enfield Chase, for your further satisfaction, wherein I shall refer you to
your honorable Friend the Earl of Salisbury, and to my good acquaintance, old
Norris, Bats and Barter, turned out by his Lordship, though great Sufferers for
their Loyalty; and the Neighbors about the Chase, take little felicity in his
Lordships Vicinity; and Barnet, with the adjacent Towns, complain heavily, That
his Lordships Steward is the worst Play Master that ever came into a Country,
which is Alamode, ex Domini moribus. And to give you a touch of other harsh
dealings, Hargrues case was very hard, who, for that two French men quarrelled
in his House, because they would not pay their Reckoning, was Imprisoned, and
for a long time in much trouble, and his House threatened to be burned, and the
poor Man to be thrown out of his own Window; to which I shall add, the too well
known Sufferings of Mr. John Wright, a Common Council Man of London, and of
that worthy Citizen Mr. John Cade, it would be over tedious to tell you all. I
have credibly heard of his Lordships cruelties, by the particular persons
unquestionable affirmation, as one Avery a Coach-maker, living at
Charing Cross, for asking money that was due to him, his Lordship gallantly
broke his staff about his Head, and after that drew his Sword: likewise one
Howard a Mercer at the Hen and Chickens, sending his Partner to demand the
money that was owing them by the Lord Gerard, his Lordship did box and beat the
poor Fellow up and down the Chamber in White Hall, a place very ill becoming
such Injuries. Next a Smith at St. Martins Lane end, for only affronting his
Lordships Footman, and a Meal-man his Neighbor, only for taking the Smiths
part, were both of them clapped into the Messengers custody, and it cost them
dearly to be released, and admitted to beg his Lordships pardon; And Col.
Streeter, for barely requesting his Lordships compassion, and mediating for a
Release for the two poor Citizens that were imprisoned about Grangers Bible,
his Lordship swore that he would cut Streeters Throat, and burn Cade and
Wright's Houses, And were it not for the Law, (swearing a great Oath) He would
Burn the City; And Dr. Gardner tells a more fearful story, which he attended at
the House of Commons door to relate, but was not called upon.


Phil. Sir, not to interrupt you, I got cold last Night, and would willingly
drink a Dish of Lac't Coffee, or Chocolet, and so I would have you too, for
methinks you speak somewhat hoarse; they say, that either of them are good for
a cold: But to our present Discourse, Did you hear of Carrs Testimony in the
House of Commons in Fitton 's cause, or can you give me any account thereof?


Call. I have just cause to know, that what Mr. Carr delivered before that
Honorable Assembly in that Affair, was truth; and especially concerning the
Witnesses produced by his Lordship to support Grangers testimony for him: And
here I must a little stir the Dunghill, and discover somewhat of the whole pack
of my Lords Witnesses, etc. Granger is so notoriously known, as to save me a
labor; I therefore begin with Post. Priestman, almost as remarkable amongst
the Attorneys of the Common Pleas, but better by the Lord Camden, and Gentry
about Stamford, whereof he betrayed at one time 100 to Cromwell, of which
number, about 22 were put to death thereupon. Another was Holland Simpson, who
carried a Halbert on the Scaffold that fatal 30th of January, when that horrid
Tragedy was acted, which I tremble to mention; to add to his other perfections,
he was a notorious Newgate bird; and to save his Craick, became Thief-taker.
Next to him, is Peter Gifford, a Renegado Benedictive Monk, too well acquainted
at Newgate, Bridewell, and most of the Prisons in London; who, to be quit of a
Prison, became Priest, and Thief-taker. Then follows a pair of famous Gaolers,
Hugh Row, and Bayley, Keepers of the Gate House, both dead since they
confessed their Perjury against that great Sufferer Mr. Fitton, with very much
reluctance, before several Neighbors, and to Carr in particular; and have left
behind them a black memorial of their Pranks: As Avery, Adams, and Cotton, the
present Keepers of Newgate can, and do relate: And amongst the rest, Honorable
Col. Ashton, forsooth, whose Wife was condemned for a Shop-lifter in 1664, and
for company sake the Lord Gerard's near Kinsman was Executed for the same
Crime, and his Lordships Brothers Son was then in Graves-end Goal, for venting
false Coin, who was therefore sent to Bombay with Sir Jervace Luvas; Next, one
Wheeler, Granger's man, who had his red coat taken off, that being a foot
Soldier, he might not appear in his proper colors; and had a new Suit bought
him, that he might appear in his painted feather, a witness of more prevalency
than desert; And then comes in another naked Gentleman, who had a Plush coat,
which was borrowed purposely for him to wear, upon the day of the Trial betwixt
the Lord Gerard, and Mr. Fitton, the better to face out his Testimony; And Sir,
I have briefly now hinted unto you what a blessed crew, and upon what virtuous
ties of friendship were mustered up, and combined together, to Swear out of
doors the Justice of the Nation, and an Ancient, well deserving Family out of
their Right, and undoubted Inheritance; And although this may seem somewhat
Satirical; Yet, (Noble Friend) know, that nothing but my great love to Justice,
and the great power of Truth exhorts me to give this relation, for to my own
knowledge Carr was employed by, etc. to save Aston's Wife, and the other, etc.
And also to get young Gerard out of Prison, in all which businesses he
disbursed moneys, and is yet unpaid, except it be with the false Coin of
hateful ingratitude, for his Lordship is pleased to cast all the groundless
aspersions that malice can rake up, upon Carr, to blacken his Reputation: But
the World laughs to think that his Lordship never discovered Carr, whether true
or false, Loyal or a Rogue, whilst he carried on his Lordips Interest: O this
dumb and insensible god, Money!


Phil. True Sir, I have heard it reported by persons of good repute, that Carr
had great credit and respect, amongst many worthy and wealthy Citizens, and so
was able to serve his Lordship.


Call. I Sir, but Carr almost lost that credit, by being looked upon as one that
had a finger in the Pie, when Wright and Cade before named, suffered
Imprisonment, and were so maliciously persecuted, only for being Witnesses to
the Recantation of such an horrid Perjury as Granger's was; But Carr
sufficiently purged himself of that supposed Crime, for all men now do know
clearly it was Dobson, Preistman, and Whitworth that prosecuted that severely,
and had the moneys wrested from the poor Citizens, to gain their Liberty: yet
it cost Mr. Carr dearly, for the Citizens highly resenting the injury done to
their good Neighbors, by Imprisonment, etc. it made them suddenly call in
their Credits in all places where Carr owed money, in one Goldsmiths Shop 9000
l. and to Carr's very great detriment, it cost him at once 350 l. to borrow
money at several places to pay off other Citizens.


Phil. But Sir, Why did not Carr, knowing the Lord Gerard, and being so
sensible of his own troublesome life under him, quit himself sooner of that
Employment?


Call. Sir, It Is certain Carr has endeavored it these three years, but the
Lord Gerard had so fast wedged him in, by the Engagement of Moneys for his
Lordship, and Relations; That he could not get off but to his utter Ruin: my
Lord having often openly vowed, He would destroy Carr if he left his
Employment: and therefore his Lordship, and Lady kept themselves constantly
indebted in great sums of money unto Carr, as I have formerly related.


Phil. But how at last came Carr to desert the Lord Gerard at Portsmouth?


Call. I have been faithfully informed it was upon this occasion, That Carr
presenting his Lordship with an Account of what his Lordship was undeniably
indebted unto him, whereof his Lordshiy took such notice that great sums
thereby became due and payable to Carr: to whom he thereupon declared, that
unless Carr would allow his Lordship above 2000 l. more than had been really
exacted out of the Pay of the Troop, he would neither account with Carr, nor
pay him a penny; and then in a minacing manner, tells Carr he was a General,
and that he could Hang, and Draw, without being questioned: insomuch, that Carr
being so well acquainted with his Lordships natural disposition, choler and
carriage to others, was advised for some time to withdraw himself, yet sent the
Account by his Brother Mr. Stephen Carr: Whereupon his Lordship presently sent
Soldiers into Carr's House, who rifled his Closets, took away all his Books,
and Files of Acquittances, and Writings belonging to others, and stole from,
and robbed Carr of Goods to the value of 200 l. (viz.) Tapistry Hangings, a
Wrought Bed, Linen, and the very Childrens clothes: did frighten his Wife and
Children, by entering his House at midnight, and kept a Guard there for Fifteen
Weeks together, burning his coals and candles; and if his Wife would not give
it to them, the Troopers swore they would burn the Chairs and Stools; and many
nights drawing their Swords, attempted to force themselves into the Rooms,
where Carr's Maidservants lodged; Things not heard of before in English ground
in time of Peace, and which the learned in the Law conceive the greatest breach
of Magna Charta, and other the good and wholesome Laws of this Land, for the
better countenance whereof, his Lordships wisdom came often to visit and confer
with his Soldiers in Naboth's Vineyard, threatening Carr's Wife, that if she did
not deliver up every bit of Paper belonging to her Husband, He would burn her
House, and clap her into Prison during life.


Phil. O what a happiness have we in England, to live under such a Government,
and Laws, to curb the surge of such Bashaws! But I pray you proceed.


Call. Then Sir, Carr writes a letter to the General, to desire his Pass, and
Protection to come and charge the Lord Gerard, and acquit himself, as an
honest, and faithful man in his Employment; And His Grace accordingly desired
his Lordships consent thereunto: But his Lordship would (by no means) be
induced, that Carr should be permitted to come and clear himself; but to
prevent his coming over, sent Orders to his Lordships Correspondents in France,
Holland and Flanders, to clap up Carr prisoner for 20000 l. but Carr escaped
that Train, finding better men his friends there, than his Lordship, by whom
were many old Remains in those Parts left unpaid: And when Carr, upon good
advice, came over to vindicate his Reputation, his Lordship hearing of his
being amongst his friends in London, consults with his old Achitophels to
practice on Carr, as he had done formerly on others; and his Lordship was
persuaded by his learned Council in the Law to decline such courses, as (by the
following Discourse) you shall understand he did take. First, his Lordship
Indicts Carr for Felony, in running from his Colors. Then for three Forgeries,
and for Cheats. Mr. Carr abides the Trials, and the Indictments proved so
ridiculous, they were hissed out of Court. When that would not take, his
Lordship employs his Bloodhound, I mean the titular Marshal Lewellin, and other
Emissaries, to search for Carr; whom, when they found, they haled out of a
civil Merchants house in Bishopsgate-street, took his Brother prisoner, and
Ransack't the Chambers, supposing they had been the second time disobliging
Wales.


Phil. These are very strange passages, and I am glad we are not at the public
Table, in regard we can be the more free one to another; Is not Lewin that you
named, the broken Exchange man, that Cozened all his Creditors, was Imprisoned
in Flanders for a Quoyner, and should have been boiled in Oil?


Call. Yes Sir, by this Pipe that I have in my hand, the very same pitiful
Wretch, who to please his two Masters that set him on work, the Lord Gerard and
-- Sacrilegiously entered the Abbey at Westminster, with a pack of such Fellows
as himself, and there seized upon Carr, tore his Band, Cloak, and stole his
Perriwig, and by that means prevented Carrs delivering his Petition to the
Parliament that day. Nay, Sir, the Lord Gerard made the Troopers of the Guard,
so many Catch-poles, to arrest Carr, honorable Services indeed for the Guard
to be employed. And here be pleased, to observe with me the justice of the
Officers of the Abbey Church, who suffered Carr to be plucked from the very
Horns of the Altar; and to be Robbed, and Wounded to boot; and because the Lord
Gerard was concerned, never as much as inquired after the Offenders: But if a
poor Woman carry as much as a burden of Meal through the Church, or wear
Pattins there, they shall be punished and mulcted. I must make a Digression,
This Coffee and Tobacco makes me a dry, I care not if the Boy bring a Bottle of
Syder.


Phil. Agreed, with all my heart Sir; and, I wish Carr were here to participate
of it; for, I am informed, he is well beloved amongst Merchants and Citizens,
and Men of good Credit and Repute; and is almost every day at Change, keeping
up his Credit highly, notwithstanding his late Afflictions. Now your thirst is
quenched, I pray tell me what became of him, after he was seized upon by
Lewellin, that Miscreant, who offered such violence in the Church, for I fear
they had a Design to murder him? And, truly Sir; Who knows what the Devil might
have tempted them to? By the Law, they ought to have their right hands cut off,
for assaulting in the Church.


Call. I am pretty well refresht with this Syder, and therefore shall answer
your request, as to what became of Carr afterward. His Lordship having Carr in
limbo, discovers a degenerous, and ignoble cruelty (that Souldestroying Malady)
to a vanquished (as he thought) Adversary, and Carr and his Brother are hurried
to the Generals Guard, as if Malefactors; but neither His Majesty nor the
General did meddle in the Affair; the Lord Gerard first sends Carrs Brother,
without Law, or Warrant, Prisoner to the Marshals house; then sends Carr (after
he was kept on the Guard until 8 at night) to the Lord Chief Justice Keeling's
chamber, with Beadles, and Major Bings, with a Lifeguard, for fear Carr should
be rescued (a dread his Lordship might easily rid himself of) foreboding, with
great joy, that Carr should be immediately sent to Newgate, the Metropolitan
Gaol: But, that Righteous Judge above, who directs the Judges on earth, ordered
it otherwise: For the truly Loyal Lord Chief Justice, observing prudently, the
great and groundless Envy and Malice of that prosecution, took poor Carrs own
engagement for that Night, and discharged the Major, and his Watchmen, then at
leisure to go and tell his swollen and angry Lordship, That Carr was as free a
man as himself; which you may be certain was ill-pleasing News to my Lord.
Whereat his Lordship being thoroughly alarmed, posts, with his nimble Agents,
Dobson, Posthumus Priestman, and Whitworth, to the Lord Chief Justices chamber,
to prevent (if they could possible) Carrs being Bailed, but to no purpose, for,
it pleased God, that he was too many for them; his Lordships Grandeur and
Huffing, could not any ways prevail against the Nations Justice. (...)



