A New Poll-Bill For Raising the Sum of Seven Hundred Thousand Pound. Humbly
offered to Consideration.
By a PERSON of QVALITY.
I. THAT a Civil TEST be tendered to all Degrees of Persons, in such Manner and
Form as shall be thought convenient, as for Example:

I (A. B.) Do Swear, and Solemnly Profess, in the Presence of Almighty God,
That I will not take up Arms, Nor by any other Ways or Means, Directly, or
Indirectly, Counsel or Assist any Person or Persons against Their Majesty's
King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.

So help me GOD.
All Men who refuse such a passive Innocent TEST as this, do refuse to live
peaceably under the Government; And, by Consequence, they do tacitly confess
to the King and Parliament, that, as soon as they have a fair Opportunity, they
will employ their Money and Strength to o^erturn the Government.

II. It Is a Maxim in Law, Protectio trahit Subjectionem, and Subjectio
Prot^ctionem. And therefore they who renounce Subject o^ to any Government, do
renounce Protection from the same: And by Consequence, have no Right by Law to
the protection of either Life or Estate under the present Government.

For which Reasons it is both Just and Convenient to (...) them. Just because
it is but a moderate and reasonable thing that they should pay down some small
Contribution, to purchase that protection for the Residue of their Estates,
which, by Law, they have no Title to; Convenient, for that by this means we
shall give Ease to our Friends, and weaken none but Enemies: And let no Man
fear the Consequences, for if it be Just, it will certainly prosper.

No Man can Foretell to what Sum this Tax may amount, but it is worth our Trial
in small Sums, and then it may be repeated as often as there is occasion;
Suppose that the most inferior Rank pay but 40 s. a Tradesman worth 100 l.
clear, 5 l. worth 200 l. clear, 10 l. and so on, at the Rate of 5 l. per Cent.
A Gentleman of any Estate 30 l. an Esquire 40 l. a Knight 50 l. a Baronet 60 l.
a Baron 80 l. an Earl 100 l. a Marquess 120 l. a Duke 140 l. At this Rate, if
there should be but 4000 persons in all England and Wales, which will probably
consist most of Gentry and Tradesmen, and so one with another at 30 l. the same
will amount to 120 Thousand l. This is but a small Number in England and Wales;
If there be more, the Tax will be more considerable and seasonable, for we
shall discover our Enemies, and make good use of that Money which was intended
for our Destruction; if there be less, we shall have Men instead of Money, and
be the better able to guess at our strength at home, and know what Measures to
take in this great Conjuncture abroad; It is impossible that the Nation can
lose any thing by such a Law, but it is probable they may make wonderful
Discoveries, and advance a considerable Tax by it.

III. That all Fines and Forfeitures which are due by Law, and may be recovered
by any Informer, shall be appropriated by Act of Parliament to the public Use;
and that the Attorney or Solicitor General be enabled to Sue for and Recover
all such Forfeitures as any informer might have done. This Proceeding will not
be inconsistent with any Alliances abroad, since no punishment is hereby
inflicted since the Revolution for Matters of Religion, but only those
Forfeitures formerly due by Law taken from the common Informer, and
appropriated to the public Use; And this will extend to all Recusants Conflict
(whether Papist or Dissenter) before the late King's pardon, and before the
Judgment in Sir Edward Hales's Case, and may raise 100 Thousand l. For the
words of the Statute are, That in case any person neglect or refuse to take the
Oaths within the time prescribed, and shall be thereupon lawfully Convicted in
or upon any Information, Presentment or Indictment, every such person shall
forfeit 500 l. So that the late King's pardon does not extend to persons
actually Convicted, but that the Informer has still a good Title to an Action
for the penalty of 500 l. but only to persons who were not Convicted, nor any
Information Filled against them before the said pardon; For as to them, the King
might pardon the penalty before Information Filled, for since they cannot now be
Convicted by Law, the Informer can never have any Title, who must, in his
Declaration set forth the Conviction as part of his Title by the said Statute.

IV. That all other persons in Offices who did not take the Oaths, shall pay
for their Heads (and for the Benefit of a General Act of Oblivion, which will
save them the Charges of pleading the late King's pardon against an Informer,
and standing Trial upon the Judgment of the Judges) some certain Sum to be
imposed by the Parliament as a Tax, and not as a Fine upon them; as for
Instance, All persons who had places of profit, or were active busy Men for
the Times 50 l. which at 2000 persons, will amount to 100 Thousand l.

That all other persons who behaved themselves well under this Revolution,
disarming Papists, etc. or have voluntarily and freely taken the Oaths to the
present Government the very next Term after the Coronation, or are persons of
Inferior Degree and Stations, do pay 10 l. The Number of these will be found to
be very great throughout England and Wales in the two last Reigns, by Neglect,
and otherwise, at least 10000 Men, which will amount to 100 Thousand l. These
Sums will be certainly paid without any Discontent, the Act of Oblivion being a
good Consideration for it.

V. Because the Reason why these persons are more particularly aimed at, is,
for that they are supposed to be Men that would have complied for taking off
the Test and Penal Laws, therefore we cannot with any Justice but take Notice
of such who did actually Subscribe their Names to Addresses and Papers for
abolishing the same: And the rather, for that they may be Impeached in
Parliament, and so have as much Need for an Act of Oblivion as any other
persons whatsoever.

That all persons therefore who set their Names to Addresses for taking off the
Test and Penal Laws, or for returning Thanks to his late Majesty for his
Toleration contrary to Law, do pay for their Heads, and for an Act of Oblivion,
some certain Sum to be Imposed by Parliament; As for Instance, The Managers,
Solicitors, and chief presenters of such Addresses 50 l. which, at no more than
500 Addresses, and Four Ringleaders to each Address, will amount to 100
Thousand l. That all others pay 10 l. which, at 20 to each Address one with
another, will amount to 100 Thousand l. more.

That all persons who Subscribed to the Three Questions, do pay 40 l. by reason
of their Quality and Estates, which, at no more than 2000 persons, will amount
to 80 Thousand l.

The Sum Total is -- 700 Thousand l.

BUT in Case the Parliament should be of Opinion, that this manner of
proceeding would also look too much like a Bill of Attainder, we may reduce
these several particulars into two Heads.

I. Upon those who shall refuse a passive TEST, as aforesaid. II. Upon all
persons who shall receive any Benefit by a General Act of Oblivion, viz. That a
Clause be brought in and added to the Bill, That all persons (except Members of
Parliament, whose Character exempts them from all Exceptions) who intend to
have any Benefit by the Act of Indemnity, shall, within such a certain time to
be prefixed, actually pay into the Exchequer, or to Commissioners to be
appointed in every respective County, some certain (...) degrees of persons;
or, in default thereof, to stand Excepted out of the said Act.
There is no doubt but all these, and many other persons, that it may not be
our Interest to disoblige at this time by a Bill of Attainder, or putting Marks
or Distinctions upon them, to render them Infamous in their Country, and which
must, of Necessity, stir up a Spirit of Opposition upon all Occasions, would
yet voluntarily and freely lay down a small Sum of Money to secure themselves
and their posterity from any future Troubles after so great a Revolution, to
purchase peace and quietness, and a firm confirmation of their Lives and
Estates by Act of Parliament.

The Parliament is not bound to distribute their Favors Gratis, without some
small Acknowledgment and Return toward the carrying on the War against France,
the Common Enemy of Christendom.

And the people would very joyfully accept of the same upon these Terms, to the
raising of a very considerable Tax as much beyond the Proposal above set forth,
as the Number of persons under the long Catalogue of Offenses in the two last
R^igns, is above the Number of the persons mentioned in this paper.

Reasons for Raising Money by way of a Tax, and not by way of a Bill of
Attainder.
NOlumus Leges Angliae mutari, the Law and Custom of Parliament is Lex Terrae,
and the Supreme Law of the Land; it regulates and corrects the Abuses of all
other Courts, and the Equity of their Proceedings is for Example to all
Inferior Jurisdictions, Ergo Nolumus Leges, and Consuetudines Parliamenti
mutari.

It Is true, the Jurisdiction of the High Court of Parliament is absolute and
unlimited, the King, Lords and Commons are in themselves uncontrollable by any
power upon Earth. But in imitation of the great Creator and Governor of the
whole World, they have been pleased to set such Rules and Bounds to their own
proceedings, as they in their great Wisdom have thought just and convenient,
and most consistent with the common safety of the people. Hence it is, that we
find the Parliament in all Ages very cautious of introducing new Presidents in
the ways and methods of Raising of Money. Hence it is, that we may observe how
very careful our wise Predecessors have been, in passing any Bill of Attainder;
and whenever we meet with such an extraordinary Bill, we shall generally find
that the same was passed in a Case of Necessity, and upon some eminent and
particular person, who had been instrumental in some high station, toward the
Subversion of the Government, and whose interest and power was above the
Authority of the ordinary Courts of Justice, as against my Lord Strafford, and
the Duke of Monmouth, and such like persons; and yet in the former, the
Parliament was so very cautious, as to Enact, That the same should never be
made use of for a president for the future.

But in all Ages and Histories we can never read an Instance of an Act of
Parliament to attaint a number of Men of Inferior station, and subject to the
ordinary Methods and Rules of Law, the Reason of which is very plain, for that
such Presidents are of dangerous Consequence, and not consistent with the
common Safety of the people of England; Salus populi, Suprema Lex. The end of
all Government consists in a general Security of the Lives, Liberties, and
properties of the Subject: And in every Government, where the Laws and Methods
of the Supreme Courts are most strict and regular for the common Safety, those
Laws and Methods are esteemed as the best, and that Nation as the most happy in
the World. God be praised, this Kingdom does enjoy the happiness of the best
Constitution in the World, which we ought to value the more, because so lately
retrieved, by the wonderful hand of providence, from imminent Destruction. But,
amongst other Laws and Methods observed in this Nation, the people of England
have always valued this, That in all the various Revolutions of the Government,
the general pardon of one prince (though but King de Facto, and not de Jure) has
ever been observed in the next Revolution; for otherwise no Man living could be
safe, but that one time or other he might be executed for a Traitor, or his
Estate forfeited, and his Blood corrupted by a Bill of Attainder.

It Is true, we have seen a pardon disputed in parliament against an Impeachment
of the House of Commons, and in the Case of a prime Minister of State; but the
Law of England is grounded upon Reason, which in such a Case is singular, and
in a manner Lex Necessitatis; for such persons are supposed to command the
Br^ad Seal, and to be able to obtain a pardon when they please. And whereas it
is a Maxim of Law, That the King can do no Wrong; the same does imply. That his
Ministers may do wrong, and may be punished for it; but that might not be, in
case a pardon should be valid in such a Case against the impeachment of the
Commons of England: The King might do wrong, if his Ministers might do it by
his assurance of such a pardon; so that the common safety of the people, which
is the Supreme Law that governs all the rest, does require that such a pardon
in such particular Instances should not be of any Force in Law; And this will
be the Case of the late Lord Chancellor, some of the Judges, and other evil
Ministers of State.

But Cessante ratione Legis Cessat Lex, where providence has thrown a pardon
upon a Number of Men subject to the ordinary Courts of Justice, and the same is
allowed every Term in the Courts of Westminster Hall, and all other Courts
within this Kingdom, when Felons, and other Notorious Offe^ders have been
discharged upon it, then it is very extraordinary to see the same at length
defeated, and a Bill of Attainder executed upon several thousand Families.

How can such a president as this consist with the common safety of the people?
For if one Legal pardon may be set aside, why not another? The general pardon
of a prince, is as Legal as any other pardon by Act of parliament, so far as it
can by Law extend; And if it should once become practicable to pass Bills of
Attainder, notwithstanding any Legal pardon to the contrary, Who can be safe?
What can be expected, but that in every Revolution the succeeding Parliament
should pass a Bill of Attainder upon the Former, notwithstanding any General
pardon or Act of Oblivion to the contrary, and then what Fatal Consequences
will such a president produce? Where will be the End of Ruin and Desolation?
This would be to put a new Weapon into Men's hands, to destroy one another to
all Eternity

Consider the various Revolutions during the Wars between the Two Houses of
York and Lancaster; if the General pardons on both Sides had been set aside, no
Man in the whole Kingdom had been secure.

As the General Law of Nations ought to be observed by all Princes and
Assemblies, though in open War one with another, so these General pardons for the
common Safety of the people ought to be observed in all Revolutions of
Government.

Object. That these Arguments tend to the setting aside of the Bill of
Forfeitures, and of the Bill of pains and penalties, and therefore are not to
be allowed.

I. As to the Bill of Forfeitures, the Answer is, That so far as the same is
really and truly a Bill of Forfeitures, these Reasons do not tend to the
setting aside thereof: But so far as the said Bill may tend to the imposing of
penalties upon persons who are not liable to the same by the Common Law, they
may; for so far the said Bill is not properly a Bill of Forfeitures, but a Bill
of Attainder, and may be retorted upon us hereafter for not receiving the
Sacrament. II. As to the Bill of pains and penalties, these Reasons can no ways
be made use of against inflicting pains and penalties upon great Ministers of
State, who have acted against their Oaths to the Government, and against the
Fundamental Constitution thereof upon the Confidence of a pardon, which they
could command whenever they pleased, and who were punishable by no other way,
but by the power of a parliament. But so far as the said Bill may extend to the
punishment of Inferior persons who are under the common Fate of Mankind, to
stand and fall by the Laws of this Realm, there such Reasons may be made use of
very justly, to raise a due Consideration how far such a president may be
consistent with the Rules and Methods of parliament, and the common Safety of
the people of England.
Object. That this Bill of Forfeitures will not be any Bill of Attainder, for
that the late King's pardon does not extend to the penalties which are due to
an Informer, for the King cannot give away another Man's Right; He may remit a
Forfeiture due to Himself, but not when it is due to the Subject; so that
wherever the Subject has a Right, the King cannot, by his pardon, divest the
same.

Resp. In all penal Statutes, the Right of the penalty is in Nubibus, and not
fixed in any person, till an Action be brought, or an information filled; and
then that person who files the Information, has a Right in Law to the penalty,
and the King cannot, by any pardon, divest the same, or remit that Forfeiture
which is by Law appropriated to the use of that particular Informer. But in
Case the King grant a pardon before any Action brought, or Information filed,
(that is) before the Right be attached in any Subject, in such Case the King
takes the first Cognizance of the Matter, and is, in judgment of Law, instead
of an Informer, and by Consequence may remit the Forfeiture which is, in such a
Case, due to himself alone. And farther also, for that after such pardon, no
person can inform tam pro Domino Rege quam pro seipso, according to the
Statutes, and for himself alone he cannot inform in any popular Action, as is
adjudg'd in 3 Instit. 194, 195. Coke 11. Report. Dr. Foster's Case, fol. 65,
66. and many other Reports. So that the late King's pardon is valid in Law to
discharge all persons against whom no Action was brought, nor Information filed
before the said pardon.

II. Upon this particular Statute, no Action can be brought till after
Conviction by Information, presentment, or Indictment, and the plaintiff in his
Declaration must set forth the said Conviction as part of his Title; But no Man
can be Convicted since that pardon, and therefore no penalty can be recovered
by any Informer, as is said before.

III. All those who had particular Dispensations in their Patents may insist,
that they had acted according to Law, that is, according to the Judgment of the
^udges; For though that Judgment might be ever so corrupt and erroneous, yet the
same was a Law that left the people to their liberty, either to take the Oaths,
or to let them alone: What is all the Law of England, but the Judgment of the
Judges reported to us from Age to Age, in our Law Books and Reports? In the 1
Ins^ fo. 168 c. my Lord C^ke tells us, That Judicium est quasi Juris d^ctum so
called, because so long as it stands in Force, pro veritate accipitur, and
cannot be contradicted. The Famous Plowden, fo. 82. in the Case of Partridge
against C^oker, has this Expression, Words (says he) which are no other than
the Verb^ration of the ^ir, do not make a Statute but only the Image of a
Statute, and the Life of the Statute rests in the minds of the Expositors of
the words, who are the Members of Parliament who made that Statute: But in Case
there be no Parliament so that their minds cannot be known, then the Judges are
by Law the Interpreters of that Statute The Law itself is but a dead Letter,
but the Judges, upon their solemn Oaths, are the speaking Law, and several
Cases are there Cited where Constructions have been made contrary to the Letter
of the Statute. My Lord Hobart in the Case of Slade against Drake tells us,
That as Articles are made de Fide, by the determination of the Church, so
matters are said to be de Lege, by the determination of the King's Courts. And
fo. 84. his Lordship declares, That the Courts Ecclesiastical cannot in^erpret
a Statute, but only the Judges of the Common Law.

It Is expressly Enacted, That the King shall not pardon Murder but by express
words, and not by the words (Felonicam Interfectionem) because the King was
frequently misinformed. and by misrepresentations used to pardon Murder;
whereas he intended only to pardon Manslaughter. And yet the King pro Tempore,
has always dispensed with that Statute, and Murder has been pardoned by the
words (Felonicam Interfectionem) ever since, contrary to the express words of
the Statute; and, as we are credibly informed, such a pardon was read, and
allowed in the King's Bench this last Term. Cases of this Nature are
innumerable, what words can be more plain and express than the words of those
Statutes, That no person shall go Judge of Assize in his own County; Nor be
Sheriff for more than one Year. That no Welshman shall be Judge Chamberlain,
etc. in Wales. That there shall not be more than 8 Justices in each County of
Wales, and the like. And yet the contrary is done and allowed even at this day,
without any Notice thereof in Parliament; and what Reason can be given for
this, but that all Mankind must confess, That the Judges are the speaking Law;
and that they have declared, That the King has a dispensing power in these
Cases, notwithstanding the Statutes say, That the King shall not be able by any
Nonobstante to dispense with the same.

And therefore let the Judges answer for the Integrity of the Law in this Case,
as well as in the Case of the Ship Money, and all other Cases, the Subject is
no way accountable by Law for the same. In the Speech of Mr. Pierpoint against
Judge Berkley, upon his Impeachment for High Treason before the Lords, he
urges, by way of Aggravation, That for a Judge to be unjust, more hurts the
public than any other; For what a Judge does, is looked upon as a thing ought
to be done, and his unjust Judgments more our Records, (that is) our Laws,
Rushworth 's Collections. The Excellency of our Laws, above the Laws of all
other Nations, consists in the Certainty of it, and the Certainty consists in
this, That every Judgment of the Judges is a Law till it be Reversed; so that
the people of England who act under such a Judgment are safe, without any
regard to the Integrity or Corruption of the Judges, of which they are no
Judges Paramount: But when that Judgment is Reversed in the Exchequer, they
have all fair warning that the Law is altered in that particular, and then the
2d Judgment will protect them; and in Case that Judgment be also Reversed in
Parliament, then the first Judgment comes into Force again: So that the people
must walk after the Judgment of the Judges in all Cases; and if they are
punished for so doing in Parliament, it must be by a Bill of Attainder,
contrary to all the former Rules and Methods of proceedings.

So that upon the whole matter, to raise Money by such a Tax as is proposed,
seems to be just and equal, and according to the ancient Rules and Methods of
Parliament: But to raise Money by the Name of Forfeitures, though in reality by a
Bill of Attainder, is a new President of very great Consequence; and whether it
be consistent with the common Safety of the people in General, or with our own
Interest in particular, is humbly submitted to our Superiors, to whose Judgment
we must all Appeal.

Let us beware lest we dig a pit for others, and fall into it our selves.

