A NEW REMONSTRANCE AND DECLARATION FROM THE ARMY, To the Kings Majesty, and
the Prince of Wales; And their Message, Proposals, and Protestation, for the
conducting of His Majesty's Royal person from the Isle of Wight, to His Palace
at Westminster, in honor, freedom, and triumph.

With the time of His Majesty's coming, the Articles and conditions thereof,
and the Armies further proposals to the Citizens of London, concerning his
Majesty, and the Presbyterian and Independent party.

woodcut of king and man

Sent from the Army November. 18, to be printed and published.

A NEW DECLARATION FROM THE ARMY CONCERNING His Highness the Prince of Wales,
to be forthwith published aboard the Fleet-Royall.
Right Honorable,
THe Agents of the Army are drawing up the Representation of the respective
Regiments to present to his Excellency, wherein they Declare their unanimous
Resolutions for the putting of a final end and period to all differences
whatsoever now in dispute between his Majesty and the parliament, and that a
peace be suddenly concluded of, and his Majesty re-invested, provided that
assurance may be given for future safety and liberties, both to the Army and
Kingdom.

And to that end, a message is drawing up, with several proposals thereunto
annexed, Humbly desiring his Majesty to give his Royal assent, for the
confirming and enacting that which they have so dearly bought and wo^^ in the
(...) the common Liberties and Freedoms of the people of England.

And that he will be pleased to sign to their Desires, for the enacting and
putting the Law in full force, to bind both prince and Representatives, from
inslaving the Subject, or imposing any arbytrary government upon them, to the
destruction of the people.

These things being assented to, they do in all mutability profess, That they
shall forthwith take upon themselvesto adhere thereunto* and to live the
honorable tile of his Majesty's Guardians, and conduct his Royal person in
honor and triumph to His palace at Westminsier, there to remain in honor,
freedom and safety; to the end, that He and his posterity may govern their
people in holiness and righteousness throughout all future Ages.

The Officers and Soldiers are in debate about another Message to be sent to
the prince of Wales, dehorting his Highness to persist no longer in his
present design against his native Kingdom, but to come in and join with them,
for the healing and curing of all diseases and distractions which lie weltring
within within the Bowels thercol.

St. Albans 18. November. 1648.
His Majesty's last and final Concessions, debated in both Houses on Saturday
November. 18.
CHARLES R.

FOR a further and final Answer to your Proposition touching the election and
choosing of Officers, and confirming of places upon persons of trust, throughout
the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales, His Majesty does
declare, that He is willing to concur with his two Houses, in all things that
may tend to the peace and redemption of his liege people from oppression and
bondage; and to that end is pleased to give his Royal assent, that his two
Houses of Parliament shall be fully empowered to dispose of all great Offices
for twenty years, according to their expression and desires contained in the
said proposition.

And his Majesty does further declare, that he is willing to pass his Royal
Word, for confirming and authorizing the Catechism (agreed upon by his two
Houses, and the Assembly of Divines) to be read and published in all Parish
Churches and Chapels, within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales,
together with the addition of a preface to be thereunto annexed.

Both Houses having received the said Message, spent sometime in debate thereof
on Thursday November the 15. And also insisted on his Majesty's Propositions
for his coming to London, in honor, freedom, and safety, and after mature
deliberation thereon, resolved, That His Majesty shall speedily come to London
in honor, freedom, and safety, and be restored to His just rights and
revenues.

SIR,
LIeutenant General Crumwell, and diverse other Officers of the Army, upon a
General council held the 11. of this instant November, debated the Proposals
of the Army, in reference to the Resentments, touching the King and his
Representments; and after some dispute in an Argumentary way, they unanimously
declared their resolutions to adhere thereunto, and to live and dye, and stand
and fall with the Army in the South, for preservation of the Rights and
Liberties of the Freeborn people of England, and the establishing of the Laws
of the Land, and confirming of certain Rules for the execution thereof between
the people and their Representatives.

And upon the close of their confultations, the Lieutenant General further
demonstrated, that he thought it requisite, that all possible means should be
used for the faciliating and obtaining a speedy grant and condescension to the
Desires of the Army, both from King and Parliament; and that a Letter be drawn
up, and expedited to his Majesty, to desire his Gracious condescensions to the
Desires of his two Houses, for the settling of a safe and well-grounded peace;
as also pressing his Majesty to take the Covenant, and to sign the
Propositions.

These Proposals were with much alacrity and amity embraced, and a Letter is
said to be forthwith drawn up, to be presented to his Majesty, together with a
Declaration and Representation in behalf of the Army.

The Lieutenant Genesis has declared his resolution to the Governor of
Pontefract, and has sent this ensuing Message (or Summons) for the surrender
thereof, viz.

Sir, Being come hither for the reduction of this place, I thought fit to
summon you, to deliver your Garrison to me for the use of the Parliament: those
Gentlemen and Soldiers with you may have better terms, then if you should
hold it to extremity, I expect a speedy answer, and rest Yours etc.

O. CROMWELL.

Sir, We hear that Lieutenant General Cromwell has sent a Letter to the
Prince of Wales, dehorting his Highness to come in to the Parliament, and to
mediate with his Royal Father for a speedy union and compliance with his two
Houses, etc.

The Lieutenant General has further declared, that he will leave no means
unassayed, for the composing of all differences between the King and people;
and for the better effecting thereof, has sent a Message to the Citizens of
London, purporting his earnest Desires for peace, and re-inthroning of the
King, and that future provision be made for the people of England, to preserve
them from tyranny and oppression, requiring them to be isntrumental therein,
which Letter is said to be signed

O. CROMWELL.

By Letters from St. Albanes Novem. 19. it is advertized, That the Council of
the Army sat close on Saturday last, and debated the Representation and
Desires of the Soldiery, which they are to expedite to the Houses for their
concurrence therein. It is said, that they begin to insist upon new proposals,
to be communicated to the King and Parliament, which contain a very pleasing
and satisfactory demonstration, and extends it self to the utmost Latitude, for
the settling of the King, dissolving of the Parliament, calling home the Prince,
and uniting the hearts of all sects and sorts of persons, viz. the
Presbyterians, the Independents, and all others whatsoever, who vary in their
judgments and opinions, within any of his Majesty's Realms and Dominions.

FINIS.

