OBSERVATIONS Upon the Chief Acts of the two late P. Assemblies at St. ANDREWS
and DVNDEE, the Year of God 1651, and 1652.

Together with the Reasons why the Ministers, Elders and Professors, who
protested against the said Pretended Assemblies, and the Pretended Assembly at
Edinburgh, cannot agree to the Overtures made to them at the Conference upon
the 28. and 29, days of July 1652.

As also the Instructions given by them to such of their Number as were sent to
the said Conference. And the Letter directed to Mr. David Dickson for
communicating their PAPERS.

Whereunto is subjoyned the Propositions which were offered to the Meeting of
Ministers and others appointed to be kept at Edinburgh July 21. 1652.

Printed in the Year 1653.

OBSERVATIONS Upon the Chief Acts of the Two late P. Assemblies at S. Andrews
and Dundee, the Year of God 1651. and 1652.
Act at Dundee, approving the Proceedings of the Commission of the former
Assembly, July 24. 1651. Postmeridiem.
THe General Assembly having considered the report of the Committee appointed
for revising the Proceedings of the Commission of the preceding Assembly; a and
having also heard the doubts and objections of diverse Brethren, against their
Acts and resolutions after-mentioned, after due examination, long and much
debate and mature deliberation, b The Assembly finds the Zeal, diligence,
wisdom and faithfulness of the said Commissioners in the discharge of the
trust committed unto them, very great, and in the manifold difficulties of this
last years great and dangerous occasions, their watchfulness and labors to
have been very singular and more then ordinary: And therefore do approve their
Acts and Proceedings, c especially their sense of the Western Remonstrance,
Perth November. 28, their Answer to the Parliaments Quaere, anent the more
general calling forth of the People, Pe^^, December. 13. their Solemn Warning,
Perth Jan. 6, their Answer to the Letter of the Ministers of the Presbytery of
Stirling, Perth Jan. 6. their Answers to the Letters from other Brethren and
Presbyteries in relation to Public Resolutions; their Answer to his Majesty,
and Committee of Estates Letter anent the Protestation of the Ministers of
Stirling, Perth March 18; their Act concerning the opposers of Public
Resolutions, and Letter to Presbyteries thereupon; their Answer to the Quaere
anent the Acts of Glasses. d And in these and the rest of their proceedings, do
judge them to deserve high commendation. e Only the Assembly having considered
their Act and Declaration of August 13, 1650. at the West Kirk, finding that
some have already made ill use of the same: And to the end that it may not
hereafter be to any a ground of unwarrantible proceeding in reference to the
Kings Majesty, or any of his Successors, Declare, that the said Act and
Declaration shall not in any time coming be interpreted to have any other
meaning, then that the King Interest is not to be owned but in subordination to
God, the Kirk being ever willing, as their duty is, to own and maintain in
their station, his Majesty's Interest in that suberdination, according to the
Covenants. And the Assembly Ordains Master Robert Bailzie Moderator pro
tempore, to return to their said Brethren hearty thanks in the name of the
Assembly, for their great pains, travel and fidelity.

Sic subscribitur A. KER.

Observations upon the same Act.
A. THere was neither such fair hearing allowed, nor such due examination used,
nor such mature deliberation taken as was requisite in such a case, anent which
such a multitude of godly Ministers, Elders and Professors' in the Land had so
great dissatisfaction in their consciences; For, 1. Albeit the most material
and important of these proceedings of the Commission (to wit, their answers and
resolutions about employing such as were formerly excluded) were of things
which the Authors thereof acknowledge not to have been determined by any of the
former Assemblies of this Kirk, as is granted in the Vindication of that
Assembly; yea, of things which to their knowledge were in the judgment of many
gracious ones in the Land, contrary to many Acts, Warnings, and Declarations of
former Assembles, and to the Covenant, and the Word of God, yet as the
Commission had at first determined the same in a very thin meeting at Perth,
not only before communicating the same to Presbyteries, and hearing their
judgment there anent; but the greatest part of their number being absent, and
many of them not being at all advertised; so did that Assembly at Dundee go on
very suddenly, notwithstanding that a delay was most earnestly desired at S.
Andrews where they first met, and that it be expressly provided by an Act of
the Assembly 1639, That no Novation which may disturb the Peace of the Church,
and make division, be suddenly propounded and enacted; but so, as the motion be
first communicated to the several Synods, Presbyteries and Kirks, that the
matter may be approved by all at home, and Commissioners may come well
prepared, unanimously to conclude a solid deliberation upon these points in the
General Assembly. 2. Albeit many things were offered unto them, both from the
Scriptures and Reason, and from many Acts of former Assemblies against the
proceedings of the Commission, and the approving thereof; the reading of a part
whereof, to wit, Sir Archibald Johnstoun of Waristoun their own Clerk his
Letter, was much pressed at several Diets by many of their own number, yet
were not these things heard, nor taken in consideration, nor could the reading
of that Letter be obtained, notwithstanding that it was once publicly promised
by the Moderator.

B. Would to God their wisdom and faithfulness in the discharge of their
trust had been such as might justly deserve such a commendation; but we fear
that upon examination, it shall be found not to have been so: 1. Because they
did not keep themselves within the bounds of their trust, which was to treat
and determine in the matters referred unto them, as their Commission expressly
bears; but it was not referred unto them to determine Cases not formerly
determined by any Assembly of this Church, there is no such clause in their
Commission; yet did they determine a very grave Case, to wit, the employing of
these who were formerly excluded, which by the chief Authors of that
determination, is acknowledged to have been indeterminati juris, a fault that
was the greater, because it is provided by the Acts of the General Assembly
1641, That since it has pleased God to vouchsafe us the liberty of yearly
General Assemblies, that no novation in Doctrine, Worship or Government, be
brought in or practiced in this Kirk, unless it be first propounded, examined
and allowed in the General Assembly. 2. Because they did not only go beyond
their trust, but walk contrary unto their trust, great part of their trust was;
to preserve the established Doctrine, Discipline, Worship and Government of
this Kirk, against all who should endeavor to bring in any contrary thereunto,
to censure Complyers and persons disaffected to the Covenant, according to the
Acts of the Assembly, and to protest against all encroachments upon the
Liberties of the Kirk; in all which three they failed: 1. In the matter of
preserving the Doctrine, not only because they taught and allowed, that
Malignants being Subjects, might be employed and entrusted for defense of the
Cause and Kingdom, as appears at length in their Warning of the date January
(...) 1651. and in their Answer to the Letter of the Presbytery of Stirling at
the same Diet, notwithstanding that the contrary had been constantly taught and
holden by this Kirk these years past, but also were isntrumental unto the
actual employing and intrusting of these men, which as to man could not but
prove destructive to the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government of this
Kirk. 2. In the matter of censuring Complyers and Persons disaffected to the
Covenant, according to the Acts of the Assembly, because they did not only
allow persons who were not of constant integrity and affection to the Cause,
and of a blameless and Christian conversation to be employed and entrusted,
which was contrary to our Solemn Engagement, but also because they take off
Censures which had been formerly inflicted upon many disaffected persons; who
had not in their ordinary conversation, given real testimony of their dislike
of the late unlawful Engagement, and of the courses and ways of Malignants,
and of their sorrow for accession to the same, and to live soberly, righteously
and godly, notwithstanding that this was expressly provided by the Act of the
General Assembly 1649. and did ordain Presbyteries to censure all such
Ministers within their bounds as did oppose or bear testimony against these
their proceedings. 3. In the matter of protesting against encroachments upon
the Liberties of the Kirk, because when some Ministers were confined at Perth
by the Civil Magistrate for their doctrine, before they were cited or sentenced
by any of the Judicatories for the same, they were so far from protesting
against this, that as they were silent when these Ministers were first cited,
notwithstanding that the Letter of citation was communicated unto them by the
Committee of Estates; so by a Public Paper given in to the Parliament, they
did condemn the Protestation of these Ministers against that citation and
confinement, which Paper is especially approven in this Act.

C. It is not our purpose to fall upon the particulars which are said to be
especially approven here; but by the word especially, and by the particulars
which are here mentioned, it is evident that the spirit which ruled in the
Assembly at Dundee, was zealous above measure for the Public Resolutions, most
of all the Proceedings of the Commission that relate thereunto, or to the
opposers thereof, or any Testimony given against the same, being particularly
mentioned, and especially without leaving out, much less excepting so much as
their Act concerning the opposers of Public Resolutions, and Letter to
Presbyteries thereunto, by which all of them were appointed to be cited as
persons guilty to the Assembly, and so were excluded from having any hand to
treat or vote therein in any thing concerning the Public Resolutions, which
beside the injury done to the persons, was to prae-limit the Assembly, and to
make it up of such only as did approve of their Proceedings.

D. The generality of Malignant and disaffected persons in the Land, who have
been enemies to Reformation and godliness, do join in this high testimony, and
cry up these proceedings and the Authors thereof, as deserving high
commendation, but most of the godly of the Land refuse to put to their seal
thereto, and make these proceedings the matter of their mourning, begging
pardon and repentance unto the Authors thereof.

E. This is another evidence, what spirit led that Assembly, as every thing
must be cried up that made for strengthening of the Public resolutions, so
every thing must be cryed-down that made for weakening thereof; yea, that very
Declaration which before Dumbar was unanimously condescended upon and approven
both by the Commission of the Kirk and the Committee of Estates, for holding
forth the true state of the quarrel upon which the Kingdom then fought, and
for shutting out every Malignant party, or quarrel or interest. 1. By
insinuating that it has already been to some a ground of unwarrantable
proceeding in these words of their Act: To the end it may not hereafter be to
any a ground of unwarrantable proceeding in reference to the Kings Majesty, or
any of his Successors. 2. They take only one clause of the whole Declaration,
to wit, that the Kings Interest is not to be owned but in subordination to God,
leaving wholly out another material part thereof, to wit, and so far as he
ownes and prosecutes the Cause of God, and disclaims his and his fathers
opposition to the Work of God, and to the Covenant, and likewise all the
enemies thereof; which is again repeated thus in the close of that Declaration,
and that they will with convenient speed take in consideration the Papers
lately sent unto them, and vindicate themselves from all the falsehoods
contained therein, especially in those things wherein the quarrel betwixt us
and that party is mis-stated, as if we owned the late Kings proceedings and
were resolved to prosecute and maintain his present Majesty's Interest, before
and without acknowledgment of the sins of his House and former ways, and
satisfaction to Gods People in both Kingdoms. The omitting of which Clauses
does so far as I can discern either from the Assemblies own words, or from the
judgments and expressions of these who had chief hand therein, or from
comparing things with things, indeed import an altering of the state of the
question, and brings it to that which was so much pleaded for by the opposers
of Reformation from the very beginning of our differences with the Kings
father, especially by some of the Authors of the cross Petition in 1643. and
of the unlawful Engagement in the year 1648. to wit, that though the King did
not disclaim his former opposition to the Work of God and to the Covenant, and
likewise all the enemies thereof, and own and prosecute the Cause of God, yet
we ought to own his Kingly Interest, by admitting him to the exercise of his
Royal Power, and obeying him in all things lawful, which how far it reaches,
as to the casting loose, and condemning of the former proceedings of this
Church and Kingdom with the King and his Father, and making a new state of the
question, has been often heretofore shown by this Church, and cannot but be
obvious to every intelligent man.

Two Acts of the Assembly at Dundee, and one Act of the Assembly at Edinburgh,
which relates unto censures.
DUNDEE Julii 31. 1651. antemer. Sess. 19.
Act for censuring of those who do not acknowledge this present Assembly, and
do not acquiesce to the Acts thereof, etc.

THe General Assembly considering that all persons who protest against, and
decline the authority of the General Assembly, are censurable by the Acts and
Constitutions of this Kirk, with the highest censures thereof, and that by the
Act of the solemn General Assembly of Glasgow, 20. December. 1638. Sess. 26.
Presbyteries and Provincials are ordained to cite and censure all such as would
not acknowledge the said Assembly. And the Assembly being very sensible of the
prejudice this Kirk may suffer in her Liberties and Privileges, by the
beginnings of such practices (if they be not timeously prevented and
restrained) Therefore according to the practice and example of the said
Assembly, They ordain Presbyteries and Provincial Assemblies, to call before
them all persons that do not acknowledge this present Assembly, and to censure
them according to the degree of their contempt and obstinacy to the Acts of
this Kirk: And the Assembly having also considered, that by the aforementioned
Act of the Assembly of Glasgow; and another Act of the said Assembly, December.
18. Sess. 24. Presbyteries are ordained to proceed against these that do not
acquiesce to the Acts of the said Assembly, and that refuse themselves, or draw
others from the obedience of the Act of the General Assembly, in manner
mentioned in the said Act. Therefore do ratify and approve the said Acts, and
declare, that they are to be extended against Ministers censured by this
Assembly, and all those that oppose the Public Resolutions thereof. Ordaining
also Presbyteries and Provincial Assemblies, To call before them all persons
that shall not acquiesce to the Acts and Constitutions of this present
Assembly, and to deal with them by conference for their satisfaction. And if in
their conference with them they shall still oppose the Acts and Conclusions of
this Assembly, That they censure them according to the degree of their offense
and obstinacy to the Acts of this Assembly. And where Presbyteries are
negligent or wanting herein, the Assembly appoints the Commission appointed for
Public Affairs, to proceed against the said offenders respective, and to
censure them in manner above specified, giving unto them full power for that
effect.

Eodem die at Dundee Ses. 19. antemerid.
Act against Expectants who oppose the Public Resolutions.

THe General Assembly understanding the scandal and prejudice of practices and
carriage of some Expectants and students, attenders of families, for
performance of religious duties by their private or public opposing Public
Resolutions; For removing whereof, they do extend the Act of the Assembly 1640.
Sess. 10. against expectants, refusing to subscribe the Covenant and the
censure therein specified, against all expectants, students in Divinity, and
attenders upon families for religious duties, that shall not acknowledge the
General Assemblies of this Kirk, and this present General Assembly, and that
shall not acquiesce to the Acts and Constitutions thereof; and do ordain them to
be removed from Bursaries, and to be discharged from public preaching and
catechizing in Congregations and families, and from all other privileges and
liberties allowed to expectants; appointing Presbyteries and Provincials to
proceed against them accordingly.

Edinburgh 3. Aug. 1652. antemer. Sess 19.
Act concerning admitting Expectants to their trials, and Ruling Elders to act
in Presbyteries and Synods.

THe General Assembly having out of their earnest desire of the Peace and Unity
of this Kirk, condescended upon an Overture of Peace, and not only propounded
it to some Brethren who were here, opposite to the Public Judicatories of this
Kirk, But also in pursuance of that end, Ordained the said Overture to be
presented and offered by the several Presbyteries or Synods, to all in their
respective bounds, who have Protested against, and Declined, or consented or
adhered unto the Protestations and Declinatours made against this and the
preceding General Assembly, and the conditions therein contained, to be
required of them; And considering the great prejudice like to arise to this
Kirk, by increasing of our unhappy Differences and Distractions, if young men
shall be admitted into the Ministry, which shall still blow the sire of
contention, and continue in avowed opposition to, and contempt of the Public
Judicatories, Therefore Ordains Presbyteries to take special care, that upon
the calling of any Expectant to a particular charge of the Ministry, before
they admit him to his trials, they require him under his hand, to pass from
the Protestations and Declinatours against this and the preceding General
Assembly, if he has been accessory to the same, and to promise and give
assurance, that he shall abstain from holding up Debates and Controversies,
about matters of Differences in this Kirk, since the Assembly 1650, in
Preaching, Writing, or other Ways. Upon the performance whereof, the
Presbytery shall proceed to his trials; if not, in that case, the Presbytery
shall foebear to proceed until the next General Assembly, leaving liberty to the
Presbytery and Congregation for planting of the place otherwise. And the
Assembly Ordains and requires, that Presbyteries be not sudden to lay by such
young men as at first refuses or scruples to perform these conditions
mentioned, but that pains be taken upon them to convince them of the
reasonableness thereof, and to persuade them to embrace them, and to give them
a competent time for that effect.

Likeas the Assembly considering the prejudice of Elders coming to Presbyteries
for strengthening a faction in opposition to the Public Judicatories, Ordains,
that Presbyteries shall require the same things fore mentioned of every Ruling
Elder that comes to sit and act in Presbyteries; and in case of his refusal,
shall not admit him to act as an Elder in the Presbytery, but require the Kirk
Session from which he is sent, to make choice of, and send another, who for the
Peace of this Church, shall agree to perform the conditions required.

THese three Acts I have put together, because they are much of the fame or
like nature, that is, such as ordain censures upon these who do not acknowledge
the authority of that Assembly at Dundee, or who shall not acquiesce to the
Acts and Constitutions thereof, or who shall not pass from the Protestations
against these two pretended Assemblies at Dundee and Edinburgh; and I offer
unto the Reader these animadversions upon them: 1. That in the first Act at
Dundee, the Act of the Assembly at Glasgow 20. December, 1638. Sess. 26. is not
faithfully made use of, but by leaving out of some words is stretched beyond
the sense and meaning thereof, The words of that Act December. 20. 1638 are, that
all such as are scandalous and malicious, and will not acknowledge nor
acquiesce unto the Acts thereof, be censured according to their malice and
contempt. But at Dundee these words, scandalous and malicious are left out, and
the censure is extended to all persons that do not acknowledge that Assembly,
how blameless or holy soever they be in their carriage, or how tender or sober
soever they be in not acknowledging the same. 2. Whereas the Act of Glasgow
1638. December. 18. Sess. 24. Ordains Presbyteries to proceed with the censures
of the Kirk to excommunication against those Ministers only who being deposed,
acquiesce not to their sentences, but exercise some part of their Ministerial
function, refuse themselves, and withdraw others from the obedience of the Acts
of the Assembly. By the Act at Dundee, all persons whatsoever who shall so do,
are made liable to excommunication. That the sin and snares of these three Acts
may be the better understood, I desire a short view to be taken. 1. Of the
thing that is thereby made censurable. 2. Of the censures themselves. 3. Of the
persons who fall under that censure. The thing that is made censurable is, the
not acknowledging of that Assembly, or not acquiescing to the Acts and
Constitutions thereof, or refusing to pass from the Protestations against the
two late Assemblies, etc. things that are in themselves not censurable, but
commendable, not sins but duties, as is sufficiently demonstrated in other
Papers and Treatises which are already published, because that Assembly at
Dundee was no free nor lawful Assembly.

The censures contained in these Acts are either in reference to places and
trust in the Church, or in reference to Church Fellowship and communion as
Church Members. The censures of the first kind are either for keeping from
places and trust, or for removing from the same. The first are relative. 1 to
Expectants, students of Divinity, attenders upon Families, who by the second
Act at Dundee, and by their extending the Act of the Assembly 1640. Sess. 10.
are declared incapable of a Pedagogie, teaching of a School, catechizing of a
family, preaching or catechizing in a Congregation, or of a Bursary, or of
liberty to reside within a Burgh, University or College, or of any other
privilege and liberty allowed to Expectants And by the Act at Edinburgh it is
provided, that if any of them be called to a particular charge of the
Ministry, that the Presbytery shall not admit him to his trials, unless he
do under his hand pass from the Protestations against these two Assemblies at
Dundee and at Edinburgh, and promise and give assurance never any more to open
his mouth, nor put pen to paper against the Public Resolutions, and the things
that have followed thereupon, which they express by abstaining from holding up
Debates and Controversies about matters of Differences in this Kirk, since the
Assembly 1650. which if he do refuse, that there shall be no proceeding in his
trials till the next General Assembly, and that in the mean while liberty be
left to the Presbytery and Congregation to plant the place otherwise. 2. To
Ruling Elders coming to sit and act in Presbyteries, who by the Act at
Edinburgh incase of their refusal to perform the things formerly mentioned,
the Presbyteries are ordained not to admit them to act as Elders in the
Presbytery. These censures that concern removing from places and trust, are
determined in regard of Elders in Presbyteries, and Expectants to preach or
catechize in Families or Congregations, or have Bursaries, for both these (if
they do not condescend to the former conditions) must unjustly be removed and
discharged, the Elder from sitting in the Presbytery, the Expectant from his
preaching or catechizing, or bursarie. Concerning Ministers they are not so
express, but leave it to Presbyteries, to proceed according to the degree of
the offense; yet so, as there be clear ground laid for their suspension or
deposition; yea far more, because they not only appoint censures equivalent to
the suspension or deposition of Ministers upon Expectants and Elders, and have
gone before by their own example, suspending some Ministers, and deposing
others: but do ordain Presbyteries and Provincial Assemblies, to call before
them all persons that do not acknowledge that Assembly at Dundee, and to
censure them; and do also in the beginning of the first Act declare, That all
persons who protest against, and decline the authority of the General
Assembly, are censurable by the Acts and Constitutions of this Kirk, with the
highest censures of this Kirk; and in the body thereof do declare, That the two
Acts of the Assembly at Glasgow 1638. (The first whereof ordains Presbyteries
to proceed with the censures of the Kirk to excommunication) are not only to
be extended against Ministers censured at Dundee, but also against all those
that oppose the Public Resolutions thereof.

The censures that relate to Church Fellowship and communion, are designed in
the first Act, which strikes equally against all persons whatsoever, who are
Church Members, Ministers, Elders, Expectants and Professors, who if they do
not acknowledge that Assembly at Dundee, are appointed to be cited and censured
according to the degree of their contempt and obst^nacy against the Acts of
this Kirk, and if they oppose the Resolutions, or do not acquiesce to the Acts
and Constitutions of that Assembly, then to be proceeded against and censured
according to these Acts at Glasgow which are extended unto them; now the not
acknowledging or declining the authority of the Assembly is in their
construction in the beginning of this Act, censurable with the highest censures
of the Kirk, according to the Acts and Constitutions of this Kirk, and the
opposing of the Public Resolutions, or the not acquiescing to the Acts and
Constitutions of the Assembly at Dundee, is to be censured with the censures
contained in the Act at Glasgow, Dec. 18. Sess 28. 1638. Thus all the
Ministers, Elders and Expectants in the Church of Scotland, who do not
acknowledge that Assembly, or oppose the Resolutions thereof, or do not
acquiesce to the Acts and Constitutions thereof, are to be laid aside,
discharged, silenced, suspended or deposed; yea all the Ministers, Elders,
Expectants and Professors in the Church of Scotland, who do not acknowledge
that Assembly, or who do oppose the Resolutions thereof, or who do not
acquiesce to the Acts and Constitutions thereof, are made liable to
excommunication, if after conference they do not receive satisfaction.

From what is already said it does appear who are the persons (as to the matter
of their supposed offense) are to be censured, I shall only add, that as to
their real qualification and carriage, that they are not such who have been
enemies, or disaffected to the Work of Reformation, or scandalous or loose in
their conversation, but such as have been zealous thereof, and faithful
therein from the beginning, and blameless in their conversation, and cannot
acknowledge that Assembly, nor acquiesce to the Acts and Constitutions thereof
for conscience sake, having a well-warranted persuasion in themselves, that
they do herein walk according to former sound principles, to depart from which
were but to involve themselves in the common defection with others. And as
these persons are so qualified in their carriage to the Public Work, and in
their conversation, so for their number they make up a very great part of the
godly in the Land, whether Ministers Elders, Expectants or Professors.

An Act and Overture of the General Assembly, for the Peace and Union of the
Kirk.
Edinburgh 2. August, 1652. Postmeridiem. Sess. 18.

THe General Assembly being deeply affected with sense of the many and sad
evils and calamities that have already arisen both to Kirk and State within
this Land, by the lamentable divisions and distractions amongst Ministers and
others of the People of God in this Kirk, and apprehensive of greater evils
which may yet follow, to the over-throwing of the blessed Work of Reformation,
(which the Lord, in his great and special mercy, was pleased to set up amongst
us, having carried it through many difficulties and oppositions) and to the
laying of the Kirk of God waste and desolat, if these divisions and
distractions shall continue; And being most desirous, as the Servants of Jesus
Christ, who is the Prince of Peace, to use all necessary and lawful means (so
far as their knowledge and power can reach) for preventing the increase of
these divisions, and making up of the breaches. And being firmly resolved, for
obtaining of this desirable end, in all meekness, gentleness and moderation,
to condescend so far as they can, without violation of Truth, and of the just
authority of the Government and Courts of Jesus Christ in his Kirk) unto their
Brethren of the Ministry and others of the People of God, who have been this
late time bypast, and are at difference with the Judicatories of the Kirk, for
bringing them to an happy conjunction with their Brethren in unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace.

Therefore, for giving an evidence and demonstration of their real intentions
and sincere purpose about the premises, as they have already, by some of their
number commissionated for that effect, Declared and made offer to some of these
their Dissenting Brethren, who were here in the time of the Assembly, so now
again do Declare and make offer by this present Act, That the four Brethren,
who, by the preceding General Assembly at S. Andrews and Dundee, were upon
special consideration justly censured, for protesting against and declining
the Authority thereof, shall have the censures inflicted on them by that
Assembly for the cause foresaid, taken off them; And further, that no censure
shall be inflicted on them for not submitting to the foresaid censures; yea,
and that no censure shall be inflicted for their Protesting against, and
declining of this present Genesis Ass. Providing 1. that they do pass from the
said two Protestations against, and declinators of the two foresaid Assemblies,
judicially under their hand, between and the second Wednesday of November next
ensuing, in their several Presbyteries or Synods respective. 2. That they also
give assurance in manner foresaid, that they shall forbear holding up divisions
by debates about matters of our late differences since the Assembly 1650 in
preaching, writing, or any otherwise. Likeas the Assembly does Declare and make
offer, that all such as did concur in, or have been accessory unto the
Protestation and Declinatour against the Assembly at S. Andrews and Dundee, and
were not censured, shall be free from whatsoever censure might have been
inflicted by any Act of the said Assembly, and that no such Act shall have any
force against them hereafter in any Judicatory of this Kirk, and that no
censure shall be inflicted on them for their accession unto the late
Protestation and Declinatour against the present Assembly, Providing they shall
perform the foresaid provisions within the time, and after the manner therein
specified.

And for prosecution of this purpose, the General Assembly ordains the several
Presbyteries or Synods of this Kirk to present this offer, with the Provisions
therein contained unto all such persons as are beforementioned within their
bounds respective: And incase the plurality of Presbyteries or Synods shall
refuse to propound the same, the Assembly does warrant such Brethren as
acknowledge the Authority of these Assemblies, to propound them: and, having
made report of their diligence and success therein to the next ensuing
Quarterly Meeting of the Commission of the Kirk, if they be then sitting,
thereafter to do as they find by the Rule of the Word of GOD, and the Acts and
Constitutions of General Assemblies of this Kirk, to be most necessary and
conducible for preservation of truth, for procuring the Peace and welfare of
the Kirk, and maintenance of the Authority of the Assemblies thereof, as they
will be answerable to the next General Assembly; And recommends unto them to
take advice of the Commission of the Kirk for their proceeding in any matter of
importance of this kind.

And now the General Assembly having out of tender affection toward their
Brethren, and sincere desire of unity and concord with them in the Lord, and
for the Lord, condescended unto this moderation and meekness, do obtest all
and every one of them in the Name of Jesus Christ, and expect, as they tender
the preservation of the Government of this Kirk (which adversaries without and
within, taking advantage of our divisions and distractions are laboring to
subvert) and as they love the establishing and promoving of the Kingdom of
Christ in this Land; and will be answerable to him in the great Day, that they
would, accepting of this offer of love; return unto unity with their Brethren
in their several respective places and Judicatories, and concur in an
unanimous way, for preserving and promoving the Work of Reformation in all the
parts thereof, and for electing of Commissioners to the next ensuing General
Assembly. And if they shall (refusing to accept this offer) continue to hold up
the divisions, the Assembly leaves it to the judgment of all the Kirks of
Christ abroad, to bear witness if we have not faithfully endeavored for our
part, to heal our present breaches; and if we shall not be free of the guilt of
the sad consequences that may come to the Work and people of God in this Land,
by continued distractions.

J. Makghie.

OBSERVATIONS.
THis Overture, for the substance of it (as is hinted in the Paper it self) was
in the time of the sitting of that Assembly communicated in a Conference by
some of the Members thereof in the name of the rest, unto some who were sent
from the Meeting of these who differ from the Public Resolutions, and being
reported by these Brethren unto the rest of their number, was taken in
consideration, and reasons then given (which are herewith printed) showing the
unsatisfactorinesse thereof, and why it could not be embraced; which reasons
are still in force. I shall therefore now only desire these two things to be
taken notice of in this Overture. 1. That notwithstanding of all the Solemn
professions of real intentions and sincere purposes of peace and of meekness,
gentleness, moderation and condescendence, which are contained in this and
others of their Papers, yet they not only justify and hold fast all their
former grounds and proceedings in reference to themselves and their own
judgments, but impose them also upon their Brethren (who differ from them, and
have been so much stumbled therewith) as the only mean of healing and of
Peace. And therefore in reference to what is past, whosoever have concurred in,
or been accessory to the Protestation against these two Assemblies, must pass
from the same judicially under their hands, between and the second Wednesday of
November next ensuing in their several Presbyteries or Synods respective, and
in order to the Public Resolutions, must give assurance in manner foresaid,
that they shall forbear to speak or to testify any more against the sin of
these which they express, by forbearing to hold up divisions by debates, about
matters of our late differences since the Assembly 1650, in preaching, writing,
or any otherwise, and in reference to what is to come, the Acts of the Assembly
at Dundee, for censuring of all these who do not acknowledge the Constitution
of that Assembly, or who do oppose the Resolutions, or who do not acknowledge
the Acts and Constitutions thereof, stand unrepealed; to which, a new one in
this Assembly at Edinburgh is added, excluding all Expectants and Ruling
Elders, who refuse the conditions contained in this Overture. When I think upon
these things, I can not but call to mind and lay before others to whom Union
and Peace (which is so much pleaded and pretended) may and ought to be sweet
and dear. 1. That which was spoken publicly in that Assembly at Edinburgh by
one of their own Members, whilst they were upon the debate of their Acts and
Overtures about these differences; to wit, All the Reverend Brethren speak for
moderation, but I think we are very like those in Micah, who cry peace peace
and bite with their teeth, Micah. 3. v. 5.

Secondly, The practice of our Prelates in Scotland, who after they had usurped
upon the Church, and brought in many of their corruptions did aggravate and cry
out of all the evils of divisions, and schism, and much plead for, and make
great professions of a desire of union and peace, that the Church might be
strengthened against the common enemy, by whom it was threatened with great
danger, and against whom they did profess much zeal, but so as they did always
hold fast their corruptions, and go on therein from year to year, and would not
yield to any other grounds of union and peace, but such as did include the
approbation of, and subjection to their authority and proceedings, and yet did
always charge their Brethren who did bear test money against their defection,
and could not be consenting to their courses, as men of unpeaceable
dispositions, and turbulent spirits, who would rather rend the Church of GOD,
and fill all with confusion and division, before they did not satisfy their
own proud and contentious humors, in striving (as they alleged) about things
(of no great consquence) relating to Church Policy, when there was no
difference in matters of Doctrine; who so pleases to look upon the records of
that corrupt Assembly at Lithgow 1608. will find that the Prelates and their
party who prevailed in that Assembly, make a great deal of noise concerning the
distractions of affections, and diversity of judgments that was arisen amongst
the Ministry, and upon the first of these they do insist at length, holding it
forth to be carnal, and therefore say they, the more dangerous, because it
suffers not the Brethren whose affections were separated to unite themselves
with effauld and uniforme counsels and advice to resist the subtle practices
of the common enemy, and so gave him place with his subtle crafts and shifts
to enter into the Kirk of GOD, and thereby to supplant and undermine the same:
Therefore their advise is, that as the danger increases by the nourishing of
the distracted affections of the Brethren, even so the cure was the more
necessary, and hastily to be applied, to wit, that the whole Brethren of the
Ministry should presently in the fear of God lay down all rancour and
distraction of hearts and affections which either of them has born against
others in any times, and be reconciled with hearty affection in CHRIST, as
becomes them who are Ministers of the Word of GOD, and Preachers of peace and
Christian life and charity to his people, to the effect that by this hearty
reconciliation, hearts and advice may be communicate for disappointing of the
crafty devise of this common Enemy. But as to that which was the real and
first fountain of this distraction and difference of judgment, to wit,
Ministers voting in Parliament, their taking of Prelacies, and fetling constant
Moderators; no acknowledging of these things as a sin, or passing from them as
corruptions, but holding them fast, and building a further superstructure of
declining upon them, whilst in the mean time by their professed forwardness
against Papists, who was then the enemy with whom the Church had to do, and the
arguments taken from the benefit of union and peace, and the sad consequences,
and bitter fruits of distraction and division, and the small importance of the
things which were then in question amongst Brethren did prevail with many of
the Ministry, not only to engage themselves in a solemn way in the Assembly,
and in their Presbyteries, with holding up of their hands to lay down, and cast
away all grudge and rancour that any of them did bear at another, and to
maintain union of hearts and affections, and to continue in mutual friendship
and holy amity in GOD, as becomes the Pastors of the Kirk of Christ, (which was
a thing in it self very good and commendable) but also to be silent in all
matters of difference about the Government and Discipline of the Kirk, by which
it came to pass, lest they should thereby hinder union and peace, and weaken
joint endeavors against the common enemy, that whilst the Shepherds were sung
asleep, the foxes came in and destroyed the vines, which may give warning to
all the Ministers, Elders and Members of this Church who desire to have the
work of Reformation preserved in purity, and promoved in power, that they be
not as their fathers and Predecessors not long ago, charmed into silence by the
sweet songs of union and peace, until they be cheated out of the precious
Truth, and pure Ordinances of GOD, but that they take notice of, and resist the
beginnings of evil, by refusing to be consenting thereto, and concurring
therein, though happily they should because of this, be cried out on, as the
troublers of Israel, and as these who weaken the hands of the Church against
the common enemy, by contending about things of no great importance.

The other thing which I take notice of in this Overture is, that
notwithstanding the authors and approvers thereof charge the Protesters with
laying of the grounds of separation, and for making good their charge, do
amongst other grounds allege, that though they be but the smaller and the
fewer number, they take upon them to judge and act in the things of the Church,
and to exercise jurisdiction and authority over their Brethren: Yet in this
Overture this power seems to be given by the Assembly to the smaller part, or
fewer number in Presbyteries or Synods who acknowledge the authority of these
two Assemblies at Dundee and Edinburgh, because both in the matter of
propounding the Overture, and in the matter of reporting of diligence, and in
after doings, the same things are committed and entrusted to the fewer or
smaller number which are committed and entrusted to the whole, or greater part
of the Presbytery or Synod. It is true that they ordain them to do as they find
by the rule of the Word, and the Acts and Constitutions of the Genesis Assemblies
of this Kirk to be most necessary and conduceable for preservation of Truth,
for promoving the peace and welfare of the Kirk, and maintaining of the
authority of the Assemblies thereof, but yet puts a restriction upon the
smaller part to proceed even to censures against the greater part, but only
lays down the rule according to which they ought to proceed, and the ends
which they ought to have before them in their procedures when they do proceed
unto, or abstain from censures, as seems to be clear by their way of
Expression; and to confirm that this is the meaning, I desire it to be
considered: First, that if they had an other meaning it had been easy for them
to express it in such words as would have holden forth their sense clearly and
unquestionably. Secondly, these limitations which they use as to the matter of
procedure, are equally holden forth both to the greater and smaller part of
Presbyteries and Synods. Thirdly, They did take notice of the smaller parts of
Presbyteries in several places of the Country who had withdrawn and separated
from the greater part, and acted Presbyterially, and apart by themselves, not
only without the concurrance and consent, but against the Authority and
declaration of the greater part, yea they did receive Commissioners from some
of them, and admitted them to sit as Members of their Assembly. Fourthly, they
gave Commissions for over-powering the greater part in some Presbyteries, that
Churches might be planted, and things done contrary to the mind of the greater
part. If notwithstanding of these things, or any thing that is intended in the
Overture it self, they will vindicate it from such a meaning; I believe it
shall be acceptably taken off their hands, but until it be done, I wish none
of them may charge the Protesters with separation upon that-ground for which
they themselves, to the apprehension of the Protesters, have both in their acts
and practice clearly paved the way.

Edinb. 5. Aug. 1 52. Antemer. Sess. 23.
a Right Honorable, right Worshipful, and Worthily respected,
WE, being met in Edinburgh at the time appointed by the former Assembly at
Dundee, b of purpose to study the healing of begun breaches in this Kirk, were
interrupted at our first down-sitting, and hindered from constitution of the
Assembly by our Dissenting Brethren their offer of Propositions and desires to
be granted by us, which could not to any good purpose, c either be debated or
effectually granted, as was required, before the Assembly was constitute, and
the Judicatory fixed. Which short delay of our answer, till we were in capacity
to answer, d was met with a Protestation, prepared before hand, for a
declinatour of the Judicatory, and all the Commissioners of Presbyteries, e as
freelychosen as any were, and sent forth from all parts of the Kingdom. In
which Protestation were contained f many grievous and unjust aspersions upon us
and others (who dare not pass from the possession of g yearly General
Assemblies; which, being in former times interrupted, was purchased at a dear
rate, before it was recovered) h and all this was presently put in Print, to
the great disadvantage of us, and misinformation of all the Kingdom. After the
Assembly was constitute, i a conference was offered by us, wherein some from us
desired, That to the intent we might join the better for promoving the Work of
Reformation, legal bars hindering us from peace, to wit, Protestations on the
one hand, and Censures inflicted, or which might be inflicted, on the other
hand, being removed. They should give assurance to forbear to trouble the Kirk,
by holding up debates on the matter of our late Differences, about the managing
of Public Affairs. k But after conference, finding no ground of hope for
present agreement, we have made the same offer to all them who adhered to the
Protestation, whether in the Town for the time, or not, as our Act (the Copy
whereof is with these come to your hands) at more length does declare, and
granted unto all, time to advise till the second Wednesday of November next to
come. And now because our Dissenting l Brethren have the advantage of the Press
for the present, and and are too too diligent and painful in gathering of
hands and subscriptions to their Protestation, of young men or elder, masters
or servants, without any trial of their qualification* to n make the world
think, that the generality of the godly (as they in their Papers presume to
call themselves) and that in great number do stand for their divisive way, o
Therefore we thought it our duty to write unto you all, who love the Union and
Peace of this afflicted Kirk, that by your counsel, conferrence, and all other
godly means, so many as in your bounds, Ministers, or others, are upon this
divisive way, which tends so much to the hinderance of the Work of
Reformation, and peace of the LORDS distressed people may be timously
reclaimed, and moved to accept the peaceable offer made to them by the General
Assembly, and the rest within your bounds may be kept free from this p
uncouth separation, that it grow not greater, q and that difference of judgment
about the managing of public affairs in our late troubles, which occasioned
this unhappy rupture, may be no prejudice to our joint acting in Ecclesiastic
Judicatories, for keeping the Liberties thereof, and the peace of this Kirk,
which at this time does so much call for communion of counsels and actings:
Wherein as you shall prove isntrumental, you shall be found to do a work of
service unto GOD, of love to your Mother-Kirk, now distressed on all hands,
most suitable to your Covenant and Profession, and contributive as to your
peace, comfort and credit in this life, so to the furtherance of your reckoning
in the day of the LORD.

Subscribed in name and at command of the General Assembly, by (...)

OBSERVATIONS.
A. It fufficeth not the authors and abbettors of the Public Resolutions who
were Members of that Assembly to have stirred up the Civil Magistrate against
their Brethren, and to have made acts in the Commission where these Resolutions
were first taken, first requiring Presbyteries to censure the opposers thereof,
then to cite them to the Assembly, and in these two Assemblies for excluding
and removing them from all Ecclesiastic employment, from Church communion and
fellowship; but they must now for ensnaring of them or rendering them
contemptible and hateful throughout the land, write this Letter to Noblemen,
Barrons, etc. in all the parts of the Country.

The direction or inscription is comprehensive (which is also proven by the
deliverance of these Letters to sundry such in several parts of the Country,
and by their stickling upon the receipt thereof) even of many of these whose
admittance to Church Fellowship, and to power and trust, is the great ground of
the Protesters stumbling and grievance; I mean many malignant and disaffected
persons, who being formerly excluded were received by the Commission 1650.
without sufficient evidences of their Repentance, and are cleaving unto their
former bad Principles, and continuing in their former evil courses, must these
be first admitted without repentance, and then whilst they are proclaiming
their impenitency to the whole Land by their evil fruits, be sent to reclaim
such who did bear testimony against receiving of them; surely this is a strange
method, and if there had not been a turning of things up-side down it would not
have been thus.

B. That some of them had such a purpose I do not question, but that the
greater part had it, is not like. 1. Because at their former Meeting at
Edinburgh the twelfth of May, they did refuse to delay the indicting the Diet
of their Assembly for a few days, until some considerable number of those who
did differ from them might be advertised to meet: Notwithstanding that, it was
earnestly desired, to the effect that by mutual previous conference some right
understanding might have been begotten, and way made for the choosing of
Commissioners and sitting of an Assembly, with the mutual consent and
satisfaction of both. 2. Because it being most earnestly desired, and the
Reasons thereof at large remonstrated unto them the first day of their Meeting,
that they would forbear to constitute themselves in an Assembly, until first
there might be a Conference upon these Propositions. (which desire and
Remonstrance they do here suppress, putting another face upon the business)
yet did they refuse the same, notwithstanding that the present constituting of
the Assembly was to make the matter hopeless, and to put us upon the necessity
of a Protestation, unless by our silence being present, we would have involved
our selves in the acknowledgment of an unlawful Authority: and notwithstanding
that the delay was pressed by some of their own number, and that it might have
been condescended unto, without any detriment to themselves, or their cause,
(unless it had been two or three days longer stay in town) seeing they could
conveniently according to the sundry former instances of that kind, which were
then given, have kept their Assembly under adjournment, though not constituted.

C. They might have been debated and granted to very good purpose before the
Assembly was constituted, and the Judicatorie fixed; because the debating and
granting of them in an amicable way, and in a mutual free Meeting of both, was
the most effectual means of removing differences and begetting a right
understanding, and so of having a free and lawful General Assembly, which would
have produced an unanimous and effectual Conclusion upon these Propositions,
whereas to refuse to Debate, or grant any thing by way of friendly conference,
or constituting of the Assembly, and fixing of the Judicatories, was in effect
to deny these Propositions and make them ineffectual, because a main intent of
these Propositions was, to find a remedy for the wrong constitution of the
former Assembly at Dundee, and for preventing of the like now at Edinburgh,
which was altogether disappointed by their proceeding to constitute the
Assembly.

D. There was a necessity of a Protestation, because the desire of delaying the
constitution of the Assembly, until there might be a previous conference, was
so peremptorily and needlessly rejected.

E. The choice was not free, because the Letter of their Commission from their
Meeting at Edinburgh in May, did contain a pre-limitation, appointing the
election to be made according to a rule, which did include the Acts and
Constitutions of the Assembly at Dundee, which do exclude all that are opposite
to the Public Resolutions; and because there were dissents and protestations
against the election in several places, neither were they sent forth from all
parts of the Kingdom, because there were many Presbyteries who did send forth
no Commissioners at all.

F. Whether there were any grievous aspersions, and unjust imputations
contained in that Protestation, does appear from the Reply that is given to the
Paper, wherein those pretended aspersions and imputations are holden forth.

G. Yearly General Assemblies, rightly constituted, and proceeding rightly, are
as much and as earnestly desired by the Protesters as by any others; and from
the desire which they have to preserve the liberty and freedom of these, they
do bear testimony against the pre-limiting and corrupting thereof.

H. Nothing was put in print by order of the Meeting, nor was it at all done,
until there was no hopes to obtain what was desired: And what was printed,
though it might be to their disadvantage, yet was it not the disadvantage of
the Truth, or mis-informing of the Kingdom; but for giving them a true account
of matters as they then were, and though by the order of narration which they
do here make, they insinuate that things came out in print before the
Conference ended, which they afterward mention, yet was nothing published in
print, until that Conference was given up and made hopeless.

I. They allege, That a Conference was offered by them; but they neither tell
when, nor how, nor to whom it was offered; and I believe it would trouble them
so to do, for they did keep such a distance that they would neither send nor
allow any of their number to motion a Conference to their Brethren who were met
together, but desired some of their number to tell such of them as they met
with upon the streets, that they were willing to confer; and when at length
there was some meeting of some few of both sides, those of that Assembly, who
were upon the Conference, could by no persuasion nor reason be induced to give
any note of their Overtures in writing, though it was often and earnestly
desired, that being clearly communicated to the whole Meeting of Protesters,
they might return a clear Answer thereunto.

K. Why this desire was not hearkened unto, good and relevant reason, is given
in another Paper long since printed and published.

L. That advantage at that time, for any thing their Brethren know, was open to
both alike, and did appear immediately thereafter to be so by their Papers
against the Remonstrance and Protestation which came abroad in print.

M. There was no diligence nor pains used to gather any Hands to their
Protestation, only those who were come together from several parts of the
Country from their respect and affection to the Cause (many of which came
commissionated from others) did put to their Hands; and for that which they say
of yong-men, or elder, masters or servants, without any trial or qualification,
it is a little disdainfully and too liberally spoken; there were many
honorable and grave persons there, and though some were youngmen or servants,
yet is that no imputation either to themselves, or to the cause which they
maintain: for it is neither men's age nor condition that does difference them in
the matters of God, but their qualification and carriage which is known to be
blameless and christian, as to those who subscribed the Protestation; and if
they can give any instance to the contrary, I believe the Protesters will take
it for a favor to have any inordinate walker of their number discovered unto
them, and shall account it not the weakening, but the strengthening of their
Cause to be rid of such; yea, at that Meeting where the Protestation was
subscribed, it was their care to admit none to join with them, but such as were
of a known integrity, or if not so well known to all, yet such as had the
testimony of others who were known to all; and being such, how mean soever
their condition was, that could not be a reason or ground to refuse their
testimony, when it was willingly offered.

N. Albeit a great deal ado is made upon that expression, yet there is truth
in the bottom of it, most of these in the Land, who have a testimony in the
consciences of truly godly Ministers or Professors either upon the one side or
the other, for acquaintance with God and the power of godliness, being of that
mind; and if this expression satisfy not, that the generality of the godly
stand for that divisive way, I shall give them one that they can less
contradict, that is, that the generality of the wicked are against that
divisive way, and for their uniting way; yea, I trow that sober men among
themselves will not refuse it, that the wicked, Malignant, loose, profane
persons in the Land, almost to a man, and as one man, do zealously, and to
their pith, oppose, and contradict and reproach that divisive way, and
cordially promote and commend their uniting way, or the way of these two
Assemblies at Dundee and Edinburgh; and though this argument be now
undervalued, yet was it wont to bear weight in the 48 year of God against the
unlawful engagement. And, I confess, with me is of a very great weight. That
which relisheth so well to the palate of profane loose men, and of such as
have zealously opposed the Work of God, and the power of godliness these years
past, and wherein their hearts does so much rejoice, I fear, has too much of
the spirit of the world, and too little of the spirit of God in it.

O. This way does not divide from any point of the truth of God, but leads in
the good old path of former sound principles, and cannot be justly charged as
divisive because it will not unite with a course of defection, and therefore
there can be no just reason to say, that it tends to the hindering of
Reformation and Peace. The true fountain of our divisions does spring from the
Public Resolutions, which divided many from received truths and former
principles, and did necessitate others to evidence their cleaving thereto, by
testifying against such backsliding; neither know I any thing that has so
directly tended to the hinderance of the Work of Reformation as their Public
Resolutions did. The Work of Reformation, as to the outward of it in Church
and State, did much stand in purging the Ministry and Elderships, and the
Judicatories and the Army, and have not all these been obstructed by the
Public Resolutions, which laid a foundation for bringing into the Army and the
Judicatories, men of questionable integrity, disaffected to Reformation, and of
scandalous conversation, and has not only blunted, but turned the edge of any
zeal that was formerly bent against ignorant, disaffected and scandalous
Ministers and Elders, and Professors, against these who cannot be consenting
to the late courses.

P. Separation and Schism has been the ordinary charge of back-sliders,
against such as would not concur with them in every age of the Church and some
of the most eminent of these who are now for the Public Resolutions, may
remember, that they were not only laden herewith by the Prelates, when they did
oppose the course of conformity, but also by all the Malignant and disaffected
persons in the Land, when they did oppose the course of malignancie; but to say
nothing, that this Assembly at Edinburgh have taught the Protesters a way of
separation, which they cannot well condemn, unless they condemn their own
judgment and practice, I mean, the allowing of the smaller part, not only to
divide from the greater, but also to act without them, and exercise authority
over them. I desire 1. that they will be pleased to let the world know what
truth that has been taught in the Church of Scotland, either concerning Faith,
or good Works, or Worship, or Discipline, or Government, they have departed or
separated from. Is it a separation, because they will not approve of, nor
submit unto the authority of two corrupt and unfree Assemblies. 2. I desire it
to be considered, that whatsoever be in the matter of separation, the
Protesters are not separantes but separati, not fugientes but fugati, they are
driven violently by unjust censures and persecution, as I have already shown
from the Public Acts.

Q. If they be indeed of the opinion, that difference of judgment in these
things should be no prejudice to joint acting in Public Judicatories, then it
concerns them for their own vindication, and for reconciling their practice
with their opinion, to tell us why their Assembly at S. Andrews did not only
approve of the Act of Commission, appointing those who oppose the Public
Resolutions to be censured, but also made Acts of their own for censuring of
such; and why the Assembly at Edinburgh did ordain, That Elders and Expectants,
who will not engage themselves under their hands, to abstain from holding up
this difference, are to be excluded from sitting in Presbyteries, and being
received as Ministers; sure if this difference need be no prejudice to joint
acting in Public Judicatories, the maintaining thereof is without ground made
a cause of censure, which must incapacitat men to act, or of exclusion, which
must bar them from joint acting in Judicatories, what shall be said to this, I
do not know, unless it be alleged, that it is not simply difference of
judgment, that is made a ground of censure or exclusion, but difference of
judgment kythed in opposing the Public Resolutions, or holding up debates and
controversies in preaching or writing about these things; but first, if it be
meant of that difference of judgment that is inward only, it is to small
purpose, because that being latent and not known to me, cannot be made a ground
for my withdrawing from joint acting with these who thus differ from me: and
if it be known and professed, how shall there be any known difference of
judgment, without some opposition to the adverse judgment, especially if it be
established in a Law, he who professes and declares the difference of his
judgment from the Law, and dis-satisfaction therewith, is he not in so far, a
weakner, gainsayer, and opposer thereof. 2. If they mean it thus, they have not
measured the same measure unto themselves and to others; they will have others
to pass from their Protestations under their hands, and to engage themselves
not to hold up debates, otherwise they will not act jointly with them in the
Judicatories, nor allow them the legal capacity to act at all, and yet while
they will do no such things themselves in reference to their Assemblies and the
Acts thereof, yea, will have these Assemblies to stand as free and lawful, and
all the Acts thereof, wherein their judgment is involved, as binding and
obligatory, they desire that their Brethren may be dealt with, not to let this
hinder them from a joint acting in the Public Judicatories. 3. If it be only
the opposing of Public Resolutions, and the holding up of debates that they
quarrel with, how is it that in Presbyteries they will have young men who have
hitherto been silent, publicly to declare themselves anent these things, or
else refuse to admit them to their trials, or to stop them being admitted, or
to refuse them Testimonials being approven.

Act for putting in execution former Acts and Constitutions of General
Assemblies, anent trying, admitting, removing, and deposing of Church Officers,
censuring of scandalous persons, receiving of penitents, and debarring of
persons from the LORDS Table.
Edinburgh 3. August. 1652. Postmeridiem. Sess. 20.
THe General Assembly, considering the obligations that lies upon all
Ecclesiastic Judicatories and Ministers within this Land, by the commandment
of GOD, and our Covenants and Engagements taken upon us, before GOD and the
World, (whereunto they resolve, in the power of the LORD'S might, constantly to
adhere) and to show themselves faithful and zealous in all their
administrations for the LORD, and for advancing the Work of Reformation; and
particularly, considering that the condition of this time does require in
special ways, that in trying, admitting, removing, and deposing of
Church Officers, censuring of scandalous persons, dispensing of Ordinances,
receiving of penitents, the Rules of the Word of GOD, and Constitutions of this
Kirk be diligently put in execution, and accuratly observed.

Therefore,

The Assembly Ordains, That Presbyteries and Synods, in admitting of Persons to
the Ministry, be accurate in their trials, according to the Order prescribed
in this Church, that none be admitted to the holy and high function, but such
as are qualified according as is required in the Word of GOD, and Constitutions
of this Kirk, both for knowledge in the mystery of godliness, and abilities to
teach and convince the gainsayers, as also in conversation and godliness,
that they lay hands suddenly on no man, nor be partaker of other men's sin; and
for this end, that every Presbytery be careful to have gathered together such
Acts of Assemblies as concerns the trial of Ministers, and have them before
them, whenever any person is called to any place of the Ministry, and is
upon his trials.

2. Ordains that Presbyteries and Synods, in their respective bounds, make
conscience, that such Ministers as are found either ignorant and not apt to
feed the people of God with knowledge and understanding, or erroneous in their
judgment in matters of Religion, or are scandalous in their life and
conversation, and are not examples unto their flocks in godly and holy walking,
or disaffected to the work of Reformation, be censured according to the degree
of their offense, and Acts of Assemblies. And for this end, that they be
frequent and acurate in visitation of Kirks, and therein make conscientious use
of the rules prescribed for visitations, and of such Acts of former Assemblies,
as holds forth the duties of Ministers, and the grounds and causes of censure.

3. Ordains that, where Ministers lawfully deposed; are unlawfully admitted,
and not according to the Order prescribed in the Acts of General Assemblies,
or intrudes themselves into places, Presbyteries and Synods make use of that
power and Authority which Christ has put in their hands, to remedy the same,
and to censure such disorders and enormities, as they deserve, And that people
be not accessory unto, or concurring with any Ministers that are deposed, in
intruding themselves into places, nor give them any countenance that does so,
as they would not draw upon themselves the wrath of God, by contemning and
despising Christ's Ordinance of Discipline, And that no Presbyteries or Synods
proceed to open the mouths of, or re-admit unto the Ministry, any deposed
Ministers, but according to the Order prescribed in the Acts of General
Assemblies, As they will be answerable unto the General Assembly.

4. Ordains that Sessions be careful that none be admitted to be Elders in
Congregations, but such as are in some competent measure able and qualified
with knowledge of Religion, and understanding of the duties of their Calling,
for discharging the duties of that Office, and of a blameless, Christian and
godly conversation; And that before any be admitted to be an Elder, the Persons
name that is designed, be publicly intimate to the Congregation the Lords day
before, that if any have any thing to object against him, they may present the
same to the Session or to the Minister. And that if any Elder be found
negligent in the duties of his charge, and continue so after admonition, or
scandalous in his life and conversation, or to be a neglecter of the worship of
GOD in his Family, he be removed from, and purged out of the Session.

5. Ordains that Sessions and Presbyteries be careful, and make conscience by
all means to censure impartially all persons of whatsoever rank or condition,
that are scandalous, either in things of the first, or in things of the second
Table, according to the Rules and Order which Christ has prescribed in his
Word, and to proceed to the highest censures, with such as are grossly and
obstinately scandalous, or are ignorant, and contemn, and continuedly neglect
the means of knowledge, as public and private catechizing, etc. after they are
made inexcusable by sufficient means used to reclaim and gain them.

6. Ordains that Ministers and Sessions in Congregations be careful, as they
will be answerable to Christ Jesus, to debar from the Lords Table, all such
persons as are found not to walk sutably to the Gospel, and being convinced and
admonished thereof, do not reform; As also all such as have not knowledge to
examine themselves, and to discern the Lords Body. And that for the more
orderly performing of this, the Minister in examination of the people, have
some of the Elders always with him, and represent unto the Session such as are
found grossly ignorant, that by order of the Session they may be debarred.

7. That Presbyteries and Sessions make conscience, that such persons as are
found scandalous, and are under censure for that cause, be not received nor
absolved from their censure, unless they give such satisfaction and evidences
of their repentance, as are expressed in the Acts of the Assemblies, concerning
the receiving of penitents.

J. MAKGHIE.

OBSERVATIONS.
This Act (as is professed and given out by many) was not only intended, but if
they may be trusted, does indeed and upon the matter give full and clear
satisfaction to the Propositions which were offered by the Protesters unto
their Brethren of the Assembly at their first down-sitting, as the best means
for satisfying of their consciences, securing of the Work of Reformation,
purging the Church, promoving the power of godliness, removing of these sad
differences, and for attaining and preserving a good understanding, and
therefore these (as they allege being satisfied) the propounders of them not
acquiescing therein, must have some other thing before them: Therefore for
vindicating of these, I shall mark a few things for showing how unsatisfactory
all that is contained in this Act is, unto the desires contained in these
Propositions, until there may be opportunity to make a more full discovery
thereof. 1. To pass the ambiguity of their Answer to the first part of the
first Proposition, wherein it is desired that they give evidence, etc. They
omit the whole second Proposition, to wit, That it be seriously laid to heart,
etc. which in order to the ends that are propounded in the Preface to these
Propositions, to wit, the satisfaction of our Consciences, is as to the present
condition of affairs betwixt them and the Protesters, the most important of
these Propositions, yea in their other Papers these things which the Protesters
complain of as defection, they commend as duty, and profess their adherence
thereunto, and appoint censures to be inflicted upon all the opposers thereof.

2. They also omit the whole third Proposition, to wit, That as we are ready in
our station, etc. by which ommission they give just ground to suspect, that
there is in their apprehension no malignant party that needs to be discovered,
or from whom the Work of God stands in danger; and though the Protesters do not
in the first part of the Proposition take upon them to secure and guard the
Cause and Work of God against error heresy and schism, but only by this
Overture gave evidence of the sincerity of their intentions in order to that
end, that so they may satisfy their Brethren in the matter of their Jealousies
thereanent, yet as they do still apprehend a great danger to the Lords Work
from a numerous party of malignants still in the Land, so are they much
unsatisfied that the Assembly gave no expression of their sense of danger this
way, nor evidence of their willingness to concur in securing against the same,
nor hold forth any way for the discovering and knowing of these for the time to
come.

3. Whereas they seem to grant much in order to the trying, admitting,
removing, and deposing of Church Officers, censuring of scandalous persons,
dispensing of Ordinances, and receiving of penitents, they do really and in
effect grant little or nothing; yea they do expressly refuse the desire of the
Propositions upon these things, and establish the very contrary: Because the
desire of the Propositions is, that the late Meeting at Dundee and the Acts
thereof being taken out of the way, and the Work and People of GOD secured from
the harm and evil consequences which have already, and may further ensue from
the same, as is expressed in the last Proposition (which they wholly omit) all
these things may be done according to the Acts of former uncontroverted
Assemblies of this Church, concerning the Work of Reformation in the literal
and genuine sense and meaning thereof; but their grants and concessions do
include for the rule, according to which they are to be regulated, viz. the
Acts of General Assemblies, and Constitutions of this Church indefinitely,
which in their sense does clearly and undeniably include the Acts of the last
Assembly at Dundee and Edinburgh, which instead of purging of the Church from
ignorant and disaffected and scandalous Ministers and Professors purge it from
a very great part of the able well affected and good Ministers, Elders,
Expectants, and Professors of the Land, because of their not acknowledging the
authority, and acquiescing to the Constitutions of these Assemblies.

4. Their actions (which before the Lord, and also with intelligent and
discerning men, are the most real evidences of the reallity and sincerity of
men's intentions) since that time do demonstrate, whether they have granted the
desire of these Propositions: Tell me how many ignorant, disaffected,
scandalous Ministers or Elders, are censured by the Authors of the Public
Resolutions since the last Assembly, or how many lawfully deposed and
unlawfully admitted are proceeded against, etc. They would fain find some
shadow of an excuse for so gross an oversight, and cast the blame upon the
Protesters, who say they have so weakened the authority of the Church, that her
censures are rendered altogether ineffectuall. But 1. To say nothing that
spiritual censures are not always to be foreborn, because men refuse to obey;
yea in many cases they are the more vigorously to be prosecuted. 2. With what
color of reason can it be alleged that those who not only acknowledge their
authority, but very zealously pleading for it, as most of the scandalous and
diseffected Ministers and Elders of the Land do, will not submit unto it. 3. It
is time for them to plead, that excuse when they meet with that difficulty;
tell me how many of that kind can be instanced whom they have not censured, who
have not submitted to their censures. 4. The not submitting to their censures
does not hinder them to proceed very zealously against sundry Ministers, and
many Elders who adhere unto the Protestation, and bear testimony against the
Public Resolutions? Let Consciences speak as before the Lord, whether they
have faithfully and zealously improven the power and authority that remains
with them in Synods, Presbyteries and Sessions for purging of the house of God,
even according to these things which they seem to grant, or whether they have
not been negligent exceedingly in this, to say no worse, and employed most of
their endeavors and zeal to bear down the Protesters.

REASONS why the Ministers, Elders, and Professors, who protested against the
Pretended Assemblies at St. Andrews, Dundee and Edinburgh, cannot agree to the
Overtures made unto them at the Conference, upon the 28. and 29 of July, 1652.
etc.
ALbeit the Essays and Endeavors which were used by us, before our coming
hither, for removing of Differences, and attaining of Union and Peace, upon
such grounds as might (indeed) bring forth a discovery of our, and the Lands
Sin, and contribute for removing the guilt thereof, and for securing and
promoving the Work of Reformation amongst us, might in a great part have
acquired our consciences, and cleared us before the world; yet the deep sense
that we had of the many and great prejudices which do ensue to the Work and
People of God, by our continued Divisions, and our ardent desire of Peace and
Union, upon the grounds foresaid, constrained us to lay hold upon the
opportunity of your meeting together at this time, and to represent unto you,
some necessary and just Propositions, as a fit subject of our conference; and
that we were willing to hear what should be offered by you to us, in order to
these ends; and, that therefore you would forbear to assume unto your selves
the power of, or constitute your selves into a Genesis Assembly. And when we found
this in-effectual, and our Union rendered more hopeless, by your denying a
desire so just and reasonable, and so agreeable to the practice of former
Assemblies, as was instanced before you by these who knew the Records:
Nevertheless upon a surmise of a purpose in you to confer with us, we did for
diverse days wait upon you, being desirous to have seen upon your part, some
serious applying of your selves to the real means of healing, and to have found
solid satisfaction unto the things contained in the Propositions offered to you
by us: But in place of this, the Brethren who were appointed by you to confer
with some of our number, did intimate unto us, that all which they had in
Commission to make offer of, was, That ye were willing to take-off the Censures
inflicted by the former Assembly at St. Andrews and Dundee, and the
Censurableness that persons, who have transgressed against the Acts thereof
might be liable unto: Providing, that these Brethren censured, and deserving
Censure, should pass from their Protestation against the former and present
Assemblies, and judicially before their Presbyteries and Synods, engage
themselves under their hands, not hereafter to deliver their Judgments in
Preaching or Writing, or any way else to hold up the late differences. Which
Overture when it was earnestly desired by these of our number to be given to
them in writing according to their Instructions, not only because it was diverse
ways represented by such of your number as did confer with them, but also that
they might the more perfectly and better understand the same, and be able to
make an exact report thereof to these who sent them, and mistakes thereupon
might be Prevented: It was most peremptorily refused, albeit most earnestly
urged and desired during the whole time of the Conference: Therefore having set
down the same as truly and impartially as our judgments and memories could
attain; We do for our own vindication, and satisfaction of others, give these
Reasons following, why we cannot accept thereof.

I. Because there is hereby no remedy at all offered for the course of
defection involved in the Public Resolutions, nor for preventing the like for
time to come, which is the main ground of difference; but upon the contrary we
are required upon the matter to retract our Testimonies thereanent, and
judicially to give Bonds and Engagements hereafter to be silent concerning the
sin and guilt thereof.

II. Because our passing from our Protestation does import a real
acknowledgement of the lawfulness and freedom of the Assemblies in regard of
their constitution, and of power in them to inflict and take-off Censures, and
so by our own consent, does not only retract and condemn the testimony which we
formerly gave against the same; But also obstructeth the remeading of what is
past, and the attaining a lawful, free, General Assembly for the time to come,
and so wreaths about our own neck, and the necks of the Lords People, the yoke
of unfree, corrupt, and unlawful Assemblies.

III. Because the offer which is made, though it contains Immunity in regard of
these who have not aquiesced unto, or opsed these Acts for the time past, yet
the Acts of themselves do notwithstanding thereof, still stand in force, as a
ground of persecution against all these Ministers and Professors, who shall not
accept of the conditions contained in this offer, or thereafter fail in
performance of the same.

IV. Because this offer is so far from reaching satisfaction to all, or most
part of the Propositions offered by us, that it does not give satisfaction to
any one of them, put pitcheth upon a particular, which ought to be of least
consequence with us, (as importing but our personal suffering) without taking
notice of the Lands defection, and of those things which do concern the Kingdom
and Interest of JESUS CHRIST, and the purging of his House; and what a sin and
provocation should it be against the Lord, and what a stumbling and grief of
heart unto the godly who have concurred in these Propositions, and after such a
defection, do expect repentance and reformation, and the purging of his House
of corrupt Officers and Members, if we should make such a transaction, as seems
to promise present sesecurity to our selves, but does not contribute for
preserving of the Truth, and attaining a solid Peace and Union in the Lord.

V. We cannot see how the passing from these Propositions, and the taking upon
us such Engagements for the time to come as are desired, should not involve us
in the condemning of our own judgments, and in the acknowledgment of a sin and
offense in making these Protestations, and bearing testimony against the
Public Resolutions, and import that what is done by you in taking off of
Censures and censurableness (as you term it) is an Act of mere favor and grace
upon your part, unto Delinquents, upon their repentance. And though we hope
that we shall never be ashamed, but esteem it our mercy and glory to
acknowledge any thing whereby we have provoked the Lord, or offended others,
yet being more and more convinced in our consciences, that what we did in these
things was a necessary duty, we dare not purchase immunity and exemption from
Censures at so dear a rate, as to deny the same, we shall rather choose still
to be sufferers, and to wait upon the issue that the Lord shall give, then to
provoke the eyes of his Glory, grieve the spirits of his People, and wound our
own Consciences, by so unsatisfying and so sinful a transaction.

And conceiving that, we shall not have the opportunity to speak unto you
hereafter, as being now about to dissolve our Meeting; We do from the zeal that
we owe to the honor of God, and from the tender respect we owe to you as
Brethren, and for exonering our own Consciences, most earnestly beseech and
obtest you, by your appearing before the Lord Jesus Christ, to give your selves
unto Prayer, and searching of your own hearts and way, in Order to Public
Resolutions and Actings, until each of you find out wherein ye have turned
aside from the straight way of the Lord, and employed your gifts and power not
for Edification, but for grieving the spirits of many of the Godly, and
strengthening of the hands of the wicked, and to Repent thereof, and to do no
more so, least wrath be increased from the LORD, the Godly of the Land more
offended, and our breach made wider, and our wound more incurable. If both you
and we might obtain mercy of the Lord to know our trespass, and why he
contends, and to accept the punishment of our iniquity, and humble our selves
before hime, who knows but that he might yet have compassion upon us, and
pardon our sins, and heal our Land.

July the 28. Antemerid. 1652.
Mr. Andrew Cant, Mr Samuel Rutherford, Mr James Guthry, My Lord Waristoun, Mr
Robert Trail, Mr John Nevay, Mr James Nasmith, being nominated to meet and
confer with some Brethren, Members of the present pretended Assembly, the
Instructions following were given them, and the Meeting does require and
expect, that they will walk according thereto.

I. That they shall declare to the Brethren with whom they are to meet, That as
they do adhere to the Protestations formerly and lately given in; so they do
protest, that they do not meet nor confer with them, nor receive any Papers
from them, as being in the capacity of Commissioners of a General Assembly, but
only as sent from a meeting of Ministers and Elders, wanting any such
Authority.

II. That whatever be offered by the Brethren with whom they do confer, they
desire to get it in writing from them, as the mind of the Meeting whereof they
are Members; That it being communicated to us, Answer may be given thereunto by
our whole Meeting.

III. That they do not engage in Conference with them at first about the matter
of Censures; It being neither the chief nor only ground of our grievance; and
because with us things of that nature, and any thing of personal concernment,
ought to be of the smallest value, while there are many things in question
betwixt them and us, of far higher consequence to the Kingdom of Christ and his
Interest, as anent the causes of Gods controversy with the Land, and the way
of remedy and cure of the former and late defection, and the way of preventing
the like in time coming. The establishing and promoving the Work of
Reformation, and the purging of the Kirk, and the like, as are laid before them
in our Propositions given in to their Meeting; And that they do intimate to the
Brethren foresaid, that we cannot look upon an offer relating only to the
Censures, upon some of our number, as satisfaction to them or us, and that
(besides what we have said) for other reasons to be communicated in dise time
to their Meeting. And that therefore they shall offer to these Brethren, and
desire of them, that if there be any Conference at all, the subject matter of
it may be upon the whole Propositions in the order as they stand.

IV. That in case of their refusing the latter part of the former Article, they
shall require and demand from the Brethren of the other Meeting, That they
would declare whether we may expect, that these from whom they were sent, will
either by the said Brethren, or any other way, give answer and satisfaction to
us anent the Propositions, and what is their sense and meaning of the Public
Resolutions, and anent the Constitution, Acts and Proceedings of the Meeting at
Dundee, and of this at Edinburgh, and what they mind to do in reference to the
same.

V. That in case there be not satisfaction obtained in these so just and
necessary things, They do profess their own and our dissatisfaction with any
thing that has been offered by them to us, or answered to our desires first or
last. And that they protest for themselves and us, That as we have sought
Peace, and pursued it by all lawful and possible means, though much in vain on
their part. So we are henceforth free from the guilt and blame of the sad
prejudices and evil consequences whatsomever, which may follow upon their
present way, and their former and future actings of that nature, so contrary
and destructive to Edification and Peace.

Right Reverend,
WE have now for these fourteen days past, been employed in using our best
endeavors, and waited for Overtures from you, for healing the breach, and
removing the differences that are amongst us; And now there being no ground of
hope given us, nor any desire made unto us for continuing the Conference,
whereby a better understanding might be attained; We have thought good before
our parting from this place, to send unto you this enclosed Paper, together
with the Instructions given in writing to these who were sent from us to the
Conference, the Copy whereof was offered by them to these who were sent from
your number, and left with them; Both which Papers we desire you to communicate
to those of your meeting. And so we rest,

Your very loving Brethren in the Lord.
Edinb. 29. July 1652. Subscribed in the name of many Ministers, Elders, and
Professors throughout the Land, who desire truth and peace.

Directed, For the Reverend Brother, Mr. David Dickson, Professor of Divinity
in the College of Edinburgh.

PROPOSITIONS which were offered to the Meeting of Ministers and others,
appointed to be kept at Edinburgh, July 21. 1652.
WHereas we, and many of thegodly in the Land have been really scandalized and
stumbled at their late Acts and Proceedings, relating to Public Resolutions
concerning the same in the nature and Intention of the Work, to have obstructed
and shaken the Work of Reformation (although we think honorably of diverse
Godly and Learned men who have been concurring in the same, and dare not judge
their Intentions to be such as we think their Work has been, and do allow
charity to others.) Therefore for satisfaction of our conscience, and for
securing the Work of Reformation, for purging the Church, and for promoving the
power of godliness, and for removing of these sad differences, and for
attaining and preserving a good understanding, We desire,

That they give evidence and assurance, that they approve of, and will adhere
unto the solemn Public Confession of sins and engagement to duties, and all
the Acts of the uncontroverted Assemblies of this Church, concerning the Work
of Reformation, in the literal and genuine sense and meaning thereof. And that
in dispensing of the Ordinances, censuring of scandalous persons, receiving of
Penitents, trying, admitting, removing and deposing of Church Officers, they
will walk according to the same. That it be laid seriously to heart before the
LORD, how after such a defection, and so sad judgments for it, the LORD may be
restored to his honor, the Land to his favor, and the like defection prevented
in time coming.

That as we are ready in our station, to follow all religious and conscionable
means and Overtures for securing (...) guarding the Cause and Work of GOD
against Error, (...) on the one hand, so they would hold out to us a (...) the
same against dangers from Malignancy on (...) we would know what shall be the
Characters in time (...) which Malignancy may be known and judged.

That a real and effectual course be taken, according to the established
rules of this Kirk, for purging out, and holding out all such Church Officers
as have not the Position, and qualifications required in the Word of God, and
Acts of this Kirk; partiularly, where Ministers deposed by lawful Assemblies,
have intruded themselves, or have been unwarrantably restored by Synods and
Presbyteries to their Charges, contrary to the form and order prescribed in the
Acts of Assemblies, be romoved, and condign censures inflicted, and that
sufficient Provision be made for preventing the like in time coming.

That after means be fallen upon and followed for censuring of all scandals and
scandalous persons, and casting out of these who shall be found grossly and
obstinatly scandalous or ignorant, after they are made inexcusable by
sufficient means and pains taken for their instructing and reclaiming.

That some course more effectual than any has been fallen upon hitherto, may
be condescended upon, for putting in execution the Acts of this Kirk, anent
debarring from the Lord's Table such persons who are found not to walk suteably
to the Gospel, and have not knowledge to examine themselves, and to discern
the Lord's Body.

That in the receiving of Penitents, care may be had that none be admitted to
the public Profession of repentance, or reconciled to the Church, but these
who are found to give such evidence of their repentance, as is expressed in the
Acts of the Assemblies, concerning the receiving of Penitents.

That an effectual course may be taken for securing of the Work and People of
GOD from the harm and evil consequences which has already, and may further
ensue from the late pretended Assemblies at S. Andrews and Dundee, and the Acts
thereof.

FINIS.

