A NEW TRICK TO TAKE TOWNS: OR, The just and perfect Relalation of the sudden
surprisall of HEREFORD; Taken December 18. 1645.

WITH A true Copy of the return of the Warrant, sent by a Lieutenant in the
habit of a Countryman; And the names of the six men his assistants.

Published by special Authority.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. 1645.

THE Just and perfect Relation of the sudden surprizall of HEREFORD, Taken the
eighteenth day of December 1645.
DIvine providence (the Governor of humane actions) brings that to pass with
much admiration that is least expected by man's judgment; Gods handy-worke
shined most clear through the cloud of the greatest difficulties, and appeared
with the fairest splendor when it passes the most hazard. Man's power does
execute what God decrees. By experience we find that the meanest of his
creatures becomes the instruments of his sacred pleasure. The King and
Kingdoms differences unreconciled seem uncureable without a conquest, and God
is pleased by his victories to declare the justice of that cause he so much
prospers. The particulars of Herefords affairs with some obscurity has past
the Press, but for the general satisfaction of the whole Kingdom (being an
instrument in the design) I have presumed to enter upon a large discovery.

SIr John Bryges in his affections most real to his Country, after his
continuance a while at Gloucester he came to London, where with the honorable
Committee of both Kingdoms, he undertook with his best endeavors the
reducing of the city of Hereford, and the introducing of the Parliaments forces
into that Garrison, being cherished by, their Honors to proceed in the attempt
he returned to Gloucester; from thence disguised he traveled into some private
parts of Herefordshire, and sent to Cap. Alderne, and Cap. Howorth who upon his
first summons repaired to him, they being together met, Sir John Bridges
delivered himself and desired their several opinions, so that after an oath
of performance and secrecy past betwixt them, they concluded that for these
reasons the design was feazable.

First, the conveniancy and situation of Ailstons Hill which faced the
drawbridge where an army might lie in ambush, yet undiscovered by the
Sentinells.

Secondly, the usual neglect of the Guard and the common custom in not
sending out Scouts to Lug-bridge.

Thirdly, the walls of the Priory within Carbine shot off the Gate, being then
standing gave an advantage there to lodge the Forlorn party of Firelocks.

Fourthly, the constant Intelligence Captain Aldern had from the City, the
which might have prevented any danger, if the business had either been suspected
or betrayed.

Fifthly, the contrivall of sending in an Officer with 6 men in the habit of a
Constable and his Parishoners. Captain Alderne drawing a Warrent and
subscribing the Constables hand of his own Parish as a return thereunto.

Sixthly, the assurance of a Reformado Officer in the City who was to be near
the Guard at the time of entry, and to hinder the drawing up of the Bridge, as
also to be ready to repair to us if he found any preparation aganst us, after
the disputeing of these reasons Sir John departed back to Gloucester, with a
resolution to Post his man to London for orders from the Honorable Committee
of both Kingdoms, Captain Howorth and Captain Alderne desired a speedy
expedition and thus determined to dispose severally of themselves, Captain
Howorth was to converse with the Officers in the City, and being acquainted
with their designs to give upon all occasions intimation to Captain Alderne
in the Country from whom Sir John was to receive intructions, so accordingly to
persevere therein, the Committee of both Kingdoms for the perfecting of this
project finding by these Gentlemen's particular engagements, there was some
possibility in the effect, their Honors sent for Colonel Birch whose Regiments
was commanded to draw into Gloucestershire, there in readynesse to attend the
event, Colonel Birch receiving his instructions, came with Sir John to Cannon
Froome, from thence he sent privately to Captain Alderne by some Troopers
belonging to that Garrison, and Captain Alderne according to their message,
prepared himself, and avoiding all the means of suspicion, he came with
Captain Howorth unto them, we blinding the business that very instant, that his
own family were possessed with an opinion that the Parliaments approach was
for no other end but contribution: Colonel Birch, Sir John Bridges, and the
two Captains being met, the particular reasons were repeated, and all with one
assent agreed upon the execution, the dry limited, which was the 16th day of
December, there was a messenger dispatched to the Officer within the city, with
a Letter from Sr. John, which intimated in short figures, both the time, and
his duty, according to the agreement of all parties, Colonel Birch and Sir
John Bridges hastened toward Gloucester, and about two of the Clock, upon
Tuesday morning the Governor of Gloucester with Colonel Birch marched to
Cannon Froome, from whence they drew toward Hereford, the Foot by reason of
the deepnesse of the Snow, grew weak and were unable to march further, the
Horse though willing were not able to accomplish the business, therefore
Colonel Birch advised with Captain Alderne, what was best to be done, and
freely offered, if Captain Alderne conceived it fit, to march with 500 Horse,
and 100 Foot to prosecute the design, Captain Alderne imagined that the City
might be entered with that few number, but in regard of the strengh, and
desperateness of the enemy, he was doubtful of a repulse, thereupon he
advised that the Horse and Foot should retreat to Sedbury, which was
accordingly effected, after some discourse between Colonel Morgan and Col.
Birch, and the other Gentlemen, it was concluded that upon Wednesday night,
that the Army should march betimes to Cannon Froome, and from thence in a
continual motion draw to Hereford, in this intervale of time Captain Alderne
kept correspondence with some of his friends in the City, and had the
particular relation of the Governors proceedings; most part of the Horse being
on a march toward the relief of Chester, the Governor himself being in some
difference with the City, Captain Alderne imagined that opportunity, the best
to compass a surprise, so that Colonel Birch and the Governor of Gloucester
drew from Sedbury to Cannon Froome, from thence Captain Alderne with two
troops of Horse secured the three Bridges, viz. Lug-bridge, Lugwarden bridge,
and Wordifords bridge, by means whereof there could no alarm or notice pass
unto the garrison; betwixt the hours of three and four of the clock on
Thursday morning the governor of Gloucester marched up with his horse, the
foot seconding him, all rendezvouzd together on this side Aylslous hill; Cap.
Howorth and one of Col. Birch his Captains commanded the Firelocks to the
Priory, the counterfeit Constable and his men were disposed to their station;
Cap. Alderne showed Col. Birch the place upon the hill, to draw up the forlorn
hope of horse, which was in a large dingle; the Morning-prayer-bell rung out,
the Travalley was beaten in the city, and a musket of ours by accident was
discharged, which possessed us with a great fear that our projects were
frustrated, our hopes a while dead; at last about eight of the clock the
drawbridge was let fall, the Constable observing his season killed the
Sentinel, Cap. Howorth and the Firelocks possessed the gate, Cap. Temple with
the horse behaved himself most gallantly, Captain Alderne according to
command with others routed those at the castle, Col. Birch and Col. Morgan
being active in their commands kept the enemy from drawing in a body, so that
without the effusion of much blood we became conquerours and masters of the
garrison. The soldiers struck with apprehension of the danger betook
themselves to shelter, the citizens knew no refuge, but kept themselves close
in their houses, and he thought himself most happy that could secure himself
till the storm was past, the two governors preventing with their utmost power
the citizens general loss and ruin. The garrison thus by policy and force
surprised without remedy was plundered, neither could the commanders rhetoric
or threat prevail with the soldier to keep their hands from pillage. The
number and quality of the prisoners, as also the Ordnance and Arms taken, I am
as yet incapable to express, but in the generality I presume it was the
largest prize taken since these wars began; to attribute that to man which is
proper to God argues a sin as high as presumption. Gods finger points out
that line the which notwithstanding all windings man must follow; and since
weak men's policy has achieved that great men's power from other Nations could
not accomplish, we are more bound to God in the strong linkes of constant
gratitude, and with an acknowledgement: we must conclude, the strongest Cities
that are most and best fortified by art and nature are easily taken if
assaulted by the General of Heaven.

A Copy of the return which a Lieutenant in the habit of a Countryman
brought in with the six men.
WHereas we have received a Warrant from the honorable Governor of Hereford,
for the bringing in to the Garrison six able men to work, with such tools as
are fit for your said service, we have in obedience thereunto by our neighbor
Hugh Morris sent a return of the names of the said parties, viz. John Baily
Will. Edwards Rich. Deem Phil. Mason J^. Ba^kervile Will. King.


These we have sent in by our aforesaid neighbor, not daring our selves to
appear in respect of the enemies garrison at Cannon-Froome.

The mark of J S Jo. Searle. Roger Hill, Constable:

Dated, December. 17. 1645.
FINIS.

