THE Yeomans Prerogative, OR, The HONOR of HUSBANDRY.

A Sermon Preached to some, and Dedicated to all the YEOMEN and FARMERS of
KENT. May 27. 1652.

By Nathanael Newbury, Master in Arts, and Minister of God's Word at Ludenham,
in the said County.

2 Timothy 2.6. The Husbandman that labors, must be first partaker of the
Fruits.

LONDON, Printed by J. Moxon, for J. N. MDCLII.

TO The Yeomen and Farmers of Kent, Particularly, To my very Loving Neighbors,
Francis Pordage, John Greenstreet, Francis Platt, Isaac Terry, Stephen Barnes,
Marks Cullen,
And the rest of the courteous Auditors of this SERMON.
IT is not so much to Vindicate the innocence of my intentions and performances
(though too enviously or unreasonably traduced by some) as it is to assert the
eminency of my respects unto you, and all others of your Order; that I now
present to your more serious review, what I lately preached, and you favorably
heard, this Sermon: I never yet doted so much upon any of my Composures, as to
think'em worthy by the midwifery of the press, to be delivered unto public
censure or protection. And for this, it might have been contented to have dyed
amongst its follows in my study, and layn there wrapped up in its own
winding sheet; but that I held it improper to light a Candle, and then
presently put it under a Bushel.

I have seen and heard of Sermons, addressed and directed to the honor of
other callings much inferior to yours; but if I mistake not, I have the
happiness to be the first, who have thus publicly remonstrated their
Ministerial affections unto Husbandry; a calling that (as I hope I have in some
good degree made it appear) is as capable of our most industrious and
honorable respects, as any other.

It is the trivial excuse of many writers, to pretend the importunity of
friends, for the publishing their conceptions; and it is the slight policy of
others, with a seeming modesty, to acknowledge the weakness, worthlesness, or
abortiveness of their labors: thereby indeed vehemently desiring that
applavse, which they would be thought to decline: I have no such excuse for
this publication. I do clearly profess, that it was my ambition to promote the
honor of your calling, and the salvation of your souls, which prevailed with
me to preach and to print this Sermon. Nor is such ambition to be blamed, but
cherished; For as S. W. D.
one has solidly and accutely observed, Ambition (if the vulgar acception of
the word were corrected) would signify no more, than an extraordinary lifting
of the feet in the rough ways of honor; and has a warmth (till it be chafed
into a Fever) which is necessary for every virtuous breast. And the Apostle
says plainly, Gal. 4.18.
It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing: Ambire, ardenter
sectari, says the Scholiast; Ambitiously, and ardently to pursue it. I have
given you the reason of this dedication, my respect unto you; I Will now add the
reason why I do so respect you.

To you who heard this Sermon, and to whom it was more particularly designed,
my respects are oblidgedly deep and many; I respect you as my very friendly
Neighbors, as my very benevolent friends, and some of you as my Parishioners,
the immediate and undeniable Objects of my Ministerial care and affections; you
are dear unto me in the Lord, it is the substance of all my studies and
contrivements, how I may advance your Spiritual good: Knowing therefore that
encouragements unto well-doing, are the Noblest and most prevailing documents,
I quickly resolved upon this undertaking; hoping it may prove the most
compendious Method, both to encourage and instruct you, since hereby I have the
advantage at once to demonstrate both your dignity and your duty.

Again, you reap unto me temporal things; and is it not my duty to sow unto you
spiritual? True it is, that we Ministers do this, in the ordinary and perpetual
seed-time of our weekly Sermons: And that we do so, we have nothing to glory of
1 Cor. 9.16.
for necessity is laid upon us yea, woe is unto us, if (so often at least) we
preach not the Gospel. But this I have done willingly, and not out of
necessity, that you may have some testimony of my Gratitude, as well as of my
duty.

Lastly, to you All, who in a Civil sense are (and it is my serious ambition,
that you may be in a religious sense too) Isa. 6.13.
the pith and substance of the County, my respects are due for your Calling
sake. A Calling, so worthy the indispensable respects of all men, that if I
would in this Epistle permit my officious pen to expatiate, I should sooner
want paper, then matter to dilate upon; but that were in part to prevent the
business of the Sermon and to entertain you longer in the Porch, then I intend
to do in the House. In a word then, my opinion of your Calling is this: that I
think the Sun, who is (under God) the universal Paerent of fruitfulness, is not
more necessary or comfortable to the world, than is Husbandry.

It Is a Calling so venerable, that it has taught the most barbarous Nations,
the most insulting Conquerors, a saving ingenuity, and a merciful tenderness;
Parce Agricolis, Have a care to preserve the Husbandman, was the public voice
of Nature and Nations; Diod Sicul. lib. 2. Bibl.
One of the most ancient Historians, relates it to have been the custom of the
Indians, that even in their mutual devastations, and invasive wars, they on all
sides spared the Husbandman; as well knowing how advantageously useful he was
to both parties. And Plutarch observes, that the old Corinthians and
inhabitants of Megara, were so respectful to the Husbandman, that no man would
by any means disturb or endamage him, Another reports, that Cyrus commanded it
to be proclaimed, That the Husbandman should be permitted to follow his
employments, Xenephon de Cyri. Jnstit lib. 5.
and preserved unharmed. And Suidas gives this full altestation to Bellisarius,
that great and most victorious General, that so solicitous and effectual was
his care of Husbandmen that no violence or wrong was ever done to any one of
them by any soldier under his conduct or command; I Will add but one instance
more, even he who has so prodigiously advanced his Empire by spoil and ruin,
he who has been esteemed, even to a Proverb. Barbareus; the great Turk, is yet
observed (by the most S. A. Blunt.
judicious of modern Travelers) to take a special and most exact care for the
maintenance of Husbandry; for he divides all his Countries among his Timariots,
who are but his Yeomanry, upon whom he bestows Timars or Teuds, not only that
they may awe the Provinces, but also couse the land to be well tilled and cul
ivat; And these Timariots (or Yeomen) themselves, that their Farms may be well
managed, held up the Farmers with much care. It were easy to add unto these
the consenting suffrages of Nations more eivilized, which are both copious and
magnificent.

But what need I multiply the Testimonies of men, to assert the honor and
respect that always has been, and always shall be due to Husbandry? Since
God himself has been, pleased to publish his most sacred respects unto it, as
many other ways, so particularly, by that strict and provisionary care which he
has taken for the protection of the most inferior pieces of it: He would not
allow so much as a fruit Tree to be spoiled; Deue. 20.19.
When thou shall besiege a City, a long time in making war against it, to take
it, thou shall not destroy the Trees thereof: For, thou may eat of them, and
thou shall not cut them down, etc. And Christ himself in that brief model of
Prayer, does not obscurely intimate the respects we owe unto the Husbandman,
when he ranks this in the middle of those jew Peritions which he would have us
to put up daily to our heavenly Father, Give us this day our daily Bread;
Which unless we understand it in a mystical or miraculous sense only, does in
my opinion clearly appoint us to pray daily for the Husbandman, by whom God
does ordinarily dispense that staff and support of life. This is every man's
duty, this shall be my practice, as to speak well of you, so to speak as well
as I can for you; And this also directs me how to conclude at this time;
Beseeching you All to accept this Sermon, as the first public Essay of my
Christian respects, and exalted affections toward you; and beseeching the
All-sufficient God, to direct, bless, encourage, and defend you, in all your
lawful labors, and laborious employments. 2 Cor. 9.10.
Now he that ministers seed to the Sower both minister bread for your food,
and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruit of your Righteousness. So
prays he who is indeed one of the most unworthy Laborers in the Lords Harvest,
But

Your very real Friend, and affectionate Servant. Nath. Newbury.

A SERMON Preached to Some, AND Dedicated to All the Yeomen and Farmers of KENT.
2 CHRONICLES. 26.10. For he loved HUSBANDRY.


THe Text is a just Apology for our Meeting at this time; For if it be demanded
why I preach, or why you hear this day; the answer is as plain as affectionate;
For he loved Husbandry.

I think I may not unfitly call this Text The Yeomans Prerogative, or The
Honor of Husbandry.

Husbandry is a word that does equally refer to the Yeoman, and the Farmer; for
it is the foundation, support, and employment of them both; as they also are
the fundamental support of the Nation and Country where they live.

Husbandry then is the subject which I intend to insist on at this time; and
that not in reference to the practice, but to the pre-eminence of it: As for
the practice of Husbandry, I must invert that of the Prophet Zechariah, cap.
13. v. 5. I belong to the Schools of the Prophets; I am no Husbandman, nor has
any man taught me to keep Cattle from my youth. It would be as impertinent for
a Scholar to discourse of the exercise of Husbandry before so many well
exercised Farmers, as it was for Phormio (that petulant Orator) to discourse
the Discipline and Managery of War in the presence of Hannibal, one of the most
experienced Generals in the world. But for the Pre-eminence and excellenly of
Husbandry, if I should not endeavor so to speak, as that I may discover my
own, and attract the love of others, to so ancient and noble a Profession; I
should both contradict the reality of my own affections, and deface the beauty
of that Royal Certificate which one of the greatest and best Kings of the world
has subscribed to in the Text; For, he loved Husbandry.

And now that I may not ill husband that time which your courteous patience
does farm out unto me; the method I shall use in the Husbandry of my Sermon,
shall be no other then that of the Husbandman.

First, I shall Plow up the ground of my discourse, in the explication of the
Text. Secondly, I shall Sow it with the spiritual seed of some seasonable
Doctrinal deductions, taken out of the Seed-cot of God's Word. And thirdly, I
shall Harrow and cover the seed, with some perticent Application.
It must be the Dew of Divine grace and the influence of Heavens blessing, that
must cause all to thrive and flourish: and then shall that of the Prophet
Zechariah, chapter 8. v. 12. be the joyful Harvest: For the seed shall be
prosperous, the ground shall give her increase, and the heavens shall give
their dew; and God will cause the remnant of this people to possess all these
things.

Give me leave then, first, To bring in my plow, to lay open the ground of my
subsequent discourse. And here indeed I meet with a ground that is so mellow
and tender, the terms of the Text, so easy and obvious, that I shall not need
to draw a deep Furrow. A shallow reach, and a weak strength (answerable to my
stock and abilities will be sufficient to turn up the bottom of the sense of
these words.

For] This word gives us an account of those undertakings which we read of in
the precedent part of the verse. It is a term of causality, and it is placed
here but to open the gate for us into the field. The field is well situated,
well feaced, well stocked; as you may easily perceive, if you please but to
survey the foregoing words. He built Towers (He kept good Fences) He dug
Wells, (or cut out many Cisterns or Ponds for the watering of his cattle.
Indeed the meanest Husbandman, whether Farmer or Grasier, knows as well as the
highest Poet, Pindar.
(...) the advantageous necessitity of Water; and therefore if his grounds be
naturally dry and parsimonious, he spares no cost nor pains to draw it out, by
sinking ponds and wells) for, he had much Cattle (He was well stocked) both in
the low Country and in the Plains (they are places convenient, and fit for
pasturage) Husbandmen also in the fruitful fields, or Carmel (there is his
discreet care to dispose his grounds and servants according to their most
proper capacity, Non omnis fert omnia tellus; He employs therefore his
Vine-dressers in the mountains; places most open to the beams of the sun; and
his Husbandmen in Carmel, or the fruitful fields; places most fit for, and
propitious to corn) these you all know are main pieces of good husbandry. The
most obstinate labor in plowing, sowing weeding etc. is but in vain, if the
ground be not fit and kindly, the fences well kept, and the stock
proportionable: Our complete Husbandman, according to the greatness of his
ability both for wisdom and wealth did abundantly provide for all these
necessary adjuncts He built etc. And why all this? For he loved Husbandry.

He] What was He? No less then a King; Uzziah, a Prince famous for Piety and
Prosperity; as you may see him described in this former part of the chapter.

First, For Piety, v. 4, 5. He did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord; And he sought God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding in the
Visions of God: See how observant a great Prince is of a good Minister, and how
useful a good Minister is to a great Prince; Nor is his piety unrewarded.
Indeed Piety toward God is the foundation of all true and durable happiness
amongst men: It appeared so eminently in the affairs of this Prince whose piety
and prosperity, like Hippocrates twins, did thrive together, and together
languish; He continues famous.

Secondly, for Prosperity; as it follows in the latter part of v. 5. As long as
he sought the Lord, God made him to prosper. I must not make a balk in this
place, but must sadly acquaint you, that this great and good Prince did
afterward decline in both; Uzziah degenerated into Uzzah; He invaded the
Ministerial Office, and violently maintained his intrusion, until an exemplary
and convincing judgment removed him from it, v. 16, 18, 19, 20. You know the
richest grounds are most subject to the blast; His prosperity overheated him,
and blasted his piety with pride; and that caused God to strike him with the
mildew of a Leprosy, so that he pined away (...) with grief and despondency of
spirit, as Josephus has recorded it. Be it so, I desire not to excuse his sin,
nor to extenuate his suffering; yet it still remains a remarkable truth. That
he was a Prince very prosperous a long time, even all the while he continued
pious; for as long as he sought the Lord, God made him to prosper; and his
prosperity is described 3. ways. 1. By his military performances and martial
successes. 2. By his Civil acts and undertakings; and 3. By his private and
family employments

First, His Martial performances and successes, may be reduced under four
glorious Ensigns.

1. Victory over his Enemies; This is the red Ensign, which you may see
displayed in several Nations and Countries. v. 6, 7. He warred against the
Philistines; and so far prevailed, that he took and dismantled their chief
forts, and strongest Towns; for he brake down the wall of Gath, and the wall of
Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod: and he built Cities about Ashdod, and among the
Philistines; no question, for garrisons, to bridle and awe that stout and
perpetually turbulent people. And well might he prevail against them; for God
helped him against the Philistines, and against the Arabians, etc. 2. Presents;
or rather tribute from neighbor Nations. This is the yellow or golden colored
Ensign, which is furled up; ver. 8. the Ammonites gave gifts to Vzziah. 3.
Renown, Fame, and Reputation abroad, This may be the white Ensign, which you
may see flying, v. 8. his name spread abroad, even to the entering in of Egyot.
4. Exceeding strength and forces. And let this be the black Ensign: for, it
was this made him so puissant and formidable: For he strengthened himself
exceedingly, v. 8. His particular strength you may read more distinctly
exemplifyed, v. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And as he was thus renowned for military
abilities and archievements, so
Secondly, For his civil undertakings. His care to build, repair, fortify, is
hinted at v. 2. He built Eloth, and restored it to Judah; and v. 9. he built,
repaired, and strengthened the chief out-parts of Jerusalem. And

Thirdly. His private and family employments were those which are specifyed at
the 10. verse. the verse of our text.

So that he is represented, a Prince happy in all the parts of humane affairs.
Military, Political, and Oeconomical; in Camp, City and Country business,
happy; and yet behold, so potent prudent and successeful a prince, thought it
no disparagement to manage the affairs of husbandry. It is recorded to his
honor, and as a special part of his happiness; that he built, and dug, and
had much cattle, and husbandmen, etc. For he loved husbandry.

Loved] He delighted in it; he was not necessitated, or enforced to it, he
found much comfort, quiet, content in it; it is no question, but he had his
Bayliffes, and Farmers under him; but himself disdayned not to over-see,
provide for, direct, encourage, support them; again, he loved it, he was not
like envious Ahab, he repined not at his thriving neighbors, but cheerfully
pursued the improvement of his own lands; and rather then he would deturbe or
turn any of his subjects out of their possessions, he procured pasturage for
his cattle a far off; and this is hinted in that word, in deserto, in the
desert, i.e. Arabia, quod pascuosum erat, as Junius notes upon the place; The
desert of Arabia had good pasturage; so that he neither disdained husbandry,
nor discouraged husbandmen, but did greatly honor, encourage, delight in both.
For he loved Husbandry.

Husbandry] All sorts of it, planting, graffing; but more particularly,
Agriculture, Tillage; the nature of which you all know so much better then my
self, that I will not be so vainly presumptuous, as to mispend either my
discretion or time in the description of it; nor is it my intention to read you
a lecture out of Virgil's Georgicks, or Markhams husbandry.

Thus have I Plowed up this little piece of ground, and (I hope) drawn a
straight, though no deep furrow, through every part of the Text, in this plain
explication; I come now,

Secondly, to Sow it, with some seasonable doctrinal deductions: and here I
must go over the ground again, and I meet but with three ridges, which are fit
to be sown.

1, Here Is a causal particle. For, 2. An honorary or commendatory relative; He.
3. The term of complacency, which is as the sod-acre, upon which all turns,
Loved. Husbanary, the 4th term, is as the whole field it self, that is to be
sown upon, and without any forcing, it will bear the seed of these three
doctrinall Observations. 1. We may observe the industrious care, and prosperous
diligence of our royal husbandman. For. 2. The dignity and honor of
husbandry: It is an employment not unworthy a King, He. 3. The affectionate
delight and delightful affection wherewith he followed his business; Loved.
For he loved husbandry.

Of these briefly, and

First, let us observe the care and diligence of our discreet husbandman;
industrious diligence in providing for, and contriving the most advantageous
managery of his affairs, is a prime requisite in a thriving husbandman: that
which is Generally propounded by Solomon. Prove. 10.4. He becemmeth poor that
deals with a slack hand, but the hand of the diligent makes rich; may be
eminently taken notice of, as a special rule in our husbandmans business; lazy,
or slothful, and letty, or hinderly are words of the same importance in your
common expressions; diligence and riches are as Bernard phrases it in another
case, Virtutes collactaneae, Foster sisters, nursed up by the divine providence
suckled and nourished with the sweetest milk of the indulgent earth; nor is it
improbable that Salmon intended this observation more particularly for the
husbandman, if we consider what he adds, v. 5. He that gathers in summer, is
a wise son; but he that sleeps in harvest, is a son that causes shame. And I
think that of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. is not only an apostolical dictate,
but a prophetical denunciation also: that if any man would not work, neither
should he eat; and he may thereby, as prescribe the penalty, so foretell the
penury of idle busy bodies; that as they ought not to have any, so neither
ordinarily is it likely that they should have their own bread to eat, if they
will not labor. However, we have here before us a princely pattern and patron
of judicious industry; Vzziah, thought not the eminency of his place, not the
largeness of his revenues, could privilege or exempt him from the labor and
trouble of domestical business; he is as eminent in industry, as in dignity:
his chargeable care about fencing, and watring his grounds; his discreet
disposal of his servants, etc. is recommended to us, and we are invited to
reflect, on it by this causall particle, for; when he had once applied himself
to husbandry, he quickly had his hands and head full of employment; he is fain
to build and fence, and dig, and look after stock, and entertain husbandmen,
for he loved etc.

Thus David also, the noblest of his royal Ancestors, when his Kingdom was
thoroughly settled, provides for the settlement and wise ordering of his
husbandry affairs; he disposes Bailiffs and Overseers for all sorts of
husbandry; the holy Ghost has been pleased to record their names in that
unperishable history of his most memorable actions, 1 Chronicles. 27.26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31. For his Tillage, Ezri; for his planted ground, Shimei, and Baalhanan;
for his Pasturage and Grazing, Shetvai, Shaphat, and Jaziz. All these were the
rulers of the substance, that was King David's. Thus the care of Christ over his
church, is allegorically represented, Isa. 5.2. he feneed it, and gathered out
the stones thereof, and planted it, etc. and when he had been at such charges,
taken so much pains with it, he might justly expect, it should yield him a
proportionable increase; if it do not, let the blame light where it will, it
cannot be charged upon him, let who will judge. What could have been done more
unto my vineyard, that I have not done in it. v. 4. A sedulous diligence, is
all that Christ will do in the husbandry of his Church. I am sure it is all
that man can do in the husbandry of his grounds; he that would interced for the
fruitless vineyard had nothing to plead, but that he might be allowed to try
the utmost of his skill and pains upon it; Luke 13.8. Lord, let it alone this
year also, till I shall dig about it, and dung it and if it, bear fruit, well,
etc. It may be there are some grounds, that will obstinately contemn the
husbandmans industry, and unkindly delude his most just and patient hopes; yet
undoubtedly it is true, what Menochius in his sacred Oeconomicks, l. 1. c. 20,
observes, Illud generatum tenendum est, multum industrii, and seduli agricolae
diligentiam posse, eumque qui agrum suum opportuno tempore versaverit etc.
facturum opera pretium. Generally the husbandmans care and diligence in
plowing, sowing, weeding, etc. wiil gratefully return into his barnes, with a
plenteous recompense of his labor; yea, a seasonable industry can work
miracles; it can turn stones into bread, and make barrenness it self fruitful.
So that (as God is pleased prophetically to express the admirable fruitfulness
of a mountainous and rugged land, 'Deut. 32.13. our industrious husbandman
shall prevailingly and triumphantly ride on the high and most stubborn places
of the earth, he shall eat the increase of the fields, he shall suck honey out
of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock. His labor may be hard, but it
shall be happy; and so much for the present of our husbandmans humble industry;
which as it is the ready, though narrow road to honor and dignity, so it does
directly lead me into the next Observation, which is.

Secondly, The dignity and honor of Husbandry; He, Vzziah, a prince, thinks it
not unworthy his care and attendance; indeed husbandry is an employment, that
the best of men have undertaken, throughout all countries, in all ages; an
employment, that the noblest spirits have not been ashamed of. It was the only
employment which God thought fit for, and becoming the most excellent of his
creatures in the state of innocence. Genesis 2.15. And the Lord God took the man,
and put him into the garden of Eden, to dress it; ad colendum eum, to husband
it, as Junius translates, proscissione, irrigatione, fatione, and siqua sunt
ejusmodi. by digging, watering sowing it, and the like acts of good husbandry
to winn and procure of it those herbs, and seeds or grain which God had
designed for the food of man; Genesis 1.16. concerning which also we may observe,
that those fruits of the earth provided for the sustentation of man, may claim
the privilege of Birthright before the Sun and Moon, as being a day elder;
Genesis 1.11. compared with verse. 14. Now as Adam was put upon this employment by
God himself, so Noah the Father of the second world, chose this calling,
Genesis 9.20. And Noah began to be an Husbandman. i.e. diligentius quam ante
dil^vium, to set himself about that business more strenuously and industriously
than they needed to do before the Flood; because as Lapide in locum observes,
that deluge, by the saltness, piercing sharpness, and fluctuating motion of the
water, had drawn forth, and much wasted the Primitive goodness and fatness of
the earth: True it is, that by the first penal statute enacted after Adam's
fall, grievous and hard labor was required of our Husbandman, Genesis 3.17. Yet
it must needs be, that this additional sterility with which the Flood infected
the earth, did also necessitate man to sorer travel and labor. Well therefore
might Noah be said to begin to be an Husbandman, as being the first that
employed the utmost of his Art and Skill, (as well as pains and industry) in
the Husbandry of the ground. The ancient Heathen attributed the invention of
the Plough to Osyris, now Pererius, Delrie, and other learned Critics
conceive, that by this Osyris was meant Noah. And whereas before the Flood,
manibus and ligonibus terram foederent, they prepared the earth with the
tedious handy-labour of the Spade; that Noah was the man, who to the great ease
and advantage of mankind, found out the artifice and use of Ploughs, as also
their draught by horse and oxen: The Heads and Princes of his posterity, Sem,
Japhet, and afterward Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Booz, etc. succeeded him in this
calling; yea after they attained the sovereign power, they did not decline the
affairs of Husbandry. Saul forsook not his old employment, as appears, 1 Samuel
11.5. And Saul came after armentum suum, his own herd out of the field: David
and Uzziah were mentioned before. And if we look out of the sacred, into other
Histories, they abound in illustrious examples to this purpose; Cyrus the
Persian, Dioclesian Justin, and other Roman Emperors; Hiero, Philo metor,
Attalus, Archelaus, and many Grecian Kings were Husbandmen; the Noblest
families in the Roman Commonwealth, were founded upon Husbandry, as appears by
their Titles and names: Hence the Fabij, Lentuli, Pisones, Cicerones, Vitellij,
Porrij, Servij, Appij, and others; to which very many Gentilitious names among
us are parallel; as Bean, Lentil, Peace, Chickly, Yokely, Swinford, Plonden,
Wheatly, etc. The most excellent Chieftains of the world, have been taken from
the Fold, or the Stall, or the Plough; Moses a Shepherd, Exodus 3.1. Gideon a
Thresher, Judges 6.11. Val. Maximus, and Dionisius Halicar speak of Attalus,
Quintus, Curious, and others; who were fetched from the Plough to the
Consulship, yea Dictatorship, in some eminent difficulty of affairs, and
distress of their country; and that after they had faithfully, magnanimously,
and fortunately discharged those great offices, they cheerfully returned to
their Husbandry business. What shall I say more? Elisha that great Prophet, was
at first but a rich Ploughman, 1 Kin. 19.19. Two of the Apostles, Janies and
Jude were Husbandmen, as Clem. lib. 2. Constit. Apost. cap. 63. has recorded
it. And therefore they do so frequently in their Epistles make use of
comparisons drawn from their own calling, as of trees, plants, fruits of the
earth, etc. Yea, Christ himself seems to have been much delighted with such
similitudes: He compares himself to a Seedsman. Luke 8.5. And the Father
accepts the appellation of an Husbandman, John 15.1. Nor refuses he the
practice of Husbandry, verse 2. How does not all this conduce much to the
honor and dignity of Husbandry? That it is a calling of immediately Divine
Institution, a calling that has been used by the best and Noblest of men in
all ages, a calling that has given a name and employment to God himself; who
can choose but honor and love such a calling? and that is it I am next to speak
to.

Thirdly, The affection of our Husbandman to, his complacency and delight in
his calling; He loved. Husbandry is a calling that deserves the dearest love,
and most affectionate respects of all men; both of those who employed and
exercised in it, and of all others.

First, It deserves the love, and requires the delight of all such as practice
it, and that among others for these 4. reasons.

1. For it laboriousness and difficulty. It is no easy, no slight, no lazy
employment. We ordinarily observe, that the Husbandmans business is never at an
end, and that he has but two sleeping nights in the whole year. Undoubtedly he
labors under the influence of that Divine Edict, Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of
thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground, even unto that
ground over which thou have taken so many weary turns. All his life he finds
that to be a practical truth, Eccles. 1.8. All things are full of labor, man
cannot utter it. Now it is love to it, and delight in it, that can sweeten his
labor, shorten his way, alienate and ease the weight and burden of his
employments.

2. For its emolument and profitableness;

This compensates his labor. How many substantial Families do originally owe
their inheritances to husbandry? It is said of Issachar, Genesis 49.14.15.
Issachar as a strong Ass, couching down between two burdens; and he saw her
Rest was good, and the land was pleasant, and bowed his shoulder to bear, and
become a servant unto Tribute. Upon which place, I like not Junius his note;
Licet robustissimus sit, nihil praeclari geret; sed d^^^ desideus ignavit^r
s^;^ tributa ir dici patietur. That through sloth, he would not perform any
honorable and hazardous attempt, but would rather slavishly submit to be a
Tributary. This note, I say, I conceive to be impertinent, because that
prediction of his Father was delivered as his blessing not his disgrace; and it
appears that he was not of such a servile nature, but that he could do
valiantly when just occasion was offered; for he willingly came in to help
Barack in that dangerous battle against Sisera, Judge. 5.15. And therefore I
approve the observation of our learned and ingenious Countryman Th. Fuller in
his Pi^gah sight of Palestine, Book 2. cap. 7.
That Issachar is resembled to an Ass, not for the stupidity of his head, but
for the strength of his back; and it seems he had wisdom as well as strength;
for this Tribe is taken notice of for an excellent piece of skill and
discretion; 1 Chr. 12.32. The children of Issachar were men that had
understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do. They were not only
weatherwise, as Rivet would have it but good Chronologers, yea discreet
Statesmen able by observation of former, to make out directions for future
times. However, this Tribe afforded the best Yeomandry in Israel, and advanced
most toward rates and assessments: The two burdens forementioned, were Taxes
and Tillage; which they sensible of the goodness of their soil, and the profits
that came in by their Country employments, and peaceful labors, did willingly
and wisely submit unto. And surely it is a piece of insolent indiscretion, for
any man to repine at the payment of a shilling to save a pound especially when
he has his life and livelihood, his peace and quiet attendance upon his
calling secured to him into the bargain. Issachar though compared to an ass had
more wit for upon observation of the advantages, that redounded to him by a
quiet attendance upon his husbandry business, he bowed his shoulder to bear,
and cheerfully became a servant to tribute.

3. For its Salubrity and healthfulness, no employment conduces more to the
health and vigor of the body, than Husbandry. It is too true indeed, and to be
bewailed, that the customary luxury of Towns and Cities, has tainted too many
of the Country, and so drawn them to partake of their diseases, as they do of
their dissoluteness; but for such as are abstemious and keep themselves
generally to their Country diet such as are resident upon, and diligent in
their Country employments, how many have there been that have outlived whole
Towns and Cities? Our northern Countryman old Parr, may be one instance;
Undoubtedly those people who are farthest removed from the fortness and luxury
of Courts and Cities, and in a manner obliged to hard labor, and homely fare,
are seldom acquainted with those high and mighty diseases of the Gout, Stone
etc. but have the hardness of their labor, and the shortness of their diet,
plentifully recompensed with the length healthfulness and salubrity of their
lives.

4. For its tranquillity and peacefulness. How have not many, (who were tired
and wearyed with the brawls and strifes, the deceipts and cozenages of Court
and City) retired unto this life, for the calm and settlement of their souls
and estates? Aeneas Sylvius, Hist. Bohem. c. 13. tells of one Suatocopius a
Bohemian King, who being worsted by Arnulph the Emperor in Battle, retired to a
private country life; and having lived long unknown in this Sanctuary when he
lay on his death bed, he sent for his neighbor villagers, and professed unto
them, Ego sum Rex Bohemiae, etc. I am a King, I have fully tried both the Court
and the Country life, and dying, I now pronounce, that there is no life
valuable unto this, for quiet peacefulness, and tranquillity, which is indeed
the very life of our lives. The last century has furnished us with a more
memorable example, Charles the 5. Emperor of Germany L. of the Netherlands and
King of Spain, did voluntarily resign all his Kingdoms and dominions, and put
himself into a small Country house of seven rooms, and a little garden, where
he spent the remainder of his years in riding about the grounds with one
servant, in quartering his garden into little beds in setting Flowers and
planting Trees with his own hands, and acknowledged that he enjoyed more solid
pleasure and content in that his private country solitude, then he had done all
his life before in all his victories and triumphs. How shall not our Husbandman
love that life that is so lovely, and affords so many accommodations? And as
Husbandry deserves the Husbandmans love, so does it also the love and respect.

Secondly, of all other men, for three Reasons.

1. For its Antiquity I am not ignorant that a plea from mere antiquity, is but
a simple sophisme; our simple nature is called the old man, yet is not
therefore to be cherished; the Devil was a murderer from the beginning, Ioh.
8.44. and the Church makes humble confession, Psa. 106.9. We have erred with
our Fathers. It was but the stubbornness of the Jews to plead, We will do as
our Fathers. Jer. 44.17. Many practices are very old, yet very erroneous; many
old sayings and old doings must be unsaid, and undone, or we shall be undon for
ever. How many old sayings of the Jews does Christ gainsay, Matthew. 5. Ye have
heard that it has been said by them of old time thus and thus. But I say unto
you, etc. I well know (as one says) that wisdom does not always lean upon a
staff, nor look through spectacles: Nor would I be esteemed so shallow, as to
draw up an argument from the Gibeonitish antiquity of moldy bread and clouted
shoes; but where antiquity is duly circumstantiated, in things useful and
excellent it is surely venerable and may claim a due respect: We are bid, Ier.
6.16. Enquire for the good old way; such is that which I propound to your
respect upon this ground, in a civil sense Husbandry is the good old way that
God himself appointed for the sustentation and employment of mankind; and what
the Apostle speaks in commendation of the commandment, 1 Ioh. 2, 7. I may apply
to this calling, this is the old calling which was from the beginning,
Husbandry is absolutely the most ancient instituted employment, it began with
man and the world, and has together with man and the world been perpetually
continued throughout all ages, without interruption: The most subtle of the
ambitious Gentiles, could fetch the antientary of their gods and Heroes, no
further then from Tellus, and Ops, Rhea, Alex. Ross.
and Vesta, by which (as our ingenious Mythologer observes) they meant the
earth. And these Nations who would boast their descent upon this Principle of
venerable antiquity, as the Accadians called themselves (...), and Ter^igenae
the Offspring or sons of the earth; and acknowledged Pan a Shepherd, their
founder and Father. They had but a glimmering of what we know to be a clear
truth; and earthen Husbandman was our Original Ancestor, and Husbandry the
prime employment of the Father of us all: We should love it for that.

2. For its innocence and harmlesness. Agricultura artium omnium
innocentissima; It is Augustines observation: that husbandry is the most
harmless of all employments, arts or trades, most otherwise in the world, men
live and thrive, either by undermining, undervaluing, or by over-powring, over
flattering overselling overreaching others: but the returns which the
husbandmans fields and flocks bring in, are no ways prejudicial many ways
profitable to others as well as himself. Our husbandman does not envy others
but lives well pleased with what providence gives him; he is free from all
fretting cares, and is fed with no man's provisions but his own; the crop of his
land comes in once a year and it is got with a good conscience but (as the
judicious Spaniard, Guevara.
excellently dilates upon this argument) he that seeks after places of
eminency, in Courts or Citys, will be sure to find envy and competitors,
frequent dissimulation, dangerous reservednes, an evil ey, ridiculous
affectation, policy, revenge, supercilious scorns, a fantastic gate,
splendid and selling words, gross calumny cursing, swearing, (which could make
a good christian wish himself deaf) with ambition the most poisonous weed of
the mind, are the plants which grow in those gardens: our humble and contented
husbandman, by Gods blessing upon his labors, thrives by an honest industry,
without supplanting his neighbor, while others out of an unfatiable avarice,
by rapine and oppression, maintain their abominable greatness with the blood
and tears of poor innocents and orphans; and like harpies and heathens, take
the bread out of the mouths, of the helpless and harmless children. O how
innocent are the advancements of husbandry! It deserves the discreet
encouragement of your most respectful affection if it be but for its
advantageous inoffensiveness; and much more.

3. For its universal usefulness, yea absolute necessity; and here indeed the
husbandman may justly triumph; for I must in his behalf confidently affirm,
there is not in all the world any other temporal, manual employment so
indispensably useful and necessary for humane life and subsistence, as
Husbandry. Let any impartial man run over all other Manual Trades and Callings,
in his most serious thoughts, and I doubt not but they will appear to be
either the Children or Nurses of Wealth, Pride, Vanity, Luxury, or Superfluity:
Or if some few others be for Convenience, yea, and respective Necessity, (as I
know some others both Mercurial, Martial, and Mechanical are, in relation to
the present posture of the affairs of the world,) yet I must still conclude,
that This, this Calling only, is of absolute Necessity: Sure I am, we might all
comfortably serve our God and our Generation, upon the conditions specified in
Jacobs Indentures, Genesis 28.20. If God will be with me, and will keep me in this
way that I go, and will give me Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on. Now
Husbandry alone, (with Gods blessing) is abundantly able to supply both these
Necessaries. Let not any man mistake me; I intend not any word or sentence that
I delive upon this Subject, in a Levelling destructive sense, I do only pursue
the argument I have undertaken in a rational way: To that purpose I entreat
every unprejudiced man, to consider these two adversary propositions, which
will jointly concur to assert the absolute Necessity of Husbandry.

First, This Calling can subsist without any others: as for the Forge and the
Axe, I esteem them but as servants and appurtenances of Husbandry; Now if all
other employments from the rich Merchant to the poor Pedlar, were vanished out
of the world, the Husbandman were able to make a sufficient, yea comfortable
provision for the Nations; He did so at first for some Ages.

Secondly, No others can subsist without this. Therefore when God would
denounce ruin and desolation to any people, he threatens to remove the staff
of bred, by blastings, mildews, unseasonable weather, and other calamities upon
the Husbandmans affairs, Lev. 26.26.32 Ezekiel. 4.16. and 5. c. 16. v. The evil
arrows of Famine, shall be for their destruction; and Ezekiel. 14.13. When the
Land sins against me, then will I stretch out my hand upon it, and will
break the staff of the bread thereof, and will cut off man and beast from it.
I conclude this with the acknowledgement of the wisest King, Eccles. 5.9. The
profit of the Earth is for all, the King himself is served by the Field, or the
King also consists by the field that is tilled; upon which the Geneva Note is
this. The revenues of the Earth are to be preferred above all things which
appertain to this life; For the greatest Princes and States cannot maintain
their Estate without Tillage.

And thus have I performed the second part of my promise: I have scattered the
seed of some Doctrinal Observations, over all the Furrows of this little Field;
I hope I have made choice of seed that was proper and kindly for the ground:
Now that it may root well and prosper, I doubt not but you will give me leave,

Thirdly, To cover all that I have sown, with the Harrow of Application. You
know that there is a twofold use of the Harrow, To break the clods, draw off
the grass and weeds, which would hinder the rooting and springing, or choke
the growth of the Corn; and to cover, keep safe and warm the seed: I shall make
use of the Harrow both ways.

First, To break the clods, and draw off the weeds, in a Use of Reprehensory
Conviction. You have heard somewhat of the Excellency, Loveliness, and
Necessity of Husbandry: What now will those proud and scornful Gallants
answer, who make the very word Plowman, (which speaks a better employment then
they themselves ordinarily are acquainted with) a term of scorn and disdain?
What will they now say, who deride and contemn the painful, useful, peaceful,
yea indeed truly Honorable Husbandman, when they shall understand the high
esteem which the noblest and wisest of men have had of him? I hope none will
prevent what I shall speak, as if it were in my thoughts to cast dirt upon the
Gentry, who are the Splendour and Glory of a flourishing Nation: I know the
Heaven has many stars which appear chiefly for ornament, yet are not without
their use and influence: I have observed that truly generous spirits, are like
a sword of the best tempered metal, most flexible and pliable, affable and
courteous in behavior to their Inferiors; Nor do I doubt but that all
understanding Gentlemen, do sufficiently know and accordingly value the worth
of the Husbandman. I reflect not upon these: but it is to the proud and idle,
the scornful and contemptuous Gentleman (who has little besides a great
Estate, and a gay suit of clothes to prove his Gentility) that I now speak.
Thou art thy self but terrae filius, a clod of Earth, or in the Language of the
Prophet, ( Isa. 40.6.) as the grass, and all thy pompous goodliness but as the
flower of the Field; and flowers there, are ordinarily more noisome to the
Corn, then pleasant to the eye: yea, I must tell thee that an idle and proud
Gentleman, who is neither bred to, nor inclined to, nor fit for any good
employment, is but a weed, perhaps the worst weed in a Commonwealth; and if I
thought it were not too bitter a censure, I would affirm that the lives of
such, I say of such Gentlemen, are of as little use, and as much mischief to a
Nation, as that of idle vagrants, and sturdy vagabonds. Nor indeed are they
very much unlike; for do they not alike spend their time in walking up and
down, eating and drinking? Do they not alike feed on the sweat of other men's
labors, the sweat of other men's brows? I must freely confess, that I do not
yet understand, what prejudice it would be to the Commonwealth, if all such
Gentlemen, were within the compass of the same Statute for Vagrants: Rivet. in
Genesis 3.
The Athenians a wise Commonwealth, did sue idle persons at Law, idleness among
them did bear an Action, and it was called Actio (...). I am sure they are
within compass of that Apostolical Statute, 2 Thessalonians 3.10. This we commanded
you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat: For my part therefore I
do not conceive that the world would much miss them, if there were never a one
of them upon the face of the Earth. Now if any man think that any of these
expressions are too sour and severe, he may please to sweeten his palate again,
by taking a review of the same thing, as it is expressed by the D. Donnes
Letters, p. 51.
great Master of English wit, and language, who has thus wrapped up this bitter
pill in his golden phrase. To be no part of any body, (says he) is to be
nothing. At most the greatest persons are but great wens, and excrescencies;
Men of wit, and delightful conversation, but as moles for ornament, except
they be so incorporated into the body of the world, that they contribute
something to the sustentation of the whole. Thou that are so useless, and do
thou vilify and despise those who are so useful, so necessary? I have done
with the first Use of the Harrow, the reproof of such as undervalue our
Husbandman. I address my self now to you who love, encourage, and practice
Husbandry.

Secondly, to cover that good seed that has been sown, with a serious
Exhortation, and some suitable directions.

And,

First, you that are Husbandmen, I do earnestly exhort you, to acknowledge the
gracious Providence of God, in that he has caused you to be bred to the most
ancient, useful, and necessary calling in the world. I may make use of that of
the Apostle, (1 Cor. 1.26.) Videte Vocaticnem vestram, as Trem: out of the
Syriack renders it, Behold, take notice of your Calling, Brethren; God has
chosen you to such a Calling, as has been adorned, by the wisest noblest, and
mightiest in the world, who have both honored it, and been practitioners in
it. If the same Providence, shall at any time, prefer you by it, above it, be
ye never ashamed of your beginning; David was not, though he was taken out of
the Sheepfold, but even thence takes occasion publicly and perpetually to
magnify God, who had exalted him; Psalm 78.70, 71. He chose David his servant,
and took him from the Sheepfolds; from following the Ewes, he brought him to
feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance.

Secondly, Since your Calling is so honorable, O be ye careful to honor
your Calling, by a suitable carriage, a correspondent convesation, and that you
shall do, if you will but observe and pursue these seven directions.

1. Be industrious in your business. Read and ponder those inducements, Prove.
13.11. He that gathers by labor, shall increase; and chapter 14.23. In all
labor there is profit, whereas sloth is easily overtaken with penury. Prove.
6.9.11. O sluggard, thy poverty shall come as one that travelleth, (suddenly,
and unexpectedly) and thy want as an armed man, ( i. e. violently and
irresistably.) Consider, that God never set up any on his Stage of the world,
for a dumb show; He has appointed all men to live, either by the sweat of the
brain, or of the brow. Consider farther, that diligence in your Callings shall
be attened with unexpected blessings: The first news of a Savior was brought
to the Shepherds, while they abode in the Field, keeping watch over their
Flocks by night, Luke 2.8. Believe it, the Husbandmans industry, is the easiest
and most certain, if not the only true Alchimy: It can turn Earth into Gold;
Industry is the most powerful charm; It can prevail with the most stubborn
ground, and cause it to yield profit and increase. The Story of C. Furius a
Roman Farmer is remarkable; He had a small Farm, yet he reaped much larger
Crops, and lived better upon it, then many of his neighbors, who had greater
Farms and Stocks. Upon this he is not only envied, but suspected of sorcery;
that by some unlawful means he had bewitched his neighbors cattle, and by some
strange slight defeated them of their expected Crops: He is brought before a
Magistrate, (I know their terms, but I make use of ours) a day appointed for
his Trial, he is vehemently accused, the Jury ready to pass upon him; All his
defense was this; He caused to be brought into the Court, all his Husbandry,
Utensils, Instruments, Plowes, etc. substantially made, well fitted, and neatly
kept. His son a robustious youth, in plain apparel, his draught Horse and Oxen,
lusty, full, and well dressed; and only added this, Veneficia mea haec sunt,
Quirites; nec possum vobis ostendere, aut in forum adducere lucubrationes
vigilias and sudores. These, these (says he) are all the charms and sorceries
that I use, besides the care and pains, the watchfulness and labor, that I am
accustomed to night and day: And those indeed I cannot at this time produce
unto you. Upon which he was presently discharged with the Universal applause of
all present. Indeed, my friends, so it is; Care can do more then Cost. You use
to say, The Masters eye makes the horse fat; and truly I must tell you, The
Masters foot, makes the ground fruitful: be industrious.

2. Be Patient: Of all men the Husbandman must study that of Heb. 10.36. Ye
have need of Patience; You have need of it, in respect of the tediousness and
perpetual succession of your labors. You have need of it, in respect of the
frequent and unkind deceitfulness of the Earth, which for much cost and care
bestowed upon it, will too often make a very unproportionable return; Indeed
the patience which is required in an Husbandman, is extraordinary; and
therefore is it propounded as exemplary, James 5.7. Be patient brethren, bebold
the Husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the Earth, and has long
patience for it: Again, you have need of it, that you may be enabled to bear
your cross, among all your crosses, that of the negligence, untowardness, and
perverseness of servants, who are sometimes more hard to be managed, then the
most unruly cattle, or then the most cledgy Earth: be patient.

3. Be Contented: Let not unseasonable weather, thin Crops, loss of cattle,
etc. discompose thy humble soul; And because thy Barns are sometimes empty, or
scarce half filled, let not thy thoughts be full of distrustful care and doubts
of Gods fatherly and merciful Providence; Know and study that short, but solid
principle of Christian Faith, Genesis 22.14. Jehovah jireh, The Lord will see, or
provide: As thou walk thy Grounds, think that to be the Motto for each of
thy Fields. Remember in all straits that experimental prescription, Heb. 13.5.
Be content with such things as you have, for he has said, I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee. Con thoroughly that useful lesson, Phil. 4.11, 12. J
have learned in whatsoever estate J am therewith to be content, J know how to
be abased, and how to abound; Every where, and in all things J am instructed,
both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and suffer need. Bernard
does appositely call contentation, Custos sigilli, it seals Gods Promises unto
our souls, and it seals up our souls to an holy submission unto Gods disposal:
I may call contentment the Keeper of the Liberties of the Soul, by authority of
the Heavenly Parliament; It depends upon Parle Dieu, God has said,

4. Be Thankeful, Deuteronomy. 8.8, 9.10.17, 18. When God gives thee a Land of Wheat
and Barley, a Land wherein thou shall eat bread without scarceness; when thou
have eaten, and art full, then thou shall bless the Lord thy God, for the good
Land, which he has given thee: Beware, lest when thou art full, and when thy
Herds and thy Flocks multiply, and all that thou have is multiplied: Then
thine heart be lifted up, and thou say, My power, and my care, and the might of
my hand has gotten me this wealth: But O remember the Lord thy God, for it is
he that gives thee power to get wealth. When the Pastures are clothed with
flocks, and the Valleys covered over with Corn, so that they shout for joy,
Psa. 65.13. then say thou also, as v. 1. Praise waits for thee, O God, in my
soul. And After a long drought, it begun to rain at that time.
now me thinks that I am speaking of praise due unto God, I should unpardonably
prevaricate, if I should not at this instant take notice, That whatsoever men
may think of it, God himself seems to approve our meeting here, in that he is
pleased to send now so very seasonable and long desired a Rain. Say not, it is
yet but a little; That Beggar is as indiscreet as impudent, who standing in
need of a shilling, shall reject a penny: A thankful acceptance of a little, is
the most ingenious method of obtaining more. Thankfulness is Heavens Harvest,
all the Crop that God can reap by man, for any favor bestowed upon him; O
then, as thou reapest Gods blessings, so let God reap thy praises. Otherwise
thy very grounds, thy cattle will condemn thee, Jsa. 1.3. The Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his Masters crib, but my people does not consider.

There is an Apologue of a poor man, who went often to a Wood to gather sticks,
where one day he found one of his rich neighbors fallen into a pit; in which
was also an Ape, a Lion, and a Serpent, so that he was in danger either to
perish by them, or together with them by famine. The poor man compassionates
him, lets down the cord for him, but the Ape takes the advantage, and gets up
by it; He puts again for the man, and his Lion ascends: A third offer he makes,
and up comes the Serpent: And lastly, he draws up the man, who for the present
is much taken with this courtesy, promises largely, earnestly entreats the
poor man, to let him see him at his house. The poor man, hoping a reward, goes
to his house the next day; but our rich man now would not see him, nor is he to
be spoken with. The poor man returns, and must to the Wood again for his fuel;
the Ape spies him, presents him a burden of sticks, ready broken and laid
together; there was his thankfulness: The next day he goes, the Lion meets him,
and presents him some Camels laden, which he drives home, and unlading them, is
enriched with much treasure. He walks that way a third time, not now for
necssity, but recreation, where the Serpent creeps to him with a precious stone
in her mouth, which she lets fall at her Benefactors feet. The Moral is only
this: That even the bruit creatures, are often more grateful, and mindful of a
good turn, then man, their great Master is. O let it not be so! Know that
unthankfulness, is not only a paradoxe in manners, but a Prodigy in nature: be
thankful.

5. Be frugal and thrifty, Prove. 21.20. There is treasure to be desired in the
dwelling of the wise, but a foolish man spends it up. Squander not by loose and
luxurious courses, what God allows thee to gather, with so much pains and
industry. It were well for many Husbandmen, if more Parsley were growing in
their Gardens, if they were more parsimonious, and less prodigal. If thou have
a care to save what God sends, thy family will be better provided for, and thou
shall be able with ease and cheerfulness, to discharge all public Taxes and
Assessments. Abridge thy self of superfluities, and thou shall not want
necessaries. Our English Martyrology, has a Relation of a woman, who being in
prison at Canterbury, (where also the last blood of Martyrs was shed in Queen
Mary's time) when she might have had better fare, confined her self to a course
and spare diet, as preparing her self to undergo, what necessity, and the
cruelty of her enemies might bring her to suffer. Indeed it is good for all men
to straiten themselves, whiles Gods hand is enlarged toward them; so shall they
be better fitted to pass through those straits, which Gods Providence, may
bring them into. Consider, that it is better looking through a weak lattice
window, then a strong iron grate. Consider, that thou sowest thy Furrow by the
handful, not by the sack. Alas! how can they thrive, who eat or drink up their
Crop, before they reap it. Be frugal while you have it; it will be too late to
put two fingers into the purse, when you have thrown all away by handfuls.

6. Be Charitable, liberally charitable: When I wish you to be thrifty, I would
not have you sordid and miserable; Grudge not your gleanings to the poor: I
know the unconscionable rapacity of some Gleaners: Be watchful, not waiward,
careful, not niggardly. Consider that of 2 Cor. 9.6, 7, 8. He which sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and he which sows bountifully, shall reap
bountifully; Let every man therefore, give not grudgingly, for God loves a
cheerful giver; And God is able to make all grace abound toward you, that ye
having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work. This
County has been anciently famous for good houskeeping: At our Yeomans Table,
you might have as good entertainment, as at the best Gentleman's, not for
variety of meses, but for solid sufficiency of meat, and hearty welcome. And it
is said, that when Hospitality died in England she gave her last groan amongst
the Yeomen of Kent. I think I may speak it without flattery, That even to this
day, the doors and hands, the tables and kitchins of Yeomen and Farmers, are as
bountiful and hospitable, as beneficial to the poor, as many Gentlemen's, who
though they have great estates, have little heart to do good, and the
Travelers observation of Englands fault, Camini mali, that we had ill Clocks,
and worse Chimnies, may for one part of it, be verified in too mamany
Gentlemen's houses, for their Chimnies seldom smoke with charity.

7. Be Religious: I propound this last, because I would have it lie uppermost
in your memories, and come first into your thoughts and practice. Be religious,
I say, very observant of God, and of Christian duties: Most of your affairs
have such a peculiar dependence upon Gods Providence, that there lies the most
special obligation upon you of all secular callings) to seek to daily, and to
serve God. Your neglects of God are stupendiously inexcusable, Jer. 5.24.
Neither say they in their heart, Let us now fear the Lord our God, that gives
rain, both the former and the latter in his season; He resorveth unto us the
appointed weeks of the Harvest. Consider farther, thy very business invites
thee to holy contemplations. Most of the parables, similitudes, arguments of
the Prophets, Apostles, Christ, God himself used in Scripture, to teach and
persuade any Christian duty, are taken from the field, or grass, or corn, or
flowers, or seed, or rain, or cattle, etc. or somewhat belonging to Husbandry:
so that I may apply the words of Job, cap. 12.7, 8. Ask now the Beasts, and
they shall teach thee, or speak to the Earth, and it shall show thee thy duty.
The labor, serviceableness, obedience of your cattle, preaches your duty of
industry, obedience, and serviceableness to God: The fruitfulness of your
fields and folds, calls upon you for fruitfulness in your lives: The increase
of your seed, for growth of grace; You cannot sow and reap in a day; this
teaches you that Lesson, Romans 2.7. by patient continuance in welldoing, to seek
for glory, and honor, and immortality, you wait for the Harvest: This teaches
you to wait for the coming of Christ, at that general Judgment, the last and
universal Harvest of the Earth: as it is called, Rev. 14.15. To speak of all
that your Calling teaches you, would engage me to begin another Sermon, and it
is now high time, that I make an end of this. I conclude; you see my beloved
friends, that Husbandry it self is the Husbandmans Sermon; and if I should
Preach to you but one Sermon in a year, yet your own business would preach a
Sermon to you every day, of your particular duties; So that if you should
forget what I have said unto you this day, I entreat you to observe, what your
own employments speak daily unto you; Industry, Humility, Patience,
Contentation, Thankfulness, Frugality, Charity, Increase in Grace, and all
Christian virtues: So will God love you, if you thus love Husbandry; So shall I
have cause to think, that I could not more pertinently conclude a Sermon unto
Husbandmen, then by intimating unto you, That Husbandry is a Sermon; which both
you and I must learn, practice, and live by; that it may appear to the Honor
of God, the Ornament, Advantage, and Establishment, of our Callings and
Country, of our Estates and Families, of our Bodies and Souls, We have loved
Husbandry.

FINIS.

