NEWS FROM GUILD HALL. OR, A Premonition to the Citizens of LONDON.
Worthy Citizens,
THere has arisen of late in Common Council, a Question of very great
concernment to your Liberties, about the election of the chief Officers of your
City of London; It is very requisite that all and every one of you, should take
notice of the whole course of Proceedings thereupon, and the issue thereof,
your Liberties in Elections being the subject matter of the Debate; and
according as the Determination is, so are you to be accounted either Freemen or
Vassals. God has in these late Times brought to light many memorable
discoveries of the Captivation and undue Subjection of the English People, and
more particularly of the many stratagems and delusive Arts, whereby the
Citizens of London, and the Commonalties of the several Corporations therein
contained; as also the Commonalties of other Corporations in other Cities and
Borough Towns, are deprived of their rights in Elections, and the knowledge of
the Liberties, Charters and Transactions belonging to, and passing from them;
whereby likewise they are kept in ignorance of their respective Revenues, and
are engaged many times beyond and against their Consents: The means of the
knowledge of all which, and many other particulars since God has afforded you,
if you shall either negelct the same, through a slothful inanimadvertency, as
if your private Callings only concerned you; or shall not (through want of
conscience) appear in the Claimer thereof, it is but just with God to leave you
in worse Vassalage, and more irremediable bondage then ever.

My purpose is not to give you a Narrative of the several Arguments and
Responses concerning the Question abovementioned, it will suddenly be done by
a very able and faithful Pen, and when upon the view thereof you shall be
truly informed what your right in Elections has been, and ought to be; how it
has been transferred into such Hands as do not properly Represent you, and yet
by such Elections conclude you; when I say you shall be sensible of these
things, and knowing your selves out of the way, shall desire to be brought in;
you may then cast your eye upon this following Act ready drawn up as fit for
that end to be presented to the Right Honorable the Parliament. Neither need
you be afraid, or doubt of good Success therein, inasmuch as your Desires are
grounded upon such Principles as they themselves have made use of in most of
their late Acts, as having been in many particulars under much the same snares
and captivations with your selves.

A Copy of the ACT thus follows:
WHereas by the aucient Charters granted and confirmed to this City, the
election of the Mayor, Sheriffs, and other Officers of the said City, ought to
be by the Citizens or Commonalty thereof; Whereby it is evident that the whole
Commonalty, either Personally (if without Confusion it might be done) or their
Representatives chosen by them for that purpose, were to have Vote in all such
Elections. And whereas of later times the Masters, Wardens and Liveries of the
several Companies of this City have used and taken upon them (with the
exclusion of an other Citizens) to make the said Elections: which practice of
theirs seems to be grounded upon an Act of Common Council made the 23. day of
September, in the seventh year of King Liber L. 53.
Edward the Fourth. Before which time the same Elections were made by a certain
number of Persons chosen out of every Ward for that purpose, as appears
(amongst ma^y other Records) by an Act or Order of the Common Hall made in the
twentieth year of King Liber ult. 20 E. 3.
Edward the Third, whereby (to avoid inconveniences happening before that time
in general and immense Assemblies of the Citizens) it was agreed that for the
time to come, the Officers aforesaid should be chosen by Representatives of the
several Wards. Now forasmuch as diverse Companies of the Citizens of this City
have no Liveries at all and so have no manner of vote in the Elections by
Liveries: And for that by the Constitutions of most of the other Companies, the
Liveries thereof are not chosen by the whole Brotherhood, but by a few (as
namely) the Wardens and Assistants only; and thereby the greatest part of the
Citizens (Members of those Companies) are also excluded from having any Vote
either in Person or Representation, in the Elections beforementioned: And so
that great Privilege of Choosing their Mayor, Sheriffs, and other Officers, is
wholly taken from them, to their great grief, occasioning thereby their often
complaints; For remedy whereof, and to the intent the ancient Charters of this
City (touching Elections) may be pursued and kept inviolable; Be it Enacted and
Ordained, That from henceforth the Election of the Mayor. Sheriffs, Burgesses
for Parliament, and all other Officers of, or belonging to this City, formerly
used to be chosen in a Common Hall, shall be made in the Common Hall of this
City at such times as has been formerly used in that behalf; And by such
Persons, and in such manner as is hereafter mentioned, (that is to say) That
the Aldermen and Common councell-men of every Ward of this City, and the like
number of other honest men of every Ward to be Chosen yearly for that purpose
in the Wardmote, to be held by the Inhabitants of the same Ward (being Freemen
of the City of London paying Scot and Lot) which persons so chosen, shall be
Representatives of all the Inhabitants of each Ward, as touching every such
Election; And shall for ever hereafter be the only Electors, of, and in every
such Election in the Common Hall; and shall be from time to time returned by
the Wardmote-Inquests of every Ward respectively in their Presentations as
Representatives and Electors for, and on the behalf of the Inhabitants of the
same Wards; and shall duly be summoned to the Common Hall when any Election is
to be made there, by the Lord Mayor of the City for the time being, or his
Officer thereunto appointed. And that every Election of any the Officers
aforesaid, which shall be made by the said Aldermen, Common-Councel-men, and
the other Persons to be chosen in every Ward for that purpose, or by the Major
part of them assembled in the Common Hall, shall be good and effectual to all
intents and purposes, as if the same had been made by all the Citizens of this
City in their own Persons. And that no Person or Persons, save only the
Electors hereby appointed, shall be at any time hereafter admitted unto, or
have any Vote in any the Elections aforesaid, upon the Penalty of paying for
every such Intruston the sum of Forty pounds. And be it further Enacted and
Ordained, That all former Acts, Orders, and Determinations heretofore made by
the Court of Common Council of this City, for, or touching the Election of any
the Officers aforesaid, shall be and are hereby Repealed, and made null and
void to all intents and purposes.

Now inasmuch as the alienation of your right in elections, is but one
particular, wherein you worthy Citizens of London have been abused, and that it
is grown almost the common discourse of every one of you, that the City Bank
and Revenue is by undue means exhausted, and the Orphans money most
uncharitably and unconscionably embezled, and the City it self thereby impaired
in its credit. You shall understand that diverse good men of the Common Counsel
out of a deep sense hereof, and sadly laying to heart the exceeding dishonor
that thereby arises to the City besides the unexpressible damage to poor
Orphans, to whom the City ought to be in loco Parentum, instead of Parents, the
institution being intended for their preservation, and the prevention of fraud
and deceit in particular persons: Those good men I say fearing a miscarriage
herein, have earnestly labored that the Common Counsel might have a true
knowledge and account of the City Treasure; And after much importunity and pains
taken therein; with much ado a Committee was obtained to take the said account,
to the year 1649. A Copy whereof for your information, as a particular nearly
concerning you, is likewise thought fit hereunto to be annexed: Together, with
the anumeration of certain other grievances, and their Remedies, offered by the
said Committee to the Common Counsel.

August 26. 1650.
The Report of the Committee appointed for Examination of the state of the
CHAMBER of London.
ABout 1630. we find the Chamber to be indebted about the sum of 050000.00.00.

At Michaelmasse 1649. the Account of the Chamber being then Cast up, the
Chamber was then in Debt: Viz.
l. s. d. To Orphans 169654: 01: 03 To other Persons for Principal money
094412: 13: 04 264066. 14. 09

The means whereby it came into Debt, are either Extraordinary, or Ordinary.

Extraordinary.
Anno 1630. A Gold Cup given the Prince 001191. 04. 09 Anno 1633. Presents
given to the King, Queen, and Prince 00326^. 00. 00 Anno 1634. A Jewel given
the Queen 004000. 00. 00 Anno 1634. Entertainment of the King and Queen at
Merchant-Taylors-Hall. 001287. 12. 08 Anno 1634 Christening the Duke of York
000633. 00. 00 Anno 1639 A Cup of gold given the Q. Mother, and other charges
001000. 00. 00 Anno 1639 Charges of the Charter 002355. 00. 00 Anno 1639 Given
the King 010000. 00. 00 Anno 1639 Composition for Package and Scavage 004000.
00. 00 Anno 1639 Composition for Londonderry 012000. 00. 00 Anno 1639 To the
repair of Paul's 000600. 00. 00 Anno 1642 Entertainment of the King and Queen
001786. 00. 00 For Building the Bridge 006400. 00. 00 For Ship-monty, and
setting out Ships at Sea 017218. 00. 00 By Gifts and Rewards to Officers for 20
years, at 1200. l. per Annum 024000. 00. 00 089730. 17. 01 Quaere, What
authority the Court of Aldermen had to give such gifts By several bad Debts By
several bad Debts 071739. 14. 01

Ordinary.
l. s. d. Charges for Marshall Causes for twenty years 035278. 00. 00 For
Interest-money paid 20 years, at 6000 l. per annum 120000. 00. 00 By delivering
up of Bonds to be Cancelled by Act of Common Council in 1640. to several
Persons for money lent them out of the Chamber 20. years before about 30000. l.
Principal in all with Interest 060000. 00. 00 For Officers standing Fees for
about 20. years, at 1400 l. per annum 028000. 00. 00. For Workmens wages for
20. years at 1000 l. per annum 020000. 00. 00 Stuff for Reparation for about
20. years, at 1600 l. per annum 030400. 00. 00 The total sum given, lost and
expended for about 20. years, is 455148. 11. 02

Now having found out what the CHAMBER is indebted, and by what means it came
so indebted; We have these Two things to offer; Viz.

The reimbursement of the CHAMBER. The prevention of the like evil for time to
come.
First, For reimbursement of the Chamber, we conceive thar a speedy course
should be taken for getting in

I. All Debts belonging to the CHAMBER. II. That all the Lands, Tenements, and
all other things belonging to this City, be speedily sold toward satisfaction
of the Debts; and in case they shall not be sufficient, then the Remainder to
be made good by a Tax, or otherwise as the Court shall think fit
And having set before you what your Engagements are, we judged it also meet to
give you a guess of what you have wherewith to discharge the Engagement. Viz.

l. s. d. By Fines for City Lands 002329. 00. 00 By Fines for Aldermen and
Sheriffs 005206. 00. 00 By several other Debts 004813. 00. 00 By the Royal
Contract 025000. 00. 00 By the Manor of Finsbury a 1000 l. per annum 008000.
00. 00 By the Lands and Tenements belonging to the Chamber, 8000 l. per annum
068000. 00. 00 By Goods, and Plate, and Jewels 001200. 00. 00 By Londonderry
020000. 00. 00 134548. 00. 00

Secondly, for prevention of the like evil for time to come, this Committee
has set down the most material Grievances, and their respective Remedies, as
they conceive, and offer them to the consideration of this Court.

Grievance 1.
The said Committee find that the Revenue of the City and the Orphans money
come all into one Bank and Treasury, and the vast and unnecessary expense of
the City exceeds it is Revenue, and incroaches upon the stock of the Orphans to
supply it is exorbitancy, and whatever charges have come upon the City have
been defrayed in great measure by the Orphans money.

Remedy 1.
That two distinct Accounts and Cashes be kept henceforth by way of Debtors and
Creditors, one for the Revenue of the City, and the other for Orphanage money,
and that none of the Orphans money be issued out for payment of former debts
contracted, but for the payment of those particular Orphans by name, whose
moneys shall from henceforth be brough in; and that until such moneys shall
grow due to be paid unto the Orphans that brought in the same, they shallbe put
forth for the best advantage, and thereout to pay finding money; and that also
a strict account be taken of what the City Revenue will amount unto (the Lands
being sold) that so we may apportion our expense accodingly.

And that two Committees be chosen, nine persons to be of each Committee, the
Quorum to be three, the one for the Revenue of the City, and the other for the
Orphans; four of each Committee to fall of at Michaelmas day every year, and
four more to be chosen, the said Committee to examine from time to time, and
Audit the several and respective Accounts of the Revenue of the City and
Orphans, and take care the money be issued upon the distinct Accounts
aforesaid, which Committee shall from time to time make their reports to the
Court of Common Counsel.

And in case the Chamberlain shall issue out any monys other then by Act of
Common Counsel, and the order of the said Committees respectively, unless for
finding money, or upon satisfaction to be made to Orphans for their portions;
that then the Chamberlain shall answer and make good the same and forfeit his
place.

The Officers under the Chamber to be employed herein to be two, the one to be
receiver of the City Revenue and of the Orphans money, the other to be Cleark
to keep the Book of Accounts.

Grievance 2.
The said Committee find an excessive charge to be upon the City in
maintaining and keeping so many workmen of all trades, and by being confined to
make use of those particular men, who bring in great sums annually Expended in
emption of reparation, stuff, and for work-mens wages, and their wages
sometimes exceeding the materials, who make their Bills it is conceived more by
custom, then by real charge expended or work done by them.

Remedy 2.
That all the said worke-men be discharged, and that a Committee be chosen that
shall from time to time contract with workmen as they shall see cause, both
for their stuff and labor, and that a Surveyor be chosen to view works to be
done, and to make report as the case shall require to the said Committee, and
upon warrant from that Committee to the Chamberlain, the workmen to be paid
their Bills out of such money which shall be raised by fifteens, According to
the Ancient and Laudable Custom of this City.

Grievance 3.
The said Committee find an Annual Charge of 6. or 700. l. per annum expended
in keeping Courts in Kent, Essex, Surry, and about the River of Thames, for
conservation of the River in Fishing and keeping it Navigable; and yet small or
no fines or other profit arises thereby to the City, whereby the said charge
may be defrayed, so that the same is a superfluous expense

Remedy 3.
That one steward be appointed to keep Courts and receive fines and give
account of the same, and to be allowed reasonable charges therein.

Grievance 4.
The said Committees find great sums of Money and Annuities given to diverse
Officers of the City by way of Gifts and rewards over and above their ancient
Sallaries and allowances, which in this ttme of the Chambers stock declining
are most fit to be spared.

Remedy 4.
That no moneys by way of gift, reward, or increase of Sallarie be henceforth
given by the Major and Court of Aldermen, without consent of the Court of
Common Counsel.

All which we humbly leave unto the consideration of this Court, and offer it
as the earnest desire of this Committee that a Common Counsel be held once
every week, to prosecute this our Report unto some good issue, for the good of
the City.

August 26. 1650. Present, Mr. Sheriff Pack Mr. Ald. Chiverton Col. Mannering
Mr. Cole. Mr. Barbone Mr. Dallison Mr. Ald. Tichborne Mr. Ald. Hayes Mr. Gibbs
Mr. Bolton Mr. Adams Mr. Manton.


By all which you may perceive.

I. That though it has ever been urged as necessary, that the chief Officers
of the City should be men of great Estates, yet you shall find that their
Liberality was still supplied from the common Purse, as appears by the Sums
swallowed up in Presents, Gifts, and superfluous Entertainments, etc. mentioned
in the beginning of their Account: Their very Hous-keeping also (for the most
part) during their being in Office, being defrayed by the City.

II. You will find the present Poverty and low condition of the Chamber of
London; and that it is necessary that some other Security be thought upon, and
the Estates you leave your Children, in some mor secure manner disposed of,
till such time as the Debts already contracted be discharged; at least force
not in the Estates of present Orphans, to stop old Aldermen-Gaps; but reserve
them carefully for the right owners.

III. You will hereby find it necessary, that an effectual way be taken for
the yearly Auditing of Accounts, such as is offered as a Remedy to the first
Grievance; Inasmuch as there is nothing does more encourage and give occasion
to embezelment, and undue dispending the City-Treasury, then the long omission
of Accounts.

I shall humbly-likewise subjoyn, as necessary for your considerations, That
the duty and business, the time of continuance and allowance of every Officer
in the City, from the highest to the lowest, be amongst your selves agreed
upon; and, That they be fairly Written in Tables, and affixed in the
Common Council, and Common Hall. And that likewise the business, time of
continuance, and allowance be expressed in Writing, and publicly Read at the
Election of every Officer; And that two Copies thereof be drawn up, the one to
remain in the custody of each respective Officer, and the other in the custody
of the respective persons that chose: That so controversies about these
particulars may be at an end; and that as well the Officer may know what he has
to do, and how far he is authorized; and that the People likewise may know
when, and how far each Officer exceeds the bounds and limits of his Authority.
This I humbly conceive to be absolutely necessary; for want whereof has arisen
these many usurpations, and undue administrations that have been complained of
on the one hand, and the many disgusts and differences between the People
themselves on the other; and all because of an uncertainty in these particulars.

Mark those that show fair before they are chosen Common-councell-men, but
prove false, or negligent, or proud and presumptuous ever after; That stand
stoutly and faithfully for your good and for your Liberty, whilst they are
Common-councell-men, but being made Aldermen prove treacherous, and trample
upon your Liberties; and use all diligence to make their unworthiness known
unto the world, and to render unto them according to their Works; and in making
use of the Act of Parliament for Elections here following, be sure to reject
all such perfidious Persons.

Vicessimo octavo Februarii, 1648.
An Act of the Commons of England in Parliament assembled for removing
Obstructions in the proceedings of the Common Council of the City of LONDON.
THe Commons of England in Parliament assembled, do enact and ordain, and be it
enacted and ordained by the authority aforesaid, That in all times to come,
the Lord Major of the said City of London, so often and at such time as any
ten or more of the Common Council men do by writing under their hands request
or desire him thereunto, shall summon, assemble, and hold a Common Council.
And if ut any time being so requested or desired, he shall fail therein, then
the ten persons, or more, making such request or desire, shall have power, and
are hereby authorized by writing under their hand, to Common, or cause to be
summoned to the said Council, the members belonging thereunto in as ample
manner as the Lord Mayor himself usually heretofore has done. And that the
Members appearing upon the same summons, being of the number of forty, or
more, shall become a Common Council. And that each Officer whose duty it
shall be to warn in and summon the members of the said Council, shall perform
the same from time to time, upon the Warrant or Command often persons or more
so authorized as aforesaid. And it is further enacted and ordained by
authority aforesaid, that in every Common Council hereafter to be assembled,
the Lord Mayor of the said City for the time being or in his absence such
Locum tenens as he shall appoint, and in default thereof the eldest Alderman
present, if any be, and for want of such Alderman, or in case of his ueglect or
refusal therein, then any other person Member of the said Council, whom the
Commons present in the said Council shall choose shall be from time to time
President or Chairman of the said Council, and shall cause and suffer all
things offered to, or proposed in the said Council, to be fairly and orderly
debated, put to the question, voted and determined in and by the same Council,
as the mayor part of the Members present in the said Council shall desire or
think fit; and in every vote which shall pass, and in the other proceedings of
the said Council, neither the L. Mayor nor Aldermen, joint or separate, shall
have any negative or distinct voice or vote, otherwise then with and among, and
as part of the rest of the members of the said Council, and in the same manner
as the other members have: And that the absence and withdrawing of the Lord
Mayor or Aldermen from the said Council, shall not stop or prejudice the
proceedings of the said Council, And that every Common Council which shall be
held in the city of London shall sit and continue so long as the major part of
the council shall think fit, and shall not be dissolved or adjourned but by and
according to the Order or consent of the Major part of the same council. And
that all the Votes and Acts of the said common council which was held 13
January last, after the departure of the L Mayor from the same council And also
all Votes and Acts of every common counsel hereafter to be held, shall be from
time to time duly registered as the Votes and Acts of the said council have
used to be done in time past. And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the
authority aforesaid, that every Officer which shall sit in the said council,
shall be from time to time chosen by the said council, and shall have such
reasonable allowance or salary for his pains and service therein, as the council
shall think fit. And that every such Officer shall attend the said
common counsel: And that all Acts and Records, and Register-books belonging to
the said city, shall be extant to be perusd and searched into by every citizen
of the said city, in the presence of the Officer who shall have the charge or
keeping thereof, who is hereby required to attend for the same purpose.

HEN. SCOBELL CLER. PARLIAMENT.

Quit your selves and the City of all those inhumane cruel, sharking, and
growling Officers, as Clerks, Sergeants ^omen, Youngmen, Coun^er keepers,
Prison-keepers, being all so enured to baseness and villainy, that in vant you
endevor to re^orm abuses whilst such ar^ employed; and in all their places,
retain none but discreet and conscionable persons that will use men with
humanity and Christianity; Be sensible of the cries of poor distressed Prisoners
and consider how it can be answered, that any should be choakt and eaten up
with nastiness, want of food, and vermin; least whilst you complain of
unfaithfulness and hard heartedness in others, your selves be found guilty in
the judgment of the Lord. And that you may more fully and groundedly know your
Rights, take the Heads of your Freedoms, as they are confirmed by the Charter
of Edward the second, as here follows; and fix them in your own, your
Servants, and Childrens memories for ever.

EDWARD by the grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of
Aquitane: To all to whom these present Letters shall come, greeting
KNow ye, that whereas our beloved and trusty, the Major, Aldermen, and the
rest of the Citizens of our City of London, for the betterment of the said
City, and for the common profit of the Inhabitants in the same City, and of
such as repair and come to the same; did among themselves ordain and Enact
certain things to be for ever observed in the said City, and earnestly
supplicated us, that we would take care to accept and confirm the same; we
having seen certain Letters Pattents touching the premises, signed with the
common Seal of the said City, and with the Seal of the Office of the Majoralty
of the same City, concerning the premises being open, and presented to us; we
have caused certain Articles to be drawn out of the said Letters Pattents, and
the same in some things to be corrected as here following they are set down,
That is to say, That the Major, and Sheriffs of the said City, be chosen by the
Citizens of the same City, according to the Tenure of the Charters of our
Progenitors, formerly Kings of England, therefore made unto them, and not
otherwise. And the Major of the City aforesaid shall not abide in the office of
his Majoralty, at one time, above one year. And that none of the Sheriffs of
the city for the time being, have but two Clerks, and two servants, in regard
of that office. And that they take such Clerks and sergeants at their own
peril, for whom they will answer. And that the Major of the City aforesaid,
while he is Major, hold no other office belonging to the City, then the office
of the Majoralty of the same City. Neither draw unto him, or hold before him in
the Chamber of the said City, any Vicecountill plea, nor any other pleas then
those which according to the ancient custom of the said City, as Major, he
ought to hold. And that the Aldermen of the said City from year to year, and
especially upon the day of Saint Gregory the Pope, by the said Commonalty be
removeable; and being removed, may not be chosen again for the ensuing year.
But instead of those that be removed, others be chosen by the same Wards of
which the Aldermen so removed were: And that Tallages or Aids for the use of
us, our heirs, or for the State or profit of the said City, from henceforth in
the same, to be assessed, after they be assessed by men of the Wards chosen or
deputed for that end, may not be increa^ed, or raised by the Major, Aldermen,
or others, but by the common conseat of the Major and Commonalty of the City
aforesaid. And that the moneys arising from such Tallages, or Aids, be
delivered in to the custody of four honest Commoners of the City aforesaid for
that end, to be chosen by the Commonalty of the said City, to be paid over by
the testimany of the same 4. men; so that the said 4. men may be able to inform
the said Commonalty, for what profit and what uses the said moneys went. And
that no stranger or alien be admitted into the freedom of the said city, but
in the Hustings. And that a Native, and especially an English Merchant of any
trade or calling, be not admitted into the liberty of the said City, but by the
manucaption of six honest and able men of the trade or calling of which he
shall be who is so to be made free; which said six men shall become bound for
him to be made free, for keeping the City harmless on that behalf. And the same
manner or form of manucaption shall be observed of the strangers or aliens
aforesaid, who are to be made free of the said city in the Hustings, if they
be of any certain trade or office. And if they be of no trade, then they may
not be made free of the said city, without the assent of the Commonalty of the
said City. And they that were made f^ee of the city, since we took upon us the
government of our Realm, contrary to the forms prescribed, and who against
their oaths in this behalf taken, or against the State of the City have acted
and been lawfully thereof convicted, shall forfeit their freedom of the City;
Provided always, that the ancient manner and form of the City aforesaid of
Apprentices in the same city, be observed, And that every year in the said
city, so often as need shall require inquisition be made, if any free man of
the said City, shall sell in the city the goods of others, who are not free of
the city by calling those goods their own, contrary to their oath, and the
freedom of the said City: those that shall be thereof lawfully convicted, do
forfeit their freedom of the City. And that all and every of those which are
free of the city aforesaid, and willing to enjoy the liberties and free
Customs of the said City, be in Lot and Scot, and partakers of all charges for
the State of the said City aforesaid, and for maintaining the freedom thereof,
according to the Oath which they did sake, when they were made free, And he
that will not this do, does for^^^^ the freedom of the City; And that all and
every who be free of the said City: and dwell without the same, and do exercise
Merchandise by themselves or Agents within the City; Bain Lot and Scot with the
Commons of the City for the said Merchandise, or otherwise, they shall forfeit
their freedom; And that main Common Seal of the City aforesaid, remain in the
custody of two Aldermen, and two other Commoners to be chosen for it by the
COMMONS of the City; And that the said Se^l be not denied to the poor: nay,
rich Commoners of the City aforesaid, whenever they stand in need of it,
while they can reasonably prove the cause or demand. And that nothing be taken
for the setting to of the said Seal. And that Redditions of Judgments in the
Courts of the City, and especially after verdict of Inquisitions taken in cases
where Inquisitions are taken, shall not be hindered or retarded, unless some
difficulty fall out; And if difficuity fall out, yet for this they shall not
remain beyond the third Court to be holden after. And that weights and measures
of Merchandise to be measured betwixt Merchant and Merthant, of which the
profits arising, and the Cognizance of the same, belong to the COMMONALTY of
the said City, remain in the keeping of honest and able men of the City,
skillful in that Calling, and to be chosen for this by the COMMONALTY of the
City to be kept at the pleasure of the said COMMONALTY, and it to be entrusted
by no means to any other, but to such so to be chosen. And that the Sheriffs of
the City aforesaid for the time being may set the Toll and other Customs
belonging to their Farm, and other public offices belonging to them (and to be
exercised by others) to able Citizens (if they will set them) for whom the
Sheriffs themselves will answer, and to none other. And if any Deputed to any
of the premises, undue customs, or shall otherwise behave himself, in that
office then be ought, and at the ^u^e of the Complainant be thereof convicted,
Be put out of that office, and punished according to his demerits. And that
Merchants who are not of the freedom of the City aforesaid may not sell any
wines or other wares within the City or the subur^^ thereof by Retail. And that
Brokers of any merchandise in the City aforesaid may not be except they be
chosen by Merchants of those trades in which these Brokers have had their
Callings to exercise, and upon this at the least take oath before the Mayor of
the said City. And that all common Innkeepers in the said City and Suburbs
thereof, though they be not of the freedom of the City, but partakers of the
charges belonging to the said City, for maintaining the state of the City, so
long as they be common Innkeepers; as other the like Innkeepers in that City
and suburbs shall partake by reason of the Innkeepers: provided always, that
merchants of Gascoign, and other strangers always may dwell and long together
in the said City as formerly they were accustomed to do. And that the keeping
of the Bridge of the City aforesaid, and the Rents and Profits belonging to the
said Bridge, be committed to two honest and able men of the City aforesaid,
others then Aldermen, to be chosen for that purpose, by the Commonalty of the
said City to be kept at the pleasure of the Commonalty of the said City, and
who are able to answer to the Commonalty of the said City for the same, and not
to any others. And that no Sergeant of the Chamber of Guild Hall of the City
aforesaid, take Fee of the Commonalty of the said City, or make execution,
unless he be thereunto chosen by the Commonalty of the City for that end. And
that the Chamberlain, Common Clark, and Common Sergeant of the City aforesaid,
be chosen by the Commonalty of the said City; and removed at the pleasure of
the said Commonalty. And that the Major and Recorder of the said City, and the
said Chamberlain and Common Clark, be content with their Fees appointed, and
paid of old, by reason of their office: And other fees they may not take for
their offices abovesaid And that the Goods of Aldermen of the said City, be
taxed as the Goods of other Citizens, in Aids, Callages, and other
Contributions happening in the City, by men of the Wards, where these Aldermen
abide.

NOW worthy Citizens, by what is before expressed you may partly see your own
freedoms and rights which are to have votes in the annual election of the
greatest of your Officers either personally, or by reason of the popularity of
the City Deputatively by representatives, and this is so essential a right of
yours, to denominate you to be freemen indeed, as the robbing you of it
demonstrates you to be slaves rather then freemen: and though in any of your
ancestors there should have been so much baseness as voluntarily to give them
away, (which they never did) yet their giving cannot tie you in your
generationss from the claiming and assuming the Exercise of your indubitable
natural rights; and high time it is for you so to do, forasmuch as the
encroachments of your Court of Aldermen upon your natural rights, has not only
run your common Treasury into about three hundred thousand pounds debt, but
also has put them in the road way to cosen and cheat all your Orphans of all
their portions that at the deaths of their fathers they force the executors to
bring into their hands and what man but a mad man or a fool would labor for to
get riches that his children shall never be the better for, but be left for
knaves and cheats to wast, spend and consume: And therefore consider with your
selves of how great a concernment it is for you at your next election to choose
faithful and valiant Common-Councel-men that will struggle with the strength of
reason to regain your lost Liberties, and to controvert with the strength of
Argument, that just and needful question now one foot betwixt your present
honest Common-Councel-men, and your arbitrary incroaching Court of Aldermen,
viz. Whether those Aldermens lands and estates that were Aldermen in those
years your money was wasted and spent, shall pay those vast debts they have run
you into, or whether now in your poverty and decay of your trades, you shall be
forced by a common tax to pay about 300000. l. your Aldermen in less then 20
years has wasted you: Room straitens me for going on, but expect in few days
a Piece to the purpose, by a better pen, and if you give encouragement by your
good use of what is here already declared to you, this pen promises to visit
you again in print before many weeks be expired; but in the mean time commits
you to God. This 17. December, 1650.

FINIS.

