News from New England: IN A LETTER Written to a Person of Quality, wherein is
a true Account of the present State of that Country, with respect to the late
REVOLUTION, and the present War with the INDIANS there. Together with a
RELATION of A Late and Bloody Fight BETWEEN The ENGLISH and the INDIANS,
wherein the latter were Routed: AS ALSO OF A Pretended Miracle of the French
Jesuits in that part of the World.
Licensed Febr. 27. 1689. J. F.

Worthy Sir,
THat you may not be imposed upon by false Accounts, which I perceive some Ill
Men do with a malicious Design industriously promote, concerning the present
State of New England; I have thought it my Duty to Communicate to you what
Intelligence I have received from thence.

You may please to be Informed, that above a year ago, whilst Sir E. A. who
acted by an Illegal and Arbitrary Commission, under the late King James, was
executing his Tyranny (as by their Declaration published at Boston, April 18th.
1689. does more fully appear) over the People of New England, the Indians in
that part of the World began a War upon them.

Those Indians affirmed (how truly God knows) that they were encouraged so to
do, not only by the French, who inhabit that Continent, but by Sir E. A. that
so they might destroy King James his Enemies. A small party of Indians began
the War, some of which were seized by the English; but Sir E. set them at
liberty, with many favors, which did not a little augment the Jealousies of
the People; and it is said these very Indians have done a great part of the
Mischief since sustained by the Inhabitants there. Whilst these things were a
doing, Sir E. A. did all that possibly he could to keep People Ignorant of
Affairs in England: Yea, some were imprisoned for dispersing the Prince of
Orange's Declaration, which was styled by some a Seditious Pamphlet, tending to
Rebellion. This, notwithstanding the Prince his Declaration, (Intelligence from
England at the same time also arriving, that in Hull, Dover, etc. the Illegal
Governors were seized on) did so Inspire and Animate great multitudes of
People, as that they secured Sir E. and his Arbitrary Accomplices, who had been
their Oppressors, reserving them for such Punishment as the King and Parliament
of England should think meet for them: And this they did that all the World
might see they acknowledge a dependence on England, as by their Charters they
are obliged.

They supposed those Persons to be great Criminals, who had either prosecuted
Quo Warranto's against their Charters, or pretended Surrenders when there were
none, or had levied Moneys on the Kings Subjects, without any consent of the
People, or of their Representatives; and this too in those Colonies, against
whose Charters no Judgment was entered, or legal Surrenders made, but an
Arbitraty Power set over them.

On the first notice of his present Majesty (then Prince of Orange) his
Declaration, before ever they know what the Event of thi^^^ ^^^ld be, they
readily Embarked themselves in that Glorious Cause which is for Religion,
Liberty, and Property.

And immediately upon their hearing that the Prince was King of England, they
did with the greatest Alacrity Proclaim him their King in New England: And this
they did of their own accord, without any Order from hence requiring it of them.

After this (as Letters from thence inform) the Indians, to whom Sir E. A. had
been so favorable, burnt several (some of them considerable) Plantations in
the Eastern parts of the Country, killing or taking Captive some scores of
them; of which as yet we have not a full and particular Account: Also the Fort
of Pemmaquid being deserted, was sometime in the hands of the Indians; but the
Master of the last Ship that came from Boston, relates, That now there are
neither Indians, nor French, nor any other in that Fort, it being demolished by
a Dutch Privateer, who was lately on that Coast, and has taken away the Guns
which were in it.

It Is also credibly reported, That the New-Englanders had a Fight with the
Indians in September last: And that their Enemies were Routed, not one
Indian-Enemy to be seen or heard of for six weeks before the last Vessels came
from thence.

In a Letter from Boston, October 16. 1689. written by a good hand, are these
words, The Indians do now and then some hurt in our Plantations, but of late
little, for there is an Army of English, with two or three hundred of our
Friend- Indians gone out against them, and have beaten them. Also there is an
Army of other Indians called Mohawks, which are going out against them, so that
in a short time an end may be put to this trouble.

Another Letter written by a Person worthy of Credit, (dated October 21.)
gives a further (and indeed a very remarkable) Account of the present State of
Affairs there, which I have therefore caused to be transcribed; the words are
these.

Sir, Among our other Calamities at this day afflicting of us, we are extremely
entangled by an Indian War, which has ruined some Heathenish English
Plantations in the Northern and Eastern Parts of the Country; but we have an
Army now in the pursuit after those Enemies, who affirm (as our Captives
escaped from them inform) that they are encouraged by some Gentlemen in Boston,
vigorously to prosecute the War upon us. By a mavelous Providence the most
Mighty and Warlike Nation of the Indians, namely, the Mohawks, who dwell three
or four hundred miles to the Westward, are become implacable Enemies to the
French of Canada, under whose Patronage and Encouragement our Indian Enemies do
shroud themselves. These Mohawks, which are the Terror of all about them, have
kindly offered to give a Destructive Visit unto our Enemies, when their hand's
in at the slaying of the French, whom they have already slaughtered many
hundreds of, and we are every day waiting for the Issue of it.

It Is remarkable, That these Mohawks had been many of them perverted unto
Popery by the endeavors of the French Jesuits amongst them; but some while
since a noted Jesuit pretended to work a Miracle for their Confirmation in the
Roman Catholic Religion; and told them, That God was angry at them for their
making no more Demonstrations of their Zeal for his Religion: and therefore as
a token of it, such a day the Sun would be black. Before the day came, the
Mohawks, many o^ (...), had (...) opportunity for some Conversation with the
Dutch, and acquainting them with their Expectations of this Miracle, the Dutch
told them, Every Child amongst them could foretell as much as that came to; for
an Eclipse of the Sun was to happen on that day: But (said they) let the Jesuit
make the Sun black a day before, or a day after, and then believe all he says.

Hereupon they were so terribly distasted at the Jesuits going to put a trick
upon them, that they have resolved to Renounce what little Popery they had, and
have seriously applied themselves to some Protestant Ministers, whose
Instructions they seem to imbibe with affections that invite us to consider
upon some further Expedients for their Conversion.

Thus that Letter.

There are also several Letters, dated October last, directed to some Persons
of Quality in London, from the the Honorable Simon Bradstreet, who is the
present Governor at Boston in New England, which inform of the great
Devastations made by the Indians in the Province of Main, (that having been the
chief Seat of the War) and in Hampshire; and some mischief they have done (tho
not much) in the Massachusetts Colony: But the three Colonies of Massachusetts,
Plymouth, and Connecticot, (which were whilst they enjoyed their
Charter-Government called the United Colonies) have by a joint concurrence sent
out a considerable Force against the Common Enemy in two Bodies; they could not
come to a pitched Battle with the Indians, whose manner is to skulk in the
Woods, and to do their mischief by several Parties. The same Honorable Person
(together with the Council in Boston) writes, that they are not secure from an
Attack by the French, who (as they hear) have considerable strength in the
West Indies; but by the help of God, they will endeavor to preserve and defend
their Majesty's Interest, as well against the French, as any other Enemies to
the Crown of England.

Also, That some in Albany fearing an Attack from the French, having first made
their Application to New York, could not be supplied from thence, they sent to
the present Government at Boston for Assistance; and Order has been taken by
the Concurrence of the three Colonies for the raising of a Company to be sent
to Albany, to enforce and strengthen the Garrison there: For the several
Governments of the Colonies in New England, hold themselves concerned to intend
the security and preservation of their Majesty's Interest throughout that whole
Country. And diverse particular Persons (such is their Loyalty and Affection to
their present Majesty's, King William, and Queen Mary,) have been willing to
advance of their own Estates, toward the charge thereof, upon the public
Credit, some beyond their Abili^^^^ They moreover write, That some Persons who
^e^e (...) ^^rned in the ^^te unhappy Government, ^^der Sir E* A. seei^g
t^emselves disappoitned in their hopes of raising their Fortunes upon the
ruins of t^^ People of New England, manifest their disaffection, not only to
the present Government there, but in England also, some of them having been so
impudent as to express their Expectations and Desires, that the late King James
would be restored again; and have done what they could to Royle the
Inhabitants, by raising and fomenting false Reports concerning the present
State ^f Affairs in England: But the People (as well as those who are now in
Government there) are steadfast in their Loyalty to their Present Majesty's.

This, Sir, is what is come to my hands respecting the present State of
New England. I expect more daily, which when I receive, I shall not fail to
gratify your desires in imparting what may be relied on as a true Relation:
This is all at present, from

Sir, Your Servant.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
There is lately Published, The Fourth Volumn of Casuistical Morning-Exercises,
by several Ministers in and about London, Preached in October, 1689.

A new Martyrology, or the Bloody Assizes, now exactly Methodized in one
Volumn, comprehending a Complete History of the Lives, Trials, Sufferings,
Death and Characters of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, Justice Arnold, Mr. College,
Arthur Earl of Essex, William Lord Russel, Colonel Sydney, Captain Walcot, Mr.
Rouse, Mr. Holloway, Sir Thomas Armstrong, Alderman Cornish, Mr. Bateman, Mr.
Noyce, Dr. Oats, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Dangerfield, the late Duke of Monmouth, the
Earl of Argyle, Colonel Rumbald, Mr. Benjamin and Mr. William Hewling, Mr.
William Jenkins, Mr. Batiscomb, the Lady Lisle, Mrs Gaunt, Mr. Nelthrope, Mr.
Charles Speak, Colonel Holmes, Mr. Hicks, Mr. Lark, Mr. Madders, Capt. Kidd,
Dr. Temple, Mr. Parret, Capt. Annesley, and Capt. Matthews. Together with the
Dying Speeches, Letters, and Prayers, etc. of all the rest of those Eminent
Protestants, who fell in the West* of England, and elsewhere; from the year
1678. to 1689. With the Pictures of several of the Chief of them in
Copper Plates. To this Treatise is added the Life, Death, and Character of
George Lord Jefferies.

Mr. Kents Funeral Sermon preached by Mr. Samuel Slater. All three Printed for
John Dunton.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultrey. 1690.


