To my Worthy Friends, Mr. W.C. and Mr. A.P.
HAD it not been a necessary Acknowledgment, I had not presumed (Gentlemen) to
have occasioned you a Blush, in throwing such a Trifle as this unto your
Protection. And yet, I fear, that what I design as an Expression of my
Gratitude for your many Favors, may draw on me a greater Obligation from you;
I mean in receiving this into your Patronage: It is the first thing I have done
public Penance for in a Sheet: Which, yet, had Mr. Blount been less hasty,
had been more Correct and Pardonable. You know the Circumstances that provoked
me to this Attempt; I shall only put you in mind, that -- Nil habet Infaelix
Paupertas durius in se,
Quam quod Ridicules homines facit!


I shall not need to trouble you with the English on it, to whom the Latin is as
familiar and easy as your own English Tongue: Nor would I have the Ladys
understand it, lest it spoil my Fortunes.

I must confess there is much in that! But there will be infinitely more in
your goodness, if you will not, for this, lessen the kind opinion you have
hitherto had of, most Dear Friends!

Your most sensibly Obliged, Obedient and Humble Servant, A. O.

THE Fair EXTRAVAGANT OR, THE Humorous Bride. AN ENGLISH NOVEL.
IT is expected (perhaps) I should say something by way of Introduction to this
Discourse, an play the Philosopher before I play the Poet. But at present I am
not disposed to be serious; besides I never was fond of that tedious Paradox,
the farthest way about, is the nearest way home, and so am willing to be
Trudging on to the Story, which tells us:

Ariadne was as Beautiful as any of her Age, as Witty as Fair, as well
Educated, and as Humorous as either; Add to these the advantage of her Uncle's
Death, who left her sole Heiress to Twelve Hundred Pounds a Year, besides some
Thousands in Money and Jewels, and you will conclude he was the happiest
younger Brother in Christendom that Married her: And so (perhaps) he was; for I
never heard her Virtue called in question; and it is hard if a Man could
miscarry among so many Excellencies; at least it must be his own fault. Her
Birth two was Honorable enough, being Daughter to a Knight Baronet, by which
you may guess she was an English Woman and our Neighbor; for (by the way) I am
not going to put any Spanish Intrigue upon you.

The last fatal time she was in Town, being about the seventeenth year of her
Reign, (for Beauty, give me leave to tell you, has a large Empire) she Lodged,
-- let me see! somewhere about St. James's. I need not describe her Lodgings to
you, I must only say, they were agreeable to her Humor and Fortune, which made
'em both splendid and pleasant, being richly hung and adorned with Cabinets,
China, Glasses and what not! But much more with excellent Pictures of the best
Hands, and those chiefly in her Closet, where (if ever you were there) you
might have observed that of Don Quixot, and Sancho Panca, which hung just over
against Amadis de Gaul, and directly opposite to Oroondates and Caesario in
Combat when they had mistaken one another; with many more fantasticks. Nor were
her Books better matched. Here you might see Frances Quarles bound up with
George Withers, Sir John Suckling and Sir John Denham, Randolph and Broom,
Shakespeare and Johnson (though they could hardly ever agree before) B^^^^^^ and
Fl^cher (you know) always wor^ together; many other Modern Poets were pil'd in
a heap; my Lord Rochester was laid aside, only Mr. Cowley stood alone: but what
was most pleasant of all, this satirical pretty Lady had bound Rablais with Dod
upon Clever. In short, here lay a Play, there a Sermon; here an Academy, there
a Prayer Book; here a Romance, and there a Bible: not but that she was a good
Christian for all this I dare say. Now be pleased to take notice, when she was
weary of singing and dancing, she did often read in one or other of these
Books, especially Romances, for she was a great lover of Knight Errantry, and
was a little (...) way addicted, as I fear you will find, she had had the tender
of many Hearts, the proffers of many a fair Service, but either this was a
Squire, or that a Clown, or the other a Fop, and so to the end of the Chapter:
she never yet had liked any so well as to M^^^y, One day, being very long and
(...) at her Devotion, I mean, her (...) on a sudden she starts up and run^
(...) a Cousin of hers, whom she l^^ed ^^ry dearly. My heart (said she) I am
resolved on it, my own Miranda (she continued) it must be. I am confirmed in the
reasonableness of the project, and I will go through with it; therefore make
have and prepare to second me. -- The young Lady her Cousin was surprised, but
knowing her humor pretty well, she straight concluded there was some frolic
intended, and boldly said, Lead on (my Dear^) I Will follow thee, assured that
still thy Virtue will guide us always. Perhaps (replied Ariadne) the zealous
and the scrupulous may at this time call it in question, but thou shall be my
Judge. Know then (thou tender'st part of my Soul!) I am just now weary of that
o'repressing weight of a Maidenhead, which I have labored under these five
long years; and since I have not been Courted by any man to whom I could engage
my self for ever and for Ay, I am resolved we will put on two of my Brothers
(...) and ramble all the Town over, (...) will meet with the man with whom I
can find in my heart to commit the dangerous Sin of Matrimony. Thou will be
witness of all my actions, which I hope shall ^^^er cost thee a Blush, Ah
(dearest friend) replied Miranda, I know your Virtue keeps too strict a Guard,
to permit any thing to be acted contrary to it is Prerogative, it is absolute and
allows but few privileges to the Subject, but those most wholesome and
pleasant; and for this little extravagance you have proposed, I think it so
Innocent, especially reguarding the design that leads you, that I protest I am
fond of it my self. Come along then (said Ariadne) let us to my Brothers Chamber
and dress! it is now about three a Clock, and Evander (that was her Brothers
name) is just gone out to take a Bottle before Play-time: How know you t^^t?
(said her Cousin,) As I sat in my Closet (replied Ariadne) I heard him ask if
the Coach were ready? 'twas answered yes, upon which he went down stairs. This
blessed opportunity must not escape us, by (...) means (said her loving
Second.) Without making any more words therefore they went directly to Evanders
Wardrobe, (...) fitted themselves with two of the richest, and most modish
Suits that were there, which indeed were very Glorious and fashionable: for by
the way, Evander was a Spark of the first Rate, his Father having left above
3000 l. a year, clear Estate in Land, besides a considerable bank of Money. He
was very good humored and very handsome, much like his Sister, and very little
Taller; four years older than she, being just turned of twenty one. However
were he twenty Brothers, and twenty times more like her, than he was, she was
mighty glad of his Absence, for they immediately dressed themselves, and the
Clothes sat very well on 'em, being all three much of the same height and
proportion. Now (said Miranda) Cousin, Marry as soon as you will, I would advise
you not to part with the Breeche^, for I vow to you they become you extremely
well! Pardon me Miranda (said our the other Amazon) if I take not your advice,
for I should perfectly hate my Husband, if I perceived he would suffer me to
impose on him. But come Child (continued she) let us see if the Coast be Clear,
and whip out the back way: saying so, down the Back-stairs they went into the
Garden, which Door they presently unlocked, Ariadne constantly keeping a Key of
it about her, afterward they rambl'd as far as Fleet Street, and the crowd
going in, and coming out, at Richard's Coffee-house, stopped 'em, which made
Ariadne curious to know the humors of such a Place, with much ado then they
thrust in boldly and sat 'em down: says one, who sat at the Table where they
were, In my opinion the Character of a Popish Successor, etc. is as Rational a
Discourse as has been writ of late, nor can I think that Mr. L' Strange has any
way answered his least Objections to the D's Succession. O (cried Ariadne) a
delicate piece it is, no doubt! And if he had but applied himself never so
little to the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, immediately upon the Death of
Mr. Jordan; in reward he had certainly obtained the Honor of being Poet to the
Honorable City of London, before any the most presumptuous Competitor in Town.
'Twas a strange oversight in him (replied Mira^da) but I understand now he sets
up for something more Advantageous; I mean, to be Cheif-Firework Maker to the
forementioned Honorable City, upon their usual Solemnities on the 5th. and
18th. of November: and it is said he designs to Burn his own Pope Joan next
Year. Why, Sir! (said another that sat by) do you imagine it deserves so ill a
fate? And that Mr. S. Writes so mean a Style, that it may only become a
Pageant. No pardon me, Sir, (replied Ariadne taking up the Cudgels for her
friend) we here no ill opinion of your Author, for certainly I like his Scenes
of Love and Gallantry very well: but my friend Elkanah had been more highly to
be commended, had he left off before he came to Pope Joan and the Character
etc. I suppose (said another neat spruce Spark in a Band) you are a Tory. A
Tory! Sir, (cried Ariadne) what is that? That is, a Tantivy-man, a Dukes-man, or
a Papist in Masquerade. On my word (said Miranda) it is of a large
signification! But I can assure you Sir, we are none of all these. Perhaps
(continued she) we wish the D. all the Right imaginable: so do I too, (replied
our Spark with the Band) but then I fear it will go very hard with him. Pray
Sir, (continued he very pertly) don't you think the late Parliament dissolved
at Oxford, were all wise and honest, well meaning Gentlemen? How Sir! (cried
Ariadne very briskly) All w^^ and honest! that cannot be, for (...) must be some
Fools, and some Knaves, or else they are not the true Representatives of the
People. At this, some laughed, and some looked Unpleasantly. On my word young
Gentlemen (said Sir Formal with his Band) it is well our President is not here,
for he would have had about with you before now. About with us? (replied
Ariadne) what before all this Reverend Company? No, no, let him take about with
his Boys, for we are not for his Management. However, (continued she) it is time
for us to be gone, for fear he should have seen us at Paris or Validolid, or
somewhere abroad where neither of us have been these forty Years. With these
words they moved their Hats as they had seen others do, and left the Company to
censure 'em; they tript on to the Dukes-Play-house, where that day was played
the Orphan, or the Vnhappy-Marriage.

By the way (said Ariadne) I am sure none of those Fellows we left are for my
turn. They got into the Pit, before they were aware, and Ariadne had forgotten
the Name of the Play. Prithee Jack (says she to Miranda) what is played to day?
The -- something, or the Vnhappy-Marriage, (answered she.) How! (said the other
in a surprise) pray Heaven it prove not Ominous! Which is enough to convince
any charitable Man that she was a good Christian, for I dare assure him, her
Prayers were heard. -- Well -- But -- As she was thus piously reflecting, a
Gentleman who sat near 'em, and whom she had not as yet observed, over heard
her Deprecations, and taking notice of the Zeal with which she uttered 'em.
Sir, (said he) you mistake, possibly; this is not St. Paul's Covent Garden, nor
St. Dunstan's Church; and indeed I believe it is not so proper a place to Pray
in. How (said she smartly) I Am sure I have heard many a good Sermon here, and
I know no reason but that I may add a Prayer to 'em if I please; for assure
your self I have found it very wholsome so to do. Nay, and more than that, I
have on the contrary humm'd a Minuet to my self, when I have seen many a
Reverend Spark in a Cassook hold forth stoutly, and have nevertheless found no
hurt by it at all I am sorry Sir (said he) you have perverted both the Places.
Perverted (cried Ariadne, looking earnestly on him) I think I made the prop^^st
use of them according to the times and Circumstances, for there I have heard
such Hum drum Discourse, that I must of necessity have fallen asleep, had I not
sung in my own defense. Now here I have often taken notice of some Scenes that
have so patly fitted the Circumstances, which I was then under, that I could
not forbear saying Amen to them. (Said Polydor, for so the Gentleman was
called,) I see (Sir) you value your self much on your Contempt of the Clergy
and things Sacred, but I can assure you, no man in his right Senses will esteem
you e're the more for it. And pray (Sir) give me leave to ask you how long it is
since you read Mr. Hobbs's Leviath^^? for, I suppose you are mighty conversant
with his Notions. Hum! -- (said she scornfully) you will pardon me (Sir) if I
do not well know whether you mean a Book or a Monster by the Name. The last
undoubtedly (cried Miranda.) You are very positive, Sir (said Polydor,) and
have soon determined on my thoughts. But by good fortune you are in the right;
for, if things that have no resemblance to the other part of the whole
Creation, may justly be called Monstrous; this is so. Ha! (said Ariadne,
whispering Miranda) This is the Man. I confess (continued she turning to
Polydor) to prevent any further discourse on this matter, I have heard before
of this old Gentleman, but I never gave my self the trouble to be better
acquainted with him, than by Hearsay. You are the happier man, Sir (said
Poloydor) for certainly you have avoided giving your self a great deal of
Perplexity. -- By this time the Curtain was drawn up, and they suffered
themselves to be entertained by the Players. And truly they did themselves no
great Violence, for I think 'twas a good Play. They had however some Discourse
between the Acts, which (perhaps) was more Harmonious than the Music,
especially to Ariadne, who was so extremely pleased with our younger Brother,
(for so was Polydor) that she had engaged to go with him to Lockets after the
Play. Now ought I in course, to give you a Character of this same Polydor, and
so I will. -- He had lived about thirty Years, and those chiefly in Paris and
London, and a good Christian too was he. I mean no Papist, nor yet a
Presbyterian, but (perhaps) of Mr. Lestrange's Faction, if I may call the
Church of England a factious Party; but pardon me, I think it more proper to
name those so, who dissent from it. For pray take notice I mean to represent
him as he was, a very honest brave Gentleman, of a good Family, well educated,
and of good natural Parts; for his Singing and Dancing I cannot say much, but
of his Poetry, the Town has had sufficient opportunities to Judge. He was as
handsome too as the best Here I have ever seen upon our Stage. Not so cruel as
Almanzor, nor yet so timorous as Sir Nicholas Culley. Not so vain as Sir
Fopling, nor so plain as my worshipful friend Justice Cloapate. In short, he
was a very deserving man, you may believe, for I have drunk some Bottels with
him. He had an excellent virtue too besides all these, which you will have
occasion to observe: I mean his Constancy. This was therefore the Man on whom
our fair Amazon had already thrown her self away. To Lockets therefore they
went in a Coach together, where my dear friend Polydor lost twenty Guinneys,
which both the Masquerading Ladies were witnesses of, but they observed him so
undisturbed at it, that they concluded him a Stoic. Said Ariadne to him, Tempt
your Fortune ((...)) once more, here are some Guinneys at your service. Pulling
out a Purse that held forty or fifty, truly I cannot tell which. I thank you,
Sir, (said Polydor, very obligingly,) but I must not accept them. I have lost
already what I proposed to my self to hazard, besides I am yet so much a
Stranger to you that I ought not in modesty to receive so great an obligation
of you, for I have not as yet forgotten that the Philosopher said. Qui
beneficium accepit, ^^ent a^om vendidit. Pray what is that (Sir) in English?
(said Miranda.) O Sir! (replied Polydor) I am sensible of my want of breeding,
and I know it was an Error to speak Latin in Gentlemen's Company, especially in
such a Place. No matter (said Ariadne) since we know (Sir) you will not accept
of my Service. But (proceeded she) I have a proposition to make to you, if you
can find in your heart to divorce your self from this good Company, and drink a
Bottle or two with my Cousin and me in another Room. I could wish you would Sir
(said Miranda) for I vow to you I am uneasy among so many Strangers. Call then
for another Room (said Polydor) and I will wait on you immediately Gentlemen. I
will but just take my leave here. They did so, after having made their Conge to
our Gamesters, and expected him not long: but no sooner were they gone, e're
one enquired who they were? Another, whether they would Play? A third, what
Estate either of them had? And how long he had known them? Nay god (said he) I
have not been long acquainted with them; tho one of them is a Relation of mine:
which was that? (cried his friend Harry.) Why, he that offered me Money,
(answered Polydor.) Dam thee for a Coxcomb, (said his other friend Tom) for
refusing it! No no (interrupted our third Gamster) I fancy he has better
Business with him hereafter. You may swear it Will (said Polydor) the Gold and
I had not parted else, at least this Night; for be pleased to take notice, I
should not have played an Ace more. Well -- However sit down and drink a little
more for the Money thou have lost already (said honest Will.) No faith (cried
Polydor going out) I am engaged. He went directly to his new Acquaintance, who
(perhaps) were very glad to see him so punctual: and after having saluted him a
fresh, (said Ariadne) Let us now lay aside all formality, for if you please
(Sir) I mean to be very intimately acquainted with you. (A pretty sort of a
Phrase, had he known who spoke it.) It will undoubtedly be my unhappiness if I
be not, (said Polydor.) You do not know (cried she very pleasantly) how it
would contribute to the whole felicity of my Life, if you would but endeavor
it. How do you mean Sir? (ansvvered Polydor by the way of Question.) I mean
(said she) that all things might be in common betvveen us two. For believe me,
I vovv it most sacredly to you: were I a Woman, you are the only man I must
love. Hovvever I will now make you an offer that may not (happily) be wholy
disadvantageous to you, though it will add much to my Quiet. -- Dear Sir
(Interrupted Polydor) pray spare your Complements, and as soon as you please
propose if you can what I dare refuse to you. Come! To the Business; to the
Business, Cousin, (said Miranda.) You shall know then Sir (continued Ariadne) I
have a Cousin that is a rich Heiress, being at present possessed of twelve
hundred pounds a year in Land, besides some thousand pounds in Money and
Jewels: her Person is Tolerable, I think at least it is so, if mine may be
thought so; for we are more like than any other two you ever saw. Her humor I
think exceeds that Pardon me (interrupted Miranda) they are both so excellent,
that it is no easy matter to determine which is most Beautiful and Charming.
She is obliged to you (said Ariadne) her Age (continued she addressing her self
to Polydor) is the same with mine, being very near Seventeen. You may believe
in these Circumstances she could never want the Addresses of many Persons, and
those (perhaps) of no mean Quality. But she is very curious in the choice of
that fatal thing we call a Husband, for (I dare swear for her) she means to
make no Property of him, but to love him as immoderately, unmodishly, and a^
virtuously as ever Husband was loved, in the old Sacramental days of Matrimony!
And were she mine, (interrupted Polydor I would love her so heartily she should
almost complain on it: Not that I mean to kill her with kindness, for if I
should attempt that, I die first my self, but I beg your pardon. Pray, Sir,
proceed: I must then remind you (pursued she) how difficult it has been
hitherto for any man to make the least impression on her Inclinations, which
she is so sensible of, that she almost despairs of finding a man she could
heartily love. I have often heard her though describe such a Figure of a Lover
and of such Qualifications to her self, which made me once offer my Service to
her in the search of such a one she had described, insinuating that I was the
more likely to Succeed of the two, and the sooner; because my Breeches would
admit me into that Company, which her Petticoats would exclude her. She readily
accepted my offer, and was pleased to say, she was certain she should approve
of my Choice. And now this very minute am I playing the Knight Errant to serve
this Lady, which I would do with the hazard of my life, for assure your self I
love her as my own heart. You were saying (Sir interrupted Polydor) she gave
you a Figure of the man she could love, pray what was that Sir? If it be not
rude in me to desire it, nor inconvenient in you to show it. I beg you would
proceed to his Picture. You shall have it Sir, (said she) as soon as I can get
yours drawn. As for your humor you are sufficiently acquainted with that
already; for your Quality, I know it by your Name. So that to save the expense
of so much precious time, I am sure you need only consult your Glass, and you
will see the very Man therein all Circumstances. O Dear Sir! (said Polydor) do
not Impose on me, but I perceive this is but real Raillery, you have a mind to
be merry: But, Come, Sir, my Service to you; this Glass will inspire us with
another and (perhaps) as pleasant discourse. She saw him drink off his Glass
fairly: And then answered, By all the truth Mankind is capable of, you do me
wrong (Sir) to imagine that I have hitherto imposed on you, or that I shall ever
hereafter endeavor it; besides, I am very sensible it is no easy attempt in
any body, especially in me. Yet, give me leave once more to attack your unjust,
and if I may say so your unkind mistrust of me, of what I have told you. By all
the hopes I have of future Prosperity (pursued she) you are the Man. How can
you be assured of that, Sir! (said Polydor.) I am absolutely Confirmed, assured
and dare swear it (replied she) For, she see's with my Eyes, hears with my
Ears, Understands with my Intellectuals, and thinks as I do. On my word, Sir,
(said Polydor) you are a very dangerous Rival then.

Alas, Sir, (replied Ariadne) were I your Rival; you have a great deal the
advantage in your Weapon: And the Combat would be more Pleasant than Fatal. But
be confident (continued she) you need fear no Rival, to my certain knowledge,
she is passionately in Love with you: And to confess the truth, I was sent to
observe your motions, and if possible to fix you so long as to make this
discourse to you, with some overtures which yet I have omitted. Polydor all
this time regarded her so earnestly, and so strictly surveyed her all over,
that he hardly was sensible when she came to this last Period: But at length
Recollecting himself, Sir (said he) allowing all this to be real; yet you are
to learn the Circumstances, which at present I am under. But forgive me, after
all the serious Faces you have used, and after all your earnest discourse, I am
still suspicious of my own Merits, tho (perhaps) not of your sincerity, and the
assurance you have from her. And come continued he drinking to Miranda) my
Service to you, Sir. Help me I beseech you to Divert this Gentleman's
Melancholy. -- Melancholy! (said Ariadne very eagerly, as soon as ever he had
set down the Glass) It Is you that Impose now, for I see you are about to
persuade me that I am a little civilly Distracted, or so. -- But (pursued she
vehemently) pray (Sir) let us learn those Circumstances of yours which we are
yet ignorant of. Polydor seeing her somewhat concerned, did not know what
Judgment to make of what he had heard, whether it were Real or Fictitious. But
weighing deliberately the Mien, the Habit, Beauty, and Discourse of the Person,
began tacitly to accuse himself of Incivility to a Person who at the first
sight had offered him so considerable a Service, as Thirty or Forty Guinneys
might have done him, had he accepted 'em, wherefore he concluded himself
mistaken and rather the madder of the two; which obliged him very easily and
modestly to reply; Sir, I most Religiously beg your Pardon for my own Madness
in mistaking you so long; and that you may the more easily be Invited to so
generous an Act I will tell you my Circumstances, and you will find what
necessity I had to despair of my own deserts in so great an advantage as this
might have been to me. You may (happily) have heard of my name (pursued he) if
you do not know any of the Family, which I dare say is honest and not
altogether Ignoble; my Father (let me speak it with Modesty) enjoys a plentiful
Estate, Heaven be praised! However I am the youngest Son: And my Fortune is
small enough. I have no dependence but on Providence and my own endeavors, if
I should extravagantly continue to impair that little Estate my Grandfather
left me; and already the better moiety is engaged, part of which you saw me
just now make my last stake in this House; yet, give me leave to add, I am an
Honest Follow, true to my King, and my Mistress when ever I had one; no more a
Gamester than my Ancestors, which (may be) was too much; I mean tho, not fond
of it, but in hopes to improve the little pittance was left to support this
Tenement, too little for the unruly Guest that fills it; for certainly I had
never been so unadvised as to hazard my Estate, had it been any thing
proportionable to my Humor; but at present I only possess 80 Pounds a year,
the Remainder of 150 l. a year left me by the old Gentlemean I spoke of before.
And now (Sir) if after all I have discovered to you it is possible this Lady
should love me, she is a Prodigy of Goodness: But I hope, you are convinced she
cannnot. So far I am from being convinced that she should not love you for your
slender fortunes (answered Ariadne) that it the more Confirms me you only must
be the Man. For, these are the very Circumstances she could have wished to have
met with in him she Loved; And when her Brother has told her she would sometime
or other throw her self away, (as he called it) on some younger Brother, or
Extravagant Elder Brother; I have often heard her protest, she had rather
bestow her self according to the deserts of the Person, not his Land, since she
bad enough to maintain both him, her self and her Children splendidly, without
being obliged to any of her Relations. This I dare safely avow (interrupted
Miranda) I have several times heard her declare it. Ay -- But Sir, (said
Polydor) what a pretty Life must that Husband have; when on the least
difference imaginable the Lady Wife shall fly out to this Effect; Base Man^ do
you consider who raised you? God made you it is true; but he left you poor; I
found you so and made you Rich? And suppose that by the advantage of her
Forte^es he should be preferred at Court; -- Was i^ not I? Was it not through my
means you are what you are? Was it not my Money Bribed such a Lord? -- Alas
poor Thing Thou coud'st hardly ha^ gone thither in a Hackney-Coach, much loss
in a Coach of thine own, but that I taking pity on thy thin Shoos, gave thee
Room in mine; nay more, in my Bed: More miserable wretch; more C^^sed Fool I! O
damned Infatuated. -- Hold, Sir, Hold! (cried Ariadne aloud) and almost out of
Breath, or I shall burst my Spleen and Ribs with La^ghing. Methinks you act it
very naturally; y' are strangely concerned what ever's the matter: But give me
the opportunity to Breath a little; and I will tell you, she is a Lady, if not
of so good a Family as Polydor's; yet he should have no cause to blush at the
alliance he may have, if he pleases. And since we do suppose her such; we may
presume she has had such Education as would not allow the least disobedient
Word to the Man whom she had once found in her Heart to Marry. And pray let me
confirm you in this Opinion of her: But above all (continued she) be absolutely
satisfied she Loves you perfectly. This I must urge too (said Miranda.) I am
extremely obliged to the Lady (replied Polydor) But what does she expect of me?
Reciprocal Love (answered Ariadne.) If you can find in your Heart (said
Miranda) to cast your self away on a most Beautiful, Young, Good Humored,
Vi^tuous, Well-educated Lady, with a good Fortune, and one that has a great
deal of Love in store for you; say the Word, and you both may be happy. How now
(interrupted Ariadne) I believe Cousin, you are in Love with her your self! --
But come, Sir, (continued she A^dressing her self to Polydor) your Answer? When
I see the Lady and have discoursed her a while I Will resolve you (said Polydor)
for (continued he) I hope you are not so unreasonable as to propose to your
self that I should make you any promise before that. Still you are scrupulous I
see Sir (said Ariadne) and let me tell you without a Cause: Dare not you take
my Word? You know my Name by this time I suppose, and some of our Family
(perhaps) if not -- Or if I do (interrupted Polydor) I must still desire to
speak with the Lady first; otherwise I should deny my self the use of my
Reason; and that I beg you would not exact of me. I confess (replied Ariadne)
that which you ask is but reasonable, but such is the Caprice of this Lady's
Humor, that she is resolved the Person she designs for her Husband shall not
see her Face till after they are Married. And in short, this is the hazard you
must run: Consider on it! To Morrow till Eleven in the Morning is the utmost
Minute she will expect you. You Will find her in the Park by Rosamond's Pond,
accompanied only with one Lady more, both Masqu'd. She that gives you her Hand
is yours for ever. These are hard Terms you will say; But Remember, Nothing
venture, nothing have. Ay, Sir, (interrupted Polydor) or faint heart, etc. No
matter for the rest. -- But pray give me leave to tell you, I hazard all the
little Estate I have: Besides, perhaps, my Reputation, as it is not impossible
but she may have loved before to my cost, should I Marry her, and then my Quiet
follows my Reputation, or pray Sir pardon me I beseech you, for you may
remember too, 'T^s good to look before we leap; I must urge what I can against
you to satisfy my self; she may, instead of being so great a Fortune, prove a
greater Cheat, and Marry me to keep her self out of a Prison. -- Hold Sir
(interrupted Ariadne) have I been all this while laboring to persuade you of
her Vi^tue and Wealth to so little purpose! What do you see in me that should
make you suspect the truth of what I have told you, after all the Protestations
I have made! if she were a lewd Woman, or one who wanted an Husband to go to
Goal for her; are there not a now in erior to you every way, that might act
such a part? in fine, Credit me; I am sure you may be very happy with her if
you embrace the Proposals I have made you.

I am in earnest, think well on it! This is the last time of asking. It Is some
what a short warning she gives a Man; methinks (continued Polydor) she might
enlarge the Bounds of her Resolution a day or two more. For, she will otherwise
have but little Reason to commend my Discretion. No matter; she is already
sufficiently satisfied of all your good Qual^ties. And she cannot afford you one
Second more. Nay (said Miranda) I know her so well, that I dare engage she will
not yield you one Moment. She Is very determinate then in her purposes! (said
Polydor;) But methinks continued he) I Dream. No, Polydor, (said Ariadne) you
wake: But you shut your eyes to your own good Fortune. Open 'em I beg you. I
suppose, you may know or have heard of her Brother Sir Fr. Heartwell, enquire
at his Lodgings of his Sister Ariadne, and if you find what I have told false
concerning her Estate and Virtue, even go back again to drink or to play as
your Humor shall then serve you. That Is pretty fair (said Polydor:) But if she
be indeed Sister to Sir Francis, whom I am very well acquainted with, why
may not I see her before we Marry. No more Questions of that nature, Dear
Infidel, (said she) I have partly told you the extravagance of her Humor, and
one Caution more I am to give you; If you discourse one Syllable of what has
passed between us to her Brother; you lose her for ever. To Morrow Morning you
may satisfy your Scrupulous Conscience in the other matters. Well! -- for once
(said he) I may chance to trust Fortune, at least I shall take the pains to
consult my Pillow about it; which I hope she and you will allow me to do. And
all the reason in the World! (Replied Miranda.) By all means (said Ariadne) so
Sir, my Service to you, (continued she drinking to Polydor.) This is the first
time (said Polydor) that I am like to have the Honor of Pledging you: But for
my part, what with drinking before the Play and since, I find my self pretty
well to pass. Besides, it grows late. Well Consider (said Ariadne, pulling out
a Golden Watch) it is now turned of ten; and I presume you may be weary of our
Company, which has so long made you uneasy. However I would have you part with
us resolved, if possible, to see this Lady that so Adores you, at the time
appointed. I will endeavor, (Replied he) to persuade my self, which is as much
as you can desire. So, immediately they called a Reckoning, which Ariadne would
needs discharge: And then parted at the Door, Polydor walking toward
Westminster, and Ariadne took Coach with Miranda for her Brothers House; into
which they got the back way as they came Where we may leave 'em to shift
themselves, for I hold it not convenient to peep into Ladies Privacies. In the
mean time my Friend Polydor was making Reflections on what had passed;
sometimes he was for going to meet 'em, then presently Cursing himself for
being such a Fool as to give ear to so, improbable a Story as he then thought
it. Staggering all the way home both in Mind and Body. At last he reached his
Apartment to speak Gentilely; And I think, without saying his Prayers, he went
to Bed; where he fell fast asleep till next Morning, about 5 or 6. When Waking,
he began afresh to recall the last Nights Adventure, and the Proposition Ariadne
made to him. Ha! (said he to himself) It Is very odd! Yet there is something in
it looks very Rea^ The two Sparks very Rich and Gay, especially my particular
Friend whose Pockets were doubly lin d: That Watch, that G^^^ and those Rings I
took notice of on his ^^^gers, were marks of no ordinary Quali^^ His Mien was a
la mode, Easy and Sweet; His Conversation Free and Generous: Sure he can have
no Ends in this. -- How Fool! (Replied he to himself) is it not very possible he
has been, and (may be) is her Gallant, who now is sated, and would willingly
turn her on my hands, with the advantage of a Great Belly. Yet as ^^^rid, why
might not another Man, any Rascal might have served his ends. What shall I do?
I am already fallen a Stern very finely; and unless I meet with a good Pilot I
shall run a' ground to rights. This Lady then must be my Pilot, I was mor'd
before, but now I only hold at one Anchor, and that too drags too fast. Well! I
will 'een throw at all. Saying so, he was just going to leap out of Bed; when a
second and contrary Thought surprised him and threw him again on his Pillow.
What art a' going to do -- Fool (cried he to himself) See all thy old
Acquaintance some of 'em Witty, Satirical Rogues, others Da^n'd, Dull Dogs, all
of them Barking at thee aloud; Is this the Spark we have so long mistaken for a
Man of Sense! Is this he who was wont to help us Laugh at all those Sots that
durst hazard their Carcasses with one Woman for better for worse? And is this
Jolly Debauche at last overtaken? Nay more, Jilted by a Lewd Woman, pretended
Heiress? Very fine in faith! -- No, no, I Will have none on it; I shall hardly give
'em the Opportunity to ease their Spleens at my cost. -- Yet -- (continued he,
turning on to other side;) My little, new Acquaintance did urge what he said so
vehemently, and with so much concern; that I must believe him. -- Well --
Hanged. The Die is thrown, and it is Decreed. At these Words out he jumped, as
resolutely as Caesar into the Rubicon: Makes himself as fine as the best of
three good Suits could make him! Puts all the Guineys he could then come at in
his Pockets, which I think were just three. Then down he drops on his Knees,
lifting up his Hands and Eyes; but where his Heart was at that time I will not
pretend to determine. Well! -- At length up he gets, and out of doors he marches
very courageously to Sir Francis's, where he met just coming out, one of his
Acquaintance who was very intimate with our young Knight. O Jack (said he
as soon as he saw him) you are the only Man I could wish to have encountr'd!
And, if you are not busy we must drink one Bottle this Morning. I am no Morning
drinker (said his Friend) However, to wait on you, I don't much care if I take
one Glass, provided the Wine be good. Where will you go? The blue Posts in the
Hay market I think is the nearest place where we may venture our Carcasses
(answered Polydor.) Now, I really believe he was in the right on it: For, he had
an excellent Palate for French Wines; I dare assure you: And I would as soon
take his Judgment of 'em as any Man's I know. To the blue Posts then they went.
Where, after they had each of 'em drank their two Glasses a piece; Polydor
began to inform himself of Ariadnes Fortune and Humor, which he found
answerable to the Character she had given him of her self the Night past in
every particular. The Gentleman who gave him this account did so enlarge on her
Beauty and Gayety of Humor, that Polydor began to be Jealous, he loved her
himself: Which made 'em part the sooner by a Bottle or two. Polydor now longed
for Eleven a' Clock, being perfectly resolved for once to make a blind Bargain
with Fortune, and wholly Committed himself to her Guidance. I think, 't was
between Nine and Ten when he shook off his Friend; so he went directly to the
Park where he expected Ariadne as eagerly as if he had Loved her for seven
years together, and that the first time she had ever made him an Assignation. I
can but think what Reflections he made on his Friends Relation of Ariadne's
Person, Beautiful (said he) to a Miracle and of an Humor as extravagantly
Pleasant. Is she so, Sir (said Polydor to himself as he walked) so much the
more happy is your Friend and Polydor like to be. Little do thou think Dear
Heart (continued he) that I am going to be Married with her this very Morning.
And 'gad it is her own fault too. If she will throw away her self and her Estate
on an Honest Fellow of a younger Brother; who can help it! The Devil take them
that would hinder her for me. I speak nothing but Reason, I am sure. I think it
is fit she should have her Humor. She Is like to pay for it, I believe. He told
me too, she Sung finely. That Is another excellence I mightily well approve of.
We may make shift to Sing two parts I fancy. Let me see! what new Song have I
to Surprise her with! Charmante Douce, etc. -- Dam these French Songs! No I Will
Entertain her with plain down right English. As thus (said he humming it softly
to himself.)

Though your Pride be great as your Beauty,
And my Vows you hear with scorn;
Yet (Alas!) it is but my Duty
Silently to Love and Mourn.
In hopeless Anguish
I Would choose to Languish,
Rather than wish to break the Chain;
It Is more Glory
Thus to Adore y^^*
Than 'ore all your Sex to Reign!
Pox on it! (said he) I made these Words my self to a French Air; I don't know
whether she will like 'em or no. But she must take 'em for better or worse, as I
take her. By this time he found himself at the farther end of the Wall; I mean
that end toward the Mulberry Garden that was. There I say, he found himself;
for he was absolutely lost before in the Contemplation of his Mistresses
Perfections. Onward he goes to Rosamond's Pond, where he no sooner Arrived, but
he was Surpised at the sight of two Ladies in their Dress, Masqu'd. One of
which, who, by the Richness of her Clothes seemed to be of the better Quality
of the two, presented him a most Beautiful, Soft, White Hand; without saying
one Word to him. He took it, and seeting one Knee to the Ground, kissed it most
religiously. I believe you may see the print of his Lips there yet, if she has
not used some art to get it out. Well -- he looked on it, and kissed it, and
kissed it, and looked on it again: Then gazed on her two Delicate, Charming,
Black Eyes through the peep holes of her Mask. And fancied to himself a Face,
if not so Beautiful altogether as Ariadnes indeed was; yet such as the most
excellent Painter could not have flattered if he should endeavor it. The other
Lady was somewhat the Kinder of the two; for, seeing him stare thus Silently
and Curiously, she pulled of her Mask and asked him if he had never a Tongue to
praise what he beheld? No, Madam, (said he) not you your self neither, so much,
as it deserves; though you come so near the excellencies of an Angel. For, to
give her her due; she was as Beautiful as any of the Sex, except Ariadne; for,
I must maintain the Character of my Heroin, for a Reason that I know. But
still, -- I say give the Devil his due! Well. She was very handsome, and there is
an end on it. Nay Polydor (said Ariadne keeping her Mask on) we know you are a
Courtier. But it is a little odd (methinks) that you should so highly commend
what you have not as yet seen. How do you know now (continued she) but this
Mask covers the most ugly Face you ever saw! O it is impossible, Madam, (said
Polydor in a Rapture) it is impossible, I swear, with those eyes. But how can
you tell (said Ariadne interrupting him) but the Skin on it may be as black as
the Velvet of my Mask. I believe it is as soft (said he very Amorously, feeling
on the Mask) But Pardon me (Madam) your Eyelids have confirmed the contrary. I
have seen, Madam (continued he) enough to complete your Victory. Dispose,
Madam, (pursued he all over in a transport of Love!) Dispose how you please of
your Slave. I was an Infidel last Night, it is true, but now I will believe, nay
I do believe you are the greatest Blessing Heaven could bestow on me in this
World.

Hey day! What a hopeful and sudden change is here, (cried Ariadne) sure this
is not the same Polydor my Cousin saw last Night. No, no Madam, (said he) not a
Word of that over Cautious, Scrupulous, and Ill natured Fellow. I have not one
doubt about me: You appear to me all Glorious and Good. But we trifle, (Madam)
Let us walk to the other end of the Park and take Coach for Mary Bone. Hold,
Sir, (said she) there is a Coach waits us at this Gate; which, I presume, is as
convenient. O most advantageous (said Polydor, leading her toward the Gate)
where they quickly Arrived, and got into the Coach; which made all the
reasonable have to the Bowling Green that could be expected. Cry your Mercy, I
mean to the Church. But I had been oftener at the first, which made it come
sooner into my Thoughts.

Besides I had forgot Polydor had any Business at the last mentioned place,
whatever he has had at the Green. By the way, (said Ariadne to him) have you
bethought your self of a Ring? A Ring Child? (said he) no, faith. -- But by
good Fortune here is one on my Finger which a French Mistress of mine gave me
at Paris; and we may make shift for once with it. Nay, nay, (said she) shift
now and shift always. But come, it must and shall do. But hark you (continued
she) don't you fancy we go as merrily to Execution as any two Condemned People
ever did? You may call it what you will (said he) but (methinks) 'twas a little
improperly spoken. Was it ever said a Man was Condemned to be happy? For such I
apprehend my Circumstance at the present; I don't know what you judge of your
own. O (said she) doubt not, I have as good an Opinion of you as you can have
of me, for the Heart of you. I see then (interrupted Miranda) you are both in a
fair way to be perfectly happy. -- You know I must make her speak something,
and not let her sit like a Mute all the while; much contrary to the humor of
her Sex. Well -- But -- now or about this time they got within sight of the
Steeple, Look there Polydor (said Ariadne) what do you think of turning back?
Why (said he) I think of it as of the only thing I must deny you at the
present. No, no -- (continued he) I am resolved to enter the Enchanted Castle
with thee, and try the force of it is Charms. Ten to one interrupted Ariadne)
you may find 'em too strong for you at a long Run. But for my part (she
pursued) I am as Resolute as my Friend John Florio. And so (said she) Coachman
open the Door. They all three immediately lighted and went directly toward the
Church; just before they came to the Porch, a little dapper old Fellow comes to
'em; and asks 'em, if they had any business with him this Morning. Why faith
Friend (said Polydor) if you can mumble over the Matrimony, or so -- We have --
How! (interrupted Ariadne) mumble it over! No don't you mistake! I mean to have
it as Audibly, Distinctly, Laudably, and Plainly read, as ever I have heard
part spoken on the Stage: But you are in the right on it Polydor (continued she)
for this Right Reverend looks as if he could only mumble it. Well; Madam, (said
the little Old Gentleman) I can make a shift to say Amen plain enough I warrant
you. But Mr. -- the Minister is within -- And I believe at leisure by this time
to do you that Office which he has don't this Morning to four Couple more. --
But, believe me Gentlefolks you are the finest we have seen today. O! We thank
you, Sir, (said Polydor) But pray how long do you Ply here a Days? Ply here
Sir! (said he) we expect Company here generally from Six till Twelve. -- But
see, Sir, (continued he) the last Couple are just coming out! I have a little
business with 'em, ever they go. If you please to walk up to the Altar, I Will wait
on you before you have done your Complements to the Minister. -- O! your
Servant, good Sir; we don't doubt it (said Polydor, leading Ariadne to the
Fatal place:) There Polydor immediately opens their Case, discovers their
Grievances, and asks a Remedy; Promising him to reward him like a Gentleman.
And now (continued he, addressing himself to Ariadne very Obediently and
Amorously as could be expected from any Man in his Circumstances) Now I hope
you will discover those Perfections which yet I only Adore in Idea's too
Imperfect to be called the true Shadows of 'em. How do you mean? (said she.) I
mean (answered he) This Cloud must be removed that I may behold the Sun. -- In
short, Madam, this Mask must off. -- She was very unwilling to unmask, but the
Minister urging the necessity of it, she was at last obliged to conform.
Polydor at the sight of her Beauty stood like a Statue, and was all over
Extasy'd with the Apprehension of his future Happiness. But at length
recollecting himself, he would fain have knelt to kiss her Hand, but she
prevented him, Charging him to forbear expressing his Sentiments of Love, or
any other Passion, till the Ceremony was over, and they in a more convenient
place: It lasted not long in the performance, but the Effects I think remain to
this day.

After the last Amen, having before given the Parson a Guinney, and the Clerk
and Sexton another, out of which they were to distribute half a Piece to the
Poor, (for he was a mighty kind-hearted Soul as lived, to my knowledge.) After
all this I say, and it is true, they took Coach, and drove back to Lockets,
where, by the desire of Ariadne, Polydor bespoke two or three pretty seasonable
Dishes of Meat: And returned in all have to say all the most obliging and
tender things his Soul was capable of uttering.

First he threw himself at her Feet, Embraced her Knees, kissing her Hands by
force, and almost wept with Joy. Then on a sudden up he starts, and like a
mere Tyrant in Love, falls aboard her delicate powting Lip, and Lovely Rising
Breasts, without so much as giving her the opportunity to chide him. Hold --
Hold Polydor (said she at last) I must make Articles with you. Hear me I charge
you. For this day is all mine, tho it be the last I must command in. -- O! say
not so my Soul (said he almost out of Breath) Thou shall ever command me. --
Observe then (said Ariadne) -- If you will sit quietly by me, and once in a
quarter of an Hour kiss me; I will now force my self this first time to kiss a
Man. -- Ah (said Polydor looking on her very Amorously) tho your Condition be
somewhat hand; yet for the Blessing of a Kiss given me heartily by you; I will
forbear as much as Flesh and Blood can. Stand fair then (said she) and look on
Miranda. O I beg your Pardon (cried Polydor) I shall lose the satisfaction of
encountering your Eyes then; which is above half the pleasure of your
Obligation; tho I could easily be persuaded to look that way, were not Ariadne
here. Well then (said she smiling and blushing at the same time) I Will shut my
Eyes. O that is cruel (cried Miranda:) No, no, fair play ought to be, Cousin:
Come Advance, and do it as you should! Can you Instruct me then? (said Ariadne.)
No matter, Madam, (interrupted Polydor) Let Love instruct you.

Well! Have at you then (cried she throwing her Arms about his Neck, and
shedding Tears which I ought to have called Pearls, according to the Laudable
custom of other Writers: But these were only Briny Tears, nothing else in the
World; which she merely distilled from her Brain through excess of Joy, I
presume:) Now my dear Polydor (said she giving him a Thousand Kisses) Are you
now convinced Ariadne loves you? I am so well convinced, and so extremely
sensible of my happiness, (said he) that I would not change circumstances with
the happy and Amorous Mark Anthony, were he now living with his Cleopatra. O
(said she, retreating a little) I must take care you do not surfeit on it. Too
much will cloy you. Ah! how Cruel are you now (said Polydor, pursuing her) can
you imagine I should surfeit before I have tasted! How! Before you have tasted!
(replied Ariadne) Why, I believe by this time you are able to distinguish the
touch of my Lips, from any Ladies in Town, though in the dark, or hoodwinked;
you have already been so familiar with 'em. Alas Madam, (said he) this is but
like a Walk and a Glass of Rhenish before Dinner to whet a Man's appetite. Or
would you have me be satisfied only with the smell of a Dish of Meat that I
Love? No, Madam (continued he) Consummation is the substantial part of our
business. That is yet behind. I don't know what you mean by Consummation (cried
she) But (methinks) I have already done you all the right in the World. -- But
(continued she looking toward the Door) I am obliged to the Waiters who have
just brought up Dinner, to prevent any farther descant on so unpleasant a
Subject. Come (pursued she very eagerly) Let us sit, I am hungry. Ay faith and
so am I too (said Polydor) and yet though Grace is said and the meat ready, you
will not so much as bring it to the Table, that I may fall on. No more Nonsense
(interrupted Ariadne.) It Is here already, and you may eat if you please. Come!
Let us sit Cousin (continued she looking on Miranda) The Gentleman (perhaps)
has no Stomach yet. Gad but he has, and a swinging one too (said Polydor;) and
that you shall find Dear heart, ever long.

With that he sat him down at the left hand of Ariadne, and eat like a
Soldier in a Siege: But drank little. Much good d'it you Don, (said Ariadne)
you are welcome to our English Flesh; I fear you have but little on it in your
Country: For, to say truth, and speak plain English, you feed like a Farmer. I
thank you, (Madam said he, with his Mouth full, and looking another way) so
methinks. But (continued he, pulling of his Peruke) you shall have better
proofs of my eating ever I have done yet. Hold! Good Sir! (cried Miranda) pray
keep on your Perurke, or I fear we must bespeak another Dish. You may bespeak a
dozen more if you please Madam, (said he) but I Am afraid you are like to find
none of the effects of my eating. No, nor any body else but your self I fancy
(said Ariadne.) That Is as time shall try, sweet heart, (said Polydor) But --
you may chance to Groan for it.

Ariadne could not choose but Laugh down right to hear him talk and see him eat
so heartily. And I believe she was well enough pleased with his Stomach; for
some reason that shall be kept secret at this time.

But pray Sir (said she Laughing) Do you always eat thus? Always Honey!
(replied Polydor) Ay: I think I do Child. What then? Why, nothing, (said she)
but only I think it most convenient we should go live in Wales, or in some
other County, where Meat is cheaper than it is here, or you will eat us out of
House and Home. -- Nay-gad (said he, looking a little surly) you need not
grudge me my Victuals, for you are like to reap the benefit on it. I thank you
Sir (replied Ariadne) But I don't care for it at second hand. Lord! (cried
Polydor lifting up his Hands and Eyes) what a delicate reasonable Wife have I
got! I warrant (continu d he looking pleasantly on Ariadne) you could be
satisfied barely with Kissing, Eating, and Drinking with me. Nay, I cannot tell
that, (said she) But I see you are providing against the worst. No, no, Dear
Heart (cried Polydor, transported with Joy) for the best, for the best Ariadne!
Nay, (said she) I know never another of the Name besides my self, and if all
these pains be taken, for me, I am much obliged to you: for (methinks) you
sweat at it! I shall before we have done (said he) no doubt. Thus did they eat
and talk till they were weary of both. The Cloth was taken away, and the Glass
went round merrily as long as one Bottle lasted. Then fell Polydor to kissing
again: Till he made both himself and his Lady mad: And I Am afraid he did not a
little disoblige Miranda; who was fain to go humming about the Room to divert
the Thoughts that sometimes did Assault her.

Well now (cried Ariadne) I swear I can endure no longer! Pray sit farther, and
let us parley a little. -- You may remember (continued he) you gave me a Ring
to day. Ay (said he,) I fancy I did, what of that? Only I mean to return your
kindness (said she) pulling of a Rich Diamond-Ring of her finger) pray wear
this for my sake,

And now (continued she) I must beg you would Entertain your self with the
Bottle till our Return; for my Cousin and I must be private for a Minute or two:
And that you may not altogether be Drinking, pray take the pains to tell over
this Gold, (said she throwing a Purse full on the Table) There should be a
Hundred pieces: See (Sir,) Your Servant for a time.

Nay, nay, said Polydor, I like the Employment pretty well, since I must be
robbed of thy dear Company so long as these two Minutes. Good Sir, (said
Miranda) don't be Jealous, I Will be your Argus. If I thought my Ariadne needed
Watching, replied he, I would even leave her to the wide World; And her own
Roving humor. This he spoke Kissing her, she dropped him a Cursey and out she
went with Miranda.

He presently fell to telling the Broad pieces, which he found exact y an
Hundred in Number: He put them up very carefully, and laid them again on the
Table: And took a March three or four times about the Room. At last he
bethought himself, and takes to the Bottle. Well honest Polydor, said he, here is
to thee: Thy dear Ariadnes good health. But I gad methinks she stays sweetly.
He drank off his glass, and expected almost a quarter of an hour longer with
indifferent Patience. But seeing no Ariadne come yet, he called up a Waiter,
and asked him, where the two Ladies were, that went down about half an hour
ago? They took Coach Sir, said the Waiter, as soon as they left you: Why it is
Impossible. Thou art Drunk sure! Saying so: He took up the Gold in all have,
and ran down to the Bar to be more fully satisfied of his Misfortune; which he
was too soon. He ran up into the Room again, like a man distracted where he
shut the Door to himself, and fell a railing at all Women kind, What! fitted
thus, said he, it is very devilish: What a damned Sot was I to let her go! But
rather what an Eternal Coxcomb to Marry such a Jilt! This is no more Ariadne, I
warrant, than I am Ariadne. It Is impossible a Person of her Quality and
Education should be guilty of so lewd an Action! Where the Devil should she go!
Or what Business had she, but with me! I find I am merely drawn into a Prison:
Ay, ay, she is in Debt, i will lay my Life on it, and I must suffer the weight of
all the Actions that are laid against her. -- So, hey for a Prison! But may she
not happily be gone to her Brothers? Then shall I look on my self as a rash,
Jealous Fop. Well (continued he) I am resolved i will see. Immediately upon this
thought, he flies down Stairs, calls for a Bill, but he was answered, 'twas all
paid. Paid, Ha! marry (said he to himself) I like the Matter the better for
this. Come, come! Cheer up my Heart! All may be well yet. He call d presently
for a Coach, and on he drives to Sir Francis's: but just as he came near the
House, his Courage failed him, and he was set down within five or six doors of
it. He stood still sometime considering what he should do, whether it were
Convenient to go directly thither and ask for her, or to pretend a Visit to her
Brother, and so learn in discourse, what was become of Ariadne. But at last, he
bethought himself of a better Expedient: He knocked at the door, and asked if
his Friend were there, with whom he drank in the Morning. The Footman that
opened the door told him, he was just risen from Dinner with Sir Francis:
Prithee, then tell him (said Polydor) I would speak with him here. The Footman
did so, and presently led him to Polydor. O my dear Friend (said Polydor with a
great deal of Concern) I must needs drink another Bottle with you this Minute;
you shall not deny me: I am so very Melancholy and out of humor, that you
will be very unkind if you do. Well (said he) I Will but just make my baise les
mains to Sir Francis, and stay one half hour with you: He just went in and
returned to his perplexed Friend. They went to the same House again, where they
drank their Mornings Draught together: And Polydor began his Circumlocutions
before he came to the business. Dear Friend (said he) how happy am I to meet
thee again at a time when I stood in most need of thy Company: I have met with
un untoward Accident since I left thee; which has. so disturbed me I cannot yet
Compose my self. But come! (continued he) Help me to divert the thought on it.
Let Us drink and talk of things indifferent! When saw you the Beautiful Ariadne
whom you so lowdly commended in the Morning? Not since last Night (answered his
Friend) she went out of Town this Morning before seven a' Clock as far as St.
Albans, to a Cousin of hers who is taken desperately ill; one whom she loves
most dearly. Sir Francis went with her himself as far as High-Gate: She had an
Hackney-Coach and four Horses that waited on her thither empty, till she left
her Brother. Ha! (said Polydor) does she go often out of Town, has she such
frequent Excursions, She Is hardly at Home (replied his Friend) three days in a
Week together. A pretty sort of a Lady (cried Polydor:) Is it a he Cousin, or a
she Cousin, she is gone to Visit? A very pretty Lady it is i will assure you (said
he.) Why do not thou strike in with this same Ariadne, or with some of her
fine Cousins? (said Polydor.) O she is too great for me! Besides she has been
engaged to a Person of very considerable Quality above these three Months.

O Cursed Jealousy! A hopeful Spark, and a kind Friend indeed was this same
Marwood to Polydor! Now she was no more Engaged than her Monkey. Only he loved
her himself, and spoke this least his Friend should have any thoughts of
attempting her. And indeed he said enough to make Polydor mad, and to confirm
him in the opinion that he had Married a Cheat instead of an Heiress. However,
he forced himself to look and talk as pleasantly as was possible for a Man in
his Condition: till at last the Bottle being out, Marwood was in have to be one
to his beloved Knight, which made both part very easily with one another.
Polydor for his part walked very disconsolately into the Park, to the fatal
place where he first saw the false fair One, as he was pleased to call her in
his Dumps. The first thing he reflected on was the Pond. Humb! (said he)
Rosamonds Pond! What a dull Beast was I not to apprehend the ill Omen, in the
very Name of the place where we first met! that ever I should hope to find an
honest Woman at a place that took its Name from a lewd Strumpet! Very fine,
faith! As if it were impossible to encounter a good Woman there because of the
Name it had! When I dare say, I have seen above twenty Citizens Wives and
Daughters at that very place; Nay, if I should say forty, I should not Ly. And
whether they could be light or dishonest, I leave all the Town to determine.
Nay, more, I my self have walked thither with a She kindred of my own, of about
7 or 8 years Old, but I must confess, I cannot swear she was a Maid, yet it is
not improbable but she might be a very good one. But now to our Hero, who all
this while has been Cursing the Pond, and Comparing himself to a decoyed Du^k.
Heavens! (continued he) was not the sight of those sufficient Caution to thee,
to prevent thy Ruin! Then bending his thoughts another way (he pursued) I am
glad I did not Bed her: I Will sue her to a divorce now, and swear point blanck
she stole me. -- (Did not he talk like a Madman now!) But he soon recollected
his straggling Senses, and (cried) Fool that I am! was ever such a thing heard
of! O Death and the Devil (continued he) Whoever She be, She is Beautiful
enough to tempt any man to make me a Monster! A Cuckold! Which (perhaps) is
just now in Agitation. -- O Justice! Justice! How many of my own intimate
acquaintance have I served so! Not to name Strangers and Foreigners. -- Well!
I am at last overtaken, and now I pay for all! For all of them put together
could never have made half such a Beauty as my false Ariadne! My Jilting
Ariadne, my Devil, Damned impostour Ariadne! Yet one Comfort is (continued he
looking on the Diamond Ring she gave him) My Cheat is a Cheat of Quality: for I
am sure this Stone is Right, and the Gold is good old Gold! Marwood said She Is
gone to St. Albans; why let her go to the Devil! who would ride twenty Miles to
see himself made a Cuckold! Ah but (continued he) That is the true Ariadne.
Well! -- True or false, I Will write to her. But first I Will go Play off ten or
twenty pieces that I may write more easily.

In this Resolution he went to look for Company, at most of the Gaming Houses
in Town; and at last he met two or three of his Acquaintance at Banisters in
the City, where he fell to Play; And fortune, as if she designed to make him
amends for the trick she played him so lately; threw every Die to his advantage,
so that in two Hours time, he had won above forty Guinneys: So we will leave him,
to find what is become of our two Ladys Errant. They were by this time gotten
almost as far as St. Albans: for 'twas true, that her Brother left her at
Highgate in the Morning; but he was no sooner out of sight, but she turned and
made for St. Jamese's, but as soon as she came into Town, she bid the Coachman
take out two of the Horses, and so went to meet her Polydor.

Now, her Cousin was in as good health as I am at this present writing praised
-- for the same (as my Mothers Maid, I remember used to begin her Letters, when
I writ them for her, about twenty years ago.) But it was a trick of Ariadnes to
cover her real design of Marrying that very Morning, who had counterfeited a
Letter as from her Cousin, whose hand she knew perfectly well, and show d it to
her Brother. But (perchance) you will ask me why she did not take her own Coach
and Horses to perform that Journey? for certainly that was easier, and looked
greater! But did ever I tell you she kept a Coach? yes, now you shall know she
did. However, she foresaw the inconvenience if she had met Polydor in her own
Coach; and besides her Servants would have been witnesses of what she intended
to conceal, had she returned to Town with them about her. And again, I believe
she was willing to spare her own Horses. Now are you satisfied?

As they were within two Miles of their Journeys End (said Miranda to her fair
Cousin) For Heavens sake what is in your mind, that you leave your Husband the
very first day of your Marriage? I should not have wondered had you left him
after the Honey-moon; I mean if you had fairly taken your leave of him for a
week or so: But this (methinks) is a little inhumane. Alas! How dull thou art
my Dear! (replied Ariadne) I design to try his Patience and his Constancy; and
all the World shall not diswade me from treating him much more severely yet,
for some days: I Married him too soon, to be acquainted with all his Humors;
but I am resolved, I will know most of them, ere we come closer together. And I
think it is but a just Punishment for his easiness, in so soon beleiving a
Stranger, in a matter of so great Importance. I like his Address and Discourse
well enough; nay so well, that I was obliged to make the more have from him,
lest he should have made me repent of my purpose.

Nay, (said Miranda) I very well know the pretty innocent extravagances of your
humor, and am sensible, you are not to be prevailed on to forbear them,
especially when they carry with them any show of Reason. But (continued she)
how long my Dear do thou intend to torment him? Why -- This day Sennight
(replied Ariadne) I mean to give him my self, and all that I have for Ever, and
Ever, and Amen. Well be sure you do (said Miranda) Or I Will be certain to
discover all to him the very next day following. I give you leave (cried she)
but not a word on it before, if thou have any kindness for me. Be confident
(said her Cousin) I will be silent. Nay, it is your best way let me tell you
(replied Ariadne) for fear I should be revenged on you, and let Marwood know
how passionately you love him. You will not be so inhuman I hope (interrupted
Miranda) do you think I shall ever be able to see any of our acquaintance again
if you do? Never disturb your self (said Ariadne) I only show you how easily,
and bravely I could be Revenged on you, if you begin first.

By this time they found themselves at the Ladys House they went to Visit, they
presently alighted and went in; where they were received with all imaginable
Kindness and Respect, and the more because their Coming was unexpected, and the
obligation pleasantly surprising. Here I must take my leave of them, and look a
little back for my friend Polydor: who that Night came off a Winner by
threescore Guinneys, pretty well laden with Wine too, which made him sleep that
N^ght the more soundly, (perhaps) without ever so much as dreaming on his
Bride; for Wine let me tell you, is a Sovereign Remedy against Love, especially
if the infection be but newly received: Besides, he was a Man of a strong
Resolution, and could swagger it out most Modishly: yet when he gave his mind
to it, could Love like a Sparrow, and as Constantly as any Turtle. In the
Morning he waked between 7 and 8, for you must know it was past One ere he got
into Bed: and he usually slept six hours upon a Tack, and that che^fly when he
had been Drinking over Night. The first thing he did was to examine his
Pockets, which he found pretty weighty on one side, and on the other all his
old Gold entire in the Purse. His hands indeed were dirty, and he had all the
other signs of a Bacchanalian, but an empty Pocket. He was generally very
pleasant, and witty after a Debauch; for he was always sure to drink the best
Wines. Well! He lay till Eight reflecting on his Good and Evil Fortune, at
length, after he had stretched and wished for his Ariadne; false or true, she
would then have served turn: After that (I say) he turns out and dresses. When
he had done that, and his Devotions, he sat him down, and writ as follows.

To Ariadne.
Madam,
I Had the good Fortune yesterday to be in a place where I presume you dropped a
Purse of Gold and a Diamond-Ring, which I am come to restore, and only beg, you
would permit me the honor of kissing your hand: I fear, I am utterly a
stranger to you, yet I beseech you (Madam) Refuse not this Obligation to

Your Ladyships most Obedient, Humble Servant. Beaufort.


When he had Written it, he knew not where to direct its And was in a Thousand
Perplexities about it, but in the end he took heart of Grace, and resolved on a
Visit to Sir Francis Heartwell, with whom, 'twas ten to one, but he found
Marwoud. He took Coach then immediately, and came soon enough to his Brother in
Law's House to take him at home; and to his greater satifaction there was
Marwoud too: Tho he did not in the least contribute to his Information of the
place of Ariadne's Retreat, as it happened. For, after the first Complements
were over, Sir Francis sat him down to make an end of a Letter, which he was
then dispatching to his Sister, to enquire of his Cousin's Health, or if there
were any need of his Presence? As Soon as he had finished it, he desired Marwoud
to fold it up, Seal it and Write the Superscription? For (said he) I have not
seen Polydor so long, that I am unwilling to lose one Minute of his
Conversation. You! must direct it (continued he) To my Sister, at my Lady
Courtin's, two Miles wide of St. Alban 's. Polydor, overjoy d at such a Blessed
Opportunity of seeing the true Ariadne with a Letter from her Brother.
Immediately offered his Service to present it to her; Adding, It could be no
trouble to him, because he had obliged himself to be at St. Albans by two a'
Clock at farthest. Sir Francis told him, by no means he would be guilty of such
a Rudeness; and that he had already commanded one of his Servants to deliver
it, and to bring him an account of his Cousin's Health, the next day as soon as
possible. Polydor urged on the other side, that he must of necessity return
himself too, the next day, before Dinner, to meet Company at Banisters.
However, Sir, (said the over Courteous Knight) I can by no means permit it.
Polydor was then just going to tell him that he had business with her, and
discover the Ring and the Gold to them, and how he came by 'em; but that he
considered, if they should not prove Sir Francis's Sisters, they would but
Laugh at him for his Credulity; or, if they were really hers; she on the other
side might be displeased at the discovery

But after all, he determined with himself to set out with the Knight's
Servant, and to his greater Comfort, he understood the Footman was not to begin
his Journey till after Dinner: For he was to carry some things with him from
the Change, which could not be ready till about one. Polydor therefore had time
enough to provide him of a good Horse; which he did as soon as he parted from
Sir Francis and Marwoud.

After he was fixed with every thing for his Journey, he betook him to a little
Alehouse almost over against the Knights House, whence as soon as he saw the
Footman come; he mounted and followed him at a convenient distance. It Is true,
he let him ride a good way before him till they got clear off the Stones; but
about a Mile out of Town, he overtook him. O Friend (said Polydor) well
overtaken! Your Servant (said the Footman) I Am very glad that I shall have the
honor to wait on you most part of your Journey. I thank thee (replied
Polydor.) -- But -- What! (continued he) Is it your young Lady, Madam -- A --
Ariadne that is sick? No Sir, (answered the Servant) It Is a Cousin of hers. Nay
(said Polydor) I only asked that Question, because Mr. Marwoud gave me this
Letter just as I left your Master and him, and I think he talked of something
there was of advice in it: Saying so, he gave him his own Letter to Ariadne. Is
this for my Lady Sir (said the Footman.) Yes, (answered Polydor) for your
Masters Sister. I Will take care to deliver it, Sir (said the Footman.) Prithe
do! (replied Polydor) There is an answer required, and pray let me have it;
for, I have engaged my self to bring him whatever she is pleased to send him. I
Prophecy (said the Servant) What her answer will be: For I am sure this is a
Love-Letter. Nay, may be so (cried Polydor.) However (continued the Footman)
I Will deliver it very faithfully to her, for I have a great respect for my
honest Master Marwoud. I Am sure. (added he) I have had many a Half-Crown of
him, nay, many a Crown, I may say; since I have known him. O (cried Polydor) if
thou had not spoke on it, I fear, my Memory is so Treacherous, I should have
done thee wrong. Here (continued he pulling Money out of his Pocket) Here Is a
Guinny for thee which he sent thee. I thank you Sir, (said the Footman
receiving it) But he is always too bountiful; I would have served him ten times
more without a quarter of this. No doubt of that (said Polydor) But prithee
(continued he) what answer do thou think she will send him? Alas Sir (replied
the Footman) a very cold or scornful one, I fear. Then she does not Love him?
(said Polydor) O, no Sir: I believe (said the Footman) she would not endure to
see him, were it not in Complaisance to Sir Francis. How so! (cried Polydor) he
is a handsome Man. Ah, Sir! (answered the Footman) As long as she does not think
him so; what advantage is his handsomness to him; in that case! Thou Art in the
right (said Polydor) But -- How long has he loved her? Above these 2 Years
(replied the Servant) They had a great deal more discourse concerning Ariadne's
Scorn, and Marwoud's Love, which Entertained 'em till they came within two
Miles of the House where the Footman was to go. Now (Friend, (said Polydor)
since, as thou sai'st, we are so near the Lady's house; show we some little
blind Alehouse or hedge Tavern as nigh it as may be: That I may expect an
answer of Marwoud 's Letter, by thee as soon as possible. I will Sir, (said the
Footman.)

So they Rode on a Mile farther, and the Footman Lodged him at a little
thatched House, where they sold good Nappy Ale. There Polydor treated himself
and his Horse, which drank Ale as freely as his Rider did Clarret. Polydor was
Cursing Marwoud heartily, though as yet he was not certain whether it was his
Ariadne or no. In the mean time the Footman came to his Post, and delivered his
Letters.

Ariadne not knowing Polydor's hand, and being very curious to see what was in
his Letter, opened it first: and looking then on the Name, she was much more
surprised by reading it; she began to guess who 'twas. What manner of Gentleman
(said she to the Footman) was he who gave you this? A very fine handsome
Gentleman Madam, (replied the Footman) something with the tallest, delicately
shaped, yet very strongly set, of a dark brown Complexion, and hazle Eyes, with
a few marks of the small Pox in his Face. By this Description she knew it must
be Polydor. Well (said she smiling, which she could not forbear) don't set up
your Horse yet, you must go fetch the Gentleman hither. With that she goes
immediately to the young Lady her Cousin, to whom she had already related her
adventure with Polydor, and desires her Assistance in tormenting him a little.
(Said she) I must get you to Personate me. Here is the Letter he sent me. But
you must tell him, you know nothing of a Ring or of Gold: these and a few more
Instructions made the young Lady Dorothea, (for so she was called) very perfect
in her part. Miranda and Ariadne were to keep out of sight.

When they had agreed upon all circumstances to deceive him, Ariadne sent the
Footman to tell Polydor, that his Lady Ariadne, desired to see him, and charged
him, not to describe her Person to him, but to bring him directly to Dorothea.

The honest Fellow obliged her very exactly, and brought Polydor to Dorothea,
who by this time really thought her self to be Ariadne. Polydor at the sight of
her, was so confounded and grieved to find it was not his Ariadne, that he was
ready to sink down. Dorothea seeing him in that ruful Posture began first, Sir
(said she) I suppose this is your Letter to me. It is (Madam) replied Polydor,
fetching a deep sigh) but I find my Error, you are not the Lady Madam. Indeed
I am not Sir, (answered Dorothea.) No! (Madam Interrupted Polydor, with a
pittious Groan) To my Eternal shame, Sorrow and Confusion, you are not my
Ariadne. Pardon me, I beseech you Madam! and to show you that this is not
merely a Pretense; see here the Ring, and the Purse of Gold, which I wrote of
to your Ladyship. I once more beg you would forgive this Rudeness, and forget
Beaufort. I am your most Obedient Servant Madam, Continued he bowing and went
out.

The Compassionate pretty Lady was so concerned for him, that she was once or
twice going to call him back to discover the fallacy to Him: But knowing
Ariadnes humor she durst not: for fear of disobliging her. However she went to
her, with resolution to chide her severely, for so ill treating so handsome a
Gentleman (as she called him) and one who She durst engage loved her most
passionately. So much the better (said Ariadne) I am glad to hear it. But ere
it be too late (continued she) I must dispatch this Fellow that came with him
to observe where he takes up his Quarters, for you have not performed half your
part with him yet. O Heavens! (cried Dorothea almost ready to weep) I am
resolved I Will not torture the poor wretch any more. Let Miranda do it an She
will! -- So I promise you, She should (replied Ariadne) if it were convenient,
but She knows her too well. And in short (continued she) you are the fittest
Person alive. My Dear (pursued she, sweetning the tone of her Voice, and
kissing her Cheek) you must oblige me. Nay (said Dorothea) since my Ariadne
says there is a Necessity for it, I shall obey. Well (said Ariadne) I thank
thee my Dear, I Will instruct thee presently, as soon as I have sent this Footman
after him. Which she did immediately, and returned to her fair Scholar, and
her Dear Miranda. Now (said she to the first) You must know I will write a most
passionate Love-Letter to him, as if I had fallen in Love with him at first
sight, and invite him hither, where you are to second what I shall write, and
pretend you are deeply in Love with him. O fie! (interrupted Dorothea) I profess
you impose a very difficult task on me; and to say truth, I am the rather more
avers to this, lest in pretending it, I should really Love him -- O! No,
(replied Ariadne) think on me, and you are secure enough. Yet I vow to you
(interrupted Miranda) it is very hard to Counterfeit love to a Man of his
Address and Person. Very fine (cried Ariadne) I see I have two dangerous Rivals
of you. Yet this must be done. Be satisfied! (said Dorothea) It shall, It
shall. Thus as they had been discoursing, and plotting against poor wretched
Polydor, for about an hours space; The Footman returned and gave them an
Accountorious as my betaken himself to the litt^ut^es of the House where he
left him at Ay (pursued how long he would continue there, he could not
positively say.

Ariadne upon this wrote a Letter immediately, as she had before designed, and
obliged the Compassionate Dorothea to Act out her part, while Poloydor lay
Raving on a Flock-B^d in the little Alehouse, not at all regarding or fearing
the Vermin that might assault him. Now if I had been he, I would rather have
sat down and drank with my Horse, than have ventured my Boots in so suspicious
a Place. For all my delight is in clean Linen, (as the VVench said when she
washed her dish-Clout.) But he not at all Curious, Sollicitous; Anxious or
uneasy for his Apartment; began a large and bitter Satyr against Women; and
concluded with no great Encomium of his own Discretion. Ah (said he) was ever
man so Credulous! so easily deluded; by a little Lewd ^ilting Scrumpet! O
Beast! and which is worst, O, Cuckold! (continued he, scratching (...) ^re it
did not itch.) Now had (...) ^enchify'd, and had it been (...) ^e, or Fall of
the Leaf, it were not Ridiculous to suppose he might have Entertained his
fingers ends with a budding Maid or two; But I dare assure you, he was as sound
as a Roach, and besides it was Summer. Yet tho he was thus tender of his
Honor, he could not but admire and commend to himself his Ariadnes Beauty and
Humor. O! (cried he aloud) were not this Creature false, (for did you mark?
that is generally the first word your Jealous or forsaken Lovers call one
another) had she not been false, (repeated he) she were worth a Thousand such
Ariadnes as I saw last, yet I must own by the little notice I took of her, she
was extremely Beautiful too! -- But (continued he all in a rage) my Devil is so
Charming, that if she were already really a Devil, (as in time no doubt She
may) she would invite a Saint to her Embraces. Well! I am a Cuckold! and I Will go
herd in the City, my Horns will not be perceived there: at least they may not
be so notorious as my Elder Brothers the Deputies of the Ward where I fix. Ay,
Ay (pursued he) and I Will throw off my Sword, and turn as great a Cheat as any
Tradesman of them all! As great a Rebel, and as great an Hypocrite as any
Puritan Villain among them, nay more (added he fiercely) I could almost find in
my heart to write-Pamphlets against the D. and call the Kings late most
Gracious De^laration a Libel. But hold, said he coming a little to himself, It
must not go there. No, let her be damned by her self, I will not persuade my
self to these Imp^^ties lest I keep her Company. Ah, Polydor! continued he;
what will thy Mother, thy Brother, thy Sisters, and all thy Relations say to
this, will they not scorn thee? will they not point at thee, and shun thee? For
there is nothing in the World so contemptible to each other, as Relations, when
any one of them Miscarries. Nay, and it carries with it some show of Reason.
It Is a disgrace to the whole Family! What says one, Marry a Whore! A Jilt! O
Devil! -- Why I shall become a Town-talk! Be sung about the Streets in a Ballad
to the tune of Fortune my Foe. Married! says another, with a Plague, what need
he have Married! He always seemed averse to it. -- But I beg your pardon Sir,
pursued he, If this Woman had been really what she pretended, I would not have
been unmarried for an Empire. -- But she is False! and I am Lost, Ruined, and
Eternally miserable.

If all this should be true now that he says, there is no body but would pity
him. But Well! He said no more for the present: only he hurried up and down
about the Room most Violently; as I have seen a Mouse looking for a hole to
escape at. In this motion Ariadnes Messenger found him, and delivered his
Lady's Letter to him, which held these words.

SIR,
Though you mistook, when you thought you had found a Ring and Gold that
belonged to me; yet I am not mistaken in accusing you, as the Man that has
stoll'n my Heart and Robbed me of my Quiet: which unless you immediately restore
with your Presence, I am resolved to haunt you, as long as I am

Ariadne.


Hey day, (cried Polydor with a scornful Smile) What Is here! more sport for
Fortune! Her Ladyship (methinks) is merrily disposed at present. Pray honest
Friend and fellow Travellor (said he to the Footman) what does your Lady mean
by this? Alas (Sir replied the Footman) I thought that Paper had fully
discovered her Intentions to you: I am only to entreat you would please to let
me wait on you to her Immediately. Humh! Immediately! (cried Polydor to
himself) Her Ladyship's mighty warm on the sudden! But IN gad, she is mistaken
her Man, as it happens. The curse on it is, nothing will go down with me now,
but that same other false Ariadne. How ever I shall oblige her so far for her
Brothers sake, for Civility's sake, and for our Families sake, who never
refused a Visit to a pretty Lady. There may (perhaps) too, be more Gold, or
more Rings coming: but I fear, I shall not deserve 'em. Poor Lady! I Am sorry for
her. I am an Elder Brother in my humor, and cannot drudge for a Livelihood.
Well! Come Friend (continued he turning to the Footman) I Will go with you, so on
they walked to the Lady, where I Will leave 'em a while.

His Guide soon Conducted him to the Couterfeit Ariadne, who expected him in
her Closet, as soon as she saw him, she was in such disorder, and her thoughts
were so confused, that she could not say one word to him. She blushed and cast
down her Eyes, as if she had really been Guilty of loving him. Polydor took
notice of it; And began, showing her the Billet she sent him. If this Paper
(Madam) has discovered more than you will own, be pleased to condemn it to the
Flames, and Sacrifice it to your Indignation. I must confess (continued he)
it is that has occasioned you the trouble of a second Visit -- By this time she
had pretty well recovered her self, and answered him. It Is true Sir, that Paper
has caused the Confusion, which (perhaps) you might observe I was in at the
sight of you. But if it had not done me the good Office of discovering my
dearest thoughts to you; believe me, I should have had no little difficulty to
persuade my self to it. And (continued she) I must needs Justify what you have
read there. But I must Chide you, (pursued she with an obliging Smile) I must
Chide you Beaufort for calling that a Trouble, which is the greatest Obligation
you could have done me at present. Pray sit (said she taking him by the hand)
they both sat down, Polydor fixing his Eyes on hers, as if he seemed to ask
them what she would be at? You expect (perhaps said Dorothea) that I should
make an Apology for my Modesty, which probably you may think I have violated,
in treating thus familiarly with a Stranger. But I shall only say, you are very
unkind if you do, since you were the cause of it your self. And give me leave
to add, 'twas Love, 'twas Almighty Love that forced me to this Extravagance.
Besides (pursued she) I did not know how soon you would leave us and the
Country: nor could I tell where to have enquired of you. Madam (replied
Polydor) I confess, it had not been very easy to have met with me by that name.
And I beseech you pardon me (continued he) and I will undeceive you. He paused,
but seeing she expected he should proceed. My name (pursued he) is Polydor; I
am not altogether unknown to your Brother Sir Francis. Why then (interrupted
Dorothea) did you borrow an other name. Because Madam (replied he) I would have
been wholly disguised to you, for some Reasons that are not fit to be
discoursed. And I beg you (Madam added he) not to press me to the discovery of
them. Alas! I do not mean it Sir, (replied the fair Impostor) I have other
Business with you, and of greater Moment to my self. I have Proposals to make
to you which (happily) may not prove absolutely Disadvantageous to you, if
embraced. I love you ( Polydor continued she, without suffering him to speak.)
And I love you so passionately, that I can be capable of no rest, nor sensible
of any Joy; unless you justly answer me. Nay Madam (Interrupted Polydor) As for
that matter I can Love as fast, and as well as any man. And I am ready to do
your Ladyship any Civil Kindness. Ah (cried she) I fear you mistake me,
Polydor! my desires and designs are honest and Honorable. -- We must Marry
(continued Dorothea) if you mean to make me Happy; If you will not kill a poor
Lady that languishes for you. How! Marry! -- (Interrupted he) you don't know
what you ask Madam. I wish I could with all my heart! But I have seen enough of
that already. I hope in Heaven (cried Dorothea all in a surprise) you are not
Married. Are you? If I be not; (answered Polydor) I have seen the fatal
Consequences of it in others: No, no Madam (continued he) no more of that! such
another word and I shall Swown, though I nere use to do so. Why (replied
Dorothea) am I so contemptible then? if you are any way acquainted with my
Brother, you may (perhaps) have heard my Fortunes are not. And (pursued she)
could it enter into your thoughts, that the Sister of Sir Francis Heartwell
could ask any thing but Marriage of you, after the Declaration of her Love? Ah
(Madam said Polydor Kneeling) for Heavens sake forgive me! I am certain you
would (added he) if you knew my wretched, Cursed, Circumstances. Heaven knows
(pursued he, looking very Amourously on her) I would soon embrace so
advantageous an offer if it were convenient for either of us. Seek not I
beseech you (continued he with a sigh) seek not to know the miserable Obstacle.
Be satisfied, I am lost (Madam!) Condemned to perpetual Infamy while here I
Live! My Reputation is Damned, my Fortune and my Rest for ever broken: And my
Liberty is no more! Ah pity Madam, (pursued he with a hearty sigh) pity a
miserable Creature, that is not capable of receiving the Happiness your
Goodness would throw away upon him! And now (continued he rising) Permit me I
beg of you to retire, and Curse my Evil Stars, which have heaped so great
Misfortunes on me, only for my Credulity; suffer me I Conjure you by your
Excellent good Humor, to retire, that I may Rave freely alone! that I may
either shake off the thoughts of my Misery, or sink under 'em. O Heavens!
(cried Dorothea weeping, which by no means she could refrain,) such was the
sweetness of her Temper, I pity you from my Soul. Alas! I cannot but be too
sensible that you are much Afflicted. And I wish heartily it were in my Power
or Art to relieve you. You may go (continued he) since you must, and will go.
But I beseech you, as ever you hope to regain your Quiet, Let me at all times
know where to find you. Be confident Madam, you shall (said Polydor kissing her
Hand) and making his Obeisance very humbly to the very Door, he left her gazing
after him.

When he was quite out of sight, she went to her cruel Cousin whom she railly'd
severely for making her Instrument in Torturing the Poor mistaken Polydor. --
But to her greater dissatisfaction, she understood, that she had a Scene or two
more to play of her part yet: Which Ariadne began to instruct her in. While
Polydor retreated to his little Thatched house; where he weighed every
Circumstance of this Last Adventure.

Heavens! (cried he) was there ever so unfortunate a Fellow as I am, to be
abused by a Counterfeit Ariadne, when I might really have had the true one!
But, perhaps, I had never seen the last had it not been in quest of the first.
It Is stranged Methinks, there is still something that hangs about my Heart and
will not let me hate that naughty Woman, nor I fear I should receive her again,
were I assured of her Virtue: Were I confident she were not in Debt, or had I
but an Estate to pay her Debts, whatever they were; upon the assurahce of her
truth to me: I should take her into my Bosom. O easy Fool that I am! I am
certain I should. She Is witchingly fair! I cannot for my Soul forget her
Beauty. Her Humor too so justly answers mine; that 'twere too great a Blessing
for me to enjoy her had she but Honor too. -- But O! (continued he) I have
lost a Diamond for a Pebble. Is that so strange! Alas! I have lost my self. --
But well (pursued he) I Will to Town, and strive to divert the Thoughts of my ill
Fortune and Disgrace with Company and Play. I may meet there with somebody as
wretched as my self: And then we will sit and Rail, and Curse Fortune, Women, and
our own Follies -- Hold, Polydor! Hold! (pursued he after a little Pause) Does
this become the greatness of thy Spirit! No; I will suffer quietly and
silently. I Will be as great a Stoic as the best of 'em. Nay more; I Will bear my
Afflictions like a Christian Woman, I forgive thee. Thou have not Damned me
yet. Thou have only made me forfeit all my Happiness on Earth, unless I find it
here, here in my Breast. I first must drive thee out and then I may. Alas! Thou
coudst not help this Treachery! It is Entailed upon thy Sex. Heaven has
ordained that you should all be false. Made Soft and Fair the easier to
Deceive.

'Twas not the Fruit nor Serpent ruined Man:
O no! The Woman looked the Sin into him!
She Smiled and raised strong Appetites within him:
The Mighty Charm prevailed! The glorious Bait.
He speedily devoured; and in one moment
Thus Poisoned all his Pure, Immaculate Soul!
And left his Sons weak Preys to's subtle Daughters!
So (continued he Recollecting himself) I can Preach I see, upon occasion.
However, this is no place to Preach in; the Night comes on apace; I will to
Town in spite of Darkness. With that, he called for his Horse and a Pen, Ink,
and Paper; which with much ado he got: But, I believe, his Hostess was forced
to tear a blank Leaf out of the Practice of Piety or some such Book; or, for
ought I know, it might as well be torn out of the Famous History of Valentine
and Orson; which indeed, is the most likely of the two: For as I understand, it
was a Quarter of a sheet of Paper; on which he wrote a piece of his Mind to the
Counterfeit Ariadne, giving her notice where she might direct her Commands to
him at any time; which he dispatched to her by a Messenger he found there, who
undertook to deliver it that Night for a Tester. So, immediately he mounted and
came for London; where he Arrived about eleven at Night: He set up his Beast
very carefully, and stayed till he had seen his Bed made, and till he had eaten
a hearty Supper of Corn. Then -- God-a-mercy Horse (said Polydor) and left him
to provide for his own self; which he did; taking Coach and driving directly to
his Lodgings; where he vowed, Prayed a little and Sighed more, so put out his
Candle and went to Bed. What with Traveling and Vexation, he was so tired,
that he slept very soundly till seven the next Morning, without the help of
Wine. When he 'rose he found himself much better for having drank so little the
Day past: But still he found his Troubles return into his Thoughts, as fresh as
ever. He knew not what in the World to do, to ease himself. At last, he
bethought himself of his Friend Marwoud: To whom he resolved to discourse his
Misfortunes at large and ask his Advice, what to do in his miserable Condition:
For, he had fully determined in his Thoughts to drink no more so largely and
frequently as he had done hitherto. To his mistaken Friend then he go's, finds
him hardly awake, in Bed. What! Not awake yet (said Polydor, drawing open the
Curtains) Who Is that? (cried Marwoud, rubbing his Eyes) O Polydor! What
Returned already! Will you believe your Eyes, or no, (replied Polydor) you see
I am. Hardly (answered Marwoud) for faith thou have made such have it is almost
incredible to me! Since, I presume, you stayed some time with your Friends you
went to see: And for my part, I declare to you, I don't love to ride so hard:
But did you not travel some part of the last Night? (continued he) I did,
(replied Polydor) I should not-like that without Company (said Marwoud) it is
dangerous, there are Highway-Men abroad every Night on that Road: Besides if it
were never so clear of them; I should nevertheless be Assaulted by all the
Melancholy Thoughts my Soul could muster. Ay! (interrupted Polydor) Those were
my Entertainment all the way. I never was so melancholy in all my Life, (added
he) nor ever had reason to be so: How? Prithee why? (said Marwoud) sit on the
Bed and let me hear the reason. You shall (said Polydor sitting down) I am
Married my dear Friend (continued he, embracing Marwoud; sighing and almost
weeping at every word) At last, he summoned all his Resolution, and made shift
to discourse all his Adventures with Ariadne to him, which he did in such
pitteous Accents and with such mournful Gestures, that Marwoud often sighed in
Consort with him. But, perhaps, it was more, because he understood that Polydor
had robbed him of his Mistress, tho he did not know it himself. But as if it had
been to make him more enraged; Polydor shows him the Ring and Gold Ariadne left
with him. Marwoud soon knew the Purse and the Ring. Which made him say, coldly,
On my Word, I should think by this she were a Person of Quality; but her
leaving you so strangely confirms me in a contrary Opinion, Polydor then
proceeded to tell him how passionately in Love the true Ariadne was with him,
all along mistaking Dorothea for her. But ( said he tenderly embracing Marwoud
again) I will have nothing to say to her, because, I know your Heart is engaged
there. How came you to hear that ( said Marwoud?) The Footman that I overtook
on the Road discovered it to me, by a trick I put upon him. Well then, cried
Marwoud, how do you like the true Ariadne? What manner of Woman is she? for,
perhaps, continued he, you may be still deceived. That Is impossible, replied
Polydor, and to convince you that I am not, I will describe her to you. Her
Hair is of a pale brown, her Eyes are Gray, full and Languishing. She Lisps a
little; and she has a Mole on her left Cheek which become her extremely. Nay,
nay, I Am sure it is she.

Well I am satisfied; said Marwoud, who knew well enough 'twas Dorothea, ^y the
Description:

He presently imagined 'twas one of Ariadnes Caprices that set Dorothea to
personate her. He began to be very uneasy, and impatient of Polydor's Stay. --
When Polydor asked him, Am not I the most wretched Creature breathing? Do
thou not pity me heartily? What shall I do? ^rithee assist me. And a thousand
other things that a man in his Condition might propose. He replied, I believe
it is Nine a Clock; I must rise to take Sir Francis ere he go out. What? shall I
drink a Bottle with you at Night? I will not fail to meet you at Eight, at
Lockets, or where you will. I Will see you ther^ if you please (replied Polydor)
bu^ I cannot Drink. You dull Dog (said Marwood to his Valet de Chamber) ar^
these Clothes for this Weather? Wha^ occasion have I to Sweat this Weather more
than I must of Necessity? Do^ your Rogueship think I Am Pox'd! yo^ are but an
ill Physician to prescri^^ me a Sweat, amid'st all this Heat, (...) I were. The
poor Devil answered nere^ word, but with all submission imag^nable brought him
another Suit that looked a little Cooler. He put it on and dressed, till he had
occasion for his Perruke; by ill Luck, that which he designed to wear that day,
was not Combed out. -- Defend us! How many Dammees? How many Oaths? How many
Insipi'd Rascally Negligent Beasts were there uttered! Polydor observing him
out of Humor, did not know what certainly to attribute it to, but thought it
very ^onvenient to leave him. Marwood (said he) good Morrow! To Night at Eight,
at Lockets; remember your Servant, answered he in the same Tone, he had spoken
to his Valet de Chamber.

Down Stairs went Polydor, and not long after Marwood took a Chair and went to
Sir Francis, where he appeared very much discomposed, all along; insomuch tha^
Sir Francis took part^cular Notice of him. Marwood (said he) What the Devil
ails thee? Thy looks are enough to give the most Costive Body a stool! What Is
the matter? Come, impart, impart It Is not wholesome for your knowledge of all
Men's, (replied Marwood) 'twill blister your Ears if I relate it. You seem to
imply (said the Knight) that it Concerns me. And your words have raised my
Curiosity to that height, that you must explain 'em, or I cannot esteem you my
Friend. My silence (answered Marwood) is now the greatest Argument of my
Friendship to you that I can make you. I beg you would not. -- Prithee do not
beg (interrupted Sir Francis) thou have stirred all that was Woman in me, and
now I must know; thy very Endeavors to conceal it makes me impatient of this
tormenting Silence. There Is Mischief in it, let me know it. Mischief! I think
there is (cried Marwood all in a Rage) Mischief, Base, Treacherous Mischief!
Why then art thou so long ere thou let'st me know it? (said Ariadnes dear
Brothe.r) Too soon (said Marwood, shaking his spiteful head, and shrugging up
his Shoulders, you will know too soon, the Lady your Sister Ariadne is Married.
-- Married! (said Sir Francis, keeping his Temper and his face.) Why, then God
give her Joy! Can you then so Tamely hear such ill News? (cried Marwood) that
your Sister is Married basely, below her self to a Man of no Fortunes, or at
least of very small Fortunes, and those too decaying! And without your
Knowledge! With all my heart, let her Marry without my Knowledge (replied Sir
Francis) But what base Man is he, she has made her Husband? Pray what is his
name? Do I know him? yes, I think you have seen him (answered Marwood) and in
my Company. Pox of my Loggerhead that ever I brought him near you! -- Prithee
(interrupted the good humored Gentleman) who is he without any more
Harrangues, let me know his Name, if he has one, I beseech you. It Is Polydor,
that Treacherous Beggarly Villain! (cried Marwood, his Face all over glowing
with Rage and Envy.) Polydor! (said Sir Francis) have a care Marwood what you
say! He is a worthy Gentleman and of a good Family, besides he was your Friend.
I am heartily glad it is so well with her, after all the fears you put me in for
her. So well (cried Marwoud. It Is true; she might have Married a Hangman, a
Cobbler, or a Porter for all you I see; But I don't apprehend how otherwise she
could have done worse! The Extravagant Prodigal knows how to spend her
Fortunes, and his own too, were they both doubled. Is this all the care you
take of your Sister! How now Marwoud! (said Sir Francis putting on a serious
Look) what do you mean by this Discourse. Pray keep your Reprimands till they
may be more seasonable: will you instruct my Care and Love to my Sister! If I
have offended Sir, (answered Marwoud) it is through the excess of my Friendship,
and Zeal to serve you. I could not think such a Lost Fellow as Polydor, a fit
Match, for the incomparable Ariadne. It seems (replied her Brother) Ariade
thinks so. And once more I give you Caution, that you treat him at your
discourse of him, as he is a Gentleman. If not for his own, and his Families
sake, yet at least as he is my Sisters Husband, and my Brother, -- But how came
this Wedding about. Marwoud told him every Circumstance as Polydor had related
to him, but (added he) I fear he has disguised the Truth, and that he surprised
her, and forced her consent to Marry him. If so (replied Sir Francis) I shall
take an Honorable Revenge on him: We Will go down to Morrow, and learn the
Truth. But I fear, Marwoud you love her, your self: I have long suspected it,
and it is Jealous hate that makes you judge so ill of your happy Rival. I hope
(replied Marwoud ready to burst with Anger, which he durst not vent there) I
had not been altogether so Contemptible and disproportionate a Match; had I
been so happy as Polydor. I grant your Estate is proportionable (replied Sir
Francis) but how unequal your Humors may be, I know not. And (perhaps added he
sharply) she is as Happy as she has disposed of her self, as if she had
proceeded according to your deliberate Instructions. It Is very possible
(replied Marwoud.)

The next Morning they came to Dorotheas, where I fancy they were expected,
because they were so Civilly entertained. As Soon as Sir Francis found his
Sister in private, which you may, be confident was before Marwoud had the
opportunity of conversing alone with her. He told her all that Marwoud had
related to him, all which she owned, who certainly gave her the greatest
animosity imaginable against a Gentleman of his Principles, and Circumstances.
It Is true she was Revenged and that by good Fortune, for (perhaps) Marwoud
durst have fought any man on equal terms of Honor or Advantage. He was a Spark
that could Love as heartily for interest as any man Breathing! He had a strange
Command over himself in Conversation! And would seldom speak Truth, for, that
is the rudest thing imaginable, especially if a man always does so. You are to
know then, that as soon as her Brother had made this Discourse to her, Ariadne
singled out Marwoud, and led him into the Garden. Is it possible (said she)
that a Gentleman and your friend, should impudently and falsely report to you,
that I was Married to him! and is it not as strange that you should give Credit
to him on so slight Circumstances, as the sight of my Ring and Purse. Look here
(continued she, showing him the Letter Polydor had written to her, under the
borrowed Name of Beaufort.) See now are you not finely abused. But I perceive
very faint appearances will prevail on you, to believe the worst things
imaginable of me. Ha! (interrupted Marwoud in a pleasing surprise) Are you not
then Married to him? Why cannot you yet give Credit to me! (said Ariadne.) Why
then (cried Marwoud) do you suffer him to wear those things, which are much
more precious in their having been worn by you, than an hundred times their
Value could make them? ^ou see (answered she) he entreates here that he might
kiss my hand; which by no means I would permit, but prevailed with Dorothea to
personate me, when upon the first sight of her, he cried she was not that
Ariadne he looked for, and left her without returning any of 'em. By Heaven but
he shall return 'em Madam, (cried Marwood in a fierce tone) and that ere to
Morrow this time. I would not (said Ariadne) Encourage you in any ill design of
Revenge upon my Account; but truly I must say, he deserves to be punished for
his Indiscretion.

What a Devil did this Woman mean now, (some will say) to set this Fellow to
Murder her Husband, Let them know she was resolved to try his Courage as well
as his other Virtues; for undoubtedly she was the most humorous Creature
Breathing. And I dare say, she wished from her very Soul, that Polydor might
come off Victorious, and Chastize Marwoud for his Tatling.

They said not much more on that Matter, because they saw Sir Francis leading
Dorothea and Miranda to them (...) they joined Discourse presently, o^ News,
and things indifferent, which lasted about an Hour: when they were told that
Dinner waited them on the Table, they all went in, and those could fed
heartily; Marwoud's Stomach was full already, with his Resolution of fighting
Polydor, and I think he Eat but little, but drank the more. And as soon as
Dinner was over, he took the opportunity to leave the Knight and Ladys in a
very hot Dispute, concerning the Constancy of Men, and the Inconstancy of
Women, in affairs of Love.

Marwoud had gotten on Horseback just as they were beginning to be warm in
their Arguments, and ordered one of the Footmen to tell Sir Francis, if he
should ask for him, that he was gone to make a Visit to a Drunken friend of his
about 7 or 8 Miles thence; and that he should not wonder if he did not return
to Night, for he doubted there might be hot Service.

Having left this Charge with the Servant, he Rode for London, with all the
Convenient speed that might be; where he found himself about Nine a Clock. He
was so Impatient, that he hardly could give himself time to change his Boots
for Shoos, ere he went to see for Polydor.

By good fortune for him, he could not light on him that Night: But the next
Morning early he took him in Bed. Polydor (said he) you must rise I have
Business with you. This he spoke in a Tone so different, from that he used to
salute his Friend in formerly, that Polydor almost guessed what he intended,
which made him say Rising, Certainly your Business with me is very strange and
urgent, that you Visit me thus early, and with that unusual Roughness which you
are not wont to accost me with. But (continued he) I am ready to give my
Friends all manner of satisfaction becoming a Gentleman. I know it Polydor
(said Marwoud) else I had not given my self the trouble to call you to an
Account, for an Injury done to a Person of Quality, and my most respected
Acquaintance. I don't know what you mean (answered Polydor) but I Will give you
the best account I can. You must restore the Ring and Purse which you pretended
was given you by Ariadne. How! Marwoud (said Polydor) pretended to be given me!
-- And must Restore them. Prithee to whom? To me (replied Marwoud.) No Marwoud
(cried he) Not so. Bring me to that Ariadne that gave me the Ring, and left the
Purse with me; and you may prevent farther Mischief. Talk not of preventing
(said Marwoud) I came to seek it. On my word, replied Polydor, you are fonder
on it than I am. However I will help you to as much as may satisfy you, within
this Hour; if you please to let me see you behind Clarenden House. Well! Good
Morrow (said Marwoud) I Will expect you there an hour hence.

He went directly to the place appointed, where Polydor after he was dressed,
according to a laudable Custom which he had always observed; threw himself on
his Knees, and recommended the Care of his Soul and Body to Heaven: And I
believe, if with Honor he might have avoided it, he wo^^d not have fought any
man in cold Blood, much less one that had been his Friend. He could not yet
imagine what obliged Marwoud to demand the Ring and Gold.

He went considering on the odness of that Mornings Encounter, till he came to
the aforesaid place, where he found Marwoud ready to receive him, with all the
Gallantry and Resolution of a Generous Enemy Said Polydor, I could wish
Marwoud, that this matter might be otherwise determined, than by the Sword.
Especially between us two. It Is in vain (replied Marwoud drawing) The Sword
alone must end this Dispute with one of our Lives. Forbid it Heaven (said
Polydor standing on his Guard) Marwoud was very Furious and Violent in his
Passes, which Polydor very calmly put by. But Marwoud continuing very eager,
made one home Thrust, and slightly wounded Polydor in his left Arm; who
immediately threw himself into his enraged Enemy and ^^^arm'd him. Here Marwoud
(said Polydor) take your Sword, I will not injure your Courage so mu^^ as to
expect you s^^^^d ask your Life. What damned misfortunes this! (cried Marwoud
receiving his Sword, I thank thee Polydor; but I must again employ it against
thy Life! I must be ungrateful (continued he) my unhappy Circumstances oblige
me to it! -- That Is somewhat hard (replied Polydor) however I cannot fear to
fight that man a second time, whom I have once disarmed. And now Sir (added he
with a threatening Gesture.) This bout may be more fatal to you than the former.
I Will take it as it comes (said Marwoud.)

They both made several Passes, and Polydor was run quite through the right
Thigh, but it was only a Flesh-wound, having mist the Sinews. This vexed him
heartily, and he pressed most V^gorously on his Rival, insomuch that he made him
retreat about two yards of Ground, and pursuing his Advantage ran him into the
Sword Arm, almost as far as his Breast. There his Sword was so engaged, that he
could not easily get it out: mean while Marwoud was shifting his own Sword into
his left hand, that he might shorten it, and run him into the Back, but Polydor
prevented him by throwing him on the Ground, where he took from him both the
Swords. Marwoud's he stuck into the Earth, and broke it short almost to the
Hilt. Now (said he) Marwoud thou have the Reward of Ingratitude farewell, if
thou can; I Will send somebody to help thee, as soon as I reach the Town. No,
hold! (said Marwood) let me walk with you. I have my due, and I am satisfied.
And I thank Heaven that we have both escaped with Life. No thanks to you though
Sir (said Polydor.)

They both made shift to get to St. Jamses, where they took Coach, and were
both Carried to the same Chyrurgeon, who assured 'em there was no great danger
on either side; but Marwoud's was somewhat the worse. When the Wounds were
dressed, they embraced very kindly, and were as good friends seemingly, as ever
they had been formerly. I dare engage that Polydor was real, but for Marwoud, I
can not say much, for he played him an ill trick after this.

They parted for the present and went to their several Lodgings. About twelve a
Clock Sir Francis came in puffing have to Marwouds, whom he found upon his Bed
asleep, and in a fine breathing Sweat. He was going to steal away softly to
leave him to his Repose, but (it seems) he could not avoid making so much Noise
as waked Marwoud. Who Is there (cried he.) Your Friend. (said Sir Francis) I Am
glad to see you alive. How is it with Polydor? Marwoud was amazed to hear him
ask so pertinent a Question, not apprehending how he should know any thing of
their last dispute. I think Sir (said he) Polydor is as well, if not better
than I am: I Am sure his Fortune was. But in the name of wonder how came you
acquainted with our Difference? Ariadne when you were gone, was fearful of what
might ensue on what she had said to you, (replied Sir Francis) and could not
rest till she had told me where you were gone, which brought us all to Town
this Morning by ten a Clock, in hopes to prevent what I see is already too
severely performed. Ay alas! (cried Marwoud) with too severe Success on his
side; Curse on this weak Arm, that could not reach his Heart. I am heartily
glad it did not (replied the Knight,) for I should certainly have lost a dear
Sister had it been so, that either of you had fallen. O no! (interrupted
Marwoud) had the wretched Marwoud falln as low as Hell, what had that concerned
the Adorable Ariadne! I must confess (added he with a scornful Smile:) if the
most Accomplished, and thrice happy Polydor had Died; 'twere enough to have
broken any Ladys heart. 'Twere enough indeed (answered Ariadnes Brother) to
have broken my Sisters heart, had you Killed her Husband on her Account. How!
(interrupted Marwoud in a great Consternation) is she then really Married to
him after all this? after the Letter she showed me, to persuade me of the
Contrary! It Is even so after all (replied Sir Francis.) And you ought not to be
be troubled, if I desire you to receive him always as your friend. I may be
Civil to him (answered Marwoud,) but I fear I shall never really love him. In
short (added he) I shall hardly ever endure to see him again. Come! Come (said
Sir Francis) this is not like a Man of Honor: I must and will have you
perfectly Reconciled. That Is as time shall try (replied Marwoud,) but at
present it appears to me as impossible, as it is to recall Yesterday. O! (cried
Sir Francis) This is only the Effect of your late Animosity. But (pursued he)
pray make have and recover, that you may restore my Friend again to my Arms.
You may come to my House Conveniently enough in a Chair: but I would not have
you be too hasty to leave your Chamber. I Will send Ariadne to Visit you in the
Afternoon. In the mean time take care of your self. Saying so he left him
without expecting his Answer, and went home.

Marwoud did not at all like the Complement his Friend made him, of bringing
his Sister to Visit him: But he considerd, he should at sometime or other be
forced to see her, unless he could altogether resolve to forbear Conversing
with her Brother, which made him put himself into the best Posture he could to
receive her that Afternoon.

Mean while Polydor fared a great deal better for he could make shift to walk,
with the help of a Cane, and the Wound in his left Arm was scarce of any pain
to him. Yet he thought it not altogether necessary to leave his Chamber for a
day or two; which obliged him to send for his three old Companions whom he used
so constantly to meet at Lockets or one Gaming-house or other. They came
according to Summons; and expressed some little kind of trouble for that
unhappy Accident, which he told 'em was a fall from his Horse. To play they
went as briskly as at the Groom-Porters: And Polydor's Hand held in most
luckily! There was indeed some reason it should, for, he Treated 'em very
largely and generously with Wine and cold Meats.

While they were thus throwing away their Money and Time, Ariadne accompanied
only with Miranda, came to see her Maimed Soldier Marwood. Which, I believe
was no little satisfaction to her, finding him no worse: For, she concluded her
Polydor's Case was not so dangerous; having heard as much from her Brother at
Dinner. Madam, ( said Marwoud to her) you do me too much Honor, and your self
too great a trouble in this Visit; but, perhaps, it is a pleasure to you to see
me thus vanquished by the Man you had made your Husband, notwithstanding the
endeavors you used to disguise it to me. You mistake Sir ( replied Ariadne) if
it be any pleasure to me to see you in this Condition: it is because, I hope it
is much worse with Polydor, for, I have already had time enough to repent my
hasty Marriage with a Man of his mean Fortunes, and hateful Humors: And I come
now to give you the opportunity of revenging yourself and me too. But first,
pray give me a particular Relation of your Duel.

He did so, with much uneasiness; and when he came to that part of the ^tory;
How! ( said Ariadne) Had you the ill fortune to be twice disarmed by him! Yes
(Madam, replied he vehemently) I had that damned confounded ill fortune, for, I
am certain it was not through my want of Resolution that it succeeded so well
with him. I don't suspect it was (answered she) But I come now to pour Balsom
into your Wounds; I mean those of your mind; promise me but secrecy and truth!
It Is neither Treason nor Murder I dare assure you. Let me know it I beseech
you (said he greedily) I will attempt it; notwithstanding I have been
unfortunate on your behalf in this last Enterprise. Alas ( said Ariadne) it is
the easiest thing imaginable, there is not the least shadow of danger in it. But
you promise Fidelity, and Secrecy so much as to my Brother? For Heavens sake do
not doubt me! (Madam, said he.) I will not ( continued Ariadne) your Province
then is to lay an Action o^ Ten Thousand Pounds on Polydor, in any bodies name,
under pretense tha^ the Debt was Contracted before Married him, manage this as
cunningly as Revenge can instruct you; and I doubt not but to be rid of an
Husband for some time, if not for ever! For, he not being used to a Prison may
the sooner take the infection of it and die; I have been told that there is no
Prison about Town but has a peculiar Distemper belonging to it. Ha! ( cried
Marwou'd) This is pretty well designed! Let me alone (Madam) to Execute it.
I Will about it the first thing I do, as soon as I can go abroad, and I am
persuaded, it will not a little Contribute to the Cure of the wound he was
pleased to bestow on me.

Ariadne thanked him for the readiness with which he embraced her Propositions;
and after a little other discourse of things not altogether material to their
Circumstances; she took Miranda with her and left him to reflect on this
Blessed Opportunity she had given him, of being in some measure revenged on a
Man whom now he mortally hated.

With great impatience, he lingered out a Week: And when he ventur d out of
Doors, the first thing he did, before he had returned any of those Visits Sir
Francis was pleased to make to him in his Chamber, was to enter an Action of
Ten Thousand Pounds against Polydor in Wood-street Compter, at the Suit of Sir
Tenacious Heedy: The next was to learn when he went into the City, which he
heard would be within two days. He made a Visit to him on the very day he was
going, and offered him his Company into the City which was very kindly embraced
by Polydor. Heavens! How Sollicitous and industrious is malice, to compass its
devilish ends! And how easily is an honest man deceived!

The unwilling Polydor takes Coach immediately with his treacherous friend for
the Sun-Tavern behind the Exchange, where he had engaged to meet some Friends;
but they were no sooner gotten within Ludgate e're the Coach was stopped by
half a dozen Officers belonging to that Blessed place I told you on before; who
presently seized on both their Swords, and would have hall'd Polydor out, had
he not calmly asked 'em what they meant, and promised to make no resistance if
they could show any Authority for what they did. One of 'em told him, he had an
Action against him, and would show him the Warrant, as soon as they came to any
Tavern, that he should name; and withal, like the rest of the wheedling
treacherous Fraternity promised him all the Civility imaginable, provided he
would obey the Kings Law. Well (said he) let the Coachman drive to Fowlers at
the Half Moon. The Rascals liked that well enough, and very obediently trudged
along by the Coach sides till they came to the place aforesaid.

Marwoud all along seemed Amazed at this Accident, and appeared as the most
Concerned man of the two. Now (said Polydor to one of the Officers) at whose
Suit am I a Prisoner? At the Suit of one Sir Tenacious Heedy (replied the
Rascal) here is the Warrant Sir, you may read it if you please. Certainly friend
(said Polydor) you are mistaken, though I confess I find my name here, but may
there not be more of my name than my self think you? for upon my Reputation, I
never so much as heard of Sir Tenacious -- Devils name till this time! Pray
what is he? A rich Merchant (answered one of the Furies) and belongs to the
East India Company. Then be satisfied (said Polydor,) I never had Trading with
any of the Profession in my Life. No Sir that may be (returned one of the
Goblins) for, I suppose it is a Debt contracted by your Lady. O damned
Impostor! (cried Marwoud on a sudden, who had instructed this Rogue before.)
It must be so I am confident, if the Officers have not mistaken you for
another. It Is impossible we should Sir, (said one of 'em.) This Adversary was
with us when he took Coach at to there end of the Town, and told us this
Gentleman was the Debtor. Dear Harpies (said Polydor Smiling,) How could you
forbear your Prey so long! O Sir! (replied one.) you were out of our
Territories till you came within Temple Bar, where yet we did not think our
selves secure enough of you, because of the Templars, and some desperate Blades
that we might have met with in Fleet Street. You have reason Sir (said Polydor
smiling) I think here within your Dominions it is a matter of Imprisonment, at
least for a Gentleman to draw his Sword in his own defense: It scares your
whining Zealots out of the little Sense they had. Besides they are always
apprehensive of their own Guilt, and fear the Punishment they might reasonably
expect from the Sword, for their Rebellious, Seditious and mutinous Endeavors
against the Royal Prerogative. I Will tell you (continued he all in a flame, not
so much for his own Circumstances, as with Zeal for his Prince.) I will not be
Prisoner within these wicked Walls, within this City, in whose Great Streets
and highest Places, the best of Kings. (O hellish Riddle!) That Glorious Martyr
for the Liberty of his People, was proclaimed a Traitor! I say, I will not be
confined to herd one Week to amend with 'em, lest I get the Infection; at least
if a Hundred pounds will remove me to the King's Bench I will not. -- Why the
Devil could not my Knight. Merchant Adversary have taken me at our end of the Town?
Was there a Necessity that I must be brought hither to this Stage, where the
factious Schismatics are playing the old Gaim again with some of the same
Cards, only the Knaves are all Changed! where little Machiaville is playing his
Pranks! A worthy Puss indeed! -- But there are Dogs that may Worry him at last.
While he raved thus; and Marwoud walked frowning about the Room. The Officers
you may be confident were not Idle, they had top'd off a matter of Seven or
Eight Bottles of Canary, and devoured the best part of two Neats-Tongues. At
last one of them begged leave of his Gut, to speak to Polydor. Well Sir (said
he! What do you propose? will you send for Bail? Send for a Whore Sir; I Will go
to Prison, (cried Polydor) O fie! (said Marwoud) do not think on it! If I thought
my Bail would be taken, I would offer you my Service. O by no means dear
Friend! (replied Polydor, Embracing the Snake) I am resolved to stand it out my
self. Then (Interrupted one of the Troublesome Attendants,) Since your Worship
will go to Prison; yet, however you shall not go into the Compter, but if you
please you may Lie at a Prison House over against it, till you have Composed
this Business. No Sir I Will go to the Compter upon my word, (replied Polydor.)
Indeed you shall not, nor must not, (said Marwoud,) who wished nothing more in
the World than that he might Ro^ there.

What Exquisite Mischief may be done with the face of Friendship! I am sorry
(answered the true and faithful Polydor) I must be obstinate, but I have some
Reasons for it. Now (the Duce take me) If I know what Reason he could have for
it: Unless it were to avoid the Extortions of a Sponging House; which
nevertheless, had he been in the Compter so often as I; he would have endured,
rather than have seen the inside on it. Indeed Sir, I would not advise you to go
into the Compter; you will find it very disagreeable to your humor: The
Prisoners there will be all ready to tear you in pieces for Guarnish, (said one
of the Officers.) I shall prevent 'em (Sir) for I Will pay it (said Polydor.)
Nay, if you please to like it Sir; Replied one of 'em whose Brother in Law kept
a Sponging House) you may go into the Prison. But there is the Turnkeys Fee, and
seven shillings a Week for a dirty, dark hole, with Cobwebs about your Bed
instead of Curtains. When if you would be persuaded (Sir) you may lie in as
good a Bed as my Lord Mayor, and have what Meat and Drink you please, and
Dressed how you please, besides, the Liberty of walking down into the Dining
Room. But I must pay for it Sir (Interrupted Polydor) I shall have there my
Landlord, who (perhaps) Drinks like a Dane, Cringes like a French man, Grins
like my Lady's Monkey, when he sees Money coming; but if that be not ready, he
looks as surly as a Butchers Dog, or as the Butcher himself, who is the rudest
Beast of the two! His Company I shall never fail of, then one or two of your
Worships will come to Visit me, three or four times a day and make me as uneasy
as this Sir Booby that Arrests me will be when he hears I Am gone over to the
King's Bench; -- No Sir; I am bound for the Compter; there I Will treat my fellow
Prisoners, that want a Bottle of Wine and a lusty Joint of Meat! 'Twill be well
bestowed.

How long is it since you have had so good knowledge of these Houses you have
described? (said Marwoud) I hope you never were confined till now. I never was
indeed ( replied Polydor.) But I have visited some of my acquaintance in such
like places several times. Well Sir since you are so obstinate, and will not be
prevailed on for your own good; (said one of the Sergeants) you shall even have
your humor, but I fear you will repent it. I shall not however acquaint you with
my Penitence if I do, ( answered Polydor,) So, let us know what is to pay; that I
may be gone to my Palace. Dear Friend ( continued he, speaking to Marwoud)
oblige me so far as to enquire into this business for me; and see what must be
done in it, and give your self a little farther trouble to send Harry, Will, or
Tom, any one of 'em or all of 'em together to me, by to Morrow Noon. I will not
fail ( replied Marwoud) Can I do you any better Service? I am sorry at the
Heart that I must leave you: Yet if my Company may add any thing to your
satisfaction, command my stay with you as long as you please, and where you
will; I Will put off all business so I may any way contribute to the easing of
your Misfortunes. O by no means ( answered Polydor again, Embracing his Evil
Angel) I cannot suffer it. I know you will be at no great ease in such a place,
which will but increase my trouble.

As they had ended this Discourse, the Drawer brought up a Bill of about eight
and twenty Shillings which these Vermin had devoured in less than three hours
time, and yet the Dogs were so greedy that they were craving still; they were
for Money for waiting! (with so many Plagues to them as they drank Glasses of
Wine!) Money for waiting! (cry d Polydor) yes; let them pay you that set you
awork. They looked a little sower; but said no more, because they saw their
Play Master in the Room; who would needs pay the Reckoning out of the
extraordinary satisfaction he received in Polydor's Affliction: But Marwoud
pretended, it was for fear Polydor should have occasion for Money, in his ill
Circumstances.

Polydor took leave of him to go to his Enchanted Castle, with a Resolution
worthy an Hero who makes such desperate Adventures! He was attended only by
four of the Giants Warders. The other two stayed with Marwoud till they had
squeezed three Guinneys out of him. He charged them when he was going to look
strictly to their Prisoner and not to allow him any liberty, that they might
lawfully deny him. They promised to be very observant of his Commands, and left
him to go homewards without his Companion; for my part, I wish Polydor had gone
homeward without him, and had left him to keep his Bed warm in the Compter! But
hanged! It Is ridiculous to wish Impossibilities! Well! Let the Treacherous
Marwou'd even trudge on! We Will return to my good friend Polydor; who by this
time had entered the Fort and paid all Dutys belonging to it.

All the rest of the poor Enchanted Souls looked upon him, as the wretched
Ghosts in Hell did on Hercules and Theseus whom they were in hopes came to
deliver 'em; and truly if Polydor did not altogether enlarge their Bodies, yet
he did much increase their Commons, during his stay there. Insomuch, that they
all esteemed him their Deliverer from a lingering sort of Famine! For he daily
gave Alms to the meanest: You may see Providence in this now! For had he not
been sent thither, many a poor Soul might have Perished of Hunger and Thirst.

His Charity to all, and his kind easy Conversation with the most ^nferiour and
Miserable Creature there was so signal, that the Keepers took particular notice
of it, and told him, after he had been there two Days and some Hours, by way of
Complement as I suppose they intended it; that, They should be mighty sorry to
lose his Company; at least (they added) the Prisoners would have no small cause
to Lament his Departure, tho they ought to wish it for his sake. He Smiled, and
told 'em, 'He thought he was obliged to it as he was a Man, if not as a
Christian and a Fellow Sufferer.

They had more discourse as they walked, at the end of which, a Jolly, Honest
Soul, (and so you would judge by the Ruddy Complexion of his Face) one who had
no small Authority there, Invited him into the Lodge; telling him, and that
truly, that it was the sweeter place of the two. He Embraced his kind proffer;
and to show he was not ungrateful for favors sent for half a dozen Bottles of
good Clarret from Matt. Fowlers, and bespoke two good substantial Dishes of
Meat for his Friend, his self and the Prisoners.

As they were drinking a Glass or two before Dinner; in came those two Officers
that stayed behind with Marwoud, who had heard of his Generosity to those in
the House, and of his Civility to every Body, and who perceived he had Money
enough; O ( cried Polydor, looking on his Friend in Authority.) These are some
of the Gentlemen that brought me hither to be acquainted with you. Sirs! Pray
walk in and drink with us (continued he, to the Officers) They were easily
prevailed on, and sat 'em down:

After a Glass or two had gone about; (said the Sergeant) I wonder, Sir, No
body has been with you yet! Ay ( said Polydor) it is something strange! But I
doubt not, my Friend whom you saw with me the other day, is busy in getting my
Liberty; and means I suppose, to surprise me with it; yet I admire he has not
sent some other Friends to me whom I expected to see here the next day after my
Confinement. You have been very patient, Sir, (said the Officer) I don't hear
that you have sent to any Friend yet. No, no, I need not trouble my self, I Am
sure ( replied Polydor) my Friend is laboring for my ease. You mean Squire
Marwoud, (answered the Sergeant.) I do so ( said Polydor.) I can then assure
you (continued the Officers) that he is endeavoring, laboring all the ways
imaginable to keep you in a Prison all the days of your Life. How Sir (
Interrupted Polydor, strangly Surprised!) what, do you know what you say! Ay,
ay, Sir, (said the other Sergeant) and Il swear it, Sir; and two Witnesses are
enough to cast a Suit at Common Law. That may be Sir, ( answered Polydor) but a
thousand Witnesses will hardly make me suspect my Friend. But pray, what ground
have you for what you say? Why, Sir (replied one of 'em) since we have found
you here among us a Civil, Obliging, and Charitable Person; I Will tell you the
whole truth, which I will Swear to, and so will my Friend there. Be assured
then, that it was he who set you for three days together, till the very day he
secured you in the Coach where we took you. I dare swear it before any
Magistrate in England, (Interrupted the other Sergeant.) ^t may be so Sir, (
replied Polydor.) Besides (pursued the Sergeant) I Am sure we had three Guinneys
of him. If this be true; ( cried Polydor) I am a very unfortunate Fellow,
indeed! For, the loss of a Friend grieves me a thousand times more than my
Imprisonment. But (continued he) did he say, I owed him any Money? No Sir
(replied the Sergeant) he told us, the Debt was real, and Contracted by a Lady
whom you had lately Married. This is all a Riddle to me! said Polydor, But I
thank you Gentlemen for your Information. I find I am made the sport of Fortune
of late. I was a happy Fellow and at Liberty once. -- But now -- Well! --
Gentlemen, your Servant. -- I thank you for this Liberty. -- Why Sir, will you
be going already, (said he who Invited him into the Lodge) Dinner is just a
coming I believe, by this time. Be pleased then Gentlemen ( replied Polydor) to
feed heartily when it does come; and Invite some of your Friends in the House
to eat with you, that want it most, at least be pleased to send 'em what you
think fit, for my part, I care not for eating. I must mind my own business I
see. And pray let me entreat the favor of you, to let me have a careful
Messenger sent to me; and you shall command me as much another time, if I ever
am in a Capacity of serving you. Ay Sir, we will be sure to send you a very
honest Fellow (answered one of 'em) but we are sorry you will not Dine, when
you have already given order for Meat. I thank you Sir ( said Polydor) I have
business of greater concern than Dining, once more your Servant.

The Gate was soon opened to him, you may believe; and to his dark Apartment he
went directly. Where after two or three hearty Sighs; he began. How should
Marwoud come acquainted with my Ariadne! How came she to employ him! And how
durst he undertake so base a thing as to betray his Friend! Yet -- what made
him fight me for the Ring and the Gold! What Title had he to either of 'em.
It Is a strange Mystery, profound and dark! And I am lost in it. He must know my
False Ariadne, if he did really betray me to this place, that is certain,
Ariadne did I call her? A very Improper Name it is (methinks) for her: For, --
she has led me into a Labyrinth! I see, all Ariadnes are not of the same
humor. Her Name sake bravely led her Lover forth, spite of a Cruel Father!
Ventured all, and lost her self at last for a false Man! When I Disarmed and
naked of deceit, have got into the Labyrinth, and met the Monster. So much for
Honesty! So much for Truth! But O! How much for rash Credulity! Had I been
practiced in the World's great Arts, Treason, Rebellion, and Hypocrisy. could I
have nosed my Prince, and to his Teeth have told him that his Power was but
painted; could I have sworn a Maid into belief, of any feigned Love, and when I
had enjoyed, have thrown the Rifl'd, Broad, Blown Flower behind me; could I, in
my Dear Friends Bosom lying, pierce it to reach his Heart; and after all, cheat
Heaven with pretended Piety, serve God with lift up Eyes and dismal tone; but
Heart of Marble, sinking down to Hell, then I had been a Glorious Devil! Then,
my Prince might have been pitty'd, the lost Maid have Fruitless Tears with my
Friends unrevenged Blood. They Would only suffered. -- O! No; I mistake: They had
been Blessed (perhaps) and with their Sighs have blasted all my hopes of future
Bliss, and blown me down to Hell; for Heaven sees, and is not to be mocked.

He fetched another deep Sigh at the end of this long Sermon, and threw himself
on his Bed: Within a little after the Fellow came to him to know what Service
he had to command him. He rose and dispatched him away to his three Gaming
Friends; and being then somewhat tired with Grief, and not having yet slept
well in his new Lodging, he fell into a slumber for two or three hours.

About which time the Messenger returned with his three Friends. He was almost
out of Countenance when he saw 'em; and hardly knew how to receive 'em. At last
( said Will,) Why, how now Polydor! What brought thee hither? Even my own Folly
( replied Polydor) you will not pity me when you hear it. However, I must
discourse it to you, that you may give me your Advice; you must know then, I Am
Married. -- Married (cried all three, in a strange Surprise) Ay, Married (
continued Polydor) and to one of the most Beautiful Creatures breathing! One
whom I would not leave for the Empire of the World, were she but really what
she seemed. You appear Amazed at what I say (pursued he) but sit ye down and I
will relate you the whole Adventure; It Is pure Knight Errantry, that you must
take notice of before hand. Then he began and told 'em every Circumstance till
the very Minute that they came to him. They heard it with a great deal of
Patience and Wonder, but with no little trouble for their Friends sake. I Am
sorry ( said Will,) you are fallen into the hands of Sir Tenacious Heedy, I
have heard he is a mere Jew to any Man that ows him Money. No, Pox on it! ( cried
Harry) Nothing troubles me but that he is Married. And what is worse ( added
Tom,) that he should throw himself away without ever so much as asking the
advice of any of his Friends! You see Friend ( said Harry) what comes of
Weddings! Pox take me, if I can pity you for the heart of me. Why were there
not Wives enough in the Town of other Men's but you must needs get one of your
own! And ( added Will,) to believe a little Rascally Lad in a matter of such
moment! A likely piece of business indeed, ( cried Harry) that a Lady of twelve
hundred a Year and some thousands in Money and Jewels, should dispose of her
self on such a Person as thine! There had been some reason; had some
probability, that I might have had such Fortune: I might justly expect it. Yes,
from such a Lady as Sycorax in the Tempest, with a Dowry of Enchanted Lands (
cried Tom) which you may take Possession of when you can discern 'em. -- No,
Faith, (continued he) to give the Devil his due, Polydor has the advantage of
us all, that way. Ay, ( replied Harry) and to give the Devil his due, he is the
silly'st Devil that ever I heard of! Come! You are Merry Gentlemen at my Cost,
( interrupted Polydor) but this is nothing to my Liberty, this is no Advice;
tho it is what I did really expect from you. Advice, ( cried Harry) why prithee
send for thy Wife Ariadne with her Clue, if thou know whither. I believe
she is gone to my Sycorax, for their Lands lie very near together. No, no, (
interrupted Tom) I rather imag n Bacchus has taken her up too, into Heaven;
he is an old Dog at Ariadne's! You shall see he will fetch Sir Francis's Sister and
all, shortly. Enough, enough of this! ( cried Will, very soberly) Let Us think
what is to be done. Why; I Will tell you my opinion ( replied Harry) I know a rich
old Widow about threescore, I Will send her to him, if he will Marry her; so as
Marrying brought him in, let it even fetch him out. Very seasonable and wholesome
Advice in gad! ( cried Tom) And then, it is but leaving her as soon as he gets
out, as Ariadne has left him, and he may thus be quitts with Fortune. Y' are
very pretty Fellows truly ( said Polydor) But -- It may fall to my share to
laugh at you, yet ever I die. Ay, if your Spouse should prove a right Diamond
and no Counterfeit, ( replied Harry) you might laugh at us for laughing at you.
In the mean time case your Sp^^en the other way, if you can, 'twill become you
better. Come dear heart ( said Will to Polydor) Take no notice of these two
Rascals! -- I Will do what lies in my Power to serve thee, upon my Soul! Polydor
than^'d him very obligingly. Hark O! what Gravity! ( cried Harry) As if it were
not possible that we might be as ready to serve him with our Lives and Fortunes
as your Worship; because you talk and look so superciliously, and we so freely!
Well said Harry! (cried Tom) What Does the Rogue affront us! Away, ye Brace of
Coxcombs! ( replied Will.) I don't accuse ye of any Aversness to his Service.
But, methinks, you should have pleased your selves sufficiently with your
raillery on him, by this time. Prithee, let us now be serious. Nay, for my part
( answered Harry) I can be as serious as a Pick-Pocket at his business in a
Church. And I ( said Tom) can be as serious as the Person! Well! And what is to
be done now? I think it the best way ( repl^^d Will,) to remove him to the Fl^^
No ( interrupted Polydor) I Will rather remove to the Kings-^ench, I have some
acquaintance there already, besides I have drank some Bottles with the Marshal,
who, I am confident, will give (...) all the Liberty (...) may with safety. I Will
be sure to Visit you every day in Term time at least. And we will make thee as
welcome as we can, ( cried Harry;) that is, thou shall never go over the Water
sober. Hang your Dutch Entertainments! ( said Polydor) I Am out of conceit of
'em. A Blessed Reformation, if it hold! ( said Tom.) It shall Sir ( replied
Polydor.)

They had some farther discourse concerning the means of getting him over,
which lasted about a quarter of an hour more, then they sent for half a dozen
Bottles of Clarret to the old House, and a dish of cold Chickens. By that time
Polydor's Stomach was come to him. For, if ever you were a Prisoner, you may be
sensible the sight of a Friend or two there, revives a Man strangely! He eat as
heartily as he did on his Wedding day: And drank off his three Bumpers as he
used to do, to the King, the Queen, and the Duke.

They stayed with him till the Fatal Bell was rung, which commands every
Prisoner close to his Chamber, and all others abroad to their business. Here
you might see one lugging two Guns (as they call 'em) which in plain English
are two Pottle-Pots of Ale and Beer, another following him with some Tobacco, a
Candle and Pipes. There a poor Soul with two or three Bottles of the Sheriffs
Wine, Anglice Fair Water; begging of another to fill his dirty Pipe with
stinking Mundungus.

I suppose, the miserable Wretch was one of the Common-side. You may believe
me, for I have lay'n in the House some Nights my self to my Sorrow; Nor is it
any great matter of wonder, for a Man of my Circumstances to have been a
Prisoner: You know we are generally special Poor. Well! There were a great many
other Objects of Pity besides this Man, that a Curious Person would have taken
notice on. But Polydor's Friends were none of that sort, for they went out
as soon as they could persuade the Turnkey to open the Door. Polydor returned to
his Chamber, and very contentedly went to Bed, where he slept soundly; for he
had drank his share with his Friends.

Next Morning, he found himself in very good temper, and withal something
inclinable to Rhiming. Whereupon he set Pen to Paper and made,

An Attempt, in Pindarique, On the Blessings of Adversity.
I.
THE Just and Brave unmoved appear,
In Storms where meaner Souls do shrink,
And ^v'n beneath themselves do sink;
Unable Miseries least weight to bear!
Or, if with Wealth and Honor Crowned,
No room within their narrow Heart is found,
To entertain the Blustering Guest;
But swelling with the Bubble straight they burst!
They in Adverse or Prosperous Fate alike are Cursed!
When, the great Soul does scarce admit
The Fawning Parasite:
Or, if he does; it is locked within his Breast:
Nor suffers him to play his part,
Within the Cabinet of his Heart,
But slighted, in the Ante-Chamber let us him sit.
An equal mind in different Fates he bears:
The one he neither Courts, nor the other fears;
Nor is with this puffed up, nor that depressed:
But in himself alone is ever Blessed.
II.
Ambition, Anger, Avarice and Lust,
With other Passions of the Mind,
The Generous Soul in Reasons Chain does bind;
And as his Captives at his Feet does thrust,
Tho Fierce and Great to Slavery does bring;
Here Nero's Tyrant li's and Alexander's King!
When the base Wretch is his Slaves, Slave;
Which, like a Conquering Prince, does brave
The reason Heaven to defend him gave:
It Is Throne Vsurps, and does affect to Reign,
Lord of the strongest Castles, both the Heart and Brain!
And now grows Insolent and Lewd:
Revels, and mingles with the purest of his Blood!
Does his best Faculties control;
And would debauch his chaster Soul!
At least misleads it for a Space;
Then leaves it naked to disgrace!
The Man who thus is by his Passions swayed,
O'r Beasts should wish to Rule, never to be obeyed!
III.
Blessed is the Man whom Heaven does not try,
With gilded Apples of Prosperity;
Sweet to the Taste and Beauteous to the Eye,
But Rotten at the Coar and Poison to the Heart!
But thrice blessed he who can reject
The proffered Pleasure of the Bait;
Who sees the future dire effect,
If overcome by the Deceit.
Losing the Pleasure he avoids the deadly Smart!
But thrice and four times Blessed is he
Whom Heaven try's with Misery,
And hardly Clothes with Rags of Poverty!
Who silently does bear his Fate
And is contented in his lowest State.
Inured to Grief and sad Mischance,
Surely, tho slow towered Heaven he does advance
Treading on Thorns the way to Bliss!
Adversity the greatest Blessing is!
And nothing than Prosperity is worse!
Prosperity ill-us'd, the greatest Curse.
IV.
Job's Tempter, sure, mistook the way,
Job's Virtue to betray!
Or, rather, the All-Merciful denied
That his Beloved Servant should be tried
By heaping Riches, so to teach him Pride.
Hardened in Grief and Plagues his Virtue grew;
Steeled it became, Temptation-Proof it was!
The deadlyest Darts which on him Satan threw,
His Body pierced, but could no farther pass.
His Patience to his Tempter gave more Pain,
Than all Job did sustein!
And he was Plagued, and he was shot in vain!
When (Lo!) The Almighty from Above,
With Eyes with Pity flowing and with Love,
Beheld the Afflicted Man, as weak he lay,
Buried in Ashes on the Ground:
Vouch'dsafe to Parley with this thing of Clay!
Taught him to know himself and made him sound.
And for the Miseries which he had shared,
Gave him a Sevenfold Reward.
Teach me then, Heaven, to withstand
The heaviest stroke of Sorrows hand!
That, to my self brought home, I may
The Obedience which I owe thee ever pay!
He had scarce made an end before an under-Officer of the House came to tell
him there was a Gentleman and a Lady below that would speak with him. He was
not a little Surprised at it, not imagining what Lady should come to give him a
Visit in such a place, unless it were his own Sister. However he bid the Fellow
lead them up. He did so. And Polydor then was much more amazed than before,
when he saw his own false Ariadne, as he thought her, led in by Marwoud the
Treacherous. They stood staring on one another a pretty while, ever either of
'em could speak. But Polydor was in a strange Perplexity! You would have
thought he had been in a Fever by his Face; he would fain have been angry and
have railed at her, but when he beheld her Beauty, he was no more able to do it,
than I am to fight a Whale in the water! And that is not very probable; for I
can Swim no more than a Millstone:

Heavens! (cried Polydor, pulling his Hat over his Eyes, and walking from her
in a great deal of have) Art thou come now thy self to torment me! Barbarous
Woman! Go! Take that Treacherous Man into thy deceitful Bosom, make as much of
him as your false Heart will give you leave. And thou Marwou'd, Faithless Man!
Embrace, Embrace the Siren! Go together! And betray one another into a
groundless and vain Opinion of each others mutual Affection! Shameless Man
(continued he, looking fiercely on Marwoud) what unheard of Impudence has
brought thee into my sight, after thou have thus betrayed me! But what ill
things dare not he do, that durst betray his Friend! Why, this is very strange
( Interrupted Marwoud) what do you mean, Polydor? I mean to Cudgel thee
(replied Polydor, all in a Rage) for thou art not worthy of my Sword! O! fie! (
interrupted Ariadne) Is it thus you Treat your Friends. Peace, Siren!
Hypocrite! Fair Devil! Peace! (cried Polydor) Thy Breath and Looks are
Infectious! Good Heaven! ( said Ariadne weeping) How have I deserved this! Ah
Crocodile! (cried Polydor, with an angry Smile) I confess thou have not
deserved that I should speak to thee! But -- admire now the sweetness of my
Temper! That I can vouchsafe to tell thee I am angry with thee: And that I have
much reason to hate thee: O! Would I could! On what Errant has Hell sent thee
to me now? Or, rather what greater Affliction is Heaven yet pleased to try me
with! -- Come! I Will be tame. And gently will confess thy Power to thee. Were
thou but half so Virtuous as Fair; and I a thousand times more Rich and Happy,
than now I am miserable: I Would kneel to get one Smile of thee. But -- thou art --
Hold! ( interrupted Ariadne) And hear my Business first; e're you proceed to
Judgment of me! I come to offer you all that I have; and were it Twenty
Thousand times more, I would lay it all at your Feet; I have brought this
Gentleman, my Friend; who (it seems) has been long your Friend, however you are
willing to mistake him now; him I have engaged to Compound the Debt with Sir
Tenacious, and if he will not accept of our Propositions; he has procured
another Gentleman his Friend to Bail you with him. She tells you truth Polydor
(said Marwoud) tho your Passion blinds, and will not let you see our kind
Intentions to serve you. And is it really true? (cried Polydor) 'Most certain,
( replied Ariadne.) Then Dam ye, Dam ye both, (cried Polydor, furiously)
What! Purchase my Liberty with the Prostitution of your Body! I tell ye, tho
you both consulted to get me into this place; yet I Will make a shift to get out
on it, without your Aid, Advice, or Money. And for thy part Marwoud (continued
he) expect I will thank thee most justly for thy Industry in delivering me into
the hands of these People; who yet have used me more civilly than thou
desired'st I should have been.

He then told him what he had heard from the Officers; while the other labored
with all the Cunning he had, to persuade him, that he was abused by them, in
that Discourse: But all to no purpose. Nay (said Polydor) it is in vain to hope
I should believe thee true to me now; when thy very acquaintance with this
Woman Lowdly Proclaims thy Guilt.

While they were arguing thus very hotly; Ariadne took up the Verses and slipped
'em into her Pocket. At last they grew loud; and then Polydor taking Ariadne by
the hand, led her civilly out of the Room; but Marwoud he almost threw down
Stairs; and immediately shut the Door to him.

Ariadne begged of him with all the earnestness that might be, to open the Door
to her; urging that she had something to discover to him that concerned the
whole Quiet of his Life; but all in vain! He bid her be gone and come no more
near him. She still pressed to come in, and I believe would have made up all
Differences had she prevailed; for she was really very sensible that she had
been to blame, in treating him thus so long. But being still denied entrance,
she went away with a Resolution to play him yet one other Trick e're she
undeceived him.

Marwoud was much out of humor, and in a great heat with Polydor, for folling
him so basely before his Mistress; but he considered, there was no Sword to be
drawn there; and besides, his happy Rival was then Naked which stopped the
effects of his Indignation, for a time: Yet he could not forbear threatening him
with Revenge, and that in the hearing of Ariadne. Who told him, he need study
no greater Revenge than what he had already; or at least, than what he was like
to have by her means.

This pretty well appeased the affronted Squire; and he waited on her home
without so much as ever threatening Polydor again.

Polydor, was a little disturbed at this unseasonable Visit; because (perhaps)
since the Fit had just seized him, he designed to have gone on Rhiming, which
their unexpected and unwished for Company prevented. Being therefore somewhat
discomposed, he went to his Friend in the Lodge and desired to drink a Glass of
Wine with him; which was presently permitted him; and they Dined together very
plentifully and cheerfully.

About 5. a Clock, as he was Drinking a Grace Cup, he was told that there was a
Lady in a Coach at the Gate who asked for him, and the officious Messenger had
hardly said the word, e're he saw Dorothea come in, whom he had all along
mistaken for Sir Francis's Sister Ariadne. She was attended by two Footmen, one
of which was Polydor's fellow-Travellor, to St. Alban's.

He was mightily surpised at the sight of her; and could not but conclude now,
that she was in earnest, and had a real Passion for him.

He led her up to his da ksom Appartment, where he began to express the sense
he had of the House, and Obligation she then did him in that Visit. She told
him he mistook, for the kindness was to her self only, and that she was come
with a full firm Resolution to know what he refused to tell her, some Days past.

But (Madam, interrupted he.) First, I beseech you let me know how you found me
out here. Marwoud, with much entreaty informed me (said she.) But had he known
that I intended you a Visit, and upon what account, I dare believe a hundred
Guinneys would not have tempted him to the Discovery. For, in short (I Will be
free with you, tho you are so unjustly strange to me) he loves me; at least I
am confident he has a great Passion for my Money and Estate. The Devil's in him
for Ariadnes! (interrupted Polydor.) She seemed to take no notice of what he
said but went on. Yet let his Pretenses (continued she) be never so generous or
so self-Interess'd I could never love him, much less since I have had the
misfortune to see you, who so obstinately deny me the least place in your kind
thoughts. Madam, (replied Polydor) I beg of you for Mercy's sake do not do me
so great an Injustice, as to believe what you have said. Heaven knows, if it
were possible; I would Sacrifice my Heart and all to the Service of Sir Francis
Heartwel 's Sister. This is mere Evasion (cried Dorothea,) I cannot apprehend
what should hinder but your own Inclination, and unless you will let me know
the Obstacle, I shall die in that Opinion.

Since then, Madam (said Polydor.) you press me so closely to it, I dare not
deny you that satisfaction; but I must conjure you by whatsoever has the
dearest Influence on you, that you will be secret: I promise it, (cried she) as
I hope for any Happiness in your Love.

He kissed her Hand upon it: And told her of his Marriage with Ariadne, the
Circumstances and all the Misfortunes that were Consequences of it.

She all the time seemed the most troubled Creature that ever was: Sometimes
she Sighed, then held her Handkerchief to her Eyes, till she had made 'em look
as if they had been so red with Weeping; then she would turn them Amorously on
his, and there hold 'em for a considerable time; then at last, with another
pittous Sigh fetched from the very bottom of her Lungs, she would fix 'em
Languishingly on the Ground. And twenty other little Arts she practiced, (which
you know, pretty Ladies are very expert in,) to make him believe how much
concerned she was at the loss of him.

I will not say positively, that she did really Weep; but I am apt to think she
might: For, Women (they say) have an excellent Talent that way! Now for my
part, I wonder at it! Since, I swear to you, I cannot shed a Tear an I were to
Hang for want of a Tear, unless I cut Onions (which is a thing I seldom do) or
take fine Spanish Snush; and that brings the Rheum partly through my Eyes, (which
truly I like as well as Sneezing, every whit. It clears my Head and does me as
much kindness as I expect from it, but these means you will say, are too visible
to be mistaken for the effects of any Passion. But after all, if I were to cry
for my Life; I would go to hear a Comedy or two, that I know.

The Doleful Tale being over at last; after some little silence on both sides;
Dorothea began to lament afresh the loss of the only Man whom, as she
pretended, she could Love; and the more to aggravate his Misery; She told him
her design in coming then to him, was absolutely to know his last
Determination, whether he could Love her as a Wife or no? And to have paid his
Debt within a Weeks time, if he had Married her; nay, farther, her extravagant
Passion carried her! She offered yet to make him her Husband, and to retire
with him to any other part of the Christian World. He could not forbear kissing
her Hand again and again, for so prodigious a kind Proposition: But he declined
it as modestly as 'twas possible any Man should. He let her see how destructive
it would be to her Reputation, how fatal to her Quiet, after a few Months when
the Excess of her Passion was allayed. Nay, and added very honestly, that it
was not improbable that he should grow sick of a Wife that had so far lost all
that was valuable in this World; and then they would both prove most miserable.

But Madam (continued he) I am very Confident that this is but a trial of my
Humor, and if I had accepted your offer, you would only have mocked my
easiness in believing your Virtue so weak and unguarded. You may think (said
she) as advantageously of me and my Virtue as you please; but assure your self,
I doubt my Love would Sacrifice all to you. But -- In the name of good Fortune
(pursued she) what happiness can you propose to your self with your Ariadne!
The greatest I could wish (replied he) were she yet but Virtuous. But (perhaps,
said Dorothea) in that you suppose Impossibilities. However Madam (answered
Polydor) I Will hope the best. Well! (said Dorothea) I see you are deaf to the
news of a better Life, and so I leave you: But with all the discontent
imaginable, on my part: Saying so, she arose from her Seat.

Polydor who had forgotten it all this while, now at last bethought him, that
(happily) she might have talked her self thirsty; begged of her to accept of one
Glass of Wine, and left her in have without expecting her answer, to send for
it. Mean while she took a Paper out of her Pocket, which she conveyed under his
Gloves:

When he returned, she told him, she neither could nor would stay to drink with
him, for whom she had lost her self; and in a seeming kind of a Pet, flung out
of the Room: He followed her, and taking her hand led her to the Gate, all the
way begging her to consider it as it was, his Misfortune, not his Fault. She
said no more, than 'twas in his Power yet to make his Fortune good or bad, and
therefore she concluded it was his fault. He took his leave very submissively
of her at the inmost Gate, looking on her with a very Penitential Face, which
(may be) he put on, merely to please her.

When she was gone, he went to his Melancholy Retreat. Where he reflected on
the strange Perverseness of his Fortune; to cheat him thus with a false
Counterfeit Ariadne of a true one; for it was past all doubt with him, that the
Lady who just left him was Sir Francis Heartwel's Sister and the Real Ariadne:
So many Circumstances there were to confirm him in that Opinion, there was the
Livery and the Coach which was near enough to be known to him for Sir
Francis's, and what was greater than all that! He was certain that one of 'em
was really Footman to the Knight.

These and such like Thoughts kept him in his Chamber for about half an Hour:
When, taking up his Gloves to walk down to give his Fellow Sufferers a Visit;
he saw the Paper Dorothea had left there.

'Twas Superscribed, to Polydor the Credulous. By way of Imitation of his
Blessings of Adversity.

THE Fool and Easy soon are lost
In Snares which careful Men avoid,
Or, which their Arts have soon destroyed;
Too subtle to be made the Coz'ners Boast!
Tho Love, or Money be the Bait,
Their Heart excludes the gilded, gay deceit;
No room is for the Shadow found:
But safe in their own Policies they rest.
They in a Prosperous World, or Adverse Fate are Blessed;
When the kind Soul does strait admit,
Each fawing Parasite!
Takes him into his Bosom from the ground
Nay, suffers him to play his part,
Even in the inmost of his Heart;
And in the highest Throne Triumphing lets him sit!
A Faith like wax to every one he lends,
Which a soft Word soon melts or a Smile bends,
Takes the Impression of a Judas-Kiss,
As deep, as the kind stamp of Faithfulness!
I think there was a Mock to every Stanza; but on my Word I have forgotten 'em.
Polydor was amazed at the Reading 'em, nor could he imagine how ^hey came there.
'Twas a Woman's Hand he concluded, but 'twas a Hand ^oo he had never been
acquainted with! ^he had traced him in his serious stuff so exactly, that he
could not but Laugh heartily at it!

He put them up very carefully and went on with his Charitable Design of
Visiting some poor Gentlemen in the House that had wanted him for some hours,
he was very pleasant with them till Bed time. When he went to sleep till about
Six the next Morning. I don't hear that he complained much of his misfortune
that Night.

In the Morning about Eleven a Clock, came Harry and Tom to see him: And
brought him news that on the Morrow in the Afternoon, his Habeas Corpus would
be ready, and he might hope to see St. George's Church before Night.

He was well enough pleased with their diligence in his business, but he wanted
his third Friend Will. O (cried Harry) he will be here time enough to rob us of
the best part of our Dinner. We have bespoke three Dishes at Fowlers, against
two a Clock, and the Wine I suppose will be here within a quarter of an hour.
He had scarce spoken ever it was brought. They got once more the freedom of the
Lodge for their Imprisoned Friend; where they Dined as soon as Will came; which
was precisely at two, as near as I can remember. They were mighty pleasant all
the time and so we will leave 'em; to hear what was done all this while at Sir
Francis's.

There had been (it seems) a strange Catastrophe, for Dorothea and Miranda had
now at last prevailed on Ariadne to leave off Tormenting her Polydor and rest
satisfied with his good qualities after so many cruel Experiments she had made
on him. What most invited her to be at last Civil to him, was the declaration
of his Love for her which he made to Dorothea, supposing, she might not have
quite lost her Virtue.

Well! (said Ariadne) I consent to undeceive my Enchanted Squire, on Condition
you will suffer me to discover your Inclinations; yours Miranda first to my
Brother, and yours Dorothea to Marwoud: Think not (pursued she not permitting
them to reply) that I ask this of ye as a favor too, no I have already
resolved on it; and as Good Fortune will have it, see here they both come. --
Come Brother (continued she) pray sit and Oblige Mr. Marwoud to sit with us: We
must Consult, here is much business to be done, and that very suddenly. Nay;
if I can serve you Madam; (replied Marwoud) you need but instruct me, and
conclude affirmatively of my absolute Obedience. You promise largely and nobly
(replied Ariadne) but I fear you will repent of your Obligation: Tho in my
Opinion you have rather cause to be satisfied with it. And, not to hold you any
longer in suspense, know 'twas with my consent and the best of my Affections
and Endeavors that I Married Polydor; and you have only been my Instrument in
trying his humor, which otherwise I could not have been so well acquainted
with. Now, therefore (continued she) the Request or Command (which you please
to call it) that I have to you; is to lay aside all Animosities to him and
Pretensions to his Wife: Not that I mean to rob you of one Mistress and leave
you absolutely destitute of an Object of Love; no; I shall rather make you too
ample satisfaction for so inconsiderable a loss, when I dare promise you and
offer you now the Heart of my Dear Dorothea, I expect no denial after the
promise you have given me: it is partly an acknowledgment you ought to make me,
for the opportunities I have shown you of gratifying your Revenge on your
Friend and my Husband. In short, I design you shall be happy with her the same
day that I am so with Polydor. Madam (said Marwoud) since you do really Love
Polydor, and that there is now no longer any hope for me from your
Circumstances, I cannot propose greater felicity to my self than Dorothea's
Love, if I could be assured on it. I will engage for it (answered Ariadne) Pray
make your Addresses.

They then fell into Cabals, Ariadne discoursing her Brother and Miranda. There
she did Miranda the violence to discover the Passion she so long had
entertained for Sir Francis, who was most pleasantly surprised with the
Relation, and blamed his Sister that she had not revealed it before, that he
might have Married as soon as she. Something she said to excuse it; but that is
not very Material here.

Marwoud was very well pleased with the Person and Humor of his new Mistress,
but still he had a Reluctance or uneasiness in his thoughts for the loss of
Ariadne's Fortunes: Dorothea was very well contented with his Humor, Person
and Fortunes; for to say truth, she had loved him long, and could have accepted
him with half his Estate.

Ariadne having brought things to so good a Period at home, proposed the day
following, to undeceive the poor desponding Polydor. In order to which, Sir
Francis and Miranda, Marwo^d and Dorothea accompanied her to him. Ariadne
desired to speak with him, and one of the Servants went to acquaint him that
the Lady was at the Gate that came to visit Him with a Gentlewoman, three or
four days past.

Polydor bid the Fellow say he was busy, as indeed he was, for there were his
three Friends who had brought his Habeas Corpus to remove him. The Messsenger
returned for all that, and told him the ^^dy was to Impo^^ that to b^^ny'd,
that she must speak with him. Tell her she may (said Polydor) If she will take
the pains to meet me three or four hours hence at the Golden Lion in Southwark.
He did so, and returned once more to let Polydor know that Sir Francis
Heartwell would see him if he pleased. Sir Francis Heartwell! (cried Polydor in
a great surprise!) Thou mistakest sure. No Sir (replied the Servant) so he
called himself, I am certain. D^^ him, let him come in (said Harry) If he does
affront thee, I shall find a time to cut his throat. I cannot blame thy zeal
for thy friend (replied Polydor) tho it be mistaken. He is a man of too much
honor to offer any Rudeness. Saying so, he went as far as he might to wait on
Sir Francis, who was just coming into the House with his Sister, Marwoud
leading Miranda and Dorothea.

After having saluted each other, Sir Francis desired Polydor to leave his
friends to entertain one other for a quarter of an hour, that he might
discourse him a little privately. Polydor spoke to 'em of it, and went into
another Room with the two Gentlemen and the Ladys. Sir, (said the Knight,
lifting up his Sister's hood, which till then covered her face) Do you not know
this Lady? Too well Sir (Replied Polydor) you had not found me here, Sir,
otherwise. Have you any pretentions to her? (said Sir Francis.) Pretentions,
Sir (answered Polydor) no, no; and I would she never had had any for me! What Is
the meaning of this? (said the Knight;) To my knowledge she loves you. Do you
know who she is? Yes, and what she is too, (replied Polydor;) she call's her
self Ariadne; but the pretty Imposture will not pass for such in this Lady's
Company. At these words, he took Dorothea's hand. It Is well (continued he) they
are both come together. I hope my Ariadne will not any longer pretend to the
blood of the Heartwells before you, Sir. Your Ariadne! (said Sir Francis) why,
are you Married to either of 'em; Yes, yes, Sir Francis (cried he in a great
Passion) To my eternal shame I am married to this false Beautiful creature;
yes I am sped with her. Well Sir, (answered Ariadnes Brother) And Heaven give
you joy with my Sister! Ah Sir (says Polydor) Do not triumph in the misfortunes
of an unhappy Gentleman! I know you do but Impose now; for that Lady's your
Sister, (said he bowing to Dorothea.) If you please Sir, (answered Marwoud)
That Lady shall be my Wife before Noon yet, as late as it is. It shall only
trouble me (replied Polidor) for the Lady's sake. Come, come, Polydor, (said
his kind b^other in Law) pen your Eyes, view her well! Is not your Ariadne more
like me than my Cousin Dorothea? for so is that Lady called who has hitherto
only personated my Sister, the more to perplex you. Ah Polydor cried Ariadne) I
bring thee now thy True and Faithful Ariadne. Let me embrace you together
(said Sir Francis.) And now Polydor (cried Marwoud taking him by the hand) Let
here all Picques and Feuds cease. I wish thee, and will not envy thee, all
those joys thou art like to possess in that Lady; To whose Embraces and
caresses I will at present leave you, to withdraw the Action that is against
you; which I protest I do, with much more content than I laid it on. Ha!
(cried Polydor) This is too much happiness for me in one day! To find my dear
Ariadne true, to be reconciled to my friend whom I thought past it, and to be
so nearly allied to one whom I have always been ambitious of serving.

Marwoud went out and discharged him of the Action and fees of the House, while
the other two Ladys complemented him; and began to confess how they had all
contributed to his seeming misfortunes. Heaven (cried Polydor) that I should
not know that face again and that shape out of Breeches. But I am now awake.
Yet (continued he) I must beg you would permit me to distrust your kindness to
me before my friends, in to other Room: Be it as your humor Commands (answered
Ariadne) But don't let the counterfit last long.

Marwou'd now returned and brought news of Polydors Liberty: who strait led
'um to his other Friend. After Complements had passed, he called his three
Friends aside, and told 'um how things had succeeded, but withal added, that
he durst not yet trust their Kindness, where fore he entreated they would
ac^ompany him to Sir Francis's, where he was going, and that he would plant 'em
so near, that upon the least call they might come to his assistance if occasion
were. They all promised to hazard their Lives and Fortunes in his Service.

Polydor then taking some Money out of his Pocket to bestow on the poor
wretches that wanted it, at the same time pulled out the mock to his
Pindarique; and showed it to Dorothea, asking if she knew the hand. She
answered, yes, 'twas her Consin Ariadnes; who smiling, confessed that she had
stolen his melancholy stuff with design to abuse it. He was not a little
pleased with this Confession.

As soon as every one had Distributed their Charities, they left the dismal
place, and Polydor took Coach with Sir Francis, Ariadne, Miranda, Marwou'd and
Dorothea: But Harry, Will and Tom were forced to walk into Cheapside, where
they likewise took a Hackny Coach, following Sir Francis's Coach, as close as
they could. They came in time to their Journey's end: Where Polidor disposed of
his three merry Boys in a very convenient Room, leaving 'em Wine enough to
supply 'em till he had dispatched his affairs in the next Room. Where as soon
as he came, he was amazed to see the Tables already spread, and all things in
as much order as if it had been designed a week before! But this was not all
the occasion of his surprise, for when his Brother in Law, and his dear
Ariadne, led him into an Inner Room, he was there presented with all the
Writings of her Estate, and a glorious sight of Rich Jewels, and of Gold and
Silver, some in Bags and some loosly scattered about the Chest. This sight was
not altogether ungrateful to Polydor, tho he did not absolutely do at on Riches.

Immediately after the show was over, Sir Francis was for calling for the
Person whom he had provided to speak some fatal words, (as strong as any
Witches Charm, I Am sure) to him and Marwou'd, and the other two Ladys. But
Polydor begged his three Friends might first be admitted; to which they agreed:
and he gave the sign immediately for them to come in. Who no sooner heard it,
but with all the Violence and Resolution imaginable, they rushed in with their
Swords drawn. Ha! (cried Polydor) whence is this Rudeness! what do you mean
Gentlemen! How now Polydor (said Harry) Have you forgot we came to your Rescue?
Rather to Divorce me from the greatest happiness imaginable (replied he drawing
his Sword, which Sir Francis and Marwou'd did likewise) This is strange (said
Will.) It is indeed (answered Polydor) very strange; that a man should betray
himself into twelve hundred a year besides thousands in Money and Jewels, and
throw himself away on so Beautiful a Creature as Ariadne. You (Harry) I
confess might have expected it? but for such a person as mine. Death we are
fooled then (cry d Tom) well we shall find a time (continued he offering to
go.) Hold Gentlemen, pray be'nt angry (said Polydor) you must not go yet, till
you have dined with us, and been Witnesses to a little Business that these two
Gentlemen and Ladies have to dispatch, Come, Put up! Put up! We are all
friends. Ay, Gentlemen (said Sir Francis) we must entreat your Company to day.
Nay (added Marwou'd) ye must be our Guess. Upon this they all put up; and were
as good as so many Certificates to Miranda and Dorothea; that Ceremony ended,
they eat and drank plentifully, had the Fiddles, Danced, and were wondrous
Pleasant, so we will leave 'em till night, when I suppose the three Hero's went
to Bed with their Ladys; where we will leave 'em to be more Happy, than I dare
tell you they were.

FINIS.

