The Copy of the Lord of Ormonds Letter to the Bishop of Dromer.
MY LORD!
I Have received yours of the 9 of this month, with a copy of Cardinal
Mazarines to you; upon which you are pleased to desire my sense, that you may
not be ignorant in a matter so nearly concerning you, in relation to the
charge you have from the King of France; nor to remit to act the part of an
honest and faithful subject, as you shall be commanded: yet you say, the
keeping firm (as you are) to be the most advantageous course you can take, to
avoid disadvantage and dishonor. The best way to comply with your desire (as I
understand it) will be in the first place to set down what has been done by
me in obedience to the King my masters command, upon which his Eminency took a
pretense to write that letter unto you. His Majesty about the beginning of
August thought fit to employ me about some affairs of his to his Highness Don
John of Austria, and amongst other things gave me order, upon all fitting
opportunities to signify unto any of his Subjects in the French service, that
his Majesty has present use for them in his, and to require them to march to
sure places as I should direct them; in pursuance of his order, upon the
rendering of Condy, I made the Kings pleasure known to Colonel Muskery, and
Sir James Darcy, who hereupon expressed all possible duty unto his Majesty, and
all readiness to obey his commands, as his most Loiall and obedient Subjects;
but they desire in performance of that duty to have liberty to provide for
their honor, by demanding dismission from his most Christian Majesty; which
they conceived could not be denied them (provision, being made in their
capitulation for it, and for a months pay to their officers and soldiers at
parting) I confess I neither was, nor am satisfied; yet that there was a
necessity for that formality (their own Kings commands interposing and
extending no farther, then to serve under his commission and by his order and
no other) but that they might very well dispense with the demanding of
Pasports, if they would quit their pretense to the months pay, and could
reasonably suspect they would be broken in this, as they have been in other
particulars, equally capitulated for by them; yet they persisting in their
belief, that it was necessary, and engaging their honors to me, to demand
their Pasports; and (in case they should be either granted or refused) to do
what became them in Allegiance: I made no attempt to draw their officers or men
from them. And this is what hitherto has passed in that matter, except that I
am lately assured that Muskery has demanded his Pass; but with what success I
cannot yet tell, howsoever I must conclude that his Eminency (when he said my
solicitations had been ineffectual) either was not yet well informed, or
intended not so much your information in the truth of that passage, as to
corrupt the officers and soldiers of the Irish Nation where you are, and to
dispose them to disobey their Kings order when they should be sent them, by
laying before them a fained example of disobedience in others, which though it
had been true, ought rather to be detected then imitated.

Of what concerns the King my masters good Treatment in France (the continuance
of a monthly assistance to him) from hence urged by the Cardinal to argue his
Majesty of ingratitude, or me of indiscretion or imposture: I shall not say
more then that his Majesty is well known, to be of a nature much more inclined
to forget injuries then benefits; and that it falls not within the Sphere of my
business, to know when or whence he received moneys: but that my proceedings at
Condy were warranted and approved, will evident unto you by the enclosed copy
of the order. His Majesty cesent to Colonel Muskery, and Sir James Darcy; and
by those which the officers with you may in due time receive, so that I cannot
but wonder so great and wise a Minister as his Eminency should (to serve any
present turn how importunate soever) make use of such Artifices as are not
only liable to present and palpable detection and refutation, but such as are
also in the best degree injurious to the honor and reputation of a servant,
that has punctually observed, and not exceeded his masters commands. I think I
know what is due from me to the first minister of a great King; I am sure there
is no man upon all occasions shall treat him with more respect, but then I
shall expect to be treated as a Gentleman, and not to be charged with an
indiscreet zeal, nor with acting without warrant through partiality to the
Spaniard, and to the disservice of my Master, as I am by his Eminency; to whom
as I ow no account of my discretion, so I take him always to be an incompetent
judge of my fidelity, and at this time no very proper instrument for what is
good or bad for my Masters service: And since he has bin pleased to usurp an
authority to judge and condemn me with circumstances of calumny, uncivilly
proceeding from the Minister of one Prince, to the servant of another. I
conceive it gives me just ground to put you in mind, that by his ministration
an Alliance is made betwixt France, and the Murderers of a just and lawful
King; and that not only without necessity, but upon such infamous conditions,
as no necessity can justify: As for instance, the banishing out of France
dispossessed Princes, the Grandchildren of Henry the fourth: Add to this, that
his Eminency is the Instrument of such an alliance, as gives countenance and
support to the usurpers of the rights of Kings, to the Professed persecutors of
the Catholics, and to the destroiers of your nation; and to those, by whom the
Nobility and Gentry of it are massacred at home, and led into slavery, or
driven to beggary abroad; and then you will be no longer of an opinion, that it
can be consistent with honor of advantage for any of the Kings subjects
(especially of the Irish Nation) to be flattered or bribed by the Cardinal from
the duty they owe to their natural King and their desolate Country. By this
time your Lordship may conceive my sense of that Letter, upon which you desire
it; and as you have done me a very great favor in sending it to me; so if it
please you to make this Letter of mine as public as that of his Eminencies
has been, you will (by an act of Justice) oblige me to continue

Bruges, Sept. 20. 1656. Your Lordships very affectionate humble servant,
Ormond.

His Highness Letter to his Eminency Cardinal Mazarin.
THe obligations and many instances of affection which I have received from
your Eminence, do engage me to make returns suitable and commensurate to your
merits, But although I have this set home upon my spirit, yet I may not (shall
I tell you, I cannot) at this juncture of time (and as the face of my affairs
stands now) answer to your Call for Toleration; I say I cannot, as to a public
declaration of my sense in that point; although I believe, that under my
Government, your Eminence in the behalf of Catholics, has less reason for
complaint, as to rigor upon men's consciences, then under the Parliament; for I
have of some, and those very many had compassion, making a difference, truly I
have, and I may speak it with cheerfulness in the presence of God, who is a
witness within me to that truth I affirm, made a difference, and as Jude
speaks, plucked many out of the fire, the raging fire of persecution, which
did tyrannize over their consciences, and encroached by an arbitrarinesse of
power upon their estates; And herein it is my purpose, as soon as I can remove
impediments, and some weights that press me down, to make a further progress,
and to discharge my promise to your Eminence in relation to that: And now I
shall come to return your Eminence thanks, for your judicious choice of that
person, to whom you have entrusted our weightest affairs, an affair wherein
your Eminence is concerned, though not in equal degree and measure with my
self: I must confess that I had some doubts of its success, till providence
cleared them to me by the effects; I was not truly, and to speak ingeniously,
without doubtings, and shall not be ashamed to give your Eminence the grounds I
had for such doubtings: I did fear that Barkley would not have been able to go
through and carry on that work, if either the Duke had cooled in his suit, or
condiscended to his brother: I doubted also, that those Instructions which I
sent over with 290, were not clear enough as to expressions (affairs here
denying me leisure at that time to be so particular, as to some circumstances I
would). If I am not mistaken greatly mistaken in his character, as I received
it from your Eminence, that fire which is kindled between them now, will not
ask bellows to blow it and keep it burning: But what I think further necessary
in this matter, I will send your Eminence by Lockart: And now I shall boast to
your Eminence my security upon a well-builded confidence in the Lord; for I
distrust not, but if this breach be widened a little more, and this difference
fomented with some caution, in respect of the persons to be added to it, I
distrust not but that party which is already forsaken of God (as to any outward
dispensations of merits) and noisome to their Countrymen, will grow lower in
the opinions of all the world. If I have troubled your Eminence too long in
this, you may impute it to the resentment of joy which I have for the issue of
this affair, and will conclude with giving you assurance that I will never be
backwards in demonstrating, as becoms your Brother and Confederate, that I am
your Servant

December 26. 1656. O. P.


