AN OCCASIONAL ESSAY By way of PARABLE, In Vindication of the EJECTED MINISTERS
FROM The usual SCANDAL OF A SCHISMATICAL SEPARATION.

Sic parvis componere magna solebam.

For every man shall bear his own Burden, Gal. 6.5. Printed Anno 1673.

READER,
IT became known to several of my acquaintance, that I had obtained the liberty
of transcribing this little paper, who were also instant with me to have a
sight thereof, and whom I could not well deny; That I might the more
commodiously acquit me of my promise, I have taken the boldness to procure its
publication. The innocence of the Author, and his Allusion, will be his
undoubted vindication, while my only plea must be the integrity of my
intentions, if I have thereby offended, either him, or thee.

Farewell.
SIR.
I Acknowledge my self not a little obliged for your great kindness, in giving
me an intimation, that an account (in writting) is expected, of the Discourse
(if I may so call it) which I a while since had, with an ingenuous sober
Friend: And yet (I know not how) so little have I been concerned, or so
backward to any further Contest; that had I not been reminded by others, and
insinuated of indiscretion, or something worse, as rashly pretending to what I
durst not undertake. I had at last laid aside all further thoughts thereof, and
sat down in Silence: not that I suspected, least that sudden and occasional.
Talk might be found liable to any just blame, it being only meant as an
innocent Essay, if happily under the Covert of a familiar Parable, I might get
within some man of Resolution (should any such be there present.) And who knew,
but though he were guarded by an invincible prejudice) I might thus win from
him such terms of Favor for the poor ejected Ministers, as by open force of
Reason (how convincing soever) no man living could have extorted.

The truth is I am apt to believe that they are not so deeply plunged into the
guilt of Schism, as has been said: Nor am I yet satisfied, that they have been
dealt withal, by some of the same Tribe, in that Courteous and obligeing Sort,
as is generally believed, and as, its possible, they might have deserved: And I
must be so bold to profess, that though I have deliberately considered what I
then offered, and judge it much too mean to give us the Trouble of this Review,
yet I cannot discover, wherein lies any just exception against it, as to what
was plainly designed, and indeed material, but that it may fully accord with
what I would have represented, and fairly reach the end proposed: Yet if it
shall be made appear, that I am mistaken in the maine, or in any Circumstance
which may invalidate what I have undertaken; I promise my self ready to be
informed, shall willingly give up the Gantlet, and on Conviction retract my
Error: But as for little quibbling exceptions against words or phrases; or idle
excursions into any by matter, besides my chief Design; as I cannot exspect
them from such Inginuity, so if I afford them any other Answer, but Contempt, I
should believe my Pains to be ill bestowed.

The Gentleman, as you very well know, (to whom I desire this paper, together
with my real Respects be presented; who also stands ready prepared to take up
the Cudgels, as soon as I shall have entered the Lists) was a great part of our
Discourse; his particular Antipathy having occasiond the Allusion which was, as
you may remember, very much to this purpose.

There were designedly met together several persons of good worth, all as if
was pretended and thought, very good Friends: They were invited to that
friendly meeting, by their common Benefactor, to whom they all owed a great
deal of Respect and Honor; something also of no small Concern was to have been
promoted by their joint endeavors: Amongst these, there was one (or more) who
had a known Antipathy against a particular Creature, suppose a Cat, for that
was the Instance; so great that it was impossible for him to endure her in his
presence: It so happens that a lusty Puss (I will not say a foul black one) it
is sufficient a Cat, is discovered in the Room: Nor is it to our purpose how
she came thither; but there she is, and as soon in the Gentleman's Eye:
Whereupon he finds a sudden faintness to seize on, and surprise him; qualms
come over his Stomach; his Spirits are disturbed, and he so far, that it
becomes plainly legible both in his Countenance and Behavior: wherefore he
makes his Application to the Company, and soberly acquaints them with the
uneasy Condition wherein he finds himself.

Gentlemen, (he is supposed to say) I am extreme loath to be the Occasion, much
more the Author of any Disturbance: nor am I less unwilling to break off from,
and desert so advantageous a Society: and thereby (as its probable) frustrate
the worthy Design of our noble and honored Friend; who is graciously pleased
to give unto us the happy opportunity of this present meeting: Yet so it is,
and such I will confess, is my real Weakness; that I cannot bear the presence
of yonder little Creature: Some here (it is possible) may think meanly of, if
not contemn and despise me on this very Account: But it might better become
them to be thankful, that they are so happy in their own Tempers and
Constitutions, and not to insult over the Infirmities of their weaker Brethren.
But now, that I look a little more narrowly, I conceive there may be more then
one of those Animals, but that is not at all to be considered: my Aversation is
from the whole Species or kind; and I can no more bear the presence of one than
of an hundred: I am not conscious to my self, that I have deserved so Ill; but
that I may be preferred before a Cat. And I think I may (without Vanity)
acquaint you, that I conceive my Company may be of some Advantage to your
Society: Some there are, of your, and my, very good Friends; who have prevailed
with me to believe, that I may be some way useful to promote the ends of our
present meeting: My desire is, that the Car may be removed and I permitted to
tarry here.

At the first blush the Gentleman's demand appears (in my Opinion) to be just
and reasonable: Nor did I observe, when I made this Relation, that there was
any any present, how prepossesed soever, but he so judged; Whereupon I thus
proceeded with my Story.

On this civil and humble Address, there presently arises, beyond all
expectation, a warm Debate: which discovered its self, at first, in a confused
noise, and little murmurings; but after a while breaks forth into a more open,
and observeable Contest: on which occasion, some one or more, (whose
Constitutions obliged them to be tender, and more mild) deliver their Opinions
in these, or the like Words.

Friends, We understand this Gentleman to be a courteous and sober Person; and
as such he has behaved himself, ever since he came into our Company: If
heretofore he has been suspected of some extravagancy, ^r any of his
acquantance been obnoxious, our Worthy, Generous, and ever honored Friend, who
gives us this kind meeting, and was much more concerned, then we can be
supposed, has also engaged us to pass it over in Oblivion: His Company, I am
sure, is very agreeable unto many of us; And as for yonder little beast, it is
plainly indifferent unto any here, (as we all acknowledge) whether she be
continued, or removed: If she remain, I know not of any real good may be thence
expected; and if she be quietly turned going, without any noise, there will not
thence accrue, in my judgment, (and I suppose in yours) any prejudice at all
unto our meeting: She is but a Cat, at the best but an impertinence; for my
part, and (I am confident) I speak the thoughts of many more, let her be
removed: nay I might have suggested; that we are bound in Civility, and good
Manners, and on several other Accounts, to resolve on her present Removal; let
her be instantly gone.

The honest man with his Antipathy, you will easily imagine, stands all this
while in a cold sweet, desirous (with some kind of impatience) to understand,
what may at length be his final Doom; and from this favorable and just Apology
begins to promise himself a sudden Relief, but stand there he may, and sweat
out his Heart; for there are others, and those a little more Crafty, and I
think something too severe, who had resolved to oppose themselves, and their
Interest (which was not then inconsiderable) against all this, that had been
proposed: He has deluded himself with a vain Hope; and on a sudden he hears
rattling about his ears, this, or the like, blustering tempestuous Reply.

For our parts (and I shall speak as it becomes me in the plural, we do not
conceive our selves to be concerned, to gratify yonder stubborn Fellow in his
pevish Demands: His pretenses, it is true, may carry along with them some show
of Reason: But we very well know, that all is but Humor, and Obstinacy: That is
the plain, and whole of the matter, and we are not bound to bestow on him any
better belief: If he will he may tarry, and if he chooses to leave the Company
it is his own Fault. He has his liberty, he may depart if he so lists: which
should he do, and thereby incurr any prejudice, he may fairly thank himself,
and his pevishness; we do him no wrong at all: suppose he indeed should have
that real Antipathy, which he would bear us in hand he has; he must then be
content to bear the infelicities to which his unhappy Crasis has exposed him:
We shall not scruple to allow him, that it is a thing indifferent (as has been
also offered) whether that little Animal he removed or continued with us; Yet
why should we humor him in his particular Fancies? Though we do not pretend,
that our meeting is advantaged by her presence; yet, neither is she offensive
to the greater number: And as for him, I know not what Reason any of us have to
concern our selves, about him, or be fond of his Company: I hope we shall be
able enough to dispatch what we have to do without his concurrence: The fewer
also the better Cheer: we will retain the Cat, she shall not be removed: And so
fare you well (good Sir) with your squeamish Antipathy.

The Result is; the Cat is continued: and the Gentleman, though much against
his will, and to his very great prejudice, is faign to take his leave, and
quietly depart; to the dissatisfaction also of sundry other Persons, judged to
be moderate, and discreet; yet no way further concerned, then as obliged by
their own good Nature, and a just Compassion: But the honest man must content
himself to be gone; and leave those tender hearted Gallants, who were resolved
on his exclusion, to enjoy this their worthy Resolution, together with its
blessed Effects. Nay he should have conceived himself very favorably dealt
withal, could he have thus escaped: But he is no sooner gone, beyond any
further Apprehensions from that little Creature, which was the object of his
Antipathy; but he is eagerly pursued by another sort, whom he never provoked;
to whom he always bore a great good will; and who not long before fawned on
him, pretending no less then a cordial Friendship.

One, being a little more tender mouthed, in a whining note, both seems to
pity, and at once accuses him of folly and madness: It is pity, says he; The
man was someway hopeful, it is great pity; that he should thus force himself
out of our Society, and be undone; but he had ever a little Crochet, or two in
his Brains; and is still troubled with a Whim: Another more uncivilly accuses
him of Incivility; and tells the World it was a very great Rudeness, and want
of good Manners, that he would not comply with his betters: but be humorsome,
and froward, and leave their worthy, and worshipful Company for an harmless
Cat. A third is yet more severe, and charges him with downright faction, and
sedition; will not allow him to be less then an Enemy to all good order; a son
of Belial; neither fit for Society, nor to live under the protection of
wholesome Laws. But he opens to some purpose, and delivers himself with a full
mouth, who would have no more regard had of the poor man, then of Insects which
breed out of our excrementitious sweat: that is, in plain English, he should be
cracked, as one would crack a lowse: he had this Wittism no doubt at his
fingers end; his Choler might afford him a fit occasion for that pretty fancy.

With this, or the like noise the poor secluded person is perpetually hound,
and Worryed: and they will all this while bear us in hand, that he alone is
troublesome, clamorous, and what not? when, alas! the man would have tarried
with all his Heart: It was his real desire, and earnest endeavor, he strove to
do it with his might: But it was not within his power to command his Antipathy:
and it is his sad Affl^ction, that he was forced to do himself the unkindness
to leave the Company; for whom he still retains a Cordial Affection.

Now the enquiry is, (suppose this Story true, in all its material
Circumstances) on whom the blame deserves to be fastened? either on this
Gentleman; who (forced by a real and unconquerable Antipathy) withdraws
himself; or the others (who for what they themselves acknowledge an
impertinence) have compelled him so to do: And who it is, that (in good
earnest) is humorsome, uncharitable, and begot the separation, with its
Consequences: And so in effect, who it is (if any) that deserves the ill
language, which is above bestowed on the secluded person.

To this purpose was the parable. The Application of it was to the Case of
Nonconformity: That several sober Ministers have had an Aversation, not unlike
that Antipathy (both known, real, and of which they could not cure themselves)
against Humane Presumptions, super-induc'd to the Worship of God, is
notoriously evident, both from the many (and I think not yet answered) Writings
on that subject, ever since the date of the Lincolnshire Abridgment; as also,
from the Severity, and prejudices they have not refused to undergo, on that
Account. Nor do I believe, that, by any overt Act, it can be proved, but that
they were indeed dissatisfied; as unable to bear those little Things; as that
Gentleman the presence of the little Creature: I also conceive: that our
Apprehensions and Judgments, about the lawfullness of such Inventions, are not
subjected to the command of our Wills, as neither had he the command of his
Antipathy. That the Ceremonies, and particularly the Cross in Baptism, Mr.
Hooper also the Martyr boggled at Ceremonies; the Contest was hot at Frankford
in Queen Marys days; Bishop Ridly before his Martyrdom retracted his urging
their use.
(for I am not here to mention other Exceptions) is a plain Impertinence, is no
less evident, from the book of Canons; to which we are commonly sent for
satisfaction: where it is roundly said; that the Ordinance is never the better,
if it be used; nor worse if it be omitted: The words are these. Can. 30. p. 31.
The sign of the Cross, being afterward used, doth-nither add any thing to the
Virtue, and perfection of Baptism, nor being omitted, does detract any thing
from the Effect, and substance of it: That it was once in the power of some
Divines, (and I know not but it may be at this present) to have omitted this
impertinence, had they so pleased, is I suppose undeniable: Which however they
have chosen to retain, not the Ejection of one only person, but of several
Hundreds, some say thousands, who might possibly have been useful in the
Church; and to the most probable Ruin, both of themselves and Families, and
the perpetuating of endless Divisions: what good language has been since
bestowed on them, and how liberally, may be seen: In Toleration Discussed;
Ecclesiastic Polity; Goulds preface to his Late Sermon; and in another preface
to a better Discourse; (where I will assure you, the brisk humor of that Modern
professor of Controversies has not jaded him) and in sundry other Pamphlets:
Now, as to the equity of the Case; let any one, who has any love to Mankind,
(not to speak of Christian Charity) be the judge. I might here have enlarged:
But I have chosen to contract what I had to say into a narrow Compass; being
resolved to confine my self to this paper. Farewell, and love such as dare not
entrench on the undoubted Rights of the Humane nature.

Thine, etc.


