A BALM presented to these Nations, England, Scotland, and Ireland,

To Cure the Wounds of the Bleeding Protestants, and open the Eyes of the
deluded Papists, that are Ignorant of the Truth, etc.

By T. O.

depiction of man

Licensed according to Order.



Printed for ^*^.

A BALM, Presented to these Nations, England, Scotland, and Ireland, to Cure
the Wounds of the Bleeding Protestants, and open the Eyes of the deluded
Papists that are ignorant of the Truth.

Being, A Timely Warning to Protestants; OR, A Seasonable Antidote against the
Errors of POPERY AND Pernicious Doctrines of the Church of ROME; Wherein they
are stated, and Learnedly Confuted; plainly showing the Deceitfulness and
vanity of so foolish a Religion, when duly weighed and considered by the Word
of God, and by what Cruelty, Fraud, and Ignorance it is upheld.

Together, With Prayers and Thangsgivings for our great deliverance from POPERY.

To which is added a Treatise of French-Persecution, or what Protestants may
expect from Papists, if they get the power over us.

By T.O. D.D.

A Warning to Protestants. etc.
Psalm. CXXIV. Ver. 2. 3. If it had not been the Lord, who was on
our side, when men rose up against us:
Then they had swallowed us up quick,
when their wrath was kindled against us.

THough the Romanists, with many specious pretenses, have (especially since the
Reformation) endeavored to prove the Verity and Validity of their Church; yet
we no where find that they have proposed any thing so material to that point,
but it has been either confuted or considered as a weak Pillar to support a
decaying and tottering Superstructure: For I would fain be informed by any
moderate Communicant of the Romanists, from whence, or upon what account the
Pope of Rome claims a Superiority or Headship? Or why the acknowledgment of the
Catholic or Universal Church of Christ should own any Infallible Head upon
Earth? And since both the Disputers and Writers of that Community, that term
themselves the Roman Catholic Church, have either waved it, as not to their
purpose, or for some other end, equivocated with the Scriptures to support a
building upon a sandy Foundation. Before I proceed to the main matter intended,
I shall give some light into this affair.

It so happened that the Roman Empire having been divided into East and West,
the latter especially was extremely harrassed by the barbarous Nations of the
North, so that the Supreme Power lay in that of the East, or Greek Empire; and
although several Popes of Rome had opposed any sole Headship, or Supremacy one
over another, holding all Bishops equal in their Province or Diocese; yet
Phocus General to the Eastern Emperor Mauritius, having murdered this
Emperor, his Empress and their Children, and for that despised and rejected by
his own People, what does the then Pope of Rome do, but clap in with him, and
the more to gain a Power or Advantage over the other Bishops, by many
flattering and insinuating Letters, extol his proceedings. And amongst others
we find these Expressions, viz. Let the Emperor Phocus live, and let the
Angels clap their hands and rejoice, that so worthy a Man, whose grateful
Influence shines on the Bishop of Rome, is advanced to the Throne of the
Eastern world, by the especial Providence of the Almighty: From which time.
though by what unjust means I leave to the consideration of the Reader, Rome
dated her Spiritual Greatness, to fulfill the Prophecy of St. John in his
Revelations, etc. And as indeed it was founded upon blood and vio^^nce, so has
it been hitherto maintained, more than by any other ways or means, as by Racks
and Tortures to such as at any time began to inquire into the Authority of that
Usurpation. and s^^^ their Errors. and by keeping the more un thinking part of
those that adhered to it, in the Region of Agnorance and darkness, by blinding
their understanding with fables, instead of real Truths, and placing the
Traditions of Men instead of the sacred Uerity of the wor^ of God; and when at
any time, where they have a temporal power, inquiry is made (...) their many
lying wonders and feigned miracles, their superstitions in worship, errors and
absurd contradictions, the answer is, tha^ they ought to believe, as their
Church be^ believes, though indeed few of them themselves know what she does
believe; and (...) this be refused, they are not only brand^^ with the name of
Heretics, but in dang^^ of their Lives, and many times expire (...) flames, by
Racks and Tortures, or languishing and lingering deaths, which is t^^ true mark
of the Beast, of which St. Joh^ speaks, viz. That kills all those that (...)
not receive his mark in their forehead, worship his Image. And this fatal
exp^rience has taught the World, by the m^^ Massacres, unjust Wars, Burnings,
(...) ^^stations, poisoning and stabbing of M^narchs, to such a degree, as has
made (...) Infidels blush to be outdone in Treacher^ and Cruelty, and these
mes^ly ^alling (...) these, that with a compliance with the (...) lasting
Gospel, opposed the errors and unwarrantable Traditions of that Church; as
their holding a Wafer, after Consecration, to be a God, and no less than the
second person in the glorious Trinity, even our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, Essential and Corporal, as well in Soul as in Body, with all the
substantial parts of a Body, as he offered himself upon the Cross, for the
Redemption of the World.

The praying for the Dead, saying Mosses for the deliverance of Souls out of
Purgatory, attributing to the Uirgin Mary the Honors only due to God himself,
praying to Saints, adoring Relics, consecrated Candles, holy Roses, Agnus
Dei's and Confessions to Men, with many other Fables and Fopperies, and for
gainsaying these, have flowed a scarlet Sea of Blood, with which, as St. John
says, I saw the Woman drunk with the blood of the Saints, and the Martyrs of
Jesus, and when I saw her I wondered with great admiration, Rev. 17. 6. And
these were they whose Souls cry under the Altar; How long, how long, O God,
Holy and Righteous, will it be ever thou avenge our blood on those that dwell
on the Earth? And although as to the first of these, our Savior did declare at
the eating the Passover, that the Bread and Wine were his Body and Blood, yet
it then, and at all times appeared to be meant only figuratively and
mistically; for at the same time when the Bread was eaten, and the Wine drank,
his Body remained the same as before, undiminished and untouched, Uisible and
Corporal, both to be felt and understood; and what more confirms it, was his
commanding his Disciples, as often as they did it, to do it in remembrance of
him, till his coming, which an imply nothing more, than to leave and ingraft
more perfectly, the remembrance of his Crucifixion and Death, in the minds of
his People and Church: for as the Passover, which he then eat, was a Type of
him to keep us the remembrance and expectation of his coming in the mind of the
Jews, so he changed the Misterious Ceremony into a Sacramental Bread and Wine,
to mind the Christians, and to put them in a full assurance of expecting his
second coming in Glory to judge the World. In many places of Scripture he calls
himself a Uine, a Door, a Shepherd and the like, which are only mistical and
figurative significations: And St. John the Baptist styles him, the Lamb of
god, come to take away the sins of the World, etc. And as for the Primitive
Church, as they all along took it in no other sense, than the Reformed Churches
do at this day, viz. That in the blessed Sacrament, we only Spiritual, and by a
lively and steadfast faith, eat and drink his Body and Blood. And to go a
little farther in this matter, the Church of Rome, contrary even to our
Saviors great command, and the use of the Primitive Churches, for up wards of
a thousand years, have taken away the Cup from the Laity, only allowing it to
the Priests and Princes, and give us only these two silly Reasons for it.
First, That the Laity are not sanctified and fitly prepared for so Essential a
part, as the Blood of Christ. And secondly, which is to Shouldir the decest,
they bear them in hand, that receiving by a Transubstantiation the entire Body
in the Wafer, as flesh, Bones, Sinews, etc. They no doubt partake of the Blood.
Likewise, as for their giving the Cup to Princes, it is to get in favor with
them; and in the second place, have the advantage over them, if they refuse to
promote the Covetous and Ambitious ends of the Pope and his Clergy, which
fattally appeared in the Emperor Henry's being poisoned by the Sacramental wine
given him by a friar: and the like done to King John of England by a Monk, and
many other such horrible und unparalelled Uillanies.

As for their Praying for the Dead, it is no where Warranted in Scripture, nor
mentioned, unless in the Maccabees; where after a Battle, it was thought fit to
Pray for the Souls of those that were slain in the Castle; which in the
strioeest sense, erceeded not good Wishes: And it was the Custom of those times
to make Funeral Dration for those that had deserved well of their Country, or
lived Piously and Uertuously, thereby to recommend their Memory to Posterity,
and Consolate their Friends. It was used likewise in the Primitive Church, and
is immitated by us in our Funeral SCRMONS: but this was never held by any,
before the Roman Superstition brought it in as a way gainful to get Moneys,
both from the Dying and their Relation: But how miserable will that Man be that
puts off the great concern of his Salvation, grounding it or this Error, in
hopes of a deliverance, may easily be determined: for beyond the Grave there is
no change of Estate, or hope of Reprieve; for there the words of the Wise Man
are truly verified, viz: As the Tree falls so it lies; as Death leaves us in
that state, Judgment will assuredly find us. And as for the Middle Region they
have lately discovered between heaven and hell, it is new and fabulous, that no
considering Man can conclude it set up for any other end than to Bug-bare fools
and ignorant unthinking People; though it may indeed he called Purgatory, for it
Purges some millions of Money in a year out of the Laity into the Purses of the
Clergy, being the chief Branch of the Popes Spiritual Revenue: and though they
hold their Masses can Redeem the suffering Souls from this place, yet the
Wisest of them were never yet able to tell where it is, or whether it be Local;
nor indeed is it any where to be found or heard of, but in the Romish Church,
for the Scripture allows no such place; for there we find those that have done
well are pronounced to go into Eternal Joys; and those that have done Ill into
Eternal Torments. It Is true, they quote for their Authority, a passage in St.
Peter, about Preaching to the Souls in Prison, etc. which according to the
opinion of all Ages, makes nothing for their purpose.

They are contented to Pray for the Dead, but to the Dead; though as the Holy
Prophet says, There is no Remembrance in the Grave, and although it is expressy
forbidden and accounted flat Idolairy: for we by the word of God, are strictly
enjoined to observe no Saint, nor Creature, nor Throne, Dominion nor Power; no
Heathenish Deity, but only the true God in Jesus Christ: Thou shall Worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Exodus 20. And see thou do it not,
says the Angel to St. John, I am thy fellow Creature, Worship God, Rev. 22. 9.
Though the Papists in this case, in the number of their Saints, to whom they pay
Divine Honors, even exceed the Pagans: nor do they spare to immitate them, in
having their Titulars for Countries, as thus: The Pagans Worshipped Appollus in
Delphos, Jupiter in Creete, Minerva in Ephesns: And so the Papists in England
Worship St. George, in Scotland St. Andrew, in Ireland St. Patrick, in France
St. Dennis, in Spain St. James, at Millain St. Ambrose, and at Venice St. Mark.

The Pagans had for the Element of fire, Jupiter, for the Air, Juno, for the
Sea, Neptune, so the Papists have Agathus for the fire, Theadulus for the
Tempests, St. Barbara for thunder, and St. Nicholas for the Sea.

The Pagans had several Titular Gods, for their Cattle and fruits, as Pon for
the first, and Ceres for the last, as also Bacchus for their wind; so the
Papists have for their wind Urbanus, once a drunken Priest, Jodocus for their
fruits Man, Debinas, for their sheep, Eulogious for their horses, and St.
Anthony for their Piggs.

The Pagans had their Titular Gods, for several Professions, as Apollow for
Scholars, Mars for Soldiers, Vulcan for Smiths, Diana for Hunters, so the
Papist have St. Gregory for Scholars, St. George for Soldiers, St. Loy for
Smiths, and St. Crispin, for Shoomakers.

So again the Pagans had their Gods, to pray to in several diseases, as to
Apollow, for the Plague, Hercules for the ^a^^ing-sickness, Lucina for woman in
Childbirth; and so the Papists have St. Rock for the Plague, St Petrenello for
the Ague, Appolina for the Toothache, and Arisastiacis, for the Headache. To
these both Pagans and Papists have builded Temples and Churches, errected,
alters, ordained, Priests, appointed Festivals, set up Statues, and burned
Lamps and Candles, by which we may see, they differ nothing in this point, and
of this the Prophet Jeremy complains, when he says, why did the Land Perish,
and was burnt up like a Wilderness, but because the People walked after Baalam,
which their Fathers taught them. And the Psalmist says, walk not in the ways of
your Fathers (and again) they follow the generation of their Fathers, which
shall not see the light; these men, with the Jews, have framed to themselves a
Queen of Heaven, giving that style to the Uirgin Mary, calling upon her in time
of trouble, Praying her Divine worship; and in their Rosary, and other books,
Blaspemously Attribute to her, what Prophets have foretold of, or Ascribe to
our Savior, though God has declared himself a Jealous God, and that he will not
give his Honor to another. And now to make this seem no Idolitry, they have
taken away the fourth Commandment, and divided the fifth into three to make up
the number.

As for their Crucifixes, Beads, Relics, Holy Oil, Holy Waters, Agnus Dei's,
Blessed Roses, Pardons, Indulgences, Absolutions, etc. They are altoge^her new,
and only the Immentions of tourzening Priests to pick the pockets of the simple
layity, having by that means rather reduced Popery to a Trade than a Religion,
and as for Auricular confssion, it was as all Authors of our Church agree, to
get into the Cabinet Councils of Princes, that so they might the better in all
places carry on the interest of Rome, though to the hazard, and ruin of those
Princes, in whose bosoms they ly like snakes, till many times they sting them
to death, holding no blood shead a crime that is spilt to ear^y on the interest
of their Church, this Fatally felt Henry the Second of France, who was without
any provocation killed with a Consecrated Daggar in his Royal Tent, Surrounded
with his Army by one Clement, a Jaccobin Moak, sent for that purpose, though
under a fained pretense of delivering a Message; and although this King was of
the Romish Communion, yet the Pope was so far from dissembling it, that he
Magnified the Villainy, and Cannonized the murderer. By the like fate, and
encouragement fell Henry the fourth of France, who was stabbed by Raviliack a
Ruffain, as he was passing the streets in his Coach, and we may fear they had
too great a hand in the Barbarous Murder of King Charles the first, etc. But
should I pass into the bloody field of their many fatal Massacres, Private
Murders Violation of Faith, Leagues and Daths it would amaze, and startle the
reader, to think so much wickedness should be in men professing Christianity,
or so much as owning the name of Christ, and the better to color their
persidiousness, when they contrary to the Letters of safe conduct, given them,
had burnt the two famous Bohemian Martyrs, Huss and Jerome, they go a decree
passed in the Council of Constance that no Faith is to be kept with Heretic
and such they account all that are note o^ their Church; a taste of which Queen
Mary gave us, who after she had promised us Religion and Liberty, was prevailed
with by the wicked Councils of the Priests, to (...) a raging Persecution be
the reward of those who had Seated her on the Throne. In which, during her
Reign, suffered for the confession of a Good Faith, five Bishops Twelve
Divines, Eighteen Gentlemen, Eighty four Artificers, One hundred Husband men,
servants, and laborers Twenty Sir Wives, Twenty Widows, Nine Uirgins, two
Boys, and two Infants, in all, two hundred Eighty seven, all of them burnt
alive, besides Sixteen that dyed in Prison, seven scourged as unmercifully as
T. O. and a great many that were found Languishing, and Released by Queen
Elizabeth. From which Cruelty and Crucl men, God of his mercy, as he has at
present most Miraculoussy done, preserve and keep these, and all other
Protestant Kingdoms, and unite our hearts in the defense of the true Faith and
Religion, for the sake of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen, Amen.
A Prayer for the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, against Popery, etc.
O Lord God, great and Glorious; whose Eyes Run too and frow, threw the Earth to
behold the ways and Actions of the Sons of men, look upon us thy unworthy
servants, and ^ut of the multitude of thy tender mereys, sense about with thy
Almighty Arm the Uine that thy own right hand has planted, water it with the
dew of heaven, that it may spring, and grow up to thy Glory, suffer not the
wild Bore of the forest to Root it up, nor the little foxes to pluck off its
render Branthes. Guard thy Church, in the Purity of Religion, and soundness of
Doctrine against the rage and malice of our enemies, and keep her her in
perpetual safety, for we of our selves are nothing but our help alone, rests
in thee, O God, through the Merits and Meditation of Jesus Christ our Blessed
Lord and Savior, Amen.

A Prayer of thanksgiving, for our Late Miraculous Deliverance from Popery, etc.
BLessed be thy holy name, O Lord God of Israel, who out of the multitude of
thy never failing Compassion, has interposed thy mercy, and made bare thy
Almighty Arm to save us from the Jaws of the Lion, and the Paw of the Bare that
were Roaring against us, and ready to devour us, we offer in all humility, our
tribute of praise and thanksgiving to thy Divine Majesty, for all thy loving
kindness to wards us; but more especially for Miraculously saving us at this
time, from the Malice and Cruelty of our implacable Enemies, which we beseech
thee to continue toward thy Church and People, that we may ever praise and
Magnify thy Holy Name, Amen.

French Persecutions: Or, what Protestants must expect from Papists, if they
get the power over'um.
THe Popes of Rome when they had no power, and were not arrived at their
Greatness, were indeed, against Persecution; but when they had once arrogated
to themselves a Spiritual power that commanded the Temporal, and at length
incroached upon the Civil Justice in all Kingdoms where the Roman See, by the
insinuation of the Clergy, could gain Credit, then, and not till then, the
bloody Banner was displayed; but to particularize upon the many bloody Murders
and Massacres, would be too tedious. It is not unknown to English Protestants,
that France has been the Scourge of Christendom, especially that part of it
professing the Gospel in its purity: wherefore the better to give them a light
into what must be expected if ever a Popish power prevail, I shall instance
some of their Cruelties.

In the Reign of Charles the ninth, though the papists and even the King,
promised the protestants the greatest security imaginable, yet when they had
made them supine or fearless of the Danger, by many Oaths and promises, not
only by chance, but by the Kings immediate Order and Decree, they were
Murdered and Massacred throughout the whole Kingdom; Women were Ripped up
alive, young Children dashed against the Pavement, Embrio's torn from the
bleeding Womb, Hoary Hairs stained with Blood, Churches Robbed, Houses Fired,
Women Ravished, Virgins Deflowred, and then Murdered with the most exquisite
Torments: And before this stream of blood stopped, at which the Pope extremely
rejoiced, and styled it The Triumph of the Church, Two hundred thousand of all
sorts, Ages and Sex, were slain, beside a greater number that were obliged to
lcaye the Country and all they had behind them. The like has happened at other
times, but more especially renewed in time of this present King Lewis, who (set
on by the Priests) first put out an Edict or proclamation, That all persons
within his Dominion should turn Roman Catholics: Whereupon all Officers that
refused were turned out of places of Trust, even from the Waggoner to the
greatest Courtier: But this the priests thought too Gentle, though thousands of
Familes was Ruined thereby: whereupon they proceeded to set the Dragoons to
Quarter upon them at Discretion, and to use them with all manner of Rigor; so
that coming into the Towns where the protestants lived, and getting knowledge
of their Houses, they Intruded themselves, crying, Turn Catholics or be
Killed: And when they had thus oppressed and plundered them eating up all their
Provisions, they fell upon their Persons torturing them, by hanging up some by
the Heels in smoking Chimneys, ducking others in Wells till almost stified,
keeping some from sleeping by frequent rattling Kettels and brass Pans over
their heads, pricking and tossing them from one to the other till they had made
them distracted, and them force them to sign an Abjuration; their Children they
took from them and thrust them into Monasteries, making one Gentlewoman, after
they had ravished her before her Husbands face, kill him, by putting a Rapier
into her hand, and forcing it into his body, but perceiving that this would not
do, whilst the Ministers remained, they committed many of them to the Galleys,
others they banished, sending them away without their Wives and Children, whom
they retained to bring by force to the Roman Religion; those that attempted to
escape were many of them surprised and put into dark Dungeons, where for want
they miserably perished, their Relations that attempted to relieve them being
reduced to the same Condition. The Pope all this while encouraging this
wickedness, which how near such usage comes to primitive Christianity, which
according to the word of God, is all Gentleness, and the dictates of the Prince
of peace, our ever blessed Lord and Savior, I leave to the Protestant Reader,
and conclude. From Popery and its Tenants, Good Lord deliver us; seeing even
the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.

FINIS.

