A LETTER FROM The Lord BROGHILL to the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker
of the Parliament of ENGLAND. Containing A Relation of the great Success it
has pleased God to give the Parliament Forces under the Command of the Lord
Broghill, in defeating the Army of the Rebels in IRELAND, under the Command of
the Lord Muskerry. Together With another Letter touching the said Defeat.

Imprimatur

Hen. Scobel Cleric. Parliamenti.


LONDON, Printed for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane
end. 1651.

A Letter from the Lord Broghill, containing a Relation of the great success of
the Parliaments Forces against the Rebels in Ireland,
THe Lord Broghill has given battle to the Lord Muskerry's Army which
consisted of 1000. horse and Dragoons, and near 2000 foot. My Lord Broughill
had but 400. horse and Dragoons, and under 600 foot, the charge was bloody on
the Victors side; For the Lord Broghill had 120* horsemen shot, and 30 killed;
he charged him that led up the Irish opposite wing, and killed him, but the
Irish did so overwing him, that his own Troop that consisted of most Gent.
Reformadoes, was charged in Front, Flank and Rear both by horse and foot;
Amongst which my Lord was so far engaged, that they offered him Quarter, upon
the refusal whereof they cried, kill the fellow with the Gold lace coat, which
in all probability had been effected if a Reformado Leivtenant of his Troop had
not come in to his rescue, whose horse was killed on that account, and himself
twice shot. The Lord Broghill got off with a dry Pike beating by the Pikemen,
but his horse received three shots. The Irish lost 600 men, among which many
officers, prisoners but few are taken, besides some Officers of the field which
are now in Cork; the defeated Army had designed conjunction with the Lemster
forces and the releif of Limrick where the siege still continues, as also
before Galloway, but of their rendition I yet say nothing. The Lord Deputies
design upon Limrick, being, as it is believed, to reduce it by famine, and
therefore to prevent them from all relief, is very diligent. The Toryes do so
infest all parts of this Dominion, that without parties of horse all parts are
dangerous. The Plague, I praise God, is quite ceased at Youghall, and is not at
Bandon, but hot extremely at Kinsale, and in most of the rest of the towns in
this Province, except Cork, where it decreaseth. To morrow the Lord Broghill
goes again hence into the field to hinder the Irish from gathering in a body
again.

Blairney 1. August.
SIR,
I Presume in this enclosed to give you the Relation of a late mercy, the Lord
was pleased to confer on a part of the Parliaments Army under my command; it
was truly a very seasonable one, in respect of the consequence of it, and by
reason God had of late been pleased to withdraw his Favor from us, in many
(though small) encounters; I trust this has taken away the expectation of
relief from Limbrick, who my Lo. Deputy the last night did acquaint with our
Victory, by 3 peals of Ordnance, and three volleys of small shot round about
the Leager. I make bold also to send you a Copy of one of those many charms
which we found quilted in the doublets of many which were killed, that you may
see how miserably the poor creatures are deluded by their Priests, and how
impossible it is to keep the Natives of this Dominion out of Arms, whilst such
great seducers have so unquestioned a power over them. I am not so vain to
write this unto you, as you are of so eminent and public a capassity, but only
as you are a person, which has placed so many signal obligations on me, that I
almost esteem it as highly my duty to give you an account of my actions, as of
being unalterably Sir,

Your most humble and most affectionate faithful servant BROGHIL.
Near Malto the 28. of July. 1651.
SIR,
THere having been letters intercepted out of Limerick from the Governor, the
Bishop, the Major, and the other prime men in it, that they were in a very low
condition; and that if not suddenly relieved, the Commonalty of the town would
force them to take conditions, conjuring all their friends in arms over all
Ireland to march day and night to their relief; I instantly drew all the forces
of this County together, hearing that the Lord Muskery was marched out of the
County of Kierry, with all the Forces he had there, and was drawing to him all
the men he had in this County, intending a general Randezvouz with the Forces
of Lei^ster at Galbally, a fast mountainous Country, not above 15. mile from
Limerick, which was the place they intended to relieve; upon my advance up to
Mallow, Muskerys forces not being formed, retired westward into the mountains
and woods near Drishane; the place wherein the beginning of the last winter he
had defeated a considerable Party of ours, under the Command of Lieut. Col.
Elsing; This made us not credit that their design was for Limerick, but rather
for the destroying of our Quarters, and that which inclined us the more to that
faith, was, the certain intelligence we had of a strong Party of Horse, being
gone over the Black-water only to that end, for we could not fancy if really
they meant any high thing, they would voluntarily deny themselves such an
assistance. We therefore for the security of our Quarters div^ded our selves in
two parts, yet not so far asunder, but that in six hours we could easily
join, and because those Horse gone over the Black-water might be timely looked
after, I marched all that night (which was the most tempestuous night I ever
was in) in order thereunto. In the morning by dawn of day a in thick mist,
their body got by us within Musket Shot, but a Party of ours took two
Lieutenants of Horse and some Troopers, by whom we learned (as the same day I
did by several intelligences) that Muskery would instantly again come up to
Droumagh, a place about 12. miles from Mallow, and there would be forming his
Army. This made me suddenly again Randezvouz at Castle-lyons, where I received
Orders from my Lord Deputy to make the fighting or dispersing of Muskery's
Army, my only design. The 21. therefore of this instant I marched to Mallow,
the 22. (though we knew the enemy had treble our numbers, both in Horse and
Foot, yet in regard if they were not suddenly fought with, we might be
necessitated to bring all our interest in Ireland to one Cast.) We resolved at
a Council of War, on Horseback to go and seek them, but we were not three
miles on our March toward them, but a Spy I had sent out, brought me certain
intelligence, that the enemies Army was three hours before marched from
Droumagh toward Castle-lishin, one of the fastest places in Ireland, and
directly in the way to Limerick, which was immediately confirmed by some
Prisoners our Scouts brought in. This made us hasten after them, and about the
fall of night we discovered the fires of their Camp; about midnight in an
horrid storm of rain and wind, we fell upon their Horse-guards and beat them
in, at which their Camp took so hot an Alarm, that without giving us leave or
time to do any thing else, they drew all away in haste and disorder, but
through a place and country that the very Teigs themselves could hardly march
in but we had this satisfaction, that 'twas to the place from whence they came,
which secured us from any intent they had on our friends before Limerick. The
23. we lay within four miles of their Army again. The 24. we advanced to fight
them, but they retreated over the Black-water to Drishane. The 25. we followed
them over the Black-water, which was much risen by the vast rain which were
fallen, concluding if they would not fight on that advantage, 'twas in vain any
longer to follow them. besides, our Men and Horses were exceedingly harrast, we
had spent all our Bread, and which was worse, they might by a further
prosecution of them that way, give us the slip in the night and get to
Limericke, or to a conjunction with their friends, before we could get up to
ours. These and many such other considerations made us, after we were past the
Black water, and saw no Enemy, to return toward Mallow, from whence we intended
having breaded our Soldiers, to march to a Place called Courtstowne, which lay
fitly to interpose between Muskeries Army and the Galbally, and not above one
good days march from Limericke. In prosecution whereof we marched from the
ground we were drawn up in, and our Van was not full half a mile from it, when
our Rear sent me word, they discovered four great divisions of Horse come down
the hill, and that they were marching after us. This Alarm made me march back
to a fair Moore I had newly gone over, where I drew up the Van of the Horse
and our Foot, and went to a rising ground, from whence I discovered all their
Army come down into the Plain and advancing directly toward us, I knew when
once their Foot came into the Plain they would give us a fair field, and to
speak truth they could not then have avoided it. I gave Major Wallis the
command of our Left Wing, Maj. Coppage, commanded our Foot, and I our Right
wing. Our Word was Prosperity theirs St. James, our signal white in hats,
theirs green Fearne. Being drawn up as we desired, I went to every division of
Horse and Foot, and encouraged them, but blessed be God, they needed no such
thing; for indeed I never saw men more generally willing to fight then our men
were. In this good temper to save the enemy the labor of coming to us, I
advanced to meet them, and a Regiment of their Foot having saluted my wing all
the way they marched to the charge (though God be praised not disordered it, we
fired in each others faces, and mingled, I had the happiness to kill the
Officer which lead the Division I charged, and after a round dispute, though we
were so very much overnumber'd and winged, that they charged us in Flanck and
Rear, and that their Pikes too galled us exceedingly; yet after a second charge
on one of their rallyed Divisions, we gave them a total route, and carried all
that wing of Horse and Foot before us. This was done before our left wing
engaged (we it seems marching somewhat of the fasttest. And though afterward
when I saw our left wing engaged and mingled; and I was rallying some Horse to
go and help them, yet by a great Division of theirs falling into our Rear,
after we had beaten what we charged in Front, we were necessitated to mind our
selves, and by that time we had beaten these importunate followers, God was
pleased to give Major Wallis's wing the like success to what he had given
mine. We had a very fair execution for above three miles, and indeed it was
bloody, for I gave order to kill all though some few Prisoners of good quality
were saved* All their Foot field-officers charged on foot with pikes in their
hands, so that few of them got off, it too, being far from any boggs or
woods, which they say they elected purposely that their men might have no
confidence but in their courages; but we relied on a better strength then the
Arm of flesh, and when their strength failed them, ours did not fail us. Their
Priests all the way before they came to fight, encouraged them by speeches, but
especially by sprinkling holy water on them, and by charms, of which I
herewith send you a copy, (many of them were found quilted in the doublets of
the dead). Certainly they are a people strangely given over to destruction, who
though otherwise understanding enough, let themselves be still deluded by
rediculous things, and by more rediculous persons; Had I been one of the
charmed, I would have first tried mine on the Priest which gave it. Muskery
himself got off narrowly.

The chief of our prisoners are L. Col. Macgillacuday commanding young
Muskery's Regiment, and a man more popular than Muskery himself in his own
country. Major Mr. Gillariogh an old Spanish Soldier, Maj Mac Fivine, a very
leading man in Kerry, Capt. Mac Gillacuddy, brother to the Lieut. Col. Cap.
Seals Governor of the Island of Valentia, Cap. Suillivane, Capt. Clausly with
some Troopers, and other inferior Officers. What people of quality are killed
we know not, only one L. Col. Suggaine that ran up and down the field offering
100li. for his life, neither do we know the number of the dead, but this we
know, that all the field was well bestrewed with dead bodies. I think that
there was never known better knocking in Ireland, nor so fair a field, where
all divisions came to handy-blowes, few of our Horse Officers but are
themselves or their horses wounded. My own Horse was wounded in three several
places, and I had a good knock with a Pike over my left arm Lieut. Inman under
God saved my life, but in doing it, had like to have lost his own, being
wounded in two places, and his horse shot under him. We have not lost above 26
men, all Troopers, and we have not less then 130 wounded, all Troopers too but
six. There were (in this signal mercy) many sweet appearances of providence
toward us, O that our returns were proportionable to their cause: But truly I
bless God, I can confidently say this, that not the meanest Soldier amongst
us, but did with his mouth acknowledge God in the whole action, and I hope did
it too, with, and in his heart.

We are so extremely shattered, that we are come for a few days to refresh and
fit ourselves for a second march.

A Copy of the Spell mentioned in the Letter and Relation.
JEsu Christi Fili Dei vivi illumina me. Benedicta Matter Dei, Gubernatrix
Angelorum and totius Mundi Ora pro me ad benedictum filium tuum florem --
Angelorum ad Coronam -- Coelorum and Confessorum -- affligentium Civitatis suae
Jerusalem Pater Noster, Ave Maria, Credo in deum.

This Orizon was found on the Sepulcher of Christ, and was approved of by the
Council of Trent: Whosoever carries this Orizon about him shall not perish in
Battle, Water, or in Fire, and shall be free from the Pestilence, and from all
his Enemies both spiritual and corporal, and shall be eased from the disease
of his heart: And she, whosoever, that is troubled with childe-birth, bind this
Orizon about her belly and she will be delivered of the child without danger.
Finally, Whosoever carries this Orizon about him continually, shall see the
virgin Mary 14 days before his death.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Hen: Scobell Cler: Parliamenti.


