A SERMON Preached at a Public Ordination IN A Country Congregation, ON ACTS
XIII. 2, 3.

TOGETHER With an Exhortation to the Minister and People, By another Brother.

LONDON: Printed for John Lawrance, at the Angel in the Poultry. 1697.

THE PREFACE.
THAT this plain, homespun Discourse, wherein there is little but what is
ordinary and common, should he pressed, not to Death, but to Life and Light, in
this Critical Learned Age, wherein there is so much Improvement made in several
Points of Natural Knowledge (I wish there were an answerable Improvement in
point of Morality) is to be attributed more to the Favor of its Judges, than
either its own Desert, or the Inclination of the Author; for it is not
agreeable to his Humor, to have the World troubled with old Matter new vamp'd
up, and put into a new Dress; (except it may be in such Practical Points as may
have a powerful Influence upon the Affections, which stand in continual need of
Excitation) only he would not be guilty of so much Stiffness, or such an
overweening Conceit of his own Judgment, as to resist the Joynt-desires of his
Brethren: And since they were the Instigators to, and Promoters of this
Publication, he expects that they should be responsible for those (...) and
(...) it may be chargeable withal.

I know nothing that can be pleaded in its behalf, but that things are laid
pretty close together: Nor have I seen any Sermon printed of late upon this
Subject; so that possibly it may be new to many, and consequently the more
acceptable.

If it may conduce to Edification, either in point of Knowledge or Practice,
that will be an abundant Recompense for the no great Pains it cost the Author,
who is

Devoted to the Service of thy Faith.

ACTS XIII. 2, 3. As they ministered to the Lord and fasted, (...). Sept. 16-96.
the Holy Ghost said, Separate we Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I
have called them. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on
them, they sent them away.
THIS Book of the Acts, is an Ecclesiastical History of the Primitive Church,
from Christ's Ascension to the second Year of Paul's Imprisonment at Rome,
which is about twenty seven Years in all.

It gives an account now the Christian Church was first planted and watered,
was first: gathered and propagated both among Jews and Gentiles. Among the
Jews, chiefly by Peter's Ministry (whose Apostle he was, Gal. 2.8.) This is in
the twelve first Chapters of the Book: And also among the Gentiles, by the
Ministry of Paul (who was their Apostle, Romans 11.13.) from the beginning of
this Chapter to the end of the Book. So that here begins the History of Paul's
Ministry to the Gentiles; and it begins with his Separation and Ordination for
this work, in the words of my Text, which I shall open particularly and
distinctly.

As they ministered to the Lord.] (...), I shall not lose time in confuting the
Popish Dream concerning the Sense of this word, as if it signified Sacrificing,
or saying of Mass; as those two great Cardinals Baronius and Bellarmin
translate it; the latter of which says, Whenever it is applied to the Sacred
Ministry and used absolutely, it is always taken for the Act of Sacrificing, De
Missa. l. 1. c. 13. But this Conceit is sufficiently confuted by the Learned
Casaubon in his Exercitations against Baronius, Exerc. 16. c. 41.

It signifies generally, all manner of Public Service, whether Sacred or
Civil, and is applied to Angelical Service, Heb. 1.14. (...), ministering
Spirits.

Here it must signify all Religious Exercises of the public Worship of God,
by Praying, Preaching, Singing, and the like, being joined with [to the Lord]
and [fasted.] Hence Chrysostom expounds it by (...), Preaching, and the Syriack
by Praying. Where observe,

That the Holy Ghost takes this occasion, when they were met together in God's
presence about his Work, to reveal himself to them, and give them particular
Instructions and Directions concerning his Will, and their Duty.

And fasted.] Probably this Fast was undertaken by the Church of Antioch, in
behalf of their Mother Church at Jerusalem, which at this time was under great
Persecution by Herod, as may be seen in the former Chapter.

The Holy Ghost said.] viz. By an inward Instinct or Motion to these Prophets
here mentioned, v. 1. God the Father spoke outwardly by his Son Jesus Christ,
Heb. 1.1. Here he speaks inwardly by the Holy Ghost, and so he does st ill in
some degree.

Do ye.] (so it is in the Original) Who were these [ye?] The Prophets and
Teachers whose names are expressed, v. 1. The Command is given to them; they
are the Persons employed by the Holy Ghost for this Work, and in this Affair.

Separate me.] This some take to be an Answer to their Prayers for the
Preservation of the Church, then under Persecution; as if the Holy Ghost had
said, I have heard your Prayers, the Church shall be preserved; and as a
Testimony thereof, Barnabas and Saul shall be now sent forth to enlarge its
Tents, to propagate its Doctrine, and to beget many Sons and Daughters to it.

Barnabas and Saul.] Here now arises a great Difficulty: If Barnabas and Saul
were Apostles before, What means this new Ordination? They were separated to
the Work of the Ministry before, What need it be done again?

To make way for the resolving this Doubt, and removing this Difficulty, I
shall lay before you, what things are certain by Scripture in this case.

(1) It is certain, that Paul was called to be an Apostle immediately by
Christ, for he affirms this of himself, That as he did not receive his
Apostleship from Man, so neither by Man, but by Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.1. viz. at
Christ's appearing to him in his Journey to Damascus; for then he tells him, I
have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make the a Minister, and a
Witness, (Mark that) -- delivering thee from the People, and from the Gentiles,
unto whom now I send thee. Sure this was plainly his Call to the Apostleship.
And therefore he seems to date his Birth as an Apostle, or the beginning of his
Apostleship from that time, 1 Cor. 15.8. Last of all he was seen of me also, as
of one born out of due time. Mark it, There was the Time of his Birth, viz. as
an Apostle Then he had his general Commission.

(2) Immediately after this Call, Paul sets upon the work of Preaching, Acts
9.20. Strait way he preached Christ.

(3) Both Barnabas and Saul were Members of the Presbytery, or Bench of
Church Officers at Antioch, for they are reckoned among the Prophets and
Teachers there, v. 1.

(4) Before this, Barnabas was sent by the Church at Jerusalem, to confirm the
Disciples at Antioch, who, together with Saul, preached to them a whole Year,
Acts 11.22-26.

(5) After this, and never before, Barnabas is called an Apostle, Acts 14.14.
which when the Apostles Barnabus and Saul heard of --

(6) This Separation was performed with the solemn Rites of Ordination, viz.
Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition of hands.

What then shall we say was the End and Design of it? Will you give me leave to
offer my Conjecture about it? What if we should say, That though Paul was called
to be an Apostle before this, immediately by Christ, Chap. 9. yet he was never
ordained and set apart by the Officers of the Church till now? For though
immediately after Christ's appearing to him, Ananias was sent to lay hands on
him, yet that was only to restore him to his sight, as the words plainly show,
Acts 9.12. He has seen in a Vision a Man coming in, and putting his hand on
him, that he might receive his sight. So that he had before no setting apart by
Imposition of hands, that we read of.

Then for Barnabas, though he was employed in the Work of the Ministry before,
yet we read not elsewhere of any Ordination he had; and it is not till after
this that he is called an Apostle, as I observed before: So that this seems to
be his Admission into, and Ordination for that Office. This I humbly propose to
Consideration; But I grant that the more received Opinion is, That they were
ordained before, and that this Separation was to give them a more express and
particular Mission to the Gentiles. They were called to the general Office and
Work of the Ministry and Apostleship before, this now is a setting them apart
more peculiarly for this branch of the Work. Therefore says the Holy Ghost,
Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the Work (not Office) whereto I have called
them. The Office is one thing, the Work of the Office is another. Called they
were before, and designed by God to be Preachers to the Gentiles, and now they
were publicly inaugurated to that great and eminent Service. Jus Div. Min.
Evang. p. 148.

Well then, Supposing that this was the end of their Separation, from this
Example of Ordination upon such a special occasion, I think I may fairly infer,

That repeating of Imposition of hands upon an extraordinary occasion, so it be
done by way of Accumulation, and further Confirmation of what went before, and
not by way of Derogation, Denial, or Renouncing the former Ordination as
invalid, may be admitted without any Irregularity, or breach of Gospel Order.

To the Work.] Though the Office of the Ministry be an honorable Office, yet
withal it is a laborious Office: A Work, not a Play. It Is that that requires
Attendance, 1 Timothy 4.13. Paul calls upon Timothy to be instant (...), which
properly signifies standing to, or over a business; and imports Earnestness and
Diligence, and that at all times, both in season, and out of season, 2 Timothy
4.2. and therefore requires a Man's presence with his Flock or Charge, and
cannot be performed by a Curate or Deputy, Ezekiel. 44.8.

This Work here, was to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, as was said: Now
this was a great Work, and not to be undertaken without a special Call from
God; which therefore Peter had for one particular occasion, Acts 10. and these
two Apostles had for a more general purpose. This, I say, was a great Work. See
after what a lofty rate Paul speaks of this Mystery of Christ, as he calls it,
Ephesians. 3.5-9. By Revelation he made known unto me the Mystery, which in other
Ages was not made known unto the Sons of Men, as it is now revealed to his holy
Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit, that the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs,
and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the Gospel,
whereof I was made a Minister according to the Gift of the Grace of God, given
unto me by the effectual working of his power: Unto me, who am the least of all
Saints is this grace given, that I should Preach among the Gentiles the
unsearchable riches of Christ, and to make all Men see what is the fellowship
of the mystery which from the beginning of the world has been hid in God who
created all things by Jesus Christ.

-- Whereto I have called them.] These words prove both the Deity and
Personality of the Holy Ghost. He who calls Ministers, and unto whose Service
they are separated separate to me) is both God, and a distinct Person in the
Godhead.

-- When they fasted and Prayed.] All Works of Weight and Moment ought to be so
undertaken. We should not set upon 'em rashly, or presumptuously, trusting to
our own strength, but imploring God's Assistance and Blessing therein.

-- They laid their hands on 'em.] Of this I shall speak anon.

-- They sent 'em away.] There being Teachers enough at Antioch beside, they
might well be spared there, and go, the Holy Ghost cuts 'em out some other
work: and the other Teachers did not let 'em lie trifling and loitering there,
but immediately dismissed 'em with their Benediction, and sent 'em about their
Business.

In the words thus opened, observe two General Parts.

A Command, and the Execution of it.

In the Command, observe,

(1.) The Time, when it was given; as they Ministered to the Lord, and Fasted.
(2.) The Person by whom it was given; The Holy Ghost said. (3.) The Persons to
whom it was given; to the Prophets and Teachers mentioned, Verse. 1. Ye. (4.)
The Matter of the Command; or Duty enjoined; Separate me Barnabas and Saul.
(5.) The End of this Separation; or to what they were Separated; for the work
whereto I have called them.
In the Execution of this Command, here is both the Manner how they executed
it; with Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition of hands: and the Consequent thereof;
they sent them away. Hence observe.

Doctr. It is the Institution and Appointment of the Holy Ghost, that they that
are Teaches, and Persons in Office themselves, should separate others for the
work of the Ministry.

This is directly to the business in hand, and fits the occasion of our Meeting
together at this time.

In the handling of this I shall not speak to every particular that may be
included therein, but single out these Four Points, or Heads of Discourse, as
the Principal to be insisted on.

1. The work of the Ministry is a separate work. 2. A Call from God, or the
Holy Ghost, is not sufficient to make a Man a Minister but he must be set apart
by Church Officers also. 3. Officers in the Church have Authority from Christ
to set apart others. 4. This must be done by Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition of
hands.
I begin with the first.

10. The Work of a Minister is a separate Work. Separate me, says the Holy
Ghost. Now Separation is From something To something: What they are separated
To, is here expressed; to the Work to which I have called them: But what they
are separated From, must be sought for elsewhere.

There is a general Separation common to all Christians, viz. from Uncleanness
and Unholiness, 2 Cor. 6.17. Come out from among them and be ye separate, says
the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing. But that is not of this
Consideration, for this Separation in the Text, is something that is peculiar
to Ministers; and that is (1) From all Lordly Dominion. (2) From all Civil,
Secular Employments.

1. From all Lordly Dominion, and Secular Power and Authority. This is expressly
forbidden by Christ to his Ministers. Matt. 20.25, 26. The Princes of the
Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, -- but it shall not be so among you. Here
they are discharged from meddling with any Temporal Rule and Dominion; such as
they expected in Christ's Temporal Kingdom. So 1 Pet. 5.3. -- not being Lords
over God's Heritage. (...); the same word that is used by Matthew. They must be
(...), Bishoping it over the Lord's Flock, but not (...), not Lording it over
God's Heritage. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. It is the Observation of Beza upon the word
(...) in my Text, that (...) vel (...) nulla fit in Apostolieis scriptis
mentio, cum de Ecclesiae politia disseritur; imo ne (...) quidem; ut nullus se
dominum ac principem cleri, sed unius Principis ac Domini ministrum esse sciat.
In the Writings of the Apostles there is no mention made of Rulers, when the
Government of the Church is spoken of, no nor so much as of Lords (or Masters)
that no one should look upon himself as a Lord or Prince of God's Heritage.

The Kingdom of Christ is not of this World, and therefore the Officers of his
Kingdom must not exercise Worldly Power. As on the one hand we must not put
asunder what God has joined together (Matt. 19.6.) so neither on the other hand
must we join together what Christ has put asunder. Indeed among the Heathen,
both Ecclesiastical and Civil Power were united in the same Person. The Emperor
Augustus assumed that Power to himself, and afterward all the Emperors took
this Power upon them: Even Constantine and some of his Successors continued it,
though they were Christians and hated Paganism, till at last the Emperor Gratian
renounced it. And therefore the Pope, who pretending to be Christ's Vicar, is
also a Temporal Monarch, is none of Christ's Officer but the Devil's: Not
Christ but the Dragon gave him his Authority, Rev. 13.2.

But yet it does not follow from hence, That they have no Power at all. The
very nature of an Office, includes something of Power in it. What Officer has
not Power and Authority to perform the Duties of his Office? Be he but a
Constable, Overseer of the Poor, Surveyor of the Highways, some Power is
annexed peculiarly to his Office. So Ministers, being Church Officers, must
have some Office-power belonging to them, which belongs not to others. True:
They have no Civil, Secular, Worldly, Temporal Power over Men's Bodies or
Estates, to punish them in their Persons or Purses; to Fine, Imprison, or the
like; but they have Spiritual Power: Spiritual (1) In respect of the Object,
the Soul and Conscience, or Spirit, 1 Cor. 5.5. (2) In respect of the Weapons
they make use of in the exercise of this Power; not Carnal (and therefore
Spiritual, and) mighty through God, 2 Cor. 10.4. (3) In respect of the Ends of
this Power; which are* Not by way of Dominion over the Peoples Faith (2 Cor.
1.24.) nor for Destruction (2 Cor. 10.8. and 13.10.) viz. of the Spirit or
Soul; but for the Destruction of the Flesh (1 Cor. 5.5.) for the demolishing
the strongholds of Satan: casting down imaginations, and every high thing that
exalts it self against the Knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity every
thought to the Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. and on the contrary, for
Edification, and building up in Faith and Holiness (2 Cor. 10.8.) and for the
Salvation of the Spirit or Soul, 1 Cor. 5.5.

This is all the Power that we claim.

And this is that which Christ has conferred upon us (and therefore cannot of
right be denied unto us, or taken away from us.) A Power of Binding and
Loosing; conferred first upon Peter, Matt. 16.19. yet not upon him only (see
Clark's Annot. there) but upon the rest also, c. 18.18. A Power of Remitting
and Retaining Sins, John 20.23. This is the Power of the Keys, as Christ calls
it there to Peter; which are distinguished into the Key of Doctrine, and the
Key of Discipline.

1. The Key of Doctrine; of Binding and Loosing; whereby is meant (in part at
least) (according to the ordinary use of that Phrase among the Jews, as is
showed at large in many Instances by Dr. Lightfoot, in Pool's Latin Synopsis)
teaching what is Lawful, and what Unlawful; declaring what is agreeable to the
Word and Will of God, and what is contrary thereto. This is called by Christ
the Key of Knowledge, Luke 11.52. i. e. The means whereby the Sense of
Scripture is opened and made known to us; whereby we are let into the meaning
of it, and see into it, as into a Room when the Door is open. Hereby a Minister
has Power to open and apply Scripture to the Souls of People, as occasion
requires; to apply Scripture Threatenings to the Impenitent, and Gospel-Promises
to Sensible Contrite Sinners. This is to use this Key for Binding and Loosing,
according to this Sense of that Phrase.

2. There Is the Key of Discipline; which is

(1) To Lock or Unlock, to shut or open the Church-doors, so as either to
admit, and let such into the Church as are fit for Membership and Communion.
This is done by Baptism; whereby solemn Entrance and Admission into the Church
is conferred, 1 Cor. 12.13. or, To Shut, and Lock the Doors against, i. e. to
keep out such as are unfit.

(2) To Retain Sins, i. e. Authority to inflict Church Censures, and thereby to
exclude or cast out Scandalous and Impenitent Sinners, who discover themselves
to be rotten Members, and so such as are to be cut off; or at least laboring
under some such dangerous Disease as requires Sharpness (2 Cor. 13.10.) and a
Rod (1 Cor. 4.21.) and to be purged out (1 Cor. 5.7.) and put away from among
them, v. 13. 2 Cor. 10.6.

(3) To Remit Sins; that is, In case of Repentance, to absolve from those
Censures, and restore to the Communion of the Church again 2 Cor. 2.7. But in
case they continue Obstinate, Impenitent and Incorrigible, then to retain their
Sins still, and to deny them this Discharge and Absolution, but continue them
still under the Sentence.

Now, Whether this Power may be called Jurisdiction (which Grotius vehemently
deems, and pleads stiffly against, de Imperio Sum. Potest. c. 9.) is not
material as to the thing it self, so long as the forementioned Powers are
allowed.

What is the first Subject of this Power; Whether the whole Church, as the Sea
Dr. Owen of the Church, p. 72.
Independents maintain; or only its Officers, as the Sea Ball 's Trial, p. 234,
etc.
Presbyterians assert? And likewise, Whether all Ministers have originally an
equal share of Church Power? Are weighty and noble Questions, which I cannot
stand to determine now.

2. As the Office of a Ministry is separated from all Lordly Dominion, and
Secular Jurisdiction, so also from all Secular Affairs and Employments, etc.

2. The Office of the Ministry is separate also from all Civil Secular Affairs
and Employments; whether by way of Office, as Justices of Peace, Mayors,
Constables; or by way of Trade, as Merchants, Shopkeepers, Grasiers, etc. or
any other Vocation, as Physicians, Schoolmasters, or the like. A Person that
devotes himself to the Ministry, must divide himself from all these as his
common Employment and particular Calling. What else can be the meaning of that
Injunction 1 Timothy 4.15. (...). Give thy self wholly to them. (Reading,
Exhortation, etc.) And suitable hereunto was the Practice of the Twelve, Acts
6.4. We will give our selves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the
Word. And that they might not be hindered therein, they appointed a fort of
Persons, commonly called Deacons (though how properly I cannot tell, for the Text
does not call them so) to perform some of that Work which they themselves
performed before. And the Apostle proves this Point by the case of other
Callings, or at least by an Example taken from Soldiers, 2 Timothy 2.4. No Man
that Wars, intangles himself with the Affairs of this Life, that he may please
him who has chosen him to be a Soldier.

Thus also under the Law, the Priests were forbidden to defile themselves for
the Dead, Lev. 21.1. to teach them, and in them all Successive Ministers of
holy things, that they ought so entirely to give themselves to the Service of
God, that they ought to renounce all Expressions of natural Affection, and all
worldly Employments, so far as they are Impediments to the discharge of their
Holy Services. Pool in loc.

Obj. But may some say, notwithstanding this Separation in the Text, Paul after
this, wrought with his hands in a Mechanic Trade, Acts 18.3.

Ans. To this I have several things to reply.

1. He puts this into the Catalogue of his Sufferings, 1 Cor. 4.12.

2. It was only in case of necessity; to minister unto his Necessities, Acts
20.34.

3. He did not make a common Practice of it. You never read he did so at any
other time.

4. Those that have His Gifts and extraordinary Abilities, may do so too, if
there be occasion for it.

5. It was the Custom of the Jewish Nation, to set their Children to learn some
Trade; yea, though they were Students, (as I could show by diverse passages out of
the Talmud) and accordingly, though Paul's Education was ingenuous, in Learning
at the feet of Gamaliel, yet it seems he learned this Mechanic Trade of
Tentmaking, and so upon the occasion forementioned, makes use of it. But one
Swallow makes no Summer: One Exception does rather establish, confirm and
strengthen the general Rule, than weaken it. This then is a general Rule, that
a Minister's Work is a separate Work from all worldly Affairs and Employments.

And therefore I cannot approve of their Practice, who join other Employments
with the Ministry ordinarily; whether it be any thing that is nearer of kin to
it, so has a tendency thereto; as matters of Learning; or more remote. I cannot
see how they can consist together, but that one must needs josle, and be a
hindrance to the other. As no Man can serve two Masters, because he will cleave
to the one, and despise the other; so neither can any Man be of two Vocations
so vastly different; for doubtless he will neglect either the one or the other;
or at least, not be so entirely devoted to the one as he ought to be. How can a
Man be said, (...), when he plunges himself over head and ears in other Affairs
and Businesses. Whatsoever a Man does in any Employment, he should do it with
all his might, ( Eccl. 9.10.) but all his might cannot be laid out about two
things at once so different. The whole Stream cannot run in two distinct
Channels. The Work of a Minister is compared to that of a Plowman, Luke 9.62.
and as he that looks back is unfit for the Kingdom of God; so he that looks
aside, or looks off, is like to make but ill-favored Work on it. A Plowman
should not Plow with an Ox and an Ass together, Deuteronomy. 22.20. nor mingle diverse
sorts of Seed, Lev. 19.19.

This is the ordinary standing Rule. What may be done in cases of Necessity,
when either the People fail of their Duty, in affording their Minister a
competent comfortable Livelihood, or in Times of Persecution, I say not: Only
this I say, That Necessity should not be pretended where there is none, nor in a
greater degree than is real. Thus much for the first General, That the Work of
the Ministry is a Separate Work.

20. Secondly, A Call from God is not sufficient of it self to invest a Person
into the Office of the Ministry, but he must be solemnly set apart by Man
also. Nothing can be plainer than this out of these words, I have called them,
says the Holy Ghost, to such a work, but do you separate them. Whatsoever a
Call from God is, or wherein soever it does consist, yet that is not sufficient
of it self. Could not the Holy Ghost here as well have separated them to, and
set them about their Work, as called them to it? Could not he as well have said
to Barnabas and Saul, Go about such a Work; and that in the same way as he said
to these Prophets and Teachers, Separate me Barnabas and Saul? Yes, certainly
he could. But he will honor his own Institutions, and maintain the Credit and
Authority of his Officers; for which reason he sends Cornelius to Peter to be
instructed by him, Acts 10.5. and he sends Ananias to Saul, to tell him what he
should do, Acts 9.11.

O how Happy would it be for the Church, if all that take upon them this Work
of the Ministry, could but show a good Call from God, though they had no (...),
no Separation or Ordination by Man: But instead of this, some allege their
Gifts and Abilities; others make use of the Election or Call of the People for
their Warrant; but neither of these have any Foundation in Scripture, as the
next Head will evince: But this Head relates only to the Negative part, That a
Call from God alone is not sufficient to make a Man a complete Minister. It was
not so then, much less is it so now, when immediate Revelations and
Inspirations are ceased, and therefore none that I know of now-a days do
pretend to an immediate Call. This is the Second.

30. Thirdly, Officers in the Church have Authority from Christ to set apart
others. You see by what steps I proceed: (1) Ministers must be set apart. (2) A
Call from God is not sufficient without a Separation by Man. (3) This
Separation must be performed by Church Officers, who are authorized by Christ
hereunto. Those that the Holy Ghost here gives this Command unto, were the
Prophets and Teachers of the Church at Antioch, v. 1.

And here I meet with Adversaries on both hands; the Prelatists on the one
hand, and some Independents and Anabaptists on the other. The former plead for
and insist upon something more, viz. That Ordination must be performed by
Officers of a Superior Order or Degree to those in the Text: The latter allow
of and are content with something less.

1. For the first of these, It is one of the grand Controversies of our Age,
between the Presbyterians and Prelatists, Whether this Separation, or
Ordination, must be performed by Bishops, or may be performed by Presbyters; so
as that it should be of no force, except a Bishop have a hand in it. That it
should be done by Scripture-bishops, i.e. Presbyters, I willingly grant: But
the Necessity of the Concurrence of a Diocesan Bishop, is that which we deny:
So that the great Question is this, Whether it be absolutely necessary to the
firm and sufficient Ordination of a Minister, that it be performed by the
Concurrence, Consent, Assistance and Approbation of a Diocesan Bishop? or,
Whether Ordination performed by a company of Presbyters, be not Valid, Firm and
Sufficient, though there be no Diocesan Bishop among them? Some high Churchmen
hold the former, That the Concurrence of a Diocesan Bishop is absolutely
necessary; and thereby Unchurch most of the Reformed Churches to gratify the
Church of Rome. And hereupon, at that notable Revolution upon the Restoration
of King Charles II. our Bishops would have all those to be re-ordain'd, that
were ordaia'd by Presbyters, during the absence of the Bishops, or else not to
be owned for Ministers, nor capable of any Ecclesiastical Employment or
Preferment.

But that Ordination, performed only by a company of Presbyters, without a
Diocesan Bishop, is firm and sufficient, I shall prove by Scripture, which is
the only Rule we profess to walk by, and therefore sufficient for our purpose.
My Scripture Proof is twofold, by Example, and by Argument.

(1) We have Scripture-Examples of Ordination performed by Presbyters alone
viz. (1) This of my Text, where you may observe, both the Work that was done;
It was Ordination, performed by Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition of hands,
whereby Barnabas and Saul were separated and set apart for their Ministerial
Employment: And if this be not Ordination, what is? Here is certainly all that
is required thereto, if we take our measures either from Scripture or all
Antiquity, (bating the Preparatives thereto, which are not of this
Consideration*) Though some make Ordination less (as we shall hear anon) yet none
make it more.

Observe also the Persons that did this Work of Ordination; who they were that
were commanded by the Holy Ghost to ordain Barnabas and Saul; why, they were
the Prophets and Teachers here at Antioch, v. 1. i.e. Such as did not only
instruct the People, and expound the Scriptures, but had also the Prophetic
Spirit, and were partakers of Revelations, says Dr. Lightfoot, Harmony of the
New Testament, p. 93. These then, though endued with a Spirit of Prophecy, as was
both usual and necessary in those times, were the ordinary Pastors and Teachers
of the Church, as the Apostle joins them together, Ephesians. 4.11. which were no
other than Presbyters.

Here then Presbyters do perform this Work of Ordination, and that by the
particular Direction and Command of the Holy Ghost, and therefore they have
power to ordain, and their Ordination is Valid and Sufficient. (2) Another
instance is of Timothy, who was ordained by the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14.
Neglect not the Gift that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, with
the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. Not of the Office (as some would
shift it off; for the Office has no hands; and besides the Office is (...), not
(...)) but of Persons in that Office. What can be more express than this? True,
Paul joined with them (2 Timothy 1.6.) as one of the Ordainers, which he would never
have done, if they had not had Authority to do what they did.

2. I prove it by this Scripture-Argument, or Reason, because Presbyters are
Scripture-Bishops: That Scripture-Bishops may ordain, I think is questioned by
none: But Presbyters are Scripture-Bishops. This is generally granted both by
Pretestants and Papists (except a few high Churchmen of late) that the words
[Bishop] and [Presbyter] are used promiscuously in Scripture for the same
Persons, or Persons in the same Office. Convenit inter omnes in Apostolorum
aetate inter Episcopos and Presbyteros nullum discrimen fuisse, says Cassand.
Consult. Art. 14. It is agreed among all, that in the Apostles times there was
no difference between Bishops and Presbyters. Apud veteres iidem Episcopi and
Presbyteri fuerunt. says P. Lombard. With the Ancients, Bishops and Presbyters
were the same. I could add more to the same purpose.

But that you may not take it upon trust, but may see with your own Eyes, I
shall make it plain to you by comparing two or three places of Scripture
together. Look into Acts 20.17, 18. From Miletus he sent to Ephesus and called
the Elders (or Presbyters) of the Church and when they were come to him, he
said unto them. These then are the Persons to whom he speaks, the Presbyters:
Now look into v. 28. and there he tells them, That the Holy Ghost has made them
Overseers, (...) Bishops. These Presbyters were Bishops. Again, Look into Tit.
1.5. I left thee in Crete to ordain Elders (Presbyters) in every City. Then v.
7. For a Bishop must he blameless; Ex hoc loco manifestum, eosdem dici and
suisse Episcopos, qui dicebantur and erant Presbyteri, alias nulla foret in
Textu Apostolico connectio, quam tamen particula (...) [(...)] diserte ponit.
Quae enim (...) haec foret, Illi constituendi sunt Fresbyteri qui sunt sine
crimine, quia Episcopum (cujus Officium, potestas, Jurisdictio and gradus
differt a Presbyterio) oportet esse sine crimine? Ger. de Min. Eccles. From
this place it is manifest, that the same Persons were both called and were
Bishops, who were called and were Presbyters: Otherwise there would be no
Connection in the Apostles Discourse; which yet the causal Particle [for]
expressly asserts. For what coherence would this be, They are to be made
Presbyters who are blameless, because a Bishop (whose Office, Power,
Jurisdiction and Degree, is different from that of a Presbyter) ought to be
blameless?
whom he calls Presbyters in one place, he calls Bishops in the other.

Once more, 1 Pet. 5, 1. The Elders which are among you. I exhort -- v. 2. Feed
the Flock of God -- taking the oversight of them. (...), Bishoping it, or
playing the Bishops. Presbyters were made Overseers or Bishops by the Holy
Ghost in the Acts: Treating of the Ordination of Presbyters, he lays down the
Qualifications of Bishops, in Titus: the Elders or Presbyters are commanded to
exercise the Office of a Bishop in Peter; Therefore Presbyters are
Scripture-Bishops, and consequently may ordain; or, Ordination performed by
them is Firm and Sufficient.

And here I might content my self with this Proof, it being sufficient for us,
that we have Scripture-warrant for what we do. But because Antiquity is so much
insisted upon by some in this case (as King Charles the First asked Archb.
Usher in the Isle of Wight, Where he found in Antiquity, That Presbyters alone
ordained any?) therefore I shall not decline dealing with them at this Weapon;
but shall join Issue with them upon this Point also; wherein I shall only
produce the Judgment and Testimony of two famous Bishops, the most Learned of
this Age.

The first is a Passage of the renowned Archb. Usher, as it is related by Mr.
Baxter, both in his Life, p. 206. and in his Disput. of Church Government, p.
216. The passage is this, I asked him (Archb. Usher) his Judgment about the
Validity of Presbyterian Ordination; which he asserted; and told me, That the
King asked him at the Isle of Wight, Where ever he found in Antiquity, that
Presbyters alone ordained any? And that he answered, I can show your Majesty
more; even where Presbyters alone successively ordained Bishops, and instanced
in Jerome's words, Epist. ad Evagr. of the Presbyters of Alexandria, choosing
and making their own Bishops, from the days of Mark till Heraclas and Dionysius.

The other is of Bishop Stillingfleet, who proves, by several Instances, that
Presbyters had the intrinsic power of Ordination, but only that it was
restrained by Ecclesiastical Laws: and that after Episcopal Government was
settled, yet Ordination by Presbyters was looked on as valid, Iren. p. 379, etc.
and then in another place, p. 273. he quotes that very passage of Jerome, which
A. Bish. Usher had done, Nam and Alexandria a Marco Evangelista usque ad
Heraclam and Dionysium Episcopos, Presbyteri semper unum ex se electum in
excelsiori gradu collocatum, Episcopum nominabant, quomodo si exercitus
Imperatorem faciat; aut Diaconi eligant de se quem industrium noverint, and
Archidiaconum vocent. Ep. 85. ad Evagr. At Alexandria, from Mark the Evangelist
to Heraclas and Dionysius, Bishops, the Presbyters having chosen one of
themselves, and set him in a higher station, called him a Bishop: as if an Army
should choose an Emperor; or a Company of Deacons, should choose one of
themselves, whom they know to be very diligent, and should call him Archdeacon.
Which Testimony he vindicates from several exceptions that were made against it.

This then may justify our practice this day against all Gainsayers; that we
who are Presbyters, and have no Diocesan Bishop among us, yet undertake to
perform this work of Ordination; since, as you have seen, we have good ground
and warrant for it, both from Scripture, and from Antiquity. To which might be
added the Consent of all Reformed Churches: but that I must hasten.

Hence also we may see the intolerable Usurpation of those who would not allow
the Ordination by Presbyters (even in those times, when, either there were no
Bishops, or they durst not be known) to be lawful and sufficient. But do but
observe the partiality of these Men: They that would not allow Ordination by
Presbyters in England, or any other Reformed Church, to be valid, yet would
allow Ordination in the Church of Rome (though their Bishops be so far from
being the true Ministers of Christ, that they are the Slaves and Limbs of
Antichrist; though their Ordination be attended with so many Fopperies and
Superstitious Ceremonies, and though the persons be never so unfit) yet because
one that has the Title of a Bishop has a hand in it, therefore that must be
valid, forsooth, and all others invalid and null. Let a Person Ordained by
Presbyters be never so well qualified, never so faithful in the discharge of
his Office; let another Person, Ordained by a Bishop, be never so defective in
qualifications, let him be never so profane in his Life, yet this Man must
pass for a true Minister, because he has the ineffectual Blessing of a Bishop,
and the other a mere Usurper, and all his Administrations must be null and void
for want of this Ceremony. Owen of Ordination, p. 86.

This plainly shows what Friends such are to the Reformation, how highly they
value the Church of Rome, and what dirt they cast in the face, and upon the
practice of all Reformed Churches.

Thus I have, I hope, pretty well acquitted my self from these Adversaries. But
there are some others, though not so considerable, that I must speak a word
unto; who, instead of this Ordination by Church Officers, set up two things in
its Room, Gifts, and a Call from the People. I shall speak briefly to both.

1. Gifts and Abilities are not sufficient to give a Man a Title to the Office
of the Ministry; it is so in no case whatsoever. There Is no instance in the
World that I can think of, from the King on the Throne to a petty Constable, or
Surveyor of the Highways, or any other thing whatsoever that has the Nature
of an Office in the Commonwealth, that a bare qualification and ability for it
does enable a Man to take upon him the discharge of it. Much less then should
it be so in the Church, where all things should be most regular and orderly, 1
Cor. 14.40. and where the least miscarriage is dangerous, Levit. 10.1. 1 Cor.
11.30. Hence even Christ himself, though filled with Wisdom, when but a Child (
Luke 2.40.) in whom were hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col.
2.3. yet did not thrust himself into the Office of a Priest, till called as
Aaron, as the Apostle observes, Heb. 5.5. Now Aaron had not only a particular
designation and appointment by God to this Office, but was actually put into
it, and settled in it by Moses, Levit. 8. and 9. So Christ was not only called
by an immediate voice from God the Father, Matthew. 3.17 but was Anointed, as it
were, by John the Baptist in his Baptism, and thereby Invested and Installed
into this Office. Wheupon the Apostle lays down this General Rue, Heb. 5.4. No
man takes (viz. legally and duly) (...), any honor or office (whatsoever his
parts and abilities be) but he that is called of God.

And thus much is generally granted by all, except a few self-conceited persons
that think better of themselves than any body else does, and so turn
Self-ordainers. They can scarce be said to be (...), because they have
generally little or no Learning, but however they are (...); they lay hands (I
don't say, violent hands) upon themselves, and so become guilty of a sort of
(...); though not in the worst sense of that word. But, if every Phaeton that
thinks himself able, may be permitted to drive the Chariot of the Sun, no
wonder if the World be set on fire, says Mr. Vines. Well then, Gifts will not
serve turn.

2. Neither has the Election of the People any more power, virtue or efficacy
in it to make a Man a Minister. No Authority can be derived from them; for
Nihil dat quod non habet. All their Interest about a Minister consists only in
making choice of such a Person for the Exercise of his Ministry among 'em;
which is quite a distinct thing from Ordination, or making a Man to be a
Minister in General, or confering the Office of a Minister upon him. This
appears plainly by that place, Act. 6.2, 3. The Twelve called the multitude of
the disciples to 'em, and said, Look you out among you seven Men of honest
report, whom we my appoint over this business. They were only to look out, no
nominate, to fix upon the Persons who were fit for such an Employment, and then
the Apostles were to appoint 'em: (...). The word frequently signifies to
authorize, or invest with authority; as Matthew. 24.45, 47. and 25.23. Act. 7.10,
27, 35. and is translated to Ordain, Tit. 1.5. I left thee in Crete, that thou
should -- Ordain Elders in every City. This the Apostles reserved to
themselves, as belonging to them; to appoint, ordain, authorize. Only
Nomination and Election was the Disciples work, Ordination was the Apostles.
And mark it, this work that they were here Ordained unto, was a work of an
inferior nature to the Ministry, viz. Serving of Tables, v. 2. Now if they
might not take upon 'em, without the special Investiture and Admission of the
Apostles, much less might they have undertaken the work of the Ministry without
it. It Is without all warrant from Scripture that the People should make a
Minister. There Is neither Precept, nor President for it in all the N. T. We
read of Ordination by Apostles, Acts 6.3. and 14.23. by Prophets and Teachers;
in my Text, by Evangelists, Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 5.22. and by Presbyters, 1 Timothy
4.14. but for Ordination by the People, we meet not at all with it: and
therefore it is observable, that all that is written in any of the Epistles
about Ordination, is in those to Timothy and Titus, who were Officers; in the
others, which were written to the Churches, there is no mention made of these
things; which is a convincing proof that the work of Ordination is a work
belonging to Ministers, and not to the People, say the London-Divines.

See this Point largely handled in Jus Div. Min. Evang. part 1. c. 9.

Thus, I hope, I have kept my ground, and defended my Position from all attacks
made upon it, either on the right hand, or on the left, That Officers in the
Church, and they only, have Authority from Christ to set apart others for the
work of the Ministry.

3. Now I proceed to the last Head of Discourse, concerning the Manner of this
Separation, or Ordination, that it must be done by Fasting, Prayer, and
Imposition of Hands.

That Fasting and Prayer must be used upon this occasion, is granted by all.
There can be no question made of it. The weightiness of the work requires it.
All the doubt is concerning Imposition of hands. Therefore to clear that, I
shall show as briefly as I can, (1) The Original, (2) The Necessity. (3) The
Use of it in this case, (4.) Whose hands are to be Imposed.

1. For the Original of this Rite or Ceremony, it was used upon several
occasions. Those that belong not to our present purpose I shall pass by.

The first place where it was used for a setting apart, or Ordaining to an
Office, is Number. 8.10. Thou shall bring the Levites before the Lord, and the
children of Israel shall put their hands upon the Levites, and then v. 14. Thus
shall thou separate the Levites from among the children of Israel. Here was a
Separation for a particular Employment: and this was directed to be done by the
children of Israel: which cannot possibly be meant of the whole Congregation
(that was impracticable) and therefore must be understood only of some of 'em:
but then the question is, Who these [some] were that were commanded to impose
their hands on 'em: and here Interpreters are divided. Some understand 'em of
the Princes and Chiefs of each Tribe, who by this Ceremony signified their
entire resignation and dedication of them to God's Service. This Sense Mr. Pool
prefers as the best: But I rather think it must be meant of the Firstborn (who
supplied the place of the Priests before) in whose stead the Levites were
taken, v. 16-18. For they (the Levites) are wholly given unto me from among the
Children of Israel: instead of such as open every Womb, even instead of the
Firstborn of all the Children of Israel have I taken them unto me. For all the
Firstborn of the Children of Israel are mine, both of Man and Beast: on the
day that I smote every Firstborn in the Land of Egypt, I sanctified them for
my self. And I have taken the Levites for all the Firstborn of the Children of
Israel. Whence it seems much more likely to me, that these were the Persons
that laid their hands on the Heads of the Levites, than the Princes or any
other, even as he that brought a Burnt-offering, was to put his hand upon the
head of it, Lv. 1.4. to note, his laying his Sins upon it, and offering it up
in his own stead So here, The Levites being taken instead of the Firstborn, To
whom did it more properly belong to lay their hands on them, than to the
Firstborn?

This is the first Example of this kind; after which it was commonly made use
of in setting apart to any Sacred Function.

2. The Necessity of Imposition of Hands in Ordination, I prove by these
Arguments.

(1) Because all Scripture Examples of Ordination were performed with this
Ceremony, and none without it. None is, or can be produced. We have
Scripture-warrant for it, but none for the neglect of it: Therefore to those
that profess to walk by Scripture-Rule, this should be sufficient. As we must
not add to Scripture-Institutions by our own Inventions, so neither must we
detract, or take from Scripture, by neglecting any thing we have
Scripture-warrant for.

Nay more than this,

(2) We have an express Command for it, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no
Man, where the Negative includes the Affirmative. As it forbids the denying of
it rashly and unadvisedly, so it enjoins the doing of it considerately and
deliberately.

(3) Because the special Nature of Ordination does consist in this Ceremony; as
appears, Because the Spirit of God in Scripture expresses the whole Work of
Ordination, by this one Act of Imposition of Hands; as in the place last
quoted, and 1 Timothy 4.14. Yea not only so, but the whole Work of the Ministry is
couched under this Expression, Heb. 6.2. as the most judicious and solid
Interpreters do understand it.

By all which the Necessity hereof appears in this case. And yet it is well
known that some Persons, though sometimes they will admit of it, yet lay no
stress upon it; don't count it a necessary part of Ordination, but think it may
be as valid without it as with it; and accordingly do frequently omit it. From
whence we may take notice of the unevenness of some Men's Consciences, or of
their Practice at least; which is like Indentures, sometimes up, sometimes
down. They require positive signs of Grace in those they admit to be Members:
They insist upon a Church Covenant to be ent'red into by them: They admit
Ordination by the People; which things have no Foundation in Scripture. On the
other side, they reject, or at least, neglect Imposition of hands in
Ordination, though there be such plain Scripture-warrant for it, as you have seen.

3. The next thing to be spoken unto, is the Use of this Ceremony. It serves
for diverse Ends.

(1) To convey unto, and bestow upon, the Person receiving it the Office of a
Presbyter. This is the principal Use of it. So it was with Barnabas and Saul in
the Text; they were hereby separated to the Work of the Ministry among the
Gentiles. So it was with Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not the Gift that is in
thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery. By [Gift] here, the The Greek word (...) is often taken, not only
for the Grace by which we are fitted for an Office, but for an Office to which
Men through Grace are fitted.
Office of the Ministry is generally understood: This was given, or conveyed
to him by Imposition of hands.

(2) It serves to design the particular Person that is set apart for this
Office. While Prayer is only made for this purpose, possibly many Persons in
the Congregation may not know who it is particularly that is meant, but when
hands come to be laid upon him, or them, then every one sees who it is.

(3) Thereby the Person is dedicated, consecrated, and offered up to the Lord
and his Service; as it was used in the Old Testament for this End, Numb. 8.10,
etc.

(4) It Is used as an Authoritative and Ministerial Benediction of the Person
ordained; as it was used by Jacob, Genesis 48.14. and by Christ in his Blessing
and Praying over the little Children, Matt. 9.15.

4. Whose Hands are to be imposed? Not the Hands of any of the People; which
some In such Churches where there are no Elders, Imposition of Hands may be
performed by some of the Brethren chosen by the Church thereunto. Platform of
Church Discipline, c. 9.
allow of when there are no Elders or Presbyters to be had: But that is a case
scarce to be supposed, and therefore nothing follows upon it. Certainly such
may be had somewhere or other. There is no warrant at all in Scripture, for any
to lay on Hands in Ordination, but Church Officers. Nothing like a Proof is
alleged, but only that place, Numb. 8.10. but that must needs be meant of the
Firstborn, who were the Priests in each Family; as I showed even now. No;
these have no power to do it: It must be done by Church Officers: So it was
herein the Text, and so in all other places where it is mentioned; as I proved
before.

Thus I have both asserted and maintained, the Lawfulness and Warrantableness,
the Validity and Sufficiency of our Practice this day, and also vindicated it
from the Cavils and Exceptions of Adversaries on either hand; so that I hope
you are all fully satisfied, that we don't take more upon us, than we have good
ground in Scripture for: That we don't remove any ancient Landmarks: That we
don't (...), Entrench upon the Rights of others, but keep within the Bounds God
has fixed and prescribed to us, and so may lawfully proceed to the Work that
further remains to be done by us.

The Exhortation.
BEloved in our Lord! I begin the concluding part of the Solemn Work of this
day, with the words of the Apostle, Heb. 13.22. I beseech you Brethren, suffer
the word of Exhortation; which I shall direct, first to you, who have been
solemnly set apart to the Office and Work of the Ministry, by the laying on of
the Hands of the Presbytery, accompanied with Fasting, Prayer and Blessing; and
then to you the People.

That which now, Sir, I am to entertain you with, is, That you would seriously
consider the Greatness of your Office and Work: How weighty your Calling is,
above all others, which has so near a relation to the Purpose of the Father,
the Purchase of his Son, and the Charge of the Holy Spirit. To you is committed
the Word of Reconciliation; your God has counted you Faithful, put you into
the Ministry, and entrusted you with what highly concerns his own Glory, and
the Everlasting Happiness of Precious Souls. Oh take heed to your self, and to
all the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made you Bishop, to feed the
Church of God, which he has purchased with his own Blood, Acts 20.28.

Your principal Work is, to Preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.17. Ministerially to
reveal the Will of God to his Church, Soundly to Interpret, Expound and Apply
the Scriptures to their Edification, and especially to Preach Christ to them.
This is most Profitable both for them and your self; This is most Weelcome and
Comfortable, and the readiest way to break their Hearts, Ephesians. 3.17, 18. Luther
at his Death thus Prayed, Thee, O Christ, have I known, Thee have I loved, Thee
have I taught, Thee have I trusted, and now into thy hands do I commend my
Spirit. The Name of Christ in a Sermon, makes the Preaching Sweetest. You are
not to be a legal Preacher, to preach Salvation by keeping of the Law; yet you
are to preach the Law a Rule of Obedience, as a means to discover Sin, and
convince Men of their Misery out of Christ, as a Schoolmaster to draw to
Christ, Gal. 3.24. Which is God's ordinary way to prepare to the receiving of
Christ. So preach the Law, that you may preach the Gospel, for that Preaching
is best which drives to Christ; and he is the best Preacher, not that tickles
the Ear, but breaks the Heart to seek after Christ, the Physician of Souls.

Labor to preach with all Plainness and Perspicuity to the meanest, set off
your good Notions in the most obvious plain Expressions. The greatest Learning
is seen in the greatest Plainness. The Learned Dr. Preston did spread his Net
that he might catch the Fish. Non Rhetorice, sed Apostolice, non quanta
Eloquentia, sed Evidentia, says Austin, Clearness and Perspicuity is the Grace
of Speech; painted Glass-windows hinder the Light. The Persian Roses were
marred with the Sweetness of Perfumes. An Iron Key will unlock, where a Wedge
of Gold will not; the Foolishness of Preaching, though not Foolish Preaching
Saves. The Walls of Jericho were thrown down, not by golden Trumpets, but
Ramshorns. Moses's Brazen Serpent cured, when Aaron's golden Calf brought
Death. Stars give Light, when Clouds darken. Plate and Silver Spoons in a
Country Fair, are only gazed on, and scarce cheapen'd, when wooden Spoons are
bought. That Glass is best, not which is curiously wrought, but shows the
truest Face; Good Corn is more eligible than gay Weeds. Naked Truth is most
beautiful, she needs not outward adorning to make her amiable; and if she
appears in finer Clothes, it is more for Modesty than Gaudiness. Mingle not
your Water with God's Wine; stuff not the Sincere Milk with the Mocks and Hairs
of your Fancy. Those Flowers are best and sweetest that grow in the Garden, not
in the Wilderness. Christ taught his Disciples as they were able to hear and
bear. Drive according to the Pace of your People. It is the greatest Art to
make dark things plain. Study rather (...) than (...), to approve your self a
Divine, than an Artist: Soar not aloft to work a vain Admiration in the
ignorant Hearers. Prefer a careless Plainness before an elaborate affected
Quaintness. Yet let not your Expressions be undecent, unseemly, or undigested.
Est aliqua frondium Gloria, the Leaves give some beauty to the Trees. Aaron's
Bells were golden, sounding pleasantly. A nasty Candlestick is unsuitable to a
bright Taper, and unhandsome Clothes do not become a fair Body. Truth loves to
be plain, but not Sluttish. Neither would I have your Sermons to be like empty
Tracts, that have a Flood of Words, and a Drop of Matter. Multa loquantur and
nihil dicunt. Some speak much and say nothing, because little or nothing to the
purpose. I am against the Abuse, not the use of Humane Authors, Tongues, Arts
and Sciences, these are Keys to unlock the Scriptures. Competent Learning is
requisite in a Minister, a blind Seer is a Solecism. A Minister ought to have
Skill in the Originals, that he may not see only with other Men's Eyes* nor take
all upon report and trust, John 4.42. yet Tongues without Arts and Sciences,
are but empty Vessels, mere sounds. But especially a Minister should be mighty
in the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. these are the Fountains, and the Foundation
you must build upon. There is more Light in the Sun than in the Stars, more
Water in the Fountain than in the Streams, more Honey in a Barrel of Honey,
than in a few scattered Flowers; and it is good digging for Gold in the Mines
of Gold. In Preaching, deliver the whole revealed Will of God, Acts 20.27. and
nothing but his Will, 1 Cor. 11.23. receive what you deliver, and deliver what
you receive, especially concerning the Way and Means of Salvation by Christ,
and Christ alone, 1 Timothy 6.3. 2 Timothy 1.13. Tit. 2.7, 8. Affect not Novelty, too
many False Opinions have insinuated themselves, by the use of Suspicious
Phrases, and the Affectation of new Light and new Language, has in these days
greatly destroyed Practical Godliness, and the Power of Religion. Some render 1 Timothy 6 20. (...).

Be Affectionate and Cordial, let the Truths you deliver, proceed from an Heart
experimentally acquainted with them. That Sermon which is feelingly Preached is
most likely to be effectual. Quod procedit a cord, redit in Cor. When you have
once affected your self, you are in a fair way to affect others. Be you, as
John Baptist, a Burning and Shining Light, first burn inwardly, then shine
outwardly in your Doctrine, and so yon you will speak in the Evidence and
Demonstration of the Spirit and Power.

Be faithful, Jer. 23.28. Call not evil good, nor good evil, neither make the
heart of the righteous sad, nor strengthen the hands of the wicked. Suppress
not, omit not any needful truths, or reproofs, out of fear or favor, Preach
not pleasing things out of flattery, or desire to get favor. This undoes the
Souls of people, especially at their Deaths, and this sin will lie heavy on the
Minister's Conscience when he lies a dying. Speak the word with boldness, Acts
4.29. Be zealous with intention of affection and speech. Cry aloud, spare not,
etc. save them with fear, pull them out of the fire. Fire sat upon the Tongues
of the Disciples when the Holy Ghost came upon them. And Isaiah's Tongue,
touched by an Angel, was not dipped in water, but tipped with fire, and fire came
out of the Mouths of the Two Witnesses. Be not the Sugar and Honey, but Salt of
the Word. There is need of this Fire to heat, of this Hammar to break, of this
Sword to fetch blood, considering the coldness, stoniness, and hardness of
peoples hearts. He is the best Chyrurgion, or Physician, not that puts his
Patient to least pain, but that cures and heals. Yet zeal and love may stand
together, for zeal is the blood and spirits of love. Mingle not your own
passions with your zeal, vent them not to disgrace others, or ease your own
Stomach. Mingle not strange fire with God's fire. That (...) complained of,
James 3.14. becomes not a Minister who should be gentle among his People, 1
These. 2.7, 11. Come with love in your heart, and use expressions of love in
your specches. The Be carries Honey in her mouth, as well as a sting about
her. Passion may raise the blood, but compassion will turn the bowels. Pills
wrapped in Sugar go the better down, and Nails dipped in Oil drive the easier,
Luke 19.41, 42. Weeping tears are the blood and spirits of Love, and those
having glazed his eyes, the bowels of Compassions that lay at his heart
affected with their misery were seen as in so many Looking-glasses. Every Dish
is sprinkled with Salt, yet something else besides Salt is set upon the Table.
Wisely put a difference between persons and persons in your Reproofs, as also
between sinners and sinners; such as sin of weakness, restore with a spirit of
meekness; and such as sin of wilfulness rebuke sharply, (...), cuttingly;
secret sins reprove secretly, and more open, rebuke more openly; yet so, as (if
you can) to hide the Person, and discover only his sin; aiming not at his
Defamation, but Reformation: reprove sin in all, but personate none: show your
zeal against the sin, yet manifest your love to the Person.

In Preaching, aim not only at your own glory, applause or credit; as you are a
friend of, so you must sue for the Bridegroom, not your self, 2 Cor. 4.5. John
3.29, 30. Pride is a sin that sticks close to the best. A Vessel is easily
emptied of Water, but not of Air; the better parts and gifts are, and
performances come off, the more subject to be proud of them. The finest Cloth
is most subject to Moths, and with sweetest Flowers Men are soonest Perfumed.
Remember that Honey, though sweet, was not offered in Sacrifice, because it would
bubble up. The better your Sermons are, and the more pains you take, if you are
proud of them, the greater is your sin, because you rob God of the more Glory,
and you take great pains to purchase great misery. Approbation may be the
result of your work, and with this the Lord crown your Labors, and encourage
your faithfulness, yet this is not to be your primary intention, or ultimate
end, which is too often the sin of young Divines. Trust God with your Credit,
Name, etc. and seek his Glory, and carry on the interest of Souls, and he will
honor you here so far as he sees good for you, and eternally in Heaven.

You are also to Chatechise the young among your People diligently, to Instruct
the Babes, and faithfully to Teach the Simple. It is your duty plainly and
briefly to handle the Fundamental Points of Religion by way of Catechism to the
Ignorant, this will much facilitate Religion to them, when they see the
beginning and end of Divine Truths. Lay a Foundation before you begin to Build,
this is the noblest and hardest work, fit for a Master Builder, and makes a
well-grounded People; Vessels seasoned with the Water of Life, may retain the
savor thereof till old Age.

Both the Sacraments of the New Testament are to be Administered by you. As to
the Lord's Supper, be tender, and walk according to Gospel-rule, that you be
not partaker of other Men's sins, nor pollute that Sacred Ordinance, by giving
it to the grossly ignorant, scandalous or profane.

As a faithful Shepherd often visit your Flock, that you may know their states,
how things stand between God and their Souls, and give them suitable, savoury,
and profitable Advices. Woe to all Careless Non-residents, by their absence
from, or negligence when present among their People.

You have, Sir, given a good account of your Learning and Sufficiency, yet let
me tell you, that you are still to give attendance to Reading, to meditate on
these things, and give your self wholly to them, that your profiting may appear
to all Men, 1 Timothy 4.15. Your Time and Parts are not your own, but, under God,
your Peoples, and to be employed for their profit. Believe it, you will find your
layings-out will be considerable, therefore your layings-in had need be
answerable. Make use of your own Understanding, neglect not your own Parts, but
labor, by Studying, Reading and Praying hard, that you may be thoroughly
furnished to every good work; content not your self with a few Baskets full of
broken Meat, but strive to be able, on all occasions, to bring forth out of
your Treasury, things both new and old.

Your head and heart must be at work, and both applied to this Implopment. If
you would be Faithful, you must mind the Work of the Ministry; and make it
appear, that both in your Preparation for, and Execution of your Office, you
labor in the Word and Doctrine. You have gotten a Cure, therefore must not
live without care, you are God's Seeds-man to sow the Seed of Eternal Life in
the Hearts of your People, and you must do it in the Morning, and in the
Evening not withold your hand. You are God's Husbandman, and this People are
your Tillage: Redit labor actus in orbem. Your work goes round in a circle,
it is never at an end, Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, no vacation in any. You
are painfully to Labor in your Study for your Public work, to provide as,
David did, for the House of God, even with all your might. The Portion allotted
to the Priest under the Law, was the Breast and Shoulder. God will not bless
your Idleness, but Endeavors, any thing may not serve your turn, wherewith to
fill the hour. God wrought six days for your example, two or three hours on a
Saturday-night will not excuse you. Cursed is he that does the Work of the Lord
negligently. There are some that are offended, and cast an evil Eye upon
diligent Preachers, because their labouriousness condemns their laziness. So
great and difficult is your Work, that even Paul says, who is sufficient for
these things; Austin says, it is Onus angelicis humeris ormindandum. How many
have spent themselves, wasted their Lungs, and Lives in this labourious Work,
the Labor of the Brain and Mind, far exceeding the greatest bodily Labor;
Witness the large Volums of the Fathers and Moderns, which were so many
Monuments of their unwearyed Pains. You must Labor for the Pulpit, and in the
Pulpit, Labor in the Study before you speak, the Labor of Zeal and Love in
speaking; and the Labor of Suffering after speaking, no danger so great as
Spiritual, therefore no care must be so great as Ministerial. Your care must be
for them who do not, and with them who do care for themselves. As much as lies
in you, be ready to Preach the Gospel, be glad to spend, and be spent in this
Service, Work the Work of him that has sent you in the Lord. Be instant, stick
close to the Work, Preach the Word in Season, out of Season, (...), in a good
Season, on the Lord's Day, the particular season appointed for the Preaching of
the Word, and out of Season, at other seasonable times, besides that set-time,
as occasion is offered, taking all opportunities of doing good. Paul exhorts
Timothy to drink a little Wine for his Stomachs sake, but not to Preach but a
little for his Healths sake, surely a Minister cannot be spent better than thus
to wast himself to save the Souls of others. Remember what Austin, Mr. Calvin,
Bp. Jewel and Dr. John Raynolds said of Dying, Praying, or Preaching, etc. Your
work is of Infinite consequence, your time is exceeding short, and precious,
and your Reward is glorious and Eternal. Look, Sir, look on this People, behold
the Souls of many wounded, bleeding, dying, and let your eye affect your Heart!
Did Christ die, and weep and bleed for Souls, and will not you sweat for Souls?
Is it not a fearful thing to be guilty of the Blood of Souls? Will you prefer
your idleness before the Salvation of the Peoples Souls? What pains did Jacob
take in feeding of his Flock of Sheep? He regarded not the heat of the day, nor
the cold of the night nor want of his sleep, Genesis 31. Do not the Prophets
denounce woes against idle and Idol Preachers? Does not Paul say, Woe be to me
if I Preach not the Gospel. Was not the slothful servant that hid his Talent in
a Napkin, condemned? What is your labor and condescension to Christ's, when he
debased himself, is it not your honor to be employed in seeking and laving
these that are lost? How can you think to be saved by the Blood of Christ your
self, if you make light of Souls that are the purchase of his Blood*

Expect, Sir, to meet with many discouragments, and dangers, much hardship and
opposition, Bears and Lions in your way, Storms and Tempests in your Voyages.
But remember you have this day professed a good profession before many
Witnesses, you have Sworn your self a Soldier, yea, Officer of the Lord of
Hosts, you have listed your self in his Muster-roll, entered your Name as a
Volunteer, and promised to Live and Die in his Quarrel: Oh, resolve rather to
Die with, than to deny him; fly not from your Colors, forsake not your
Captain, go not out of God's Blessing into the warm Sun, but endure hardship as
a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. Leave not that Service which you have chosen
and liked, as in all things the best; Know that good is your Cause, better is
your Crown and best of all is your Captain, to whom keep close, and he will
bring you off with Triumph, either keep you safe on Earth, or take you safe to
Heaven.

Like a good Shepherd show your Flock a good Example, 1 Pet. 5.3. Lead it as
they in the Eastern Countries, who drove not their Flocks before, but the Sheep
followed them. Let your Life and Doctrine go together, and not cross each
other. Say as Gideon to his Soldiers, look on me, and do Likewise. Be a burning
Light in your Sermons, and a shining Light in your Conversation. Join the Bell
of Preaching, and the Pomegranate of Practicing together. Have your Vrim Purity
of Doctrine, and Thummim Sanctity of Life, walk in the right way your self, in
which you are Mercury to direct others. Aaron's sign of being called to the
Priesthood, was a Fruit-bearing Rod. The Cloven Tongues of the Apostles, had,
as it were, Fingers on them to show and teach them, that their Words should be
their Works. It is the note of a bad Man, but mark of a good Minister, Prove.
6.13. to speak with his feet, hence Romans 10.15. How beautiful are the feet of
those that Preach the Gospel of Peace, not only their Tongues, their Speaking,
but their Feet, their walking? and teach with his Fingers. I would not have to
be vox et praeteura nihil, yet tota vox, that your People may see your Voice
acting in your Conversation, and say, as we have heard, so we have seen. You
are an Angel in this respect, because you should have hands under your wings,
and should be as an Angel in your life, in comparison of other Men. But if an
Angel falls, he turns a Devil. You are called a Star, and should be an Ornament
in the Heaven of the Church, but if you are Erratick, they that walk by your
Guidance, will be apt to wander. Oh, then let it be your care to be holy as
Angels, yea, God himself is holy in all manner of Conversation, walk with God
in your Closet, Family, Words and Speeches, be sober and gracious, forgetful of
injuries, slow to Anger, patient in Afflictions, ready to do good to all, but
hurt to none, and a companion of them that fear the Lord. Your conversation is
narrowly looked into, for you are as a City set upon a Hill; a little spot is
soon seen, a little hole is soon spied in your Coat, yea, if there be none,
there are those that will make one if they can. A Wart a Mole, the least
blemish in the face is perspicuous and apparent to all.

You are called to draw near unto God, and, with Moses, to be with God, as it
were, in the Mounts therefore had need be holy, Lev. 10.3. Aaron's Forehead had
Holiness to the Lord written upon it, when he stood before the Lord, and none
could be made a Priest that had any Blemish. Joshua the High Priest was
commanded to put off his filthy Garments before he stood before the Lord.
Unclean hands are not fit to carry God's Ark. How holy had he need be that
draws near to so Holy a God, Isa. 33.14, 15. Alas, who is he to speak to God,
and live? Nay, to speak from God to the People, that they may live?

Would you Preach with Authority, Practice that your self which you Preach to
others. Christ Taught with Authority, and not as the Scribes, because he did
and taught, he Taught by Example as well as Precept, Acts 1.1. Then there is
life in your Doctrine, when there is Doctrine in your life. Suadet loquentis
vita, non oration. Life Oratory is most powerful. But words have little power,
when our lives are contrary. Dicta factis deficientibus erubescant. Words blush
when Deeds fail. Quid verba audiam! cum facta non video. He that lives contrary
to his Preaching, prostitutes his authority, forfeits his own credit, and his
hearers belief of what he Preaches, Romans 2.22, etc. He who lives loosly, has
Jacobs Voice, and Esaus hands, who acts a double part, of a Saint in the
Pulpit, of a Sinner out of it, tempts the People thus justly to argue, if what
he Speaks be true, why does he not practice it? If he lives aright, why does he
not Preach it? A suitable Living and Conversation will gain and uphold the
Credit and Reputation of a Minister and his Preaching. This raises even in
Wicked Men sometimes, a reverent and high esteem of the work of the Ministry,
and of the Person for the Works sake, as in Saul to Samuel, Ahab to Elias,
Joash to Jehoiada, and Herod to John Baptist. An exemplary Life is a good
preservative against Contempt, or at worst a ground of Comfort in it. Whereas
an unsuitable Conversation exposes a Ministers Person and Office to Contempt
and Scorn. Wholesome Meat coming out of a foul Dish is loathed, the wicked Lives
of Eli's Sons, made the People abhor the Offerings of the Lord. The
Lacedaemonians would not receive good Counsel from a debautch Person till the
same was given by one of a grave carriage. Cujus vita despititur, Ejus
predicatio contemnitor, Gregory. Sins of Teachers are teaching Sins. Praecepta
docent, exempla movent. Hence under the Law as great a Sacrifice was offered
for the Sins of the Minister, as of the whole Congregation. Lev. 4.3.

Without this holy exemplary Life, how shall you save your own Souls, and those
that hear you? but while you Preach to others, your self may prove a Castaway;
and it may be truly said of you, what was falsely said of Christ, You saved
others, your selt you could not save: So the Carpenters who built an Ark for
Noah, which saved others, were drowned themselves. So the Sea-mark may rot it
self, which gives others warning to avoid Shipwreck. So Moses brought the
People to the Land of Canaan, but entered not himself. So Sampson's Lion had
Honey in his Belly, which refreshed others, but not himself. Such a Minister's
Sermon to others will witness against himself, and make his Judgment
inexcusable, when his own Mouth shall condemn him, and his own lips bear
witness against him. Take then the Counsel given, 2 Timothy 4.16. I refer you to 1 Timothy 3. -- Tit. 1. So carry your self, that you may have a good report of them
that are without, that your very Adversaries may say, This is a fit Man for
this Sacred Sanction, and may be converted by your example. Let not your Works
give your Words the Lie, but Preach as powerfully by your Life as by your Lips.
Do not only, as Erasmus says, magna loqui, but magna vivere. Live as becomes
the Gospel which you Preach to others. Augustine says, Operum copia egregia est
fandi copia, praeturbeat aliis exemplum, and sit ejus quasi copia dicendi forma
vivendi. He Preaches best who lives best, and exemplifies his Doctrine in his
Life, and Preaches that as profitably in his Conversation, as in the Pulpit. Be
a daily Preacher, having your Life a standing Reproof of sin, and an Argument
of Piety, Luke 24.19. We well approve of what you have told, us that your ends
in the Ministry are, to exalt the Glorious Name of your God in the Conversion,
Edification, and Salvation of Souls; that you seek not your Peoples goods, but
good; not your own profit, but the profit of many, that they might be saved;
and we hope, pray for, and shall rejoice in your success: Let the Lord pour out
a double portion of his Spirit upon you, and by his Blessing so prosper your
Studies, that you may be an able Minister of the New Testament; not of the
flesh, but of the spirit; a Workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of Truth. Yet if in the discharge of your duty, your Labor
should be unfruitful, Mourn in secret for it, water the Word with your Tears.
So did Christ, Luke 19.41. And Peter wept himself before he converted others.
Pray much for success, the Praying Ministers, says Augustine, is more
successful than the Eloquent Orator. Reform your self, perhaps your sin may
hinder the efficacy of the Word, the Seed may not prosper, because sown with a
Leprous hand, Luke 22.32. By no means give over, you are not exempted from
yours, because the People neglect their duty. Be not discouraged, your word may
thrive afterward, you are not to limit God, but do your duty. Better be
unsuccessful then disobedient. The Husbandman does not Sow and Reap in a day.
God, even your God will however accept the sincerity of your obedience and
endeavor the will for the deed; and though you may seem to labor in vain as to
the efficacy, yet you shall not, as to the reward of your Ministry; which is
secured by him who rewards not only Success, but Faithfulness, Isa. 49.4, 5. If
you have Success, set the Grown of Glory on God's Head alone: Know you are but
the Instrument, He is the principal Agent; you are but the Pipe, He is the
Spring whence the Water of Life flows: You do but Sow the Seed, God gives the
Success: Rebecca Cooks the Meat, but Isaac gives the Blessing: Moses hews the
Tables, but God writes the Law: Man carries the Bottle, but God gives the Wine:
Man may speak words, but God gives Grace. In coelo Cathedram habet, qui corda
movet. Si non sit intus qui docet, inanis strepitus noster. Vestrum est docere
and dare operam Dei flectare and dare operationem. Paul can but Plant, Apollos
Waters, it is God that gives the Increase.

In a word, take heed to your self, to your Doctrine, to your Life. Be watchful
in all things, endure Affliction, make full proof of your Ministry, do the Work
of a Faithful Pastor; and the God of all Grace fill you with the Fruits of his
Spirit, that you may feed this People with Knowledge and Understanding, this
Flock, of which you have taken the oversight or Episcopacy. So shall you
receive from the chief Sheepherd, when he comes to Judgment, a full Reward,
even a never-fading Crown of Glory, 1 Pet. 5.2, etc. I close, with that strict
Command, and earnest Adjunction of the Great Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. I charge
thee, before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall Judge the Quick and the
Dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom: Preach the Word, be instant in season,
out of season: Reprove, rebuke, exhort with all Long-suffering and Doctrine.

Exhortation to the People.
HAving told your Minister his Duty, perhaps you may say, What is this to you:
Therefore to make you amends, I shall address my self to you, who by holding up
your Hands, have declared your Consent and Willingness to receive and
acknowledge this our Brother, whom we have ordained, as a Minister of Christ.

As he is to Preach, you are to Hear; his Preaching and your Hearing are
Relatives; there is a Necessity on him to Preach, and on you to Hear; Christ
has ordained him by us to Preach, and we in Christ's Name command you to Hear.
Therefore in the Name and Fear of God, I exhort you to attend on this Ordinance
of God as such, not as an Ordinance of Man; but an Ordinance of God: Go to the
Word, as the Word, and for the Word, so you may comfortably assure your selves
of God's Blessing. God has given Preaching and Hearing a special Efficacy, as
the ordinary means of Knowledge, Grace and Salvation; come then to the Word as
a means of Salvation, be thoroughly convinced that your Salvation is concerned
in the Word; think with your selves, every Sermon you come to near, that you
come to further your Salvation, that your Souls are concerned in this
Ordinance, Isa. 55.3.

Your Minister is confined to one Subject, Christ, and the Gospel of Christ; he
must not know any thing else among you, and you are not to desire to know or
hear any thing else from him.

He is to give attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.13.
and you are to be very attentive to hear him, Luke 19. ult. Acts 8.6. To lay
aside not only Worldly Employments, but Earthly Desires; yea roving Thoughts,
gating Eyes, and unfixed Ears.

He is to propound right ends in his Preaching, and you also to your selves in
your Hearing, even those Ends for which God has appointed his Word to be
Preached, as the Inlightning, Convincing, Quickening, Strengthening and
Comforting of Souls. Come habitually and actually prepared and disposed, with
Prayer and Meditation, considering into whose Presence and Service you come;
put off your Carnal Affections, purge out your Sins and Corruptions, and
compose your outward Man to a decent Becomingness, and holy Reverence; when you
Pray, Sing, or hear. Come in Faith to the Word, with an historical Faith,
believing the Word of God, to be the Word of God, and closing with the Truth of
it in your Assent and Judgment, with a particular applying Faith: Have I an
Interest in this Promise? Does this Threatening belong to me? Does my Assent
incline me to Practice? Your Minister is to Pray in Private and Secret for you,
and so are you for him: He, for your Spiritual Advantage, as Paul bowed his
Knees to God for his Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.14. He is to be your Solicitor at the
Throne of Grace, before an Orator in the Pulpit, and first to breath the
Longings of his Soul in Prayer to God, before he vents the Meditations of it to
you. 1 Samuel 12.28. You are to Pray for him, to beg a Door of utterance for him;
which Prayer is a Key to open, and reveal the Secret Cabinet of God's Will and
Word: Knock then by Prayer at the Gate of Heaven, that God would open his
Mouth, both for inward Gifts and Abilities, and the outward Expression of them,
Ephesians. 6.18, 19. Col. 4.2, 3. 2 Cor. 1.11. Beg a Door of entrance for your
selves, that God would open your Hearts; and not only give you an Eye to see,
but an Heart to embrace the Word, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. Psalm. 119.18. Luke 24.45. Pray
that the Word may have a free passage in his Mouth and your Hearts, God must do
both, Acts 16.14. The Messages that he brings, and the Blessing of his Labors,
is from God; Pray for his Protection, Assistance, and Success in his Work,
which is of great Importance, very hazardous to miscarry in, and most opposed
by Earth and Hell: He that is engaged in this Work, is subject to the like
Infirmities with his Brethren; yea, he is at work for you; for the Service of
your Faith, and your Profit by him, is not a little furthered by your Prayers
for him: Forget not then to commend your Minister to God. He has Authority to
reprove Sin in any of you, and that plainly and boldly, as one having
Authority, Tit. 2.15. Jer. 2.17. It is your Duty to admit and accept of this
part of God's Ordinance, even of the word of Reproof, as well as of Instruction
and Comfort, James 1.21. And if you have Grace, you will take well, and love him
the better, that deals Faithfully with you this way, for surely much of Grace
is seen in giving a Reproof duly, and in taking a Reproof thankfully.

He is to be exemplary in Piety, yet you are not to expect he should be free
from some Frailties, Weaknesses and Infirmities, though he may from Enormities.
He is subject to like Passions with other Men, so was Elias, Paul, etc. The
High Priest himself, who was only to enter into the Holy of Holies, was first
to offer for his own, then for the Sins of the People. Dirt may, but Dust can
hardly be kept from Clothes. The most Godly Minister has his Pillar of Cloud,
as well as of Fire. Is he a Man of God? yet but a Man; yea, none are so clean,
but others may cast Dirt upon them. Clothes brushed and clean, may be dashed
and spotted in dirty Ways by passers by. Some paint Angels black, because they
cannot make them so; this was done to Christ and the Primitive Christians. Thus
it fared with Athanasius, Luther, Calvin, Beza, not to instance in the more
Modern. And alas! hereby the Power of the Ministry is hindered in the Hearts of
the Hearers. Look not for Angelical Perfection in your Minister, nor Censure or
Despise him for the least Infirmity you discern in him, or any that are or may
be near to him; yea, be loath and unwilling to see Infirmities in him, but
rather set your Eyes on God's Ordinance, and the good things that are in him,
and that you receive by him; and make account that he is a Man as well as you,
subject to the same Infirmities that you are.

He is not to show himself Stately, Austere, Churlish, or Strange to any of
you, that shall be willing to make use of him about your Doubts, but to
encourage you to move your Doubts to him: You are not carelessly to pass over
what you hear and understand not, but to seek to know the meaning of it, and to
be resolved, by conferring among your selves; and if you that way receive not
Satisfaction, you are to go to your Minister, your Teacher; and if that will
not ferve, go to Christ by Prayer. You are to put your Minister forward in his
Work and Service; and with Love, Wisdom and due Respect to his Place and
Calling, put him in mind of his Duty. Say to Archippus is Faul's Charge to the
Colossians. But withal you are to encourage him, not only verbally, but really,
allowing him a Competent and Comfortable Maintenance, honoring and respecting
his Place and Calling; whatever his Person deserves, his Calling is honorable
and challenges respect. You, Sir, are to use all good means to gain and
maintain the Credit, Reverence, and Estimation of your Person and Ministry in
the Hearts of your People; and you, Sirs, are to honor your Minister for his
Gifts and Works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. I do not call for the Honor due to
the Magistrate, and Great Ones of the World; but in your Minds and Judgments
you are rightly to esteem of the need you have of God's Ordinance in his
Ministry, and of the inestimable Benefit you receive by it, 1 Cor. 4.1. In your
Affections and Hearts you are to Reverence him; and in your Practice to yield
Obedience to his Doctrine, and be directed by him according to the Word of God.
Your Minister will thankfully resent your Civility, when you show Respect to
his Person. Yet I am to let you know, that this is not all that he looks for,
or can be contented with, but you would glad his very Heart with the Joyful
News of your Repentance, and Acceptance of Jesus Christ. May you accept his
Labors, may your Persons, Ears, Hearts, Lives, entertain the Work of his
Ministry, no Encouragement like this.

To conclude, Do you, Sir, your utmost Endeavor to pursue the Design of your
Office, and the Ends of year Ministerial Gifts and Abilities; as an Ambassador
to Negotiate this Peoples Reconciliation to God; as an Angel, to be a
Ministering Spirit sent forth to Minister for them that shall be Heirs; as a
Builder, to edify this People in Faith and Knowledge; as a Steward, to
distribute what you are entrusted with for the Good of God's Family, the
Household of Faith; as a Nurse, to give out the Sincere Milk of the Word,
whereby the Children of God may grow; as a Star, to shine for the Benefit of
others, especially in this Night of Ignorance and Atheism: This will be your
Comfort both here and hereafter, on a Deathbed when your Conscience shall
testify to the Sincerity of your Desires of Saving Souls, 2 Cor. 1.12. Acts
20.24. 2 Timothy 4.6, 7. and your Reward will be certain and great, Dan. 12.3. you
shall have a Prophet's Reward, one of those three Aureola's mentioned by the
Schoolmen, an additional Accession to the essential Happiness of the Saints.

O ye People, Do you grow and thrive in Grace, let your Minister find the Work
of the Lord to prosper in his hands, and see his Labor, which is not in vain
in the Lord, not to be in vain in your Hearts and Lives: This will be a Credit
to the Gospel, and proclaim to the World that it is more than a mere Notion,
and that there is Power, Virtue and Efficacy in it: This will be the Joy of
Angels, the Advantage and Comfort of your Pastor and Minister in Life, and at
Death; at once a Credit to the Ambassador and his Message, the Preacher and his
Gospel; and be a Testimony and Evidence of the Power of his Preaching: This
would secure and encourage the Increase of his Gifts, when he sees so happy an
Issue of his Prayers and Sermons, of his many restless Nights, and weary Days.
In a word, This would sweeten all his Enjoyments, and be your own Concernment
and Interest.

FINIS.

