XXIX. ARTICLES OF PEACE, Concluded, agreed and signed by the Marquess of
ORMOND, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Commissioner for the KING, AND, The Lord
Viscount MOUNTGARRET, President of the Supreme Council, and Commissioner for
the Irish at the Treaty held at DUBLIN.

Published in DVBLIN by Heralds, and sound of Trumpet, Aug. 1. 1646.

August 22. 1646.

These are the true Copies of the Original Papers that were presented to the
Committee for. Ireland, and are appointed to be forthwith printed and
published.

LONDON, Printed by I. C. 1646.

XXIX. ARTICLES OF PEACE, Concluded, agreed and signed by the Marquess of
Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Commissioner for the KING, and the Lord
Viscount Mountgarret, President of the supreme Council, and Commissioner for
the Irish at the Treaty held at DUBLIN.
IMPRIMIS,

THAT the Professors of the Roman Catholic Religion in the Kingdom of
Ireland, or any of them, be not bound not obliged to take the Oath of
Supremacy expressed in the second of Elize.

II. That a Parliament may be held on or before the last day of November next,
and that these Articles agreed on may be passed, provided that nothing may be
passed to the prejudice of any of his Majesty's Protestant party or adherents.

III. That all Acts, Ordinances, and Orders made by both or either Houses of
Parliament to the blemish and prejudice of his Majesty's Roman Catholic
subjects, or any of them, since the seventh of August, (1641.) shall be vacated
by act of Parliament.

IV. That no Prossesses, Letters Pattents, Grants, Leases, Custodiums, Bonds,
Recognizances, and all Records, Office or Offices, Inquisitions, shall be
removed before the said Parliament, in case it be sooner called then the last
of November; provided that no person or persons shall be questioned by reason
hereof for mean rates or wastes, saving wilful wastes committed after the first
of November, 1645.

V. That all debts do stand in state as they were in the beginning of these
troubles.

VI. That the Plantation in Connaught, Kilkenny and Wickloe, may be revoked by
act of Parliament in the next Sessions.

VII. That the Natives may erect one or more Innes of Court in or near the
City of Dublin, they taking an oath.

VIII. That places of Command of Forts, Castles, Garrisons, Towns, and other
places of importance, and all places of honor and trust, shall be conferred
with equal indifferency, according to their respective merits and abilities.

IX. That 12000. l. Sterling be paid the King yearly for the Court of Wards.

X. No Peer may be capable of more proxesse then two, and no Lords vote in
Parliament unless a Lord Baron be worth 200. l. per annum, Lord Viscount 400.
l. per annum, and an Earl 600. l. per annum, otherwise lose their votes until
the purchase.

XI. That the Council Table shall contain it self within its bounds, and not
meddle with matter betwixt party and party.

XII. That no dependence of the Parliament of Ireland be on the Kingdom of
England.

XIII. That all Acts concerning staple or native Commodities of this Kingdom
shall be repealed except wool, and meal.

XIIII. That no Governor be longer then the pleasure of the Subject, and must
make no Purchase.

XV. An Act of oblivion may be passed without extending to any who will not
except of this peace.

XVI. That no Governor or any other prove Exmers of His Majesty's Customs

XVII. A repealing all monopolies to be passed.

XVIII. Commissioners to be appointed to regulate the Court of Castle Chamber.

XIX. Acts prohibiting plowing by Horses tails, to be repealed.

XX. That course be taken against the dissobedience of the cessation and peace.

XXI. That maritine Causes be determined here without appeal into England.

XXII. That the increase of rents lately raised upon the Commission of
defective titles, be repealed.

XXIII. That all interest of money due by way of debt, morgage, or otherwise,
and not yet satisfied since the 23. of October 1641. to pay no more then 5. l.
per cent.

XXIIII. That the Commissioners have power to determine all Cases within their
now quarters until the perfection of these Articles by Parliament.

XXV, That A. B. C. D. be for the present Commissioners of the Peace Oyer and
Terminer, and Goal delivery in the now quarters of the confiderate Catholics,
with power of Justice of Peace to extend to crimes except they exceed 10. l.

XXVI. That no Cause be sued or pleaded before any Judge, or Justice, or
Commissioners whatsoever then before the Commissioners aforesaid, until a full
settlement.

XXVII. That the said Roman Catholics do continve the possession of such His
Majesty's Cities, Garrisons, Towns, Forts, and Castles within their quarters,
until a setlement by Parliament, the said Forts, and Towns, etc. being
governed by any whom the chief Governor, or Governors shall appoint together
with the consent of the Lord Viscount Mountgarret, Donnough Lord Viscount
Muskery, Sir Daniel O Brian, sir Lucas Dillon, Nicolas Pluncket, Richard
Belling Philip Mae Hugh O Relii, Turlough O Neale, Thomas Fleming, Patrick
Darcy, Garret Fennel, and Jeffrey Brown, Commissioners.

XXVIII. That all his Majesty's Customs and Rents shall grow due at Easter
next, and from thence forth be paiable to his Majesty, notwithstanding the Act
of Oblivion.

XXIX. That the Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer shall have power to hear
and determine all murders, manslaughters, rapes, stealths, burning of houses
and corn in Rick or Stack, robberies, burglaries, forcible Entries, detainers
of possessions, and other offenses committed and done from the 25. September
1643. until the first of the next Parliament, provided that the Commission
continue no longer then the first of the next Parliament.

In witness whereof his Excellency the Marquis of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, his Majesty's Commissioner, to that part of the Articles remaining
with the said Lo: Viscount Mountgarret and Muskery, etc. have put their hands
and Seals. At Dublin in the 21. year of King Charles his Reign.

ORMOND. MOUNTGARRET.

August 1. 1646.
FINIS.

