A Declaration of the Lord BROGHIL, and the Officers of the Army of Ireland in
the Province of Munster.
AS the Freedom of Parliaments is their undoubted Right: so are our utmost
endeavors for restoring them unto, and preserving them in their Freedom, our
undoubted Duty. Our Interest also is involved in our Duty; and if we truly love
that, we cannot decline this; since whosoever enquires into the Foundations of
his own Freedom, his Posterities and his Countries: in a Free and Full
Parliament, as in a common Center, will find them all to meet. And therefore he
that is not free in his Representative, has little reason to hope he shall be
so in his Person or Property. The Theory of this truth has not been more
believed by other Nations, than the Practick of it has been sadly felt by
Ours. For, ever since the first violence which was put upon the Authority of
Parliament in 1648 we have been without Foundation; it having cost us more
Blood and Treasure to maintain confusions, than ever it did cost any former Age
to free it self out of them. For whilst we were fighting for our Properties and
Liberties, we have even almost in our successes lost both; and whilst we
contended for Reformation in Religion, we have almost lost the very Being and
Life of it. More Heresies and Schisms being introduced whilst the highest Light
was pretended to, than ever the darkest times were involved in; and whilst we
seemingly aspired to Perfectness, we actually lost that Charity which is the
Bond of it; becoming thereby a reproach to our selves, and a derision to that
Protestant part of the World, unto which, whilst our Supreme Authority was
inviolated, we were a Bulwark: the Universities and Schools of Learning in our
Nations having been looked more after to poison them, than to keep them sound;
that not only our Streams might be impure, but even our Fountains; many have
been employed to teach, who stood in need to be taught; and the Legal
Maintenance of the Ministry of the Gospel conferred on Men unable, unwilling
or unfit to dispense it, who had less ill deserved a Maintenance for their
Silence, than their Speaking. Never greater Taxes raised for Armies and Fleets,
and never Fleets and Armies more in Arrear. Taxes and Impositions laid, which
past Ages never knew, and many thousand Families of the present have been
beggered by. Powers have made Laws, and subsequent Powers disowned and nulled
what the preceding Powers had Acted: that now the Questions are not so many,
What is the meaning of the Law, as, What is a Law: whereby that is become a
Subject of Debate, which formerly was a Rule for ending of it. All which are
yet inseparable Effects of such a Cause: for whilst an Authority it self is
disputed, their Acts will always be the like; and whilst many are unrepresented
in making of Laws, few will be satisfied to be obliged by them: And what is
Enacted by any but a Full and Free Parliament, will always be Questioned, if
not Repealed, when such an One does sit: nor can it be believed that the Laws
of a Parliament, the very much greater part of whose Members are kept out
without Impeachment or Trial, will ever pass the Test of a Free Parliament;
lest thereby they should encourage others to serve them in like kind.

These sad Miseries, and these certain Truths, made us believe we hazarded more
in submitting to that Force that was so lately over us, than in taking up Arms
to oppose it; and thereby endeavoring the Restoration of the Parliaments
Authority: in which God was pleased so to own the duty of our endeavors, that
in a few days we were not only at unity among our selves, but even able and
willing to offer our assistance to our Brethren in England and Scotland; which
had it been needed, it had been as readily sent as offered. But we must
confess, we could hardly so much as imagine that those Members which had so
recently felt, and justly exclaimed against a Force upon themselves, would when
it was taken off, have denied their Brethren to participate in that right they
saw the three Nations had engaged their All to restore them unto.

If it be a justice to declare for the restoring of some Parliament Members
under a Force, it is a greater justice to appear for the restoring of all that
are under it: yea, as much as the whole is preferrable to a part; so much
greater is the duty of this declaring, than of that.

We were more than hopeful, that when the Cause ceased, the Effect would do the
like; and when the Rebellious part of the Army was broken, those Members would
have been readmitted, which hitherto, we were made believe, were kept out only
by it. The happiness of the now-Members Restoration, and of the suppressing of
those Forces which lately had interrupted them, could not have been greater
than the Honor they would have acquired, in making those other Members, which
had participated with them in their Sufferings, to have also participated in
their Restitution. We were loath by an Address of that nature to have lessened
the beauty of their expected performance, and had rather have enjoyed the Right
and happiness of having this Parliament Full and Free, as the Product of the
Justice of this present House, than as any Effect of Our Solicitations.

When the violence was put upon the Parliament in 1648, we did with much
contentment observe how sollicitous those that sat were to have it taken off,
thereby asserting their Rights, though they were denied the actual enjoyment of
them; which made us the more cheerfully engage our selves to restore those to
the Power of doing Justice, who then manifested they wanted not the Will: It
being a crime too great to enter into our beliefs, That they asked, because
they were sure to be denied; and would approve when they had the power, what
they condemned when they had not the power: which, though then objected against
them by many, we did not then credit, and we wish we never since had cause to
believe. Nor was it unobservable, that though such Members of theirs as have
been lately put out of the House by them, as Sir Hen. Vane and others, were
known to be guilty of joining with that Rebellious part of the Army: yet they
admitted them to sit in the House, till particular Charges were brought in
against every one of them; they heard, and judged by the House. If such be not
the true and ancient manner of proceeding against Members of Parliament, why
was it practiced to those so deeply guilty? and if it be, why is it denied to
others, who have not hitherto appeared to be so? Doubtless such as were kept
out of the House by a Rebellious part of the Army, merited at least as much
favor and justice, as those who joined with it. We do the more deplore such a
Procedure, because from it Pleas have been raised for the like violence acted
on the Members now sitting: and happy are those who condemn not themselves in
the things which they allow.

What more pregnant proof need there be of the want of those worthy Patriots,
so long excluded, who with the earliest stood in the gap for our Liberties and
Properties, than, that Petitioning to the Parliament is now punished as a high
Crime in the People, which at the Parliaments first meeting was declared to be
their undoubted Right? And though a constant experience has taught us, that
the People may lawfully Petition for Repealing an Act of Parliament which is
grievous to them, and therefore much more against a Vote which is so: yet to
our Trouble and Amazement we understand those worthy and eminent persons, who
in obedience to their Countries desires, presented Petitions for the
Restoration of the Excluded Members, an imprisonment in the Tower was their
Answer: That, we again say, which was declared the Right of the People, being
now become their transgression, Is it not high time to declare for that
Justice, which when Petitioned for, is punished?

And because we know the common aspersion to such a Declaration is, That it
savors of a Design of introducing the Common Enemy; We shall here set down some
of those many Grounds which makes us experience, That in the Duty we now engage
in, we are not to be frighted by such words: it may indeed terrify and dare
others; but such who mean what they say, and are satisfied in what they do,
will only pity those who therein believe what they speak, and contemn those who
therein speak what they do not believe. We rather doubt, that if the House be
kept so empty as it is, it will admit the Common Enemy, than the House so
filled: for whilst eight parts of ten of the People are unrepresented, and two
Nations of the three entirely; may not it too probably provoke those People to
join with whoever will promise them their Right, than lie under that power
which has hitherto denied it to them? To keep out most of the Members, that a
few may keep him out; is to do evil that good may come thereof. We love to do
Lawful things, Lawfully.

That the House ought to be fuller than now it is, seems of late to be the
granted Opinion of the Members that now sit in it; and that we conceive can no
way so probably with safety be effected, as by admitting all those who in the
year 1648. and since, were excluded; those being likelyest to take care of our
Safeties and Settlement, by whose Authority our Actings were influenced during
the greatest heat of our Wars; and therefore in Interest as well as Justice
will be most concerned for us. And when such are admitted, there will be no
fear that the necessary Qualifications for those Additional Members to be
futurely elected, to supply the vacancies of delinquent and dead Members, will
be disobeyed, being enacted by so unquestionable an Authority; nor that those
then chosen can be able to over-vote so full a House, were that as much their
design, as it is far from our thoughts to have so unworthy a belief of them.

We believe, under submission, that we have acted and fought against the
pretended King, as long as any others; and therefore ought to apprehend his
coming in, as much as any others: but, through the mercy of God, our Principle
is not to act an Evil our selves, to secure the doubts of some, that our
Supreme Authority else would commit one. We are not to speak nor think evil of
the Rulers of our People; nor out of the fear of an uncertain Ill, to decline a
certain Duty.

If the said Excluded Members be readmitted, they must be either the Greater
or the Lesser Number in the House: If the Lesser, where is the Danger of their
Admission? If the Greater, where is the Justice of their Exclusion? for then it
will appear, that the Minor Number keeps out the Major. And if in the
apprehension, that a Parliament when Full and Free, will abuse their Authority,
it be a received Maxim to keep them from the Exercise of it; a certain
Foundation is laid for all that have the greatest Force, to have also the
greatest Authority; and whoever has strength and this Tenent together, may too
easily be persuaded to believe, that he has as much Right over the Minor part
of a Parliament, as the Minor part has over the Major. Neither can any Act of a
Supreme Authority be so evil, as is the admitting that any but the Supreme
Authority ought practically to judge what is best for the Nations: the One can
be but an ill Act in Governors, but the Other is a destroying of Government.
We do not desire that any of the Secluded Members, if they have offended, may
not be tried: but we humbly desire that they may have a Parliamentary Trial.
And though we much value their Persons, yet we can with as much truth aver, We
ask this for their Cause, not for Them. And had those Members who now sit, been
in the Condition of the Excluded Members, and the Excluded Members in their
Condition, we had as cheerfully appeared for These, as now we do for Those.

And considering that in past Ages, and more particularly since the beginning
of the late horrid Rebellion in Ireland, our Brethren in England have
abundantly manifested a tender and compassionate sense of the Condition of
Ireland; and were careful to relieve us in our lowest Estate, as bone of their
bone, and flesh of their flesh: which we do and shall ever acknowledge with
humble thankfulness; and (as a debt which we well know to be due from us to
them above all people in the world) shall be for ever as tender of their
happiness and welfare, as of our own, which indeed is involved in theirs, and
without whom Ireland cannot be happy: We therefore remaining constant in the
Reasons of our Brethrens Declaration of the 14 of December 1659. for adhering
to the Parliament in defense of its Privileges, and the just Rights and
Liberties of these Nations; all which we see now are apparently more and more
violated by the not-admission of the said Excluded Members, and by not filling
the vacant places, whereby the House might be full; and being freed from force,
might uninterruptedly act according to their Judgments and Consciences toward
re-settling these Nations, which otherwise in all humane probability can never
be restored to Peace and Tranquillity.

We do therefore declare for a full and free Parliament in England, consisting
not only of those that sat on the 11 of October 1659. but also of all such of
the Members of Parliament, imprisoned, excluded or withdrawn in December 1648.
as are yet living; whom we desire may be restored to the freedom and liberty of
their sitting and acting, according to the Trusts committed to them by the
several Counties and Places which did choose them; that so they may be no longer
debarred from discharging their said Trusts; and that vacant places may be
speedily supplied by free and due Elections of the People: yet so, ^s none of
the Persons to be admitted or elected, be any of those who have been in Arms,
or otherwise aiding, abetting or assisting the late King or his Son in the late
War against the Parliament; or that have put rebellious Violence upon the
Parliament: and that the House so filled, may proceed unanimously to consult
the best means for re-setling the peace of the Nations, the re-establishment of
true Religion, (the surest Foundation as of all Government, so of all the
happiness of a Nation) the Fundamental Laws of the Land, (whereby all men's
Rights and Liberties are preserved) and the Liberties and Freedom of the
People, which are supported by those Laws.

And for these Ends, and in discharge of our duty to God and our Country, we do
resolve (by the blessing of Almighty God) to join with all our Brethren in
England, Ireland and Scotland, who have or shall join with us for the ends
aforesaid; and do resolve for the maintenance and preservation thereof, to
hazard our Lives and Estates, and all that is dear to us: and we doubt not but
all our Brethren in the said Nations, who disdain to be made Slaves, will join
with us herein, as being with wisdom and reason desirous to deliver over to
their Posterity that Liberty and Freedom which was conveyed to them at so dear
a rate by our Ancestors. And then we trust, that by the great mercy of God,
will speedily follow a happy Settlement of these yet-miserable and distracted
Nations; and consequently, that the true Protestant Religion in the power and
purity thereof, may be established; the Godly, Learned and Orthodox Ministers
of the Gospel maintained by their Tithes, and other their accustomed Rights;
their persons supported and countenanced; the Universities, and all other
Seminaries of Learning, cherished; Heresies and Schisms suppressed; needless
Impositions and Taxes on the people, removed; and no charge to be laid on any
of the Nations without their own free consents, given by their Representatives
in their several and respective Parliaments: Manufactures and public Trade and
Commerce at home and abroad, advanced; Justice in its due and wonted course,
administered; the just debts of the Nation, satisfied; the Treasure and Revenues
thereof preserved, and returned to their right and proper Channels; the Arrears
of the Army, and other public debts, duly satisfied; the Armies and Forces
continued in due obedience to the Supreme Authority, and not presume, as some
have done, to give Laws thereunto, which has been the root of a great part of
our miseries; the Nations enriched, united and strenthned; the reformed
Protestant Churches abroad supported and countenanced; the Honor of the
English Nations restored, to the comfort of Friends, and terror of Enemies;
the Plantation of Ireland in the hands of Adventurers and Soldiers, and other
English and Protestants advanced, as a further accession of honor and
greatness to the English Nati^n: And so by the blessing of God, all will
shortly terminate in the Glory of God, the Peace and Tranquillity of these
Nations, the strengthening of them against foreign Invasion, and intestine
Rebellion, and the comfort, contentment and satisfaction of all the good people
in these Nations.

BROGHILL. ^^p. Sir Mau. Fenton Col. Ralph Wilson Lt. Col. J. Widenham Lt. Col.
Ben. Lucas Lt. Col. A. Barrington Lt. Col. Fr. Foulk Major Will. Wade Major
Will. King Major N. Purdon Major R. Goodwyn Cap. And. Ruddock Cap. J. Wakeham
Cap. Ge. Dillon Cap. Ja. Manserghe Cap. To. Russel Cap. Jo. Nicholls Cap.
Samps. Towgood Cap. Thomas Cullen Cap. D. Coghlan Cap. Hum. Hartwell Cap. Tho.
Lucas Cap. Will. Pope Cap. Will. Hartwell Cap. John Friend Christop. Perkins Lt.
Hum. Ray Lt. Jo. Zan^ Lt. Rich. Wakeham Lt. Rich. Ashwood Lt. Pat. Dowdal Lt.
Zac. Holland Lt. Hen. Haward Cornet H. Fagetter Cor. Mat. Pennefether Cor. Dane
Rono Ensign Bar. Foulk Ens. John Brown Ens. Ant. Shackleton Ens. John Sloughter
Ens. James Banting Ens. Hen. Bindon Qu. Mr. Jason Whi^^^^ Rob. Fletcher, Com.


Dublin, Printed by William Bladen, by special Order, and Reprinted at London,
by John Macock. 1659.


