BRADSHAWS VLTIMVM VALE, Being the Last WORDS That are ever intended to be
Spoke of HIM.

As they were delivered in a SERMON Preached at his Interrment.

By J. O. D. D. Time-Server general of England.

OXON, Printed in the Year, 1660.

Hearken unto the words of my Text, as you shall find them written round about
the Dyall of Pancridge Church.
WE MVST
SPEND WELL THY TIME

FLY SWIFTE FROM SIN



BEloved, they say, yea the Heathen say, that Roundheads will not Steal, but
they will Lie abominably. I on fesse my self to be a Roundhead, and the Son of
a Roundhead (of else what should I do here) and yet contrary to the reproaches
of the ungodly, I believe I have now spoken a truth, which neither you will,
nor they dare deny.

The words consist of seven letters W: e: e: M: u: s: t, and a certain thing
called an Hieroglyphic. What that is, I shall tell ye by and by, if I can,
though beloved I must needs say unto ye, it is a very hard word. But let us
begin first with the Letters, for give me leave to tell ye, there be many
mysteries hid under other Letters and Figures, as well as under S, p, q, R, or
666, as, give me but a little leave, and I Will show you: as for example W: e: e:
M: u: s: t. Here W; is as it were a discovery of the natures of a right
Congregational Man; as if I should speak to any of ye all here present who
have been famous in your Generations, and say W. S: -- W. V: --, W. N: --; what
were this, but as if I should say, You Double or double hearted S: --, You
Double or doublehearted V: --, You Double or double hearted N: --. Then in the
second place, being such, and liable also to death, it denotes unto you, and
me, and all of us (for I see never a Barrel better Herring) that as the strokes
of the W: will never meet at the top, but are easily joined at the bottom: so
none of us here congregated together are likely to meet above, that is to say,
in Heaven, but must be joined and riveted together in the lower Parts of the
Earth. Benlowes sacred Fancies, c. 2. v. 5. The same learned Author affirms
that, and resembles a man who being very melancholy, hangs down his Head in his
Breast, which is now our condition; for though we have no reason to be sad for
the Rings we have got, yet have we great cause to hang down our Heads and Mourn
for the loss of our Brother. Now there is not one e: but two ee's: Mark how
pat this falls out, as much as to say, We are in little ease. Judge ye now if
this be not just to a Cow's Thumb, for who among us can say now he is at ease?
No! for We are all in little ease; Partly for the loss of our Friend here,
partly for the loss of our Honors and Gospel enjoyments which I fear is nigh
at hand, for that our Foes do multiply, and there is none to save us. Dr. H --,
Beloved, a Brother of ours, has spoken and made public in his Fancies upon
the Revelation and Daniel, many pretty Knick-knacks and Whimsies of his own,
and truly very applicable to the words, but if he could fetch such a mystery as
this out of two ee's, I Will give him my Mother for a Maid. The subsequent Letters
are M: u: s: t, which being put together composeth or compileth the word Must;
some say this word is a royal word, because of the Proverb that says, Must is
for the King. Truly Beloved I could wish it were only for the King, but here is
the mischief on it; and indeed the Devil ought u^ a spite, for he made us little
Kings and Princes also every one in his turn, on purpose to put his Must upon
us too. But this word Must has several significations, Firstly and first of
all, it signifies a term of force or violence, as you shall find it in the
second Chapter of the English Proverbs, v. 3. Needs Must he go whom the Devil
drives. But our Brother Cook at the Bridge foot, who dressed many a good Dinner
for the upright, took it in another sense: And so I can assure you, that
Rhenish Wine upon the Must is very sweet, but Death upon the Must is very
sour. The next thing that I shall explain to you, is the Hieroglyphic, by
which we have expressed the two Monosyllables Dye all. To do this I shall tell
you negatively first what it is not, and secondly affirmatively what it is.
Give me leave then in the first place to tell ye that a Hieroglyphic is no
Sturgeon; for though a Sturgeon be good meat, yet it is not Hieroglyphically
so. I will not deny but that a Sturgeon may be a Hieroglyphic; yet this on the
other side I dare affirm, that though every Sturgeon may be a Hieroglyphic, yet
every Hieroglyphic is not a Sturgeon. It Is true many of our Ancient and Modern
Prophets, have hid the mysteries of their mystical sayings, under the shapes of
several Beasts; but this argues not that a Sturgeon should in this place be
counted an Hieroglyphic. For though they make many of their Monsters to come
out of the Sea, yet they give unto none of them the shape of Fish; and indeed
it is thought, that ever since Jonas was in the fishes belly, none of those
kind of people cared that Fish should come into their bellies. Yet I could wish
our deceased President were now in a Fishes belly, because of the report of
Men, who say, that he is in a place where there is so much want of water. But
some will object and say, what think ye of Mermaids? To which I answer, that
Virgil and Homer were in their Liquor, when they found out that watery and
fluid invention; So that a Mermaid can be no Hieroglyphic neither. It Is true, a
Maid joined with a Man, or with a Mastiff, may be a Hieroglyphic, as our
Brother Benlowes observes in his comment upon Alciates Emblems; but I hope
Maids have more wit, when there are such Creatures upon Land, than to run into
the Sea to look after Tritons. Neither can a Bag Pudding be in this place
counted an Hieroglyphic; for that a Pudding has two ends, but all those that
dye have but one end; and some say, when they are dead they have no end; but as
to that I shall say little at present; Abel best knows it, who was the first
man that ever died in this World. But now to let ye know what this thing is we
have so much talked off, an Hieroglyphic, being truly defined, is an Egyptian
Trimtram; But some will say, what? do you make use of Fool's Baubles, and
Trimtrams, to express the death of so worthy a Patriot as here lies before us?
To this I answer, that I wonder at ye my beloved; for would you have me Preach
any other sort of Sermon at his Funeral, than he was wont to hear while he
lived? where was there such a Poltron as our Brother Foxley, who spoke Bulls
more reverently in the Pulpit? or was more gravely impertinent in his Homilies?
Yet was he Chaplain to our deceased Patriot, and he fed him with Money, and fat
Venison. But why have we made use of a Sundyall? why? because it is the only
thing which discovers the Thieveries of that Arch Pilferer old Time: You Will say,
I might as well have made use of those things, with which the young Striplings
play for Sawcers in Bartholomew Fair: but I deny that; for though they serve to
pass the time away, yet they are no Sundyals. Now this Time my Beloved, was
one of the arrantest Thieves in the World; He was Great grandfather to
Robin-Hood, that Robbed in Yorkshire, and his Mother was Sister to Wood of
Kent, For he was as great a Glutton, as a Thief; and he Robbed to Eat, and Eat
that he might Rob. And therefore our Ancestors knowing how great a Thief he
was, translated the Latin word Tempus, and called it Time, placeing him upon
the Beams of Sundyals, with a great Si^h in his hand; judge ye what great
gobbets he puts in his mouth, and what a Stomach he has, by the weapon with
which he uses to cut his meat. Now this Time being made a Demon or Semigod,
even as our fore Fathers deifyed Wine, and called it Bacchus, by reason of its
great power over Mortals, will not yet leave his Theiving, but steals our
Years, our Days, Months, and Minutes, nay our very Lives from us: And more than
this, if the Sexton be not too nimble for him, makes no Conscience to steal our
winding Sheets from us, as we lie helpless and succourlesse in our Graves. In
Law Offices, the Rats and He feed together upon old Parchments; so that the
Lawyers are fain to make their Deeds, and Leases, of no use after so many
years, lest he should eat away the Evidences of Men's Inheritances. Ecce venio
ut Fur, says the Dyal of Cannon Street Church. Surely he was a Wise Man, that
made that Dyall, and understood Latin; for never was a better Character given
of Time than this. But let him go like a Thief as he is, and let us see what we
have next to insist upon.

You find by what we have said already, a true explanation of the Letters, and
Hieroglyphic of this Text. Now the Letters and Hieroglyphic being put together,
do immediately spawn or procreate this sense or meaning, We Must Dye all. Here
we are to note the action, and universality of the action; The action is Dying,
the universality of the action, We Must Dye all. Well then, We Must Dye all;
But what? must we Dye all after one fashion? In other things there is variety;
as of Women, there are the Black, the Brown, the Fair. Of Drink there is
variety, as Ale, Beer, Cider, Sack, Claret, etc. There are also several sorts
of Meat, as Flesh, Fowl; And of these also, there are various kinds, whereby
the Palate need not to be nauseated always with one and the same thing. And is
there but one way of Dying? Beloved ye need not fear: There are as many ways
of Dying, as of Eating and Drinking. Some Men Dye for Love, as you may read in
the first Book of Claudian Gruget, or the Cronicles of Queen Marget. Beloved, I
shall read unto you the Text it self; where you shall find the Story of a
certain young man who this way lost his Life; It is said o him,

V. 1. c. 10. There was a certain young man who loved a certain Lady, and his
Love was grounded on no other end, but to Love her with all his power as
perfectly as he could.

V. 2. But this Lady, he being not a match sufficient for her, was by the
urgency of her Friends, caused and forced to marry another Gentleman.

V. 3. Therefore he fell Sick, and his strength failed him, so that he was
forced to keep his bed.

V. 4. Nevertheless the Daughter and the Mother, having some compassion on
him, came to visit the Gentleman, whom they found near his end;

V. 5. But then being ready to descend unto the sleep of Death, and beholding
her whom his Heart loved, he found himself so fortified, that he did arise up
in his bed,

V. 6. And said unto the Mother of the young Lady, I beseech you to give her
into my Arms, and command her to Embrace and Kiss me.

V. 7. Then Embracing the cause of his death, and Kissing her with his pale and
cold Lips, he held her with so much vehemence, that his weak Heart could not
endure the strength of his Love.

V. 8. Therefore the faculties of Life abandoining him, the seat of his Soul
failed, and she fled to her Disposer.

Thus you see the Example of one way of Dying; But what says the Learned Hircan
in his Comment upon this place. This, says he, was the veryest Fool that ever
I heard speak; for is it likely or reasonable that we should Dye for Women who
are made for us, and be afraid to ask them what they are enjoined to give us?

Now I speak not this for my self, nor for any man here that is married, for I
have enough of a Woman; or rather more than will serve my turn; but to show
you that there are more ways to the Wood than one. Truly Beloved, our dear and
worthy Brother here lying before us, was not a little guilty of this vanity,
which made him in hisyounger days quaff a health to his Mistress in his own
blood. I should have blamed him for it, but that it made him known, and showed
him fit for the trust reposed in him, for he that was so lavish of his own
blood, could never be chary of another man's. But there are other ways of
leaving the World, and I believe as many postures there are of dying, as our
Brother Aretine has delivered postures of Copulation. Let us reckon; One I
have told ye already.

The second is, when a man going to bed takes a good Dose of Opium, and sleeps
away his life: and this is called the Syndercomb.

The third is, the Turks way of strangling, and borrows its name from a stuff
in Pater-noster-ro: and is called Lutestring.

The fourth is, that posture which Derick most commonly uses: and is called
Noosing.

The fifth is, burning to death: and is called the Witches Farewell.

The sixth is, breaking on the wheel: and is called St. Katherines Legacy.

The seventh is, when a man wasted with a Disease lies upon his back, and gives
up the Ghost: and is called the Custom of Women.

The eighth differs little from the seventh, only that the man lies on one
side: and this is called King Arthurs way of dying.

The ninth is, broyling to death: and is called St. Lawrences March.

The tenth is, drowning: and this is called Neptunes Excise.

The eleventh is, beheading: and is called Bradshaws Delight.

The twelfth and last which I shall now number up, referring you for the rest
to the Pictures of the ten Persecutions, and Sennertus's work, is our deceased
Brorhers way of dying: and is called the Agues Triumph. Whereby you may see
that a Souls House, and a Man's House are not alike; for they say of Building,
that a trembling House stands fastest; but a Soul loves not that her Mansion
should shake.

The Physicians say, because they are not able to cure this Disease, that it is
a certain Devil which possesses a man. If this be so, then certainly it was
Beelzebub himself possessed our dear President; For he shook him worse than he
shook the Protectors Trees, and never left shaking him, till he had shaken him
into his Grave. Truly Beloved, it is a sad thing when the Devil comes to Winnow
a man's Soul out of his Body. But to say truth, what had he to do, to live any
longer, he had done his great work, neither was there any likelihood that he
should have any more, by reason that the Nation was so generally inclined for a
Commonwealth; He knew, for ordinary Delinquents, and a Common High Court of
Justice, the Lord Lisle could serve as well as he; He saw that the Rump stunk
in the Nostrils of the Nation, and it grieved him to see them so despised by
the people. He had had his reward in this World; and therefore thought 'twas
time to get his reward in the other. What that is, we cannot tell: his Friends
hope the best; his Enemies hope the worst. However, to give ye some
satisfaction, we shall a little dive into the Actions of his life, and see if
they deserve that punishment, which his Enemies would inflict upon him. I
confess we have a difficult task to undergo, to Cloth Virtue in the Habit of
Vice, and to trick up Vice in the Habit of Virtue. Nevertheless we must do
something in the discharge of a good Conscience; for else how can I be said to
have merited my Ring, and my Five pieces; perhaps it may be Ten, which is a Sum
considerable. Truly we Ministers love Money, it is the main thing we Ball for;
and I think he is a Fool that does not. You know it is Money that makes the Mare
to go: it is Money that makes the Pot boil. Now good victuals my Beloved, are
highly reverenced and esteemed among us Parsons; it is that which encloses our
Kidneys, and lines our Midriffs with fat. They talk of the Food of the Soul;
but I believe that if there were no other Food, we might starve for all that.
Therefore says the famous father Binet, c. 31. v. 130. By Hook or by Crook it
matters not whether, so we can but gain Riches, which are indeed the Nerves and
Sinews of a Man's life. Thus much by way of pickeering from our Text, a thing
usual among us modern Divines. Now let us begin to justify our deceased
President. You must know then, that once upon a time Escobar and Lopez meeting
together, they fell into a dispute concerning the Actions of a Man's life; But
me thinks I hear Somebody, pulling me by the sleeve, say unto me, who is that
Escobar and Lopez you talk o^? why my Beloved this Escobar was great
Grandchild to the Pin^r of Wakefield, who coming of the race of the Valiant,
became a very strong man at an argument; Now Lopez was an East-Indian Divine,
and he wore a Jerkin made of Ostrich Feathers; his Shoes were made of an
Elephants Hoof, and upon his Head he wore a Fools Cap. Then said Lopez unto
Escobar, May a Man do Evil, that Good may come thereof? and Escobar answered
and said, Follow the Prestdent that lives in our days; Don Juan de S^, the
Portugal Ambassadors Brother, proves this most exactly from the Doctrine of
Probability. For says he, ^. 7. v. 3. A Man may do that, which he conceives
lawful according to a probable opinion, though the contrary be in reality the
more honest. And Vasques says, in his book of Sanctified Experiences, that in
cases of Morality, a man ought not to be guided by the ancient Divines, but by
the modern Casuists; Of this opinion also, was our dear Brother Julian the
Apostate. Now you will say that our deceased President was Ambitious: I grant
it; but what then? but hear what the famous Escobar says; Ambition, which is
an immoderate desire of greatness and dignity, is of it self a venial Sin;
(...) when a man covets that greatness to prejudice the State, the external
circumstances are that which make it Mortal; But our President exercised his
Ambition for the good of the State. He prerended Religion, the destruction of
Tyranny, and at last the setting up of the Good Old Cause: And therefore ye
may read, in our de^^ Brother Catilines Remains, how that he disturbed (...)
Country, for that he was greatly in Debt, and had no other way to get money to
be honest to his C^. But me thinks I hear the Cavaleers crying out with open
mouth, how he killed the King. Why what if he did? did not our dear Brother
Ravillac kill Harry the Fourth? would not our Brother Faux have blown up the
King and all his Peers? did not our Sister Tomyris cut off King Cyru's Head?
did not our Ancestors run a hot spit into the Fundament of King Edward.
Therefore says our Brother Syndercomb, It is as lawful for to kill a Tyrant,
as it is to drink Coffee. And the ancient Greeks and Romans, gave rewards to
those that were most swift in the execution of such an enterprise. Machiavel in
his Comment upon the works of Heliogabalus, says, that it is lawful to kill a
Man for six or seven Ducats; and our holy Brother Molina the Jesuit assures
us, that regularly a Man may kill another lawfully for the value of a Crown;
and in this opinion consents with him Domitian the Fly-killer and the holy
Nero: Also further says, that it is lawful for one Man to kill another for an
Apple. Now if this be true, that a Man may be killed for six or seven Ducats,
or for such a slight thing as an Apple; then certainly might our President
judge a Man to Death for my Lord Cottingtons Estate. Our President was like
Necessity, for he had no Law; If then he had no Law, could ye blame him for
not doing that which was agreeable to Law? Thus my beloved you see it proved
out of the Labors of the most authentic Divines, that he was not so bad as
the World took him to be; But he is gone, and we stay here behind to wear Rings
for his sake. Truly I would wish, if I might reap the same benefit, that such a
President might dye every day: For I Will warrant ye our Rings are worth eight
and twenty shillings a piece, now twenty eight shillings a day, is five hundred
and eleven pounds per annum; I Will promise ye a good younger Brothers Estate,
and I believe the time has been, when the best of ye all here present, has
been contented with far less. I am sure the time was when our Beloved
President had not so much; but thanks be to God, and his own impudent face, his
condition was well amended before he departed this transitory World. Now they
say that Mr. Tyburn mourned also for him, and was himself at the charges of a
black Cloak. Truly I wonder I do not see him here; I know no reason why he
might not have come along, having three Legs, as well as we go along that have
but two. But me thinks I hear you enquiring of me whither he is gone; why truly
for my part, I cannot tell. Now What are you the better for asking? His Friends
say he is in Heaven, but his Foes say he is in Hell; now of these two opinions
choose you which you will believe. If he be in Heaven, it is well, and if he be
in Hell, it is well too I think, especially if he had the wit to carry his Ague
along with him; for Agues love warmth. Had he but had the French Disease, it
might then serve him instead of a hot-House; I hope in God he is by this time
turned into a Salalamander; for then I am sure the Fire can do him no hurt.
Truly I think it is the best place he could go to; for they say there are three
Judges or Lords Commissioners there. Now if there should happen to come a
change there, as perhaps Noll and he may bring it to pass, if they will lay
their Noddles together, why then it is but putting out them, and there is a place
for him, which he may keep to himself till Lisle and Keeble can come to assist
him. Doubtless this was his design when he died, which was the reason he would
have carried the Great Seal along with him. I know not why such a thing may not
be dove, for the Devil has been dealt withal before now. St. Dunstan you know
led him up and down by the Nose with a pair of Tongues; and Cook Ruffian
scalded him in his Feathers, and we see daily as great alterations here among
us and as unlikely: therefore let us wonder at nothing, but wait with patience.
This I will say for him, that he was a good Housekeeper, and liberal of his
diet, as our Brother N -- well can tell, and our Brother Foxley also had daily
experience thereof; For he fed him till his Ears dript again, and taught him to
live in another man's House and pay no rent, just as he himself did.

As for his Conscience, they say it was as large as one of my Lord Desboroughs
Sacks; and truly if it were so, it was as large as any reasonable Man need
desire.

As for his Religion, some say he was a Turk, but I hardly believe it, because
that Religion is solely composed for a Monarchical Government. Neither was he a
Jew, for they cried out for a King. Therefore doubtless he was a Christian,
but what sort of Christian we know not; Some say he was a Disciple of Caesar
Borgia, which is very probable. Truly it is well he was of any Religion, for
there are abundance of Atheists in these times.

But he is gone; farewell He: for I cannot help it, nor all the Physicians in
England could not help it. Thus you see Protectors dye, Presidents dye, yea and
the great Whale is dead, though it is no miracle, for according to the words of
my Text, We must dye all.

Is it so then that We must Dye all, then let us live as long as we can, and
enjoy the Creature while we may: and when our time is come, let us, because we
cannot help it, bequeath our bodies to the Earth, and our Souls to him that
gave them: I know no other remedy; it is Hobsons choice; And so much for this
time.

FINIS.

