AN ORDER By the COMMISSIONERS of the Admiralty and the Navy, concerning the
payment of the Prize-money due to Seamen and Soldiers, and their Widows, that
have served at Sea in this last years Expedition.
16 January, 1653. By the Commissioners for the Admiralty and Navy.

UPon consideration had of the Results of a Council of War, held aboard the
Swift-sure, in the Fleet, the first of December, 1653. concerning the
Prize-money due to Seamen and Soldiers that have served at Sea in this last
years Expedition, It is hereby Declared and Ordered as follows.

1. That all Seamen and Soldiers that have served in the Fleet in the three
last Engagements against the Dutch, and shall list themselves aboard any of the
States Ships, at or before the last of March next, shall have for their
respective shares of Prizes, twenty shillings.

2. That such as have been in two of the said Engagements shall have thirteen
shillings four pence.

3. That those who served only in one of the said Engagements, shall have six
shillings eight pence.

4. That all such Seamen and Soldiers as have been disabled by sickness, or
wounds received in the Service: As also the Widows of any such Seamen or
Soldiers, slain in any of the said Engagements, shall have paid unto them
their full shares of Prize money, viz. twenty shillings.

5. That such of the Soldiers as are now again entertained in the Army (having
Tickets for their Prize money) do produce unto the said Commissioners, a
Certificate under the hand of the Captain, under which they now serve: As also
a Copy of the last Muster Roll of the Companies to which they respectively
belong, Or in default thereof, a Certificate under the hand of the
Muster-master, testifying their being in the Service; whereupon Order shall be
given for payment of the shares of Prizes due unto them.

John Disbrowe, George Monck, Rob: Blake, Vin: Gookin, John Stone, John Clerk.


Ordered by the said Commissioners, that the said Declaration be forthwith
Printed and published, To the end, all persons therein concerned, may take
notice thereof.

To: Blackborne Secre:

London, Printed for Laurence Blaiklock, and T. Hewer, 1653.


