A LETTER OF Dangerous Consequence, From Sergeant Major Ogle, to Sir Nicholas
Crisp at Oxford.

As it was Intercepted by Colonel Goodwin of the PARLIAMENTS Forces.

Together with the Examination of the Messenger, in the Collar of whose Doublet
the said Letter was found.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Letter and Examination be
forthwith printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for EDW: HUSBANDS, February 27. 1642.

A Letter from Sergeant Major Ogle to Sir Nicholas Crisp, as appears by the
Examination (herewith printed) of the Messenger, in whose collar the Letter was
found, who was intercepted by Colonel Goodwyn; Sergeant Major Ogle likewise
being examined before a Committee, confesses the Letter to be all of his own
hand, and by him sent to Sir Nicholas Crisp by the same Messenger, but affirms,
that the Letter intends nothing else, but to desire a resolution from Sir
Nicholas Crisp, touching some lands which he had offered him formerly to sell:
And this is all he will yet confess; and what appearance this has of truth,
deducible from this Letter, let the Reader judge.

A Letter of dangerous consequence from Sergeant Major Ogle, to Sir Nicholas
Crisp at Oxford.
Noble Sir,
SInce your departure from hence, I writ you (...) Letter which I hope came to
your hands: If I had known of your bosome-friends coming to you, I should have
sent, and imparted that which now I cannot: But since you have the convenience
and safety of Mr. Collewells coming hither, Pray let me receive a final
determination, and hang no longer in suspense, whether any thing is to be done
or no in that business we spoke. I want nothing but money to effect it, but in
case there be either a difficulty in the thing, or a dishke or dispute of me
for the Actor, pray let me know; and in case therebe some reasons which I am
ignorant of, to hinder what we spoke of, then M. Colwell can tell you somewhat
I wished him to write to you, which upon the receipt of money I shall bring
along with me to you speedily. In a word Three thousand five hundred pound will
serve to effect that, which will be an extraordinary benefit and advantage, if
not a final happy conclusion to what we both desire, which money if you will
give Master Colwell order to furnish me with, I Will give him that Land and
Collery which I spoke to you in security for the same; And speedily come to you
well prepared when I shall take a full order for your satisfaction: However
pray let me know your positive determination, and of what account and reckoning
(if any at all) I am there, which how bad or small soever it be, I would
willingly repair by this, or some other notable way wherein I might be
entrusted: your candidnesse herein, I shall take for an extraordinary evidence
of your friendship, which till death I will requite by resting

Your faithful Friend to serve you, THEOPHILUS PHILOBRITANIS.


THe nevves here is, that the Commons yesterday carried up their Votes to the
Lords, with reasons declaring their disassent from concurring with the Lords
in a Cessation of Arms and a Treaty: And that upon these reasons the Commons
had Voted the disbanding both Armies presently, and till that were done no
Treaty upon the Propositions; which if his MAjESTY would assent unto, there
should be a Treaty and a Cessation of Arms toward a disbanding. One
particular circumstance I will acquaint you with in the carriage of this
business, which was remarkable. After the Lords had voted a Cessation of
Arms and a Treaty, the next morning they sent a Message to the Commons for a
conference to acquaint them with their Votes. While the Messengers tarryed for
their Answer (which usually is very short, either they will; or they will send
an Answer by Messengers of their own) it was so ordered that Colonel
Manwaring, Captain Harvey, Captain Titchburn, Captain Underwood, Captain Gore,
and diverse other Citizens, with Master Case, and Master Wodcocke and Buroughs
with other Ministers, came to the House of Commons, and desired to be heard,
and to deliver some reasons they had in the behalf of the City, against a
cessation of Arms and a Treaty: Whereupon there was present resolution to call
them in: But a Debate of almost an hour, whether they should be called in
before the conference with Lords or no: After several Votes the House was
divided, and by ten Voices carried to call them in first, and so they had the
pre-eminence of the Lords. When they were called in, Colonel Manwaring was
their spokes-man, and tendered a paper containing the reasons: but they were
commanded to withdraw, and after some debate the paper was received, and they
remind thanks. You may judge by this what likelihood there is on other end save
by the sword. If it please God I come to you I shall more enlarge then I dare
write. We hear his Majesty had made Sir Ralph Hopton Baron of Glasonbury, but
he enjoyed his honor a short space, for he and Six hundred men more of his are
slain before Plunmouth. I have him that I sent to you upon the Exchange yet,
and the rest you know of ready to do as I direct them. The God of Heaven direct
us all aright, and settle the peace of this Church and Kingdom.

Vale. Pray let me hear speedily from you.



The Examination of Henry Commins, Servant to Master Daniel Colwell, one of the
searchers of the Custom House London, taken before Colonel Goodwin and
Colonel Bulstrode, the 16. of February, 1642.
HE says, that his Master went from his house in Bartholomew lane London, to
Oxon, upon Friday last, with Sir Nicholas Crisps his Lady, and that Captain
Ogle, dwelling over against Pallace-yard conduit Westminster, sent by him a
Letter to Sir Nicholas Crisp to Oxon: Which Letter the said Captain did,
together with his Maids help sow up in the Collar of the Doublet of this
Examinant, giving him a great charge to deliver the Letter carefully, and not
to confess from whom he had it: And there coming one to speak with Captain
Ogle, whiles he was sowing in the Letter, he suddenly called this Examinant
into his Closet, that he might not be discovered.

And this enclosed Note, the Examinant said, was sent from Sir Nicholas Crisp
his Servant, unto his Master.

Henry Comens.

FINIS.

