A Short Discourse, To Prove the USEFULNESS OF Vomiting IN FEVERS, BY PLAIN
REASONING And the Authority of the Best Physicians, ANCIENT and MODERN.

By CHARLES OLIPHANT, Doctor of Medecin.

EDINBURGH, Printed for Thomas, Carruthers, and Sold at hi^ Shop in the
Parliament Closs. M.DC.XC.IX.

THE PREFACE.
IT is but too remarkable, That Physic as it has advanced in Age, so it has
decayed in Reputation. Physicians, who among the Learned Grecians were held in
the highest Esteem, are now rather employed out of Custom and Fashion, as
necessary Implements of Deathbed Sickness and Funeral Charges, than for any
great Performance expected from them, either by the Patients themselves, or
their Relations. And the Truth is, at the rate a great many Practice, we cannot
say the World it altogether in the wrong: An affected starch't Gravity with a
saucy Assurance, and a parasitical Cunning to get into the Acquaintance and
good Opinion of People, is almost all that does entitle some Men to their
Employment. It is to such mostly we are obliged to, for the Discredit the
Practice of Medicine is fallen under of late, who contenting themselves with
studying the mean and crafty Politics of the Trade, and having neglected every
thing else to qualify them for it, do by their Puny Feats make a great many
judge it to be more the fault of the Art than of the Practisers. And indeed it
is no wonder that the World is more imposed upon by the Pretenders to this
Science than to any other whatsoever, so far is is out of the ordinary Road of
these, who do not make it their Study: When a Lawyer, appears at the Bar, or a
Minister in the Pulpit, every Body that has but little more than common Sense
may be almost a Judge of either the one or the others Performance, but the
Generality of the World does not so much as pretend to understand the first
Elements of Physic, and consequently can be but a very ill Judge of the
Sufficiency of those who profess it. What Applauses have we seen a Formal
Pretender, when he has spruc'd himself up with a little forced Rhetoric draw
from his listening Admirers, who commonly have not Line enough to Fathom him;
that he is an Ingenious Man, is a Character they cannot in justice deny him,
and make no question but he is as good at Curing a Disease, as he is at telling
a Stale Jest, or an Antiquated Story; but whenever they have occasion to use
this Talking Machine, and find how ill suited his Dwarfish Performances are to
his Gigantick Wit, then presently they throw Dirt on the whole Faculty, and
proclaim Physic to be nothing else but Conjectural ill grounded Notions wrapped
up in difficult and hard Terms.

I am not ignorant how much Physicians have lessened their Esteem by the
Indecent Scuffles amongst themselves, and that by Inveighing one against
another, they rather fasten an Imputation on the whole Profession, than there
where they design it: however this has been mostly the fault of those who know,
that it is much easier to establish themselves by Decrying what another Man
does, than to acquit themselves as they ought to do, when their own Skill is
required. It was such an Inhumane and Malicious Treatment I met with from one
of my own Employment, that gave occasion to this Discourse, which otherwise may
be of use to such as may hazard their Lives by their Prepossession in the
Affair discoursed of. The Story in short is, That I was very lately called to a
Gentleman of Consequence and Merit, who had been in a Fever several days
before; from the beginning it had been attended with such Symptoms, as were
evident Signs of Repletion, his Stomach being overcharged with Choler and other
Humors, which of it is own accord it threw up frequently, with a great
Bitterness in his Mouth, and other undoubted Evidences of Redounding Gall:
Blooding and Clistering with Milk and Sugar had been the Achillean Cures his
ordinary Physician had plied him with before I came; When first I saw him, I
found him laboring under the greatest Oppression imaginable, his Pulse low and
oppressed, his Breathing uneasy, and his Spirits overwhelmed with the
continuing Disorder of his Stomach which he had from the beginning; in a word,
he was in such a Case, that I could not venture to give him that which I was
sure ought to have been done at first, and which as yet was the only thing
could be done to purpose, until I had procured a Remission by Injecting a Sharp
Clister, which had the desired Effect, so that next day I ordered a Vomit of an
Ounce of Emetick Wine, and three Drachms of the Syrup of Buck-thorn: This, by
the by, was not only aggravated with the Frightful Name of an Antimonial Vomit,
but also called a Triple Dose, which I leave to be judged of by those, who have
the Courage to give more than a Single Drop or two of the Spirit of Hartshorn
at a time. The Evacuation of Gall that followed the taking of the Vomit, both
upwards and downwards, was so Surprising, that in all Probability imaginable,
it must have been of Fatal Consequence, if it had been left to the Course of
the Fever, to have been carried off by a Crise, After that the Fever went on,
but without any thing near that Oppression I at first found him under, so that
both that Gentleman, whom I alled to my Assistance, and whose Judgment and
Knowledge are equal to his Years and Experience, and my self gave good Hopes of
his Recovery; but his Physician, who, it seems, is equally good at the Cure and
the Prognostic, not only told, that he was gone past Recovery, but that I had
Killed him, and that the giving of Vomits in Fevers, was an Innovation in the
Practice of Medicine, never before heard of. So for my own Vindication I have
shown, that both by plain Reason, and the General Rules and Maxims of Physic,
that Vomiting is not only to be done in most of our Fevers, but also, that if
is so far from being a Novelty to any, to whom the whole Art is not such, that
we have it Confirmed by the Authority of the best Physicians, both Ancient and
Modern. But nothing can be Surprising from the Impudent Ignorance of that Spark
after his Elaborat Work, I mean Apollo the Mathematician, as one merrily called
it, where he attacks as ignorantly as dully the Useful, Ingenious, and
Demonstrative Discoveries of a most Learned Physician, who had given him no
occasion for it, that I know, and where he overturns whole Mathematical
Demonstrations by such Witty Turns, as calling an Effatum an Effartum, etc. I
shall say no more, but only tell him, that if he find his Choler moved,

Et si
-- Turgescit vitrea bilis.
he would even best take one of his own Topping Prescriptions, an easy Parable
Medicine made up of Domestic and Safe Ingredients, no Edge-Tools, an Injection
of Milk and Sugar to bring it downwards.

A Short Discourse, etc.
IT is beyond my Design to Discourse of the several Causes and Natures of
Fevers, or of their several Names and Divisions. I confine my self only to
speak of those Continued Fevers, which most usualy reign amongst us, and of the
Use, or rather Necessity of giving Vomits in such: And I think I need scarcely
be put to prove a Matter of Fact so well known, to wit, That most of our
Fevers, from the very first Invasion of them, are attended with a
Squeamishness, Vomiting of Gall, bitterness of the Mouth, and such other
evident signs of overflowing Choler in the Cavity of the Stomach and
Intestines. I am not now to enquire what are the Antecedent Causes of producing
this quantity of Bile in the Body, neither shall I Dispute, whether it be
Generated immediately in the Stomach by a depraved Digestion, or whether it is
separated from the Blood by the Liver, and poured into the Stomach by the
passage of the Gall, that is inserted near the lower end of it; But I suppose
it to be actually there now, where it cannot stay long, without undergoing a
great Alteration by it is Stagnating in the Stomach, and consequently not so fit
to be mixed again with the Blood as it was before it was separated from it. Now
the Question is, Whether we shall Assist or Stimulat Nature, to Dislodge so
dangerous a Guest, or shall we suffer it to mix with the Chyle in the Stomach
and Guts, and be carried again to the Blood, from which it must be separated
again, otherwise the Patient Dies.

I think after stating the Question, I need make no answer, only I would advise
these Gentlemen who Practice with that Caution they pretend to, not to think so
lightly of neglecting these necessary Evacuations in the beginning, the doing
of which must at best prolong the Disease; and with all, I would have them take
some better notice whether Bleeding ought to precede them or not, This may be
Discust by a very plain Calculation.

I suppose the Fever beginning, and the quantity of Gall and other Humors
actually fluctuating in the Stomach; which cannot be carried off by any
Medicine, but part of it will mix with the Blood. Now, Supposing the Humors in
the Stomach to be to the whole Mass of Blood, as one to Twenty; if you let a
Twentieth part of the Blood, then it is but as one to Ninteen; that is, the
proportion of the Blood is diminished in respect of that Matter, which gives
Fuel to the Fever, and consequently not so able to Digest or throw it off by a
Crise. On the contrary, if we evacuat (for Example) one half of the Humors
before they mix with the Blood, they are but as one to Forty; which must make
a vast difference in the event of the Cure. This Calculation is so plain, that
I shall not quot the Fifth Book of Euclide to prove it, and by it I would have
these wary Gentlemen take notice, that seeing they do little more than look on
and see fair Play between the Patient and the Disease, that at least they would
not cast the Balance on the last's Part, and leave the Patient to manage his
Strength the best way he can, against both Disease and Physician. I do not
pretend by this, but there may be some Cases that Require Bleeding before any
thing else; but to do it of Course without any urgent Indication, at the Rate
as is commonly practiced, must certainly be of fatal Consequence to a great
many.

But now the Fever is gone on for several days before a Physician be called.
Well says Master Dolittle, Here can be no place for evacuation, because the
Course of the Disease has wasted the Strength and Spirits, and the Patient
shall never be able to endure it; and further, it will put the Blood into a
great Commotion, and Increase the Fever.

I do indeed Confess the Patient had run a great deal less hazard if these
Evacuations had been made in the beginning; But yet as we are still to make
best of an ill Bargain; and if the Patient be not reduced to extreme weakness,
I say it is yet to be done. As for wasting the Strength and Spirits, it is
evident, that these Humors mixing with the Blood, to be at last subdued by a
tedious Crise, must infallibly at the long run, exhaust and weaken them a great
deal more than the short Operation of a Vomit; which does but lend a hand to
Nature; and I appeal to any man who ever took an ordinary Vomit, if he has not
found himself more weakened, and his Strength more exhausted by a few Hours of
tossing and anxiety from a disordered Stomach, than from the effect of the
Vomitive Potion. As for the other Objection of increasing the Fever, every body
knows, that has the least studied the Operation of Medicaments, that a Vomit
works only in primis viis, the suddenness of its effect too, shows that it has
no time to mix with the Blood, to put it into any great Commotion. That the
heaving of the Breast, and the Extraordinary motion of the Muscles of the lower
Belly, and Diaphragm will quicken the Pulse, and make the Blood move faster
during its working, is without all Question, but even that will Contribute more
to the Cominution and digestion of the Feverish Matter in the Blood, than do
any harm to the Patient, seeing that cease so soon as the Vomit has done
Operating.

To call this an innovation in the practice of Medicine, is to speak against
the current of the Physicians or all Ages, as well as against the General
Maxims of Physic. It is true the Ancients knew no other Vomits, but what were
of the Vegetable kind; and these were either too weak, such as the Decoction of
Hysop, Oil and Water, common Oxymel, etc. and consequently had either little
or no effect, or these which had a deleterious and poisoning Quality, and
therefore over violent and unsafe, which makes them speak mostly of Purgatives.
But even these they used, notwithstanding of the vast Commotion they make in
the whole Juices of the Body, beyond Vomitive and Laxative Medicines, such was
the force of the Indication. It were endless to give all the Quotations which
can be adduced to prove this, and would far exceed the bounds I laid down to my
self.

I shall begin with Hippocrates, who Aph 21. Sect. 1. says, Such Humors as are
to be carried off, let it be done that way that Nature affects most; if it be a
convenient way. Now, I judge no Physician ever pretended that Redundant Choler
in the Stomach should not be carried off, neither that the way of Vomiting is
not lege natura commoda; so Heurnius translates it. In the 10 Aph. Sect. 4. he
says, In very acute diseases Purging is to be used if the Humor be turgid, for
it is dangerous to delay. Now, what way we are to evacuat the first cited
Aphorism shows, and this shows we are to do it even in the most acute Diseases.

Celsus, Cap. 13. de Vomitu, says, Vomiting as in perfect Health it is often
necessary for such as are Choleric, so it is also in those Diseases which are
occasioned by Choler, only he adds, That in Fevers and Acute Diseases, we need
not use the harsher Medicaments, such as White Hellebor, which was the only
effectual Vomitive he knew, and which they were almost always in a dread to
give, and by it is Violence now quite out of Use. It is not possible to Quote
the Innumerable Passages from Galen, and the other Principes Medici to prove my
Assertion, besides, that what they write concerning Fevers, cannot so exactly
jump with the Case in hand, it being certain, that mod of their Fevers were
either of the Inflammatory or the Pestilential kinds, and that the Difference
of the Clymats, and of our Way of Living from theirs, must of necessity alter
the Type of the Diseases very much. So I shall not longer insist on their
Authority, but now come to the Moderns, of whom I shall only take the most
Famous, and whose Practice has most obtained.

I shall begin with the great Fernelius, Cap. XI. de Curat. Febr. When (says
he) there happens an Evacuation of Bile of it is own accord, the Fever may end
without any Medicine, but when that is either none at all, or too little
Medicaments are to be given, lest the Fever, by being neglected, change it is
Species, and become worse, and of longer Continuance. And a little afterward
he adds, for seeing the Stomach and Intestines, (which is what he means by the
Prima Corporis Regio) in which the Noxious Humor fluctuats, are most unclean,
some of it is to be timeously evacuated in the beginning, especially if there
be Bitterness in the Mouth, Oppression of the Heart, or Squeamishness, or want
of Appetit, etc. And, Cap. V. Which treats of these things which are to be
observed in the Methodical Cure of Fevers, he says, Not only therefore in very
Acute Diseases, whose Matter is Turgid ( after Hippocrates 's Way, to whom only
Violent Medicines were known) but also in all Acute Diseases, Purging is proper
in the beginning. And a little after, If in the first days of the Fever the
Evacuation be omitted, whatever time you are sent for, you shall order Remedies
as if the Disease were beginning. When there is an Inclination to Vomit, what
he gives is Oxymel or Hydreleum, the Use of Antimonial Vomits not being known
in his time, or if they were, being first introduced by rash ignorant Quacks,
they were cried down by the Dogmatical Physicians for a while, until their safe
and easy Operation brought them in, in spite of Humor and Prepossession.

Platerus who lived about fifty years after him, and whom Sylvius, who was hot
over prodigal pf good Names to any Man, calls Magnus Platerus, says in bis
Treatise de Febribus, Page m. 77. Vomiting to these who are accustomed, and
Nature pushing on to it, is allowed, and if in a continued Fever, the Gall does
work up in the Stomach, and be troublesome, it will extremely help. And
afterward, Page 87. If there be crude Humors in the Stomach, and the Gall be
carried into it, Nature is to be helped to throw out that by Vomiting which
does molest it. I shall Quote no move of the Moderns of that Age, these two
being looked on by all to be the most Learned, awl best Practitioners amongst
them.

I come now to the later Physicians, and shall omit the Crowd of German
Authors, whom I take to be all on my side, Ludovicus in that excellent Book he
calls Pharmacia Moderno Seculo Applicanda. I remember somewhere says, That he is
sure, wherever one was killed by giving a Vomit or Opium, a hundred have died
for want of them. Etmullerus de Febr. asserts, That Vomiting is proper in all
Fevers, even in these which are Malignant. And withal tells us, He had often
observed, that to whomsoever he gave a Vomit in the beginning of Malignant
Fevers, that whether the Event was good or bad, through the whole Course of the
Disease they lay quiet and easy. He does also prefer the Antimonial Vomits to
all other, because of it is Sulphur which resists Malignity. It were tedious to
give you many more Quotations, so I shall end with the Testimonies of the three
greatest Physicians of this Age, that is Willis, Sylvius, and Sydenham.

Willis in his Treatise of Fevers not only approves of Vomiting in continued
Fevers, but shows by some Observations that it was his common Practice, For
Example, the first he gives is, Of a Noble Matron of Fifty years of Age, of a
slender habit of Body, a low Stature, who by shifting her Clothes in the Month
of June, was ill toward Night, after that she was taken with a Squeamishness
and oppression of her Stomach, felt flying pains without any excessive heat.
The Second and Third day she was much the same, on the Fourth day after she had
taken a Vomit, which was an Ounce of Emetick Wine, she Four times vomited up
yellow Gall, and Purged thrice: And so he gives an account of the Progress of
the Fever afterward, too tedious to insert: However, she Recovered. He has
several others to the same purpose, which may be seen in his Works.

Sylvius Prax. Med. lib. 1. Cap. XXXL after, he tells that the Primary Cause of
these continued Fevers is the Bile which is faulty either by its Acrimony, or
inflammability, Sums up the Method of curing them all in the last Paragraph of
the Chapter, thus. Blooding indeed is then chiefly conducible, when there is an
extraordinary heat, the provoking of Sweat, when there are Signs of a
troublesome acidity, and lastly purging by Stool and Vomiting when the Gall
works up and is too Plentiful. Now, what sort of Vomit he is for, may be seen
the next Chapter but one, in which he treats of Malignant Fevers, where he
says, that in those when Vomiting is necessary, he prefers Antimonial Vomits to
all others, because of their Admirable Sulphur, which does wonderfully mitigate
every thing that is Acrimonious. But he tells Positively, Cap XXIII. I prefer,
says he, Antimonial Vomits to all other, both because they promiscuously
evacuat all Humors, and also because they are most Friendly to Human Nature;
reducing by a peculiar way, all the juices in the Body to a Laudable State;
which Power I Question, is to be found in other things, but I know it to be in
Antimony, whatever either Learned or Ignorant Men may Prate to the Contrary.

I shall Conclude with the Opinion of the Judicious and Ingenuous Dr. Sydenham,
who in the Fourth Chapter of his Works, treating of such continued Fevers, as
are every whit the same we commonly have amongst us, says,

After Blooding (if it should be found necessary after the fore mentioned
Cautions) I carefully enquire whether Vomiting or any Inclination to it, did
trouble the Patient toward the beginning of the Fever. If that happened, I
certainly order a Vomitive Medicine, except either tender Age, or some
extraordinary weakness of the Patient do persuade me to abstain from it. And
indeed the giving a Vomit where such an Inclination to Vomiting has preceeded,
is so necessary, that unless that Humor be expelled, it will turn to a Sink of
Evils, which shall torture the Physician during the whole Course of his
Medicating, and throw the Patient into no small danger. The most usual and
Chief is a Diarrhea or Flux, which for the most part follows in the Declination
of the Fever as often as Vomiting, when there was an Indication for it, was
neglected, etc. Now, says he, The Danger of that Diarrhea lies here, that when
the Patient is sufficiently weakened by his Disease, he is by it further
Enervated, and besides, (which is yet of greater Moment) in the Declining of
the Fever, at which time the Blood ought to Contract it self, and Exert it is
Power to throw off by Despumation the Morbifick Matter, is now entirely hindered
by that Evacuation.

Now lest you should doubt that this Humor that Nestles in the Stomach, except
it be carried off by Vomiting, will sometime thereafter make this Tragedy; if
you will enquire, you shall almost always find, that if a Flux do accompany the
Fever, that the Patient had in the beginning of the Disease been Squeamish, and
that no Vomit had been given him. And further you shall find, that although that
Inclination to Vomiting be over, yet nevertheless the Diarrhea shall cease so
soon as you give the Vomit, provided the Strength of the Patient be able to
endure it: I have also frequently observed, that when the Diarrhea once began,
that adstringent Medicines, either taken inwardly, or outwardly applied, did
little or nothing contribute to the stopping of it.

Then he tells the common Vomitive Potion he to uses in such Cases, which is
six Drachms of Emetick Wine, with Oxymel of Squills and Syrup of Scabions.
Afterward he goes on.

If any Man ask me, What time of the Fever I would have a Vomit givens.

I Answer.

If I could have my Wish, I would do it in the very beginning: for by that I
shall preserve my Patient from these dreadful Symptoms, which are occasioned by
that Heap of Humors in the Stomach, and Neighboring Places; and even perhaps
crush the Disease in the Bud, which otherwise would grow to the danger of the
Patient, being nourished by these Humors, etc. But, (says he, the next
Paragraph) If, as it often happens, by our being too late sent for, we cannot
Consult the Safety of our Patients toward the beginning of the Fever;
Nevertheless I am certainly of Opinion, that it ought to be done whatever time
of the Disease it be, provided the Strength be not so far wasted, that it
cannot endure the Force of a Vomit. And indeed for my own part, I have made no
Scruple to give a Vomit on the twelfth day of the Fever, even when the Patient
had left off to be Squeamish, and not without Success: And afterward, Neither
would I in the least doubt to do it later, except the Consideration of the
exhausted Strength of the Patient should stop me.

These Quotations which I have Translated, do faithfully speak the Sense and
meaning of the Authors I took them from; and I think they are so decisive, that
there is not any need for more: I shall only add, that as Vomiting in Fevers
has been the way of the best Physicians of all Ages; so it is at this time all
Europe over, the Practice of such who understand any thing of their Business,
and is daily Confirmed (not to mention the good event of that Gentleman's
Fever, which gave occasion to this Discourse) by the recovery of these who are
so treated.

Neither shall the Reader take this on my bare assertion for that it is at this
time the practice of the French Physicians, who had used to be the greatest
opposer of Antimonial Medicines, they shall have the word of a very Honest man
for it; I mean Dector Tournefort. whose admirable Genie and Learning, procured
him the Profession of Botany in the King's Garden at Paris, and made him worthy
to be a Member of that Illustrious Society, The Royal Academy of Sciences. He
in a late Book entitled, Histoire des plants qui naissent aux environs de
Paris. In the Preface, speaking of the great use of Vomits, and of their way of
Operating, adds, That France is Obliged to the Diligence of it is Skilful
Physicians, for it is being free from the? Plague in these latter Times, which
must have Dispeopled that Kingdom, if they had kept to their Blooding, Ptisans,
and Diaphoreticks, even with much ado, says he, it yielded to Antimony,
Helebor, Elaterium and Coloquint.

I shall end with this, that I am sorry a great many People should have so
rashly past their Judgment, in an Affair, which it seems, they understood so
little, especially when they had better ground for it than the false
insinuations and Malicious whisperings of one who, is very far from being a
Judge in these Matters himself, or the open talking of some men who are so mean
as to think it worth the while to be his Emissaries.

FINIS.

