Immoderate MOURNING FOR THE DEAD, Proved Unreasonable and Unchristian.

OR, Some Considerations of general use to allay our sorrow for Deceased
Friends and Relations;

But more especially intended for Comfort to PARENTS upon the Death of their
CHILDREN.

By JOHN OWEN, Chaplain to the Right Honorable Henry Lord Gray of Ruthen.

2 Cor. 6. 8. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing.

Detestandae sunt illae lachrymae, plenae Sacrilegio, Infidelitate plenissimae,
quae non habent modum.

Hieron. Epist. ad Paulam. LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for John Williams at
the Crown in St Paul's Churchyard, 1680.

To the Excellent and Virtuous Lady, the LADY JANE MUSTERS, of the Parish of
Harnsey in the County of Middlesex.
MADAM,
WHen I first heard of the Death of your Dear Child, and only Son, I much
deplored your Loss, and was greatly concerned to think how you would bear it,
as considering that your affections toward him were exceeding great, and
surpassing the common and ordinary Love of Women; and that your Heart was set
so much upon him, that your Life seemed to be wrapped up in his; so that he could
hardly die, but his Death must go near to kill you too.

I knew indeed your Prudence and Religion to be very great, yet I much feared
that upon so severe a trial, your Passion might get the start of your Reason,
and so far over come it, as to prove a great prejudice to all wise
Considerations: And as I feared, so I was credibly informed by some that were
Spectators of your sorrows, that you laid the Death of your Son so much to
Heart, and was so deeply ingulph'd in sorrows, that like Rachel you refused to
be comforted: And the truth is, you had a singular loss, and therefore might
very well be afforded some grains of allowance in sorrowing more than ordinary
for the loss of your only Son; the most intense sorrow being described and
represented in Scripture by Mourning as for an only Son.

And therefore when I understood that you took on so heavily, and continued
mourning and afflicting your self at such a great rate, I thought it my duty to
do my best endeavors (as having received so many Obligations from your Family)
to support part of the foundation when it was sinking with the weight of
overmuch sorrow. And whilst I was studying for some Counsels that might be
proper for one in your case, it was my misfortune to meet with the like sad
Providence in the death of one of my own Children, which made me more sensible
of the greatness of your loss, who was bereaved of your only Child; so that I
had now a new work to do, which was to master my own Grief, and to keep those
sorrows within compass, which naturally arise upon the loss of our nearest and
dearest Relations: whereupon immediately I consulted not with flesh and blood,
which I knew would lean more to the side of Passion than Reason, but begged of
God that he would endue me with wisdom from above, and that whilst I showed the
resentments of a man, I might behave my self like a Christian, and not sorrow
like others without hope. And being by the Divine Assistance supplied with the
Considerations in the following Discourse, which wrought effectually upon me
toward the mitigating of my sorrows; I thought that the same remedy which I
found from them might very rationally be propounded to another, and probably
work the same Cure upon your Ladyship, which they had done upon my self. And so
Cicero relates of himself, that being in great affliction for the loss of his
Dear Daughter Tullia, he was forced to fly to the Precepts and Arguments of
some famous Philosophers for comfort and relief, and to propound to himself the
Examples of some Eminent Persons who had behaved themselves with great temper
and moderation under the like sorrowful circumstances. And notwithstanding all
the wise Precepts and brave Examples of others, he found it so hard to be
reconciled to Providence, and to conquer his Grief for the loss of such an
Excellent and Virtuous Daughter, that he was fain to set upon writing his Book
of Consolation, on purpose to divert his Melancholy, and to beguile the
tediousness of his Sorrows. And praised be God, I have had the happiness to
find the same benefit by Consideration, which Cicero did. And hope that having
experimented the benefit of my own Counsels, I Deinde plus me habiturum
autoritatis non dubitabam ad excitandum te, si prius ipse consurrexissem.
Seneca ad Helviam.
may be better qualified to win both upon your Ladyships Reason and Judgment.

Indeed your Ladyship has had somewhat the greater trial, as losing a Son, and
an only Son, Quid enim utilius filio? quid jucundius unico? Says Cicero de
Consolatione: What is more comfortable and useful than a Son? and what is more
pleasant and dearer to us than an only Son? And yet he tells us of At filium
and unicum Q. Fabius, praeterea Consularem, qui jam magnas res gesserat, and
majores cogitabat, amisit: neque solum non doluit, quod fortissimus animus
fuit, sed etiam mortuo laudationem in foro dixit, etc.
Q. Fabius, who lost his only Son, one that was in a place of great Dignity and
Honor in the Commonwealth, and had got a great reputation by doing brave and
excellent things, and would have been more famous if he had lived; That he was
so well reconciled to the Death of his only Son, and bore it so bravely, that
he stood up and made a large speech, and a very trim, solid, and even Oration
in Commendation of his Son, and recited his great Virtues without lamenting his
Death.

And he makes further mention of one Q. Martius, a King, who lost his only Son
and Heir Apparent to the Crown, and of many others, as Xenophon, Cassius,
Pericles, who had the misfortune to bury and lose their Sons, when they were
come to be men, and were persons of great worth, of singular prudence and
piety, and of a growing fame and reputation in the World; who carried it with
great prudence and moderation, and showed themselves great Masters of their
Passion upon these sad occasions.

But perhaps these Examples of a Masculine patience may seem not to suit with
the softness of your Ladyships temper, nor agreeable to the natural tenderness
of your Sex; Men being always accounted the more hardy and invulnerable, and
less liable to the impressions of sorrow than Women, whose very constitution
does give a lift and advantage to their Passions; for being the weaker Vessels
they cannot so well contain their resentments, and support their spirits in
affliction, as those that are stronger. And although the Poets feign that Niobe
was turned into a Statue, because of her weeping so stiffly for the death and
slaughter of her Children; yet they make no mention of her Husband Amphion,
that the he was any ways concerned at loss of them. And therefore some
instances of the like patience and moderation in some of your own Sex, are more
likely to prevail with your Ladyship, and to excite you to their imitation. I
crave leave therefore to produce the same Examples which Seneca did to Marcia
upon the very same account. Now the Examples which he produces are Octavia and
Livia: Each of which had the misfortune to lose a Son, and they were a pair of
very hopeful and pregnant Youths, and of great expectations in the World.
Octavia, she laid so much to heart the death of her Marcellus, that she could
not endure the least mention of his name, but was ready to sink whenever she
heard it, and would not admit that the least word of comfort should be spoken
unto her. Talis (says Seneca) per omnem vitam fuit, qualis in funere, she
mourned and took on at the same rate all her lifetime as she did at the time of
the Funeral. But Livia she behaved her self quite otherwise, and though she
lost her Drusus, who was a great man at present, and rising to be a Prince; yet
she beheld the pompous Funeral that was made for him, and how his Death was
lamented by the whole Nation as a public and general loss, without falling
into any great fit of Passion, and as Seneca phrases it, ut primum intulit
tumulo, simul and illum and dolorem suum posuit, she buried all her sorrow in
his Grave, and laid aside her grief as soon as he was laid in the ground. And
having propounded these Examples to Marcia, he refers it to her wisdom and
discretion which of them she would choose to follow. But I dare not make any
such proposition to your Ladyship, or make the least question which way your
choice is determined, being well assured that you steer all the actions of your
life by the compass of Reason and Religion. So that I need not tell you, that
Moderation is the Christians Motto, and that there is quaedam and dolendi
modestia, A Rule of Decency to be observed in our very Mourning.

And therefore if your Ladyship will be pleased to pardon the trouble and
presumption of this Dedication, I shall add little more, but only to make some
Apology, and to acquaint you with the reason why this Discourse was presented
no sooner to your hands. And truly I can give you no other reason but what the
Excellent Cicero and Seneca have given long before to excuse their writing
their Tracts of Consolation so late to their Friends, Non enim vereor, quin, si
minus in ipso Doloris aestu remediis utendum Homines censeant, certe, cum
modice Dolor resederit, ac se paulum quasi remittere coeperit, ad exstinguendas
Doloris reliquias monita, praeceptaque nostra adhibeantur. Cicero de
Consolatione. Dolori tuo, dum recens saeviret, sciebam occurrendum non esse, ne
illum ipsa solatia irritarent and accenderent. Nam in morbis quoque nihil est
magis periculosum, nec perniciosum, quam immatura Medicina. Seneca ad Helviam.
viz. that I thought a Comforter would hardly be admitted, or very welcome to
you when you were in the Zenith of your sorrows, and that it was improper, as
Physicians think it in other Cases, to apply a Remedy, or administer Physic
till the Fit was over. But now that your sorrows have had a considerable time
to spend themselves, and that the flood of your tears, as may be presumed, is
pretty well abated, I thought that this Discourse would come at the most
opportune and convenient time to have your Consideration, and to put a full
stop to your Mourning.

And now that I have given your Ladyship the reason why this Discourse came so
late, perhaps others may require a reason why it came so soon, and why I would
venture to expose it to public, especially in such a Critical Age, wherein the
most Correct Discourses can hardly pass muster with some captious Wits, and
escape their censure and reflection. But the most that I can say for my self
why I have published such a slender Discourse is this, That although there is a
great plenty of Authors who have written excellently well upon this subject of
the great unreasonableness of intemperate Mourning for the Dead; yet few have
so confined themselves as to handle it with a particular respect to the loss
and Death of Children; which being a common and daily Calamity, and the sorrows
thereupon so mightily prevailing, and judged to be not only natural but highly
reasonable, I thought with my self, that it might not be amiss to endeavor to
obviate this vulgar Error, and to lay down such Arguments as might be a
perpetual fence against all inordinate sorrowings for the loss of Children. And
I hope that my good intentions herein will make some Atonement for the failings
of my Pen. And that it will be a great Provocation to some able and judicious
Divines to set upon providing and furnishing the World with better and more
substantial Arguments against this sort of Passion, which is often so violent
and outrageous, both in Parents and others, upon the loss of their Children and
Relations, to the great scandal both of their reason and their Christian Belief.

I have, as your Ladyship may easily see, avoided all flowery Expressions, or
to deck up this Discourse with the paint and varnish of Oratory, as
considering, that the plainer it was, the more suitable to wait upon a Lady in
Mourning.

But after all it must be confessed, that you have had a great affliction and a
deplorable loss in the Death of your only Child, and only Son: But I doubt not
but God will give you a better Name than that of Sons and Daughters; and that
by your eminent Example and practice of true Virtue and Piety, you will entail
a greater blessing upon your Family, than if you left behind you a large and
numerous Progeny. Now that you and your Relations may live long to bless the
World with your Excellent and Pious Examples, and when you leave this
troublesome Place, may be translated to a Kingdom of Joy and Peace, and rest
Eternally in a Bosom of Blessedness, is, and shall ever be the Ardent Prayer of

Your Ladyships Most humble and devoted Servant, JOHN OWEN.

COMFORT FOR PARENTS UPON THE DEATH OF THEIR CHILDREN.
2 Samuel xii. 21, 22, 23. 21. Then said his servants unto him, What thing is
this that thou have done? Thou did fast and weep for the Child while it was
alive, but when the Child was dead, thou did rise and eat bread.

22. And he said, While the Child was yet alive, I fasted and wept; for I said,
Who can tell whether God will be gracious to me, that the Child may live?

23. But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back again? I
shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.


BEfore I fall directly upon the words in the Text, it may be convenient and
necessary to give you some previous account of the occasion of the Death of the
Child which David had by Bathsheba, in the time of whose sickness David mourned
exceedingly, and was much cast down, and took on heavily, and after whose Death
he seemed to be comforted, and to take heart; which occasioned these words that
I have now read unto you. Now in the Chapter immediately before this, we have a
sad story and relation of David's Adultery and Murder; how that from the
temptation of his own idleness, and Bathsheba's Beauty, he committed Folly with
her, and drew aside the Curtains of her Husbands Retirements; and when he had
overcome and corrupted the Wife, there is mention of the great Artifices which
he used to bring Vriah the Husband to cloak and cover this foul and shameful
sin of his; and when Vriah out of pure Loyalty and a hearty Zeal for his
service, refused to take that ease and pleasure which David under a color of
love and friendship advised him to, and when all those little arts and ignoble
devices of entertaining him in his Palace, and at his Table, and making him
drunk, would not bring Vriah to his purpose, then how basely and unworthily
does he plot and contrive his Murder, by giving Orders to his General to set
him in the most dangerous place, in the Front of the Battle? which poor
Innocent Vriah might possibly take for an Honor, and interpret it an Argument
and esteem of his greater Courage, when in truth, he was only placed there as
a mark to be shot at, and to fall a Sacrifice to his Sovereigns Lust. Which
accordingly happened, Vriah being slain upon the spot, and dying in that station
where it was not likely he should live. And when David had thus secretly in his
heart designed Vriahs Death; yet when news was brought to him that Vriah was
dead, he cunningly and slily pretends to look upon it as no other than a
Casualty, the misfortune of War, saying with himself, that such chances will
come; and bid the Messenger tell Joab that there was no reason why he should be
troubled or concerned at the Death of Vriah; for there was no saving any man's
life in Battle, none could be priviledg'd from Death in Warlike Encounters; and
that the Arrows or Bullets made no distinction, and that all are alike liable
to destruction, and that Vriah might as well fall and be slain as any other in
the Army; which is the sense of those very words which David caused to be
returned to Joab, in the 25. ver. of the foregoing Chapter. Then David said
unto the Messenger, Thus shall thou say unto Joab, Let not this thing displease
thee: For the Sword devoureth one as well as another. And lastly, When David
had thus dispatched and caused the Innocent Husband to be made away, he then
takes the guilty Wife into his possession and marries her, and expects to live
many happy and pleasant days in mutual endearments. But though David thought
that the marrying her would legitimate their love, and take off the old scandal
of their former Embraces, yet it was an act highly offensive to God, and is so
expressed in the last v. of the Chapter, And when the mourning was past, David
sent and fet her to his House and she became his Wife, and bare him a Son; but
the thing which David had done displeased the Lord.

But then notwithstanding that David had committed those two horid sins of
Adultery and Murder, yet he had not any true sense and feeling of his guilt,
nor that remorse of Conscience which he should have had for sins of that
Crimson die; but he rubs on a considerable time, without any regret or sign of
repentance: which insensibility and hardness of heart we may justly ascribe to
his living in ease, and enjoying the Charms of Bathsheba's Beauty, which at
first enticed him to sin and afterward made him forget it, whilst his Soul was
steeped in pleasure and triumphing in the enjoyment of his new Spouse. But
whilst David was in his Nuptial jollity, and swallowed up in fond Caresses and
doting upon that Beauty which had formerly bewitched him, God stirs up his
Prophet Nathan to give him some check and interruption in his solaces, by
propounding something that might bring his late horrid sins to his remembrance.

And accordingly the Prophet does his office, and propounds to him the Parable
of the poor man with his little Ewe-Lamb. How that this was his only Companion,
his only Darling, his Bosom Friend, that he had nothing else to love and
delight in, nor that he could call his own, but this one poor Innocent
Creature; and yet there was a rich man which had a numerous Flock, and enough
to make a Feast for any Friend or Stranger whatsoever, and yet was guilty of so
much incivility and injustice, as to take away this single Lamb from a poor
man, with a pretense that he needed it to make an Entertainment, which he might
have done without the least wrong or detriment to himself, as having such a
number of his own, and so many which he might well have spared.

Which Parable was no sooner propounded to David, but he resents the Act with a
great deal of indignation, and delivers his opinion against him that should do
such a fact, as an unpardonable offender, and that he was guilty of such a high
piece of injustice, that he was not fit to live. For him that had enough of his
own, and yet to invade the right and property of a poor man, and to rob him of
his little All, was in David's Judgment an unsufferable wrong and injury, and
that he that did it, deserved nothing less than Death; for so are the words in
the fifth ver. of this Chapter: And David's anger was greatly kindled against
the man. And he said to Nathan, As the Lord lives, the man that has done this
thing shall surely die. And he shall restore the Lamb fourfold because he did
this thing, and because he had no pity: So just and severe was David in
condemning the robbing of a poor man, and taking away the small substance he
had.

But then when the Prophet took upon him to make a nearer Representation of the
case, and to bring it home to himself, and point blank to charge him with the
like injustice which he had so severely condemned in another, saying, Thou art
the man: We must needs think that David was much startled when the guilt
recoiled upon himself, and that his own Conscience made the rebound. But then
when it was brought so close to him, that there was no avoiding his own
self-Condemnation, David presently makes an ingenuous Confession, saying, I
have sinned against the Lord. And such we may observe are the mercies of God,
that his pardon follows immediately upon his Confession. And Nathan said unto
David, The Lord has also put away thy sin, thou shall not die, in the 13. v.
Howbeit, in the next v. says the Prophet, Because thou have by this deed given
great occasion to the Enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the Child also that is
born unto thee shall surely die. Where we may observe, that although God was
pleased to grant him the greatest pardon of his life; yet he does not give him
a general pardon from other Punishments, but assures him at the same time that
he granted him his life, that he should have such a punishment wherein he might
read the nature and deserts of his sins. The Child that is born unto thee shall
surely die. From whence it may not be unuseful to observe, that God is pleased
sometimes to lay the Punishment due to the Parents sin upon their Children, and
so here David had sinned and the Child must die for it; which may be of great
use and moment to make people more wary and deliberate how they enter into the
Holy State of Matrimony: For though it be a Divine Institution, and ordained of
God in Paradise, and the State of Man's Innocence, yet there may be ways of
unhallowing Marriage, and turning that into a sin which was at first ordained
for the greatest Blessing. For if only Interest, or Humor, or Lust, be the
chief foundation and ingredient of our Choice; or if some sinful pre-ingagement
or lewd Amors make Marriage necessary for the hiding our shame; or if any of
these things do cause a Contract, or make up the match, we may expect that God
in justice may blast and curse the fruits of our Body for the sin of our Soul,
and for the sins of our flesh too. An instance whereof we have in Gods
decreeing the death of David's Child; which though it was born in Marriage, yet
God utterly disliked the Conjunction; the first occasion and grounds thereof
being laid in Adulterous Embraces; David making no scruple to murder the
Husband that he might obtain the Wife.

But when David heard that heavy sentence against his Child, that he should
surely die for his sin, might not he have confessed himself altogether in the
fault, and desired to suffer wholly himself, and have said as in another Case,
1 Chronicles. 21. 17. It is I have sinned, and done evil indeed, but as for this
Lamb, this Innocent Babe, what has it done? Let thy hand be upon me, or my
Fathers House, and not on this Child, that that should be plagued. I say, one
would think that David should have set himself to deprecate Gods displeasure
against his Child upon his account, and desired to have sustained the burden
of his own sin: But the sentence was gone out, and what was written was
written, and there was no reversing the Decree. And therefore all they that
intend to change their condition, and desire that they may leave their
Inheritance to their Children, had best look to it, and have a care that they
do not make Lust, or any sinful Pre-ingagement, a Preamble and Introduction to
Marriage, for fear God disappoint them in their hopes and desires, and either
write them Childless, or take away their Children in wrath for their folly and
wickedness. For though God spared David, and gave him a grant of his own life,
that he should not die; yet there is no begging the life of his Child, the
Prophet reading its Destiny, the Child that is born shall surely die. So that
for people to couple together in a scandalous and sinful way, and to make Lust
the basis and foundation of Marriage, is to murder their Children in the Womb,
and in a manner to predestinate them to destruction.

But then when David heard that his Child should not live, but was under a
sentence of Death, and that according to the words of the Prophet it presently
fell sick and was desperately ill, How then did he behave himself? Truly like a
very kind and indulgent Father; for it was no sooner struck with sickness but
David besought God for the Child, And David fasted and went in and lay all
night upon the Earth, and the Elders of the House arose and went to him, to
raise him up from the Earth, but he would not, neither did he eat bread with
them, in the 16, and 17. v. of this Chapter. Here we see David in a sad and
mournful posture, expressing all the symptoms and signs of a mighty sorrow, and
being earnest in Prayer to God for it; which if all Parents would do the like
upon the same occasion when their Children are sick, or any ways afflicted,
they would find their Prayers to be a more efficacious way than all the Drugs
of the Apothecary, or the numberless prescriptions of the Physicians for the
recovery of their Children: For the effectual fervent Prayer of the Righteous
avails much.

But then we may consider, that David had great reason to bewail the sickness
of the Child, as first, being the effect and punishment of his sin, and
secondly, upon the account of natural affection.

First, He had a great deal of reason to grieve and be troubled at the sickness
of his Child, it being sent as a punishment for his own personal sin; and
therefore when he saw it in misery and pain, and great anguish, and considered
that it suffered all this principally for his sake, that he had the greatest
hand in bringing all this trouble and sorrow upon it, and that he was the great
Actor in the Tragedy, and this his sin occasioned this great scene of sorrows:
How could he do otherwise than lay the sickness of it to heart, and take on
bitterly, to think that by the murder of Vriah he had caused the Death of his
Child, and that by committing folly with Bathsheba, he had brought such an
affliction upon their Issue? I say, such a consideration must needs wound David
to the very heart, and cause him to make great Lamentations over the Child. And
truly the same sorrows would become even the best Parents, and it might not be
amiss for them to make some like Reflections. For the Parents are generally apt
to impute the Distempers, the Sickness, the Death of their Children, either to
want of due care in their Nurses, or to the badness of the Air, or the
unwholesomness of the Season, or ill diet, or the irregular course of the
Physician; I say, though we are apt to ascribe the sickness and Death of our
Children to these outward and secondary Causes, yet we should do well to
suspect our sins as the cause of their misery and sufferings, and to believe
that there is something more than ordinary in the afflictions of such harmless
and innocent Creatures. Surely the Parents have sinned though these poor Lambs
suffer, and therefore it is good and convenient that all Parents do examine
themselves, and see whether they need go any further than themselves to find
out the true cause and original of those many weaknesses and distempers which
they see in their Children, and for which they seem so much concerned and
troubled. How mightily are some Parents troubled to see their Children grow
crooked and deformed, and yet little consider that possibly their Children are
the unhandsomer for their being so proud of themselves, and glorying in their
Beauty; others are grieved to see their Children prove such Punies, so feeble
and infirm, and of such a weak Constitution, and do not reflect upon the
debaucheries of their life, and how they have lost their strength in Dalilahs
Lap. And it is a general complaint and observation that every Age declines more
and more in strength and virility, and that the latter Generation of men are
dwindled almost into Pigmies in comparison of what they were formerly, and yet
men do little consider, that Luxury and riotous Living may be assigned as the
grand Causes and Reasons of this great Degeneracy. And we also see that new and
strange Diseases do creep up daily and multiply and invade humane Bodies, and
yet we seldom impute these decays and breakings of nature to the vices of our
Progenitors.

Whereas we have just reason to grieve at the sight of those many Diseases
which attend our Children, and those great infirmities which they often labor
under, and the more reason to be humbled when we reflect upon our selves as the
Authors of them. The truth is, we have laid a train of mischiefs in our Bodies
by our Vices, which will certainly ruin and blow up our Children; we have
Created Diseases in our Bodies by trespassing too much upon nature, and
offering great violencies to our Constitution; we have broken and shattered our
Bodies by great excess, by hard and unseasonable Drinkings, and that may be one
reason why we deliver down such a weak and crasie Progeny. We have turned our
Bodies into Bogs of uncleanness and putrefaction, by our lust and wantonness,
and that may be a very proper reason why our Children carry about them such an
Hospital of Diseases. We have made our Bodies Sepulchers and burying places of
Wine, and that may be another reason why our Children become Corpses so soon,
and go so early to their Graves; we eat and drink destruction to our Children
by our Gluttony and Drunkenness, we dig their Graves as well as our own with
our Teeth, and by swallowing down overmuch, we prepare them for the devoration
of the Worms; and it is not any whit probable or likely, that our Children
should prove sound and healthful, when we distemper our Bodies, and treasure up
Diseases. And we may consider, that we do propagate Diseases many times as well
as our nature, and there are Diseases which (our Posterity find by woeful
experience) run in a blood; And therefore it is the duty of all Parents who
desire the good of their Posterity, and have a regard to the welfare and
happiness of their Children, to be very strict and punctual in observing the
Rules of temperance and sobriety, and in keeping their Bodies pure and
undefiled; forasmuch as by a vicious and debaucht life we store up Diseases for
Posterity, and transmit great evils to our Generation. For it is certain, that
by great excesses and impure mixtures we do corrupt our blood, and consequently
must convey a taint to our Offspring, and a rotten Father seldom produces any
other than a Consumptive Child; and besides, our Vices are as communicable to
our Children as our Diseases, and who knows but that God might determine to
take away David's Child for this very reason, lest he should Patrissare take
after his Father, he being the Child of an Incontinent Father, and the Issue of
such unhallowed Embraces. And therefore when David was devoting his Enemies, he
makes this one of his dreadful Curses, Let the iniquity of his Father be
remembered with the Lord, and let not the sin of his Mother be blotted out, in
the 119. Ps. and 14. v. And truly I fear that there are too many ungodly
Fathers and Mothers in the World, whose wickedness and folly is such, as that
their Children suffer for it deeply, being covered with Sores and Boils, and
having such Diseases breaking forth as are plain marks and tokens of their
Parents sins. God visiting the iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children, and
not suffering the iniquity of the Father to be concealed, nor the sin of the
Mother to be blotted out. And therefore those Parents that are conscious to
themselves of any such great and foul sin as David's was, have very great reason
to lament the Diseases and Death of their Children, when they consider, that
they themselves were the great Instruments of bringing all those miseries upon
their Children, and that their sins have had the greatest hand in their
destruction. And it is very well worth our observation, that in the first Age of
the World it was never seen that the Son died before the Father, but the oldest
always went first: But then when the wickedness of men grew great, and their
Pride so great that they were too high for their Station, and would needs be
building Castles in the Air, and climbing up to the Battlements of Heaven, it
happened presently afterward that Terahs Son died before his Father, and there
is a special note and mark set upon it as a kind of wonder, in the 9. of
Genesis and 28. v. And Haran died before his Father Terah in the Land of his
Nativity. From whence we may observe, that the wickedness of a Father is enough
to alter the course of nature, and to shorten his Childrens days, and to
accelerate their Death, and bring them to the dust before their time. And thus
I have been somewhat long on this Argument, that I might represent to you the
danger of a sinning Father and Mother, and what a fatal mischief they do their
Children by their wickedness, in that they bring a Curse upon their Family, and
by their sin occasion the Death and ruin of an Innocent Child; as is clear and
manifest in this one instance of David's Child being taken away for the sin of
his Father. And we may also remember what a grievous Curse God entailed upon
old Eli's Family and Posterity, that they should die in the Flower of their
Age, and be cut off in their very prime, and that chiefly upon the account of
old Eli. And therefore Parents had need take a care to please God, and that
they do commit no great offense, and to keep from great transgressions, that so
their Children may not repent that ever they were born of them, and suffer
sadly for their miscarriages. And indeed all Parents that desire it should be
well with their Children, and that they should live long and see good days, are
concerned to live a pure and unspotted life, to possess their Vessels in
sanctification and honor, not in the lust of Concupisence, otherwise they may
bring great miseries upon their Children, and perhaps a sudden Death; and if
they are resolved to continue their debaucheries and lewd Amors, they had even
as good strangle their Children when they are newly born, and it may be a mercy
to tear them in pieces as Medea did her Brother Absyrtus, rather than they
should live to inherit their Phthisicks, Consumptions, and loathsome Diseases,
and to be plagued all their life long with the miserable effects of their
Parents sins. And truly all vicious and ungodly Parents have the same grounds
that David had to lament over their Children when they shall see them sick of
their Diseases, consuming with their Lusts, and expiring under the curse of
their sins. And therefore if Parents would but take care to live better, and
more virtuously, possibly their Children would not prove so sickly, and might
live longer; for it is certain, that David's Child was sick, and died so soon,
for the wickedness of the Father.

Secondly, David's great grief and mourning for his Child, during the time of
its sickness, was very just and reasonable upon another account, as being an
expression of humanity, and the result of a natural affection.

For our Religion has not like the Stoic sealed up the fountain of tears, and
wiped them away from our eyes, whilst we are in this bitter Achor and Valley of
tears; but has given us liberty to vent our sorrows, and ease the inward griefs
of our mind in a reasonable measure, according to the proportions of humanity,
and so far as is consistent with, and not contradictory to our Christian hope;
and therefore as to grieve immoderately is unlike a Christian, so not to grieve
at all is unlike a man: so that David's sorrowing for his Child when he saw it
in pain and anguish, was but a reasonable passion, becoming him as a man, in
sympathizing with the sufferings of humane nature, and much more becoming him
as he stood in the relation of a Father, whose Bowels, if he had any, must
needs move and yearn over a sick and languishing Child. And therefore it was no
such real matter of wonder, as the Spectators of David's sorrows thought it, to
see him involved in tears, and making his Bed on the ground, and acting the
part of a true Mourner, whilst his Child was alive; for he saw it restless, and
tumbling up and down for ease, and could find none; he saw it in great pain and
anguish, and that there was no helping of it; he saw that Physicians were of no
value, and all they could do could do no good; he saw the Child lie panting and
heaving, and bemoaning it self with sighs and groans that were unutterable; he
saw it in sore conflicts and struggling for life, and in the pangs and Agonies
of Death; and how could a Father forbear weeping and making great Lamentations
over a Child in such a deplorable and sad condition? He saw also the Mother
wringing of her hands, and beating her Breast, and with floods of tears running
down her Cheeks, and crying out, What shall I do for my Child? Lord spare my
Child, Lord be merciful to my Child: He saw likewise the Attendants that stood
about not well able to endure the room, for the hollow sighs and sobs, and the
piercing groans of a Child that was drawing on, and breathing out its last. And
lastly, he saw the servants of his House very much clouded, and hanging down,
and going mourning and heavily, and quis talia fando, temperet a lachrymis? Who
can possibly forbear weeping almost at the rehearsal of such a large scene of
sorrows? How could a Father restrain his tears when he beheld his own flesh and
blood, and Bone of his Bone, to be in such great affliction? How could he
endure to see his own Bowels torn from him without a deep and sorrowful
resentment? How could he look upon a Child, an Innocent Child, rolling about in
so much pain and torment, without being (...), heavy and sorrowful, even to
Death? Would it not melt a heart of stone, and draw tears from a marble to
behold such a spectacle of pain and misery? And therefore David's taking on so
heavily for his Child in the time of its sickness, was very reasonable and
justifiable too; forasmuch as tears are the natural tribute which we pay to the
sufferings of Mankind, and much more do we owe them to our Friends and
Relations, and our dear Children, and such as are part of our selves.

But then, if David was such a man of sorrows, and took on so grievously for
his Child in the time of its sickness, and whilst it was yet alive, surely we
may expect to find him in a desperate condition and ready to sink into the
Grave with it, when he heard of its departure. Certainly, he that was so much
troubled to see his Child in pain, must be in the greatest Agonies of sorrow
when he hears it is dead. He that could not endure to see it in misery, how
will he bear the loss of it? He that was ready to kill himself with grief for
his Child when he was sick, surely cannot live when he is dead and gone, and
past all recovery. This was that indeed which his Servants, and all that were
about him expected. They supposed, seeing their Master had laid the sickness of
the Child so much to heart, that he would be in strange confusions, and refuse
to be comforted when he heard of its Death. But there was no such thing, the
Scene is much altered and changed, and the expectation of his servants is much
deceived: for instead of extreme mourning for the Child when it was dead, he
begins to revive and take heart, and falls to his meat, and takes those
refreshments which he had lately refused. Which action and carriage of David
showed very strange and a wonder to his Servants in the 21. v. But he presently
removes the wonder, and tells them the reason why he mourned no longer, but
rather rejoiced at the news of the Child's Death. And he said, While the Child
was yet alive I fasted and wept, for I said, Who can tell, whether the Lord
will be gracious to me that the Child may live? but now he is dead, wherefore
should I fast? can I bring him back again? I shall go to him but he shall not
return to me.

In which expressions David does signify and declare the reasons why his
carriage upon the Death of his Child differed so much from what it was when it
was sick, and yet alive. For I said, who can tell whether the Lord will be
gracious to me that the Child may live? that is, though the Child be
desperately ill and past all hopes as to outward appearance, yet who knows but
God may hear my Prayers for him, if they be made with true fervor and
devotion, with zeal and integrity? Who can tell but upon my humble Petition and
earnest Intercession for the Child, God may spare him to me, and give a further
grant of his life, and recall the black Sentence and Warrant for his Death, if
there be such a due application made to him? For whilst there is life there is
hopes, and there is mercy always with God, that he may be feared and
supplicated unto, and therefore it may be expedient and useful to continue my
Prayers and to proceed in my penitential sorrows. And thus did David argue the
reasonableness of his sorrowing and humbling himself before God for the Child
whilst it was yet alive.

And truly it would be an excellent and laudable thing in all Parents to follow
this Example of David, so as to betake themselves to Prayer, and to use the
deepest humiliation when their Relations and Children happen to be under the
rod and hand of an afflicting Providence; for there is no such effectual means
for their recovery as a hearty and sincere Prayer. For the effectual fervent
Prayer of the righteous avails much, says St. James in the 5. c. and 16. v.
There is more virtue and efficacy in Prayer than we are ready to believe, and
they have a more sovereign power to cure all maladies than the best
prescriptions: This is the Panaceavera, and the great Catholicon, surpassing
all those of humane Art and Invention, which some have so vainly boasted to
find out. Prayer is the Universal Remedy, and has performed greater Cures, and
greater Recoveries, and done greater wonders than all the Elixirs, or
Proprietates, or Nostrums of the most skilful and renowned Physicians. It was
Prayer that restored Hezekiah from a dangerous sickness, and prolonged his
Days; it was Prayer which supported David under all his troubles, and gave him
ease in his greatest extremities; it was Prayer that opened the eyes of the
blind, and ejected the Devils, and did the most glorious things to all
Admiration: and therefore we must apply our selves to God, and depend upon our
Prayers as the most proper and specific remedy in afflictions. We must be
fervent, and frequent, and importunate in Prayers to God on the behalf of our
Friends and Relations, and who can tell whether God will be gracious to us that
our Friends may live.

But then may some reply and say, it was in vain for David to use Prayer or any
other means; it was to no purpose for him to expect the recovery of his Child,
or that God should answer him though he prayed never so much. For he knew that
God had decreed the Death of his Child, and told him in as plain words as could
be, by his Prophet, that the Child should surely die; and why then should David
flatter himself so as to imagine that he could do the Child any good by his
Prayers, or prevail with God for his Recovery? Why should he use that dubious
Language, as, who can tell, it is possible, or it may be that the Lord will be
gracious to me that the Child may live? Why should he stand doubting or
supposing a possibility of a thing, when God had positively declared the
contrary?

To which I Answer, That God declared by his Prophet Jonah, the destruction of
the Ninevites, and prefixed the time to just forty days, and this was declared
with as great positiveness as the Death of David's Child by the Prophet Nathan,
and the Prophet Jonah tried and said, Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be
overthrown, in the 3. of Jonah and 4. v. and yet after the delivery and
promulgation of this sentence, the Ninevites did not despond, or utterly
despair of Gods mercy, but fell to repentance and humbling themselves, and put
the success to the same venture that David did, and much in the same Language,
saying in the 9. v. Who can tell if God will return and repent, and turn away
from his fierce anger, that we perish not? And what was the Issue of their
Repentance and Humiliation, and using the best means they could to divert Gods
Judgments? Why the Issue was, that by their Repentance they stav'd off the
judgment and put it back, as we may see in the 10. and last ver. And God saw
their works, that they turned from their evil ways, and God repented of the
evil that he had said, that he would do unto them, and did it not. And so in
the 20. Chapter of the 2. of Kings, God ordered the Prophet Isaiah to go and carry
to Hezekiah the same message of Death, and to acquaint him that he must expect
no other than Death. Thus says the Lord, Set thine House in order, for thou
shall die, and not live: Could any thing be more absolute and positive than
these words? and yet Hezekiah instead of melancholizing himself with the
thoughts of Death, or expecting it every hour, turned his face to the Wall, and
prayed unto the Lord, saying, I beseech thee, O Lord, remember now how I have
walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which
is good in thy sight: and Hezekiah wept sore, in the 3. ver. And what good,
will you say, could Hezekiah's praying, and weeping, and appealing to the
Righteousness of his life do him? Could that or any thing else save him and
prevent his dying, when God had so solemnly Decreed? yes truly his Prayer and
Repentance did him so much good, as to prevail with God to grant him a longer
Lease of his life; and ordered the same Prophet that had just now told him of
his Death, to return forthwith and acquaint him also that he had reverst the
fatal sentence: Turn again, and tell Hezekiah the Captain of my people, Thus
says the Lord, the God of David thy Father, I have heard thy Prayer, I have
seen thy tears: behold, I will heal thee; on the third day thou shall go up
unto the House of the Lord. And I will add unto thy days fifteen years. What
then shall we say, that there is any change in the Divine Decrees, or any
inconstancy in God, or that he is worse than his word, when he thus positively
denounces judgment, and yet suspends it? God forbid, says the Apostle, yea let
God be true, but every man a liar, as it is written, that thou might be
justified in thy sayings. And therefore for the clearing of God from all
imputation of falsehood or mutability in these instances of his judgments
denounced against sinners without any actual execution, we are to understand
that those threatenings of God in Scripture, which run in an absolute form, have
a condition implied, that is, Nineveh shall be destroyed, and Hezekiah shall
die except they repent: So that God does still reserve a power of revocation,
and puts in a conditional clause of repentance, which though it be not expressed,
yet is always to be understood; and therefore where Gods threatenings of death
and destruction seem most peremptory and final, we are yet to attempt the
diverting and preventing them by our Prayers and repentance; we are to use the
means, and as we say, leave the success to God: For who knows but the Lord may
be gracious? But if God will not hear our Prayers, nor accept our Repentance,
as he did neither in the present Case of David's Child; yet we are to use the
most proper means, and to try all the ways imaginable to pacify Gods anger, and
to appease his wrath, and still to go on praying and repenting as David did. We
are not to despond of mercy, or to despair of success, but at the very last
push, and the utmost extremity of affliction, to say, who can tell but the Lord
will be gracious?

And thus I have delivered to you the just reasons why David mourned so
exceedingly for his Child when it lay upon a Bed of sickness, and languishing:
As first, considering that his own sin was the chief and declared cause of his
Child's grievous and desperate sickness; and secondly, upon the account of that
natural affection which is in all Parents toward their Children, which moves
their bowels to pity and bewail them when they are in misery and distress.

But then the great wonder is, that the Father which was so much concerned and
deeply immerst in sorrow for the sickness of his Child, should give over
mourning upon the death and loss of it; that his sorrow should expire and be at
an end as soon as the Child was departed, and had given up the Ghost. But now
he is dead, why should I fast? Why should I trouble and grieve my self any
longer? But how oddly and strangely, may some say, does this look in a Father,
to dry his Eyes, and clear up his Countenance presently upon the death and loss
of his Child? Is not this a thing out of course, and a very strange temper, to
sorrow so much for the Child when it was sick, and to cease sorrowing when it
was absolutely dead and gone? Surely, this giving over mourning at the death of
so near and dear a Relation as a Child, must needs proceed
fromhard-heartedness, or the want of natural affection and of common humanity.

But then we may observe, that David both to excuse and justify his not
mourning for the Death of his Child, nor taking on so grievously as he did
before, alleges these good and substantial reasons, as first, The
consideration of the necessity of his own dying; and secondly, The
impossibility of his Child's coming to life again. And we may also suppose that
he had some further considerations at that time, which helped to allay and
silence his sorrows, as namely First, the consideration of the Child's dying in
its Age of Innocence. Secondly, That it was gone out of a wicked and
troublesome World. Thirdly, That it was freed from those pains, and sicknesses,
and diseases, which are incident to this mortal condition. Fourthly, That it
was released from those pains and miseries which it underwent: And fifthly,
That it was the will of God it should be so. And it is but very reasonable to
imagine, that all these considerations, though not verbally expressed, might
occur to David's mind, or any man's else upon the like emergency.

I begin with the first consideration that put a stop to David's sorrowing for
the loss of his Child, and that was the necessity of his own dying. Can I bring
him back again? I shall go to him. David considered that Death was common to
all, and that it is appointed for all men once to die: What man is he that
lives and shall not see death? in the 89. Ps. and 48. v. And I know, says Job,
that thou will bring me to death, and to the House appointed for all the
living; and so David was convinced that he must as surely die as he was then
alive, and that life is but a short preamble to death, and why then should he
grieve and torment himself for the loss of his Child, when nothing had happened
to that but what must also happen to himself and to all men living? For he was
only gone the way of all flesh, and had paid that debt to Nature, which every
one must do at one time or other, sooner or later. His Child indeed was dead,
but that was but a common, natural and unavoidable thing, and the beaten road
to the Grave, and the usual way of going out of the World. He considered wisely
with himself that his Child was only gone before him, and that he must prepare
to follow; that his death indeed was somewhat early and immature and sooner
than ordinary; but the Father must not stay long behind. He saw that sometimes
the buds and blossoms were nipt and fell to the ground, and that ripe fruit
would certainly drop off; He observed that sometimes the Lambs went to the
slaughter, and that there was no escaping for the old Sheep; And therefore it
was in vain to be troubled at a thing which was past and gone and could not be
helped, and which all must submit to, young and old, the Father as well as the
Child.

And what though it was a Princely Babe, and Heir to a Crown, and if it had
lived might have been valued at as great a rate as his Father, worth ten
thousand of the ordinary sort of people; yet Death was no respecter of persons,
makes no distinction, and takes the ignoble and noble, the Prince and the
Peasant, and sweeps away all alike; it is not a Crown or a great Inheritance
that will purchase life, or deliver from Death; it is not a high descent or
being of the Royal Blood, that will privilege or exempt from the Grave. But
David himself must surrender up and lay down his Scepter at the summons of the
King of Terrors, which had so lately cut off and prevented his Sons Inheriting
the Fathers Glory; the branch is now lopt off, and ere long the root will be
taken up and carried away. And therefore it is not long, says David, before I
shall go to the same place, and be laid equal with my Child in the dust. He has
only made the first hancel of my Tomb, and taken the first possession of my
Grave. He has had the misfortune, or rather privilege, to go before me, but I
am going apace to meet him. He was snatched away betimes, and I only wait Gods
leisure, and look when my change will come, and expect every day to be called
away; and therefore I do not think it reasonable to imbitter this short life,
or to make my self uneasy and uncomfortable the rest of my days, by a great and
violent sorrow for the loss of my Child; when I know that I have not much
longer to live, and that the days of my Pilgrimage will shortly be at an end,
and that his condition will shortly be mine, and we shall both meet together in
the Grave, and be fellow Lodgers in the Dust, and sleep together in the same
Chambers of Darkness; and therefore, says David, why should I fast? why should
I macerate and wast my self? why should I grieve and pine away? why should I go
and throw away my life in sorrowing for the Death of my Child, when I know that
all the sorrow in the World will do no good? and that my Child has passed those
Gates of Death, which I my self must after a little while strive and struggle
to get thorough, and that he is now in his Grave out of which I cannot keep
long; and why then should I fast? can I bring him back again? I shall go to
him, but he shall not return to me.

But he shall not return to me. That Is another Consideration which might well
serve to pacify David's sorrow and discontent at the loss of his Child; namely,
the impossibility of its coming to life again, or returning to the same
condition as formerly. I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.

Death is that which puts a perfect and absolute end to this present life, and
when we are committed to the Dust and laid up in the Grave, there is no
breaking forth, no expecting our liberty or enlargement till the day of the
general Resurrection. We are Prisoners of hope, says the Prophet, that is,
though we have a Promise and assurance of our rising again, and being delivered
from the Grave, yet still we are Prisoners till the time of our Redemption
comes, and consequently must remain in hold, and under the strict custody and
durance of the Grave. Death is a total privation of life, and a totali
Privatione ad habitum non datur regressus, our Philosophy tells us, that is,
though it be possible to recover the sight when the Organ of the Eye is only
inflamed or distempered, or grown over with a film; yet when a man is stark
blind, and his Eyes are dropped out of his Head, then such a recovery is utterly
impossible: and so Death being a total privation of motion, sensation, and all
the acts of the animal life, there is no returning after that has once passed
upon us, to any such vital operations, we are, says the Prophet Samuel, 2 Samuel
14. and 14. ver. as water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be gathered up
again, that is, as Water spilt upon the ground presently vanishes out of sight,
and sinks into the Earth, and by the diffluence of its parts is so dispersed and
wasted that there is no gathering it up again in the same quantity that it
fell; so Death causes such a dissolution of the parts of our Bodies, that there
is no reuniting them in the same manner, or forming them into the same orderly
lively Fabric by all the power and art in the World. Can these dry bones live,
says the Prophet, is a Question that might very well be asked, as being a thing
almost incredible, but that nothing is impossible with God. But then how is it
that these dry bones will live? surely not in the same way as formerly, nor can
they be enlivened by any humane power or Art, but they shall be quickened by a
miraculous power, by the same power which raised Jesus from the Dead; but at
present, during the time and reign of mortality, they must remain rotten, and
shattered, and liveless, and only in a possibility to return to life by the
wonderful power of God in the Morning of the Resurrection. And Job in the 24.
c. and 14. v. asks much the same question, If a man die, shall he live again?
where Job does not so much doubt or question the truth of a Resurrection, as
puts it out of all doubt by so propounding it; if a man die, shall he live?
yes, he shall, but not by any power of nature to restore it self, nor that
there is any remains of spirit in man after death which can quicken into new
life of its own accord, nor that there is any seed of immortality in humane
Bodies, as some of the Jews did fondly conceive, when they imputed the
Resurrection to the virtue of a Worm in the backbone which never dies: And
therefore though we are to believe another life, yet we must believe it in
another place; For when our life here is once expired, there is no return of
it, till God breath into us a new spirit of life, and inspire us with new
vigor and motion. And therefore prayed in another place, that God would
continue his life a little longer upon Earth, as verily believing he should
never see it any more when he had once left it; Spare me, O Lord, a little
longer, before I go hence, and be no more seen, Ps. 39. and 13. v. Man, says
Solomon, goes to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets, long
indeed, whence there will be no moving or stirring a foot till the great day of
Judgment. And not improper to our purpose is that observation of the Fox in the
Fable, who when he was much urged and importuned to go and pay a Visit to the
Lion in the time of his sickness, and told, that his Company would be more
useful and serviceable to the Lion, in order to the helping him to make his
will, as being one famous for his wisdom and sagacity; answered, by no means,
for there was a great deal of danger in going to visit this King of Beasts; For
he had observed a great resort to the Lion, but saw no marks or footsteps of
any that ever returned from him. Vestigia nulla retrorsum; and so may we say,
that we have known millions that have entered into the shades below, but none
that ever came back from thence; and therefore we find, that when Dives was in
torment, and made this earnest request to Abraham, that one might rise from the
dead and inform his Brethren of the truth of Hell torments, and by such a
wonderful information might scare them from doing any thing that might bring
them thither; yet this request was denied him upon this account, Joh. 7. and 9.
v. there being so great a publication of a future State by Moses and the
Prophets and other divine testimonies; and besides, Abraham told him, that
between us and you there is a great Gulf fixed, which place is enough to evince
the impossibility of a return to this World after Death; and therefore we
imagine, that David at the parting of his Child took his final leave of him,
bidding him an Eternal farewell, and an Everlasting good night. For he
considered that there was no hopes of seeing him again under the same
circumstances, or conversing with him in the flesh; and therefore having
decently committed his Body to the ground, and laid him in the bosom of our
common Mother Earth, and perhaps dropping a tear or two upon the Hearse, and
besprinkling the Grave with tears, as our Savior did Lazarus in testimony how
much he loved him, he retires from the Funeral with great Solemnity we may
imagine, but without any further Lamentations, saying, wherefore should I fast?
can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.

But then perhaps several may be ready to tax this Discourse with impertinency,
and say, what needs there all this stir and ado to prove a thing that never was
gainsaid or contradicted? as namely, the impossibility of the dead coming to
life again, and rising out of their Graves to live anew in this World: who is
so silly or credulous as to expect such a thing? or who would desire to see the
Ghosts, or any representations of their Friends when they are dead and gone?

To which I answer, That I believe there is none so silly, or whimsical, or
deeply melancholy, as to expect a return of their Friends and Relations from
the Grave. But then people make a great Argument against themselves, and do
highly condemn themselves of the greatest folly in their inordinate sorrowings
for the Dead. For why should they take on and weep so bitterly for the loss of
a Child or Relation, when they believe no such thing as a return from Death?
why do they wound themselves with such mighty and piercing sorrows for their
Relations, when they know they are dead and gone, and that there is no hopes of
seeing them again as long as the World endures? This indeed is their folly to
grieve for an irrecoverable loss, and to weep incessantly at the remembrance of
deceased Friends. For it is the vainest, idlest thing that can be, to mourn when
all the mourning in the World will do no good, neither to us or our Friends;
and therefore this consideration, that all our tears are in vain and
ineffectual, and that they may be spent as well upon a dead Tree as a dead
Child, and recover one as soon as the other, may serve to suppress all the
extravagant sorrowings of all persons for their Friends and Relations, and make
them argue with themselves the unreasonableness of all such desperate mourning,
saying with David, now they are dead why should we fast and take on so
grievously, and refuse to be comforted, as Rachel, because our Children or our
Friends are not? For to what purpose is all our weeping, and mourning, and
casting down our selves? can we bring them back again? no, that is utterly
impossible, we shall go to them very speedily, and follow them close into their
Graves, but there is no expecting to see them any more: they shall not return
to us.

Thirdly, Another thing which might well stop David's sorrowing for his Child,
might be this Consideration, That his Child died in its innocent time, and
before it came to the Age of sinning.

For though it be a great happiness to have our Children live and grow up to be
Men and Women, to see them ripen to the perfect use of reason, and to arrive at
years of discretion; though it be a singular comfort and honor to Parents to
see their Children grow eminent for Piety and Wisdom, and to become the great
Lights and Ornaments of their Generation; yet the great unhappiness in breeding
up Children is this, that Parents are not sure of their Childrens Inclinations
to virtue. And they are not certain though they give them the best Education in
the World, but that they may make an ill use of it, and turn the edge of their
wits against God and Virtue, and only prove more ingeniously wicked, and great
Critics in Debauchery. For good Education does not always and infallibly make
good men; and though our Children are sometimes very hopeful when they are
young, and give great presages and specimens of virtuous dispositions, yet
their inclinations are as uncertain as wind, and as unstable as water in that
slippery Age, and it is a thousand to one but that when they come from under the
Discipline of the Rod and Ferula, and are left more to their own liberty, and
have the reins laid loose upon their Necks; it is then, I say, very great odds,
but they will prove contrary to expectation, and the bias of their
inclinations be turned a wrong way. For whoever shall consider the flexibility
of youth, and how easily it is seduced and led aside by bad Examples and great
temptations, which do every where abound in the World, cannot but think it a
Miracle of Grace for youth to keep upright and unspotted from the World. It may
indeed much fortify and preserve youth against the Assaults and flatteries of
Vice, to be seasoned with good and virtuous Principles: But if they are never
so carefully Educated, and religiously brought up, yet when they come fresh and
green into the World, they are ready to be bent any way, and most likely to
lean to the wrong side, and to stand according to the bent of corrupt nature.

But questionless good Education will go a great way in making a good man, and
has a great stroke and influence upon the succeeding part of our life. But yet
it is but a common supposition, that that Virtue which was so secure and
flourishing when it was confined within Walls and out of the reach of
temptations, may be in great hazard and danger when it comes abroad, and to
live in the Air, and within the breath of temptations. For a Cloister may
secure that Virtue which perhaps would be lost if it walked at large, and a
School may send forth a good Lad, which perhaps Liberty and Company may corrupt
and spoil. So that there is no depending upon or assurance of our Childrens
Virtue whilst they are young, and before they come to the Regions of Choice,
and make some experiment of themselves, how tenacious they are of Virtue, and
how much they can hold out against the great and suitable temptations that are
in the World; and therefore we are very fond and foolish to promise to our
selves great matters from our Children, or to build overmuch upon their future
Virtue, and to please our selves with thinking what rare men they will make,
and what great Comforts they will prove to us; whereas we know not what great
alterations time may produce, and what years may bring forth. For although we
may dote upon our Children when they are young, as David did upon his Darling
Adonijah, and applaud their Inclinations, yet they may get to head, and grow
Masterless, and disobedient and incorrigible as Adonijah was, they may grow
worse and worse as they grow older, and as Jacob said upon another account, may
by their great undutifulness and ill behavior bring down our gray hairs with
sorrow to the Grave.

We are apt, too apt indeed to mutter and repine at the Providence of God when
he takes away our Children when they are young, and of great hopes as we think
and presume; but God knows what manner of persons they might have been, if they
had lived, whether they might have proved good or bad, a joy or grief unto us.
What if these hopeful Children had lived to imbibe ill Principles, to scoff at
Virtue, to deride the Being of a God, and to make a mock of sin? what if they
had lived to be profane and irreligious, and to prove such youths as we have
some in these days, should we then have thought their life a Blessing, and not
rather a Curse unto us? and who knows but there was a great mixture of mercy in
Gods Judgment upon David, in taking away and bereaving him of his Child, lest
he should have proved one of bad inclinations, as being sprung of a vicious
Stock, and as the vulgar Proverb says, that which is bred in the bone will
hardly ever out of the flesh.

We see how ill his other Children proved, Tamar was defiled and ashamed of her
self; Amnon was incestuous and brought a great stain upon his Family: and his
Dearest Absalom was both a Murderer and a Rebel, and died in such a state of
wickedness, that David was exceedingly troubled at his going out of the World
in such an impenitent condition, mightily deploring his untimely Death, and
wishing if God had so pleased, that he had laid down his life in exchange for
his Sons, speaking it with the greatest ingemination, as a sign of the deepest
sorrow, O my Son Absalom, my Son, my Son, would God I had died for thee, O
Absalom, my Son, my Son. And if these Children of David proved so bad, who
knows but the Child that died might have proved as bad as any of the rest in
case it had lived? Ah Beloved, we know not what manner of persons our Children
will prove, what their qualities and conditions may be, and therefore we know
not well what we do when we murmur at Gods removing them from us. And if we do
but look into the Proverbs, we may be easily convinced (and observe how we read
there) that Children are not always such blessings that we should desire so
much their living, for they may be Curses as well as Blessings to us, according
as they shall prove. A wise Son makes a glad Father, but a foolish Son is the
heaviness of his Mother, Prove. 10. 1. and in the 23. of Prove. and 24. v. The
Father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice, and he that begets a wise
Child shall have joy of him; and in the 17. chapter and 21. v. He that begets a
Fool does it to his sorrow, and the Father of a Fool has no joy; and in the
25. v. A foolish Son is a grief to his Father, and a bitterness to her that
bare him. In all which expressions we may see, that a man is much happier in
having no Children than such as are foolish and vicious; and that nothing can
be a greater grief and dishonor to Parents, than to have silly and wicked
Children. What comfort is there in having such lewd and profane Sons as old
Eli's, who brought a scandal upon their Father, and a Curse upon their Family,
the whole Generation? O^ what can be a greater grief to a Father than to have
such a Son as Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin? that is, one
that shall prove the pest of the Age, and the^ bane of Mankind? And therefore
we need not be so greedy and desirous of Children, or so loath to part with them
when we have them, unless we could have a better prospect of their conditions,
and assuredly knew that they would prove Comforts and Ornaments to us, by their
wisdom and good conversation. An^ therefore David might well comfor^ himself,
and take heart after the lo^^ of his Child, to think that though he had lost a
Child, yet it was a^ Innocent Child, one that had n^ great sin, if any to
answer for, on^ that had not sullied its Soul with the least tincture of any
actual sin or transgression, and that it went as pure out of the World as it
came into it; whereas if it had lived to maturity, it might have been like the
rest of the World, or died with some great sin upon it unrepented of, as well
as some of his Children had done.

And truly the same consideration may well be made use of by all Parents, to
bring them quietly to sustain the loss of their Children when they die in their
nonage, and very young. And what can be a more comfortable consideration, than
for Parents under such losses, to think that their Childrens Virtue if they had
lived, was very uncertain, and that Vice was the most likely to prevail? that
sin reigned more in the World than goodness, that the greater part of the World
was stark naught, and that but few continued in it but contracted some spot or
stain, and none that was perfectly Innocent? And therefore it might be a mercy
to their Children to be set out of the reach of sin and temptation, and to have
such an early translation to Heaven, before they had done any thing to hazard
their Salvation, or to forfeit the love of God and title to Eternal Life and
Happiness. Well may Parents pronounce their Children blessed when they die in
such a state of Innocence. For of such, says our Savior, is the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Fourthly, Another consideration which pacified David's sorrows for the loss of
his Child might very well be this, That it was removed from the great Evils and
Calamity of the World.

This World (God knows) is but a troublesome place at the best to live in, and
no man must think to go scot-free from troubles of one kind or other. The
Thracians, as Cicero reports out of Herodotus, were wont to weep at the Birth
and Nativity of their Children, to think what a sad and troublesome Theater
they entered upon, and that they were born to know a great deal of sorrow and
misery; but to rejoice at their departure and going off the Stage, to think
that they then retired from the distracting cares and inquietudes of a
troublesome World, and were past the reach and grievance of all misfortunes.
This World is too low a Region to be free from storms and tempests, and there
is no expecting a perfect serenity but above the Clouds; and there is no such
happiness to be enjoyed here as a freedom from all misery and trouble, he being
the happiest man at present that meets with the least trouble or perplexity;
and therefore no man of experience in the World needs to be told, that all here
is Vanity and vexation of Spirit; and whoever shall consider the great changes
of misery that are in the World, from War to Pestilence, from Pestilence to
Fire, from Fire to great Confusions which have happened, not only in the memory
of many, but in our days, and within the compass of a few Years; and moreover,
what great and terrible judgments are continually impending over our Heads, and
full upon the Inhabitants of the Earth because their wickedness is great; and
also the continual losses and crosses, the sorrows and disappointments which
come of course, and happen according to the mutable condition of things below.
Whoever, I say, shall seriously consider this sad revolution and mixture of
sorrows, cannot judge it in reason good being here, or look upon the World as a
desirable place to live in, much less think his Children or Relations the
happier for being here. And therefore David might well think it unreasonable to
mourn for the loss of his Child, when it was considered, that it was gone out
of a cross and troublesome World, where the highest and most advantageous
condition (as himself had found by sad and woeful experience) could not exempt a
man from great Calamities, when he who was his Father and a King, was forced
from his Throne, and put to his shifts, and driven from Post to Pillar, and
perhaps was reduced to such great straits and extremities, that he would have
exchanged his condition with the meanest of his Subjects: How could he mourn
for the Death of his Child when he considered that it was subject to the same
Calamities as himself, and perhaps might prove every whit as unfortunate in the
World if it had lived to succeed him, and might have Inherited his troubles as
well as his Crown? And therefore he looked upon it as a kind Providence, that
God had so happily prevented the Child's seeing any of those miseries which the
Father had felt, and thought it a singular happiness and favor of Heaven, that
his Child went out of the World without knowing or being sensible what a
trouble meant: whereas himself had been sufficiently tossed up and down upon
the waves of affliction, and miserably broken with the cares and inquietudes of
a troublesome World, and knew the World better than to esteem it the best or
happiest place that his Child could be in. And truly all Parents would do well
to consider how it has fared with them, what usages and entertainment they have
met with in the World, what reproaches and slanders, what losses and vexations
have fallen to their share, and how troublesome a passage they have had; and I do
not question, but that upon a serious reflection upon the Calamities in their
days, and their own private personal sufferings, they will be ready to confess
with old Jacob, that the days of their Pilgrimage have been few and evil, and
conclude them happiest that are out of it. And therefore all Parents have
reason to cease mourning for the loss and death of their Children, upon the
same consideration which we may well suppose David made use of, namely, that
they are past the Waves of this troublesome World, and are taken away from the
evil to come.

Fifthly, Another thing which might well prevent David's extreme sorrowing for
the Death of his Child might be this consideration,

That it was freed from those sicknesses and diseases which attend this mortal
life.

No doubt but David upon the loss of his Child, did consider what innumerable
Diseases do continually accost and prey upon humane Bodies, as first the many
weaknesses and diseases that are natural to and attend our Infancy and
Childhood, as the great pain of breeding teeth, the being subject to the small
Pox, to engender Worms, to fall into the Rickets, and many other distempers
which are common and peculiar to Childhood; besides the many dangers that
Children are apt to run into, and the sad accidents that often do befall them,
whereby they contract either lameness or deformity, or come to an untimely end.
And if we have the good fortune to get safe over our Childhood, and to come to
riper years, yet as we grow strong, so our diseases are stronger, and in our
youth our blood is hot and feavourish and quickly in a flame, and our very
strength of nature helps to augment our distempers, and makes them prove the
more fatal to us; and when we come to the perfect state of Manhood, our very
dependence and presumption upon the strength and benefit of nature, makes us
bold with those Vices which oftentimes help to cut us off in the midst of our
days, and then if we live to old Age, that is a Disease of it self, and nothing
but sorrow is our Portion, and the pains of Death lay hold on us: so that if we
take a survey of our whole life, and of our passage from the Womb to the Tomb,
we shall find that every stage and period of this mortal life is waylaid and
beset with Death. And we know that there are certain dangerous seasons in the
Age of Man which we call Climacterical Years, wherein our life is in great
Controversy, and we have a push for it whether we shall live or die: And truly
there are so many Diseases that are of course, and many more that are
incidental and happen between our infancy and youth, that it is a great wonder
that we ever live to be men, and much more that we should pass all those
casualties and misfortunes which lie all along in our way to the Age of
threescore Years and ten. And moreover it may be considered what a great
fatality Gods Judgments make, what a great depopulation and vast havoc of
Mankind, the Plague, and Sword, and Famine do make; and that when these come
they sweep away Millions as with the Besom of Destruction.

But then secondly, If we do further observe how many sorts and kinds of
Diseases there are in the World, how that new Diseases daily start up, and that
old ones so vary and alter in their circumstances, and contract such strange
degrees of malignity, that they become new too; how also that some Diseases are
acute, others Chronical, and that some are rackt with the Stone, others
tortured with the Gout; some are drowned in a Dropsy, others burnt up with a
Feavour; and that there is scarce a man but has a Disease peculiar to himself,
and proper to his constitution, and dies something a several way from his
fellow Mortals: I say, whoever shall make this observation of the great swarm
and multiplicity of Diseases which assault Mankind (and that whereas the
Diseases now mentioned do kill their thousands, so there is a Consumption which
kills its ten thousands, and deserves the Name of Apollyon, the great Destroyer
of Mankind) must needs grant that the life of man is in jeopardy every moment.
And that he is obnoxious to a great deal of misery whilst he lives.

But if my Courage or your Hearts would serve you to go into the Hospital, and
there turn over the great Volume of Diseases, and see what huge havoc they
make; to behold how the Canker has pared off the side of one man's Face, and
rotted off another Nose, and eaten out an Eye, and carried away a Limb; to see
how the Palsy has mortified another, and struck him half dead; and how many
either by natural or vicious Consumptions are turned into mere Skeletons and
walking Ghosts, and are only the shadows of men: Here you will say are sad
spectacles of mortality, here are such sights of humane frailty, as are enough
to make the hardest heart to bleed, and to squeeze tears from a stock. Who can
forbear weeping and lamenting to see Man that is born of a Woman become the
spoils of so many Diseases, and to be Anatomized and Dissected, even alive?
Here then we may see the sad and dismal ruins of these fleshly Bodies, and what
miserable Creatures we are when God is pleased to afflict, and to lay sore and
grievous Diseases upon us. And truly we are all subject to various and manifold
Diseases, which issue forth in effects according to their several kinds and
qualities; the matter of most Diseases lies lodged in our nature and brooding
within us: and we have the unhappiness to inherit some Diseases by traduction
from our Parents, and there are many more which are hatched by our Vices, and
prove the most deadly and mortiferous. Some Diseases are so favorable as to
carry off quietly and speedily, and others are more cruel, and like the Tyrant
multiply our Deaths, and kill us by piece-meals; and nothing is a truer
observation than this, that we no sooner begin to live but we proceed to die,
and are every day going forward and stepping toward the Grave. But then
although life be a sweet and precious thing in it self, and it be natural for
all men to desire to spin out the thread of life to the utmost length; yet God
may send those Diseases upon us which may make us weary of our lives, and to
wish for Death and the Grave; and so we find that Job was so pestered with
Diseases, that his Life was a burden to him, and he does frequently and
passionately beg of God to do him the favor to dispatch him, and put an end to
his days, as we may see in the 6. chapter of Job and 8. v. O that I might have my
request, and that God would grant me the thing that I long for! even that it
would please God to destroy me, that he would let loose his hand, and cut me
off; and in the 3. chapter and 20. v. He speaks much to the same purpose, Saying,
Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the bitter in
soul? Which long for death but it comes not, and dig for it more than for hid
treasures: Which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the
grave; and in the 7. chapter 3, 4, and 5. verse. He declares how uneasy and restless
he was through the greatness and violence of his Diseases, and how severely he
was handled: So am I made to possess months of vanity, and wearisome nights are
appointed to me. When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be
gone? I am full of tossings to and fro, unto the dawning of the day. My flesh
is clothed with worms and clods of dust; my skin is broken and become
loathsome: and in the 13. chapter and 14. v. He professes that he had so little joy
and comfort in his life, that he would esteem it a mercy to die, saying, My
Soul chooses Death, and strangling rather than life. Nay, he goes further, and
says, that he was quite out of conceit with living, and would not be immortal
on Earth for never so much, they are his own words, I loath it, I would not
live always, let me alone for my days are vanity; and in the 10. chapter and the 1.
v. His afflictions seem to have been so great and lasting, that they almost
wore out his patience, and he could not endure them any longer; which makes him
speak like a man in great extremity and a desperate condition: Saying, My soul
is weary of my life; and so David in the 6. Ps. and 6. v. utters himself in the
same manner, Saying, I am weary with my groanings; And therefore David might
well cease sorrowing for the loss of his Child, when he considered the manifold
Diseases that mankind is liable unto, and that it often happens, and that he
himself had so experienced it, that men meet with such sorrows and afflictions
that make them weary of the World, and exceedingly imbitter their lives, and
why then should he be troubled at the death of his Child? and that it did not
live to be in danger of enduring all the Diseases in the Bill of Mortality? And
how did he know but that if it had lived, it might have proved of a sickly and
weak Constitution, and perhaps might bring those Infirmities into the World
with it as were past all Cure, and might be a sorrow to the Parents, and a
misery to their Child as long as it lived. And besides, Children run many
risques and hazards whilst they are young, and come oftentimes to great
mischances; and either they contract a lameness by a fall, or lose one Eye or
both by the small Pox, or are drowned, or burnt, or killed unfortunately; any
of which would prove matter of greater sorrow to Parents than a bare natural
Death. And therefore seeing God was pleased to take it away so very young, and
that it dropped off with its first sickness, there was a great mixture of mercy
in this sad Providence, and little reason to be grieved at such an early Death,
when it was so natural, and perhaps prevented the meeting many sad mischances,
and a Troop of Diseases which are incident to this frail and perishing life.
And truly all Parents have the same reason (which we suppose David had) to
comfort up themselves after the loss of their Children, when they die very
young; as considering that an early death may prevent a miserable life; and
that it is much better to die young; than to live longer and have such Diseases
grow and hang upon us as shall make life a burden to us. And indeed though we
are extremely desirous of living, and are sad and melancholy when we think of
dying; yet we may live so long as that we may have enough of it, and may meet
with such sore Diseases as may rob us of all pleasure and comfort in living,
and spoil our taking any contentment in the greatest enjoyments this World does
afford us; we know how the case stood with Job, and how that afflictions
crowded in so thick upon him, that as he often professes, they made him even
weary of his life. And there is none of us that has any privilege or
exemption, or greater security from Diseases than Job, nor have we Bodies of
Brass, or Sinews of Iron more than he, but we have Bodies subject to the same
Infirmities, and liable to be invaded by the same Diseases, if God to make an
experiment of our patience shall think fit to handle us as severely as he did
Job, and to inflict the same Diseases upon us: And therefore we need not so
much desire long life and length of days as commonly we do; Because it may so
happen, that before we run out half our race, or come to the middle of our
Course, besides the troubles that are from without, we may meet with such a
numerous train of bodily afflictions, that may make us more covetous of death
than ever we were of life, and we may live to know so much sorrow and pain
before we die, that like Job we may be ready to curse our Birth Day, and wish
that we had never been born: And therefore we should not be so very unwilling
to depart and leave the World at any time, though never so soon; because we may
suppose, that the longer we continue in it the worse it may be for us, and
although we are in health at present, and enjoy our selves finely, yet Diseases
may within a little time overtake and grow upon us, which may make our life a
perfect torment to us, and cause us to consume our days in misery. To speak
compendiously, all Parents and others have little reason to ingulph themselves
in sorrows for the Death of their Friends and Relations, and more especially if
it be early and natural, because when they are taken away so soon they happily
miss of those sore and grievous distempers which in running out the whole stage
of life, do seize upon oftentimes, and render this present life extremely
bitter and unacceptable. And indeed what comfort is there to see our Friends
often sick, or roaring with the Stone or the Gout, or some acute pain, or to
have them of an ill habit of Body, or of a broken health, and to be ever crazy
and lingering with some fixed and incurable Disease? What pleasure is it to see
our Relations rotten and unsound, and patcht up with Medicines, and supported
with the Arts of Physic, and kept alive by nice and superstitious observations
of diet? or what delight can we take in enjoying our Friends when they cannot
enjoy themselves? And what reason then have we to lay so much to heart the
death of our Friends and Relations, and to pine away merely for sorrow that
they are gone? whereas they are now freed from all the sorrow and contagion of
bodily distempers, and have escaped those sore burdens which we are like to
feel and suffer if we stay here: Methinks we should rather comfort our selves,
as we may well suppose David did, to think that our Relations when they are
dead and gone, are past the shock and fury of a Disease, that they have endured
one brunt for all; that they have charged that Enemy home, which we so much
fear and must expect every day to encounter withal: so that considering how we
that are left behind are to run the Gantlet through Troops of sorrow, and to
pass the Pikes of a thousand Diseases, it is highly unreasonable to mourn and
sorrow for the dead, they being past all possibility of Diseases, and far
removed from this Climate of Sickness and Death.

Sixthly, Another thing which might restrain David's sorrowing for the loss of
his Child, might be this consideration: That it was released from the great
pains and miseries which it lately felt and endured.

It Is certain and indubitable, that the Soul does not quit its Mansion of the
Body without great strivings and reluctance, and though it be considered that
the Child was but in its Infancy, and newly in possession of life, and that the
Soul and Body had contracted but a late acquaintance, and that the Friendship
was very new; yet where there is such a strict Conjunction as there is between
the Soul and the Body, though but for a moment of time, the separation cannot
be without great grief and sorrow; where there is such a close union and
intimacy, there is no parting without pain and trouble; and consequently,
though the Soul of the Child was now just entered into its New Tenement, yet it
was so firmly settled, and had taken that deep rooting, that it could not be
removed or ejected out of possession without great disturbance. And therefore
to see a Child struggling for life, and to have only breath enough to entitle it
to life, could not but wonderfully affect and produce great Agonies of sorrows
in the hearts of the Spectators. And we may observe, that men have naturally
that compassion as to pity even a Brute when it lies in pain and misery, and
look upon it as an act of mercy to dispatch it out of the way. And therefore
David seeing his Child in that extreme anguish and distress, in that sickness
to Death, and that there was no way to ease and relieve it, could not but
reflect upon it as a singular mercy of God to take away the Child, and to put
an end to such a painful and miserable life. David could not forbear weeping
and sadly lamenting over his Child when he saw it in the pangs of Death, and in
those frightful Convulsions which were precedaneous to its dissolution. But
when it pleased God to seal up its breath, and to give it a happy Issue out of
this troublesome World, then David began to be better satisfied, and to be
somewhat comforted with the consideration that God had in mercy released his
Child from that pain and misery which it lately underwent, and the sight
whereof would have pierced the hardest heart living. So that all those that
have the sad opportunity of standing by their Relations and Friends when they
are upon their sick Beds, and in the approaches of Death, and there to observe
what a tumult and commotion nature is in at that time, and with what pain and
trouble the Soul and Body take their leave one of the other, must needs
conclude their parting and separation to be a more dismal and amazing sight
than a Divorce between the most desperate Lovers. Let us but be present with
our Friends in the heat and rage of their Distemper, or in the ultimate efforts
of life, and we shall then see a tremendous and ghastly spectacle, which is
hardly to be related without tears, and cannot be seen without horror and
astonishment. O the hollow sighs, and the deep sobs and pierceing groans of our
dying Friends, which are enough to wound any heart living, and to strike that
dread upon us, that the sound of their cries and groans shall never be
forgotten, and can we pretend to pity them when we see them in so much anguish
and distress, and in the depths of misery, and shall we so contradict our
pretenses to sorrow, and our compassion for them in the bitterness of Death, as
to be troubled when they are out of misery, and to deplore their going to rest.
Shall we weep and mourn to see our Friends upon the Rack, and in great torment,
and shall we take on the more when they are past the sense and feeling of any
pain? How can we reconcile this Posthumous Passion to common reason? Or can we
think to persuade people that we loved our Relations dearly, when they see us
grieve when they were in misery, but to grieve more when they are stepped into
happiness? In a word, we may yield to the meltings of nature, or the tenderness
of our affections, and gratify our compassions in mourning for our Friends when
they are in great misery, and the Agonies of Death. For a compassionate grief
is both natural and reasonable, and if we have any spark of good nature we
cannot but be mollify'd at the mournful accents of the most despicable Creature
when it is in pain and great extremities. But then to mourn excessively for our
Friends when they are out of pain, and the bitterness of Death is past, is both
unreasonable and unchristian: unreasonable because they have endured and passed
the worst, and are perfectly discharged from those troubles and sorrows which
those that remain alive are subject unto; and it is unchristian, because it
gives occasion to people to suspect our belief of a Resurrection and a future
Life; and that we are not really persuaded that our Friends are removed for the
better, and much for their advantage. And therefore the Apostle in the first to
the Thessal. 4. chapter and 13. v. admonishes Christians not to grieve and take on
for the dead as others which have no hope, lest they should by that means
scandalize their Religion, and render their belief of a Resurrection suspected
and dubitable: so that we are concerned as Christians, and as we tender the
reputation of our Christian Faith, not to be lavish of our tears, nor over
profuse in our expenses of sorrow for the dead, lest we should be suspected of
believing our Friends happier here than they will be hereafter. But we should
rather in a manner rejoice at the departure of those who have lived well and
innocently, and die in the Lord: Forasmuch as the Apostle tells us they shall
rest from their labors and have all tears wiped away from their Eyes, Revel.
7. 17. And we should as our Church wisely directs us in the office for the
Burial of the dead, give hearty thanks to God that it has pleased him to
deliver our Dear Friends and Relations out of the miseries of this sinful
World, which may furnish us with another consideration that might possibly
incur into David's mind, and help to suspend and allay his sorrowing for his
dead Child, and that is this:

That it was removed far above the power of sin and temptation.

We at present, as the Apostle Paul complains, carry about us a Body of sin and
death. We are subject to manifold sins and temptations, and have brought with
us into the World those corruptions which in time will ripen into and sally
forth in great actual transgressions. Job makes a kind of wonder at it, that
any man should think he can be perfectly pure and innocent in this body of
flesh: For what is man that he should be clean? or he that is born of a woman
that he should be righteous? Job 15. 14. and so David tells us, Psalm. 51. 5.
That sin is the Inheritance of our Parents, that we are infected with it in the
Womb, and that we are born with propensions to evil, Behold, I was shapen in
iniquity; and in sin did my Mother conceive me. So that the seeds of
disobedience are lodged in our nature, and the groundwork of sin is laid deep
within us, and there is nothing wanting but time and opportunity to make it
bring forth in abundance: So that when our Children die very young, and go
early to their Graves, we may comfort our selves with this consideration, that
we lose them in good time, and before they have added any actual to original
sin; and that if they had lived much longer they would have contracted a new
and further guilt, and perhaps have advanced in sin as they did in Years: for
it is certain, that the strength of nature gives strength to our sins too, and
it is only Age that qualifies and fits us for great and notorious wickedness. So
that that sin which was only in Embryo in our infancy comes within a few years
to a perfect shape, and our propensions to evil, in a small process of time are
reduced to real and visible acts. My meaning is, that although there is a
natural aptness and proclivity in Mankind to sin and err from the Laws of our
Maker, yet sin does lie hid and brooding in the time of our infancy, and is
only hatched into perfection by the addition of longer time: and although we
have all the principles of wickedness inherent in us at the very first moment
of our Nativity; yet we are too impotent to commit evil, and to offend God at
that rate, as when we come to a full stature in Years and knowledge. We may be
full of bad inclinations when we are young and Children, but it is only Age that
can make us capable of doing mischief, and to be workers of iniquity, and we
cannot so highly provoke God when we are ignorant and childish, and know
nothing of him, as when we come to the perfect use of reason, and to know his
will, and yet run Counter to it. And therefore the Death of our Children may be
a happy prevention of their sining: and if they live so long as to receive the
benefit of Baptism, and to be regenerate and born anew of Water and the Holy
Ghost, and so be made lively members of Christ's Church, we are bound to thank
God for the mercy of their Regeneration, and that they had their sins washed
away in the laver of Holy Baptism; so as that they go much purer out of the
World than they came into it: whereas if they had lived longer in the World
they would have contracted a greater guilt, and had more sins to answer for;
they would have been continually liable to temptations, and in danger of
falling into great and grievous sins, and to be corrupted by the bad examples
which abound in all places of the World. And therefore there is no reason why
Parents should so much lament their Childrens leaving them so soon; if they do
seriously consider, that it is a naughty World we live in, and that men's love
and practice of wickedness is exceeding great, and that it is impossible to
escape all the pollutions that are in it: and if they do further consider, how
much humane nature is tainted with original sin and corruption, which prompts
us on to evil continually, and what a subtle and vigilant Adversary we have,
who is always seeking to beguile and destroy us; and how thick set the World is
with snares and temptations; I say, if this consideration did but enter into
our minds, it would be of great force and power to assuage our Passion, and to
allay our sorrow for the death of our Friends and Relations: it being a very
comfortable thing to contemplate the happiness and privilege of those that
have shook of the clogs and fetters of the flesh, and let fall their Bodies,
the troublesome Mantles of their Souls, and are now expatiating in Regions of
Bliss and Happiness, and live in the pure Element of Goodness, and where it is
impossible that any temptation should approach, or sin have any Dominion over
them.

Lastly; Another thing which might stop David's sorrowing for the loss of his
Child, might be this consideration, that it was the will of God it should be so.

He considered that it was altogether foolish and in vain to enter into any
controversy with God about his dealings with his Child, or to stand
expostulating the justice of God in taking it away. For he was convinced that
Gods will ought to be a Law unto us, and that there is no need of disputing the
Righteousness and Equity thereof, it being always ruled and determined by his
wisdom, and justice, and goodness. For though God be of an infinite and
uncontrollable power, and can do whatsoever he pleases both in Heaven and
Earth; yet there is a Maxim in Theology as well as Policy, That the King of
Heaven can do no wrong. It must be acknowledged by us all, that our life and
being is the gift and blessing of God, and so is the life of our Children too;
and therefore when God does in mercy give us Children, so he may with justice
take them away. For may not he dispose of his gifts, and do with his own as he
pleases? God lent us Children for a little time on purpose to please us; shall
we be troubled when he resumes them to himself, or grieved when he requires
them back? we are to observe, that there is a great difference between Gods way
of disposing his gifts, and that of men's. For though it be common with men to
make a Deed of Gift, and to transfer their own right to a thing wholly to
another, so as to lose all propriety in it; yet God does not make the same
disposition of his gifts in that absolute manner; but when he gives us Riches,
or Honor, or Children, or any other gifts, he does not make over to us all the
title to, and interest in them, but reserves to himself a power of Revocation,
so as that he may demand them back at pleasure; he only gives us the use and
comfort of them for a time, but never parts with the propriety, or resigns up
all his claim to them: And besides, we should consider, that although God does
put those Children into our power, and under our jurisdiction, which he is
pleased to give us; yet that Parents have not that absolute power over their
Children that God has, nor are they wholly at their disposal, as to the great
Issues of Life and Death, which are only in Gods Hands. And therefore though we
may look upon our Children as our own, as being flesh of our flesh, and bone of
our bone, though we may appropriate them to our selves, and reckon we have the
best title to them of all our Possessions; yet still God retains the supreme
right, and has the first and oldest title to them, and we are only deputed by
God to be the Overseers and Guardians of our Children: and therefore as God is
pleased to commit our Children to our care for some time, yet when he does not
like they should be any longer under our tuition, he does in mercy and kindness
to them take them away; when he sees it not good for them to continue with us,
he then to show his Authority, removes them from us, and calls them home. And
therefore Parents would do well to consider, that God has more right to their
Children than themselves, and that they are absolutely at his disposal, but not
at theirs, that they have not that power of Life and Death over their Children
which God has: And therefore Parents have no reason to be in that Hurricane and
storm of Passion upon the loss of their Children, unless they are troubled that
God should have his will more than they have theirs; unless they are grieved
that God should take upon him to dispose of their Children without their
consent and liking; which argues a great impiety of mind, as if they thought
that God was either unjust in taking away the Children from their right Owners,
or unmerciful in not sparing of their lives, which was a greater comfort to
them than all other enjoyments; whereas it would be much better, and tend to
hush and silence all the sorrows of Parents for the loss of their Children, to
consider, that they are but under-Proprietors of their Children, and that they
came first from God, before they came to them; and that as God is the donour of
them, so he may well be allowed the disposal of them, whether for Life or
Death. And besides, it should be considered, that Gods will is and ought to be
supreme, and Master of ours; and that we should patiently leave them to Gods
will and pleasure, when he does not think fit to leave them to ours. It was an
excellent saying, and submissive speech of Jobs, chapter 1. 21. who when God was
pleased to bereave him of all his Children by violent and unnatural Deaths, and
of all his Worldly goods too, yet submitted to his great misfortunes with an
invincible patience and mildness, saying, Naked came I out of my Mothers Womb,
and naked shall I return thither, the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away,
Blessed be the name of the Lord. Here is an Example beyond Example of Patience,
and quiet submission to the will of God in one of the greatest and severest
trials imaginable; here indeed is an Example fit for our imitation, and should
be drawn into practice upon the like occasion. And it would highly become
Parents and others, and indeed is the duty of all to lay themselves at the will
of God, and with all humble Prostrations resign up their wills to his, and to
resign up their Children and Relations freely to him, who first gave them
freely to them. And to say in like manner with Job, God has indeed blessed us
with Children, but has not thought fit to continue them to us: and though we
could have been well content to have enjoyed them, if God had so pleased; yet
we are content to want them, being he has thought it better both for them and
for us to take them away. The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away;
Blessed be the name of the Lord.

Ita non est quod nos suspiciamus, tanquam inter nostra positi: mutuo
accepimus. Vsus fructus noster est, cujus tempus ille arbiter muneris sui
temperat. Nos oportet in promptu habere quae in incertum diem data sunt; and
appellatos sine querela reddere. Pessimi est Debitoris Creditoris facere
convitium. Omnes ergo nostros, and quos superstites lege nascendi optamus, and
quos praecedere justissimum ipsorum votum est, sic amare debemus tanquam nihil
nobis de perpetuitate; immo nihil de diuturnitate eorum promissum est. Sen.
cap. x. ad Man.
Seneca will teach us otherwise in words to this purpose, that we ought not to
reckon all that we enjoy our own, or to look upon our Children as a sure
Inheritance, and entailed upon us, but consider, that they are of the same
uncertain hold and tenure as other outward blessings are, that they are given
us but for an uncertain time, and that we must not promise to our selves any
long or certain enjoyment of them; if we are allowed the use, and benefit, and
comfort of our Children for a time, it is not fitting that we should mutter or
think much to part with them when God demands his own, and requires back what
he only committed to us by way of lone; but rather be in a readiness to part
with our Children and all other blessings when God will not trust us with them
any longer.

Having thus showed upon what considerations David might well cease sorrowing
for his dead Child, and which may be of excellent use and service to support
and comfort others under the like losses, and to prevent all excessive mourning
for the Death of their Friends and Relations, especially when they die young, I
shall now wind up the whole Discourse with a word or two,

First, By way of Reproof.

Secondly, By way of Exhortation.

First, By way of Reproof to all those that are apt to quarrel with Providence,
and to entertain hard thoughts of God, as if he were either unjust or
unmerciful when he takes away their nearest and dearest Relations from them;
and do often in the bitterness of their Souls, and the great anguish of their
spirits, charge God foolishly, and speak unadvisedly with their lips, and think
they do well (like Jonah) to fret against the Almighty, in that he deals with
them after such a manner, and will not suffer them to enjoy the desire of their
Eyes, and the joy of their Hearts, so long as they wish and desire. They assert
with a great deal of sorrow, that their Soul was wrapped up in the life of such
and such a Child, that it was an Absalom for its Beauty, and a Solomon for its
Wisdom, and a Moses for its meekness and good nature; that it was very pregnant
and a great Wit, and gave great and lively Specimens of future Virtue and
Wisdom; and therefore for God to deprive them of a Child that had naturally
such Charms, and whose virtuous temper and disposition did presage so much
comfort to themselves, and so great a benefit to the World, must needs make
deep and melancholy impressions upon their Spirits, and put them into an
extreme Passion. And thus Parents and others are apt to clamor against and
censure the dealings of an afflicting Providence, when it comes home to them,
and touches them in part of themselves, and such as they profess to love as
dearly as their own Souls: whereas it is an utter fault in them thus to repine
at the hand of God, and they know not what Spirit they are of when they fall
into such fits of Passion, and paroxysms of discontent, refusing like Rachel to
be comforted, because their Children and Relations are not; and wish like
Elijah in a pet, that God would take away their life too, for they are no
better than those that are gone before them. But is this like men or like
Christians to be absorpt and swallowed up in a vortex of sorrow, and to be
carried away with such an Euroclydon and violent storm of Passion? O the great
folly and wickedness that is in the hearts of men, thus to grumble at
Providence, and to be so much out of humor as to fall sick as Ahab did for
very vexation that we cannot enjoy what we have a mind to, and a great longing
to possess. So great and stupendous is our stubborness and obstinacy not to
yield to Gods will nor submit to his pleasure, but to take on and rave like mad
people, and to complain grievously like Laban, that we have lost our Gods, our
greatest hopes and comforts, when God has only taken away our Idols. But we had
best have a care that we be not so very impatient and outrageous when God takes
away our Relations from us; and so cause and provoke him to write more bitter
things against us, and bereave us of all our Worldly Comforts, and of the light
of his favor, and the supports of his Spirit, which would be the greatest and
sorest loss that can possibly befall us.

Secondly, By way of Exhortation to Parents and all others who may be concerned
in the loss of Relations and Friends, that they would endeavor to compose
themselves to a quiet, and humble, and patient submission to the will of God in
the severest of his dispensations; that they would comport and demean
themselves with that temper and moderation at the Death of their Friends, as
becomes Christians who profess a firm belief of a future Resurrection, and a
future life in glory; and that they would banish all unkind, and uncharitable
thoughts of God when he is pleased to take away their Darlings and Favorites,
and quietly acquiesce in his Providence, and endeavor to believe, that what
God does is best both for themselves and their Relations, saying with all
humility and submission of Soul, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him
good.

Thirdly, It would be wisdom in all Parents and others to consider, that their
Children and Friends are mortal, and of humane race, and that they are born in
order to die. And so Seneca advises his Friend Marcia, not to grieve or take on
desperately for the loss of her Son, but to consider, that mortality was an
appendage to humane Nature, Et ex quo primum lucem vidit, iter mortis ingressus
est; that he no sooner began to live but he began to die, and that life is a
constant journeying and properation to the Grave. And it is well worth our
remembering what is reported of Anaxagoras, that when he was warmly engaged in a
Philosophical Disquisition, and word was brought unto him that his Son was
dead, he did not seem in any disorder, or to be discomposed at the news, but
went on with his Discourse very smoothly, and only made this reply, That he
knew that he was the Father of one that was mortal. Anaxagorae inter familiares
suos de natura rerum disserenti, filii mortem nunciatam tradunt; nihilque aliud
ab eo responsum, nisi, se illum genuisse mortalem. Cicero de Consola. And
therefore all persons to prevent the being so much troubled and startled at the
Death of their Relations, should often meditate on Death, and be frequently
possessed with thoughts of their own and others mortality; and when they live
in a daily expectation of their own Death and those that belong unto them, they
cannot be amazed at the early Death of their Relations, or sorely afflicted
when it pleases God to take them away first. For the looking upon the life of
their Relations to be altogether as uncertain as their own, must needs make
their death more tolerable, than when they reckon and depend upon their living;
quae multo ante praevisa sunt, languidius incurrunt, says Seneca. When we
think of a thing long beforehand, it loses of its terror, and we are not so
much troubled at it when it actually comes. So that if we did but consider that
our Children and Relations are as mortal as our selves, and that it is no rarity
for them to die before us, we should not proceed to break our hearts with
overmuch grief, or to bury our selves in sorrow at the death of our Relations,
come it sooner or later. But as Seneca observes, In hoc omnes errore versamur,
ut non putemus ad mortem, nisi senes inclinatosque jam urgere, cum illo
infantia statim and juventa, omnisque aetas ferat; it is a general error, and
popular to think that the Aged and the Decrepit must needs die first; whereas
the youngest are as liable to Death as they, and are taken away every whit as
soon. And again in the same Consolatory Discourse: Tot praeter Domum nostram
ducuntur exequiae, de morte non cogitamus, tot acerba funera. Nos togam
nostrorum infantium, nos militiam and Paternae haereditatis successionem animo
agitamus. There are (says he) so many Funerals and spectacles of mortality
pass by our doors every day, and we do not regard them, nor lay to heart this
Death of others: But we are thinking to make our Children fine and great, and
what great Heirs they will be after our decease: But we think of nothing less
than our Childrens dying, which makes their death so very grievous and
surprising unto us: Whereas by a due premeditation on death, and forestalling
it in our thoughts, both our own death, and that of our Relations would become
less terrible and astonishing, as being a thing which we every day expected and
stood looking for.

Fourthly, It would be very reasonable and prudential to command or check our
passion in due time, and not to let it spin out to too great a length. For as
Seneca tells Marcia, that our tears cannot always flow, nor our mourning last
always. Dolorem dies consumit, quamvis contumacissimum, a little time, or a few
days, will exhaust the Fountain of our tears, and drain it dry, and overcome
the most obstinate grief. And Cicero says the same thing. Quod etiamsi nolis,
tempore tamen ipso extenuatur and evanescit, that is, we must give over
sorrowing at last, whether we will or no, and when we have wept so long that we
can weep no more; and therefore it is a stark shame that our reason should not
do that which a little time will effect; that it should not put a stop to our
tears, which within a little while will dry up of themselves. Multum autem
interest, utrum tibi permittas moerere, an imperes, says the same Seneca, it is
more honorable to suppress our passions, than to let them run themselves out
of breath and to sink of their own accord.

And in another place, he tells Marcia, that it is wisdom to husband our tears
well, and not to let them stream too plentifully, but to be sparing of them,
and to reserve some against another time. Lachrymae nobis deerunt antequam
dolendi causae. For if we live in the World, we shall meet with many occasions
to weep and mourn, and shall never want matter of sorrow and trouble. And
therefore we should make it evident by our ceasing to mourn for the dead in
just and convenient time, that our reason has that ascendant over our Passion,
as not to let it run too far, or spend it self quite at once, whereas there may
be great reason and occasion for it at some other time.

Lastly, and to conclude all, Let none suspect that this Discourse had any aim
to promote or introduce a Stoical Apathy among Christians, whose Religion is a
complete body of mercy, and a perfect systeme of tender-heartedness and
compassions, and teaches men to be pitiful and compassionate and melting above
the common standard of humanity. Let none, I say, so misconstrue it, as because
it argues against excessive and immoderate mourning for the dead, that
therefore it intends to harden men's hearts, and to bar them from paying a just
tribute of tears and sorrow to the memory of their Deceased Friends; or because
it declares against effeminate weepings and lamentations, that therefore it
will not allow us the sense and feeling of men. Nec vero credi velim, says
Cicero, me, quia dolori nimio repugnem, idcirco dolorem omni ex part
improbare, omnesque illius ex animo filias evellendas existimare, etc. But our
design is chiefly to persuade men to curb and moderate their Passions and
sorrows for the Dead, by showing, that if they would but listen to the Counsels
and Dictates of reason, it would inform and convince them of the folly of
grieving and afflicting themselves to no purpose, and when all the sorrowing in
the World will do no good, Parcamus Lachrymis, says Seneca, nihil
proficientibus; and also how contradictory it is to the Faith of a Christian to
continue mourning for the Dead, as if they were irreversibly gone and lost to
all intents and purposes of happiness, as if Death were an utter extinction and
annihilation of their beings, and as if there were no immortality after this
short and fading life is ended. It Is true, that the Stoics injoined their
Disciples to dam up the current of their natural affections and passions, and
not to let them forth in the least degree upon any occasion whatsoever. And
this Apathy they pretended and boasted to be the aim and perfection of their
Philosophy; whereas the Christian Philosophy is not near so rigid, but allows
us to give way to our passions in some measure, and upon just and solemn
occasions. We read of the Lamentations of Jeremiah, and how that the Death of
the good King Josiah was solemnized with great mournings and lamentations, all
Israel mourned for Josiah, and Judah lamented Josiah, 2 Chro. 35. 24. And that
which does more authorize our Mourning for our Friends, is the carriage and
practice of those devout men in the Gospel, who carried Stephen to his Burial,
and made great Lamentation over him, Acts 8. 2. Nay a further Confirmation of
the lawfulness of mourning for our deceased Friends, is the Example of our
Savior himself, who wept over Lazarus's Grave, as we may see John 11. 35.
which the standers by made a great Argument of his love and concernment for the
Death of Lazarus. And it is very well known that the Jews looked upon tears and
mourning to be so natural and proper at a Funeral, that they hired Women called
(...), Jer. 9. 17. (and so had the Romans their Praeficae for the very same
purpose,) to weep at Burials for the greater solemnity, so that rather than
there should be any want of tears upon such sad occasions, they Celebrated the
Obsequies of their Friends with a mercenary sorrow; and therefore it was a
severe and unnatural Injunction of Tiberius to charge the Friends and Relations
of those persons that he put to Death, not to mourn for them, or so much as
shed a tear at their Execution upon pain of his highest displeasure.
Interdictum ne capite damnatos lugerent, Suetonius. Whereas our Religion does
not require us to put off bowels of pity and compassion, as the Philosophy of
the Stoics, or the cruelty of the Tyrant did; but only prohibits us to pluck
up the Sluices, or to open the Flood-gate of our Passions, so as to let them run
with a mighty Torrent, and to overflow the bounds of reason and moderation.
But then although we are permitted by the Example of our Savior to sympathize
with the sufferings of humane nature, and to grieve according to the
proportions of humanity, for the loss of our Friends and Relations; yet we are
to have a special care that our sorrows are not unreasonable or immoderate: for
as no sorrow shows want of humanity, so too much shows the want of Religion.
For by our immoderate grievings we seem to renounce our Creed, or at least to
distrust the truth of one of its prime and fundamental Articles, which is the
Resurrection of the Dead. And therefore St. Paul seeing the Christians in his
days were apt to grow exorbitant in their sorrowings for the Dead, thinks fit
to give them this instruction, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. But I would not have you to be
ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even
as others which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again,
even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him; in which words
he does plainly declare, that we do in a manner confute and dissolve our Belief
of the great Article of the Resurrection, if we lay the loss of our Friends so
much to heart, and ingulph our selves in sorrows as those that have no hope.
And indeed, what can be more unlike, or contrary to the Faith and Belief of
Christians, than that unruly and excessive sorrow of Rachel for the loss of her
Children, whom the Scripture seems not only to note, but to brand and
stigmatize for her impatience, in that she wept for her Children, and would not
be comforted, because they were not? Ah Lord! what a sad thing is this to
contradict our profession, to say, we believe a Resurrection, and yet sorrow as
if there were none? But in short, either we believe a Resurrection, or we do
not; if we do believe it, why do we bewail the Death of our Friends with so
much bitterness and lamentation, as if they were utterly lost and gone, as if
they were past all joys and comfort, and were to perish for ever? Si enim a
miseriis abstrahit, si in meliorem vitam inducit; si neque misera ipsa est, nec
ullius particeps miseriae, cur mala censetur? sin hoc largitur, ut sempiternis
bonis potiamur, vitamque quam mortalem habemus, aeternam adipiscamur, quid
morte beatius esse possit? that is, says Cicero, if we do really believe that
death does abstract and deliver us from the miseries of this World, and sets us
far out of harms way, and that it is an entrance and introduction to a better
life, then what reason have we to look upon it as such a sad and grievous thing
to die? But if it be further granted that Death puts us into the possession of
Eternal and never-failing blessings, and that it slides us from a short and
fading to an Everlasting Life; we are then to repute Death our best and dearest
Friend, in that it leads and ushers us to such Endless Happiness. But if we do
not believe a Resurrection, why are we so rash and formal as to own an Article
that we dare not rely on? Ah! We little think that the greatest Atheist in the
World cannot make a greater Argument against our Religion than we do our
selves, when we let loose the reins of our passions, and refuse to be comforted
for the dead, and wound and pierce our hearts thorough with great and mighty
sorrows, thereby testifying that we little believe a Life to come, or a better
State than this is, or that our Friends have exchanged for the better: and
therefore we had best look to it, and endeavor to curb and check our passions,
that we do not give occasion to our Enemies to blaspheme and say, where is that
Heaven, that place of rest and blessedness which you so much talk of? where is
that Faith of a future Life and a judgment to come, which you so zealously
profess? how can you persuade us that you believe what you profess, seeing that
upon the trial you are ready to kill your selves with very grief for the Death
of your Friends and Relations, and thereby give a strong suspicion, that you
think this World the best Paradise for your Friends to live in, and the other
the best only to talk of.

To conclude, Let us endeavor to possess our hearts and minds with a firm hope
and persuasion of a future State and Eternal Life; and then we shall be the
freer to think of our own Death, and be less troubled to part with our Friends
and Relations when God thinks fit to take them away. Simplicius in his Comment
upon Epictetus cap. 33. does rightly observe, how variously we are affected at
the Death of others and the Death of our own Relations, (...), If we hear,
says he, of the Death of another Wife or Children, we are not much concerned,
but put it off very slightly, and say, that their dying is no wonder at all,
and that there is no reason to be much troubled at it, forasmuch as Death is
natural and common to all. But then, says he, when we happen to lose any of
our own Relations, we seem to have another guise opinion of Death, and to
change our note, (...), that is, We hear of and see the death and burial of
others patiently enough, and without being much troubled or inwardly concerned,
but when it comes home to our selves, and we lose any of our own dear Friends
and Relations, we are presently in a storm, and rise into a supreme passion,
and in the bitterness of our Souls cry out, that we are miserable and undone,
and the unhappiest people in the World, and that there is no loss like our
loss, and that none has such great afflictions as we, and then there is nothing
to be heard or seen but great Lamentations and Mourning, and a huge Scene of
sorrows. In which words, the Philosopher does rightly note our partiality to
our selves, and how that we esteem and look upon Death to be only unkind and
cruel to our selves and those that belong to us, and that we can hear and think
kindly enough of it at a distance, but when it comes nigh us, and touches us in
our Relations, then we are all mutiny and confusion. And therefore it is a
great Argument of our folly and indiscretion, to waver and alter so much in our
opinion of Death, as to entertain worse thoughts of it at one time than
another. For albeit, the more than ordinary sympathy that is between us and our
Relations, may defend and justify our sorrowing somewhat more for them than
for perfect Strangers; yet it is against common sense and reason, that we
should be so desperately disquieted at that Providence which deprives us of our
Relations, whereas we are so little concerned at the common fatality of
Mankind. And therefore it behooves us in point of Prudence, to labor to have
always the same thoughts and opinions of Death, and to count it no more cruel,
no more an Enemy, when it seizes upon our own flesh and blood, than when it
seizes upon the rest of humane race: And if we make no great matter of the
death of others whom we see daily fall to the ground, looking upon it as a
natural thing for them to die: so let us consider, that it is every whit as
natural for our Relations to die, and nothing happens to them but what is
common to all flesh living. And this consideration the Philosopher looks upon
as very just and reasonable, and prescribes it as an excellent Remedy and
Antidote against all immoderate sorrowing for the loss of our dearest Friends
and Relations: But alas! why do I urge such a poor consideration as that of
Death being common to all men, to assuage and mitigate our sorrows for the
Dead, as if any consideration in the World could do it more effectually than
our Christian Hope and the belief of another and better life hereafter. Some
indeed may attempt and endeavor to quiet and silence their sorrows by
Arguments drawn from reason, and the acute sayings of Philosophers; and think
they may be able from mere natural courage, and some bold principles, to laugh
at and despise Death as well as the Stoics did in their high rants and sullen
moods: but no Arguments, or the most stubborn Principles in the World, can be
of equal force with our Christian Hope for that purpose. A Hope that opens to
us the Casements of Heaven, and represents to us in a great measure the glories
of the Resurrection; the exact and full knowledge whereof cannot be attained in
this narrow state of mortality, and is far transcending all humane reach and
comprehension; so that for me to go about to make a full and complete
description of the excellencies and perfections appropriate to the future
state, would be the same fondness as to attempt to illustrate a Star with my
Finger: But yet for our great comfort and encouragement at present, the
Scripture gives us this plain notice and information of a glorious
transformation as to our vile and terrestrial part; How that then our vile
Bodies shall be changed, and made like unto Christ's glorious Body, that this
mortal shall put on immortality, and this corruptible incorruption. How then
can we that have this Hope faint in our mind, or so much as shed a tear at the
departure of our Friends out of this miserable Life, seeing it will be so much
for their advantage, so very much for their preferment to leave us? For they
that are accounted worthy to obtain that World, and the Resurrection from the
Dead, shall strangely exceed themselves, and surpass all the excellencies of
humane Nature at present, and be (...), equal to the Angels, and (...), bear
the Image and Form of Christ himself. And this equality to Angels, and likeness
to Christ, is no more than what we have sure and certain grounds to hope for
from the plain and positive words of Scripture; and therefore we seem either
not to believe or else to envy the happiness of those that depart this Life,
when we are in such extreme Agonies of sorrow for their removal from us.
Wherefore let this Hope be always our support and comfort, that Death is a
certain advantage to our Friends that have so lived as to die the Death of the
Righteous; and that they are freed from the least touch or feeling of those
sicknesses, and pains, and Diseases, and Imperfections, and from those toils
and hardships which this mortal frail condition exposes us unto. And having
this Hope and belief of a better life hereafter, Let us rather bless God for
delivering our dearest Friends from this present evil World, and taking them
away from the evil to come; Let us, I say, bless God for doing that singular
favor to our Friends whom we loved so well, as to translate them to Glory and
Happiness before us, and in giving them such an early possession of that Crown
of Life which we all so much strive and pray to attain, rather than repine at
Gods Providence in not letting them stay any longer with us in this Valley of
Tears. Let us look upon Death rather as a mercy than a Judgment to our Friends
which die in the Lord, for they shall rest from their Labors, and have all
Tears wiped away from their Eyes, and shall never know the meaning of a sorrow
or trouble any more; in a word, Let us look upon Death as a Friend rather than
an Enemy to our Relations, which puts a period to the days of their Pilgrimage,
which are but few and evil at the best, and esteem it a blessed change, which
is the term of their Bondage, the end of their Cares, the conclusion of their
Sorrows, and the beginning of endless Happiness, and which passes them through
the Gates of Death to the Kingdom of Glory.

FINIS.

