AN Admonition to the English, CONCERNING Their Near Approaching Danger, and
the Means to Escape it.
BY A Gentleman of Quality of LANGUEDOC. To which is added, Archbishop Usher's
Prophecy concerning the same Matter, attested by the Lord Chief Justice Hale,
and another Person of Honor, with some Observations concerning it.
Translated from the French Copy.

Licensed Feb. 25. 1690.

THe Original French of the following Admonition I received lately in Holland
of the Author, whose Name is thereunto subscribed; a Gentleman of an Ancient
Family in Languedoc, whose Seat is an ancient Castle of the same Name with
himself, about three English Miles from Montpeilier, with a considerable
Revenue thereunto belonging. But he was forced to leave it, and all that he
had, after two years Imprisonment, for his Religion. And this is his Condition
at present. The Author of those Admonitions, which he mentions, was his Younger
Brother, who died near three years since, of about Forty eight years of Age, a
Person, as he says, of great Piety and Credit, and of extraordinary Knowledge
of things absent and future. And of him our Author received both Admonitions
before (...) of the things here said to have happened to him, and an
Explication afterward of the Mysteries of them, and the Signification thereof.
He is not without Witnesses of the truth of what he relates; but they are
dispersed into several Parts, and some of them now in England.

It was the Author's Desire to have it communicated to the English as soon as
might be, and my Good Will to my Country, and desire to serve them, inclined me
to lend him my Assistance therein without much difficulty, both because it does
agree so much with the known Predictions of Bishop Usher, and because the State
and Course of Affairs seem to agree but too much with both, in a manifest
tendency to the Accomplishment of them. And that the Reader may not be so much
disturbed, as admonished by it, for his better Direction and Instruction how to
use it, I thought fit to subjoyn the principal part of the Bishop's
Predictions: Which I can assure the Reader to be no Imposture, but True and
Genuine, from the Testimony of two Witnesses beyond all Exception: The one, the
late Lord Chief Justice Hale, who, when I showed it him in Writing before ever
it was Printed, and desired his Judgment of it, told me he had heard him say
the Substance of it, the Substance of it (repeating those words) twenty times
with a great deal of confidence: The other, a Person whom I ought not to name
without License, but of great Honor by Degree, and much greater by real Worth
and Virtue, to whom the words were spoken by the Bishop, and who committed them
to Writing, and was pleased to favor me with the perusal of the Original.

Avis pour les Fidelles d'Angleterre.
IL faut etre dans un grand aveuglement pour ne s'etre pas apperceu, que la
colere de Dieu paroit alummee depuis long temps presque sur toutes les parties
de l'Europe, de sort qu'il semble que Dieu vueille comme par un nouveau deluge
exterminer toute chair; puisqu'il n'est que trop vray qu'elle s'est portee a
toute sort d'excess. L'indignation du Tout-puissant a commence a le respandre
en particulier presque sur tous ceux, qui portent le nom des Protestans. Ces
raisons devoient nous porter a nous amender and nous corriger de nos vices;
Mais le Ciel and la terre sont Temoins que nous n'avons sceu qu c'estoit
d'affliger nos Ames and amender le train de notre vie; C'est aussi pour cela
que les jugemens de Dieu (don't nous n'avons tenu Conte, Lorsque leur decret a
tant and tant de fois si epouvantablement enfante) se sont tous jours
r'enforcees. L'Experience nous la fait voir en France, n'ayant pas profit des
avis qui nous avoyent ete donnes.

Il y a plus de vingt ans que je receus une lettre, qui m'apprennoit nos
malheurs and me marquoit le moien de les prevenir, qui etoit d'assembler les
Intendants Pasteurs and Anciens de I'Eglise and leur dire de fair fair, une
Jeune de trois jours a la premiere Eglise qui seroit attaquee and qu'on en
verroit les effets. Je negligai cet avis, non scachant d'ou il venoit. Mais
environ dix ans apres l'ayant sceu, and v^ ^^river bien de chooses qui m'avo^^^^
(...) marquees, j'en parlay a ces M^sseurs, qui (...) p^o^^^^yent pas: Ce
qui^^^^s a fait (...) ^acheuse suittes. (...) en Angl^^erre plusieur^ M^^stres
qui estoient presens Lorsque je ^^ur vis voir la lettre, qui m'avoit ete
envoyee.

Madam de Turene, Monsieur de Rouvigny, and Monsieur Gaches Ministre de
l'Eglise de Charonton curent les memes avis que moy, le Synod en eut en suite
and l'auteur voyant qu'on n'en profitoit pas m'ecrivoit en ces Terms.

Un Vaisseau agite d'une rude Tempete est en piteux etat. Lorsqu'nn Enfant,
n'avant su eveiller les Matelots pout sortir les eaux qu'il y voioit entrer,
est en-fin oblige de crier; sauve qui peut. Malheur a qui n'aime le Seigneur
Jesus and ne port tous les jours ce Divin Crucify dans son Ceur.

Il y a environ huiet a neuf ans que je receus un coup de Foudre de jour;
j'avois ete averti de ce coup trois ans avaunt qu'il tomba sur moy and par trois
diverses fois: Ce coup fut suivi environ six semaines apres d'un coup de
Tonnerre, qui tomba de nuit (don't meme etoit averti.) Je fus oblige de fair
eveiller tous ceux, qui estoyent chez moy au lict: Nous fusmes au lieu ou je
faisois precher; je faisois lire la parole de Dieu, lorsque le Tonnere tomba
sous mes pieds: Le lieu ou nous estions estoit pave and les rochers au dessous:
Ou entendoit gronder le Tonner sous moy qui estois eloigne d'eux neanmoins,
dans le meme endroit, aussi fort qui'l a accoutume de fair; Il y fut assez de
tems; Nous ne discontinuasmes pas pourtant la lecture de l'Ecriture saint. Ces
furent des coups terribles and mysterieux presages and avantcourreurs des maux
pres a fondre sur la France and sur l'Angleterre: Il y a en Angleterre
plusieurs Persons qui estoyent chez moy lorsque ces chooses se passerent: Ils
en ignoroyent le Mystere, mais je puis bien prouver ce que j'avance.

Etant en Etat de quitter la Province ou je faisois mon sejour, il y a environ
cinq a six ans, l'auteur des avis, qui a recu d'une vie si chretienne qu'on ne
luy scauroit rien imputer and a qui Dieu a fait de Graces si extraordinaires
que je ne pense pas que depuis plusieurs siecles on ait oui parler de
semblables, me donn^ un depot cachete, and me dit le tems que je devois
l'ouvir; Il avoit au commencement de cet ecrit.

O Roy un plus grand Roy que Toy te command song aut conte que tu dois render
plutot que tu ne penses: Et a fin, O Angleterre si tu te rends complice du
crime Tu auras part a la peine.

L'orage est furieux rempli d'horreur and de carnage, Tachez a le prevenir a
fin que votre Contree soit une Contree de paix, une Isle fortunee, and un
jardin d Eden: C'est le souhait de

Votre tres obeissant Serviteur, Saint Jean.
Guettes Israel c'est ici le tems de veiller and de prier, C'est le tems de
cries a plein gosier and de ne se point epargner, sonnez du Cornet en Sion,
Reveillez les Peuples endormis, Insistez en tems and horse tems, and Ditez
hardiment a Jerusalem, qu'elle fe repent a fin qu'il y ait Paix pour elle and
non une souddain destruction: Car le Tonnere a gronde.



An ADMONITION to the Christians of England.
HE must be very blind, who perceives not that the Wrath of GOD has long since
been kindled against all parts almost of Europe; so that he seems resolved to
destroy all Flesh again as it were with a New Deluge, since it is but too true,
that they have abandoned themselves to all kind of Wickedness. But the
Indignation of the Almighty has begun to manifest it self more especially
against those who are called Protestants. And by these means ought we to have
been induced to Repentance and the Reformation of our Manners. But Heaven and
Earth are Witness, that we have not so much as known, or well considered, What
it is to afflict our Souls and amend our Lives. Hence it is that the Judgments
of God, which we so little regarded, though the Decree has again and again
brought forth so terribly, have been daily more and more increasing. This we in
France have been made to see by Experience, since we neglected the Admonitions
which were given to us.

It is now twenty years and upwards, since I received a Letter, which
admonished Me of Our approaching Miseries [in France,] and the Means to prevent
them: Which were, to call together the Governors of our Church, and acquaint
them that they should appoint a three days Fast in that Church, which soever
should first be attached, [by Process by our Enemies;] and they should see the
Effects thereof. But I neglected that Advice, not knowing whence it came. But
abut ten years after, when I understood that, and saw the Event of much of that
which was foretold, I acquainted those Gentlemen with it: But they regarded not
what I said. Which made the Consequence so sad. There are now in England diverse
Ministers, who were present when I showed the Letter which was sent me.

The same Advice which was given to me, was sent also to Madam Turene, and to
the Sieur Ruvigny, and to Mr. Gache Minister of Charenton, and to the Synod of
Languedock. And when the Author, who sent these Admonitions, understood that
nothing was done thereupon, he wrote thus to me:

Very unhappy is that Ship, which being shaken in a grievous Storm, the
Mariners will not be roused even by a Child to pump out the Water, which he
sees running in, till he be forced to cry out, Every one shift for himself. Woe
to him who loves not our Lord Jesus, and does not carry the Divine Crucified
One daily in his Heart.

About Eight or Nine years since a sudden stroke as of Thunder struck me down
in the Daytime (about Eight in the Morning) according to three several
Warnings thereof given to me three years before. This was followed about six
Weeks after by a Thunder in the Night: Whereof I had also been admonished.
Whereupon I called up all who were in Bed in my House; and we went into the
Room where we used to have Prayers, and there read the Scriptures. While that
was doing it Thundered under My Feet, though the place was paved and upon a
Rock. We all heard the Noise of Thunder (directly) under Me (who was at a
distance from them, though all in the same Room) as loud as it used to be in
the Air, and for some time. Yet we left not off our Reading the Scriptures.
They were terrible Claps, and mysterious Presages and Forerunners of the
Calamities, which are ready to break out upon the Kingdoms of France and
England. There are in England several persons who were at my House when these
things happened: They understood not the Mystery of them: but I am able to
prove what I here declare.

About five or six years since, when I was to leave the Country where I dwelt,
the Author of these Admonitions, (who lived so Christian a Life as none could
blame, and whom God had favored with such extraordinary Graces, as few, I
believe, in several Ages have heard the like,) deposited with me a sealed
Paper; and told me the time when I should open it. In the begitning were these
words:

O King, a greater King than thee commands [or rules] thee: conside^ of the
Reckoning thou art to make, sooner than thou think. And in the End,

O England, if thou make thy self partaker in the Crime, thou shall take part
in the punishment.

The Storm is violent, full of Horror and Destruction: Endeavor to prevent it,
that your Country may be a Country of Peace, a Fortunate Island, and a Garden
of Eden: Which is the hearty desire of

Your most obedient Servant, Saint Jean.
Postscript.] You, who are Watchmen of Israel, this is the time to Watch and to
Pray, this is the time to cry aloud and spare not: Sound the Trumpet in Sion;
Awaken the sleeping People: Be instant in season, and out of seasor, and speak
boldly to Jerusalem, that she repent, that so Peace may be unto her, and not
sudden Destruction; for the Thunder has already begun.



Archbishop USHER 's PREDICTION.
THe Year before he died, being asked, Whether he did believe that Great
Persecution of the Church of God in England, Scotland and Ireland, (of which he
had spoken with great confidence many years before in time of great Peace) to
be past, or yet to come? He said, That it was yet to come, and that he did as
confidently expect it, as ever he had done; adding, That this sad Persecution
would fall upon all the Protestant Churches of Europe. And when it was
answered, It might be hoped that it might have been past in these Nations, by
reason of the Devastation and Bloodshed which had been in the late Civil War:
He replied with a very serious and stern Look,

Fool not your self with such Hopes; for I tell you, All you have yet seen,
has been but the Beginning of Sorrows, to what is yet to come upon the
Protestant Churches of Christ: Who will e're long fall under a Sharper
Persecution than ever yet has been upon them. And therefore look you be not
found in the Outward Court, but a Worshipper in the Temple before the Altar.
For Christ will measure all those who profess His Name, and call themselves His
People; and the Outward Worshippers he will leave out to be trodden down by the
Gentiles. The Outward Court is the Formal Christian, whose Religion lies in
performing the Outside Duties of Christianity, without having an Inward Life,
and Power of Faith and Love Uniting them to Christ. And these God will leave to
be trodden down and swept away by the Gentiles. But the Worshippers within the
Temple and before the Altar, are those who do indeed worship God in Spirit and
in Truth, whose Souls are made his Temples, and he is honored and adored in
the most inward Thoughts of their Hearts; and they sacrifice their Lusts and
vile Affections, yea, and their own Wills to him. And these God will hide in
the Hollow of his Hand, and under the Shadow of his Wings. And this shall be
one great Difference between this last and all the other preceding
Persecutions: For in the former, the most eminent and spiritual Ministers and
Christians did generally suffer most, and were most violently fallen upon; but
in this last Persecution, these shall be preserved by God as a Seed to partake
of that Glory, which shall immediately follow and come upon the Church, as soon
as this Storm shall be over: For as it shall be the Sharpest, so it shall be
the Shortest Persecution of them all; and shall only take away the gross
Hypocrites and Formal Profissors; but the true Spiritual Believers shall be
preserved till the Calamity be overpassed.

To this I think (...) P^rtinent (...) Excellent Passage of his to the same
Person, concerning San^^ (...)

(...) understand what Sanctification and the New Creature are. It is no less
than for a Man to be brought to an entire Resignation of his Will to the Will
of God; and to live in the offering up of his Soul continually in the flames of
Love, as a whole Burnt-Offering to Christ. And how little are many of those,
who profess Christianity, experimentally acquainted with this Work on their
Souls!

Some Circumstances of the Persecution aforesaid are mentioned in the Printed
Paper of his Predictions, to which I refer the Reader. But one there is not
mentioned there, or ever by him expressly, that I have heard of, viz. the Time.
Of which yet it may be observed, that he seems in diverse Discourses to have
intimated it so, as it must be now very near, by telling some Persons, viz.
such as were ancient, that they should not live to see it, and others that they
might, that is by course of years, and among others Judge Hale, who, had he
been now living, had been upwards of Eighty one. Besides, if the same was
signified by the Thunder underground mentioned by Mr. St. Jean, that seems to
agree well with the Manner mentioned by the Archbishop, of a sudden unexpected
Massacre.

LONDON, Printed for J. Harris in the Poultrey, 1691.


