TO THE Supreme Authority OF ENGLAND, THE REPRESENTORS OF THE PEOPLE in
PARLIAMENT assembled; THE Humble Petition OF Richard Overton, late Prisoner in
Newgate by the House of Lords, in behalf of himself and other Commoners that
have suffered under their Prerogative Jurisdiction.

London, Printed in the year, 1649.

To the supreme Authority of England, the Representors of the People in
Parliament assembled;
The humble Petition of Richard Overton, late Prisoner in Newgate by the House
of Lords, in behalf of himself and other Commoners, etc.
Shows,
THat whilst the Peoples Sovereignty, in their Parliaments, was held captive
under the Norman Preorgative of the King and Lords, your Petitioner expected no
right or freedom in any wise to this Nation; and in the since thereof has long
groaned under the weight of his sufferings, counting it bat as water spilt upon
the ground for the Asserters of the Peoples Authority (bow suffering soever) to
make any Address or Petition to this House, for any case or relief, during the
Negative Interposition of that destructive Interest.

But your late Proceedings in taking off the King, (the supreamest piece of
Justice that ever was in England), your rejection of the House of Lords, your
vindication of the supreme Authority of the Nation, declaring and avowing it to
be originally (as of right it is) in the People, and legally in their
Representative, clearing the same from all pretenses of a Negative Voice, does
animate your Petitioner with lively hopes, that now at last after all the
blood, the sighs and tears of the people the horrid treacheries, defections,
and revokings amongst your selves, we shall yet find a Sanctuary of Refugt in
this House, to save and deliver us from our oppressions, and give us Justice
and Right upon our oppressors.

Many of us (even of the ^^^t affected to the Commonwealth) have formerly with
uncessant importunity cried out and complained unto this House against the
Oppressions of the Land, praying for Redress, but we have been meniced, abused,
imprisoned, our Petitions burnt by the hand of the common hangman, although the
Votes and Orders to that purpose more deserved the same; and all our just
Assertions of the supreme Authority of the Nation, and Endeavors after
Foundations of common Right, (as is evident to the whole world) voted
treasonable and seditious, being branded for the vilest of men, bearing the
reproach of Levellers, Jesuits, Heretics, Sectaries, Despisers of Government,
Contenders for nothing but Anarchy and Confusion.

But now, Right Honorable, you being in a great measure purged of a traiterous
Faction from within your selves, we look for better things at your hands, free
admitrance and access with our Complaints, and them not to be slighted, or our
persons imprisoned or abused for the same; for we know none has more
faithfully asserted your Authority, and the Freedom of the People, then we; and
that you now stand in the strength of those righteous principles (more then in
the strength of an Army) which we (enduring the shock of all changes) have held
forth unto the people.

Hence your Petitioner is imboldned humbly to desire exemplary and impartial
Justice from this House upon the E. of Manchester, and the rest of that late
prerogative Order of Lords, for their treasonable, exorbitant practices over
and against the common Rights of the people during their late Session, with
ample and full Repairation out of their Estates unto all good people of
England, that have illegally contrary to the common Interest of the Nation
suffered under their usurped Power, hoping that you will not suffer our Laws,
our Rights, our Lives, Liberties and Estates, by them to be trod under-foot;
our houses to be plundered, our wifes, and our servants to be imprisoned, our
children exposed to the wide world, and our selves to be tossed from Goal unto
Goal, lay most unreasonable fines upon us, ten times beyond our estates,
disfranchise us from all Right in the Commonwealth, damn us to perpetual
imprisonment, throw us into noisome dungeons, tetter us in irons, drag us like
dead dogs through the dirt and mire of the street, deprive us of the benefit of
pen, ink and paper, deny us the comfort and visitation of our friends, and not
suffer so much as our wifes or servants to be admitted unto us, to bring
victuals or other necessaries, and not allow us bread, but leave us to
merciless famine, execute their cruel Orders upon us in a warlike manner, beset
our houses with Musquetteers, burst open our doors, emer the same with drawn
Swords, and Pistols ready cockd, threatening death to him that oppose, and that
in a place under civil Government, which in the Bill of Attainder against the
Earl of Strafford was adjudged a levying of War against the Kings Majesty and
his liege people of Ireland; break open our locks, our trunks, chests, desks,
etc. Rasle, rob, steal, and carry away what they please; impose oaths upon
servants to betray their Masters, examine the free People of this Nation upon
Star Chamber, High Commission, Interrogatories, to ensuare and destroy
themselves and nearest relations, stop the proceedings at Law by their
immediate Orders, dis-inherit whom they please, conspire and confederate in the
treasonable designs of the late King, assert themselves the most supreme Court
of Judicature, above the Parliament and People; introduce and set up an
absolute Arbitrrry Government amongst themselves, contrary to the fundamental
Laws of this Commonwealth, and crush and destroy all that submit not
thereunto; Acts and Crucities for which the said Earl of Strafford and the
Bishop of Canterbury etc, were adjudged and attainted of high Treason,
forfeited their Heads, their Goods, Chattels, Lands, Tenements, Heredaments and
Freeholds; and such as has formerly been by this House (in your Petition and
Ramonst. to the King December. 1. 1641.) declared to be more the proper issues of
Turks, Pagans, Tyrants, and men without any knowledge of God, then of those that
have the least spark of Christianity. Honor or Justice in their breasts; and
which, in the case of Lieut. Col. John Lilburn against the Bishops, you voted
not only illegal, and against the Liberty of the Subject, but also to be
bloody, wicked, cruel, barbarous and tyrannical, and voted him 3000 l.
repairation for the same.

And your Petitioner offers upon the forfeiture of his (...) to make good, in
behalf of the Comoners of England, and of himself, the said Charge of Treasons,
Oppressions and Cruelties against them, and hops, that you cannot in reason
and conscience hear and behold the same, and not do us right upon the Tyrants
and Traitors themselves. He further hops, that you are so sensible of your
own future preservation, that for your own sakes, if not for ours, you will
expire your Session in honor and renown with the people, which will not be but
is their relief; ease our afflictions, and state us in perfect freedom, and you
will be safe, otherwise you have but left us a President of an High Court for
our next Representative to call you to an account (but in a juster manner
allowing you your Juries etc.) which you shall never be able to prevent, for
your Session must have an end: If you do us not right, we shall never cease, if
God prolong our days, till, with the King, you have tasted the stroke of like
impartial Justice, according to your demerits; and amongst other things we
shall not be satisfied without just recompense upon the Lords, and
satisfaction, according to Law, for our several sufferings and abuses under
them. It avayleth not to change their Prerogative Session into a monsterous
Council of State, to shelter them from Justice. It is not expected, that the
two pernicious Interests of Lords and Lawyers (the Vermin and Caterpillars of
the Commonwealth) should be disguised in new robes, from the present
discerning of the people, by insensible transmutation, into the specious Garb
of a Council of State, under new forms and figures to prolong our miseries; for
may we look for grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Can we expect Freedom
from the Masters of Oppression? You may as well Interest the Lord Bishops
thereunto; for it is not the change of Tyranny from old names and forms into new
that will satisfy.

If you do not mean to right and repair us, but let them escape unpunished, your
own Votes and Actions against them will be as a thousand witnesses on our side,
for else what means your period to that Court? It is equally just to repair
the oppressed, as to remove the oppressor from his place; to throw down and not
repair, would be a small president of honor to this house, lastend of terron
for the name at would be an encouragement to such Arbitrary spirits to be as
exorbitant as these, for no punishment, no fear. Your Petitioner therefore
humbly prays, that Justice and Right may be done upon them, that you will not
deny is nor deter it is is but the benefit of the great Charter of England he
desueth, and what you have often Col. of Dec page 264. 336. 382. 50^. col. of
Declar. page. 81 172. 262. 266. 267 340. Coll. De^^. 666. 673.
before God and the world sworn to do, and in diverse of your Declarations
declared to be your duty without any private aims, personal respects or
passions whatsoever, to do Justice and Right, and secure the persons Estates
and Liberties of all that joined with you, imprecating the Judgments of Heaven
to fall upon you, when you declined the same: Remember the Kings Imprecations,
and the vengdance that fell upon him; and slight not the suit of your
Petitioner, though he be mean and despicible in the eye of the world.

Thus then (Right Honorable) in his own behalf he humbly desires you would be
pleased to consider, that after his opposition of Episcopacy, High Commission,
Star Chamber, Scoth-Presbytery, etc. and deep sufferance for the same, he
became a witness against this Prerogative Session of Lords, and for the same,
without any legal summons, Indictment, or other due procese at Law, preceding,
contrary to the great Charter, and other the good Laws and Statutes of the
Realm. [Mag. Cart. c. 29. l. Ed. 3. c. 9. 25. Ed. 3. c. 4. 28. Ed. 3. c. 3. 42.
Ed. 3. c. 3. 25. Hen. 8. c. 14. 1. Eliz. c. 1. Petstion of Right, 2, Caroli.
Stat. for abolishing the Star Chamber.] Had his house suddenly surrounded with
Muskerreets, taken in his bed with their swords drawn, threatened to be shot,
fun through, basely and barbarously dragged through the dirt and mire, beat,
abused, and vilified, endured a most tedious and cruel imprisonment for the
space of 12 months in the Goal of Nemgate, laid in double irons on the common
side amongst the Theives. Murderers and Felons, his wife at the same time
thrown into Bridewell, his brother into Maiden-lane prison, (who then depended
upon his charge) both continuing in that durance the space of eight months,
his house risled and plundered several times, his three small children left go
the mercy of the streets besides other inhumane abuses and sufferings, which he
here omitteth, all executed upon him and his, by several tyrann nical Orders of
that Prerogative Court, (whereof the Earl of Manchester was then Speaker,) to
his utter ruin and beggarly (...) being, thereby reduced to extreme want and
misery, and for (...) other cause, but for his just Vindication of the supreme
Authority of this House, his open defiance and resistance of their usurped
Jurisdiction, Writing, Printing and Publishing Papers to that end, refusing to
answer to their High Commission, Interrogatories, and the like; all which your
Petitioner by the just Laws and Freedoms of this Nation was allowed, and as a
true Englishman obliged to do, and yet notwithstanding your Petitioner could
never gain any consideration or recompense for himself, or any Right or Justice
upon those destroyers of the people, being still born down with their might,
and trod under their merciless feet; he has petitioned and apealed formerly to
this House against their exorbitant crueleled upon him, and had his Case with
Leiu: Col. John Lilburns, and M. Larners referred to a Committee for
consideration of the Commoners Liberties, where Col. Henry Martin had the
Chair; and our sufferings were there determined and found upon due eximination
and proof to be illegal and unjust, deserving Repetation; but hitherto none of
as have tasted either Right or Repetation at all from this House, whereby your
Petitioner, with his charge, are even ready to perish through want.

Be pleased therefore to reassume the Cause of your Petitioner, and other the
like sufferers, into your timely and serious Consideration, forthwith to resign
up those impeached Delinquents, as well as other traiterous Lords, to trial,
(saving in a more just and legal manner then the present Proceedings of this
High Arbitrary Court, exalted above all Law, Right and Freedom of the People,
it being both Judge, Jury and Prosecutor, overruling all liberty of exception
of Tryers, etc.) And your Petitioner (in this extraordinary case, no other way
of remedy being left) humbly defireth your assigument unto him of such
Repairations as for his suffirings and just demerit of so public a cause you
shall, in Justice and Reason, judge meet.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.
FINIS.

