To the high and mighty States, the Knights and Burgesses in Parliament
Assembled; (Englands legal sovereign power) The humble Appeal and
Supplication of RICHARD OVERTON, Prisoner in the most contemptible Goal of
Newgate.
Humbly shows;
THat whereas your prisoner under pretense of a Criminal fact being in a
warlike manner brought before the House of Lords to be tried, and by them put
to Answer to Interogatories concerning himself, both which your Petitioner
humbly conceiving to be illegal, and contrary to the natural rights,
freedoms, and properties of the free Commoners of England; confirmed to them
by Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and the Act for the abolishment of the
Star Chamber: he therefore was imboldened to refuse subjection to the said
House, both in the one and the other, expressing his resolution before them,
that he would not infringe the private rights and properties of himself, or of
any one Commoner in particular, or the common rights and properties of this
Nation in general: for which your Petitioner was by them adjudged
contemptuous, and by an order from the said House was therefore committed to
the goal of Newgate, where, from the 11 of August 1646. to this present he
has lain, and there commanded to be kept till their pleasures shall be further
signified (as a copy of the said order hereunto annexed does declare) which
may be perpetual if they please, and may have their Wills; for your Petitioner
humbly conceives that thereby he is made a Prisoner to their Wills, not to the
Law, except their Wills may be a Law.

Wherefore your liege Petitioner does make his humble appeal unto this most
Sovereign House (as to the highest Court of Judicature in the Land, wherein
all the appeals thereof are to centure, and beyond which, none can be made)
humbly craving (both in testimony of this acknowledgment of its legal
regality, and of his due submission thereunto) that your Honors therein
assembled, would take his cause (and in his, the cause of all the free
Commoners of England, whom you represent, and for whom you sit) into your
serious consideration and legal determination, that he may either by the mercy
of the Law be repossessed of this his just liberty and freedom, and thereby
the whole Commons of England of their thus unjustly (as he humbly conceives)
usurped and invaded by the House of Lords, with due repairations of the damages
susstained, or else that he may undergo what pennalty shall in equity by the
impartial severity fo the Law, be adjudged against him by this Honorable
House, in case by them he shall be legally found a transgressor herein.

And your Petitioner (as in duty bound) shall ever pray, etc.

