Oats New Shams Discovered: And how they carried it on from Time to Time, Sent
in a Letter to his Grace James Duke of Monmouth from Doctor Titus Oats.
ABout ten years agone, this Kingdom I say, was got with Child, with a huge and
horrible Popish-plot, it had neither Head nor Foot, but sixty thousand Rumps
and Tails, and what do you call 'ems. Now Sir about five yeras agone -- her Belly
began to Gripe -- she made foul Faces and looked very black in the Fundament,
and fell into Labor with this Plot; and was very ill indeed, she fathered the
Plot upon the Jesuits, and several other persons of Quality -- and several of
the Papists where hanged and cut in pieces and the rest Beggered and Ruined,
and all the able Men-Midwives in England were sent for, to help to deliver her
of this great Belly: First that great states Midwife, Shaftsbury -- who took
his turn for four years together, and at the lastwith a full Resolution to
fetch it out, thrust his hand a little too far, and broke a Leg or an Arm, and
was forced to run away to save his Neck. Then was chose a Counsel of six of the
able states Midwives in the Kingdom to try Experiments, amongst whom the Lord
Russel scorning to be out done; fell to work Tooth and Nail; but being too hot
upon it happens to lay hold on the Arse gut and all beshit his Fingers. Upon
this misfortune he fell into a desperate passion: and in revenge resolved to
cut his Majesty's Throat, but just in the attempt his own Head dropped off.

Next comes Midwife Gray, but having just left his two Wives behind the Curtain
which were really Sisters, and he not being able to satsfie one, his Horns on a
sudden sprouted out so much longer than his Arms, that they goar'd Britain
into the Belly before he could reach it, which put her into such a Fit of
Torture and Kicking, as frighted him out of his sense and sight of the World,
that he was never seen since.

Then comes E -- x with serious reserved deliberate gravity: And as soon as he
had felt how it was with her -- he pretended to wish that the K. did but know
half so much as he did, but feeling the second time -- she unmannerly slapt her
Tail in his Eye, and pist in his Face -- which caused some of the Deputy
Midwives to laugh at him; which put the Earl into such a passion, that he swore
the K. had a hand in it -- for which and other Crimes he was clapped up; and in
revenge he played the fool and cut his own Throat.

Then comes thundering Tickle me Tom, and he was so foolish Rash he would needs
father the Pug before it was Born; he was so in love with the Bastard that he
attempted to out of the Royal Line to make a King on it: which made Britain up
with her heel and hit him a dab o'th the Chops and farted in his Face, Gad,
what does he do for madness, but transforms himself into the Spawn of a Makrel
and was never heard of since.

Next comes Perking Teckely -- though a Bastard he had an undoubted Right to
the Imperial Crown of England, he laid both his Commissions, Life, and his
expected Crown, that he would fetch it out the first attempt without difficulty.
Then he falls to work, Sir, upon the Brat, and got by the back with both hands
at once -- and pulled it with such an undanted Courage that five hundred Rumps
and Tails come off in his hands -- and he lost his hold, which so inflamed his
Grace, that he turned up her Tail, and showed her Nakedness to forty thousand
of the Rabble -- which made Britain pull him by the Lugs -- and wrapped a Ladys
shitten Smock about his Chops and Eyes and sent his Addle-head, Reeling
Blindfold from the Land of Promise to Wapping; where the other Sister wiped his
Chops -- and he sputtered and Hectored about and threatened Revenge for a while;
at last was lost in a Mist; like Aenvas, for ingratitude and never was heard of
since -- a great many more made the like attempt, with such or worse success --
and some hanged, some in hold, some turned Trimmers and the rest run away: for
just in the interim when the K. was to have been Murdered comes me in -- one
Howard, Rumsey West, and Keeling -- and undertook to deliver this great Belly
-- and upon the word of a Priest, they handled it with such Dexterity, that in
a fortnights time, they brought out this great Monster -- and what do you think
it was that made all this noise-e'en honest Presbyter John -- a Delicate Bade,
but so stuffed with' Soiciations, Noble Feer's Speech; Holy Leagues, and
Covenants, etc. that it was Farting full again: And being Incubus it spoke as
soon as it was Born, and named above six-Hundred Fathers that were at the
getting on it- Shaftsburys, Tongue, and my self, three of the Chief-then drwing
its Mouth on one side; Cried, You must all turn Turks or be damned and ever
since I have had a great Ambition to leave off my Hypocritical Jump, and turn
Muffty. But how do you think this Brat served us at l^st; for all we have
lick't it into five hundred shapes and colors nothing serves its turn but
speaking truth with a Pox to the Rascal: and has spoiled all our future
proceedings; and we have lost the Charter into the bargain. But as for Popish
Commissions, Spanish Pilgrims, Black Bills, French Armies, Pickerings Guns,
Teuxbury Mustard Balls, Popish plots etc. I received ready money for them, both
from Court and City at once: but now, notwithstanding all my Gaurds, I was
arrested three or four times a week, and have neither Plot nor Commission to
make a penny on, to help my self withal; and my Bums, like a company of
Ravenous Wolves, are ready to tear my heart out. But for Wests Blunderbuss,
Wilamans Cannon, most of them are visibly taken and Seized by the K. Just now
my sacred person was seized for twenty pounds due for linen, which I took up
to wipe clean my Bum. To conclude Sir, unless our party can get to a head,
before the K. calls a Parliament, all our Gang must of necessity fly to your
Mightiness for refuge -- Therefore I beseech you let the Sarraglio, be
forthwith made ready for me and my Retinue -- for Bums, I shall carry fourscore
along with me, for Whores and Baudes, let there be two thousand made ready: for
I intended to out do Solomon in Letchery, Mahomet in Blasphmy, and Judas in
Perjury and Treachery.

LONDON, Printed for Absalon Chamberlain, in Red-bull Play-house-yard over
against the Pound in St. John-street; near Clerken-well-green.


