THE Stedfastness of PROMISES, And the Sinfulness of STAGGERING: Opened in a
SERMON Preached at Margarets in Westminster before the PARLIAMENT Febr. 28.
1649. Being a day set apart for solemn Humiliation throughout the NATION. By
John Owen Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole, and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of
the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1650.

TO THE COMMONS OF ENGLAND IN PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED.
SIRS,
THAT God in whose hand your breath is, and whose are all your ways, having
caused various Seasons to pass over you, and in them all manifested, That his
Works are Truth, and his VVayes Judgment, calls earnestly by them for that
walking before him, which is required from them, who with other distinguishing
mercies, are interested in the specialty of his protecting Providence. As in a
view of present Enjoyments, to Sacrifice to your Net, and burn Incense to your
Drag; as though by them, your Portion were Fat and Plenteous, is an exceeding
provocation to the Eyes of his Glory, so to press to the residue of your
Desires and Expectations, by an Arm of Flesh, the Designings and Contrivances
of Carnal Reason, with outwardly appearing Medium's of their Accomplishment, is
no less an Abomination to him. Though there may be a present sweetness to them
that find the life of the hand, yet their latter End will be, to lie down in
sorrow. That you might be prevailed on to give Glory to God by stedfastness in
believing, committing all your ways to him with Patience in well-doing; to the
Contempt of the most varnished Appearance of Carnal Policy, was my peculiar
aim, in this ensuing Sermon.

That which added ready willingness to my Obedience unto your Commands for the
Preaching and Publishing hereof, being a serious Proposal for the Advancement
and Propagation of the Gospel in another Nation, is here again recommended to
your Thoughts, by

Your most humble Servant, in our Common Master, J. O.
March 8th 1649.
The stedfastness of PROMISES, AND, The sinfulness of STAGGERING: Opened in a
SERMON Preached at Margarets in Westminster, before the Parliament, Febr. 28.
1649.
Romans 4. 20. He staggered not at the Promise of God through unbelief.
IN the first Chapters of this Epistle, the Apostle from Scripture, and the
constant practice of all sorts of men, of all Ages, Jews and Gentiles, Wise and
Barbarians, proves all the world, and every individual therein, to have sinned
and come short of the glory of God: And not only so, but that it was utterly
impossible, that by their own strength, or by virtue of any assistance
communicated, or privileges enjoyed, they should ever attain to a
righteousness of their own, that might be acceptable unto God.

Hereupon he concludes that Discourse with these two positive Assertions:

1 That for what is past, every mouth must be stopped, and all the world become
guilty before God. Chap. 3. v. 19.

2 For the future, though they should labor to amend their ways, and improve
their Assistances and Privileges to a better advantage then formerly, yet by
the deeds of the Law, shall no flesh be justified in the sight of God. v. 20.

Now it being the main drift of the Apostle, in this Epistle, and in his whole
Employment, to manifest that God has not shut up all the Sons of men, hopeless
and remediless under this Condition; he immediately, discovers and opens the
rich Supply, which God in Free Grace has made and provided, for the delivery
of his Own from this calamitous estate, even by the Righteousness of Faith in
Christ, which he unfoldeth, asserteth, proves, and vindicates from Objections
to the end of the 3d Chapter.

This being a matter of so great weight, as, comprizing in it self the sum of
the Gospel wherewith he was entrusted; the honor and exaltation of Christ,
which above all he desired; the great design of God to be glorious in his
Saints, and in a word, the chief subject of the Embassage from Christ, to him
committed, (to wit, That they who neither have, nor by any means can attain a
Righteousness of their own, by the utmost of their workings, may yet have that
which is complete and unrefusable in Christ, by beleiving) he therefore
strongly confirms it in the fourth Chapter, by testimony and example of the
Scripture, with the Saints that were of old: Thereby also declaring, That
though the manifestation of this Mystery, were now more fully opened by Christ
from the bosom of the Father, yet indeed this was the only way for any to
appear in the presence of God, ever since Sin entered into the world.

To make his Demonstrations the more evident, he singleth out one for an
example, who was eminently known, and confessed by all to have been the friend
of God, to have been righteous and justified before him, and thereon to have
held sweet Communion with him all his days; to wit, Abraham, the father
according to the flesh, of all those, who put in the strongest of all men for a
share in Righteousness, by the Privileges they did enjoy, and the works they
did perform.

Now concerning him, the Apostle proves abundantly in the beginning of the
fourth Chapter, That the Justification which he found, and the Righteousness he
attained, was purely that, and no other, which he before described; to wit, a
Righteousness in the forgiveness of Sins, through Faith in the blood of Christ.

Yea, and that all the privileges and exaltations of this Abraham, which made
him so signal and eminent among the Saints of God, as to be called the Father
of the faithful, were merely from hence, That this Righteousness of Grace, was
freely discovered, and fully established unto him: an Enjoyment being granted
him in a peculiar manner, by Faith, of that promise, wherein the Lord Christ
with the whole spring of the Righteousness mentioned, was enwrapped.

This the Apostle pursues with sundry and various Inferences, and Conclusions,
to the end of Verse. 17. Chap. 4

Having laid down this, in the next place he gives us a Description of that
Faith of Abraham, whereby he became Inheritor of those excellent things, from
the Adjuncts of it. That as his Justification was proposed as an Example of
Gods dealing with us by his Grace, so his Faith might be laid down as a pattern
for us, in the receiving that Grace.

Now this he does, from 1 The foundation of it, whereon it rested. 2 The matter
of it, what he believed. 3 The manner of it, or how he believed.


1, From the bottom and foundation on which it rested, viz. The Omnipotency or
Al-sufficiency of God, whereby he was able to fulfill whatever he had engaged
himself unto by promise, and which he called him to believe, verse. 14. He
believed him who quickneth the dead, and calls those things which be not, as
though they were.

Two great Testimonies are here of the power of God: 1 That he quickneth the
dead, able he is to raise up those that are dead to life again. 2 He calls
things that are not, as though they were: by his very call or word, gives being
to those things which before were not: as when he said, Let there be light,
there was light, Genesis 1. 3. by that very word, commanding light to shine out of
darkness, 2 Cor. 4. 6.

These Demonstrations of Gods Al-sufficiency he considers in peculiar
reference to what he was to believe; to wit, That he might be the Father of
many Nations, verse. 11. of the Jews according to the flesh, of Jews and
Gentiles, according to the Faith whereof we speak.

1 For the first, his Body being now dead, and Sarahs womb dead, verse. 19. he
rests on God as quickening the dead, in believing that he shall be the father
of many Nations.

2 For the other, that he should be a Father of the Gentiles by Faith, the holy
Ghost witnesses that they were not a people, Hos. 2. 23. the implanting of
them in his stock, must be by a power, that calls things that are not, as
though they were: giving a new nature, and being unto them, which before they
had not.

To bottom our selves upon the Al-sufficiency of God, for the accomplishment
of such things, as are altogether impossible to any thing, but that
Alsufficiency, is faith indeed, and worthy our immitation: It is also the
wisdom of Faith, to pitch peculiarly on that in God, which is accommodated to
the difficulties wherewith it is to wrestle: Is Abraham to believe, That from
his dead body, must spring a whole Nation? he rests on God, as he that
quickens the dead.

2, His Faith is commended from the matter of it, or what he did believe: which
is said in general to be the promise of God: verse 20. He staggered not at the
promise of God through unbelief. And particularly the matter of that promise is
pointed at, verse. 11. 18. that he should be the father of many Nations; that
was his being a father of many nations, of having all nations blessed in his
seed. A matter entangled with a world of difficulties, considering the natural
inability of his Body, and the Body of Sarah, to be Parents of Children

When God calls for believing, his Truth and Alsufficiency being engaged, no
difficulty nor seeming impossibilities, that the thing to be believed is, or
may be attended withal, ought to be of any weight with us: he who has
promised, is able.

3, From the manner of his believing, which is expressed Four ways.

1 Against Hope, he believed in Hope: verse 18. Here is a twofold Hope
mentioned, one that was against him, the other, that was for him.

1 He believed against Hope, that is, when all Arguments that might beget Hope
in him, were against him.

against Hope, is against all motives unto Hope whatever. All Reasons of
natural hope were against him: What Hope could arise, in, or by Reason, that
two dead Bodies, should be the Source and Fountain of many Nations? so that
against all inducements of a natural Hope he believed.

2 He believed in Hope: That is such Hope as arose as his Faith did from the
consideration of Gods Alsufficiency; this is an Adjunct of his Faith, it was
such a Faith as had Hope adjoined with it: And this believing in Hope, when all
Reasons of Hope were away, is the first thing that is set down, of the manner
of his Faith.

In a decay of all Natural helps, the deadness of all means, an appearance of
an utter Impossibility, that ever the promise should be accomplished, then to
believe with unfeigned Hope, is a commendable Faith.

2 He was not weak in faith: verse. 19. (...), not weak, is the 2d thing. Minime
debilis: Beza. He was by no means weak. A negation, that by a figure ((...))
does strongly assert the contrary, to that which is denied. He was no way weak;
that is, He was very strong in Faith, as is afterward expressed, verse. 20. He
was strong in Faith giving glory to God.

And the Apostle tells you, wherein this his, not weakness did appear: says
he, He considered not his own body being now dead, when he was about an hundred
years old, neither yet the deadness of Sara's womb: verse 19. It was seen in
this, that his Faith carried him above the consideration of all impediments,
that might lie in the way to the accomplishment of the promise.

It is mere weakness of Faith, that makes a man lie poering on the difficulties
and seeming impossibilities that lie upon the promise. We think it our wisdom,
and our strength, to consider, weigh and look into the bottom of oppositions,
and temptations, that arise against the Promise. Perhaps it may be the strength
of our fleshly, carnal Reason; but certainly, it is the weakness of our Faith:
He that is strong in Faith, will not so much as debate or consider the things,
that cast the greatest seeming improbability, yea impossibility, on the
fulfilling of the promise. It will not afford them a Debate or Dispute of the
Cause, nor any consideration, being not weak in Faith, he considered not.

3 He was fully persuaded, verse 21. (...), he was persuasionis plenus, fully
persuaded: this is the 3d thing that is observed in the manner of his
believing. He fully, quietly, resolvedly cast himself on this, That he who had
promised was able to perform it. As a Ship at Sea, (for so the word imports)
looking about, and seeing storms and winds arising, sets up all her Sails, and
with all speed, makes to the Harbor. Abraham seeing the storms of doubts and
temptations, likely to rise against the Promise made unto him, with full sail
breaks through all, to lie down quietly in Gods Al-sufficiency. And this is the
3d.

4 The 4th is, That he staggered not, verse 20. This is that which I have
chosen to insist on unto you, as a choice part of the commendation of Abraham's
faith, which is proposed for our imitation:

He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief.

The words may be briefly resolved into this Doctrinal Proposition:



What is of any difficulty in the Text, will be cleared in opening the parts of
the Observation.

Men are apt to pretend sundry other Reasons and Causes of their staggering.
The Promises do not belong unto them, God intends not their souls in them, they
are not such, and such, and this makes them stagger: when the Truth is, it is
their unbelief, and that alone, that puts them into this staggering condition.
As in other things, so in this, we are apt to have many fair pretenses for foul
faults. To lay the Burden on the right shoulders, I shall demonstrate by Gods
assistance, that it is not this, or that, but unbelief alone, that makes us
stagger at the Promises.

To make this the more plain, I must open these two things: 1 What is the
Promise here intended? 2 What it is, to stagger at the Promise?


The promise here mentioned is principally that which Abraham believing, it was
said eminently, That it was accounted to him for Righteousness: So the Apostle
tells us, verse 5. of this Chaper: when this was, you may see Genesis 15. verse. 6.
there it is affirmed, That he believed the Lord, and it was accounted to him
for Righteousness. That which God had there spoken to him of, was about the
multiplying of his seed as the stars of heaven, whereas he was yet childless.

The last verse of Chapter 14, leaves Abraham full of earthly Glory. He had
newly conquered five Kings with all their host: honored by the King of Sodom,
and blessed by the King of Salem; and yet in the first verse of Chap. 15. God
appearing to him in a vision, in the very entrance bids him FEAR NOT: plainly
intimating, That notwithstanding all his outward success and glory, he had
still many perplexities upon his Spirit, and had need of great Consolation and
establishment: Abraham was not clear in the accomplishment of former Promises
about the blessed seed, and so though he have all outward advancements, yet he
cannot rest in them. Until a child of God be clear in the main, in the matter
of the great Promise, the business of Christ, the greatest outward Successes
and Advantages, will be so far from quieting and settling his mind, that they
rather increase his perplexities. They do but occasion him to cry, Here is
this, and that; here is victory, and success; here is wealth, and peace; but
here is not Christ.

That this was Abraham's condition, appears from verse. 2. of that Chapter,
where God having told him, That he was his shield, and his exceeding great
reward. He replies, Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I go childless? As
if he should have said, Lord God, thou toldest me when I was in Haran, now 19.
years ago, That in me and my seed, all the families of the Earth should be
blessed, Genesis 12. 3. That the blessed, blessing seed, should be of me: but now
I wax old, all appearances grow up against the direct accomplishment of that
word, and it was that, which above all in following thee, I aimed at; if I am
disappointed therein, what shall I do? and what will all these things avail me?
what will it benefit me, to have a multitude of earthly enjoyments, and leave
them in the close to my Servant?

I cannot but observe, That this sighing mournful complaint of Abraham, has
much infirmity, and something of diffidence, mixed with it. He shakes in the
very bottom of his soul, that improbabilities were growing up as he thought to
impossibilities, against him, in the way of the Promise: Yet hence also mark
these two things:

1 That he does not repine in himself, and keep up his burning thoughts in his
breast, but sweetly breaths out the burden of his Soul, into the bosom of his
God: Lord God, (says he) what will thou give me seeing I go childless? It is
of sincere Faith, to unlade our unbeleif, in the bosom of our God.

2 That God takes not his Servant at the Advantage of his complaining and
diffidence: but lets that pass, until having renewed the Promise to him, and
settled his Faith, then he gives in his Testimony, That he believed God. The
Lord overlooks the weakness, and causless wailings of his, takes them at the
best, and then gives his witness to them.

This I say was the Promise whereof we spoke, That he should have a seed of his
own, like the stars that cannot be numbered, Genesis 15. v. 4, 5. And herein are
contained Three things.

1 The purely spiritual part of it, that concerned his own soul in Christ. God
engaging about his seed, minds him of his own Interest, in the blessing
bringing seed. Jesus Christ, with his whole Mediation, and his whole work of
Redemption is in this Promise, with the enjoyment of God in Covenant, as a
shield, and as an exceeding great Reward.

2 The kingdom of Christ in respect of the Propagation and Establishment of it,
with the multitude of his subjects, that also is in this Promise.

3 The temporal part of it, multitudes of Children to a Childless man: and an
Heir from his own bowels.

Now this Promise in these 3 Branches, takes up your whole Interest, comprizes
all you are to believe for: be you considered, either as Beleivers, or as
Rulers.

1 As Beleivers: So your Interest lies in these Two things: 1 That your own
souls have a share and portion in the Lord Christ: 2 That the kingdom of the
Lord Jesus be exalted and established.

2 As Rulers: That peace and prosperity may be the inheritance of the Nation,
is in your desires: look upon this in subordination to the kingdom of Christ,
and so all there are in this Promise.

To make this more plain, these being the Three main things that you aim at; I
shall lay before you Three Promises, suited to these several things, which or
the like, you are too view in all your actings, all staggering at them, being
from unbelief.

1, The first thing you are to believe for, is the Interest of your own souls
in the Covenant of Grace, by Christ: as to this I shall only point unto that
Promise of the Covenant, Heb. 8. 12. I will be merciful to tbeir
unrigbteousness, and their sins, and their iniquities, I will remember no more.

2, The second is the establishment of the Kingdom of Christ, in despite of all
opposition: and for this amongst innumerable, take that of Isa. 60. 11.
Therefore thy Gates shall be open continually, they shall not be shut day nor
night, that men may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles, and that their
Kings may be brought; for the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee,
shall perish.

3, The quiet and peace of the Nation, which ye regard as Rulers, as it stands
in subordination to the kingdom of Christ, comes also under the Promise, for
which take that of Jeremiah 30. 20, 21.

These being your three main ayms, let your eye be fixed on these three, or the
like Promises; for in the Demonstration and the Use of the Point, I shall carry
along all Three together: desiring that what is instanced in any one, may be
always extended to both the other.

2 What is it to stagger at the Promise: He staggered not. (...) he disputed
not; (...) is properly to make use of our own Judgment and Reason, in
discerning of things, of what sort they be. It is sometime rendered, to doubt;
Matthew. 21. 21. If you have faith (...), and doubt not; that is, not use
arguings and reasonings in your selves concerning the Promise and things
promised. Sometimes it simply denotes to discern a thing as it is: so the word
is used 1 Cor. 11. 29. (...) discerning the body.

In the sense wherein it is here used, as also Matthew. 21. 21. it holds out, as
I said, a self-consultation and dispute, concerning those contrary things that
are proposed to us. So also Acts 10. 20. Peter is commanded to obey the Vision,
(...) nothing doubting: What is that? Why, a not continuing to do, what he is
said to have done, verse 17. He doubted in himself, what the Vision he had seen
should mean: He rolled, and disputed it in his own thoughts, he staggered at it.

To stagger then at the Promise, is to take into Consideration the Promise it
self, and withal, all the difficulties that lie in the way for the
accomplishment of it, as to a man's own particular, and there so to dispute it
in his thoughts, as not fully to cast it off, nor fully to close with it. For
Instance, The Soul considers the Promise of Free Grace in the blood of Jesus,
looks upon it, weighs as well as it is able, the Truth of God, who makes the
Promise, with those other considerations, which might lead the heart to rest
firmly upon it; but withal, takes into his thoughts, his own unworthiness,
sinfulness, unbelief, hypocrisy, and the like; which as he supposes,
powerfully stave off the Efficacy of the Promise from him. Hence he knows not
what to conclude: if he ad a grain of faith, the scale turns on the side of the
Promise; the like quantity of unbelief, makes it turn upon him: and what to do
he knows not: let go the Promise he cannot, take fast hold he dares not; but
here he staggers and wavers to and fro.

Thus the Soul becomes to be like Paul, in another case, Phil. 1. 23. He
considered his own Advantage on the one side by his dissolution, and the profit
of the Churches by his abiding in the flesh, on the other; and taking in these
various thoughts, he cries out, He is in a straight, he staggered, he was
betwixt two, and knew not which to choose: or as David, 2 Samuel 24. 14. when he
had a tender of several Corrections made to him, says, I am in a great
straight; he sees evil in every one, and knows not which to choose.

A poor creature looking upon the Promise sees, as he supposes, in a steadfast
closing with the Promise, that there lies presumption; on the other hand,
certain destruction, if he beleives not: and now he staggers, he is in a great
straight: Arguments arise on both sides, he knows not how to determine them,
and so hanging in suspense, he staggereth.

Like a man travailing a Journey, and meeting with two several paths, that
promise both fairly, and he knows not which is his proper way; he ghesses, and
ghesses, and at length cries, Well, I know not which of these ways I should
go, but this is certain, if I mistake, I am undone, I Will go in neither, but
here I Will sit down, and not move one step in either of them, until some one
come, that can give me direction. The Sonl very frequently sits down in this
haesitation, and refuses to step one step forwards, till God come mightily and
lead out the Spirit to the Promise, or the Devil turn it aside to unbeleif.

It is, as a thing of small weight in the Air: the weight that it has, carries
it downwards; and the Air, with some breath of wind, bears it up again: so that
it waves to and fro: sometimes it seems as though it would fall, by it is own
weight, and sometimes again, as though it would mount quite out of sight, but
poyzed between both, it tosseth up and down, without any great gaining either
way.

The Promise, that draws the Soul upward, and the weight of its unbelief, that
sinks it downward: sometime the Promise attracts so powerfully, you would think
the heart quite drawn up into it: and sometime again, unbelief presses down,
that you would think it gone for ever; but neither prevails utterly, the poor
Creatures swaggs between both, this it is to stagger: like the two Disciples
going to Emaus, Luke 24. v. 14. They talked together of the things that were
happned: debated the business: and verse 22. they gave up the result of their
thoughts; They trusted it had been he that should have redeemed Israel. They
trusted once, but now seeing him slain and crucified, they know not what to say
to it: What then? do they quite give over all trusting in him? No, they cannot
do so, verse 23, 24, 25. Certain Women had astonished them, and affirmed that
he was risen: yea, and others also going to his grave found it so: hereupon
they have communication within themselves, and are sad, verse 17. that is, they
staggered; they were in a staggering condition: much appears for them,
something against them, they know not what to do.

A poor soul that has been long perplexed in trouble and anxiety of mind, finds
a sweet promise, Christ in a promise suited to all his wants, coming with Mercy
to pardon him, with Love to embrace him, with Blood to purge him, and is raised
up to roll himself in some measure upon this Promise: On a sudden, Terrors
arise, Temptations grow strong, new Corruptions break out, Christ in the
Promise dies to him, Christ in the Promise is slain, is in the grave as to him;
so that he can only sigh and say, I trusted for deliverance by Christ, but now
all is gone again, I have little or no hope, Christ in the Promise is slain to
me: What then? shall he give over, never more enquire after this buried Christ,
but sit down in darkness and sorrow? No, he cannot do so: This morning, some
new Arguments of Christ's appearance again upon the Soul, are made out: it may
be, Christ is not for ever lost to him. What does he then? steadfastly believe
he cannot; totally give over he will not: He staggers: he is full of
self-communications and is sad. This it is, to stagger at the promise of God. I
come now to prove, That notwithstanding any pretenses whatever, All this
staggering is from unbelief.

The two Disciples whom we now mentioned that staggered and disputed between
themselves in their Journey to Emaus, thought they had a goodly Reason, and a
sufficient appearing Cause of all their doubtings: We hoped (say they) that it
was he, that should have delivered Israel. What do they now stand at? Alas!
the chief Priests and Rulers have condemned him to death, and Crucified him,
Luke 24. 20. And is it possible that deliverance should arise from a Crucified
man? This makes them stagger. But when our Savior himself draws nigh to them,
and gives them the ground of all this, he tells them it is all from hence; they
are foolish and slow of heart to believe, verse 25. Here is the rise of all
their doubtings, even their unbelief. Whilst you are slow of heart to believe,
do not once think of establishment.

Peter venturing upon the waves at the command of Christ, Matthew. 14. seeing the
wind to grow boystrous, v. 29. he also has a storm within, and cries out, Oh
save me: What was now the Cause of Peter's fear, and crying out? why the Wind
and Sea grew boisterous, and he was ready to sink: no such thing; but merely
unbelief, want of Faith: verse 31. O thou of little Faith (says our Savior)
wherefore did thou doubt? it was not the great winds, but thy little Faith
that made thee stagger. And in three or four other places, upon several
occasions, does our Savior lay all the wavering and staggering of his
followers, as to any promised mercy, upon this score, as Matthew. 6. 30. and 8.
26.

Isa. 7. Ahaz being afraid of the Combination of Syria and Ephraim against him,
received a promise of deliverance by Isaiah, verse 7. whereupon the Prophet
tells him and all Judah, That if they will not believe, surely they shall not
be established, verse 9. He does not say, If Damascus and Ephraim be not
broken, you shall not be established; no, the stick is not there: The fear that
you will not be established, arises merely from your unbelief, that keeps you
off from closing with the Promise, which would certainly bring you
establishment.

And this is the sole Reason the Apostle gives, why the word of Promise being
Preached, becomes unprofitable; even because of unbelief: It was not mixed with
faith, Heb. 4. 2.

But these things will be more clear under the Demonstrations of the Point;
which are Two:

Certitudo mentis, the assurance of his mind, or Certitudo entis, the certainty
of the thing it self, is wanting.

He that doubts whether his friend in a far country be alive or no, his
staggering arises from the uncertainty of the thing it self: when that is made
out, he is resolved, as it was with Jacob in the Case of Joseph. But he that
doubts, whether the Needl in the Compass, being touched with the Loadstone,
will turn Northward; all the uncertainty is in his own mind.

When men stagger at the Promises, this must arise either from within
themselves, or some occasion must be administered hereunto, from the Promise. If
from within themselves, that can be nothing but unbelief; an inbred obstacle
to closing with, and resting on the Promise, that is unbelief. If then we
demonstrate, that there is nothing in the Promise, either as to the matter, or
manner, or any attendency of it, that should occasion any such staggering, then
we lay the burden and blame on the right shoulders, the sin of staggering on
unbelief.

Now that any Occasion is not administered, nor Cause given, of this staggering,
from the Promise, will appear, if we consider seriously whence any such
Occasion or Cause should arise. All the stability of a Promise, depends upon
the Qualifications of the Promiser, to the ends and purposes of the promise. If
a man make me a Promise to do such and such things for me, and I question,
whether ever it will be so, or no; it must be from a doubt of the want of one
of these things in him that makes the Promise: either 1 of Truth, or 2d of
Ability to make good his word, because of the difficulty of the thing it self;
or 3d of Sincerity to intend me really, what he speaks of; or 4th of constant
Memory to take the Opportunity of doing the thing intended; or 5th of
stableness to be still of the same mind. Now if there be no want of any of
these, in him whose Promises we speak of, there is then certainly no ground of
our staggering, but only from our Own unbelief.

Let us now see whether any of these things, be wanting to the Promises of God:
and begin we with the First:

1 Is there Truth in these Promises? If there be the least Occasion in the
world, to suspect the Truth of the promises, or the Veracity of the Promiser,
then may our staggering at them, arise from thence, and not from our unbelief.
On this ground it is, That all humane Faith, that is bottomed merely on the
Testimony of man, is at best but a probable Opinion: for every man is a liar,
and possibly may lie, in that very thing, he is engaged to us in. Though a Good
man will not do so, to save his life, yet it is possible, he may be tempted, he
may do so: But now the Author of the Promises whereof we speak, is Truth it
self. The God of Truth. Who has taken this as his special Attribute, to
distinguish him, from all other. He is the very God of Truth; and holds out
this very Attribute in a special manner, in this very thing, in making of his
Promise. He is faithful to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1. 9. whence his Word is
said, not only to be true, but Truth, Joh. 17. 19. Truth it self: All flesh is
as grass, but his Word abides for ever, Isa 44. 1.

But yet further, that it may be evident, that from hence there can be no
Occasion of staggering. This God of Truth, whose Word is Truth, has in his
infinite Wisdom, condescended to our weakness, and used all possible means, to
Cause us to apprehend the Truth of his Promises. The Lord might have left us in
the dark, to have gathered out his Mind and Will toward us, from obscure
Expressions: and knowing of what value his Kindness is, it might justly be
expected that we should do so. Men in misery, are glad to lay hold of the least
word, that drops from him, that can Relieve them, and to take Courage and
Advantage upon it: As the Servants of Benhadad, watched diligently, what would
fall from the mouth of Ahab, concerning their Master, then in fear of death:
and when he had occasionally called him his Brother, they presently laid hold
of it, and cry, Thy Brother Benhadad: 1 King. 20. 35. God might have left us,
and yet have manifested much Free Grace, to have gathered up falling Crumbs, or
occasional droppings of Mercy, and supply: that we should have rejoiced to have
found out one word looking that way: But to shut up all Objections, and to stop
for ever the mouth of unbelief; he has not only spoken plainly, but has
condescended to use all the ways of confirming the Truth of what he says and
speaks, that ever were in use, among the sons of men.

There be Four ways, whereby men seek to obtain credit to what they speak, as
an undoubted Truth, that there may be no Occasion of staggering.

1, By often avering and affirming of the same thing. When a man says the same
thing again and again, it is a sign that he speaks the Truth, or at least that
he would be thought so to do. Yea, if an honest man, do clearly, fully,
plainly, often engage himself to us in the same thing, we count it a vile
jealousy not to believe the real Truth of his Intentions. Now the Lord in his
Promises often speaks the same things, He speaks once and twice. There is not
any thing, that he has Promised us, but he has done it, again, and again. For
instance; as if he should say, I will be merciful to your sins, I pray believe
me, for, I will pardon your iniquities, yea it shall be so, I will blot cut
your Transgressions as a cloud. There is not any want, whereunto we are liable,
but thus he has dealt concerning it. As his Command is line upon line, so is
his Promise. And this is one way, whereby God causes the Truth of his Promises
to appear. To take away all color of staggering, he speaks once, yea twice, if
we will hear.

2, The Second way of Confirming any Truth, is by an Oath. Though we fear the
Truth of some men in their Assertions, yet when once they come to Swear any
thing in Justice and Judgment, there are very few so knownly profligate, and
past all sense of God, but that their Asseverations do gain Credit, and pass
for Truth. Hence the Apostle tells us, Heb. 6. 16. That an Oath for
Confirmation, is to men an end of all strife. Though the Truth be before,
ambiguous and doubtful, yet when any interposes with an Oath, there is no more
Contest amongst men. That nothing may be wanting to win our Belief to the
Promises of God, he has taken this Course also, he has sworn to their Truth,
Heb. 6 13. When God made Promises to Abraham, because he could swear by no
greater, he swear by himself. He confirms his Promise by an Oath. O faelices
nos, quorum causa Deus jurat, o infaelices, si nec juranti Deo credimus! When
Christ came, in whom all the Promises of God, are, Yea and Amen, to make sure
work of the Truth of them, he is confirmed in his Administrations, by an Oath:
Heb. 7. 21. He was made a Priest by an Oath, by him that said, The Lord swear,
and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever: Now I pray, what is the cause
of this great Condescension in the God of Heaven, to confirm that word, which
in it self, is Truth, by an Oath? The Apostle satisfies us as to the End aimed
at, Heb. 6. 17, 18. This was (says he) the Aim of God herein, That his People
seeing him engaged, by two such immutable things, as his Promise and his Oath,
may be assured that there is an utter impossibility, That any one word of his
should come short of it is Truth; or that they firmly resting upon it, should be
deceived thereby. And this is a Second way.

3, Another Course whereby men Confirm the Truth of what they speak, is, by
entering into Covenant, to accomplish what they have spoken. A Covenant gives
strength to the Truth of any engagement. When a man has but told you he will
do such and such things for you, you are full of doubts and fears, that he may
break with you: but when he has indented in a Covenant, and you can show it
under his Hand and Seal, you look upon that, consider that, and are very
secure. Even this way also has the Lord taken to confirm and establish his
Truths and Promises, that all doubtings and staggerings may be excluded, he
has wrapped them all up in a Covenant, and brought himself into a faederal
Engagement, that upon every Occasion, and at every Temptation, we may draw out
his Hand and Seal, and say to Satan and our own false hearts; see here, behold
God engaged in Covenant, to make good the word, wherein he has caused me to
put my Trust: and this is his property, That he is a God keeping Covenant: So
that having his Promise redoubled, and that confirmed by an Oath, all Sealed
and made sure by an unchangeable Covenant, what can we require more, to assure
us of the Truth of these things: But yet further.

4, In things of very great weight, and Concernment, such as whereon Lives, and
the Peace of Nations does depend, men use to give Hostages, for the securing
each other of the Faith and Truth of all their Engagements; that they may be
mutual Pledges of their Truth and Fidelity. Neither has the Lord left this way
unused to confirm his Promise. He has given us an Hostage to secure us of his
Truth: one exceedingly dear to him; one always in his bosom; of whose Honor,
he is as Careful, as of his Own. Jesus Christ, is the great Hostage of his
Fathers Truth: the Pledge of his Fidelity in his Promises. God has set him
forth, and given him to us, for this end. Behold the Lord himself shall give
you a sign, (a sign that he will fulfill his word) A virgin shall conceive and
bare a Son, and shall call his name Immanuel, Isa, 7. 14. That you may be
assured of my Truth, the Virgins Son shall be a Hostage of it. In him are all
the Promises of God, Yea and Amen. Thus also to his Saints, he gives the
further Hostage of his Spirit, and the first fruits of Glory; that the full
accomplishment of all his Promises, may be contracted in a little, and
presented to their view: As the Israelites had the pleasures of Canaan in the
Clusters of Grapes, brought from thence.

Now from all this it is apparent, not only that there is Truth in all the
Promises of God, but also that Truth so confirmed, so made out, established,
that not the least Occasion imaginable, is thence administered to staggering or
doubting. He that disputes the Promise, and knows not how to close with them,
must find out another Cause of his so doing: as to the Truth of the Promise,
there is no doubt at all, nor place for any.

2 But Secondly, though there be Truth in the Promise, yet there may want
Ability in the Promiser to accomplish the thing Promised, because of it is
manifold difficulties. This may be a Second Cause of staggering, if the thing
it self engaged for, be not compassable, by the Ability of the Ingager. As if a
skilful Physician, should Promise a sick man a Recovery from his Disease,
though he could rely upon the Truth and Sincerity of his Friend, yet he cannot
but question his Ability as to this, knowing that to cure the least Distemper,
is not absolutely in his power: but when he Promises, who is able to perform,
then all doubting in this kind, is removed. See then whether it be so, in
respect of these Promises whereof we speak. When God comes to Abraham, to
engage himself in that Covenant of Grace, from whence flow all the Promises
whereof we Treat: He lays this down as the Bottom of all, I am (says he) God
Almighty, Genesis 17. 1. or, God Alsufficient, very well able to go through with
what ever I Promise. When Difficulties, Temptations, and Troubles arise,
remember who it is that has Promised; not only he that is true and faithful,
but he that is God Almighty, before whom nothing can stand, when he will
accomplish his Word. And that this was a bottom of great Confidence to Abraham,
the Apostle tells you, Romans 4. 21. Being fully persuaded that he who had
Promised, was able also to perform. When God is engaged by his Word, his
Ability is especially to be eyed. The Soul is apt to ask how can this be? it is
impossible it should be so to me: but, he is able that has Promised. And this,
Romans 11. 23. the same Apostle holds out to us, to fix our Faith upon, in
reference to that great Promise of Re-calling the Jews, and Re-implanting them
into the Vine. God (says he) is able to graft them in: though now they seem as
dead bones, yet the Lord knows they may live, for he is able to breath upon
them, and make them terrible as an Army with Banners: Yea so excellent is this
Alsufficiency, this Ability of God to accomplish his whole Word, that the
Apostle cautions us, That we do not bound it, as though it could go so far
only, or so far: Nay says he, Ephesians. 3. 20. He is able to do exceeding
abundantly, above all that we can ask or think.

When men come to close with the Promise indeed, to make a life upon it, they
are very ready to question and enquire, whither it be possible that ever the
Word of it, should be made good to them. He that sees a little Boat swimming
at Sea, observes no great difficulty in it, looks upon it without any
solicitousness of mind at all, beholds how it tosses up and down, without any
fears of it is sinking: but now, let this man commit his own life to Sea in that
Bottom, what inquiries will he make? what a search into the Vessel? Is it
possible (says he) this little Thing should safe-gaurd my Life in the Ocean?
It is so with us, in our view of the Promises: whilst we consider them at
large, as they lie in the Word, alas! they are all true, all Yea and Amen,
shall be all accomplished: but when we go to venture our Souls upon a Promise,
in an Ocean of Wrath and Temptations, then every blast we think will over-turn
it: it will not bear us above all these Waves; Is it possible we should swim
safely upon the Plank of a Pinnace in the midst of the Ocean?

Now here we are apt to deceive our selves, and mistake the whole thing in
Question, Which is the Bottom of many corrupted Reasonings and perplexed
Thoughts. We enquire whether it can be so to us, as the Word holds out; when
the Truth is, The Question is not about the Nature of the Thing; but about the
Power of God. Place the Doubt aright, and it is this, Is God able to accomplish
what he has spoken? Can he heal my Backslidings? Can he pardon my Sins? Can
he save my Soul? Now that there may be no Occasion, nor Color of Staggering
upon this Point, you see God reveals himself as an Alsufficient God: as one
that is able to go through with all his Engagements. If you will stagger, you
may so do; this is certain, you have no Cause to do so from hence; there is not
any Promise that ever God entered into, but he is able to perform it.

able, thus Alsufficient, yet may there not be Defects in the Means whereby he
works? As a man may have a strong Arm able to strike his Enemies to the
ground, but yet if he strike with a Feather, or a Straw, it will not be done;
not for want of strength in his Arm, but of fitness and sutableness in the
Instrument, whereby he acts. But,

Means of Accomplishing what thou expectest by the Promise, be in themselves
never so weak, yet know, that from God's choosing of them, to that End, they
shall be filled with Virtue and Efficacy to the Accomplishment of it.

2, It is expressly affirmed of the great Medium's of the Promise, that they
also are Able, that there is no want of Power in them, for the Accomplishment
of the Thing Promised.

1 There is the Means procuring it, and that is Jesus Christ: the Promises, as
to the good Things contained in them, are all purchased by him: And of him, the
Apostle affirms expressly, That he is ABLE to save to the uttermost, them that
come to God by him: Heb. 5. 27. No Want here; no Defect: He is able to do it to
the uttermost; able to save them that are tempted: Hebrews. 2. 18.

2 There is the great Means of Manifestation, and that is the Word of God: and
of this also it is affirmed that it is able. It has an Alsufficiency in it is
kind. Paul tells the Elders of Ephesus, That the Word of Grace is able to build
them up, and to give them an Inheritance among them that are Sanctified, Act.
20. 32.

3 There is the great Means of Operation, and that is the Spirit of Grace: He
works the Mercy of the Promise upon the Soul: He also is able, exceeding
powerful, to effect the End appointed. It has no bounds, nor measure of
Operation, but only it is own Will: 1 Cor. 12. 11.

Hence then it is apparent in the Second Place, That there is no Occasion for
Doubting; yea, that all staggering is excluded, from the Consideration of the
Ability of the Promiser, and the means whereby he works: If thou continuest
to stagger, thou must get a better Plea then this, it cannot be, it is
impossible: I tell thee nay, but God is able to accomplish the whole Word of
his Promise. But,

3, There may be want of Sincerity in Promises and Engagements, which whilst
we do but suspect, we cannot choose but stagger at them. If a man make a Promise
to me, and I can suppose that he intends not as he says, but has Reserves to
himself of another purpose, I must needs doubt, as to the Accomplishment of
what he has spoken. If the Soul may surmise, that the Lord intends not him
sincerely in his Promises, but Reserves some other Thing in his Mind, or that
it shall be so to others and not to him, he must needs dispute in himself,
stagger, and keep off from Believing. This, then must be Demonstrated in the
Third Place, That the Promises of God; and God in all his Promises, are full of
sincerity, so that none need fear to cast himself on them, they shall be real
unto him. Now concerning this, Observe,

1 That God's Promises are not Declarative of his secret Purposes and
Intentions. When God holds out to any a Promise of the pardon of Sin, this does
not signify to any singular man, That it is the Purpose of God, that his Sin
shall be pardoned. For if so, Then either all men must be pardoned to whom the
Word of Promise comes, which is not: or else God fails of his Purposes, and
comes short of his Intendments; which would render him, either Impotent, that
he could not; or Mutable, that he would not establish them: but, who has
resisted his Will? Romans 9. He is the Lord, and he changes not: Mal. 1. So that
though every one, to whom the Promise is held out, has not the fruit of the
Promise; yet this derogates not at all, from the sincerity of God in his
Promises; for, he does not hold them forth to any such End and Purpose, as to
declare his Intentions, concerning particular persons.

2 There are some absolute Promises, comprehensive of the Covenant of Grace,
which as to all those that belong to that Covenant, do hold out thus much of
the Mind of God, That they shall certainly be Accomplished, in, and toward
them all. The Soul may freely be invited to venture on these Promises, with
Assurance of their Efficacy toward him.

3 This God principally declares in all his Promises, of his Mind and Purpose,
That every Soul, to whom they shall come, may freely rest on; to wit, That
Faith in the Promises, and the Accomplishment of the Promises, are inseparable.
He that believes, shall enjoy; This is most certain, this God declares of his
Mind, his heart toward us, That as for all the good Things, he has spoken of
to us, it shall be to us, according to our Faith. This I say the Promises of
God do signify of his Purpose, That the Believer of them, shall be the Enjoyer
of them: In them, the Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith,
Romans 1. 17. From the Faith of God Revealing, to the Faith of Man Receiving: So
that upon the making out of any Promise, you may safely Conclude, That upon
Believing, the Mercy, the Christ, the Deliverance of this Promise, is mine. It
is true, if a man stand disputing and staggering, whether he have any share in
a Promise, and close not with it by Faith, he may come short of it; and yet
without the least Impeachment of the Truth of the Promise, or sincerity of the
Promiser: for God has not signified by them, That men shall enjoy the good
Things of them, whether they believe, or not. Thus far the Promises of Grace
are General, and carry a Truth to all, that there is an inviolable Connection
between Believing, and the Enjoyment of the Things in them contained. And in
this Truth, is the Sincerity of the Promiser, which can never be questioned,
without Sin and Folly. And this wholly shuts up the Spirit from any occasion of
staggering. O ye of little Faith! wherefore do ye doubt? Ah! lest our share be
not in this Promise; lest we are not intended in it: Poor Creatures! there is
but this one way of keeping you off from it, that is, Disputing it in your
selves by Unbelief. Here lies the Sincerity of God toward thee, That
Believing, thou shall not come short of what thou aimest at. Here then is no
Room for staggering. If Proclamation be made, granting Pardon to all such
Rebels, as shall come in by such a season, do men use to stand questioning
whether the STATE bear them any good will, or no? No, says the poor Creature,
I will cast my self upon Their Faith and Truth engaged in Their Proclamation
whatever I have deserved in particular, I know They will be Faithful in Their
Promises. The Gospel-Proclamation is of Pardon to all Comers in, to all
Believers: it is not for thee, poor staggerer, to question, what is the
Intendment toward thee in particular, but roll thy self on this, There is an
absolute Sincerity in the ENGAGEMENT, which thou may freely rest upon. But,

4, Though all be present, Truth, Power, Sincerity; yet if he that makes the
Promise should Forget, this were a ground of staggering. Pharaoh's Butler,
without doubt, made large Promises to Joseph, and probably spoke the Truth
according to his present Intention: afterward standing in the presence of
Pharaoh, restored to Favor, he had doubtless Power enough to have procured the
liberty of a poor Innocent Prisoner: but yet this would not do, it did not
profit Joseph; because, as the Text says, he did not remember Joseph, but
forgot him: Genesis 39. 23. This forgetting made all other things useless. But
neither has this, the least Color in Divine Promises. It was Syons infirmity
to say, The Lord has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me: Isa. 49. 14.
For, says the Lord, Can a woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not
have compassion on the Son of her womb? yea, they may forget, but I will not
forget thee: behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands, and thy
walls are continually before me: verse. 15, 16.

The Causes of forgetfulness are, 1 Want of Love. The things that men Love not,
they care not for: the matters of their Love are continually in their thoughts.
Now says God to Syon, Why say thou, I have forgotten thee? Is it for want of
Love? Alas! the Love of a most tender Mother to her sucking Child, comes
infinitely short of my Love to thee: My Love to thee, is more fixed than so, and
how should thou be out of my mind? How should thou be forgotten? Infinite
Love will have infinite Thoughtfulness and Remembrance.

2 Multiplicity of business: This with men is a Cause of forgetting. I had done
says one, as I Promised, but multiplicity of Occasions thrust it out of my
mind, I pray excuse me: Alas! though I Rule all the World, yet, thou art
graven upon the palms of my hands, and therefore thy walls are continually
before me. See also Psalm. 77. 9. Neither then is there as to this, the least
color given us, to stagger at the Promise of God.

5, But lastly, Where all other things concur, yet if the person Promising be
changable, if he may alter his Resolution, a man may justly doubt and debate in
himself, the Accomplishment of any Promise made to him: It is true, may he say,
He now speaks his heart and mind, but who can say he will be of this mind to
morrow? May he not be turned, and then what becomes of the Golden Mountains,
that I Promised my self upon his Engagement? Wherefore in the last place, the
Lord carefully rejects all sinful surmises concerning the least change or
alteration in him or any of his Engagements. He is the Father of Lights, with
whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning; Jam. 1. 18. no shadow, no
appearance of any such thing. I am the Lord (says he) I change not; therefore
ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed. Mal 3. 6. The Lord knows, that if any thing
in us, might prevail with him to alter the Word that is gone out of his mouth,
we should surely perish. We are poor provoking Creatures, therefore he lays
our, not being consumed, only on this, even his Own unchangableness: This we
may rest upon, he is of one mind, and who can turn him?

And in these Observations, have I given you the first Demonstration of the
Point: All staggering is from our own unbelief.

Experience which we have of the mighty Workings of God, for the Accomplishment
of all his Promises, gives light unto this thing. We have found it true, That
where he is once engaged, he will certainly go through unto the appointed
Issue, though it stand him in the laying out of his Power and Wisdom to the
uttermost. Hab. 3. 9. Thy Bow was made quite naked according to the Oath's of
the Tribes, thy Word. If Gods Oath be passed, and his Word engaged; he will
surely accomplish it, though it cost him the making of his bow quite naked, the
manifestation of his power to the utmost.

It is true: Never did any wait upon God for the Accomplishment and fulfilling
of a Promise, but he found many difficulties fall out between the Word and the
Thing. So was it with Abraham in the business of a Son: and so with David in
the matter of a Kingdom. God will have his Promised Mercies to fall, as the
Dews upon the parched gasping Earth; or as the shadow of a great Rock in a
weary Land, Isa. 32. 2. very welcome unto the Traveller, who has had the Sun
beat upon his head in his travel all the day. Zion is a Crown of Glory in the
hand of the Lord, as a royal Diadem in the hand of her God: Isa. 62. 3. The
precious Stones of a Diadem, must be cut and pollished, before they be set in
Beauty and Glory. God will have oftimes the precious living stones of Zion, to
have many a sharp cutting, before they come to be fully fixed in his Diadem:
but yet in the close, whatever Obstacles stand in the way, the Promise has
still wrought out it is passage: As a River, all the while it is stopped with a
Damme, is still working higher and higher, still getting more and more
strength, until it bear down all before it, and obtain a free course to it is
appointed place: Every time Opposition lies against the fulfilling of the
Promise, and so seems to impede it for a season, it gets more and more Power,
until the appointed hour be come, and then it bears down all before it.

Were there any thing imaginable, whereof we had not Experience, that it has
been conquered to open a door for the fulfilling of every Word of God, we might
possibly, as to the Apprehension of that thing, stagger from some other
Principle, then that of Unbelief.

What is there in Heaven or Earth, but God and his ministering Spirits, that
has not at one time or other, stood up to it is utmost Opposition, for the
frustrating of the Word, wherein some or other of the Saints of God have put
their trust? Devils in their Temptations, Baits, Subtilties, Accusations, and
Oppositions: Men in their Counsels, Reasonings, Contrivances, Interests,
Dominions, Combinations, Armies, Multitudes, and the utmost of their
Endeavors: the whole frame of Nature, in it is Primitive Instituted Course,
Fire, Water, Day, Night, Age, Sickness, Death; all in their Courses have fought
against the Accomplishment of the Promises: And what have they obtained by all
their Contendings? All disappointed, frustrated, turned back, changed, and
served only to make the Mercy of the Promise, more amiable and glorious.

I would willingly Illustrate this Demonstration with an Instance, that the
Almighty, al conquering Power that is in the Promise, settling all staggering
upon it is own Basis of UNBELIEF, might be the more evident.

I might here mention Abraham, with all the difficulties and appearing
impossibilities, which the Promise unto him did pass through, and cast to the
ground, the Mercy of it at length, arising out of the grave; for he received
his Son from the dead in a Figure: Heb. 11. 19. Or I might speak of Joseph,
Moses, or David: but I shall rather choose a President from among the Works of
God, in the Days wherein we live: and that in a business, concerning which, we
may set up our Eben-Ezer, and say, Thus far God has been a helper.

Look upon the Affair of Ireland. The Engagement of the great God of Revenges
against Murder and Treachery, the Interest of the Lord Christ and his kingdom,
against the man of Sin, furnished the undertakers with manifold Promises to
carry them out to a desired, a blessed Issue. Take now a brief view, of some
Mountains of Opposition, that lay in the way against any Success in that Place;
and hear the Lord saying to every one of them, Who art thou, O great Mountain?
before my People thou shall be made a Plain: Zech. 4. 7.

Not to mention the strivings and struglings of two manner of People, in the
womb of this Nation, totally obstructing for a long time the bringing forth of
any Deliverance for Ireland: nor yet, That mighty Mountain, (which some
mis-named a Level) that thought at once to have locked an everlasting Door upon
that Expedition: I shall Propose some few (of many) that have attended it.

1 The silence that has been in Heaven for half an hour as to this Business:
The great Cessation of Prayers in the Heavens, of many Churches, has been no
small Mountain in the way of the Promise. When God will do good for Zion, he
requires that his Remembrancers give him no rest, until he do it. Isa. 62. 7.
and yet sometimes in the close of their Supplications, gives them an Answer, by
terrible things, Psalm. 65. 5. He is sometimes Silent to the Prayers of his
People, Psalm. 28. 1. Is not then a grant rare, when his People are silent as to
Prayers? Of how many Congregations in this Nation, may the Prayers, Tears, and
Supplications for the carrying on of the Work of God in IRELAND, be written
with the lines of emptiness? What a Silence has been in the Heaven of many
Churches, for this last half hour? How many that began with the Lord in that
Work, did never Sacrifice at the Altar of Jehova nissi: nor considered that the
Lord has sworn to have War with such Amalekites as are there, from Generation
to Generation? Exodus 17. 15, 16. They have forgotten, That Ireland was the
first of the Nations that laid wait for the blood of Gods People desiring to
enter into his rest; and therefore their latter end shall be, to perish for
ever: Numb. 24. 20. Many are as angry as Jonah, not that Babylon is spared, but
that it is not spared. Has not this been held out as a Mountain? what will you
now do, when such or such, these and those men, of this or that Party, look
upon you as the grass upon the house tops, which withers before it grows up:
wherewith the Mower fills not his hand, nor he that binds sheaves his
bosom, That will not so much as say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you, we
bless you in the name of the Lord? But now! shall the faithlesness of men, make
the Faith of God of none effect? Shall the kingdom of Christ suffer because
some of those that are his, what through Carnal Wisdom, what through Spiritual
Folly, refuse to come forth to his help, against the mighty? no doubtless! The
Lordsees it, and it displeases him; he sees that there is no man, and wonders
that there is no Intercessour: (even marvels that there are no more
Supplications on this behalf) therefore his own Arm brought Salvation to him,
and his own Righteousness it sustained him: He put on Righteousness as a
brestplate, and an helmet of Salvation upon his head: and he put on the
garments of Vengeance for clothing, and was clad with Zeal as a Cloak:
according to their deeds, accordingly he will repay, fury to his adversaries,
recompense to his enemies, to the Island he will repay recompense: Isa. 59. 15,
16, 17, 18. Some men's not Praying, shall not hinder the Promises
accomplishing. They may sooner discover an Idol in themselves, then disappoint
the living God. This was a Mountain.

2 Our own Advises and Counsels have often stood in the way of the Promises
bringing forth: This is not a Time nor Place for Narrations: so I shall only
say to this in general; That if the choycest and most rational Advises of the
Army, had not been overswayed by the Providence of God, in all probabilities,
your Affairs had been more then ten degrees backward, to the Condition wherein
they are.

3 The visible Opposition of the combined Enemy in that Nation, seemed as to
our strength, unconquerable. The wiseman tells us, That a Threefold Cord is not
easily broken: Ireland had a Fivefold Cord to make strong bands for Zion,
twisted together: Never (I think) did such different Interests bear with one
another, for the compassing of one common End.

He that met the Lion, the Fox, and the Ass traveling together, wondered quo
una iter facerent: whither these ill-matched Associates did bend their Course!
neither did his marvelling cease, when he heard they were going a Pilgrimage,
in a business of Devotion.

He that should meet Protestants, Covenanted Protestants, that had sworn in the
Presence of the great God, to extirpate Popery and Prelacy, as the Scots in
Vlster; Others, that counted themselves under no less sacred bond, for the
maintenance of Prelates, Service Book, and the like; as the whole Party of
Ormonds adherents: joined with a mighty number, that had for Eight years
together, sealed their Vows to the Romish Religion, with our blood and their
own; adding to them those that were profound to revolt up and down, as suited
their own Interest, as some in Munster; All closing with that Party, which
themselves had labored to render most odious and execrable, as most defiled
with Innocent Blood: He, I say, that should see all these, after seven years
mutual conflicting, and embruing their hands in each others blood, to march all
one way together, cannot but marvel, quo una iter facerent, whither they should
journey so friendly together: Neither surely, would his Admiration be lessened,
when he should hear, That the first thing they intended and agreed upon, was,
To cover the innocent Blood of 41; contrary to that Promise: Behold the Lord
comes out of his place, to punish the Inhabitants of the earth, for their
iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her Blood, and shall no more cover her
slain: Isa. 26. 21. And Nextly, To Establish Catholic Religion, or the Kingdom
of Babel, in the whole Nation, in Opposition to the Engaged Truth, and in our
days visibly manifested Power of the Lord Jesus: with sundry such like things,
contrary to their Science and Conscience, their Covenant and Light, yea the
Trust and Honesty, of most of the chief Leaders of them.

Now how can the Promise stand in the way of this Hydra? What says it to this
combined Opposition? Why First, says the Lord, Though hand join in hand, the
wicked shall not be unpunished: Prove. 11. 21. Their Covering shall be too
short, and narrow, to hide the blood which God will have disclosed.

And Nextly, Though they will give their Power to the Beast, and fight against
the Lamb, consenting in this, who agree in nothing else in the World; yet they
shall be broken in pieces; though they Associate themselves, they shall be
broken in pieces: If Rezin, and the Son of Remaliah, Syria and Ephraim, old
Adversaries, combine together for a new Enmity against Judah; If Covenant and
Prelacy, Popery and Treachery, Blood and (as to that) Innocence, join hand in
hand, to stand in the way of the Promise; yet I will not in this join with them
says the Lord Though they were preserved all distinctly in their several
Interests for seven years, in their mutual conflicts, That they might be
scourges to one another; yet if they close, to keep off the Engagement of God
in the Word of his Promise, not much more then the 4th part of one year, shall
consume some of them to nothing, and fill the Residue with indignation and
anguish.

By what Means God has mightily and effectually wrought, by mixing Folly with
their Counsels, putting Fear, Terror, and Amazedness upon all their
Undertakings, to carry on his own Purpose, I could easily give considerable
Instances. That which has been spoken in General, may suffice to bottom us on
this, That whilst we are in the way of God, all staggering at the Issue, is
from unbelief; for he can, he will do more such things as these.

First Use shall be as unto Temporals; for they also (as I told you) come under
the Promise, not to be staggered at, with the limitations before mentioned.
Learn hence then to live more by Faith in all your Actings: Believe, and you
shall be established: I have in the days of my Pilgrimage seen this evil under
the Sun: Many Professors of the Gospel, called out to Public Actings, have
made it their great Design to manage all their Affairs with Wisdom and Policy,
like the men of the residue of the Nations. Living by Faith, upon the Promises,
has appeared to them, as too low a thing, for the Condition and Employment
wherein they now are: Now they must Plot, and Contrive, and Design, lay down
Principles of Carnal Fleshly Wisdom, to be pursued to the uttermost: And what
I pray has been the Issue of such Undertakings?

1 First, The Power of Religion has totally been devoured, by that lean,
hungry, never to be satisfied Beast of Carnal Policy: No signs left that it was
ever in their bosoms. Conformity unto Christ in Gospel Graces, is looked on as
a mean Contemptible Thing: Some of them have fallen to downright Athiesme, most
of them to wretched Formality in the Things of God. And then,

2 Secondly, Their Plots and Undertakings, have generally proved Tympanous and
Birthless: Vexation and Disappointment has been the Protion of the Residue of
their days. The ceasing to lean upon the Lord, and striving to be Wise in our
Actings, like the men of the World, has made more Rehoboams, than any one
Thing in this Generation.

What now lies at the Bottom of all this? merely staggering at the Promise,
through Unbelief. What building is that like to be, which has a staggering
Foundation? When God Answers not Saul, he goes to the Devil. When the Promise
will not support us, we go to Carnal Policy: neither can it otherwise be.
Engagedmen, finding one way to disappoint them, presently betake themselves to
another. If men begin once to Stagger at the Promise, and to conclude in their
fears, That it will not receive accomplishment, That the Fountain will be dry,
they cannot but think it high time, to dig Cisterns for themselves. When
David says, He shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, (whatever God had
said to the contrary) His next advise is, Let me go to the Philistines: and what
succes he had in that Undertaking, you know. Political diversions, from pure
dependence on the Promise, do always draw after them, a long time of
entanglements.

Give me leave to give a Word of Caution, against One or Two Things, which men
staggering at the Promises through Unbelief, do usually in their Carnal
VVisdome run into, for the Compassing of the Thing aimed at, That they may not
be found in your Honorable Assembly.

1 Take heed of a various management of Religion, of the Things of God, to the
advantage of the present Posture and Condition of your Affairs. The Things of
Christ should be as Joseph's Sheaf, to which all others should bow. When they
are made to cringe, and bend, and put on a flattering countenance, to allure
any sort of men into their Interest, they are no more the Things of Christ. I
would it had not been too evident formerly, That men entangled in their
Affairs, enjoying Authority, have with all industry and diligence, pursued such
and such an appearance of Religion; not that themselves were so passionately
affected with it, but merely for the satisfaction of some in that, whose
Assistance and Compliance they needed for other things. Oh let not the Things
of God, be immixed any more with Carnal Reasonings. His Truths are all eternal
and unchangeable. Give them at once the Sovereignty of your Souls, and have not
the least thought of making them bend, to serve your own Ends, though good and
Righteous. Think not to get the Promise like Jacob, by representing your selves
in the Things of God, for other then you are.

2 Hide no Truth of God, as to that way of manifestation which to you is
committed, for fear it should prove prejudicial to your Affairs. That Influence
and Signature of your Power, which is due to any Truth of God, let it not be
withheld by Carnal Reasonings. I might further draw out these, and such like
things as these; the warning is, To live upon the Faith of that Promise, which
shall surely be established, without turning aside to needless crooked paths of
your own.

working all your works whereunto he is engaged. Your work whereunto (whilst
you are in his ways) God is engaged, is your safety and protection. Gods work
whereunto you are engaged is the Propagating of the Kingdom of Christ, and the
setting up of the Standard of the Gospel. So far as you find God going on with
your work, go you on with his. How is it that Jesus Christ, is in Ireland only
as a Lion stayning all his garments with the blood of his Enemies? and none to
hold him out as a Lamb sprinkled with his own blood to his friends? Is it the
Sovereignty and Interest of England that is alone to be there transacted? For
my part, I see no further into the MYSTERY of these things, but that I could
heartily rejoice, That Innocent blood being expiated, the Irish might enjoy
Ireland so long as the Moon endures, so that Jesus Christ might possess the
Irish. But God having suffered those sworn Vassals of the man of Sin, to break
out into such ways of Villainy, as render them obnoxious unto Vengeance, upon
such rules of Government amongst men, as he has appointed: Is there therefore
nothing to be done, but to give a Cup of Blood into their hands? Doubtless the
way whereby God will bring the followers after the Beast to Condign
Destruction, for all their Enmity to the Lord Jesus, will be, By suffering them
to run into such practices against men, as shall righteously expose them to
vengeance, according to acknowledged Principles among the Sons of Men. But is
this all? Has he no further Aim? Is not all this to make way for the Lord
Jesus to take Possession of his long since Promised Inheritance? And shall we
stop at the first Part? Is this to deal fairly with the Lord Jesus? Call him
out to the Battle, and then keep away his Crown? God has been faithful in
doing great things for you, be faithful in this one, Do your utmost for the
Preaching of the Gospel in Ireland.

Give me leave to add a few Motives to this Duty.

1 They want it: No want like theirs who want the Gospel. I would there were
for the present, one Gospel Preacher, for every Walled Town in the English
Possession in IRELAND. The Land mourns, and the People perish for want of
knowledge: Many run to and fro, but it is upon other designs; knowledge is not
increased.

2 They are sensible of their Wants, and cry out for Supply. The Tears and
Cries of the Inhabitants of Dublin, after the Manifestations of Christ, are
ever in my view. If they were in the dark, and lived to have it so, it might
something close a door upon the bowels of our Compassion: but they cry out of
their darkness, and are ready to follow every one whosoever, to have a Candle.
If their being Gospelless, move not our hearts, it is hoped, Their importunate
Cries will disquiet our Rest: and wrest help, as a Beggar does an Alms.

3 Seducers and Blasphemers will not be wanting to sow their Tares, which those
Fallowed Fields will receive, if there be none to cast in the Seed of the Word.
Some are come over thither already without Call, without Employments, to no
other end, but only to vaunt themselves to be God; as they have done in the
open streets, with detestable Pride, Athiesme and Folly: So that as IRELAND was
heretofore termed by some in Civil things, A Frippery of Bankrupts, for the
great number of Persons of broken Estates that went thither: So doubtless in
Religion, it will prove A Frippery of Monstrous, Enormous Contradictious
Opinions, if the Work of Preaching the Word of Truth, and soberness, be not
carried on. And if this be the Issue of your present Undertakings, Will it be
acceptable, think you, to the LORD JESUS, That you have used his POWER and
MIGHT, to make way for such THINGS, as his Soul abhors?

1 Will it be for his Honor, That the People whom he has sought to himself
with so high a hand, should at the very entrance of his taking Possession, be
leavened with those high and heavenly Notions, which have an open, and
experimented tendency to Earthly, Fleshly, Dunghill Practices? Or,

2 Will it be for the Credit and Honor of your Profession of the GOSPEL, That
such a breach should be under your hand? That it should be (as it were) by your
means? Will it not be a Sword, and an Arrow, and a Maul in the hands of your
Observers? Who can bear the just Scandal that would accrue? Scandal to the
Magistrates, Scandal to the Ministers of this Generation, in neglecting such an
Opportunity of advancing the GOSPEL; sleeping all the day, whilst others sow
Tares.

3 Where will be the hoped, the expected Consolation of this great Affair,
when the Testimony and Pledge of the peculiar Presence of CHRIST amongst us,
upon such an ISSUE, shall be wanting?

What then shall we do? This Thing is often spoken of, seldom driven to any
close!

1 Pray; Pray the Lord of the Harvest, That he would send out, That he would
thrust forth Laborers into his Harvest. The Laborers are ready to say, There
is a Lion in the way: Difficulties to be Contended withal: And to some men it
is hard seeing a Call of GOD, through Difficulties: When if it would but cloth
it self with a few Carnal Advantages, how apparent is it to them? They can see
it through a little Cranny. Be earnest then with the Master of these Laborers,
in whose hand is their life and breath, and all their ways; That he would
powerfully Constrain them, to be willing to enter into the Fields, that are
White for the Harvest.

2 Make such Provision, That those who will go, may be fenced from outward
Straights and Fears, so far as the uncertainty of humane Affairs in General,
and the present tumultuating perturbations will admit. And let not I beseech
you, this be the business of an unpursued Order. But,

3 Let some be appointed (Generals dye and sink by themselves) to Consider this
thing, and to hear what sober PROPOSALS may be made by any, whose Hearts God
shall stir up to so good a Work.

This I say is a Work wherein God expects Faithfulness from you: Stagger not
at his Promises, nor your own Duty. However by all means possible, in this
Business, I have strived to deliver my own Soul.

Once more, to this of Faith, let me stir you up to another Work of Love: and
that in the behalf of many poor perishing Creatures, that want all Things
needful for the sustentation of Life. Poor Parentless Children, that lie
Begging, Starving, Rotting in the Streets, and find no Relief: Yea, Persons of
Quality, that have lost their dearest Relations in your Service, seeking for
Bread, and finding none. Oh that some thoughts of this also, might be seriously
Committed to them, that shall take care for the Gospel.

To lay the burden and trouble of our Lives upon the right shoulder. In our
STAGGERINGS, our Doubtings, our Disputes, we are apt to assign this and that
Reason of them; when the sole Reason indeed is our Unbelief. Were it not for
such a Cause, or such a Cause, I could Believe; that is, Were there no need of
Faith. That is Faith must remove the Mountains that lie in the way, and then
all will be plain. It is not the greatness of Sin, nor continuance in Sin, nor
backsliding into Sin, that is the true Cause of thy Staggering, whatever thou
pretendest: The removal of all these is from that Promise, whose Stability and
Certainty, I before laid forth: but solely from thy Unbelief, That root of
bitterness which springs up and troubles thee. It is not the distance of the
Earth from the Sun, nor the Sun's withdrawing it self, that makes a dark and
gloomy day, but the Interposition of Clouds and vaparous Exhalations. Neither
is thy Soul beyond the reach of the Promise; nor does God withdraw himself,
but the vapors of thy Carnal Unbelieving Heart, do Cloud thee. It is said of
one place, Christ could do no great Work there: Why so? For want of Power in
him? not at all: but merely for want of Faith in them; it was because of their
Unbelief. The Promise can do no great Work upon thy heart, to humble thee, to
pardon to quiet thee; Is it for want of Fullness and Truth therein? not at all:
but merely for want of Faith in thee, that keeps it off. Men complain, That
were it not for such things, and such things, they could Believe; when it is
their Uubelief that casts those rubs in the way. As if a man should cast Nails
and sharp Stones in his own way, and say, Verily I could run, were it not for
those Nails and Stones; when he continues himself to cast them there. You could
believe, were it not for these Doubts, and Difficulties, these staggering
perplexities, when alas! they are all from your Unbelief.

sinfulness of all those staggering doubts and perplexities, wherewith many
poor souls have almost all their thoughts taken up: Such as is the Root, such
is the Fruit. If the Tree be evil, so will the fruit be also. Men do not gather
Grapes from brambles. What is the Root that bears this Fruit of Staggering? Is
it not the evil Root of Unbelief? And can any good come from thence? Are not
all the Streams of the same Nature with the Fountain? If that be bitter, can
they be sweet? If the Body be full of Poison, will not the Branches have their
Venom also? Surely if the Mother (Unbelief) be the Mouth of Hell, the
Daughters (Staggerings) are not the Gates of Heaven.

Of the Sin of Unbelief, I shall not now speak at large: It is in Sum, The
Universal Opposition of the Soul unto God: All other Sins arise against some
thing or other of his revealed Will: Only Unbelief sets up it self in a direct
Contradiction, to all of him that is known. Hence the weight of Condemnation in
the Gospel, is constantly laid on this Sin. He that believes not, on him the
wrath of God abides: he shall be damned. Now as every drop of Seawater
retains the brackishness and saltness of the whole, so every staggering Doubt
that is an issue of this Unbelief, has in it the unsavouriness and
distastefulness unto God, that is in the whole.

Further to give you a little light into what acceptance our staggering
thoughts find with the Lord, according to which, must be our Esteem of all that
is in us.

Observe, that 1 They grieve him. 2 They provoke him. 3 They dishonor him.


1 Such a frame grieves the Lord. Nothing more presses true Love, then to have
any Appearance of Suspicion. Christ comes to Peter and asks him, Simon, Son of
Jonas, love thou me? Joh. 21. 15. Peter seems glad of an opportunity to
confess him, and his love to him, whom not long since he had denied; and
Answers readily, Yea, Lord, thou know that I love thee. But when Christ
comes with the same Question again and again, the holy Ghost tells us, Peter
was grieved because he said unto him the 3d time, Love thou me? It
exceedingly troubled Peter, That his Love should come under so many
Questionings, which he knew to be sincere. The Love of Christ to his, is
infinitely beyond the Love of his, to him. All our Doubtings are nothing but so
many Questionings of his Love. We cry, Lord Jesus, Love thou us? and agai^^
Lord Jesus, Love thou us? and that with distrustf^^ (...) thoughts, That it
is not, it cannot be. (...) the Unbelieving Jews, the holy Ghost tells us,
Jesus was grieved for the hardness of their hearts: Mark 3. 5. And as it is
bitter to him in the Root, so also in the Fruit. Our Staggerings and Debates
when we have a Word of Promise; is a Grief to his holy Spirit, as the unkindest
return we can make unto his Love.

2 It provoks him. How can this be, (says Zechariah) that I should have a Son?
This shall be, (says the Lord) and thou thy self for thy questioning shall be
a sign of it, Thou shall be dumb and not speak: Luke 1. His Doubting was a
Provocation: And our Savior expresses no less in that bitter reproof to his
Disciples upon their wavering, Matthew. 17. 17. O faithless and perverse
Generation, how long shall I be with you? How long shall I suffer you? How long
shall I suffer you? That is, in this Unbelieving frame. Poor Souls are apt to
admire the patience of God in other matters; That he spared them in such and
such sins, at such and such times of Danger, but his exceeding patience toward
them in their carnal Reasonings, and fleshly Objections against Believing; this
they admire not. Nay, generally they think it should be so: God would not have
them one step further. Nay, they could be more steadfast in Believing as they
suppose, might it stand with the good Will of God: when all this while, this
fram of all others, is the greatest provocation to the Lord; he never exercises
more forbearance, then about this kind of Unbelief.

When the Spies had gone into Canaan, had seen the Land, and brought of the
good Fruit of it, then to repine, then to question whither God would bring them
into it or no: This caused the Lord to swear in his wrath, that they should not
enter into his rest. When God has brought men to the Borders of Heaven,
discovered to them the Riches and Excellency of his Grace, admitted them to
enter as Spies into the Kingdom of Glory, then to fall a staggering, whether he
intends them an Entrance or no; is that which lies heavy on him. The like may
be said of all Promised Mercies, and deliverances whatsoever.

That this is a Provocation, The Lord has abundantly testified, in as much, as
for it, he has oftentimes snatched sweet morsels from the mouths of men, and
turned aside the stream of Mercies, when it was ready to flow in upon them. If
(says he) you will not believe, you shall not be established: Isa. 7. 9. The
very Mercy but now Promised, concerning your deliverance, shall be withheld.
Oh stop not Success from Ireland, by Unbelief.

3 It dishonors God. In the close of this Verse, it is said, Abraham was strong
in Faith (or staggered not) giving glory to God. To be established in
Believing, is to give God the greatest glory possible. Every staggering Thought
that arises from this Root of Unbelief, robs God of his Glory.

1 It robs him of the Glory of his Truth. He that believes not, has made him
a Liar, because he believes not his Record: 1 John 5. 10. Let men pretend what
they please, (as most an end, we give in specious pretenses for our Unbelief)
the bottom of all is, The questioning of the Truth of God, in our false hearts.

2 It robs him of the glory of his Fidelity or Faithfulness in the discharge of
his Promises: If we confess our sins, he is faithful to forgive us our sins: 1 John 1. 9. He has engaged his faithfulness in this business of the forgiveness
of Iniquities: He whose Right it is, calling that in Question, calls the
faithfulness of God in Question.

3 It robs him of the Glory of his Grace: In a word, If a man should choose to
set himself in an universal opposition unto God, he can think of no more
compendious way then this. This then is the fruit, this the advantage of all
our staggering, we rob God of Glory, and our own Souls of Mercy.



When Job, after all his complaining had seen the End of the Lord, he cries
out, Now I abhor my self in dust and ashes. You have seen the End of the Lord
in many of his Promises: Oh that it might prevail to make you abhor your
selves in dust and ashes, for all your Carnal Fears and Corrupt Reasonings,
upon your staggerings.

When David enjoyed his Promised Mercy, he especially shames himself, for every
thought of Unbelief, that he had whilst he waited for it: I said (says he) in
my haste, That all men were Liars. And now he is humbled for it. Is this to be
thankful, to forget our provoking Thoughts of Unbelief, when the Mercy is
enjoyed? The Lord set it home upon your Spirits, and give it to receive it is
due manifestation.

1 If there be any Counsels, Designs, Contrivances on foot amongst us, that are
bottomed on our Staggering at the Promise under which we are, Oh let them be
instantly cast down to the ground. Let not any be so foolish, as to suppose
that Unbelief will be a foundation for quiet Habitations. You are careful to
avoid all ways that might dishonor you, as the Rulers of so great a Nation: Oh
be much more careful about such things as will dishonor you as Believers:
That Is your greatest Title, That Is your chiefest Privilege. Search your own
Thoughts, and if any Contrivance, any Compliance be found springing up, whose
seed was sown by staggering at the Promise; root them up, and cast them out,
before it be too late.

2 Engage your hearts against all such ways for the future: Say unto God, How
faithful art thou in all thy ways! How able to perform all thy Promises! How
have thou established thy Word in Heaven and Earth! Who would not put their
Trust in thee? We desire to be ashamed, That ever we should admit in our
hearts, the least staggering at the stability of thy Word.

3 Act as men bottomed upon unshaken things: that are not at all moved by the
greatest appearing Oppositions: He that believes, will not make haste: be not
hasty in your Resolves, in any distress. Wait for the Accomplishment of the
Vision, for it will come. So long as you are in the way of God, and do the Work
of God, let not so much as your Desires be too hasty, after appearing
Strengthnings, and Assistance. Whence is it that there is amongst us, such
bleating after the Compliance of this or that Party of the Sons of men, perhaps
priding themselves in our Actings upon Unbelief; as though we proclaimed, That
without such and such, we cannot be protected in the Things of God. Let us (I
beseech you) live above those things, that are unworthy of the great Name, that
is called upon us.

Oh that by these, and the like ways, we might manifest our self-Condemnation,
and Abhorrency, for all that Distrust and Staggering at the Word of God, which
arising from Unbelief, has had such deplorable Issues upon all our Counsels
and Undertakings.

FINIS.

