THE PEDIGREE and DESCENT OF His EXCELLENCY, General George Monck. Setting
forth how He is descended from King EDWARD the Third, by a Branch and Slip of
the WHITE ROSE, THE House of York. And likewise, His Extraction from RICHARD
KING of the ROMANS.

WITH The State, Title and Descents of the Houses of YORK and LANCASTER in
their several Branches.

London, Printed for W. Godbid, over against the Blew Anchor in Little Britain.
1659.

READER,
I Would not by this following Discourse, be understood to have any Design,
either to stir up Titles and Claims where there is no Right, or to obscure and
smother a Right where it is in truth. No, as I well know it to be a Contest
that borders upon Danger; so it carries much of Dishonesty in it; but this may
with safety, and without offense, be observed, That where Empire and Regiment
has been built with the brittle Materials of Murder and Bloodshed, it has
seldom proved either prosperous, or long-lived, as might be cleared by several
Precedents; to pass by William the Conqueror, who though he had a numerous
Issue, yet none of his Sons left a Son either to succeed or survive them; and
to instance in the House of Lancaster, where three of them successively sat in
the Throne, the two first being held as fit for Government, as any of the
Twenty three from the Conquest; and the third a person of that Innocence, that
he attained the Title of a Saint: Yet himself, and his Son Edward, a Prince of
great hopes, both died Violent and Unnatural Deaths. But it is not my purpose
to insist upon this subject, other than to give a brief Account of the State
and Titles of the two Houses of York and Lancaster, and the several Branches
issuing from either of them, as appears by History and Records; and amongst
others, of that Noble Person, General Monck, whose Prudence and Valor has
raised him to a Degree of Honor and Esteem suitable to his Birth and Honorable
Extraction. All which is done without Flattery, or other sinister end, out of
love to Truth.

The Declaration of the Descents of the two Houses of York, and Lancaster, in
their several Branches, etc.
KIng Edward the third married Philippa Daughter to William Earl of Henault and
Holland, and of his Wife Mary, Daughter to Charles Earl of Valoys, Son to King
Philip the Hardy, and Brother to Philip of Valoys King of France; she was
married to King Edward at York, the four and twentieth of January, An. 1327.
and Crowned at Westminster, the first Sunday in Lent following; it is said this
match was made up in have by Queen Isabel, King Edward's mother, for her own
Ends; yet according to some Opinions, a better could never have been made, upon
deliberation for K. Edwards Ends; for albeit her Extraction was not great, and
her Dower less, yet she made amends for both by her virtue; never King having a
better Wife: by her K. Edward had issue seven Sons and five Daughters, which
were, First,

Edward Prince of Wales, commonly called the Black Prince; not that he was so
in Complexion, but from his Heroic and dreadful Acts; He was born at
Wood-stock the fifteenth of July, in the third year of his Fathers reign, and
shortly after created Prince of Wales, Duke of Aquitane, and Cornwall, and Earl
of Chester; and in his wives Right Earl of Kent; which was Joan the Daughter
and Heir of Edmund Plantaginet Earl of Kent, and of his Wife Margaret Sister
and Heir of Thomas Lord Wake; she was a Lady of that admired beauty, in that
age, that she was commonly called The Fair Maid of Kent: By her Prince Edward
had issue two Sons, Edward that died young; and Richard born at Bordeaux, who
after the death of his father was Prince of Wales, and after the death of his
Grandfather was King of England, and known by the Name of King Richard the
second.

William Surnamed Hatfield, second Son to K. Edward the third, and Queen
Philippa died young, and was buried at York.

The House of YORK.
LIonel, the third Son to King Edward the third and Queen Philippa, was born at
the City of Antwerp, the 29th of November, in the twelfth year of his fathers
reign; He married Elizabeth, daughter and heir of William Burgh Earl of Ulster
in Ireland; and because he had by her the Honor of Clave in the County of
Thomond, he was in Parliament made Duke of Clarence; from which Duchy the name
of Clarencieux (being the Title of King of Arms for the South parts of England)
is derived. This Duke had issue by her only one daughter his heir, named
Philippa, who was married to Edmund Lord Mortimer Earl of March, and in her
right was Earl of Ulster, and had issue by her three Sons, which were,

First, Roger Mortimer Earl of March and Ulster, and by Parliament in the 9th
of King Richard the second, appointed his Successor in the Kingdom of England,
and shortly after so proclaimed.

Sir Edmund Mortimer Knight, second son: and Sir John Mortimer Knight, third
son, Beheaded 3 Hen 6.

Roger Mortimer aforesaid Earl of March and Ulster, married Eleanor Daughter of
Thomas Holland Earl of Kent; and by her had Issue Edmund, and Roger Mortimer,
that died without Issue: and Anne his Daughter that after her Brothers death,
became Heir to a goodly inheritance, and was married to Richard Plantaginet
Surnamed Coningsburgh Earl of Cambridge; by whom he had issue Richard
Plantaginet Duke of York, and Isabel a Daughter married to Henry Lord Bourcheir
Earl of Essex.

Richard Duke of York, and Earl of Cambridge, was Lieutenant to King Henry the
sixth, in his Kingdom of France, and Duchy of Normandy, and was the first of
the House of York, that raised that grievous war against the house of
Lancaster, and gave for his Cognizance the White Rose. He married Cecily
Daughter to Ralph Nevil, the first Earl of Westmerland, by whom he had issue
Edward first Son, King of England by the Name of,

1. King Edward the fourth.

2. Edmund, second Son, Earl of Rutland, slain at the Battle of Wakefield by
the Lord Clifford.

3. George Plantaginet, third Son, Duke of Clarence, Earl of Warwick and
Salisbury, in the Right of his Wife Isabel, eldest Daughter and Coheir of
Richard Nevil Earl of Salisbury, by whom he had issue Edward Earl of Warwick,
beheaded by King Henry the seventh, leaving no issue: and Margaret Countess of
Salisbury married to Sir Richard Pool Knight, she was beheaded by King Hen. 8.

4. Richard Plantaginet, fourth Son to Richard Duke of York; was first Duke of
Glocestor, and after King of England, known by the Name of King Richard the
third, who died without issue to survive him.

Richard Duke of York aforesaid had four Daughters, which were

1. Anne, married to Henry Holland Duke of Exeter, first; secondly, to Sir
Thomas St. Leoger Knight, by whom she had daughter and heir, married to Thomas
Manners Lord Ross.

2. Elizabeth, second daughter, married to John de la Pool Duke of Suffolk.

3. Margaret, the third daughter, married to Charles Duke of Burgundy.

And 4. Ursula was the fourth daughter.

King Edward the fourth aforesaid married Elizabeth daughter to Richard
Woodvile Earl Rivers, (Widow to Sir John Gray Knight) by whom he had issue
three sons and seven daughters.

Edward, eldest son to King Edward and Queen Elizabeth, was presently after his
fathers death, with his brother the Duke of York, most barbarously murdered in
the Tower of London by their unnatural Uncle, Richard Duke of Gloucester, that
was left their Protector.

George Plantaginet, third Son to King Edward the fourth, and his Wife Queen
Elizabeth, was Duke of Bedford, and died young.

1. Elizabeth, eldest daughter to King Edward the fourth, and his wife Queen
Elizabeth, was married to Henry Earl of Richmond, after King of England, known
by the name of King Henry the seventh.

2. Cecile, second Daughter to King Edward the fourth, and Queen Elizabeth, was
married to John Lord Viscount Wells; but died without any issue.

3. Ann, the third Daughter of King Edward the fourth, and Queen Elizabeth, was
married to Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and had by him two Sons that died without
issue.

4. Bridget, the fourth Daughter to King Edward the fourth, and Queen
Elizabeth, was a Nun at Dartford in Kent.

5. and 6. Mary, and Margaret, the 5. and 6. Daughters died young.

7. Katharine, the seventh Daughter to K. Edward the fourth, and Queen
Elizabeth, was married to Will. Courtney Earl of Devonshire, who by her had
issue Henry Courtney Earl of Devon, and Marquess of Excester, that was beheaded
by King Henry the eighth, and was father to Edward Courtney the last Earl of
Devonshire, and Marquess of Excester, of that family who died without issue.

King Edward the fourth had a Natural Daughter, whose name was Elizabeth, she
was married to Sir Tho. Lumley Knight, who by her had issue Richard Lord
Lumley, etc.

King Edward the fourth, had also a Natural Son called Arthur Plantaginet; and
as is by General consent affirmed he had him by his Concubine the Lady Eliz.
Lucy; This Arthur married Elizabeth, Sister and Heir of John Gray Viscount
Lisle, (Widow of Edm. Dudley) and in that respect he was by King Henry the
Eighth, created Viscount Lisle, and had issue by her three Daughters his
Coheirs: which were, Elizabeth married to Sir Francis Jobson of Westmerland
Knight, Lieutenant of the Tower of London, whose Heir General is Edward Brock
of Apsal in Suffolk Esquire, who is descended of a younger Brother of the
ancient family of Brook Lord Cobham.

Frances, another Daughter and Coheir of the said Arthur Plantaginet, was
married first to John Basset in the County of Devon: by whom she had Sir Arthur
Basset Knight, etc. she after married to Sir Thomas Monck of Potheridge, in the
aforesaid County of Devon: which Sir Thomas was the Son of Anthony, the Son and
Heir of Humphery Monck of Potheridge, and of his Wife Mary, Daughter and Coheir
of Rich. Champernoon in Cornwall, by the Daughter and Coheir of Sir John Lumley
Knight, and of his Wife the Daughter and Coheir of Sir Humphrey Talbot Knight,
which Richard Champernoon was Son to Richard, Son of John, third Son to
Richard, Son to Henry, Son to Thomas, Son of Richard, and Joan his Wife
Daughter and Heir of Ralph Vantort, and of his Wife Joan, Daughter to Edmund
Earl of Cornwall, Son to Richard King of the Romans: Sir Thomas Monck
aforesaid, had issue Anthony Monck, first Son: (and several other Children)
from whom is descended George Monck Lord of Potheridge, and at this time, the
Famous and most Renowned General.

Bridget, the third daughter and Coheir of Arthur Plantaginet, was married to
Sir William Cardon Knight. There is a story of this Arthur, which may to some
seem worthy the relating, and it is this: He being Lieutenant of Callis, and
some of his servants having a design to betray the said Town to the French;
which being discovered to the King and his Council, he was committed Prisoner
to the Tower of London, but after search and due Examination of the business,
the truth appeared, which cleared his Innocence; and thereupon King Henry the
eighth sent him a rich Ring from off his own Finger, with a Message to assure
him, That he was fully satisfied of his Loyalty, and therefore advised him not
to be cast down and dejected at his Imprisonment, but to rest confident of his
favor, that would suddenly procure his enlargement: Which token of the Kings
favor, and news of his freedom from prison, he entertained with such joy,
that the very same night he died with the excess of the same.

This is the Title, and these are the several Branches and Slips of the White
Rose of the House of York: Now follows the Title and Descent of the House of
Lancaster.

The House of LANCASTER.
John of Gaunt, (fourth Son to King Edward the third and Queen Philippa) so
called from the Town of Gaunt in Flanders, where he was born in the fourteenth
year of his fathers Reign. He was in his childhood created Earl of Richmond;
which Title was after recalled, and bestowed upon John Duke of Britain, who had
married his Sister, and to whose Duchy it had formerly belonged. This John of
Gaunt had three wives; the first was Blanch, daughter, and in the end, sole
heir to Henry Duke of Lancaster (son of Edmund surnamed Crook-back) and in her
right was at first Earl, and after Duke of Lancaster, etc. and by her had issue
Henry Plantaginet, surnamed Bullingbrook, of the place where he was born in
Lincolnshire: He was Earl of Derby, Duke of Hereford, and after King of
England, known by the name of King Henry the fourth, etc. The said John Duke of
Lancaster had two daughters; Viz.

1. Philippa, married to John King of Portugal.

2. Elizabeth, married first to John Holland Duke of Exeter; secondly to Sir
John Cornwall Baron Fanhop.

The second wife of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, was Constance, daughter
and Coheir of Peter King of Castile and Leon, by whom he had issue Katharine,
heir to her Mothers Inheritance, that was married to Henry, son to John King of
Spain.

The third wife of John of Gaunt aforesaid, was Katharine, daughter and Coheir
of Wayne Roet a Gascoigne, Guien King of Arms for that Country (Widow to Sir
Hugh Swinford a Knight of Lincolnshire, by whom he had issue three sons and one
daughter.

1. John Beauford Earl of Somerset, first son of John of Gaunt and Katharine
Swinford.

2. Thomas Beauford, second son, Duke of Exeter.

3. Henry Beauford, third son, was Bishop of Winchester.

Joan, daughter of John of Gaunt and Katharine Swinford, was married first to
Robert Lord Ferrers of Oustey; secondly, to Ralph Nevil the first Earl of
Westmerland, who by her had issue eight sons and five daughters, etc.

These three Sons, and the Daughter of John of Gaunt and Katharine Swinford,
were born before Marriage, and were made Legitimate by Act of Parliament, in
the twentieth year of King Richard the second, and they were named Beauford, of
a Castle so called, which the Duke of Lancaster had in France, where they were
all born.

John Beaufort aforementioned, was also Marquess Dorset, and married Margaret
Daughter to Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, by whom he had issue Henry, that died
without issue, and John Beauford second Son Earl and Duke of Somerset, who
married Margaret Daughter of Sir John Beauchamp of Bletso Knight, by whom he
had issue Margaret, his Daughter and Heir married to Edmund Tudor, Surnamed
Hadham Earl of Richmond, by whom he had issue, Henry Earl of Richmond, and
after King of England, called Henry the seventh.

John Marquess Dorset had two Daughters, viz. Joan married to James, the first
King of Scots; and Margaret the second, married to Thomas Courtney Earl of
Devonshire.

Edmund Beaufort, third Son to John Marquess Dorset, was Earl of Moriton in
Normandy, and after the death of his Brother John Duke of Somerset, and
Marquess Dorset; He married Eleanor Daughter and Coheir of Richard Beauchamp
Earl of Warwick, by whom he had issue, four Sons and five Daughters, viz.

Henry Beaufort, Son and Heir of Edmund, was after the death of his Father,
Duke of Somerset, and Marquess Dorset, he died without Legitimate issue, but
had a Natural Son, called Charles Somerset, whom King Henry the eighth, created
Earl of Worcester.

1. Eleanor, eldest Daughter to Edmund Beaufort Duke of Somerset, was married
first to James Butler Earl of Wilsthire; secondly, to Sir Robert Spencer
Knight, one of whose Daughters and Coheirs, Margaret, was married to Thomas
Carry, Grandfather to Henry Carry, the first Baron Hunsdon.

2. Joan, second daughter of Edmund Duke of Somerset, married to the Lord Hoth
in Ireland.

3. Ann, the third daughter, married to Sir Will. Paston Knight.

4. Margaret, the fourth daughter, married to Humphrey Earl of Stafford, and
after to Sir Richard Darel Knight.

5. Elizabeth, or Isabel fifth daughter, married to Sir Henry Lewis Knight.

This is the descent of the several Branches of the House of Lancaster, who
gave for their Cognizance the Red Rose; by which it appears, that
notwithstan-the Crown of England (Upon the deposing K. Richard the second, he
having no issue) was to descend to Roger Mortimer Earl of March and Ulster,
beforementioned; Yet Henry of Bullingbrook, before spoken of, taking advantage
of the peoples discontents; and the General dislike they had of his Cousin,
King Richards evil Government; He places the Crown upon his own head; and from
the year An. 1399 until the fourth of March An. 1460 in three descents the
slips of the Red Rose in the Line of Lancaster, did sit in the throne, end bear
Rule; And the Eruption of the House of York, did never appear, until Richard
Plantaginet Duke of York beforementioned, upon the twenty third of March, An.
1455. drew his sword to make good his Claim and Title to the Crown, and
Kingdom of England; from which time issued all the murders, and overthrows,
and slaughters, that continued until the death of Richard the third, in which
Bloody contest, were slain no less then fourscore Princes of the Blood Royal,
and double the Number of Natives as were lost in all our Wars and Conquests in
France. But these Uncivil Civil quarrels had a happy Period, after that Henry
Earl of Richmond, beforementioned, had overthrown King Richard the third in
Bosworthfield, and himself in the head of his Army had the Crown set upon his
head; and shortly after, upon the thirtieth of October. in An. 1485. he was with
great solemnity Anointed and Crowned King of England, by the whole consent of
the Nobility and Commons, by the Name of King Henry the seventh; and on the
eighteenth day of January following, was solemnized his marriage with the Lady
Elizabeth, King Edward the fourths daughter; which added to his Title a wreath
of Three so indissolvable, that no age since, has Ever questioned it, etc.

FINIS.

