The Fundamental Right, Safety and Liberty OF THE PEOPLE (Which is radically in
themselves, derivatively in the Parliament, their Substitutes or
Representatives) Briefly Asserted. Wherein is discovered the great Good or Harm
which may accrue unto the People by Parliaments, according to their different
temperature and motions. Together with some Proposals conducing toward an
equal and just Settlement of the distracted state of this Nation. As likewise a
touch at some especial Properties of a Supreme good Governor or Governors.

By ISAAC PENINGTON ( junior) Esquire;

The Safety of the People is the Supreme, most Natural and most Righteous Law,
being both the most proper End and most adequate Rule of Government.

London, Printed by John Macock, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert at the
West end of Paul's. 1651.

To the present Parliament of England.
THE Righteous God loves Righteousness, and he alone rightly weighs,
measures and administreth in Judgment and Truth. Man has a selfish Principle
within, which secretly blinds and draws him aside in his purest aims and
intentions. Man knows not his own heart, how much he is engaged for himself,
what little truth of love, mercy and justice there is in him toward others.
Every man thinks he minds the public Good and Interest, little seeing or
suspecting how straightly he is bound up within the narrow compass of himself.
Every man pretends to be just, and very ready to amend the wilful or
negligent miscarriages of others: but where are the men, who once attaining to
greatness and power, slide not by degrees into the same paths of Injustice,
which they condemned others for walking in? Man cannot observe his own errors,
nor indeed can he bear to hear of them: He loves himself so well, that he
cannot discern that evil which is in himself, nor endure to be told of it by
others; but thinks they deal injuriously with him if they take notice of it, or
warn him against it: for it is not evil in him, but an evil eye in them, which
makes them look upon it as so.

The Powers of this World being so apt to err (and their errors being so like
themselves, powerful) have great need of faithful Monitors and plain Dealers,
but seldom meet with them, and their condition makes them little able to bear
them. Their condition has commonly this double bad influence upon them, it
makes them able to do ill, able to do harm; but unable to bear the sight or
representation of them. It blinds their own eyes, in reference to themselves
and their actions; and makes them enemies to him who is not equally blinded
with them. Nor can it be otherwise, Man cannot take it well to have others
telling him of that evil, which he upon search cannot find in himself; or to
have them still blaming him for that as evil, which he himself accounts as
good.

O ye present great Ones (I speak it not in disrespect, but in honor,
acknowledging that God, by his providence and dispose of things, has made you
great) Look upon that Snare, which hardly ever man, in your condition, avoided!
Consider this poor Nation, its great Cost, its great Danger, your great
Promises to it, and let its Right and Liberty be precious in your eyes.
Consider (if it be possible) impartially its Right, and lead it into the
possession of it. If ye walk in the way of man, ye will come to the end of man:
If ye be Successors in unrighteousness, ye will end in ruin. Ye have an harder
piece of Self-denial to practice then yet ye have met with, if ye will be safe.
(Your danger is greatest when ye seem most out of danger.) As there have been
hitherto many Cries for you, so there are now many Cries to you, and Cries
against you daily. Complaints have seldom been greater, it behooves you to look
thoroughly that it be without a cause on your part. If the poor fatherless people
be destitute of help, and have none to cry to but the righteous One (being
wearied out with crying to man) it may make him the more regardful of their
Cries, and the more speedy and strict in exacting an account of your
Stewardship from you.

The FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT, LIBERTY AND SAFETY of the People is here presented to
your view in general with others (to whom also it appertains.) It concerns
you most particularly to take notice of it, and to use industry and fidelity,
answerable to your Power and Trust, to instate them in it; which how ever they
may abuse, yet they ought to enjoy: And if ye cannot make them happy* yet
putting things into their due order according to right, this will be a comfort
unto you, that they are only made miserable by themselves: whereas if ye detain
their Right from them, though with never so good an intent, that will not
excuse you at present, nor afford you comfort at the last. Ye have expressed a
great Sense of the Injuries which the People have suffered by being deprived of
their Rights and Liberties, and have undertaken to restore them to the
possession of them again; do it in truth. Let not Jealousies, of what may
happen, cause you to turn aside from the direct path of Righteousness. Put
them, as well as ye can, into a way of minding and prosecuting their own good;
but take heed of overthrowing their Right and Liberty, though from never so
great a desire to do them good. I am exceeding-jealous over you, lest ye should
unwittingly be deceived by your own hearts, and unawares deceive the People:
forgive me this Jealousy. It arises both from love to you and the People:
because my desire is so great, on the one hand, to have the People free and
happy; and on the other hand, to have you the Instruments of it. For as my
desire was toward those which went before you, while their day lasted, that
they might rather have found the way of administering Righteousness to others,
then of occasioning ruin to themselves: So is my desire now toward you, while
your day remains; and O that ye could see, at least in this your day, the
things that concern your peace, and the good of this Nation.

Every thing is bounded, but few things know their bounds; and so, passing
beyond them, both give and receive wounds, which always smart and afflict, be
they never so slight; but if they be very deep, tend to death. KINGLY POWER did
pass its limits, we may now speak it. Does PARLIAMENTARY POWER keep within its
limits? How shall we resolve this fairly and clearly (resolve it indeed we may
in our own Judgments and Consciences) when the limits of it are not determined?
And if things should yet devolve lower, into the great and confused Body of the
People, is it likely they would keep their limits?

O GOD, how is man entangled! So far from attaining true, inward, spiritual
Liberty; that he cannot reach the shadow, the outward part, the earthly part,
the liberty of man! So far are we from enjoying Liberty under any Government;
that we can, at best, but groan and pant under it after Liberty. Man cannot be
free in himself, not free from himself (while Self is in him, it will make him
selfish,) and while it is so, others under his power or within his reach cannot
be free. O that the time of man were come to an end; that he who is righteous,
and cannot but be righteous, would put unrighteous man out of place, and
administer righteousness himself. Till then I expect no satisfaction, not only
not in spiritual affairs, but not so much as in the Government of this World.
Yet it behooves you, who are in place and Power, to remove as far from your
selves, and press on as near toward righteousness, as possibly ye may: for
which end, to provoke you somewhat toward it, this ensuing Discourse is partly
intended by him who exceedingly thirsts to approve himself

An unfeigned Servant to the Lord of all, to your selves, and to his Country,
Isaac Penington ( junior.)

TO THE Sorrowful People OF This Sick Nation.
Poor People,
I Pity your condition, and in the midst of my own weights and pressures, have
not learned wholly to forget yours. I cannot but bewail your miseries, which it
is hard extricating out of. Ye have been long tossed in a sea of trouble, and
are not yet come to the sight of Land. The necessities whereinto ye are cast,
cannot but make your burdens heavy: yet this might somewhat ease them, if ye
could but once discern the approach of a long expected end. Ye are far from
attaining your Desires, and yet that may not be very ill for you, because ye
your selves are so apt to mistake in your Desires, not truly understanding what
may tend to make you happy. There is no safe retreating, how ever ye may think,
and very hard to espy how to go forward comfortably. Ye may easily run into
confusion and prove workers of your own ruin, but ye know not how to step one
step aright toward Rest, Peace, Liberty.

If I should tell you, that it were better to lie still and suffer then seek
after a disorderly remedy (for that is likely still to be worse then the
disease) it cannot but sound very harshly in your ears. Man is not very willing
to suffer, yea hardly can he be cast into such a condition, but he finds or at
least fancies some door of hope, at which he thinks he might escape. It is not
often changing either backward or forward, or various kinds of changes, which
will administer relief; but an orderly, a rational change, a change fitly
suited to the condition of that which changes. If ye would move aright, nay so
much as desire aright; ye must come to a true understanding of your condition.
Do ye understand your selves? do ye act like men? or are ye led and driven up
and down like brute Creatures? Have ye took notice what, this long season, has
been doing among you? Can ye tell me, whence ye came, whither ye are going,
where ye now are? Shall I put you in mind?

Ye came from Slavery, from such bonds and burdens as ye were very weary of.
Ye are marching toward Liberty, thither is your intent to go, into a free
state and condition where ye may have cause to complain no more of Oppression
or burdens. But where are ye? who knows that? Why surely ye are in an
entangled estate and condition, wherein ye have lost your way, or at least the
sight of it: Ye would fain return back or turn aside, but ye have no mind to
go forward. Thus is it often in cases of this nature; The wilderness, the way,
the passage to Canaan (the Land of Rest) is many times so grievous, that Egypt,
even the Land of Bondage, seems more tolerable. That people was ready to
stone Moses for leading them into such a perplexed condition, though Moses
guided them faithfully. I do not compare your Leaders with Moses (yet it
becomes you to remember, how strangely they were raised up to appear for you,
when ye groaned under sharp and heavy pressures) I do not think them so weighty
in the balance: yet I doubt ye wrong them, when ye weigh them, your balance
not being right, nor you affording them their due allowances. They have met
with real difficulties and straits, which has made their way very uneven and
hard to walk in: yea such a continued series of distracting occurrences and
affairs may have tended to put them quite out of their way. Do ye consider
this? I will tell you what I have much observed: Man is very prone to do evil,
to be unjust in every state and condition, to bend his trust aside, to neglect
seeking and serving those whom he ought to seek and serve, improving that very
advantage for the further seeking and serving of himself. This is usually the
state of man, look on him where you will you shall find him in this posture:
but he that accuses is commonly as unjust, if not more, in the accusation,
then the other was in the transgression. The common people are most subject to
this of any, who receive things by rumors and common reports, without examining
or scanning whether things be so or no. This is the common miscarriage between
Superiors and Inferiors: The one does not govern righteously, the other does
not obey righteously: and yet they are both unjust in their complaints of each
other; the Superior complaining in an unjust manner of the Inferiors Obedience,
the Inferior complaining in as unjust a manner of the Superiors Government. If
every man could once espy and grow most weary of his own faults, there might be
some hope of amendment. This World is a strange Mystery of Iniquity in the
whole course of it, in every piece and parcel of it; every one being offended
with each other, for adulterating in their intentions, motions and actions, and
yet the mean while, as deeply, in the very same way, they themselves
adulterating. If ye should incline to entertain this as a melancholy
apprehension from my pen (for man is very difficult to hear the sound of ill
concerning himself, and ready to throw dirt into the face of him from whom it
comes) look into the Scripture, see if that do not speak expressly to the same
purpose. Particularly into that Romans 2. 1. where the words run thus. Therefore
thou art inexcusable, O Man, whosoever thou art that judge: for wherein thou
judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge do the same
things.

When this Scripture is opened in that light which penned it, who will be able
to stand before it! What man is it that judges not another? and he that
judges another thinks himself free, at least in that respect wherein he
judges another: but what is said here? O Man, thou that judge art
inexcusable. Yes, will man say, such as judge rashly, such as judge unjustly: nay
but the words here carry it further, whosoever thou art that judge. Why what
ground is there for this? Are not such and such things evil? does not the
person deserve to be judged for them? Yes, but not by thee, who art guilty with
him of the same things, though thou see it not, and so in judging him thou
doft but condemn thy self; for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest
thy self. How can that be? I condemn only those that do such and such things,
but thanks be to God, though I have my failings, yet I am free from those
things: I should not think my self worthy to live upon the face of the Earth,
nay I should think my self fit for nothing but Hell if I were guilty of those
things mentioned in the latter of the former Chapter. Thus thou say, this is
thy testimony concerning thy self: but he who knows thee ( he who searches
the heart and tries the reins) accuses thee for thy judging, telling thee
that in so doing thou condemnest thy self, giving in this as the reason of it,
because thou do the same things: for thou that judge do the same things:
If he cannot make this good against thee, thou shall escape. Ah poor man, how
art thou hid from thy self! thou know not what is written in thine heart
(even all that which is mentioned in the latter end of the foregoing Chapter;)
thou know not the way thy heart has to bring forth these things; thou do
not know how or when thou do them. When thy heart shall be opened by him who
knows it, and these things plainly discovered to have been in thee, and drawn
forth into act by thee; when both the root and the fruit shall be made as
manifest as the day, what will thou say! Surely then O man, thou who have been
so confident and abundant in clearing thy self and accusing others, wilt grow
speechless, and sink under thy treble condemnation, first for being and doing
evil, then for justifying thy self, and lastly for condemning others.

I must contract my self in what remains. Dear Countrymen, If I were able to
speak a word in season, I would commend a little advice to you, but my
condition makes me unwilling to do it, yet your condition overswayeth me
again, and extorteth it from me. It may perhaps, where it takes root and
springs up, tend toward the settling of some spirits, and toward a sweet and
orderly guiding of them in public acting. For clearness sake, I shall branch
it into a few Heads.

1. Apply your selves to be sensible what true Freedom is, wherein it lies, and
of what value it is. It is of more worth then your Estates, yea then your
Lives; and therefore deserves to be higher prized. It consists not in
licentiousness, to do what ye will, nor in having no Taxes laid upon you (this
may be necessary for your safety) but in these four things. First, in having
good Laws, suited to your state and condition. Secondly, in a good method of
Government, whereby ye may come to enjoy the benefit of all those Laws, and
whereby your remedies of redress may be easy and cheap, not so hard to be come
at, nor so costly, as commonly they are. Thirdly, in having a good Governor or
Governors, who may faithfully oversee the execution of these Laws according to
this method. Fourthly, in having a settled way of Parliaments, to amend, alter
or add to in any kind (as need shall require) these Laws, this method of
Government, these Governors. And, which I might name of fifth, to have such a
clear way, for these Parliaments to proceed in, as they might not easily miss:
for otherwise, if the way be not very plain, such a Body of the common sort,
who are not supposed either to be very skilful or experienced in Government,
are likely to do a great deal more hurt then good.

2. Be not weary of the pursuit after Liberty, because of the many difficulties
and expenses which it occasions. Undergo the pains of cure. What charge will a
man be at, in a Suit of Law, to recover a piece of Estate? Is it not worth more
to recover the Liberty of a man? The Nations of the Earth have still layn under
Slavery, have not ye your selves felt it? Would ye not creep out, and do ye
think to creep out with ease? The very casting of so great a burden will make
the Earth shake under you: Besides the opposition of such who find advantage
by riding upon your backs will heighten the difficulty of it. If ye will be
cured of your Sickness by Physique, ye must suffer that Sickness which comes
with Physique. O do not run into Slavery to avoid a few present burdens, but
pursue your Freedom, what ever it cost you. If ever ye come to enjoy it, ye
will not think much of what ye have laid out for the purchase of it.

3. Eye not man, no not in those things wherein he appears as the main agent.
Consider who it is that does all, especially in such great changes. It is not
the wit of man, the will of man, which manageth these things, but one above
man. He speaks Peace and Settlement to a Nation, and who then can speak
Trouble or Disturbance? He also stirs the mud in a Nation, and who then can
settle it? He throws down the mighty from their seat, exalting them of low
degree; and he does not give liberty to man to find fault with him either for
throwing down the mighty because he liked them, or for setting up them of low
degree because he disliketh them. Read and consider that place Psalm. 75. 7.
(and show in practice, as well as in profession, that ye reverence Scripture)
GOD is THE JUDGE, He puts down one, and sets up another. Take heed what ye
do: If ye had only man to deal with, ye might make your party good; but it is
hard kicking against the pricks. It may be his design at present ( whose
counsel shall stand, and who will fulfill all his pleasure) as it was once
concerning Nebuchadnezzar, to make you also sensible, that the most High rules
among the children of men, disposing of Kingdoms, Powers and Governments, as
and to whom he pleases.

4. Expect not help or satisfaction from man. Man has no worth in him, and for
this end may he be made use of, by God, to show how vile and empty he is, how
unable and unfit to produce any thing of value. Truly I have often thought,
that the Powers and Governments of this World are intended, rather to make us
weary of them, then to yield us satisfaction in them. This whole Creation is a
mere piece of vanity, and (in all the changes of it) can yield but vanity: What
do ye mean to raise such expectations, concerning any thing or from any thing
in it? It may be the intent of God to discover to you (by multiplied sense and
experience) that man cannot help you: While your expectations are from man, or
upon this or that change, ye are far from learning this lesson. I know means
are appointed and made use of by God in the producing of effects, but sometimes
he withers them, to divert our eyes from them, and to make us feel what empty,
barren, imperfect things they are. While ye cry out so much against any means
or instruments, on the one hand, or so much magnify any, on the other hand (as
every one almost does according to his different esteem of them) ye cannot so
fully be taken up with observing the principal Agent. If God intend himself to
bestow what ye desire upon you, he may hold his hand while ye expect it from
man: If God intend at last to put forth an excellent piece of strength and
wisdom for your rescue, he may defer till he has tired out yours: And if that
should be his intention, ye are out of the way while your expectation is
fastened elsewhere.

5. And lastly; Groan and pant, unto him who is skilful to save, after your own
deliverance and after the deliverance of his people. He who wants
deliverance, and knows not where to obtain it; what is more proper for him,
then to groan and pant after it? The whole Creation is continually in a
condition of groaning and traveling after deliverance, not of enjoying it.
Bear a part with the Creation, as ye are a part of it; yea the higher your
extremities grow, the greater let your groans be. Be content with your
traveling pangs, which is the common track and rode unto bringing forth.

And groan likewise for the liberty of the sons of God: for what do ye know but
your Liberty may spring up with theirs? Israel is in bonds, the Lord has
smitten him, the Lord has hid his face from him (yea the Lord has made him a
reproach and byword among all the Heathen) and while he frowns upon him, he
knows not how to smile upon any else. The people of God have ever had hard
usage in this World, and particularly in this Nation. Can ye expect that God,
who disposes of all things, should be forward to give you your Liberti^s,
while ye are not willing they should enjoy theirs? Can they submit to the Laws,
Ordinances and Constitutions of man concerning their God, while an higher light
is set up in them? No they cannot, though they were in the dark. If ye can be
content and desire to do so, do so quietly, live your selves in Egypt if ye
like it (and ye may better do it, for it will not be a Land of bondage to you)
but let my people go that they may serve me, said God, concerning his people,
when alas they knew not how to serve him. This is a ticklish point, and of
more consequence to the Welfare of Nations then they are aware of. Therefore if
ye love your selves, your own Peace, (...) own Liberties, your own Happiness,
beware of this; take heed of enthralling them in spiritual things, who were
never in that respect (but only in outward, in things common to man) put under
your yoke. But, in stead thereof, wish after their Liberty: and though ye
cannot heartily desire it in respect to them, yet do it in reference to the
enjoyment of your own your selves, because, for ought ye know, yours may lie
wrapped up in it.

All this have I spoken unto you, not from any design in me in reference to any
thing or person: but truly and faithfully from my very heart commending unto
you, what to me (in this my state of weakness) appears best for you. Which
having done, I now take my leave of you, wishing you the best benefit this can
afford, or rather the full fruition of that which this does but weakly and
imperfectly drive at, viz. the quietest enjoyment of your selves in your
present condition, and the safest and swiftest passage to a better. This is the
heart of him toward you, who earnestly desires to be

Yours in true Love and Faithful Service, Isaac Penington ( junior.)

THE Right, Liberty and Safety OF THE PEOPLE Briefly Asserted.
THe Right, Liberty and Safety of the People lies chiefly in these three
things; in the Choice of their Government and Governors, in the Establishment
of that Government and those Governors which they shall choose, and in the
Alteration of either as they find cause. This belongs to every people (though
few, if any, are in possession of it,) and that people, which enjoys these,
enjoys its Right, is indeed free and safe while it so remains.

1. The Right, Liberty and Safety of the People consists in the Choice of their
Government and Governors.

It is their Right: for in Civil Societies Nature has not cut out the body
into form and shape, but has left it to be done by the will and wisdom of man,
having imprinted in him a sense of and desire after the enjoyment of Justice,
Order, Love, Peace (and whatsoever else is good and profitable for him) both
particularly in himself and in common with others; which desire thoroughly
kindled in man, and guided by the true light of Reason, will lead man to choose
that which is properly good both for himself and others. And though man may
possibly or probably abuse this, yet that is no sufficient ground for depriving
him of his right.

Their Liberty lies in it too. They only are a free People who have their
Government of their own choice. Such upon whom others do intrude, or upon whom
other Laws or Regents are imposed then what themselves judge meet and necessary,
and besides that which they themselves voluntarily and by free consent submit
unto for their good and welfare, are so far under slavery and such a miserable
subjection as Nature never appointed them unto.

Their Safety likewise lies in it: for to be sure they will choose nothing but
what in probability will conduce to their own good and happiness; whereas
others, making Laws for them, or setting Governors over them, may respect their
own particular benefit and advantage, and not so much the good of the People,
which is the main end why Laws, Governments and Governors are appointed, and to
which they should in a direct line be guided.

And upon this ground I conceive it very requisite, that men who are chosen to
sit in Parliament to make or alter Laws, to set up or alter Governments or
Governors for and in behalf of the People, should, as soon as any, lie open to
the force of all the Laws they make, or of any thing they do in that kind; that
no Law they make should take effect till they be dissolved, and come to lie as
liable to it as any, otherwise they will not be sensible enough of the Peoples
condition, and consequently not fit to stand in their stead, or to act for them
in cases that concern them so nearly. The greatest security the People have
concerning their Parliaments is that they choose persons whose condition will
keep them from injurying them, for if they prejudice them they prejudice
themselves, if they neglect their good they neglect their own good: This
security is good while the people choose them that are of their own rank, and
while these make no Laws for them which shall have any life or virtue to do
good or hurt till they come also to be exposed to them, but otherwise it is
very invalid, if not wholly lost. They who are to govern by Laws should have
little or no hand in making the Laws they are to govern by: for Man respects
himself in what he does; (The Governor will respect himself, his own ease,
advantage and honor in Government, and lay loads upon the people, but make his
own burden light:) Therefore things should be so o^dered, in the behalf and
for the security of the people, that such as are chosen and appointed to act in
this kind should lay no load upon the people, but what their own backs may come
as soon and as fully, in their degree and station, to bear, as any of the
peoples.

2. The Right, Liberty and Safety of the People consists in the Establishment
of their Government and Governors. As they have right to choose, so they have
right to confirm what they choose, to establish that Government and such kind of
Governors as they judge or find most convenient and necessary for them. Without
this the people can be neither free nor safe no more then without the other,
nay without this their right to choose would be to little purpose, the end of
choice in things of this nature being for the duration of its appointed season.

3. Their Right, Liberty and Safety lies also in enjoying and exercising (as
need requires) the Power of altering their Government or Governors: that when
they find either burdensome or inconvenient they may lay it aside, and place
what else they shall judge lighter, fitter or better in the stead of it. Nature
still teaches every thing, as it grows, to reach further and further toward
perfection. No man is bound to that which he chooses or establishes further
then he finds it suitable to the end for which he chose and established it:
Now several states and conditions of things and persons changing, there must of
necessity be an answerable change in Laws, Orders, Governments or Governors
also, or man will be instrumental to introduce slavery, misery and tyranny upon
himself, which Nature teaches every thing both to abhor, and as much as may be
to avoid.

It is the desire of most men both in reference to Church and State (as men
commonly speak) to have Laws and Ordinances, after the manner of the Medes and
Persians, which cannot be altered: I cannot but approve the desire, since it is
written in man's nature. It is natural to man, and a stamp of the divine Image
upon him, to press after unchangeableness both in himself and in the things
which appertain unto him: But yet it is not suitable to his present condition
which will in no wise admit of it, because it is continually subject to change
and alteration: And as it still changes, so do his needs and desires, as also
his experience and wisdom, and so must the Laws and Orders which he prescribes
to himself and others, or he will be grievously cruel to himself and others.
Ages have their growth as well as particular persons, and must change their
garments, their Customs, their courses, etc. for those which are still suitable
to their present state and growth. Laws are but temporary; and as they are
founded upon Reason, so they are no longer to last then the Reason of them
lasts, to which they ought to give place, and admit of such a succession as
it appoints. Only herein has Nature provided well for the people, if they
could fairly come to their Right, and had wisdom to use it (which sense and
experience is continually instructing them how to do) in that she does allot
them to make and alter their own clothes, to shape out their own burdens, to
form, renew or alter that yoke of Government which is most necessary and
convenient for their necks.

All this, or any part of this ( either the choosing, establishing or altering
Governments, Laws or Governors) the people cannot do in a Body; an whole Nation
is too unweildy to act together themselves: therefore Nature has taught them
to do it by Substitutes, whom they themselves choose to stand in their stead to
do any of these things for them as their present condition and need requires,
which Body of persons is with us called a Parliament, who are picked out by the
whole to be the Representative of the whole, to do that for the whole which
they would have to be done, and would do themselves if they were a Body in a
capacity to act.

And from this first rise of things may best be discovered the nature, ends,
proper use and limits of Parliaments, all which are necessary to be known, both
that they may move according to their nature, pursue their ends, be rightly
used, keep within their compass, and that the people may clearly discern that
they so do, whereby they will come to rest satisfied in their proceedings, and
in their expectations of good thereby.

We see here of what kind of persons the Parliament is to consist, viz. of the
common people, that they may be fit to represent their burdens and desires.

We see here of what use and for what end they are, viz. to relieve the people,
to redress any occasion of grief or burden to them, to make Laws, alter Laws,
set Laws in a due way of Administration, set up or alter Governments and
Governors, dispose of every thing in such a way as the people may freely enjoy
their Rights in Peace and Safety.

We see also their bounds in general, viz. the exercising the power of the
People in such ways as were proper for the people to exercise it in were they
capable of joint and orderly acting.

We see likewise their Nature or Constitution, what they are. They are the
ELECTIVE POWER, the CONSTITVTIVE POWER, the ALTERATIVE POWER. What lies
confused and unuseful in the people is treasured up in them in order, and in a
fitting way for use. Is there a Government wanting? The people cannot orderly
or wisely debate or choose that which is likely to be most commodious and safe.
Are there any Laws wanting? The people cannot well set about making Laws. Are
there any Laws, Customs, or Encroachments burdensome? The people cannot rightly
scan how far they are so, or proceed to a regular alteration of them. So that
the whole Right, Freedom, Welfare and Safety of the People consists in
Parliaments rightly and duly called, constituted and ordered toward acting
faithfully in the discharge of the Trust reposed in them.

Yea lastly, Here we may see in a direct line the proper course and way of
Parliaments, which speaks out it self, and would easily be discerned by us, if
our eyes were kept fixed here, and not entangled with other intermixtures,
which are apt to seize upon every thing, and interweave with every thing,
hardly any thing keeping its own pure nature or proper current. Take it thus,
(with a little kind of Circuit for the better illustration of it, yet very
briefly.)

All Governments (though intended for and directed toward common good) are
still declining and contracting private, selfish and corrupt Interests, whereby
the people come to feel burdens under them, and find want of fences to guard
them from the insolences and assaults of such as are above them, which are
very usual every where, for every man (I think I need not add, almost) though
he be unwilling to have any tyrannize over him, yet he is too prone to
tyrannize over such as are under him. Who would not, when he feels oppression,
if he were able, thrust the Oppressor out of his seat? and yet who sees how
ready he himself would be, so soon as he has done it, to seat himself in the
same throne of oppression; and that he will as certainly do the one as the
other, if he be not hindered by outward force, or (which is better) by an
inward principle? Indeed man can by no means come to see this concerning
himself, but the people still come too soon to feel it.

Now the People, who wear their Government, finding by experience where it
sits easy or pincheth, what present loads they groan most under, what
future fences they stand in need of to shelter them from the injurious assaults
of Powers above them; accordingly choose persons, who lie under the same sense
with them, to represent, consult about, and redress these their grievances, by
punishing Offenders for misdemeanors past, by opening the course of Law for
time to come, as also by adding thereto, or detracting therefrom, as the
condition and need of the people requires, etc.

These persons thus chosen are to come with the sense and desires of the
particular Counties, Cities or Boroughs for which they serve, mutually to
represent these, and to consult together how all burdens may be taken off, and
all desires satisfied in such a way as may stand with the good of the whole.

After full debate had how these things may be done, to come to an agreement of
full settling them accordingly in the firmest way that can be, which having done
to dissolve, and leave the people experimentally to try and reap the benefit of
their care, pains and fidelity, and to return immediately into their former
condition, to lie with them sensibly again under the benefit or inconvenience
of what they have done.

And this to be done with as much speed, as the motion of such a kind of Body,
in Affairs so weighty, can permit; that if they chance to fail in effecting
what is desired and expected from them, the people may quiet themselves with
the expectation of another remedy in its season approaching. The reason why
Parliaments should with all possible speed dispatch their work, is for avoiding
of that corruption which standing pools are subject to, and which is most
dangerous in them; for what shall rectify the last remedy, if that be out of
order, and grow so corrupt, that it has more need of a Physician it self, then
to act the part of a Physician? All things by degrees gather corruption, the
governing Power by degrees declineth from its first purity, and so also does
the rectifying and reforming Power, its deviation is as easy as the others,
and of far greater consequence; more destructive, less curable. Therefore
better were it for Parliaments to leave part of their work undone, then to sit
so long as to contract corruption: It is better to want somewhat of the full
application of a remedy, then to have it poisoned. But of this more by and by
under a distinct head by it self.

Now the whole Right, Liberty, Welfare and Safety of the People consisting in
Parliaments; the right Constitution and orderly motion of them is of the
greatest consequence that can be, there being so much embarked in this Vessel,
where, if it miscarry, it is irreparably lost, unless it can be recovered again
out of the Sea of Confusion.

Wherefore it becomes every one (both in reference to himself and the whole)
to contribute his utmost toward the right steering of this Vessel, toward the
preserving of it pure both in its state and motions, lest both the good and
welfare of the whole and of every particular miscarry, for want of due care and
observation.

Toward which work, the further to incite and provoke others, I cast in this
present offering, making mention of those dangers which lie open to my eye in
reference to Parliaments, whereby the true and genuine fruit of them may either
be hindered from growth, or come to be corrupted, whereby the People at least
cannot but miss of the proper use and benefit, which it ought to reap from them.

There are, in reference to Parliaments, six Cases or Considerations, evident
to me, whereby the hazard of the people may be very great, which I shall set
down distinctly that they may be the better taken notice of, weighed and judged.

1. Want of Parliaments. Parliaments are the proper Remedy to relieve the
grieved People from their burdens and oppressions; from any kind or the several
kinds of oppressions that may befall them; from the oppressions of any
Government, any Governors, any Laws, any Encroachments etc. (for by several
ways, means and instruments the people may be oppressed) Now if Parliaments be
wanting, that is to say, be not duly called according to the need of the people
(it being their proper engine whereby alone they can duly, orderly and safely
act) their Right, Liberty and Safety is much hazarded, and they obnoxious to
lie under the burden of oppression without remedy. If diseases grow, and a due
course of physique be not to be had, the body cannot but suffer damage and
hazard.

There are two things essentially necessary to the health and well-being of a
Nation, as well as of other bodies both natural and politic, which are, the
cutting off of exuberances, and the supplying of defects, both which in the
principal and most weighty part of them, are peculiar to Parliaments; so that
where there is want of them, the radical life and virtue of the people must
needs be obstructed, languish and decay. This is a very ill disease, how ever
those who never knew or experimented the sweetness of enjoying their Right and
Liberty, may not be considerably sensible of it.

2. Want of fair Elections, as thus, If the people be by any means drawn from
minding their own good, from bending themselves to choose persons who may be fit
to act for them. How easily may Parl^aments warp aside from easing and
relieving the people unto further burthening and grieving of them, if such
persons be chosen to appear in their behalf, who are friends to their
Oppressors, and have a particular advantage of sharing with them in the benefit
of that which is the burden and cause of grief to the people? And here is a
great danger the people are very obnoxious to: Their burdens commonly arise
from the miscarriage of the still present Governors, and these Governors cannot
but have great advantages, by their Power over them, to have an influence upon
their choice. Therefore if the people be not so much the more wary, that which
was intended for their greatest relief may turn to their greatest prejudice. O
how miserable is man, whose remedies against multitudes of dangers are so few,
and even those few all along so subject to miscarry! A Parliament may be
prevented, that it may not be to be had when there is most need of it: A
Parliament may be corrupt before it has a Being, it may be so ill constituted
in respect of the materials of it, that it may be a fitter engine of slavery
and misery then of freedom and happiness to a poor enthralled people. And yet
this is not all the danger that Parliaments are exposed unto, as also the
people, in relation to that good they hope for by Parliaments.

3. Short continuance of Parliaments. Suppose the people have Parliaments, have
a fair and free choice without being overpowered therein, or swayed aside; nay
suppose yet more, that they choose well for themselves; yet the Power they are
to deal with may overbear them, and (if they cannot bend them aside) enforce
their dissolution. And hereby the people must needs be deprived of reaping that
good they desired and hoped for by their endeavors.

Parliaments are great Bodies, and consequently flow in motion, which is their
proper pace and advantage, for they can hardly do any thing well but what they
do slowly; for motions that require swiftness Nature has cut out other kind of
bodies. Again, Parliaments are to act very warily, (as the things they are to
do, are of great concernment, and require much circumspection and
consideration,) and therefore in both these respects must have time convenient
to act accurately in the discharge of so great a Trust, and in the managing of
so weighty Affairs, which if it be not answerably allotted them, they must of
necessity be defective in.

4. Want of Power to Parliaments. Parliaments have a difficult piece of work,
viz. to chastise the greatest Oppressors, and to strike at the very root and
foundation of oppression in any kind, and unless they have Power answerable
they cannot possibly go through with it. Oppositions and interruptions from
other Powers they must expect to meet with, which if they be not able to graple
with and overcome, they cannot exercise the full Right and Liberty of the
People, either in punishing Offenders against the People, or in choosing,
establishing or altering Governments, Laws or Governors for the People. This
must necessarily much hinder, if not put a stop to their work: for if any fall
short of those means which are proper to an end, they cannot possibly attain
that end: If the hand which imposes and would keep burdens upon the back, be
stronger then that which would remove them; If the hand which would supply
defects, be weaker then that which stands in its way to stop it in its course,
vain and fruitless will all its endeavors be. (The Power that relieveth from
oppression must of necessity be greater then the Power that oppresses.) And
this was the condition of this present Parliament, there was visibly such a
Power over them as they could do nothing to purpose for the good of the People;
This doubtless they had great reason to strive to get loose from, and the
people had great reason to stick to them in it, as also to expect from them
their own freedom after they were made free, the freedom of the people being
the end (theirs but the means,) and therefore most to be eyed. It Is to no
purpose at all to have never so free a Parliament, unless we have also a People
put into the possession of their freedoms by the Parliament.

5. Over-long-duration of Parliaments. This was glanced at before, but yet it
will be requisite to consider of it further, because after those many changes
which of late we have been much driven and necessitated into, we may at present
lie more open to the ill influence of this, then of any of the former: and it
should be the especial wisdom and care of man to take most heed of that danger
which he lies most open to. Every thing has its appointed seasons, bounds and
proper way of operation, within which it is very beautiful and profitable, but
beyond it very uncomely and dangerous. Parliaments, in their season, may bring
forth a most sweet and excellent kind of fruit, which may vigorously refresh
the spirits, and recover the decaying Liberties of a dying Nation; but
continuing longer then its season, the Root it self may easily grow corrupt,
and the fruit prove sour, harsh, and deadly, yea may tend to a more bitter
death then it was ordained to prevent. Many dangers Parliaments are exposed to
by long continuance, whereby their nature and constitution may be depraved, or
they induced to act after a different nature, or in other ways then is proper
for them, or good for the people. Those dangers which more principally in this
respect represent themselves to my eye, I shall here make mention of.

1. Parliaments, by long continuance, will be subject to fall into factions,
which is the foundation of so many breaches and divisions in the whole, upon
which they cannot but have an influence to conform them unto themselves, the
eye of the people being still upon the fountainhead. We have had sufficient
experience to evidence the truth of this, for still as the Parliament has been
divided, there have also been divisions throughout the whole Nation. Persons
who act jointly and uniformly at first, (having one and the same sense upon
their spirits, one and the same end in their eye, one and the same desire in
their hearts) may in process of time lose this sense, this desire, this end,
and be drawn aside to another sense, desire, end, and differ also in their new
choice, which may insensibly creep in upon them; and according to this
difference, there will ensue a division among them both in their motions and
actions. Now how dangerous this is to have a breach in the Root, to have a seed
of division in the heart, working there, springing forth from thence, and
diffusing it self throughout the whole body, I think it will be needless to
express.

2. Parliament men, by the long continuance of a Parliament, will be exposed to
the temptation of seeking themselves, of minding and prosecuting their several
particular ends and interests. A Parliament man, as he is chosen to be, so he
should set himself to be a public person, as it were forgetting himself, and
giving up himself to be taken up only with the public good, for the season of
this work. This a good Patriot may find somewhat easy to do for a while, but
if the Parliament last long, Self which is very strong in him, and may
challenge a right to be looked after, will revive its right, pleading both
reason and necessity in its own behalf. That man, that could be content to lay
all aside, and bend himself wholly for the public for a short time, cannot
hold out in doing so, but will be enforced to look after himself, his own
affairs, his own profit and thriving in the world, etc. And when he comes to
manage these and the other together, it will be very difficult for him to avoid
making use of that advantage, which both his power and the long continuance of
it affords him, toward his own particular benefit. And Self, having thus crept
in, will grow more and more upon him, and will be continually, secretly and
subtly drawing him more and more toward himself, and more and more from the
public: and killing those affections in him (which are too apt of themselves
to do) which were very lively at first for the public, and consequently much
unfit him for his work.

3. Parliaments by long continuance are in danger of contracting a particular
Interest (an Interest distinct from that Interest which they have as a part of
and in common with the people) in the public Government. Every man has an
allowable Interest in common with the whole, so that if it goes well with the
whole, every one shares in it: This is a good, a profitable Interest, no way
prejudicial to any else. But then there is a particular Interest, whereby it
may go well with some, though ill with the generality; nay the welfare of some
may arise out of the incommodity of the generality; That wind which blows ill
upon the public, may blow profit to some. This Interest all Powers do readily
contract to themselves, partly by their own strength, and partly by their
advantage to wind into other Powers, the greater still bringing the less into
subjection, which must be at its command and use, or be broken by it. This
snare which other Powers by their continuation are still running into, the
Parliament is to redeem and purge them from; but to take heed lest their own
continuance should be so long, as to bring them into the same snare; which may
both unfit them for their proper work, which is to be Judges on the behalf of
the Commonwealth, which how can they truly execute, who have a particular
interest and share of their own (besides that which they have in common with
the people) in the present Government, whom as it favors, so they must again
favor it? As also it may engage them in an improper work, viz. in becoming
Administrators in the present Government, which is no way proper for such as
are appointed to be the Judges of Administrators and Administrations.

A Parliament have an interest in the Government with the rest of the people,
yea a right and power conferred upon them by the people to order, settle,
amend, or (if need be) new-make the Government for themselves and the people;
but not to meddle with the administration of it, or to endeavor to bend it
aside, in the administration of it, for any particular end or advantage of
their own; which their Power may easily do, and which their over-long-duration
may too much entice them to assay to do.

4. Parliaments, by long continuance, may incur the danger of interrupting, if
not of swallowing up the ordinary course of the peoples enjoying their Right in
obtaining speedy, free and impartial Justice by the administration and
execution of the Laws. The greater does commonly weaken, if not devour the
less. Extraordinary remedies are apt to thrust into the place of the ordinary,
especially when by long duration they may seem to challenge to themselves the
right of becoming ordinary.

5. (Which is worst of all) Parliaments, by over-long-duration, may slip into
danger of depriving the people of the proper use and benefit of Parliaments.
The proper use of Parliaments is to be a curb to the extravagancy of Power, of
the highest standing Power: But if they themselves become the standing Power,
how can they be a fit curb for it? A Parliament is to be such a Body as may
have the sense of the people upon them, that so they may be led by that sense
to ease, relieve and safeguard the people: But if once they become Governors,
they will lose that sense, and have a sense of a different nature upon them:
They will (like other Governors) have a sense of the duty of the people which
they owe to their Governors, but lose (by degrees, still more and more) their
sense of the burdens and grievances of the People. So that if Parliaments
succeed in the place of the supream-administring-power, there will be as much
need of somewhat else to stand between the people and them, as there was of
them to stand between the people and Kingly Power: for they coming into that
place and Authority, the people are in as much danger of them, as they were of
the Power of Kings: for it is not the person simply, but the power, wherein the
danger or benefit lies. And this doubtless is the Right and Liberty of the
People, and herein lies their Safety, viz. to have an extraordinary,
legislative, alterative, corrective Power above the ordinary standing Power;
and this Power, as to consist of the Body of the People, so likewise to be kept
altogether free from having any particular hand in Government, (but to keep
within the bounds of their own extraordinary work, which is not so much in as
about Government,) that so they may both have and retain the sense of the
people, being engaged by their state and condition to do nothing which may
prejudice the people, because in case they do, they themselves will suddenly
feel the smart of it.

6. The last danger, which I shall at this time mention in reference to
Parliaments, is this. The assuming a Power of a different nature from them, not
proper to them; and intermedling with a work which they are not fitted for,
entrusted with, or appointed to.

Powers, like other things (and somewhat more advantagiously then other things,
having stronger hands) are still gathering in to themselves. The rich man will
be gathering riches, the wise man will be gathering wisdom, and the powerful
man will be gathering power: And in attracting to himself (especially where he
is the sole Judge) it is very difficult for him to be moderate or innocent. He
who has a right power in some things, it is hard for him to keep there, and
not to seek after and lay hold on, if he can, that power which he ought not to
have, and in those other kind of things wherein he ought not to have power.
That a Parliament, as well as other Powers, is subject to this temptation,
cannot be denied.

This is dangerous every where. (To have things endowed with a different, if
not contrary nature, to have things employed about a different, if not a
contrary work to neglect their own work for which they are fit, to which they
are appointed, and execute another work for which they are not fit, to which
they are not appointed; this, let it be never so carefully and faithfully
managed, must needs bring disorder, confusion, nay greater inconveniences.) But
the greater the power is, the greater is the danger: because as the greatest
power may do most good in its own way, so it may do most harm in a wrong way.
Powers that are great, bring forth great effects either of Peace or Trouble,
Order or Confusion, Salvation or Destruction. No remedy so sovereign, so
restorative as a Parliament rightly constituted, rightly applied, and rightly
acting: No disease more deadly, more consuming the very heart-life of the
Rights and Liberties of a Nation, then a Parliament misconstituted, misapplyed,
misacting.

But every one here will be ready to say, What is that Power which is proper to
Parliaments? what is their proper work? what is that Power of a different
nature, which will be so dangerous for them to assume? and what is that work,
which they are not fitted for, entrusted with, or appointed to?

To satisfy the desire of such as may greedily enquire after this, I shall
answer somewhat, according to that insight which is afforded me into the nature
of things, showing (from the Principles foregoing) both what their proper Power
and Work is, and then what Power and Work is improper for them. And it is a
clearer and far safer way, to search out and discover things from their first
rise in Nature, then from succeeding Principles or Practices, which may easily
decline awry and cover the true knowledge and intent of things.

Now concerning their proper Power and Work, I shall not undertake to define
the particular limits of it, it will suffice to my purpose, to express the
general nature of it, which to me appears thus.

It is a NATURAL (Humane or Civil) EXTRAORDINARY, CONSTITVTIVE, CORRECTIVE,
ALTERATIVE POWER. I shall speak chiefly of their Power, which will of it self
discover their Work, therefore that will not need so particularly to be opened.

First, I say it is NATURAL: such a Power as is sown in man, in the nature of
man. Man has a power over himself, to dispose of himself, according to that
wisdom and righteousness which is seated in him, grows up with him (if it be
not blasted or kept under,) which he further attains to, or is in a further
degree bestowed upon him. Of this common kind is this, with all other earthly
Powers.

But this expresses only the kind of it, we are yet far from the particular
nature, end, or use of it.

Therefore to describe it further, I term it EXTRAORDINARY, which it discovers
it self to be, being a thing not for common and constant use, but for
extraordinary ends and purposes; and the nature of things must be suited to
their end, for thither it is to direct them.

Then more particularly there is expressed what kind of extraordinary Power it
is, namely, CONSTITVTIVE, CORRECTIVE, ALTERATIVE: It is a Power of seting up or
establishing Laws, Governments, Governors; of correcting them, of altering them.

This is the nature of their Power, which points out their work so plainly,
as it will not need more particularly to be specified in this place.

Now by this there are two sorts of Power cut off from them, one whole kind of
Power, and one main branch of another kind.

1. Spiritual Power, which claims its descent from Christ as the Head of his
Church, and is appropriated by its nature, end and use, unto his Body the
Church, which is his City or Kingdom, to be governed by him, even by that power
of his Spirit which he pleases to exercise upon them, whether immediately by
himself, or mediately by such as he substituteth under him. This Power, as it
is spiritual, so it is fit to be managed only by spiritual hands: Not by Men,
but by Christians; nor by every Christian, but by such only as can clear the
derivacy of it from Christ to them, such as are fitted and appointed by him to
be under him in his own seat and place of Government. Nor are Christians to
exercise this Government over other men, but only over Christians, whom alone
it is suited to. Nor are they to govern as men; by outward force; but as
Christians, by spiritual virtue and efficacy upon the Conscience, the seat of
Christ in man, so that it may appear that not they, but the Spirit of Christ,
the Spirit in Christ, does rule and govern. O how sweet would this Government
be! how pleasant to a Christian the strictest execution of the sharpest Laws in
it! Christ's yoke is easy, and his burden is light, even in the sharpest and
weightiest part of it.

But this Power belongs not to any Nation or People under Heaven, there being
not any Nation or People which can evidence the fair and clear derivacy of this
Power from Christ to them: (as it was not intended for any Nation or People,
save only his own Nation, his own People.) Therefore not to any Parliament,
who are but the People in a representative Body, in a Body contracted into a
narrower compass for the use and service of the People; who as they stand in
their stead, so they have only their Power. The People being the stock or root
from whence their Power and Authority does spring, it can rise no higher, not
be of any other nature, then that which is in the People.

2. In Civil Power, the administrative or governing part of it appears from
hence not to appertain to them.

In Civil Societies, as well as in natural, Nature has cut out the proportion
(in general, though not in particular.) There is the Head and the Members,
having each their several innate Properties, Motions, Laws and Privileges,
which cannot be transgressed without violence to Nature, or without danger to
that Body or Society which breaks the bounds limited by Nature. In every
Society which is orderly, there is the Head and the Members, part to govern,
and part to be governed; to each of which appertain their particular Rights: to
the one such as they may be advantaged for and in government by, to the other
such as they may be advantaged under government by; that the yoke may be
gently, orderly, and sweetly managed by the one, and sweetly born by the other.

Now this is most evident, that the People are the Body, the People are to be
governed; not to be the Head, not to govern. The Legislative Power indeed
belongs to them, that their yoke might be the more easy: But the
Administrative Power does in no wise belong to them, but to those who are to
govern. And though the People might be flattered and encouraged, from sense of
the misuse of this Power, to take it into their own hands, yet it can never
thrive there: and though they should set themselves to rest content, nay to
please themselves with it; yet you must needs grow weary of it, and that very
quickly, the inconveniences will multiply so fast, and grow so unavoydable.

Parliaments are the Body of the People, chosen by the People to stand for
them, to represent them, to act in their stead: Answerably, They have that
Power which is proper to the People, the Legislative, the Supremely-Judicative;
but not that Power which belongs not to the People, viz. the Administrative.

In like manner this discovers a double kind of work improper for them.

The one is, meddling with spiritual affairs. The constituting of these, the
amending of these, the altering of these is only proper to such as are
invested with spiritual Power and Authority. The Laws of Christ were never
appointed to be set up by the Power of man, but by the Power of his Spirit in
the Conscience. It is accounted profane, and much startled at, to touch that
which man has made holy, which man has separated and consecrated to divine
use; and yet how propense are, almost all persons, to be laying hands on that,
which God has made holy and set a part for himself! How sad an effect we have
seen and felt from undertakings in this kind, cannot but be fresh in our
memories; what a sad breach and disunion it has occasioned throughout the
whole Nation, and particularly in the Parliament. Nor can I conceive readily,
how it could be otherwise; The closest bond of union mistaken and misapplyed
must needs become the greatest instrument of division (to let pass Gods
interest to blast men, when they will be venturing upon that work which he has
not appointed them unto, but reserved for himself.) The wound thus made may
prove incurable. Men differing in their judgments, and consequently in their
desires; differing in the apprehension of their duties; their motions and
endevors must needs run cross and become irreconcilable, while the foundation
of this difference remains. While a man is strongly persuaded, that this or
this is the way and Will of God, that it is his duty to use the utmost of his
abilities, opportunies and advantages for the promoting of it, that this is the
main end for which power is put into his hands, the chief thing God expects
from him, and will call him to a very strict account about the improving of all
his power and interest unto the advancing of this; I say while things stand
thus, how can he with the quiet of his Conscience neglect acting accordingly?
The Presbyterian is now engaged indissolubly, to use his utmost strength and
endevor toward the advancing of Presbytery, which is Gods instituted way of
Worship in his eye; and so the Independent of Independency, which is Christ
Institution in his eye. Now having tasted so much of this, and smarted so much
by this, men should be very wary of intermedling in things of this nature,
further then their ground is clear.

The other is, The taking upon them the Administration of Government, or
intermixing with the administration of Government. This is the most pernicious
thing to a Parliament that can be, for it both diverteth them from their own
work, and out of their own way, into one of another nature; and so thrusts
them into a necessity of doing disservice, and into an incapacity of doing
service. This may make useless, nay may make burthensom, the best constituted
Parliament. Suppose a Parliament of never such entirehearted-honest-men, most
studiously bent and applying themselves to public service; yet if they be
over-full of another kind of business then their own, or intermix another kind
of business with their own, they can neither well dispatch that other kind of
business which they are so over-full of, or which they so intermix; nor there
own neither. And it is the ready way to turn the hearts of the People from
Parliaments: for finding things go so grievously amiss (as by this means they
needs must,) and in the hands too of such men, as they can hardly hope for
better, they will begin to look on a Parliament no longer as a remedy, but as a
worse disease, then that which they addressed themselves to it for cure of. O
consider your snare, ye who are in danger of it! How prone was the
Administrative Power to entrench upon the bounds of the Legislative, and how
afflictive did it become thereby! Is not the Legislative Power as prone to
entrench upon the Administrative? and in so doing, is it not likely to prove as
afflictive?

Look into Nature, See if ever this kind of Body was cut out, fitted or
appointed by it to govern. It has not a fit form or shape for it; it is
unweildy for such a kind of motion.

Again, Look into the tenor of your Call and Trust: Were ye ever entrusted
herewith by the People? Is it, or ever was it, the mind of the People? Did
they choose you for this end? Have ye a Commission from them, I mean not
formally, but so much as vertually, intentionally? They called you to rectify
Government, that is clear enough; but did they call you to govern? O remember,
remember, when any such motions arise in you, when any such temptations beset
you; Ye are not fitted to it by Nature: your motion is slow, but the work and
way of Government requires speed and swiftness; And if ye should from a desire,
from an apprehension of advantage, from sense of present need, or any other
never so good an intent, alter your own slow pace and strive to act swiftly; it
will quickly appear how uncomely it is in you, and how unsafe for the People.
Remember also, that ye are not called to it by the People: and if ye will yet
be venturing upon it, doubtless ye will run the hazard of ruining both your
selves and the People.

These are some of the dangers which Parliaments (and through them the People)
are obnoxious to. How far this present Parliament has been overtaken with any
of them, or how far the People has suffered thereby, I shall not take upon me
to determine. Only thus much I cannot but express, That the present state of
affairs is (to my eye) much entangled, and that the true foundations of Right
and Freedom (so far as I can discern) are not yet laid; and I could earnestly
desire and much entreat those in whose power it is, to do the main work, and to
do it thoroughly: To let fall all desire of Power or Supremacy (whose sweetness
will be tempting the best) to strike at the root of all particular Interests
which stand in the way of public good, and to set upon such ways of public
good, so evidently and directly tending thereto, as might be forcible to
convince very enemies to them by their clearness in reason, and by the sweet
benefit which they should not be able to avoid tasting and reaping from them.
Having such advantage of Power in their hands, what is it which might not be
done for public good, if men had hearts, and were in a right way?

It is commonly said, that a stander by may see more then a gamester: which if
it be true, I may assume unto my self some freedom of speech more then
ordinary, my condition interessing me in it. For I have been long taken off
from being an Actor in any kind, to become only a Spectator; yea and I think I
may say safely, not an engaged but a free Spectator. I have not been interessed
in the designs of any party whatsoever, nor so much as in desire to have any
party thrive, further then they have been guided by Principles of Reason and
Righteousness unto common good. There is not one sort of men upon the face of
the Earth, to whom I bear any enmity in my spirit (though in some respect I
must confess my self an enemy to every sort of men) but wish, with all my
heart, they might all attain and enjoy as much Peace, Prosperity, and
Happiness, as their state and condition will bear. There are not any to whom I
should envy Government, but, who ever they are, they should have my vote on
their behalf, whom I saw fitted for it and called to it. Indeed I am offended,
very much offended with most persons and things, and I have a deep Charge
against them, which at present I keep secret, not intending to bring it forth
till I come upon that stage where I may have fair play. Yet thus much I will
say, which touches a little upon it. I am offended both with Light and
Darkness, or rather with that which pretends to be Light, and that which is
acknowledged to be Darkness. I am offended with that which pretends to be
Light, because it does not more fairly overcome Darkness; but while it blames
it for its dark paths of Tyranny, Cruelty and Oppression, it self seeks (not by
the pure virtue and power of Light, but) by the same weapons, viz. of dark
violence to conquer it; and if it ever prevail this way to do it effectually, I
shall be much mistaken. I am also offended with Darkness; because it is not
true to it self, not just to it self, not at peace with it self, nor keeps
within the sphere of its own dark Principles (even those which it does
acknowledge) in its own motions, or in its opposing either Light or Darkness
Christians dishonor themselves and their Principles; They speak indeed of the
Light of God, of the Life of God, of the Power of God, of the great Name of
God, but are fallen short of the true virtue and glory of all these, both in
Religion, and in their course in the World. Men dishonor themselves and their
Principles, falling short of that common love, good will and righteousness
which very Nature would teach them to observe, notwithstanding its depravation,
were their ears open. But I delight neither to complain nor accuse, only I
cannot but wish that all cause and occasion of complaint and accusation were
taken away from him who does delight in either. All the liberty I shall now
make use of, is only freely to express what I conceive necessary, in the
present confused state of things, to reduce them into some certain safe and
well-grounded order, according to plain Principles of Reason and Righteousness,
without aiming either at the throwing down or setting up of any person or
thing: Which, what interpretation soever of weakness, folly or disaffection may
be put upon it, I find not my self very prone to value. This temper has long
attended my spirit, not much to regard, what account either I my self or any
else put upon things, but rather to expect what things will then appear to be,
when they shall be made manifest by that Light, which does discover them as they
are, and will pass such a judgment upon them as they deserve, and shall not be
able to gainsay or avoid.

It is a kind office and a commendable piece of service to help out of the
mire, or to offer so to do, yet can hardly be so esteemed by him who observes
not himself to be in the mire, and consequently has no sense of any need of
help: He will rather entertain it with disdain then acceptance, it implying
him to be in such a condition as he is unwilling to own or acknowledge. But how
ever, as I have on the one hand expressed my sense (though very sparingly) of
our present entangled condition, wherein we find our selves at a loss in our
very remedy: so I shall on the other hand offer what help my Reason and
Judgment presents to me as proper and necessary to dis-involve us and bring us
into a right course.

To come then to what I drive at, first I shall speak a word in general toward
settling, and then propound more particularly, what things are needful
(considering our present state) toward the settling of affairs in order,
justice and safety, both to dis-engage us from fundamental miscarriages and
dangers (which it is very easy to slip into, and very hard to wade out of,
especially after our so long treading in such an unusual track, as of late we
have been much driven into) and to set us straight.

Toward settling in general I should say three things.

First, That we should look well to our settling, look well how we settle.

Secondly, That we should be careful of avoiding Arbitrariness of Government in
our settling.

Thirdly, That we should have regard to the Rights of the People, and
especially to their rectifying Right, that it have its free current.

1. We should look well to our settling. Shakings generally tend to settling; and
setlings frequently make way for future shakings. Shakings are sudden and
violent most commonly, not flowing so much from deliberation as from force: but
setlings require great wariness and circumspection, lest that corruption which
caused our disturbance (and should be shaken out) put on a new guise, and
settle again on our new foundation; whereby there are not only new seed plots
strown of fresh ensuing miseries, but also preparation made for a new
Earthquake. Therefore it behooves us to look well about us, and to settle
warily, that we may settle surely.

2. We should be careful to avoid Arbitrariness of Government in our settling.
If Arbitrariness of Power, and a Government by Will, not Law, was our burden,
and that which we so strongly desired and endeavored to throw off from our
backs: then surely they to whom it appertains, and who have engaged
themselves to free us from it, ought to be exceeding careful and watchful
against involving us again in it. If it has already miscarryed in one hand, it
may also do in another: However, in reason we are not to be tied to run the
venture. It is not the change of the hand, but the change of the Rule, which we
expect as our foundation of Safety. He that does us good in an arbitrary way,
and by an arbitrary power to day, may by the same way and power do us harm to
morrow.

3. In our settling regard should be had to the Rights of the People, and
especially to their rectifying Right, that it have its free current. The Rights
of the People were the main thing presented to view in this great conflict, and
therefore in equity should be mainly prosecuted* and most principally those
which are their most needful and useful Rights. Our Laws are our Rights, and we
should be loath to be deprived of any of them (whose reason was both good at
first, and remains still in force:) But there are some Rights and Liberties
which are the root and foundation of our Laws, and our ultimate Refuge for
succor and safety; and therefore much nearer to us, and more essential to our
happiness, then others are. These are especially to be regarded. And this so
much the rather, because the people are so fit a Body to be subjected and
trampled upon, that it is very hard for those which are great in power, to keep
their feet from off their necks. Alas, the people have no way to avoid danger
but by running upon the Rocks; they have no way to shun ruin, but by hasting
into ruin. Those they choose to govern them gently, to defend them, may fit
hard upon their backs, yea themselves may make a prize of them: And if they can
in length of time, through many difficulties, obtain and appoint Trustees to
rectify these miscarriages, yet how many temptations they have to mismanage
it, they think not of, and how they will manage it, they know not. Experience
does still show how difficult it is thoroughly to mind the good of the people.
One half of the work is sometimes done (sometimes very often) viz. the crushing
of Oppressors: but the other half, viz. the breaking the yoke of oppression, is
very rare and hard even for them to do who have prevailed to shake the
Oppressors out of their seats.

Thus much in general. Now more particularly, there are four things appear to
me as necessary, unto a fair and firm settling.

1. A clear distinction between the administrative or executive Power, and the
legislative or judicative: that as they have in themselves, so they may retain
in their course, their clear and distinct natures, the one not intermixing or
intermedling with the other: That the administrative may not intermingle it
self, or meddle with the legislative, but leave it to its own free course; nor
the legislative with the administrative by any extemporary precepts, directions
or injunctions, but only by set and known Laws. Things which are severed in
their nature must likewise be severed in their use and application, or else we
cannot but fail of reaping those fruits and effects which we desire from them,
and which otherwise they might bear, and we enjoy.

2. A prescription of clear and distinct Rules and Bounds to each. That the
Trust, Power, Privileges and Duty of each, which flow from the common light of
man, and are intended for the common good of man, may be made evident to that
common light; that the people may know hereby what they are to expect from
each, what they are to expect from the Parliament, what they are to expect from
their supreme Governor or Governors, and so may be understandingly sensible of
good or ill usage. There is nothing (among that nature of things we now treat
of) of it self unlimited: and the more clearly the limits of any thing are set
and known, the greater advantage has it both to move safely, and to vindicate
the integrity and righteousness of its motions. If the limits of Power be not
described and made known, it will be left too loose in its actings, and the
people also will be left too loose in the interpretation of its actings
(neither of them being groundedly able to justify themselves in either unto
the other) neither of which is safe. If the Parliament has one apprehension of
its limits, and the people another, they can neither be satisfied in the other;
but the people must needs disrelish the actions of the Parliament, and the
Parliament cannot but think themselves injuried by the people, which may
occasion the laying of a dangerous foundation of discontent and division
between them. Yea hereby the Parliaments best friends may be forced to become
its enemies, and it may be forced to deal most sharply with its best friends,
and so weaken its best strength, and the best strength of the Nation. Those
that are friends to things are not friends to persons, any further then they
are subservient to things. It is as hateful to true-bred-spirits to idolize the
name of a Parliament any more then of a King: it is righteousness, rightly
administered in its own proper way and channel, by persons in place and power,
which alone can make them lovely to such as love not men, but righteousness. It
was the error of the foregoing governing Power to esteem it self more at
liberty, then in right it was; it may also be the error of the present
legislative power, yea their condition exposes them more unto it (their
Liberty being larger, or of a larger kind;) and therefore they ought the more
abundantly to beware of it, and to apply themselves to produce, or cause to be
produced, a true and fair discovery of those bounds and limits wherein they are
(by the nature of things) circumscribed: for if they do not know them, it will
be impossible for them to keep within them; and if the people do not know them,
it may be difficult (in many considerable cases) to them to believe that they
do keep within them.

3. An unquestionably free and equal Parliament. It is not every cause which
will produce a true and genuine effect, but the cause must be rightly tempered
to bring forth kindly fruit. It is not every Parliament which can heal or
settle a Nation, or that the people have just cause to rest satisfied in; but a
Parliament fairly chosen, equally representing the people, and freely acting
for the people.

Now every man knows force to be opposite to freedom. That which is free is
not forced, and that which is forced is not free.

This Parliament has, visibly to every common eye, been more then once forced;
and it is not very easy after violence to break forth again into perfect
liberty: the sense and remembrance of the former force, together with an inward
fear of the like again (if the like occasion shall happen) may be a secret,
though not so apparent a bond upon their spirits, which may in some particulars
incline them both to do what they would not, and to neglect the doing of what
they would.

Besides, it may be considered how far that visible force, which caused so
great an alteration in the Parliament, and such a change in affairs, did
entrench upon the freedom of Parliament. For though every detention of some or
many Members may not disanul the freedom of a Parliament, yet some kind of
detention, so and so qualified, necessarily does. An occasional or accidental
detention is not of so great force as an intentional: yet if such an accidental
detention of some of the Members should happen, whereby the state and course of
the Parliament should be changed, it might well be disputed, whether the rest
(still sitting and acting contrary to what was done before those Members were
detained) might be accounted a free Parliament, (when such a force was visibly
upon some part of it, as changed the whole state of affairs in it:) for this
were plainly an accidental bending of the Parliament from its intended course,
from its free current, and so far as it is bent it is not free. But in the case
in hand there was yet more, There was an intentional bending of the Parliament,
(as was expressly declared by them who were the instruments to bend it) there
was a culling out of those who stood in the way of what the Army thought just,
safe and necessary to be done. And this was done purposely that the Parliament
might be put into another posture, and act other things different from what, as
they were then constituted, they could be drawn unto. Now though there should
be a violent detention of diverse Members of the Parliament from doing that
service, which they ought and desire to do according to their Judgments and
Consciences; yet if the Parliament be not bent hereby, but go on in the same
path it was walking in before, it has the greater advantage thereby to argue
and to make good its freedom: But if by this force it be visibly and apparently
bent, put into another posture, and into contrary ways and motions, the
evidencing of its freedom will, in this case, be more difficult.

There might yet be further added the Judgment of the Army concerning this
action of their own, who were likely to look favorably upon it being their own,
but I purposely wave it: for I do not go about to make the most of these
things, but desire only the granting of thus much to me, that this Parliament
is not unquestionably free, and so the people, who are sensible thereof, cannot
rest fully satisfied in their spirits, that this present engine is their
evidently-genuine and proper engine.

And as this present Parliament is not unquestionably free, no more is it an
unquestionably equal Representative of the people, neither in respect of the
number of the persons, nor in respect of the qualification of the persons.

First, for the number of the persons. Every County, City, Borough, having
their stock going, their right and interest concerned in the whole, their
particular advantage or disadvantage while Parliaments sit; so they ought to
have their proper Substitutes or Representers to appear for them, to stand in
their stead, to have an influence in the managing of their particular cases,
and their right in the whole, which, as the case now stands, many do want.

Secondly, for the qualification of the persons. For it is not a number of
persons (though chosen by the people) simply considered, that do or can
represent the people: They are but shadows, not the true Representatives of the
People (though designed by the people to that end) unless they be rightly
qualified. How is that? Why thus: by understanding the condition and desires of
those they stand for, and by representing those desires seasonably in their
stead: for they are chosen to be common persons, and therefore ought to have
the common sense of the Rights, Liberties, Safeties, Needs, Desires of those
they stand for. If a man undertake to appear for me, and does not know or care
to know what I need or desire, he does me a double injury; both putting me to
the loss of that which I might obtain, and depriving me of the means I might
otherwise have attained it by.

Now there is a great exception against these present Representers in this
respect, the state of things, and consequently burdens being much changed,
since they were chosen to represent them. It is a long while since the first
sitting of this Parliament, and the change of Power, with other things, may
have caused many new burdens, which they, being in power, cannot so fully
feel, nor seem so fit to be Judges of. The burdens of the People still arise
from the present Power, that power from which they did formerly arise is
removed, another has succeeded: Now they who are the greatest in the
succeeding Power seem no way fit to represent the burdens of the people under
that power: but such of the common people as lie most under them, and most feel
them, are likely to be most fit to represent the sense of them. These indeed
might be fit, when they were chosen, to be Judges of former burdens and
oppressions, but they seem not now so fit to be Judges concerning present
burdens and oppressions: Not that which manageth the power can so fairly,
clearly and sensibly judge whether it be easy or grievous, but that which lies
under it.

And here I may not unfitly add one thing concerning the way of managing
affairs in Parliament so much in use, viz. by Votes; the necessity whereof in
some cases, and the multitude of transactions, may have been an occasion to
draw into more common use then is either fit or safe. My ground of excepting
against it is this. The actions of the people (and so of the Parliament, who
are the collective body of the people) should be very clear and evident to the
eye of common sense, so as to bear down all opposition or gainsaying. The
people should desire the removal of nothing but what is evidently burthensom,
the addition of no Law but what is evidently good, the punishment of none but
him who has evidently been an offender. But the putting things to Vote is an
argument against this clearness and evidence, and does seem to whisper, if not
to speak out, that things are doubtful, and that the determination is also
doubtful, arising not necessarily from the strength of reason, but perhaps from
the number of voices. I confess it is impossible for such a body to manage many
affairs without this course: but I cannot conceive that ever Nature cut out
such a body for the managing of many affairs. It is a body of the common
people, who are not supposed to be skilful in administering Government, nor
intended to meddle in managing of affairs, but only to set them in a right
posture, and in a fair way of administration. A few, easy, necessary things,
such as common sense, reason and experience instructs the common sort of men
in, are the fittest things for them to apply themselves unto. Indeed the people
should have no more hand in or rather about Government, then necessity requires
for their own preservation, safety and welfare; and dispatch quickly what they
have to do (as a few plain things may quickly be done) and so return into
subjection unto Government again, whereby alone they will be able to know
whether they have done well or ill in what they have done. Again, as it is a
Body of the common people, so it is of a great bulk (it cannot be otherwise
formed,) and therefore not fited for many motions, but only for such as are
flow and sure. Yet their slowness of motion (the right order of nature being
observed) will be neither burdensome to themselves nor others, being recompensed
by the fewness of those things which Nature (I mean the nature of their end,
call and trust) has appointed for them to do.

4. A regular way of Elections: that the people might be put into a fair,
clear, understanding way of managing this: that they might not be urged from
favor to the present administering power to make their choice according to
their desires, but might be left free therein, and might be incited to wariness
by being instructed of what concernment their choice is: that if they choose
amiss they contribute toward the laying a foundation of enslaving themselves
and the whole Nation. The people have a sense of their own good, as well as a
desire to please their Superiors, and if that sense were by suitable means
quickened in them at the time or season when they choose, they would be so much
the more careful to make choice of such as were fittest to represent that
sense. In such a great and extraordinary Remedy there should be extraordinary
care about every step and degree of the framing and constituting of it, that we
may be sure (as sure as possibly we can) to have it right and fit for its
appointed end and use: for one error here is as it were a womb of danger and
misery, which hereby it is in a way to bring forth. Now that the people might
put themselves, or rather be put (for they can hardly do any thing themselves
orderly) into such a posture as they might choose most advantagiously to their
own good; and that those whom they choose might the better understand the end,
work, etc. for which they are chosen, and the better apply themselves thereto;
that both these might be more commodiously done, I shall propound these three
things. (And here I desire free scope in the balance of every ones Judgment,
for I propose not these things from any conceit of them, but merely from the
strength of that reason which represents it self to me in them, having no
desire they should take place, so much as in any ones mind, any further then
the reason in them makes way there for them, and it will be my delight and joy
to see them give place to any thing which is better or more solid.)

1. That the Counties, Cities or Boroughs meet together (as they were wont to
do to choose their Knights, Citizens or Burgesses) to choose a convenient number
of their Commonalty as a Committee to choose their Knights, Citizens or
Burgesses for them for that one time.

I speak now in general concerning a convenient way of choosing, but if I were
to speak concerning a sudden new choice, I should add this. That none should be
admitted either to be chosen or to vote in this choice, but such as have been
faithful to their Country in the late great defection: for which end, that
exceptions should be drawn up, and great penalties annexed to them, to be
inflicted on such as should venture to give their vote, who are excepted from
choosing; or such as shall accept of the choice, who are excepted from being
chosen. (Only these exceptions should be so plain, as there may be no cause of
doubt or scruple concerning the interpretation of any of them, lest they prove
a snare to any to deprive them of the exercise of their just Right and Liberty
herein.) It is undeniably just and rational, that the people having fought for
their Rights and Liberties, and purchased them with the expense of their blood,
should now enjoy them, and not permit such a participation of those among them,
who endeavored and fought against them, as may cause a new hazard of the return
of that into their hands, which has been thus difficultly and costlily
recovered from them.

2. That this Committee immediately upon their being chosen (before or at their
first sitting) may have an Oath administered unto them, to this intent. That
without partiality, regard to friendship, or any other by-respect, they shall
choose (either from among themselves or elsewhere) him whom they shall judge most
fit, both for ability and fidelity, to serve his Country in general, and that
County, City, or Borough in particular.

3. That this Co^mittee, immediately after they have finished their choice,
consult about and draw up (and that an Oath be administered for this end
likewise, or a clause for it inserted in the former Oath) a Copy of what,
according to their Consciences, they conceive them to be entrusted with by the
people; with what kind of power, in what sphere, and to what end; which might
be before them as a Light and Rule unto them, though not absolute, yet it might
be very helpful: Whereas otherwise (without some such help) persons called to
that employment may be ignorant what their work is, and from this ignorance
(and their own modesty together) may join with others in the way they find them
in (if a Parliament be sitting) or in the way some, who are most looked upon,
may propose; in the mean while they themselves not understanding where they
are, to what direct end, or upon what ground they act. And I must confess this
has ever made me unwilling to venture upon that employment, not having clear
and certain instruction how or what to act therein: and I must confess my self
somewhat unsatisfied to undertake a Trust, the nature whereof is not clearly
manifested unto me. I am content to serve my Country with all my poor strength,
but withal cannot but be shy of such a snare of doing them disservice in stead
of service, as my own remediless ignorance herein may necessarily expose me to.
And perhaps there may be some others who may stand in need of this help as well
as I: however, a clear and plain way of knowledge, methinks, should be burdensome
to none.

Such kind of things as these are proper transactions for a Parliament, for
there may be errors or defects in this kind which the people cannot come
together to consult about and heal, yet it is requisite such things, in this
kind amiss, should be healed, who therefore fitter to do it then their
Representatives? And what might not be done in this nature, and entertained
thankfully by the people, if it were so managed, upon such plain grounds of
Reason and principles of Justice, and in such a plain clear way, as might carry
conviction, that it was not done from any selfish respects, but for common
good. It is a jealousy in the people, that their Substitutes neglect them, and
mind themselves, which makes them interpret their actions so ill, which
jealousy by this means would easily be rooted out of the people, nay it would
fall of it self.

These are the things which to me seem necessary to set us right. And if it
were once thus, that Powers were rightly distinguished according to their own
natures, rightly bounded within their own spheres, ranks, orders and places; if
there were also a Parliament in every respect fairly chosen, set right in its
constitution, and rightly acting according to its own nature, end and work
within its own bounds, there might be some ground of hope both toward the well
settling of things at present, and the easy further amending of what should be
found amiss afterward. But I dare confidently affirm it, that until the true
way, course and end of Nature be discovered and observed, let there be never so
many other advantages; a Parliament never so wise, never so industrious, never
so faithful; a People never so pliable and thankeful, never so quiet and
patient, both in submitting unto the pains of their cure, and in continual
renewing of their expectations when it will once be; yet the desired end will
never be effected by the Parliament, nor enjoyed by the People. If a Parliament
will produce such or such effects, it must become such or such a cause as is
proper to produce those effects, (and operate like that cause) otherwise it
will be impossible.

There is one thing more I desire to mention, of no small importance, (with the
same freedom which I have used hitherto) which has been acted publicly in
the sight of the world, and will one day be examined more publicly. That
which is well done will endure a review; and that which is ill done does
deserve a review, that it might be amended: yea that which is of very great
consequence may in equity require a review.

The thing is this, that there might be a Revisal of this present Government
(whether by this present Parliament, or an ensuing, or by both, I determine
not) wherein it might be taken into full consideration (more full perhaps then
that present exigence of affairs, when it was first pitched upon, would
permit;) First, the necessity of a change; and secondly, the commodiousness of
this change, or certainty of advantage by this change: for changes are never
good but when they are necessary, and when the change is certainly, or at least
very probably, for the better. Now as there is at some times need of a change,
so there is at other times an itching humor in man after change, when there is
no need: yet a man who has a mind to change, will take it for granted that
there is a need of change, and run greedily into it though he suffer loss
thereby, changing for that which is ten times worse, even in that very respect,
because of which he changes, only his eye being blinded by his present desire
and interest, he cannot discern it.

There ought to be much circumspection in all weighty changes: This, being the
most weighty and of most concernment to the people, deserves the greater
wariness and the more through scanning. It does not become wise men to take a
prejudice against a thing because they have smarted by it, or to conceive well
of another thing because it is different from that, or because it appears
plausible at first view, or because they have not yet had experience of the
incommodiousness, evil or danger of it; but narrowly to pierce into the ground
and nature of things, and from a clear sight thereof to bottom their change.

In changing either Governments or Governors, it is very incident to man to be
unjust. Man ordinarily does that unjustly which is just to be done. Because of
his sense of smart, he is become an enemy (and so far an unfit Judge) to that
and them which he smarted by; and can very hardly afford them a fair hearing of
what they can say for themselves. Yet this is the due of every thing which is
laid aside. And for my part, though I shall not plead for the resettlement of
Kingly Government (for I am not so far engaged in my affections to it, as it
yet has been) yet I would have a fair and friendly shaking hands with it, and
not any blame laid upon it beyond its desert: For doubtless it is both proper,
good and useful in its kind, and has its advantages above any other
Government on the one hand, as it has also its disadvantages on the other hand.

Now since I have waded thus far herein, I will proceed a little further,
propounding what way I should judge most convenient for my self to take, if I
were to have an hand in this particular, so as I might discharge it with most
Justice in reference to the thing it self, and with most satisfaction in
reference to my own spirit. (Every man must be master of what he does in his
own Understanding, or he cannot act justly; and his heart is poor and weak, if
it can be satisfied in managing things beyond his strength.)

In the first place (supposing I had Power) I would require such learned
Lawyers, as I should judge most fit, to give me a plain and full description of
Kingly Government; of the Duty, Power, Prerogatives of it, with all the several
bounds of it, according to the Laws of this Land.

Secondly, I would consider, whether any of these were defective; and
particularly since the Prerogative part was so encroaching, what bonds might be
laid upon it for the future, and how far they might be able to bind it fast
from intrenching upon the Rights and Liberties of the People.

Thirdly, I would consider, what security or certainty might be had of a settled
course of Parliaments in fitting seasons and with sufficient Power for
remedying any grievances which might arise to the People from this Government,
or from any Governors which might be employed in it: for in every Government
there are (besides the Supreme) Sub-governors, who are usually the greatest
Oppressors.

Having done this, fully and fairly, to the satisfaction (not of my will or
desire, but) of my understanding unbyassed; I would as fairly propound, to my
view, the other Government, which might seem fit to succeed in the stead of
this. I would take a full draught of it; the Duty, Power, Prerogatives (for
such it ought to have; its work being hard, in equity it should have
privileges to sweeten it) and several limits of it. I would consider again and
again, how it could be bound faster then the other: How the Convention and
Session of Parliaments in season, with full Power and Freedom, might be more
certain under this. And after full and through consideration of every thing
needful to be considered, if it did indeed appear that Errors in the former
kind of Government could not safely or easily be amended, nor the dangers
thereof well prevented, but might with much more safety and ease be both
amended and prevented in the latter; then would I abolish the former, and
settle the latter.

This, in my apprehension, would be a fair and just way, and would not expose
me to drink in prejudices (which become not a Judge) against the Government
which is to be called into question; or to lay that as a particular Objection
to it, which other Governments are as liable unto. Neglecting of Duty, grasping
of extraordinary Power, enlarging of Privileges and Prerogatives, trampling
upon them that are low, that are as it were the earth under them, riding in
pomp upon the backs of the People, etc. these are common to every Government,
and will be growing up under every Government further then they are powerfully
suppressed. As for that great Objection of the enmity of Kingly Government to
Parliaments, any other Government may be as liable to it. No ordinary supreme
Power loves an extraordinary supreme Power; and what Power soever be set up,
it will go near (if much care be not used to prevent it) to have an influence
upon the choice of Parliament men, and will be molding the Parliament to it
self, which if it cannot do, it will hardly look upon it as its friend. I must
confess the changing of the form of Government is not so considerable in my
eye, but the fixing of so strong and safe bounds and limits, as a good Governor
or Governors may delight to keep within, and a bad or bad ones may not be able
to break through: which may be much helped by the frequent use of Parliaments,
if they can be kept within their bounds, or else that will be worst of all
according to that known Maxim, Corruption optimi pessima, the best thing being
corrupted proves worst.

When this is done (for I do not look upon it as yet done, till all reviews,
which in reason and equity can be desired, are first over) and the supreme
Governor or Governors fully agreed upon: then it will be seasonable, just and
requisite to restore to them those Rights and Privileges which belong unto
them, and which it is the mind of the People they should have: as particularly
his or their consent in making Laws. It is great reason the People should make
their own Laws; and it is as agreeable to Reason, that he who is to govern by
them should consent unto them. As the People (so far as they understand
themselves) cannot but be unwilling to be made slaves by their Governor, to be
governed by such Laws as he should make at his pleasure: so neither should they
desire to make him a slave, by putting what Laws they please into his hand,
requiring him to take care of the observation of them: but a mutual agreement
and transaction in things of this nature is fairest and most just. Yea this
would be most advantageous to the people, for he who constantly weilds the
Scepter is in likelihood best able to give advice concerning Laws, and may put
them into a better way (by virtue of his experience) of attaining their ends
and desires then they of themselves can light upon. If the chief Governor or
Governors shall refuse to assent to such Laws as are evidently good and
necessary, a better remedy may be found out then the depriving of him from this
Liberty. The true way of curing is difficult, requiring much skill, care and
pains; the common way of man is by running out of one extreme into another,
which he is apt to please himself much in, because he observes himself at such
a distance from that which he found so inconvenient and perhaps so mischievous
before. But this is neither just in it self, nor can prove either easy or safe
in the issue.

To draw to a conclusion; I shall only mention some few properties of a good
Governor, to which the people should have respect in their choice, and to which
he who is chosen by the People to that degree and honor, should have respect in
his acting.

There are two properties or proper ways of motion (which contain in them
several properties) of a good Governor, which, if he will be furnished unto,
will make him very useful and serviceable in his place.

1. To manage his Trust with all care and fidelity. To neglect himself, his own
particular ease, pleasure, advantage; and apply himself to the good of the
whole. To minister Justice equally, fairly, freely, speedily; and mercy
tenderly. To punish merely for necessity sake, but to relieve from his heart.

2. To settle the Foundations (so far as lies in his way and within his reach)
of the Peoples Liberty, Peace and Welfare, that it may be in a thriving
condition growing still more and more: For the welfare of the People does not
so much consist in a quiet, prosperous, settled state at present, as in a good
seed for future growth, whereby alone the Government can come to yield the good
fruit of a present good settling. It may cost much at present to manure the
ground and plant a good Government, the benefit is to be reaped afterward,
which will lie much in the Governor, who may help much to cherish or blast it.

The main thing in a Governor (which will much fit him unto both these) is to
keep within his bounds: Not to think or undertake to do all the good which is
needful to be done, but that good which belongs to his place and office: Not to
avoid bonds, but to desire to be bound as fast as may be. He who is indeed
unwilling to transgress, to do evil; is willing to be tied up, as fast and
close as can be, from all temptations and advantages thereunto. Good honest
plain-dealing-hearts are too apt to desire scope, thinking only to improve it
for good; and others are too apt to trust them, little suspecting that they
will do otherwise, till at length on a sudden so evident snares and temptations
overtake them, as give too plain a proof of the contrary. This experience is so
deep, that it may well be questioned, Whether it were better to have a bad
Governor being fast bound, or a good Governor being at liberty; which would be
very difficult to resolve, because on the one hand it is so hard to find bonds
to bind a bad Governor fast enough, and so difficult on the other hand for a
good Governor being left at liberty, to act well. He who has had experience
what he is, when he is left at liberty, and what others are when they are left
at liberty (how easily his or their Judgment, Will and Affections are
perverted) will neither desire to be left at liberty himself, nor to have
others left at liberty. A good Governor might do great service in this respect,
namely both by a ready compliance with his bonds (for the good and necessary
use of them) which is very rare; as also by seeking further bonds, where he can
discover starting holes, which is yet more rare.

Man naturally seeks liberty from bonds, desires to avoid them: He would
bind others, but be without bonds himself: Others need bonds, but he can act
well without them, yea he can do more good without them then with them: They
may be a fit curb for others, but they will be but a clog to him in the pursuit
of the peoples happiness, whereby he shall be hindered from doing that good
service which he would and otherwise might: Thus the best men, many times, come
to do most hurt, least suspecting themselves, and being least mistrusted by
others. (Who would not believe his own heart, that if he were in place and
Power he would not do thus or thus, but amend this and that and the other
thing; and the more scope he had, the better and more swiftly would he do it?)
But to seek bonds, to desire to be hedged up from every thing that is unlawful
or unfit; to seek where one might evade and prepare beforehand strength to
resist it, engines to oppose and keep it back, this is as unusual an
undertaking in Governors, as needful and profitable for the people.

There would one great advantage from this arrive unto Posterity, besides that
which the People themselves might enjoy under it at present: for it would make
the fruit of a good GOVERNORS Government extend it self to future Generations,
in this respect, because by this means there would be bonds prepared to tie up
such as should afterward succeed, who might be more inclinable to break forth
into unjust and by-ways, then a present Governor or Governors. There are none
who have such advantage to espy starting-holes, as those who are penned up: and
if they be careful in espying and faithful in stopping up those holes (by
putting the Parliament upon setting such fences of Laws so made about them, as
may best secure the People in this respect) the Administration will soon prove
both regular and safe, as also in a thriving condition, in so much as that the
Liberty, Safety, and sound Prosperity of the People will grow more and more
upon them.

FINIS.

