A SERMON Preached on the 27th. of January, 1673/4.

BEFORE SEVERAL PERSONS Who Formerly have had their EDUCATION IN St. Paul's
School, LONDON.

By R. P. Member of that SOCIETY.

Wisdom is justified of her Children. LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. 1674.

TO THE READER.
THe Contrariant Principles, and Dissenting Interests of the Men of this Age
and Nation, have prevailed to hinder the Censures which some Men's Devises and
Practices have too well Deserved: By means of which they have taken the
confidence to Discover those Latent Inclinations, which they sometime concealed
for fear of the Areopagites.

Two Notable Factions have lift up their Heads to the apparent Danger of
Government, Virtue, and true Religion. The one of these call all Matters into
Question, and so Discard the Duty of Mankind; Pyrrhon is their old Master,
whose Creed they profess in his own terms. He (...), Diogen. Laert. in vita
Pyrrhonis.
gave out that there was neither Good, nor Evil, Just, or unjust; nothing was
really so, only by law and custom somewhat was approved, and somewhat
distasted, or Decryed; These are, and needs must be open Atheists, impudently
Profane, and Gro^ss Blasphemers of God, and all Virtue.

To these I say, that they Degrade their own Natures, and if they say true, are
not Men, to whom conscience does as centainly belong as any other power of
Reason; and they are only Serpents, the subiilest of all the Beasts of the
Field, though in Man's likeness. The Fabric of Heaven and Earth is the great
standing Miracle which must convince them of an Eternal Power and Godhead. But
if this have no Effect, Divine Mercy will have no further trouble with them;
they are Anathema Marenatha already, and shall soon feel the Fury of that God
whom they will not know: In the mean time it may be he will bring down some of
these Nebucadnezars to the Baseness of all Ignominy, and to Graze with the Head
till they know that the most High Reigns, and does whatsoever he pleases. The
Lord Reigns.

The other sort are of those who boast of the sharpness of their Wit, and their
absolute liberty of Will, hoth which make them in their own Opinions at least,
Ethereal Genii, and in the Dialect of the Stoics, such as may compare with
Jupiter himself; for they tell us, that they are so Entirely at their own
conduct, and choice, that God cannot Interpose, or alter them, but by that very
act, he violates the Right of their Natures, and overthrows the Order of
Humanity, so that they are neither praiseworthy for well-doing, nor yet
punishable for Misdemeanors.

Many of this sort bid Defyance to the others, and would be thought like Atlas,
to hold up Heaven with their shoulders; they lay the Foundations of Nature,
Society, Equity, Purity, and Piety, and challenge their Adversaries to Duel
them therein. But while they go not forth to Battle in the strength of the Lord
of Hosts, they have not I think, been succesful in their Encounters, as the
huge increase of Infidelity ever since this Contest began, will bear Witness.
Let me say somewhat of the presumption of these Men, and somewhat of their
Principles.

I acknowledge it is a Worthy Endeavor, and Deserves all the learning of this,
or any other Age, to Discover the stability and rectitude of Moral and
Christian Principles: But as it fares in Naturals, that no man knows the Work
of God to Perfection, so is it undoubtedly in Spirituals: It is necessary then
that they which undertake this Work be heartily humble, that they seek the
illumination of the Glorious God, and have well-believed, and learned
themselves what they would teach to others; Otherwise their own misconceptions
of the things they would Evidence, their imperfect Ratiocinations concerning
them, will as they have done, Embolden their Adversaries to conclude, that
their probable Assertions have derived their Reputation, as it were wholly from
the Politic Councels of Princes, and the Craft of Priests. Thus we shall make
short Work, and at once burn our Ethics, and our Bibles.

As to their Principles: I affirm that to the best of my Understanding, they
which Assert an Vngovernable and Incontroulable Liberty, are as Dangerous,
though more slye Enemies of God, and true Righteousness: The Difference is not
so great as may seem, for one part deny's the power of God, the other his
Grace. One Affronts the Article of Credo in Deum Patrem, etc. Creatorem Caeli
and Terrae, the other Disavow's Credo in Spiritum Sanctum. Yea I protest it to
be Dishonorable to God, unbecoming his Wisdom, to bestow his Grace upon those
that Declare they need it not; Yea it is Hypocrisy for them to ask it, and
contrary to the Tenor and Economy of the Gospel. The Atheist will be Wiser
than Christianity; the Libertine will not be beholden to Christ: both these I
hold equally false, perilous, and impudent.

I leave them then to consider, 1. If it were not indiscretion and weakness in
God most Holy (I speak as a Man) to make such Creatures as Angels or Men, if
according to these Men's supposals, he could not Govern them, incline, alter
them, and have his Ends upon them. It is below the Wisdom of such Men as you,
or my self, to make any thing, if we had power, and give it such excellent
Liberty as should set it out of our Reach, Dominion, or Control; Wherefore it
is impossible with me to Believe that God has done so.

2. If Man have such power and liberty as God cannot touch or intermeddle with,
then is all Religion and Righteousness the proper fruit and product of our Sole
Endeavors, which he that says, must needs forget, or never have understood
what he speaks of; For he that has attained to pure and undefiled Religion,
behaves himself Really and Honestly, though not perfectly so as the
Unsearchable Wisdom of God has nothing to find fault with, has arrived to the
Life, Goodness, and Holiness of God, has so Reconciled himself to his Majesty,
that he has no Offense or Enmity against him: He that Believes that he can
perform all this without Heavenly help, is neither acquainted with God or Man;
He Abandons his Creator to keep Hogs and Sheep, to use his Providence about
Beasts, Birds, and Fishes; But as for the great Man himself, he is (...)

3 If God does not concern himself with the free inward Actions of Men, all the
Ministers of Religion must forthwith ceas, for then they are but Vain and
Hypocritical: If no Virtue Descend from the Almighty by them, what do they
pretend to? I know not, and leave the consideration of it to them that do.

Both these grand Miscarriages which I have now spoken of proceed not from
Phlegmatic and Pleboian Souls; they are the deadly Weeds that grow in busy
and ascending minds; this Poison is not Expressed from the stupifying Hemlock,
but from piercing, enterprising, sublimate, and is most Displeasing to that
high God, who most of all hates Spiritual Wickedness. Some might happily
suppose that when I was to speak to a Society of such Learned Men, I should
have Courted them with a Panegyric of Arts and Knowledge, that it became me
(...) with the Fellow in Athenaeus: But I thought it my Wisdom and Duty rather
to profit, than please you, to show the use and danger of abusing what you
have, or might have, than puff you up with a Vain Opinion of it.

For this end and purpose, being desired to Allow Copies of what I spoke to
you, I was content to suffer all to be made Public. I Beseech therefore the
Father of Lights, and God of all Grace to make it a Blessing to those that
shall peruse it.

Horton, Feb. 2.
PHILIP. 37. But what things were Gain to me, those I counted Loss for Christ.


ST. Paul (whose Name our Founder of Happy Memory would have us bear, professes
himself a great Linguist (1 Cor. 14. 8. v) I thank my God I speak with Tongues
more then you all; and since the Wisdom of the Prince is well discerned in
chosing able Ministers and Instruments for his Business, Christ the King of
Kings, and the wisdom of all the Wise, gives us to understand that for
Intellectuals, Morals, Spirituals, and Fidelity in the use of them all, never
any exceeded or equalled this Man, for for to him he committed that trust,
which was formidable even to Angels; he sent of them to joy a righteous, but
sorrowful Soul, to encourage a fearful minded Man, to strengthen a staggering
Faith; they had but one particular, little Work to do, must say no more then
the person, and present Case required, and flee up again to their Heavenly
Habitations. But our Apostle was to lay the foundations of eternal truth and
holiness for all Generations, to give an Example in himself, a repenting
sinner, of doing and suffering according to the perfect Will of God, and to
transact the Affairs of the Kingdom of Heaven with all the World.

I cannot surmise then Reverend and Learned Fathers and Brethren, that any of
usshould be so sick of an evil (...), a windy conceit, or haughty presumption
of our selves, as to despise the counsel, or practice of so great a Master in
things both Humane and Divine. He did not mount up aloft, and sing to himself,
he did not please himself with the Music of his own Notes; he did not so far
forget himself as to think his own things were for his own Use and Admiration,
but prostrated all at the feet of the Lord Jesus (...), I thought them all,
says he, loss for Christ Jesus.

If you look back upon the (...) what things they were he made so light of,
they seem no way contemptible: as (1.) He was Circumcised the Eighth day; he
was early and duly Consecrated to God like Isaac the Son of the Promise; he was
taken into the Covenant, and so under the Coverture of Gods mercy, and under
the influence of his Grace. (2.) He was of the stock of Israel, a Legitimate
Son of the Holy Seed, born in the House of God, had right to all the Ordinances
and Promises of God. Of this the Ancient Jew boasted more Warrantably, then any
one now can of his Family, or Honorable Ancestors, ( Romans 9. 4.) Whose are the
Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all God
blessed for ever. (3.) Of the Tribe of Benjamin, that is one of the most
innocent and beloved Families of the Patriarchal Race; not by the Concubine, or
Bondwoman, but by the lawful Wife, and Free.

Not by the despised and suborned Leah, but by the chosen and beloved Rachel;
of a Country which lay not far from the Holy City, and the House of its God,
and so fit to enjoy the Society of Holy Prophets, Priests, and Peers, and hear
the Wisdom and determinations of their Oracles. For the shire-line of its
Division run through the streets of Jerusalem, though the Temple was in Judah.

-- Divisa erat Vrbs (Hierso^ym.) inter Tribum Judae and Benjaminis.
Processitque linea disterminans per ipsum atrium Templi. Gloss. in Sanhedr.

(4,) He was an Hebrew of the Hebrews; of Holy Parent's on both Sides: no
prosyte, nor of later Institution, but bred up from his Infancy in the
knowledge of the Law by those that had Learned it themselves, with the first
Rudiments of things.

If you ask hw it could be? when as he professes himself a free Roman by birth,
22 Acts 28. Photius the Learned Patriarch of Constantinople resolves you well;
(...), etc. Phot, in Epist. Euschaem, Caesar, Archiopisc.
His Father was born in Gischala, a petty Town of Benjamin, but carried Captive
with his Wife into Cilicia, where he Seated himself in Tarsus, and obtained the
privilege of a Roman. Soon after this (it is like) he had this Son, who has
been a Glorions blessing to all succeeding Ages. If you say, Sed genus and
proavos and quae non fecinius ipsi, Vix eo nostra voco, Mark (...) our Apostle
was by Election and Inherent Virtue.

5. As to the Law he was a Pharisee; he chose the straitest Sect of profession,
Act. 26. 5. his Master was Gamaliel of Jerusalem, one of the Honestest Men, and
profoundest Scribes of the Sanhedrim.

(6.) As to his Zeal, indeed he persecuted the Church; which mistake of his
had like to have cost him the favor of God; but before Men, has this Excuse
and Mitigation that he meant to uphold and secure that Religion which he knew
was Originally from God himself.

(7.) As to the righteousness of the Law, he was blameless: No Religion can
save that Man who does not live by the Rule and Direction of it; he does but
weakly receive his own Faith, who does not Address and Conform his Life
accordingly; We shall be found vain boasters, if we magnify the
reasonableness of our Religion, when we disavow it in our practice. Clemens of
Alexandria has Taught us well, Clem. Stromat. l. 2.
(...): the Office and Business of Faith is to beget a new heart and life.
(...). He is a believer that observes the things which God has delivered to
him.

And what has he delivered us, but ((...)) his holy Commandments, which if we
keep not, we as certainly believe, that God will refuse our Souls.

You see then what Advantages our Apostle had, natural, and rational, civil,
and religious; the parallels of which, most of us, I trust, have had by the
glorious Grace and Donation of God, viz. an Early Baptism, were born Children
of the Church, had our Education where Learning and virtue is professed, had
the lively Oracles of God, (...) Citizens, at least for a time, of no mean
City. I wish from my Soul now, that there be no profane person among us as
Esau, who by a naughty life and behavior blemishes this Gifts of God, his
worthy Masters, and his own Education.

(...). Origin. lib. 1. Contra Celsum. But if there be, and these Favors of
God are bestowed on him in vain, and his Pearls are trampled under foot, let
such a one bear his own burden, and his Iniquity will be heavy upon his head.
Yet does not his Abuse detract any thng from the things themselves, but they
remain not (...), not in appearance only, but verily, and in truth great Gains.
Is it a mean Advantage to be able to converse with all the Worthy Souls in all
parts and Ages of the World? Nothing to enjoy Conference with the Hero's past,
and dead, and yet without Necromancy? To be in the Roman Senate, and hear the
Masculine Eloquence af Cicero, who made them yield to him, to whom all the
World submitted it self, is this of no value? You may Accompany Caesar in all
his Expeditions and victories, and know the Caball and Intrigues of so wise a
Commander; but above all, to be privy to the Wisdom of God, to understand the
Resentments and holy affections of those who had his most familiar
Inspirations, how Glorious is this? What a raising Education! Is it a mean
Opportunity to stand next to Heaven Gate, to hear the Son of God call, come ye
and Inherit Eternal life, to have him reach forth his hand to pu^ us up to him,
if we do not wickedly scorn and refuse so stupendous a Grace? If I should say
more, which is not hard to do, we would be rather puffed up then Edified; for
these External privileges do easily beget (...), a confidence in our selves,
and in our God wot what! Let me rather say, what kind of Gains these things
are, that we may understand our selves and them, with their Nature and Use:

And 1. They are (...) rather Capacities then perfections, rather foundations
then superstructures; they are excellent Instruments if held by a Wise and
provident hand.

2. They are (...), things of a variable and middle nature, which may be used
well or ill, according to the disposition and preparation of him that has
them; they are like the Sword which may Kill our Enemy, or Wound our Friend;
not like the (...) which you read of Hebr: 6. 9. the things that contain
Salvation, which include it, which will bless and sanctify those that have
them, and bring them assuredly unto God.

3. They are (...), such gifts of God as flow from his Bouncy and good Will to
us; though they are not the peculiar Inheritances of the children of the
Kingdom, yet are they fair Legacies which any one would be glad to have. Shame
then must cover their faces who have had the Key of Knowledge, and the
Institution of the Wise, and yet have not profited thereby. May I not say to
some of you, What has the Church or Nation, your company or Relations been the
better for you, Or what you have been Learning with so much pains and
patience? May I not take up that of St: Augustine against you? Surgunt Indocti
and rapiunt Caelum, sed nos cum Doctrina in Gehennam detrudimur: The unlearned
take Heaven by violence, and you and all your Learning are thrust into the
Dungeon of utter Darkness. Verily these things were Gains, a great and fair
Estate; but if We have misspent them, We shall give an Account to God, who
knows the Worth and Weight of his own Talents.

I come now to the maine Assertion of the Apostle, and the Text, That as great
as all these things are, He, and so We must count them all loss for Christ
Jesus. He does not require us to loose them; for Christ Ascended up on High,
and bestowed these and such like Gifts on Men, for the Edification of his body,
which is the Church; and he does not now mean that we should throw them all
away, as some in this Malevolent and perverse Age understand it: the Scholiast
has well attained the meaning of the Apostle, (...). He speaks not simply,
when he directs us to to count all loss for Christ; as if he meant to revile
the Law of God, his Gifts and Favors, as the Marcionites Occumen. in loc.
of old Construed him. (...), either in comparison with Christ they are loss,
or else in Opposition they are not Worthy to appear.

1. In comparison of him; though these things have their Worth, yet if you
respect (...), the far more excelling and transcendent Knowledge of the Lord
Jesus, they are mere dross and dung. And now Brethren, I wish we may all appear
to be true Scholars of St. Paul herein, Ye have heard his (...) his past, and
present thoughts, and what he ever resolved to think, that all these things,
yea, if they were a thousand times more Worth, are not yet Worthy to be Named
with him, to be had or held if Christ be in the Counterpoise: Sequimurne patrem
non passibus aequis? Do we follow this Father and Instructor in Jesus, though
with little Iulus we take shorter strides, and prove somewhat behind? In
Christian simplicity and verity, if you do not look upon Christ as the Sun in
the Firmament, as one that infinitely outshines all other glittering
Excellencies, you are unworthy of him; let me add, so unworthy you are, that
your Ingratitude will constrain him to Withold the blessing of all from you,
and the reproach you cast upon him will kindle his righteous Indignation
against your Souls; yea your Parts and Ornaments of Wit Art, Learning are
Cursed to you, and Cursed be they all, if you exalt them above and against the
Lord Jesus our precious Savior.

The grand Importance and Consequence of this Argument has constrained me to
urge and provoke you a little for your good with these honest Interrogatories.
1. Is Christ the end of all your Accomplishments? He is indeed the Alpha and
Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and end of all things, but do you
intend him? do you aim at him? do you count that all things are impertinent
and vain that (...) do not Minister to him? do you reckon that you are
frustrated in all your labors, if you have indeed the Reputation of Eminent,
Learned, and Eloquent, but Jesus Christ is not sanctisied, nor satissied in the
Salvation of his Redeemed ones? if the Lord Christ be principal, and all loss
in comparison of him, he must thus be the end of all. 2ly. Do (...) look upon
all your Ornaments and Acquisitions but as means to this our end? In heart and
conscience do we thus apprehend? do We thus Operate? do we promote with the
greatest Zeal and Diligence those things that lie nearest to the heart of the
Lord Jesus, and are more precious to him than his blood? do we labor in our
places and degrees that the people which he has purchased may be redeemed from
under the power of Satan? do we delight in sealing to them the love of God, and
the consolation of the Spirit?

Do we Intend with Zeal and Heartiness (...) Men (...) would turn to Christ,
and give him the glory which belongs to him? do We Intercede for them with God
when they sin, as those that are truly touched with the dishonor and loss of
Christ himself? Is it our care in all our discourse, private, or public, to
show forth the unsearchable Riches of his Majesty? If Christ be not the next
end of our callings, yet is he the real and ultimate end of our conversation?
If ye study the knowledge of the Laws, is it your principal aim that judgment
and justice may be impartially Administered, that the Oppressed may be
delivered, that we may all live in Godliness and Honesty to the praise of
Christ? Is it not rather that you may get Wealth, Reputation, and victory,
while Christ and his Members bleed and perish? If you bestow your selves upon
Nature, is it your business to Advance the public Good of Mankind, and like
Compassionate Samaritans to set free those whom Satan has bound in manifold
Infirmities? If ye be Gentlemen of Estate, do you employ your Authority,
Interest, Wealth, and Power to Encourage the Profession, Ordinances, and People
of Christ? If Citizens, and Traders, Is it your care that Faithfulness, Just
dealing, Equity and Love may appear in all your Matters, and this for Christ
his sake, who has called us to be Brethren? If not Sirs, we pervert the Text,
we disavow the Apostle, we loose our right in Christ, we count that he is but
loss to us while the World is our Gain. If we do not thus aim at the Lord
Jesus, he is but light with us in the Scales of comparison.

I proceed now to the 2d. Particular from the (...) to the (...) to see if we
reckon all but loss for the Lord, when he is set in Opposition with other
things: When Christ is set before us on this Hand, and the World with all its
Glories on that, what do we choos? whom do we follow? what do we hold to? We
shall despise one to give content to the other; and I pray Brethren, Where are
our Hearts? God has as I may say, Furnished us Tables with Royal Daintyes; He
sets before us his own blood, and the flesh of his Son, a Feast which the
Archangels of Heaven are not Invited to in like sort: But there are Acorns
also to be picked up, and the sour Fruits of the Hedge, As We feed, as we
choose, so We discover our Nature and Appetite. Do we then, Christian Brethren,
as the children of the Kingdom, as those that are of a Celestial and Divine
Race, (do We I say) feast our Souls with Gods precious Manna, the things of
life Eternal? Do we not rather with Kites and Vultures fly upon the Carrion? do
we not hunt as the Swine that we may glut our selves with the trash and offal
of this World? do we not glory in our hearts how much Wiser we are than our
Religion? do we not look down from our high contemplations, and despise the
poor people who serve the Lord Jesus in Humility, Simplicity, and the loss of
all things? do We not rejoice in a Criticism more than in a Sacrament? have We
not more Inward Satisfaction in little Experiment about matter, and motion,
than in the Sanctification of the Spirit, and having our Names Written in the
Book of Life? What is our Element my Friends? Where are we most our selves? Had
we rather be in the company of the Holy Jesus, and doing his Work, than vending
our selves as Acute and Learned? I beseech you by the Mercies of God, let us
lay our hands upon our hearts, and ask within doors if these things be not too
true with many of us; Christ ought to have had the preference, he is the Altar
that must Sanctify our Gold, our Gifts, and Parts, I mean, or they will never
find acceptance before the Throne of God.

That this may be more effectual, let me present you with a few Considerations
Relating hereto, and I have done. 1 Know that Christ is Worthy of all the
Interest that he claims in your Hearts and Study's, Consider the Dignity of
his Person. We venture for him, We yield all to him, by whom all things were
made in Heaven and Earth, visible or invisible, whether they be Thrones, or
Dominions, Principalities, or Powers, and he is before all things, and by him
all things consist, 1 Coll. 16, 17. Think upon the Endearments of his Grace,
the Zeal of his Love and Sufferings, that he might bring us into Friendship and
Favor with God. Oh how nearly does it concern us to get into his love, that we
may live with God! Whether fall we if Christ be not our Friend? how do these
things touch us to the quick, to the flesh, and to the bone, yea to the marrow,
and the Spirit? One day sure the Acceptance and Favor of Christ Jesus will be
somewhat Worth. What is there then of all the Worldly Gauds and Glories that
you can set up as a Rival against his Glorious Majesty? For what things will ye
part with your Immortal Hopes in him? How easy, me thinks, it is to the
believing serious Soul to scorn and trample upon all those things which we have
sometimes called Temptations? How reasonable is it to boast in the Lord, and
say, What shall separate us from the Love of God in his dear and blessed Son?
2. If Christ have not the Headship and Dominion, he will blast the glory of all
our Excellencies, and tarnish the beauty of them.

If we provoke him to jealousy with our parts, wit, learning, his Indignation
like a Canker will quickly Eat up our springing Hopes and Glories. It has been
Observed always that the most pregnant Wits in our Schools of Language, have
not proved the most Substantial in our Universities, and the forwardest there
also have not been the most serviceable in the Church, or Nation; they have
been as Trees Transplanted out of our Nurseries which do not prosper
accordingly in the Orchard where they should bear Fruit: When as in the Interim
many Obscure and Unobserved Souls have come forth from their Privacies like the
Great Gregory from Nazianzum, a poor Country Village in Cappadocia, who have
been the Wonders of the Age, and the Glory of the Church. This comes to pass
not only from the diverse Natures of the Wit, Capacity, and Abilities which are
proper to the several Studies, Employments, and Excellencies; nor merely that
certain Intellects arrive to Ripeness in their proper periods, before which
they are harsh and unsavory; but chiefly and mostly by the blessing of God upon
their humility, patience, and Integrity: When as the others have boasted too
much of the Ignis lambens that Environed their Temples, and have Adored too
much the brightness of their Intellectuals. Christ was not, could not be
pleased that his Servants should count themselves his Betters, that they should
Belive they knew what was Wisdom better than himself; they have it may be with
Herod received the Applause of them that cried out, Nec vox hominem sonat! the
voice of God, and not of man! Thus the Angel of the Lord had smitten them with
dishonor; they bring to God the Sacrifice of Cain, whose Error was of Old
thought to be, that when he seemed to bring somewhat to God, yet too much too
himself; for ye Read, ( Genesis 4. 7.) after the Septuagint thus: (...); If thou
have brought a right and worthy Offering to God, but have not divided Right
(between him and thy self) have thou not sinned? To this Reading agree both the
Samaritan Text, and the Targum of Jerusalem, though the Hebrew Bibles, and
those that are derived thence have not the Words, The belief or Tradition of
Ancient times seems to have been, that in the Mincha, or Meat Offering which
Cain brought to the Lord, he took too much for his own Portion; wherefore God
that has no pleasure in the Illibera^le Sacrifices of Churls, who think that
all is too much which is bestowed upon him, had no Respect to him, and refused
to testify his Acceptance by sending down fire upon the Altar. But is not this
our own case? have we not counted that Christ in Humility, Simplicity,
Self-denial, Meekness, and Holiness is but loss, while the Reputation of Men,
the praise and profit of the World have been thought all the Gain? What do we
then but set the Celestial and Royal Diadem of God upon our own Heads? shall he
Encourage us in so Horrible a Sacrilege? shall he contribute to his own
Dishonor?

3ly. If all be not loss for Christ with us, he may justly leave all our Parts
and Ornaments to be our Infelicity, and the Bane and Mischief of those that
converse with us. If unbred Souls commonly prove brutish, inconsiderate,
stubborn, and profane; no lesser or lighter Diseases attend those that have
been quickened by Study, Exercise, and Education. The most spritely and
vivacious Wits have always proved most Ungovernable, the most Turbulent
Subjects in the State, the most Pestilent Heriticks in the Church, the worst
Friends, the worst Neighbors, the worst Husbands or Masters to their Relations
and Families. The Men of middle capacity and stature of mind have in the
interim been successful in their Affairs, peacable in their Deportment,
treatable by their Allies, and more truly profitable to the World. In Ten years
there have been more Frayes and Seditions of one in City Florence, than in five
hundred among the Switzers and Grisons, people of a slower Genius, and (...)
Mettle. But what need we go so far for Examples? See we not among our selves,
what the Audacious Wits of Men are daily endeavoring and practicing? do we not
see how our Capitones, Men of great and busy Heads, cannot be at rest, but
they enterprise and examine every thing, and can suffer nothing to settle? how
do they as with battering Rams shake, undermine, demolish the very fences and
foundations of Nature. Policy, Piety, and Society? They censure and judge of
every matter; and what they have not ability to comprehend, or humility to
submit to, they despise as weak and imperfect, or will not Reverence as Holy.

Ill Work we make for our Governors Ecclesiastical or Civil, while we molest
and vex them with our unruly practices. when We should help them to bear their
Burdens. (...). Origines libr. 1 Contra Celsum.


While some be Wiser than Christianity, others wiser than the Laws, and all the
rest wiser than their Teachers and Governors, we forget our selves, and become
Reprobate in our Manners and Conversations, Nobis obsequii gloria relicta est,
Corn. Tacit. The glory of yiedling Obedience to those that are over us in our
proper Virtue and Eminence. What now is the cause of all this Disorder?
Learning? Knowledge? Wisdom? God forbid that we should have such a Thought in
our Hearts! God never gave Understanding to Men to do them Mischief, no more
than daylight to Blear our Eyes: But the Mischief is, that we Eat more freely
of the Tree of Knowledge, than of Life, that we have knowledge in
Superproportion to our Humility, self-denial, Modesty, and Sanctity, and so
that Sun which should Enlighten our Earth, by our Ill conduct sets it all on
fire, and then instead of counting all our Wisdom loss for Christ, we are left
to the tyranny and sedition of our Thoughts.

4. If we give not Christ the preeminence, our Rebellious Affections will
pollute and deprave our Judgments: This Honorable City which Trains up so
many Youths to Learning, has not in my Opinion been suitably Happy in them.
The reason of which (besides the foreassigned) is like to be, that the Luxury
and many vices of the place like Ill Weeds grow up with the Corn, and choke it
that nothing comes to Perfection. By their Means they who should have by their
Studies made themselves serviceable to the Lord Jesus, become but more
Ingenuously wicked. Ah! sad conclusion of so much Goodness of God! To conclude,
Learning is both Profitable and Honorable, it is the light of our Eyes, the
Guide of our Lives, the proper Excellency of Humane Nature: But if it claim
precedence of Christ, though We were Angels of Heaven, it would bring us down
to Hell: Take therefore the good Counsel of the blessed Apostle

1 Cor. 1. 30. 31. Let Christ be made unto us of God, Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption, and let him that Glories
glory in the Lord. FINIS.

