THE JESUITS GRAND DESIGN UPON ENGLAND, Clearly discovered in a Letter lately
written from a Father of that Society.
SIR,
I Received your last, and have sent the enclosed to the party according as you
desired. Monsieur De-vaulx came hither last night from Lions, where he met with
Monsieur Pre who was going post from Rome (where he has been ever since the
death of the Duke of Orleans, his great friend and benefactor) to Germany; he
says he is like to repair the loss he had by the Dukes death, with an
employment which an Italian Cardinal will help him to; I am glad of it, for
although the man have none of the acutest parts, he has heen very active and
industrious, and has done (to my knowledge) no small services. He says that
some Grandees in those parts are not so much joyed with the King of Swedens
death, as it was supposed they would; I could partly guess the cause, but
referring that to another opportunity, I shall at present enlarge my self
concerning what is now the greatest trouble and care to us all: The state of
things in England, which truly I am very sorry to hear how it daily grows worse
and worse: For although you seem not to apprehend so much, because as you
write, if things should come to a settlement there, that you could not think
the Catholics to be in a much worse condition; because you suppose it would be
then, as in former times, viz. the Laws concerning their Estates not to be put
in so rigorous an execution as now, and that they had rather be in some certain
way under the Government of one, whose prudence and moderation was well known,
then still to be exposed to the Frantic madness of what ever happens to be
uppermost, who upon all occasion, link them with their greatest enemies, in all
mulcts of punishment; And who can never be supposed with any face to show the
least favor to them; And that it is the opinion of some sober men, that their
case (if there were once a settlement) in some Parliament, might deserve some
consideration as to penal Laws, which were made in a conjuncture of time, when
severity was requisite, and the Kingdom exasperated by (I must needs say) very
desperate attempts; but seeing in so long a tract of time, the party is much
wafted, and made inconsiderable in whatever might make them formidable: And
they have not a long while been guilty of any exorbitant offense, and that the
interest of the King would be rather to compose and court all parties, then
exasperate any: You (I say) for these reasons do suppose our condition there,
would be rather better then worse.

I must needs confess that there is some ground for your opinion, as to the
English Catholics of estate and fortunes, and who by consequence cannot but
have much of the Nations true interest in them, and possibly as to their
particular had better be settled in some moderate way, then in such condition,
as if things come to that pass, which we so long have driven at, for advancing
the general cause of the Church, which perhaps by reason of your years you
have not so fully understood, and which only (neglecting all other particulars)
is a grand duty of a true son of the Catholic Church, and how far we were all
herein concerned as to the affairs of England.

For you must know that about twenty years ago the English Heretics had
brought their Church to such a height, and settled it in so fair and plausible
a way, the Doctrine of it so learnedly maintained by their Divines; Men (I must
needs say) most of them of admirable learning and parts, whatsoever we could
object to them still so fully answered, Their Discipline such, as did daily
give satisfaction to more and more of all parties, Their Ceremonies being
decent and comely, for the most part grounded upon Scripture, or the ancient
customs of the Primitive Church; Insomuch that many who were offended with the
multiplicity, insignificancy, and superstition which they apprehended in ours,
did much better like of them; For (I must needs say (as I think I have
sometimes told you before) we did retain many things, because we thought it
more prudent to alter nothing at all, rather then that some could be solidly
maintained, thinking it better with wit and art bravely to bear them out, then
by yielding to the least alteration (which once begun we could perhaps never
have stayed) breed any disrepute or dishonor to our Church; And finally all
things settled in that splendid and orderly way, under so potent and
considerable a Monarch, that as it was the powerful head and protector of all
the Protestant Churches in the world; so likely to be the great countenancer
and procurer of any new revolt, which in some considerable states, was feared,
and in veryshort time probable to gain ground upon, if not quite overthrow the
Catholic Church; Insomuch that as, then those considerations (to my knowledge)
there was nothing more terrible to us; so, then that, which was afterward the
occasion of dissipating these fears nothing more welcome: Although it was no
more then we might ever somewhat probably also expect, as we have from time to
time carried on affairs there by our Agents, we knowing well that there was
always in England a numerous sort of well meaning men, who did desire to serve
God in a perfect way, as their consciences instructed as they were) informed
them. These being most of them of indifferent wealth, and of a middle degree
and capacity, and therefore few of them being capable to apprehend the main
scope and design of the Rulers of their Church, but being (I cannot tell how)
persuaded (to the no small laughter of us you must imagine) that the way their
Bishops then went was in order to favor, if not quite bring in the Catholic
Religion, and being not a little heighthned in such their fancies by our
indefatigable endeavors, They began at length to prove very troublesome, and
in some good sort to answer our expectations. The Universities likewise
swarming then with men of excellent learning and parts, it was a hard matter
for one, who was not therein eminent, to attain (if not well befriended) to any
considerable preferment. Hence it was that they which had loytered their time,
when they could live no longer there, usually seated themselves in some
populous Town, in which were great numbers of the aforesaid people, then called
Puritans, from whom (by reason of some Lecture) they having their maintenance,
their preaching was such, as was most likely to get credit with that party.
Hence were their Sermons commonly invectives against the present or-orders of
the Church. And the more they were taken notice of by Authority, the more were
they flocked after, and grew to greater eminence, and thereby had occasion of
gaining a greater number of Proselites to their opinion, so that in time some
Thousands there were, which were desperately bent against their Church
government. These (as we ordered the matter) being made use of by some persons
of quality and ability, who being discontented upon private occasions, or else
thinking they had no preferments answerable to their merits, and many things
(too long to relate) then conspiring together, and driving affairs to that
exigence, that it was not in the power of the wisest to prevent, did in some
short time (which your years might then begin to take notice of) quite confound
that, which (as I said before) was so dreadful to us. For now the English
Church, which before was so much the object of our fear, was only fit for our
contempt and scorn: whilst we saw nothing but confusion, such infinite
divisions, and so many frantic Sectaries still swarming and countenanced, so
that we could not possibly expect any the least inconvenience from thence: Nay,
we could not in all prudence, but in a little time suppose those strange
distractions would afford some potent Prince of our Religion an opportunity to
get considerable footing in that Nation: Or else that some usurper, who not
altogether relying upon the inconstant and dangerous support of an Army, might
strike in with the Pope, and strengthen himself with his, and all our
Interests. A thing to my knowledge that has not been altogether unattempted by
you know who, in either of which cases our ends had in some good measure been
accomplished.

But it seems the Generality of the Nation, are made by all these strange
vicissitudes of misery, that they have of late run through, so fully to
understand their condition, that they do with their utmost vigor endeavor the
freeing themselves from that force and Tyranny under which they have so long
groaned, in order to the obtaining a firm composure of things, and re-setling
their Church; which truly I am in much doubt they may possibly bring about, and
so frustrate our grand and chief design.

For although there be many strange kind of divisions amongst them, yet the
considerable, wealthy, and potent part of the Nation, are for the most part but
of two sorts, that is to say, the Royal Party, and the Presbyterians; between
whom, although we have used all the art that can be imagined to create an
everlasting jealousy and enmity; yet we have great cause to fear that they may
possibly come to some good correspondence. For the Presbyterians have been made
sensible, that they two being such considerable Parties, neither of them are
able to establish any thing like to last, if either of them oppose. And
although the Presbyterians did at the beginning, some things, which many have
thought to have been the cause of what after happened; yet it is long since
manifestly known that public actings were, by the prevalency of our
correspondents then mixed amongst them (whom I suppose you know) carried a
great deal further then their intentions, which at the first no doubt were
somewhat moderate, although they were still surprised and hurried on by that
party from one thing to another, as the urgency of affairs required, and in
order at length to their own preservation: And that they did much endeavor the
composure of things, and were in the midst of such endeavors, when the Army
acted those high exorbitancies, quite contrary to their minds, and to the
amazement and grief of most of them. None are ignorant, as also that many of
them thereupon, and sundry others, by the since loyal endeavors of that party
were made fellow sufferers with the Royalists. And for the matter of Religion,
the difference is not so great, as some animosities of the parties have made
them: They agreeing in most substantials, And their Divines on both sides being
men of Learning and Reason, (heates laid aside, and both parties moderated by
the experience of so much affliction) some healing temper perhaps not yet
thought on, may probably be found out: That they can have no reason to believe
the King should bear them the least regret, seeing the premises are not only
notorious, but also many of them that were once eminently active against him
and his Father, are now become his greatest confidents. And if his mild and
gentle nature were not so manifestly known to be unapt to harbor thoughts of
revenge; Yet his affairs being in such a condition as they are, he cannot be
supposed in any prudence to disoblige so potent a party, but rather that it
must needs be many years before he can bring the Nation to that firmness of
settlement, that he may with any safety exasperate, or slight the most
inconsiderable faction. And that the Royal Party likewise, would be so far from
having any memory of things past, that if they might but once come to that free
condition that the other subjects of the Nation are in, without any more fear
of confinement, imprisonment, or mulcts peculiar to them, and restored to a
capacity of bearing some share equally with others in the Government; that they
would think themselves in a happy condition without raveling into former
businesses of any kind, the forgetting whereof on all hands, being most
absolutely necessary to a future peace. These considerations, (as I have lately
heard from a credible hand) have made such an impression upon the
Presbyterians, that I doubt there is no little cause to fear that all our
practices to hinder the aforesaid reconciliation will prove ineffectual; our
utmost endeavor (however) must not yet be omitted; and somewhat was done
lately to that purpose by good advice, which I hope by this time is published
as a Letter sent from Bruxels, that affair being put into such hands, as it is
known will do it to the purpose.

And although we have also been in hopes that the Army joining with these
Sectaries, (who it seems have got a new name, and are now called Phanatiques)
would strenuously endeavor to make some considerable new disturbance, being
instructed, that if there should once happen to be a composure, that they would
absolutely be disbanded, or at least remain in no power, credit, or countenance
at all; And many of their Officers, having shares in the Kings and Bishops
Lands, cannot but think that in such case they must needs lose them: yet I have
heard likewise, that they have been much quieted, and appeased by some, who
have made them understand their present, true, and best interest; And have
represented to them, that although in the conclusion of that sharp war,
wherein all the active spirits of the Nation were almost destroyed, the whole
Kingdom in a consternation with their great success, which was indeed as much
to be attributed to the disorders and negligence of the other party, as their
own valor and conduct. Their Body likewise then far more considerable for
number then now they are, and for some years quartered together, and thereby,
with the extraordinary politic endeavors, and practices of as able an head
as any this latter age afforded, made all of one mind, They made a shift to
carry on a design, and bear it very high for a while, yet (that which all sober
and serious persons could not but conjecture at first) partly with their own
(not long after) disagreement, which did necessarily arise, and the opposition
of others, did many times stagger, and finally run it self into such
extremities, that had all the said wily devices continued with the life of the
Protector Oliver, it could not in all likelihood have stood much longer, And
that now they have notoriously lost much of their repute: For when they pulled
down Richard, it was visible to the whole Nation, they were in no sort able to
carry on their intended work; but were forced to set up for a present shift
those members, that now for some while in England are so famously known by name
of the Rump, who in a very short space, had almost ruined them. And not long
after, when they turned those out, they were far more at a loss then before.
They (not without much difficulty, making good their ground in London, where,
if they had been but never so little more baffled, they had utterly been
ruined) were beat out of several Towns in the Country, and no doubt in some
little time, had been utterly wearied out, if not quite torn in pieces, even by
the disorderly, tumultuous, and disarmed rabble. But now, that they are in no
considerable Bodies together, nor can have no great confidence of one another,
there being such endeavors used, whereby their least attempts of seditious
communication (if any be) are discovered, and that perhaps by some whom
themselves little think of, The Nation also having recovered infinite courage
and heart, thousands of men of spirit able to carry on business, being grown
up, who were but children in former transactions, and scarce remember, and
therefore are not sensible of the dread of those things, which have been the
greatest cause of keeping others so quiet. Not a County almost in the posture
it is in, but being able to hinder their greatest attempt. Such a formidable
Militia in London, which in very few years might be increased to thrice the
number, besides so disciplined, experienced, and choice a body, as the
Generals Soldiers are. They cannot in reason expect any success, or should
they beyond their expectation have it, they could hope for nothing but to make
some busle or disturbance for a while, the consequence whereof, they themselves
know not, and in most probability would still prove worse and worse to
themselves, as those they have made already, have always done.

But should they in the least measure be worsted in any such enterprise, no
people in the world would be more miserable then they, the hatred that the
Nation has already conceived against them upon that occasion likely to be so
aggravated, that in every corner thereof they would find the effects of their
fury, whereas if they behave themselves peaceably, they cannot but be
honorably dealt withal; the ensuing Parliament being likely to make such
provisions for them, whereby the quiet of the Nation should not be hazarded by
any such their desperate and vain attemps. And as to their purchases, they
being in the same condition with others, and many of the Presbyterians in the
same state too, the Parliament cannot but find out some expedient (as many
already are thought on) to content all persons, nor can it be supposed they
will suffer so great a number as are concerned in those lands to be
dissatisfyed. And lastly they, having given such ample testimony of their
valor and ability to serve their Country, will in all likelihood be looked
upon thereafter to their full content.

Nay some do think that their own reason will persuade them, that the best game
they have to play, is for them to appear forwardest in that course things now
so naturally tend to, and so get the start of them, whom of late they have so
much envied: and highly oblige him, from whom the most certain and permanent
preferments are to be expected, in doing that absolutely, which perhaps some do
aim to do by halfes, which certainly, as the whole Nation and each County
wherein they quarter, are now inclined, were no hard matter for them to perform.

The Generality of the Phanatiques also considering, that although there be
some number of them, yet they being most but of small wealth, and interest in
the Nation, which having conceived a great odium, and jealousy of their
principles, and designs, and having of late had some discovery of our actings
with them, would be very ready and earnest to oppose their least attempt: And
they beleiving the indulgence and compassion that those, who are now coming to
power, would have of their errors and weakness: And how in all prudence and
policy, for many Years, there can be no rigid courses taken against any party
whatsoever, except they give a just provocation by some desperate attempt, are
resolved (we fear) to acquiesse likewise. Nay the whole Kingdom is so
charmed, with the expectation they have of the ensuing Parliament, which being
likely to consist of men of integrity and ample estates, the enjoyment of which
in peace, and free from imposition, must needs be such their and the whole
Nations true interest, that there is scarce any hopes left to us, but that they
are generally and cheerfully resolved to submit to their determination.

The substance of what I write to you I have from as able and active a head, on
our behalf now there upon the place, as any Europe affords, to be the present
posture of affairs in England, which no little augments all our troubles, nor
could I forbear communicating of it unto you, for your full information,
knowing you are as fit as any man to have your full share in acting some things
that are yet thought upon to prevent (if posible) those contingencyes, so
unhappy and disastrous to us, of which I shall shortly send one to you that
shall give you an account.

Procure me Sir I beseech you if you can, the second Tome of Escobars moral
Theology, the Lions edition, and Du Puis his doctrina vera lately printed with
you at Paris. And take heed what communication you keep with the Cure of St.
Roch, and Monsier de Russe, because to my knowledge they keep great
correspondence with the Jansenists. This is all at present which I thought fit
to trouble you with; I commit you therefore to the protection of our Savior,
our Blessed Lady, and all the Holy Saints.

Doway 27 March, 1660. Stilo novo. J. M.


